6 
 
 
 
 
PROMOTION OF CLIMATE RESILIENT AGRICULTURE, NATURAL 
AND ORGANIC FARMING THROUGH KVKS 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2024-25) 
 
 
 
SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  

SIXTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2024-25) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
 
PROMOTION OF CLIMATE RESILIENT AGRICULTURE, NATURAL 
AND ORGANIC FARMING THROUGH KVKS 
 
 
 
(Presented to Speaker, Lok Sabha on 04.04.2025) 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 23.07.2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
April, 2025 / Chaitra, 1947 (Saka) 

CONTENTS                                  Page No. 
        
Composition of the Committee on Estimates (2024-25)    ii  
Introduction           iv 
PART-I 
Chapter-I      Introductory         1 
Chapter-II     Climate Resilient Agriculture and NICRA     4 
Chapter-III    Sustainable Farming Practices: Promotion of Natural and  
                       Organic Farming        10 
Chapter-IV   Impact of Chemical Inputs in Farming     22 
Chapter-V    KVKs and their Role        36 
 
PART-II 
Observations/Recommendations    45 
 
ANNEXURES 
Annexure-I  Drought/Moisture Stress tolerant varieties released during  
2014 to 2024         70  
Annexure-II  State-wise data of Pesticide samples tested in last five (5) years  
from 2019-20 to 2023-24       78  
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 26.09.2024  79 
II. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 03.02.2025  82 
III. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 03.04.2025                      85 
   

ii 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2024-2025) 
 
Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson  
 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri M. Mallesh Babu 
4. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
5. Shri Pradan Baruah 
6. Shri Charanjit Singh Channi 
7. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
8. Shri Devusinh Chauhan 
9. Ms. Iqra Choudhary 
10. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
11. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
12. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
13. Shri Manish Jaiswal 
14. Shri Naveen Jindal 
15. Shri Jugal Kishore 
16. Thiru Dayanidhi Maran 
17. Shri P. C. Mohan 
18. Shri B. K. Parthasarathi 
19. Shri Awadhesh Prasad 
20. Shri M. K. Raghavan 
21. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
22. Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy 
23. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
24. Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan 
25. Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
26. Kumari Selja 
27. Dr. Bhola Singh 
28. Dr. Indra Hang Subba 
29. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
30. Shri Ve Vaithilingam 

iii 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri Y. M. Kandpal - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri  Lalkithang - Director 
3. Shri Balram Sahu - Deputy Director  
    
 
 
  

iv 
 
INTRODUCTION 
      I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Estimates, having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, do present this 6th Report on the subject 
“Promotion of Climate Resilient Agriculture, Natural and Organic Farming through KVKs’’. 
2.   Recognizing the crucial role of  Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) in promoting sustainable 
agricultural practices, the Committee seek to assess their effectiveness in advancing climate -
resilient agriculture through farmer training, field demonstrations, and technical support. These 
initiatives aim to reduce chemical dependency, improve soil fertility, and ensure long -term 
agricultural sustainability. While organic farming focuses on practices such as crop rotation and 
bio-control, natural farming adopts a no-input approach that relies on biodiversity, compost, and 
natural pest management. The Committee intend to evaluate the contribution of KVKs in 
promoting these sustainable practices, identify the challenges encountered in achieving these 
objectives, and examine how inconsistencies in service conditions across KVKs may affect staff 
performance and overall outcomes. In this regard, the Committee on Estimates (2024 -25) have 
selected this subject for a detailed examination and report to the House.  
 
3.   In this report, the Committee have undert aken a comprehensive examination of various 
aspects related to Climate Resilient Agriculture and the National Innovations in Climate Resilient 
Agriculture (NICRA) initiative. The analysis covers the promotion of sustainable farming 
practices, including nat ural and organic farming, the impact of chemical inputs on agriculture, 
and the critical role played by KVKs in these domains. Based on this detailed assessment, the 
Committee have provided their observations and recommendations to address the identified 
challenges and enhance the effectiveness of these initiatives.  
 
4.  The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare on the subject on 26th September 2024 and 3rd February 2025. The Committee 
also held informal discussions on the subject during their study visit on 29 th December 2024 at 
Junagadh, Gujarat.   The draft Report was considered and adopted by Committee on Estimates 
(2024-25) at their sitting held on 3rd April 2025.  
 
5.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare for furnishing material, written replies to list of points and 
tendering evidence before them.  
 
6.  For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/ recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Part-II of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                     DR. SANJAY JAISWAL 
03 April 2025                  CHAIRPERSON 
13 Chaitra 1947 (Saka)                        COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 

1 
 
PART-I 
CHAPTER-I 
1.1 Introductory 
India’s agricultural landscape faces unprecedented challenges in the wake of 
climate change, with millions of farmers grappling with unpredictable weather patterns, 
reduced yields, and rising production costs. This introduction outlines an integrated 
approach—centred on climate-resilient agriculture, natural, and organic farming —and 
highlights the pivotal role played by Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) in promoting 
sustainable agricultural practices.  
1.2 Understanding Climate Vulnerabilities in Indian Agriculture 
Climate change poses significant threats to India’s food and nutritional security. 
With a high proportion of the population dependent on agriculture, even modest 
reductions in crop yields can translate into subs tantial economic setbacks. The 
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare  (MoA&FW) emphasizes that climate 
change is predicted to reduce yields by approximately 4.5 to 9 percent over the 
medium term, impacting about 310 districts that are classified as highly vulnerable. In 
a country where agriculture contributes roughly 16 percent of t he GDP, such yield 
losses represent not just a challenge to food security but also an economic risk at the 
national level. 
Against this backdrop, the Government of India has prioritized research and 
development initiatives under the Prime Minister’s Nation al Action Plan on Climate 
Change. Projects like the National Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture 
(NICRA) were launched to develop, demonstrate, and scale technologies that enable 
farmers to adapt to climatic variability. The focus here is not only  on technical 
interventions but also on building the resilience of the entire farming ecosystem —a 
critical step towards sustainable agricultural practices. 
1.3 Natural and Organic Farming 
A cornerstone of this resilience-building exercise is the promotion of natural and 
organic farming. Natural farming  emphasizes the use of indigenous inputs such as 
cow dung and urine -based formulations (e.g., Beejamrit, Jeevamrit, and 
Ghanjeevamrit) alongside practices like intercropping, mulching, and the application of 
botanicals. These techniques are rooted in traditional agricultural wisdom but are 
being validated through systematic research. For instance, natural farming practices 
have demonstrated not only comparable yields to those achieved through integrated 
crop ma nagement but also significant reductions in the cost of cultivation. The 
approach helps in maintaining or even enhancing soil organic carbon levels —a key 
indicator of soil health. 
Organic farming, with its avoidance of synthetic inputs and focus on buildin g 
natural fertility, complements the principles of natural farming. Both methodologies 
advocate for a reduced reliance on chemical fertilizers and pesticides, thereby 
mitigating the adverse effects of intensive farming on the environment. Moreover, 
these practices contribute to better moisture conservation and soil fertility, which are 
vital in regions increasingly affected by erratic rainfall and prolonged dry spells. 

2 
 
Several on -station and on -farm evaluations demonstrate the effective 
integration of natural farming practices into existing cropping systems. The focus is on 
developing a resilient agricultural system that tackles the immediate challenges of 
climate variability while promoting long -term sustainability through soil health 
preservation and reduc ed input costs. By blending traditional inputs with modern 
scientific validation, natural and organic farming present a promising pathway toward 
sustainable, economically viable, and environmentally sound agriculture. 
1.4 The Strategic Role of Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) 
Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) have emerged as critical nodes in the 
dissemination and practical application of climate resilient, natural, and organic 
farming techniques. Functioning as extension centres, KVKs bridge the gap between 
research institutions and the farming community. They are instrumental in 
demonstrating climate smart technologies through on -farm trials and participatory 
approaches that ensure interventions are tailored to the specific resource constraints 
and agro-climatic conditions of local communities. 
The MoA&FW outlines a comprehensive technology demonstration component 
where KVKs implement climate resilient practices in selected vulnerable districts. This 
involves a participatory process at the village level —beginning with the formation of 
Village Climate Risk Managemen t Committees, followed by planning interventions 
across modules such as natural resource management, crop production, and livestock 
management. The hands -on demonstrations include practices like on -farm water 
harvesting, supplemental irrigation, introducti on of drought and flood -tolerant crop 
varieties, and improved drainage systems. Such efforts are aimed at showcasing the 
collective strength of a technology package rather than isolated practices. 
Beyond demonstrations, KVKs play a vital role in capacity b uilding. Through 
training programs and awareness campaigns, they have reached thousands of 
farmers, enhancing their climate literacy and equipping them with the knowledge to 
implement sustainable practices. Whether it is through organized workshops, on -field 
training sessions, or exposure visits to model natural farming plots, KVKs act as 
catalysts in driving the adoption of sustainable farming practices at scale. 
Furthermore, under the National Mission on Natural Farming, KVKs are tasked 
with responsibilities that extend to the training of Community Resource Persons and 
farmer master trainers. These initiatives are designed to create a cascading effect 
where well-trained individuals further disseminate the techniques among their peers, 
ensuring that the ben efits of natural and organic farming reach even the most remote 
areas. Such a decentralized approach is critical in ensuring that adaptation strategies 
are not only adopted widely but are also tailored to meet local conditions and 
challenges. 
1.5 A Collaborative Path Forward 
The integrated strategy of promoting climate resilient agriculture through natural 
and organic farming, with KVKs at the helm of extension efforts, underscores a 
broader shift towards sustainable agricultural practices in India. This ap proach aligns 
with national goals of ensuring food security, reducing production costs, and mitigating 
the impacts of climate change —all while preserving the ecological balance and 
enhancing soil health. 

3 
 
The collaborative efforts -spanning strategic researc h, technology 
demonstration, and capacity building -reflect a comprehensive framework that 
leverages traditional knowledge and modern innovation. By emphasizing context -
specific solutions and fostering local ownership through participatory approaches, 
India is charting a path towards a resilient and sustainable agricultural future. 
The integration of climate resilient practices with natural and organic farming 
represents a transformative step for Indian agriculture. With KVKs playing a pivotal 
role in this t ransition, the focus remains on empowering farmers with the knowledge, 
tools, and techniques necessary to navigate the challenges of climate change while 
safeguarding the long -term health of the nation’s agricultural resources. This 
collaborative model ser ves as a robust foundation for sustainable development, 
ensuring that future generations inherit a resilient and thriving agricultural ecosystem. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

4 
 
CHAPTER-II 
CLIMATE RESILIENT AGRICULTURE & NICRA 
2.1 Introduction 
The Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) launched a major Project 
entitled, National Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) during 2010 -11 
with an outlay of Rs.350 crores for the XI Plan with the following objectives:   
 To enhance the resilience of Indian agriculture covering crops, livestock 
and fisheries to climatic variability and climate change through 
development and application of improved production and risk 
management technologies.   
 To demonstrate site specific technology pa ckages on farmers’ fields for 
adapting to current climate risks  To enhance the capacity building of 
scientists and other stakeholders in climate resilient agricultural research 
and its application.  
2.2 Project Components  
Both short term and long terms outputs are expected from the project in terms 
of new and improved varieties of crops, livestock breeds, management practices that 
help in adaptation and mitigation and inputs for policy making to mainstream climate 
resilient agriculture in the developmental planning. The overall expected outcome is 
enhanced resilience of agricultural production to climate variability in vulnerable 
regions. The project is comprised of four components.  
i)  Strategic research on adaptation and mitigation  
ii) Technology demonstration on farmers’ fields to cope wi th current climate 
variability iii) Sponsored and competitive research grants to fill critical research 
gaps  
iv) Capacity building of different stake holders  
 (i) Strategic Research  
The strategic research has been planned at leading research institutes of ICAR 
in a network mode covering crops, horticulture, livestock, natural resource 
management and fisheries sectors. To begin with, the project is focusing on crops like 
wheat, rice, maize, pigeon pea, groundnut, tomato, mango and banana; cattle, buffalo 
and small ruminants among livestock and both marine and freshwater fish species of 
economic importance. The major research themes are:   
 Vulnerability assessment of major production zones   
 Linking weather based agro-advisories to contingency planning 
 Assessing the impacts and evolving varieties tolerant to key climatic 
stresses (drought, heat, frost, flooding, etc.) in major food and 
horticulture crops   
 Continuous monitoring of greenho use gases in open field conditions in 
major production systems   
 Evolving adaptation and mitigation strategies through e nhancing water 
and nutrient use efficiency and conservation agriculture   

5 
 
 Studying changes in pest dynamics, pest/pathogen -crop relation ships 
and emergence of new pests and pathogens under changing climate  
 Adaptation strategies in livestock through nutritional and environmental 
manipulations   
 Harnessing the beneficial effects of temperature in inland and marine 
fisheries through better understanding of the spawning behaviour.  
The research was initiated during 2011 -12 in all the above themes. The major 
emphasis during the year was on building state of art research infrastructure like high 
throughput phenotyping platforms, free air tempera ture elevation systems in open 
fields, environmental growth chambers with CO2 and temperature controls and special 
caloric metric system to study livestock response to heat stress. These are some of 
the unique facilities being set up for the first time in Asia. In all the target crops like 
rice, wheat, maize, pigeon  pea, tomato and mango, core sets of genetic resources 
were assembled and field phenotyped at different institutions with a view to identify 
sources of tolerance to climatic stresses and related genes and traits. For the first 
time, all the germplasm of wheat with NBPGR has been multiplied for field 
phenotyping and currently under evaluation. Country wide studies have been initiated 
to understand the impact of temperature on flowering behaviour in  mango. A 
nationwide pest surveillance and monitoring system has been put in place for all the 
target crops for major pests and diseases wherein real time incidence is being 
monitored along with weather parameters to build pest warning models. Methods for 
measurement of greenhouse gas emissions in the marine ecosystem have been 
standardized. Carbon sequestration potential through agro forestry systems across the 
country is being quantified. Monitoring of experiments on conservation agriculture in 
different production systems is initiated to assess the adaptation and mitigation 
potential of CA practices. The vulnerability of all the rural districts in the country (about 
540) is being quantified in terms of exposure, sensitivity and adaptive capacity in order 
to prepare a vulnerability atlas. 
(ii) Technology Demonstration  
The technology demonstration component deals with demonstrating proven 
technologies for adaptation of crop and livestock production systems to climate 
variability. This component is implement ed in selected vulnerable districts of the 
country through location specific interventions by Krishi Vigyan Kendras in a 
participatory mode. The project is implemented in 151 districts across the country. 
These districts are selected based on the following  criteria besides the strength of the 
KVKs: 
 Drought proneness based on 30 years rainfall data (Source: IMD)   
 Cyclone proneness based on frequency as recorded by IMD/State Disaster 
Management agencies.   
 Flood proneness based on IMD data and NDMA maps. 
 Vulnerability to heat wave and cold wave based on IMD grid data on 
temperatures. 
 Actual incidence of floods and droughts as recorded by AICRPAM centres 
The interventions in the village panchayats are finalized following a participatory 
approach through the  Village Climate Risk Management Committee (VCRMC), after 
the PRA to assess the climate related problems in the village and baseline survey. The 

6 
 
program was launched formally in all the villages by involving the state line department 
functionaries and lead ers of the panchayats to ensure local ownership of the project 
from the beginning and convergence of related schemes currently in operation in the 
panchayat. In each village, the interventions are made in the following four modules: 
Module I: Natural resources 
Module II: Crop Production 
Module III: Livestock and Fisheries 
Module IV: Institutional Interventions 
(iii) Sponsored and competitive grants  
Under this component, critical researchable issues like impact on plant 
pollinators, fisheries in estuarine habitats, hail storm management, hill and mountain 
eco-system, small ruminants and socio economic aspects of climate change etc. are 
provided research grants. 
 (iv) Capacity building  
Since climate change is an emerging area of science, capacity building of 
young scientists on simulation modelling, high through put phenotyping, greenhouse 
gasses measurement, etc. is being taken up through training programs organized in 
India and sponsoring scientists abroad. Simultaneously, more than 100 training 
programs have been organized across the country covering 50000 farmers to create 
awareness on climate change and variability. 
2.3 Climate change poses a significant threat to Indian agriculture,  affecting food 
security, rural livelihoods, and economic stability.  With 109 districts classified as "very 
high risk" and  201 as "highly vulnerable" under the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change  (IPCC) protocol, it is imperative to develop and implement climate -
resilient agricultural strategies. Recognizing this ch allenge, the Government of India 
has initiated multiple programs, notably the National Innovations in Climate Resilient 
Agriculture  (NICRA), to enhance adaptive capacity through research, technology 
demonstrations, and farmer education.  Additionally, pol icies under the National 
Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) aim to integrate climate -smart farming 
practices to mitigate the adverse effects of changing climatic conditions. 
2.4 Key Interventions under NICRA  
In response to the Committee's inquiry regarding the major initiatives 
undertaken under NICRA to enhance climate resilience in Indian agriculture, the 
Ministry provided the following insights:  
 
i. "Risk and Vulnerability Assessments:  Extensive climate risk evaluations 
were conducted in 573 out o f 651 agricultural districts. This effort led to the 
development of District Agricultural Contingency Plans (DACP) in 651 
districts, enabling targeted interventions.  
ii. Development of Climate -Resilient Crop Varieties: More than 2,900 new 
crop varieties have been developed in the last decade, with 537 specifically 
designed to withstand extreme climatic conditions such as droughts, floods, 
and salinity. Notable examples include drought -resistant rice varieties 
(Sahabhagidhan, CR Dhan 801) and heat  tolerant wheat varieties (HD 

7 
 
3411). (A list of drought/moisture stress tolerant varieties provided by the 
Ministry is attached at Annexure-1)  
iii. Technology Demonstration and Capacity Building : In 151 climatically 
vulnerable districts, location -specific climate -resilient technologies have 
been tested and validated through Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs). Over 
21,000 capacity -building programmes have benefited nearly 600,000 
farmers, resulting in productivity gains of 28 - 37% for crops and 10-12% for 
livestock . 
iv. Infrastructure and Institutional Support : Custom Hiring Centres (CHCs) 
established under NICRA have facilitated the use of modern farming 
implements at affordable costs, improving efficiency and reducing labour 
constraints for small and marginal farmers. Furthermore, Village Climate 
Risk Management Committees  (VCRMCs) play a crucial role in local 
decision-making and the dissemination of climate-resilient technologies."  
 
2.5 Government Policies and Climate Adaptation Strategies  
         The Committee  inquired about the specific government policies aimed at 
integrating climate resilience into agriculture and ensuring long -term sustainability, the 
Ministry outlined the following strategies: 
i. “Achieving land degradation neutrality for 26 million hectares by 2030. 
ii. Expanding organic and natural farming  through programs like the 
Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) and the National Mission on Natural 
Farming (NMNF). 
iii. Promoting climate-smart technologies such as alternate wetting and drying 
(AWD) in rice, di rect-seeded rice (DSR), and customized nutrient management 
using precision agriculture tools. 
iv. Enhancing water use efficiency  through programs like Pradhan Mantri Krishi 
Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY), which supports micro -irrigation and rainwater 
harvesting infrastructure.” 
2.6 Climate Mitigation through Sustainable Practices 
        The Committee sought information on the measures taken to reduce the 
environmental impact of agriculture, particularly in relation to methane and nitrous 
oxide emissions challenging net-zero agriculture. In response, the Ministry outlined the 
following strategies: 
“In agriculture, methane emissions are largely observed from the rice 
cultivation and livestock. Adoption of technologies such as system of rice 
intensification, direct seeded rice and alternate wetting and drying in rice, 
whereas improved feed and fodder systems and community fodder bank in 
livestock would curtail the methane emissions. Nitrous oxide emissions can be 
minimized by adopting soil test based integrated nutrient management, leaf 
colour charts -based nitrogen fertilization, avoiding crop residue burning and 
promoting residue recycling. In addition, adoption of agro -forestry systems and 
horticultural crops aids in carbon sequestration. All these technologies are up -
scaled by the government to farmers through various schemes such as NMSA, 
NICRA, MIDH (Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture), etc.” 

8 
 
2.7 Enhancing Farmers’ Economic Resilience 
          In response to the Committee's inquiry about the economic benefits of climate-
resilient agriculture for farmers, the Ministry shared the following key findings: 
“Studies conducted in NICRA -adopted villages in Telangana and Karnataka 
indicate that farmers’ incomes have increased by 35 -40% compared to non -NICRA 
villages. Factors contributing to this economic uplift include: 
i. Adoption of resilient crop varieties , leading to stable and higher yields 
despite erratic weather conditions. 
ii. Access to modern agricultural machinery  through C ustom Hiring Centres, 
reducing input costs and labour dependency. 
iii. Value addition and market linkages  facilitated through farmer cooperatives 
and self-help groups. 
iv. Integration of livestock management , ensuring a diversified income stream 
that is less vulnerable to climatic shocks.” 
2.8 Financial Allocation and Expenditure under NICRA 
           In response to the Committee's inquiry regarding the financial resources 
allocated to NICRA over the past five years, the Ministry provided a detailed 
breakdown of allocations and expenditures, highlighting key investments in climate-
resilient agriculture. 
Year 
Demonstratio
n Allocation 
(₹ Cr) 
Research 
Allocatio
n (₹ Cr) 
Demonstratio
n Expenditure 
(₹ Cr) 
Research 
Expenditur
e (₹ Cr) 
Total 
Allocatio
n (₹ Cr) 
Total 
Expenditur
e (₹ Cr) 
2019
-20 11.57 34.43 10.16 30.42 46.00 40.58 
2020
-21 14.00 35.83 13.03 31.71 49.83 44.74 
2021
-22 15.35 31.65 15.08 30.98 47.00 46.06 
2022
-23 16.00 24.87 15.89 24.56 40.87 40.45 
2023
-24 18.62 29.53 18.40 29.02 48.15 47.42 
Total 75.54 156.31 72.56 146.69 231.85 219.25 
 
2.9 Future Prospects and Scaling up Climate Resilience 
         When asked about the government's future roadmap for enhancing climate-
resilient agriculture, the Ministry outlined the following key priorities: 

9 
 
“Expand NICRA interventions to more high -risk districts and ensure 
wider adoption of proven climate-resilient technologies. 
 Strengthen public-private partnerships for research and development of 
next-generation climate-smart crops and farming techniques. 
 Enhance the role of digital technology in agriculture, such as using 
remote sensing and AI -driven predictive mo dels for early warning 
systems. 
 Foster community-led climate adaptation models, where farmer groups 
and rural institutions take an active role in knowledge dissemination and 
resource management.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

10 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
SUSTAINABLE FARMING PRACTICES – PROMOTION OF NATURAL AND 
ORGANIC FARMING 
3.1 An overview 
As informed by the Ministry, a range of sustainable farming practices —including 
natural farming, organic farming, Paramparagat Krishi, and cow -based farming —is 
being actively advanced. The Ministry is dedicating resources to robust training 
programs that equip farmers with the practical skills and critical knowledge required to 
implement these methods effectively. Alongside these initiatives, extensive on -ground 
extension services —featuring practical fi eld demonstrations and hands -on 
workshops—are provided to ensure that farmers fully understand the standardized 
definitions, guidelines, and benefits of each approach. These coordinated efforts aim 
not only to improve soil health, reduce reliance on chemic al inputs, and enhance 
productivity, but also to build climate resilience and promote long -term economic 
viability for farming communities.                     
3.2 Understanding Natural Farming 
Under the Bharatiya  Prakritik Krishi Paddhati (BPKP) scheme—promoted since 
2019-20 as a sub -scheme of Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) —natural 
farming has been championed. BPKP is proposed to be upscaled into the National 
Mission on Natural Farming (NMNF). Currently, NMNF defines Natural Farming (NF) 
as chemical-free farming that integrates livestock and diversified crop systems rooted 
in Indian traditional knowledge. This approach aims to improve soil health, reduce 
input costs for farmers, and enhance climate resilience. It recognizes the natural 
interdependence of soil, microbiome, plants, animals, climate, and human agricultural 
requirements by using on -farm inputs produced from local livestock and plant 
resources rather than relying on off -farm inputs like laboratory -manufactured bio -
fertilizers. T raining modules have been developed, and farmers are encouraged to 
adopt these Natural Farming methods.      
3.3 Benefits of Natural Farming 
On being asked by the Committee about the measurable benefits of Natural 
Farming, the Ministry replied as under:       
“Benefits from the Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojna: 
 To promote natural resource based integrated and climate resilient 
sustainable farming systems that ensure maintenance and increase of soil 
fertility, natural resource conservation, on -farm nutrient recycling and 
minimize dependence of farmers on external inputs; 
 To reduce cost of agriculture to farmers through sustainable integrated 
organic farming systems thereby enhancing farmer’s net income per unit of 
land. 
 To sustainably produce chemical free an d nutritious food for human 
consumption. 

11 
 
 To protect environment from hazardous inorganic chemicals by adoption of 
eco-friendly low-cost traditional techniques and farmer friendly technologies. 
 To bring large contiguous traditional/ default organic areas un der organic 
certification and empowering the farmers of such areas with market linkages; 
 To facilitate certification access to individual and small farmer groups not 
covered by any scheme. 
 To empower farmers through their own institutional development in t he 
form of clusters and groups with capacity to manage production, processing, 
value addition and certification management in value chain mode; 
 To make farmers entrepreneurs through  providing direct market linkages 
with local and export trade houses/ chains. 
 Ensuring professional handholding  of the so developed clusters  for 
transforming into business enterprises for better value realization of their 
premium organic produce.” 
 
3.4 Difference between Natural and Organic Farming 
    On the query of the Committee regarding the d ifferences in concept and practice 
between Natural Farming (NF) and Organic Farming (OF), the Ministry submitted the 
following reply:         
Practices/inputs Natural Farming 
(NF) 
Organic Farming (OF) 
Concept NF mostly relies on on-
farm inputs for nutrients, 
insect-disease 
management with 
mandated practice of 
multi- cropping 
(intercrop, cover  crop, 
trap crop), mulching 
(soil and crop residue 
mulch), Whapasa and 
application of 
concoctions prepared 
from cow dung and 
urine. 
OF allows use of off-farm inputs 
as per national standards for 
organic farming apart from on - 
farm inputs for nutrient, insect - 
disease management. Practices 
such as multi -cropping 
(intercrop, trap crop, cover crop 
etc), mulching etc, are optional. 
Cropping 
during 
Multi-variate 
cropping/Pre-monsoon 
dry seeding with mixture 
of minimum of  9 crops 
of different crop types 
for biomass addition 
Monocrop of green manures 
such as Sesbania aculeata, 
Sesbania rostrata, Crotalaria  
juncea etc are grown. 
Optionally, summer ploughing is 
also recommended for pest 
management. 
 
 
 
summer/fallow 

12 
 
Seed treatment Seed treatment with 
Beejamrit prepared 
using desi cow  dung, 
cow urine, lime, virgin 
soil and water 
Seeds are treated with bio - 
control agents such as 
Trichoderma, Pseudomonas and 
bio-fertilizers such as 
Azospirillum, Azatobacter, PSBs 
etc 
Nutrient Application of an 
enriched microbial 
culture such as 
jeevamrit and Ghana 
jeevamrit prepared 
using desi cow dung, 
cow urine, jaggery, 
pulse flour and virgin 
soil as a  microbial 
enhancer for native 
nutrient supply 
Mainly through green manuring, 
legume crops, biofertilizers, 
vermicompost, enriched 
composts, VAM, panchagavya, 
cow urine, non -edible oil cakes, 
effective micro  organisms (EM) 
consortium cultures and 
biodynamic (BD) formulations 
(BD-501, BD-502etc). 
management 
Plant protection Pest and disease 
control are carried out 
using bio -formulations 
such as Neem Seed 
Kernel Extract, 
Neemaster, Brahmaster, 
Agniaster, Dashparni 
ark, Buttermilk etc., 
prepared from desi cow 
urine, cow  dung, 
tobacco, green chilli, 
garlic; neem, karanj, 
custard apple, castor & 
datura leaves and water 
etc. 
Pest and disease control is 
primarily through bio -control 
agents such as Pseudomonas 
spp., Trichoderma spp., 
Trichogrammaspp. etc; Bio -
pesticides like Neem based 
formulations, plant -based 
extracts, pest repellent plants 
(trap crops) on the ridges and 
borders; and using Yellow/blue 
sticky traps etc. Light traps and 
Inter-cultivation practices. 
Standards and 
certification 
No Standards and 
certification system is 
available as of now. 
However, committee 
has been constituted for 
defining standards and 
certification process. 
National Programme for Organic 
Production (NPOP) standards 
having equivalence with 
European Union, USDA and 
Switzerland s tandards. PGS 
and Third -party certification 
exists. 
  
  

13 
 
3.5 Integrated Approaches and Hybrid Practices 
When asked about the possibility of a unified or mixed approach incorporating 
both organic and conventional farming practices, the Ministry clarified:  
“It is not permitted to mix organic and conventional farming practices as there 
are chances of cross contamination and will dilute the effectiveness of organic 
certification process. Under All India Network Programme on Organic Farming, 
comparative evaluation of organic, towards organic (integrated) and  inorganic 
farming practices have been evaluated  at 20 locations in 16  States. Under 
organic approach commonly referred as integrated crop management,  
evaluation of  following practices is being underta ken in different  crops and  
cropping systems. 
a)  50%  organic package (manures, insect/pest/weed management)  + 50% 
inorganic package (mineral fertilizers    with    need -based    application    of 
pesticides) 
b)  25% nutrients through organic +25% nutrients  through   inorganic   source   
of   nutrients   + Seed/Seedling   treatment   with   Beejamrit   + application of 
Ghanjeevamrit @ 1000 kg/ha, Jeevamrit@1500litres/ha/time  twice a month 
with irrigation water 
Above two treatments which are being tested incorporates both  organic and  
conventional farming practice.” 
3.6 Role of Inter-Cropping and Multi-Cropping in Natural and Organic Farming 
The Committee sought information on the role of inter -cropping and multi-cropping 
in both Natural Farming (NF) and Organi c Farming (OF). In response, the Ministry 
replied as under:            
 “The benefits of inter-cropping and multi-cropping are given below: 
 Planting species in-between rows allows utilizing the resources in a more 
efficient way.  
 Intercropping performs several functions, either repelling or trapping 
pests and attracting beneficial insects.  
 Secondary crops provide more returns and ensure profit even when the 
primary crop fails. 
 Plants between rows and in alley intercropping, in par ticular, mitigate 
erosion. 
 The leguminous family is known for nitrogen fixation and thus provides 
nitrogen for the companion species. 
 More efficient use of natural resources like water and solar energy as 
they are distributed to secondary crops as well. 
 Beneficial plants occupy vacant spaces between rows in intercropping 
and suppress the weed growth. 

14 
 
 The more agricultural species grow, the better it is for the environment 
which enhances biodiversity and stability 
Intercropping/multi cropping is used effecti vely in natural/organic farming. 
Studies conducted on natural farming with intercropping under AINP -OF revealed 
significant yield advantage (9.1 to 67.7 %) in different cropping systems including 
intercropping/multi-cropping over conventional system. 
Intercropping systems in rain fed agriculture play a vital role in climatic 
adaptations and risk resilience. Crop diversification with intercropping systems 
enhances resource use efficiency, overall system productivity and income per unit 
area to the small holde rs. Further, crop diversification with intercropping systems 
provides better conditions for food and nutritional security and enables farmers to grow 
surplus products or sale at market and thus, helps to obtain increased income to meet 
other needs related to household well -being. Diversifying from the monoculture of 
traditional staples can have important nutritional benefits for farmers. Diversification 
can also manage price risk, on the assumption that all products may not suffer from 
low market prices at the same time and can increase the profitability of the farming 
community. Thus, crop diversification with intercropping systems contributes in 
achieving food and nutritional security, income growth, employment generation and 
sustainable rain fed agriculture. 
Some experiments lay down by ICAR and SAUs showed that the yield improved in 
some crops after intercropping.” 
3.7 Cluster formation in Natural Farming 
 Cluster formation is natural farming is the process of grouping farmers, villages 
or geographical areas into clusters to promote and practice natural farming methods.  
The main objective of cluster formation is to create a supportive ecosystem that 
enables farmers to share knowledge , resources and best practices, ultimately leading 
to improved productivity, profitability and sustainability. 
 On being asked about the  criteria for selecting districts and clusters for 
promoting natural farming , the Ministry has stated as under :                                   
                                                   
“NMNF is proposed as a Centrally Sponsored Scheme and shall be 
implemented by States/UTs. Districts are selected in consultation with 
States/UTs based on factors like high input sale, low input sale, and th e 
prevalence of natural farming practices. Priority is given to areas such as the 
Namami Gange regions within a 5 km corridor along the river Ganga. Areas 
with established traditional NF practices, practising NF farmers, and strong 
local institutions such as SRLM, FPO, or PACS are given due consideration. 
Approximately 125 willing farmers are proposed to form a cluster, receiving 
training from practising NF farmers and trained scientists from KVKs and 
Agricultural Universities.” 
3.8 Natural Farming Practices across Regions 
         When asked how the Ministry is addressing the differences in natural farming 
practices across states and what measures are being taken to standardize them while 
preserving regional relevance, the Ministry has explained as under: 

15 
 
“Evaluation and validation of natural farming in various agro-ecologies are being 
conducted through the All India Network Programme on Organic Farming at 20 
locations across 16 States . Core practices include natural concoctions 
(jeevamrit, beejamrit, ghanje evamrit), intercropping, mulching, and multi -variate 
crop-based green manuring during fallow periods. While these core practices 
remain consistent, variations in crop selection, mulching materials, trap crops, 
and traditional inputs occur based on regional  relevance. Based on these 
experiments, a generic protocol for natural farming has been developed in 
consultation with various stakeholders”.      
      
3.9 Out-Scaling of Natural Farming through Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) 
          On being asked by the Committee about the impact of the demonstrations and 
trainings on farmers’ adoption of natural farming practices  under the project  “Out-
scaling of Natural Farming through Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs)” , the Ministry stated 
as under: 
“The activities envisaged and carried out in the project "Out-scaling of Natural 
Farming through Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) are organizing awareness 
programmes, training an d demonstrations of various fac ets of natural 
farming.  The KVKs organized 11341 awareness programmes involving 11.37 
lakh farmers and other stakeholders; 2476 training programmes for 1.02 lakh 
farmers; and 7592 demonstrations on natural farming practices module at 
farmers field and build capacity of the farmers on preparing different na tural 
farming inputs like, beejamrit, jeevamrit, ghanjeevamrit, neemaster, 
brahmaster, agniaster, dashparni ark, etc. It leads to reduction in cost of 
cultivation (3 to 55 %), besides improvement in soil micro -environment 
including improvement in water hol ding capacity of soil and soil health, 
reduction in cost of cultivation by 12 -45% under natural farming as compared 
to chemical fertilizers. Farm produce with natural farming practices reportedly 
fetched better price in some cases. However, the farmers hav e some 
hesitation regarding the assured income at par with conventional farming.” 
3.10 Role of Master Trainers and Extension Officers in Natural and Organic 
Farming 
The Committee enquired about the Ministry’s approach in identifying and 
training "champion farmers" as master trainers in natural farming and the impact of 
this cascading training model. The Ministry replied as under: 
“In the NMNF proposal, the nomenclature “Champion Farmers” has been 
changed to “practising NF farmers”. The identification of the se practising NF 
farmers is proposed to be done by the States/ UTs as per the proposed 
selection criteria (practicing NF for a minimum of 3 years, have prior 
experience in providing training on NF, undergone prior training on NF, have 
Model NF Farm, livest ock and good communication skills). The training of 
these practising NF farmers to become “Master Trainers” in Natural Farming 
is proposed to be conducted by experienced Centres’ of Natural Farming.” 
In response to a similar query about the role of extension officers in supporting 
farmers, the Ministry replied as follows: 

16 
 
“Under MOVCD -NER, Local Resource Persons (LRP) are onboarded as 
master trainers or extension officers, providing them trainings from KVKs, 
MANAGE, Agricultural Universities etc. Krishi Sakhi’s under SRLMs are also 
leveraged. These LRPs will help in dissemination of knowledge in local 
language, Coordinate activities between the farmers, FIGs and FPO etc”.  
                
3.11 Establishment Bio-Input Resource Centres 
In respo nse to the Committee's query regarding bio -resource centres, the 
Ministry provided the following information: 
“Under the proposed NMNF, 10,000 Bhartiya Prakritik Kheti Bio -Input 
Resource Centres (BRCs) shall be established by practising NF farmers, 
FPOs, SHG, PACS/ Cooperatives, local rural entrepreneurs, etc. to promote 
Natural Farming. The following support is proposed to be provided on a need 
basis to set up the BRC:  
i.   Purchase of equipments such as filter, pressure cooker, drums, etc 
ii.   Set up preparation unit/ shop 
iii.   Cow shed lining 
iv.   Construct pipelines and channels to collect cow urine 
v.   Transportation, packaging of NF inputs, etc 
It is proposed in the NMNF that NCONF/ NIPHM shall develop modules, 
systems and processes to periodically assess the quality of various NF inputs 
sold at the BRC. Further, NCONF/ NIPHM is proposed to develop the 
modalities of quality assurance. 
    
3.12 Seed and Fodder Banks and Research 
The Ministry informed that  seed banks have been established by 23 centres 
under NICRA to ensure the availability of climate-resilient varieties in targeted areas.  
When enquired about any research focused on developing seed quality for the 
Himalayan region, considering the significan t altitude variations and whether KVKs in 
Himachal Pradesh, Sikkim, and Uttarakhand are conducting research to adapt seeds 
for different climatic conditions and altitudes, the  Ministry replied that the Research on 
seed quality for the Himalayan region is conducted by evaluating seed production 
technologies at farmers’ fields and through quality seed production by KVKs. For 
instance, KVKs in Himachal Pradesh, Sikkim, and Uttarakhand have produced 
significant quantities of quality seeds, while institutions l ike ICAR -IGFRI and its 
Regional Research Stations in Palampur and Srinagar work on varietal improvements 
for forage crops and the development of seed standards for Himalayan grasses and 
legumes. Similarly, ICAR-VPKAS, Almora, along with its associated KVKs , is engaged 
in producing quality seeds adapted to hill regions.  
Regarding seed and fodder availability , the Ministry informed about the 
production quantities and market challenges. Breeder seeds for forage crops —such 
as oats (around 100 quintals of breeder seed with 300 quintals of TFL seed), PLP-1 (6 

17 
 
quintals breeder, 30 quintals TFL), Berseem (40 quintals breeder, 180 quintals TFL), 
and fodder maize SFM-1 (1 quintal breeder, 10 quintals TFL) —are produced annually, 
although the market remains unorganized.                                                                                
For perennial forage crops, production is limited due to lower demand, with 
IGFRI centers reporting outputs like 105 kg of orchard grass, 70 kg of tall fescue, and 
other quant ities, along with around 200,000 rooted slips. For Napier (a Bajra -Napier 
hybrid), propagation is carried out through rooted slips transplanted in the rainy 
season, with several high -yielding varieties released and distributed nationally. These 
initiatives emphasize the need to scale up production and better organize the forage 
seed market to ensure timely access to high-quality, regionally adapted seeds.  
    
3.13 Role of KVKs in Livestock and Fodder Management 
Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) play a key role in promoting improved livestock 
and fodder management practices. Through demonstration units, KVKs educate 
farmers on dairy farming —covering aspects such as breeding, feeding, management, 
and healthcare—and collaborate with District Livestock Farms, Fodder Stations, and 
Agricultural/Veterinary Universities. Training programs on fodder crop cultivation, 
silage, and hay making are regularly conducted, and community fodder banks with 
high-yielding varieties are established to ensure a sustainable supply of fodder for 
livestock.             
3.14 Milk Production and Breed Development 
Addressing queries on milk production and breed development, the Ministry 
clarified concerns regarding the high yields claimed for Brazilian cows with Indian 
genetic lineage. It was noted that while such claims exist, the exact genotype and 
genetic constitution remain unconfirmed. The ICAR -Central Institute for Research on 
Cattle (ICAR -CIRC) is implementing a scient ifically driven breeding program for the 
genetic improvement of Sahiwal, Gir, and Kankrej cattle, leading to an approximate 
40% increase in milk yield under strict protocols.                                                                
3.15 Development of Cold Storage Facilities for Crops 
 Cold storage facilities are specialized warehouses designed to store perishable 
crops, such as fruits, vegetables and flowers at controlled temperatures to maintain 
their quality and extend their shelf life.  These faci lities play a crucial role in reducing 
post-harvest losses, improving food security and enhancing the overall efficiency of 
the agricultural supply chain. 
   On the quer y that “Given that about 40% of perishable fruit and vegetables are 
wasted and that cold storage solutions are limited, particularly beyond potatoes, the 
Committee sought to know what efforts the Ministry is making to develop cold storage 
particularly net zero such as the one developed by the CONCOR” ,  the Ministry  
responded as under: 
“Directorate of Onion & Garlic Research , Pune has designed and developed a 
controlled storage structure for onion under Public Private Partnership mode with 
Kala Biotech Pvt. Ltd., Pune to curtail storage losses in onion. Storage structure 
was designed to maintain temperature of 27 ± 2°C and Relative Humidity (RH) of 
60 - 65% with air circulation system. The storage losses  of onion  in the 
Controlled Atmosphere are very low (15%) compared to the traditional onion 
storage (40-60%). This structure can be construc ted in different capacities (200, 
400, 800, 1200, 2000 MT)”. 

18 
 
 3.16 Transitioning from Conventional to Natural and Organic Farming 
The Committee expressed concerns about the challenges faced by farmers 
during the transition to natural and organic farming. They sought information on how 
the Ministry supports farmers by addressing lower returns during the three - to four -
year transition period, ensuring fair pricing, and facilitating the marketing and branding 
of organic produce. 
The Ministry  replied that holistic support is provided to Farmer Producer 
Organizations (FPOs) for three years to ease the transition from conventional to 
natural and organic farming. This support covers a comprehensive range of inputs and 
services including farm inputs, quality planti ng materials, organic certification, market 
linkages, processing unit set -up, and branding of end products. In addition, financial 
assistance is provided directly to farmers via direct benefit transfers (DBT) for both on -
farm and off-farm organic inputs, w hich further incentivize  the adoption of organic 
practices. 
To ensure that farmers can overcome the initial lower returns associated with the 
three- to four-year transition period; the Ministry facilitates the aggregation of farmers 
into groups and clusters. This collective approach helps them access farming inputs, 
advanced agricultural technologies, and collaborative marketing channels. Linkages to 
markets and buyers, along with t echnical support for organic certification, are key 
elements of this strategy. 
3.17 Incentives for Organic Farming and Publicizing Schemes  
The Committee further enquired about the specific incentives, subsidies, and 
public outreach measures implemented to  promote the adoption of organic practices 
over conventional methods. 
The Ministry replied that in terms of incentives, it has rolled out schemes such as 
Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) and the Mission Organic Value Chain 
Development for the North Eastern Region (MOVCDNER). Under PKVY , farmers 
receive assistance of Rs. 31,500 per hectare over three years, which covers various 
components including training, capacity building, PGS certification, value addition, 
marketing, and publicity. Out of this, R s. 15,000 per hectare is provided through DBT 
for on -farm and off -farm organic inputs. Similarly, under the MOVCDNER scheme, 
farmers benefit from an  assistance of Rs. 46,500 per hectare over three years for 
creating FPOs, quality seeds/planting material, and training, with specific allocations of 
Rs. 15,000 for organic inputs and Rs. 17,500 for planting material. 
Furthermore, extensive efforts have been made to publicize these schemes and 
incentives at the grassroots level. Initial workshops for FPO select ion and formation 
are conducted, while informational posters are displayed at village councils, 
panchayats, and district development offices. Regular capacity -building and training 
programs further raise awareness among farmers about the benefits of organi c 
farming. 
For marketing and branding, several initiatives are in place to ensure that organic 
produce receives fair pricing and has access to robust market linkages. The launch of 
the Jaivik Kheti portal —a comprehensive online e -marketing and knowledge 
platform—has enabled over 6.22 lakh farmers to directly connect with buyers. In 
addition, the Ministry supports the development of institutional structures through 
APEDA and the Ministry of Cooperation, which facilitate the creation of dedicated 

19 
 
marketing pl atforms and organic outlets in premium locations such as district 
collectorates. 
Finally, dedicated support is provided to organic FPOs, covering end -to-end 
value chain components. This includes financial assistance for FPO formation and 
handholding, quali ty planting material, ICS management and certification, and 
additional support for creating infrastructure such as custom hiring centres, seed 
stores, cold storage facilities, aggregation centres, transport vehicles, and processing 
units. These measures en sure that farmers not only receive incentives to adopt 
organic practices but also gain the necessary support to market and brand their 
organic produce effectively, thus making organic farming a viable and attractive 
alternative to conventional methods. 
3.18 Incentivizing Organic Farming through Subsidy Reforms  
The Committee enquired whether it would be feasible, under the current fertilizer 
subsidy structure, to redirect a portion of these funds to support and promote the 
adoption of organic farming practices. 
The Ministry stated that  to promote the adoption of organic farming, the 
Government of India has introduced several initiatives. Under the Market Development 
Assistance (MDA) scheme, a subsidy of ₹1,500/MT is provided for the sale of 
Fermented Organic Manure (FOM), Liquid Fermented Organic Manure (LFOM), and 
Phosphate Rich Organic Manure (PROM) produced at plants under the umbrella 
GOBARdhan initiative. This initiative encompasses various schemes, including the 
Sustainable Alternative Towards Affordable Transportation (SATAT) scheme of 
MoPNG, the ‘Waste to Energy’ programme of MNRE, and the Swachh Bharat Mission 
(Grameen) of DDWS. 
Additionally, the government has launched the “PM Programme for Restoration, 
Awareness Generation, Nourishment, and Amelioration of Mother -Earth (PM -
PRANAM)” scheme . This initiative supports sustainable and balanced fertilizer use, 
promotes organic farming, and encourages resource conservation technologies. 
Under PM-PRANAM, 50% of the subsidy saved by a State/UT —through the reduction 
in consumption of chemical fertil izers (Urea, DAP, NPK, MOP) compared to the 
average consumption of the previous three years —is provided to the respective 
State/UT as a grant. This mechanism aims to incentivize the shift towards sustainable 
agricultural practices, including organic farming. 
3.19 Sikkim Model of Organic Farming 
The Committee further enquired whether organic farming is profitable for farmers 
and the status of current situation of organic farming practices in Sikkim, The Ministry 
in its reply stated as under: 
“Organic farming can be profitable for farmers, but factors such as yield levels , 
input costs, certification costs, premium pricing and market access and 
demand determine the actual profitability. Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research through All India Network Programme  on Organic Farming have 
developed organic farming packages on scientific principles for 80 major 
cropping systems and identified varieties suitable for organic farming. These 
contribute for better yield under organic farming making them profitable 
provided market demand and support is ensured. Further, ICAR also 

20 
 
developed 8 integrated organic farming system models for 7 States which 
reduces the market input cost of organic farming significantly thus making it 
profitable. Sikkim is India's first fully organ ic state (declared in 2016) and 
serves as a model for organic agriculture. Productivity has stabilized, and soil 
health has improved. Organic farming in Sikkim resulted in diversification from 
rice and other coarse cereals to vegetables and high value crop s. Farmers 
mainly grow cardamom, ginger, turmeric, oranges, and vegetables. 
Government of Sikkim promotes itself as an "Organic Tourism" destination, 
attracting visitors interested in sustainable agriculture and eco -tourism. The 
main challenges are higher labour costs and difficulty in accessing larger 
markets because of terrains. 
Sikkim has become Organic in January 2016 with the support of National 
Project of Organic Farming (NPOF) under National Mission for Sustainable 
Agriculture (NMSA) and Government o f Sikkim state run scheme, namely 
"Sikkim Organic Mission (SOM)". However, Government of India is projecting 
all 8 North Eastern (NE) States in the country for organic value chain. 
Sikkim Org anic Mission was launched in 2010  with a clear road map of 
converting the entire state into organic. The programme had several initiatives 
in the area of organic certification, consumer  education and market 
development including local organic outlets. 
Government of Sikkim has informed tha t the Production Incentive Scheme 
(PIS) was launched on 25th December 2020 to motivate farmers and boost 
production of buckwheat, turmeric, ginger, large cardamom and orange by 
providing incentives to growers who sale their products through registered 
institutes like Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs), Sikkim State Co -
operative Supply and Marketing Federation ltd. (SIMFED) etc.  
Government of India has been implementing Mission Organic Value Chain 
Development for North Eastern Regi on (MOVCDNER) scheme sin ce 2015-16, 
exclusively in the 8 North Eastern  States including Sikkim, for development of 
certified organic production in value chain mode to link growers with 
consumers and to support the development of the entire value chain from 
inputs, seeds  and certi fication to the creation of facilities for certification, 
aggregation processing, marketing and brand building initiatives. Under 
MOVCDNER, an assistance of Rs. 46,500/ha for 3 years is provided for 
creation of FPO, support to farmers for organic inputs, q uality seeds/ planting 
material and training, hand holding and certification. Financial assistance @ 
Rs 32500/ ha for 3 years is provided to farmers for off -farm /on-farm organic 
inputs is provided to Sikkim for sustaining the status of fully organic farmi ng 
State.  
The farmers practicing organic farming receive about 20% -30% premium 
prices than what they got for conventional produce. Various buyers have 
shown continued interest to procure organic products from Sikkim, but 
currently the quantities produced  are not enough to meet the local and 
domestic demand. Farmer Producer Organisations (FPO s) are being formed 
under MOVCDNER scheme with an expectation that they will collectively 

21 
 
ensure primary processing of the raw material which will not only add value but 
also be economically viable for transportation”. 
3.20 Guidance for Industrialists on Sustainable Materials 
The Committee sought to understand whether the Ministry is providing guidance 
to industrialists on suitable materials for organic farming, such as avoiding plastic 
containers etc. and the steps that are being taken to ensure safety for both consumers 
and farmers. The Ministry replied as under: 
“Startups have been promoted under MOVCDNER with financial assistance 
and capacity building. Regular workshops are conducted with the help of 
institutions such as FSSAI, APEDA, Indian Institute of Packaging on best 
practices and export compliances.” 
3.21 Certification of Organic Products 
In response to the Committee's query, the Ministry submitted that two certification 
systems are implemented to uphold organic food quality and strengthen consumer 
confidence.  
 National Programme for Organic Production (NPOP):  
A third -party certification system based on ISO systems and international 
protocols, applicable for domestic and export markets. NPOP involves 
comprehensive reviews of production, processing, handling, stor age, and 
transport practices to ensure compliance with organic standards. 
 Participatory Guarantee System (PGS-India): 
A decentralized, farmer group -centric certification system that emphasizes 
participation, transparency, trust, and horizontality. PGS-India is designed to be 
affordable, involving group meetings, peer inspections, and collective decision -
making. It utilizes two logos —Large Area Certification (LAC) for extensive 
traditional organic areas and a group certification model for individual 
producers—to help market certified produce.        
3.22 Integrating Sustainable Agriculture in Education 
When asked by the Committee about incorporating organic farming into school 
curricula and short -term courses, the Ministry stated that s ustainable agricultural  
practices are being integrated into educational initiatives. While school curricula fall 
under the Ministry of Education and State Education Departments —with NCERT 
incorporating agricultural topics —ICAR contributes to higher agricultural education. 
Guidelines have been developed for a three -year diploma in organic farming, which 
includes an exit option after one year to obtain a certificate.    
     
 
 
 
 
 

22 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
IMPACT OF CHEMICAL INPUTS IN FARMING 
4.1 An overview 
Chemical inputs, including fertilizers,  pesticides, and herbicides, play a crucial 
role in modern agriculture by boosting crop yields and protecting plants from pests, 
diseases, and weeds. These inputs have significantly contributed to global food 
production and security. However, their excessi ve and indiscriminate use can have 
severe consequences, leading to soil degradation, water contamination, biodiversity 
loss, and health risks for humans and animals. 
Prolonged overuse of synthetic fertilizers deplete soil organic matter, reduces 
microbial diversity, and disrupts natural nutrient cycles, ultimately lowering soil fertility 
over time. Similarly, the runoff of excess chemical fertilizers and pesticides into water 
bodies causes pollution, eutrophication, and aquatic ecosystem damage. The 
persistent application of chemical pesticides and herbicides also contributes to the 
emergence of resistant pests and weeds, making them harder to control and 
necessitating even stronger chemicals. Pesticide residues on food crops pose 
potential health hazards to consumers, leading to concerns about food safety. 
4.2 Mitigating the Impact of Fertilizer Use on Grain Quality and Livestock Health 
The Committee enquired about the Ministry’s approach to address the potential 
negative effects of fertilizer use on grain q uality and the health of livestock consuming 
straw from fertilized crops and sought information on the alternative measures 
explored to mitigate these impacts. The Ministry replied as under: 
“The AICRP (All India Coordinated Research Project) on Long Term Fertilizer 
Experiment (LTFE) indicated that soil test based integrated nutrient 
management (100% NPK + FYM/Lime) resulted in good nutritional quality 
than imbalanced nutrient application. 
Alternative approaches include developing climate resilient varietie s with high 
inputs/nutrient use efficiencies. Focusing on research towards identification of 
novel genes from related wild species as well as generating desired variability 
for such traits using non -conventional and pre breeding approaches. Some of 
these e xamples include novel hybrids between pearl millet and its wild 
relatives such as Pennisetum squamulatum and P .orientale, hybrids between 
berseem and long duration wild species, oats with wild relatives, and novel 
seed producing bajra-napier hybrids.” 
During the post -evidence sitting, the Committee further enquired about the 
outcomes of long -term fertilizer experiments on soil health and their effectiveness in 
reducing fertilizer usage. In response, the Ministry provided a detailed explanation, 
summarizing the key findings and impacts as follows: 
“...The main reason of decline in soil health is imbalance d use of fertilizer with 
low addition of organic manure resulting in multi nutrient deficiencies in 
several parts of India.  The limiting nutrients do no t allow the full expression of 
other nutrients, thereby, lowering the fertilizer responses and crop productivity. 

23 
 
The ICAR is suggesting soil test based balanced and integrated nutrient 
management through conjunctive use of both inorganic and organic sourc es 
(manure, biofertilizers etc.) of plant nutrients to improve soil health and fertility. 
In addition, split application and placement of fertilizers, use of slow releasing 
N-fertilizers, growing leguminous crops and use of Resource Conservation 
Technologies (RCTs) are also advocated.” 
The Ministry further added that good agricultural practices (GAPs) and integrated 
nutrient management (INM) have shown significant potential in reducing fertilizer 
usage by 20 –30% across major crops. Techniques like precision  nutrient 
management, subsurface drip fertigation, and the use of nano fertilizers enhance 
nutrient efficiency. In rice, practices such as organic manure addition and residue 
incorporation can reduce fertilizer use by 25%. Conservation agriculture and 
integrated phosphorus management in pulses and cotton also contribute to substantial 
fertilizer savings. Overall, adopting these practices improve soil health, sustains yields, 
and reduces fertilizer dependency. 
4.3 Ensuring the Safe and Responsible use of Pesticides 
The Committee voiced their concerns about the excessive use of pesticides by 
farmers growing multiple crops, leading to pesticide residues in fodder and the food 
supply, which pose serious health risks, including cancer and other illnesses. Heavy 
reliance on pesticides has resulted in declining yields for farmers. In this regard, the 
Committee sought to know about the steps being taken to reduce pesticide usage, 
ensure pesticide -free fodder and animal feed, mitigate health risks, and implement 
testing mechanisms to detect pesticide residues in vegetables, grains, and fruits for 
public safety. Furthermore, the Committee sought information on whether any policy 
measures have been introduced to reduce or prevent pesticide contamination in 
agriculture. 
 On the question of steps taken to reduce pesticide usage, the Ministry 
submitted as under: 
 “Pesticides are recommended to be used in a safe and judicious manner for 
the control of specific pest on particular crop as per the approved label claim of 
the use  of the pesticide by the Central Insecticide Board & Registration 
Committee (CIB&RC). Regional/State/Site specific recommendations for use 
of pesticides are given through the various AICRP of different crops after 2 -3 
years experimentation in the entire zo ne of the country. These 
recommendations are ensured that only need based optimum quantity of 
various pesticides is used for control of a particular insect -pest or disease. 
These recommendations are included in the zone-wise package of practices of 
the sta te after validation at farmers’ field through Adaptive trials by the state 
government. Regular farmers’ trainings, doordarshan and radio programmes 
are held for creating awareness of the farmers to use only recommended dose 
of pesticides. Further, now the various bio -pesticides have also been 
registered for the control of pesticide on crops by the CIB&RC. The various 
other measures taken to reduce the pesticide usage are as under:   

24 
 
 ICAR-NBAIR is working on various bio -control strategies for insect pest 
management, which are most effective and safer alternatives to chemical 
pesticide usage.  
The Institute has generated 47 technologies towards non -chemical pest 
management wh ich are validated under ICAR funded All India Coordinated 
Research Project on Biological Control of Crop pests through various 
cooperating centres across the country and disseminated amongst the 
farmers, which can reduce their reliance on chemical pesticides”. 
With regard to the measures taken by the Ministry so that fodder is free from 
pesticides, the Ministry replied as under: 
 “Under the ICAR-All India Network Project on Pesticide Residues, the harvest 
time residues of pesticides are evaluated in straw o f cereal crops (rice, wheat, 
maize) through multi -location supervised field trials conducted as per Good 
Agricultural Practices (GAP) in different agroclimatic zones of the country”. 
On the steps taken to reduce pesticide levels in animal feed to mitigate health 
risks, the Ministry replied as under: 
 “The only way to reduce the pesticide levels in animal feed to reduce the 
health risk is lesser use of pesticides. In this direction the various efforts are 
being made which include recommendations of pesticide  doses on scientific 
basis i.e. good agricultural practices, farmers’ awareness programmes like 
trainings, television and radio programmes to use only recommended dose of 
pesticides, use of bio -pesticides and follow integrated pest management 
practices”. 
On the question of measures that are in place to test for pesticides, residue 
and other element s in vegetables, grains, and fruits to ensure safety of public, the 
Ministry submitted that: 
 “The pesticide residues in food commodities and water are regularly 
monitored under the Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, Ministry of 
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare sponsored project on “Monitoring of Pesticide 
Residues at National Level (MPRNL)” implemented by the ICAR -All India 
Network Project on Pesticide Residues since 2005-06. 
Under the MPRNL project, the samples of vegetables, fruits, spices, herbs, 
cereals, meat, egg, tea, milk, fish and marine products, are collected from the 
farm gate, retail outlets, agricultural produce marketing committee (APMC) 
markets, organic outlets and surface water/ irrigated water located at different 
parts of the country by 35 participating laboratories and analysed for the 
possible presence of pesticide residues by the NABL accredited testing 
laboratories representing Ministry of Agriculture, Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research (ICAR), Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Ministry of 
Environment and Forest, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research 
(CSIR), Ministry of Chemical and Fertilizer, Ministry of Commerce& Indu stry 
and State Agricultural Universities across the country. 
The monitoring data related to pesticide detection above the prescribed limits 
and off label pesticide detection is shared with the State Agricultural 
Departments to promote safe and judicious use of pesticides and 

25 
 
implementation of Integrated Pest Managem ent by the farmers. The 
monitoring data on spices is shared at international level with the 
FAO/WHO/Codex Committee on Pesticide Residues for risk assessment and 
fixation of Codex Maximum Residue Limits on spices and with FSSAI for 
fixation of Indian MRLs.”. 
On the Committee's query on whether the efforts have been made to reduce 
or prevent the use of pesticides and other undesirable elements through changes 
in agricultural policy, the Ministry replied as under: 
“Government of India registers pesticides under section 9 (3) of the 
Insecticides Act 1968. However, to promote eco -friendly bio -pesticides over 
chemical pesticides, provision has been made in the act to register them 
under Section 9 (3B), wherein bio-pesticides are given provisional registration 
with less data requirement. Such provision is fast -tracking the registration 
process and commercialization of the bio-pesticides.  
DPPQS with help of its 47 offices (CIPMCs and LCIPMCs located in 30 
states/ UTs) ha s actively focused on minimizing pesticide dependency and 
promoting eco-friendly IPM practices for pest management. DPPQS regularly 
organizing several integrated pest management (IPM) programs, which are 
key steps aligned with national efforts to reduce ch emical inputs. Here are 
some of the ongoing initiatives aimed at pesticide reduction: 
1. Training Programs for Farmers and Agri -stakeholders: Conducting 
extensive training programs at multiple levels, including Farmers Field 
Schools and HRD programs (2 -day an d 5 -day sessions), as well as 
season-long training for state agricultural officers and progressive 
farmers. These programs emphasize using IPM practices, such as 
biological controls, pheromone traps, and other non-chemical methods. 
2. Promoting Alternatives t hrough IPM Seva Kendras: To ensure the 
availability of IPM inputs such as bio -control agents, Neem extracts, and 
mechanical traps, DPPQS is planning for establishment of IPM Seva 
Kendras by enthusiastic entrepreneurs. These centres are aimed at 
providing farmers with easy access to safe pest control alternatives, thus 
reducing reliance on chemical pesticides. 
Further CIPMCs are planning campaigns and programs advocating for safe 
and judicious pesticide use of pesticides especially in high -consumption 
districts (as per MPRNL data) by promoting safe application practices, aiming 
at reducing unnecessary pesticide use across crops and regions. 
Besides, Govt. of India is also focusing on research on ecofriendly pest 
management approach like biological control and  Integrated Pest 
Management (IPM) through ICAR Institutes and promoting and disseminating 
the technologies through Central IPM Centres, KVKs, State Agricultural 
Universities, ICAR Institutes and State Agriculture Departments. 
Govt. of India has also launch ed the mission on Organic Value Chain 
Development under National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture. Govt. of 
India launched the soil health card scheme for optimum use of fertilizers”. 

26 
 
 
4.4 Initiatives for Promoting Nano Fertilizers in Agriculture 
The Committee enquired about the steps being taken to educate farmers on the 
use of nano fertilizers compared to traditional fertilizers and the extent to which 
farmers have benefited from their adoption so far, the Ministry stated as under: 
“The promotion of na no fertilizers among farmers is being actively pursued 
through several initiatives. Awareness about Nano Fertilizers is created 
through various activities like awareness camps, webinars, street plays 
(nukkad nataks), field demonstrations, Kisan Sammelans, and films in 
regional languages. The product is made available at Pradhan Mantri Kisan 
Samridhi Kendras (PMKSKs) through concerned companies and is included 
in the monthly supply plan issued regularly by the Department of Fertilizers.  
The Indian Council o f Agricultural Research (ICAR), through the Indian 
Institute of Soil Science in Bhopal, recently organized a national campaign on 
the “Efficient and Balanced Use of Fertilizer.” which includes the promotion of 
Nano Fertilizers. This effort is also supporte d under the Viksit Bharat Sankalp 
Yatra (VBSY), launched on November 15, 2023, aimed at increasing 
awareness and delivering the benefits of flagship government schemes. 
To facilitate easier application of nano fertilizers through foliar methods, 
innovations like Agriculture Drones’ operated by Women members of Self 
Help Groups (SHGs) and battery - operated sprayers are being made 
available at retail points, with pilot training and custom spraying services 
promoted through Village Level Entrepreneurs, nano f ertilizers are available 
for sale across various platforms. Additionally, the Central Sector Scheme : 
NAMO Drone Didi”, approved by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
(CCEA), has enabled fertilizer companies to provide 1094 drones in first 
phase to Women of Self -Help Groups (SHGs) ensuring wider application of 
Nano Fertilizers through drone technology.” 
During the post -evidence discussion and in response to the Committee's query 
on how nano fertilizers reduce reliance on traditional fertilizers, the Ministry provided 
the following statement: 
“At ICAR -IARI, New Delhi, the detailed field study on wheat -maize and 
mustard-pearl millet cropping systems was carried out. After two years of 
experimentation, it was noticed that there is possibility of curtaili ng up to 25% 
of the recommended dose of N itrogen by application of two sprays of Nano -
Nitrogen. The brief experimentation period did not indicate towards N itrogen 
mining from soil under nano fertilizer application. Nevertheless, a more 
thorough investigati on of nitrogen and others nutrients budgeting is 
necessary before drawing final conclusions of benefits of using Nano-Urea. 
ICAR research institutes/state agricultural Universities carried out nano urea 
(liquid) trial on different crops like Paddy, Wheat, Mustard, Maize, Tomato, 
Cabbage, Cucumber, Capsicum and Onion in different agro -climatic zones.  
Based on the research it is recommended to use 2 foliar sprays of Nano 
along with 2/3 rd N and recommended doses of NPK that has the yield 
advantage of 3 - 8 % in various crops. In rice, NPK (recommended dose) + 2 

27 
 
nano urea spray @ 0.2 % on crop leaves at active tillering and panicle 
initiation stages is recommended.” 
When the Committee further sought details of use of nano -fertilizers in India 
and its reach to marginal and small farmers, the Ministry replied as under: 
“ICAR doesn’t have data on the use of nano -fertilizers in India. It is with the 
fertilizer manufacturers”.   
4.5  In response to the Committee's inquiry regarding  the use of human waste as 
fertilizer the Ministry stated that technologies have been developed to convert urban 
and city waste, including human waste, into city compost through proper segregation, 
ensuring safe use in agriculture by preventing heavy metal contamination. 
4.6 Stubble Management and Soil Health Improvement 
The Committee inquired whether the Ministry is aware of any technology or 
product that can convert stubble into fertilizer, promote earthworm growth, and 
enhance soil fertility and also sou ght information on the measures being taken to 
integrate such solutions for mitigating stubble burning and improving soil health. The 
Ministry replied as under: 
 “ICAR suggests in -situ/ex-situ crop residue management practices using 
microbial inoculation f or easy decomposition, adoption of conservation 
agriculture practices for solving crop  residue burning and saving in  nitrogen 
fertilizer application  by 20%. The practices of conservation agriculture 
increased earthworm’s population in soil by 15 times compared to conventional 
practices besides improving the water infiltration rates (~17%), soil organic 
carbon (~88%), available nitrogen (~25%) and available potassium (15%) in 
soil. 
The Ministry is promoting the use of bio-decomposers, which contain beneficial 
microbes that break down stubble within a few weeks, converting it into 
organic matter. This method enhances soil fertility by improving microbial 
activity and creating a favourable environment for earthworms. 
Happy Seeders, Mulchers, Reversible MB Ploug hs, and Super Straw 
Management Systems (SMS) are being promoted to enable farmers to cut, 
mix, and sow seeds without removing stubble. This reduces the need for 
stubble burning and improves soil organic content and financial assistance is 
being provided to farmers and cooperative societies. 
State Governments, Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs), agricultural universities, 
and NGOs are conducting awareness campaigns to educate farmers about the 
benefits of stubble management, soil health, and sustainable farming 
practices. 
Demonstrations have been conducted across various states to showcase the 
impact of in-situ machinery and bio-decomposer use. 
Under Crop Residue Management ( CRM), established more than 40,000 
Custom Hiring Centres (CHCs), where farmers can rent agr icultural machinery 
at affordable rates, ensuring access to stubble management tools for small and 
marginal farmers”. 

28 
 
 
4.7 Preventing the use of Fake pesticides and insecticides 
The Committee expressed concerns about the serious issue of fake pesticides and 
their harmful effects on agriculture. They sought information on the measures being 
taken to address the problem and its impact on agricultural products, the Ministry 
replied as under:  
 “The insecticides/ pesticides are inherently toxic in nature as t hey are 
designed to develop to kill or combat the insects, diseases and weeds. The 
existing legislation for regulation of insecticides is the Insecticides Act, 1968 
and the Insecticides Rules, 1971. This Act regulates import, manufacture, 
sale, transport, distribution and use of insecticides for preventing risk to 
human beings or animals, and matters connected there -with. The 
Registration Committee (RC) constituted under section 5 of the Act is 
technical statutory body which evaluates the efficacy and safet y of the 
pesticides under the specified conditions for use in the country.  To assess 
efficacy of the insecticides and their safety to human beings and animals, RC 
has framed exhaustive guidelines for data requirements for Chemistry, Bio -
efficacy, Toxicity, Packaging and Legal disciplines. Prior to giving registration 
to any insecticide for use in the country, various attributes are verified in 
detail, like, in chemistry, verification is conducted for process of manufacture, 
information about raw materials u sed, step -wise manufacturing process, 
chemical composition, identification & quantification of identifiable impurities, 
Physico-chemical properties of adjuvants, etc. After issuance of Certificate of 
Registration by the Registration Committee, License to manufacture and sale, 
stock etc of insecticide are granted by the State Agriculture Department after 
verifying the plant and machinery, safety devices, first aid facility etc. 
As per the Insecticides Act 1968, the quality control of pesticides is primarily 
conducted by the States being  the licensing authority. Insecticide Inspectors 
appointed by the State Governments and Central Government under section 
20 of Insecticides Act have been vested with powers to enter, search 
premises, seize documents, stop distr ibution, sale or use of stock of 
insecticides and take insecticide samples for analysis at State Pesticides 
Testing Laboratories to ensure that conditions of the Certificate of 
Registration or License and provisions of the Act are complied with. 
Insecticide Inspectors periodically inspect  the manufacturer, distributors, 
dealers and retailers within the area of his jurisdiction to satisfy himself that 
the conditions of the license are complied with.  
At present, 11080 officers of State Governments are notifi ed as Insecticide 
Inspectors to check the quality of pesticides and its management.  Insecticide 
samples are drawn and are analysed in 70 State Pesticides Testing 
Laboratories established in 25 States and 2 UTs with a total annual capacity 
to test 77,040 samples.  
The Central Government supplements the resources of State/UT 
Governments in quality control testing of pesticides. At present, 207 Central 
Government officers are notified as Central Insecticide Inspector and two 
Regional Pesticides Testing Laboratories at  Chandigarh and Kanpur are 

29 
 
established under the Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine & Storage 
(DPPQ&S) with an annual testing capacity of 3100 samples.  In case of any 
dispute, samples are referred to Central Insecticides Laboratory (CIL), 
Faridabad constituted under section 16 of the Act, with an annual capacity of 
1600 samples. If samples got failed in referral analysis, process to launch 
prosecution against the firms are initiated . Recently Ministry of Agriculture 
and Farmers Welfare (D.O:No.3 -7/2O22-23/IPM dated 25.09.2024) has sent 
the directive to the states to constitute State -wise Committees for pesticides 
residue monitoring at state level and preparation of action plan under the 
chairmanship of Additional Chief Secretary/Principal Secretary, Department of 
Agriculture of the State. Other members of the committee are: The Director , 
State Agriculture/Horticulture Department, The Director of Research, State 
Agriculture Universities, I/C Pesticide residue testing laboratories in the state, 
Representative from FSSAI, The Secretary, Agriculture Produce Marketing 
Committee/Mandi Board, Officer In -charge, RCIOMCs/CIPMCs and The 
Zonal Coordinator/ATARl, KVK in the state. 
The terms of reference of the constituted committee in the state are as under:   
1. To monitor pesticides residue in the state on quarterly basis to discuss 
and review the MPRNL reports for compliance and necessary action.  
2. To identify crops and regions having reports of pesticide residues in order 
to implement IPM and GAP  
3. To sensitise t he stakeholders through “Jago Grahak Jago” campaign/ 
awareness programmes.  
4. To provide action plan/suggestions to DA&FW on pesticide residue 
management”.  
The Committee further enquired about the need for a regulatory framework to 
safeguard farmers, the Ministry replied as under: 
“Offences related to import, manufacture or sale of ‘misbranded’ insecticides, 
which include use of false or misleading or deceptive information, imitation or 
sold in name of another pesticide, does not display required warning, caution, 
word, statement or other information required on the label, or not registered 
or unlicensed or improper packaging or higher toxicity etc., are punishable 
with imprisonment up to two years, or with fine between Rs. 10,000 to 
50,000, or with both. Further, the punishment provisions mentioned in Section 
29 of Insecticides Act 1968 are quite low and are not sufficient to create 
deterrence among the defaulters and hence more stringent punishment 
provisions are required to be introduced in the Act so as to  prevent repeated 
offences of manufacturing low quality pesticides by the manufacturers and to 
ensure availability of quality pesticide to the farmers.   
During the last 05 years (2019-20 to 2023-24) , a total of 3,60,614 samples of 
pesticides were  analys ed, 9233 samples found mis -branded, in 2588 cases, 
prosecution filed against firms who were found involved in the manufacture, 
sale and illegal import of sub -standard/low quality pesticides and in 185 
cases the firms are convicted by the Hon’ble Courts”. (Annexure-II) 

30 
 
 
4.8 Lab to Land initiatives under ICAR/CAUs 
The Committee sought information on laboratory research projects under the 
"Lab to Land" initiative that have been successfully implemented by Central 
Agricultural Universities, bringing scientific advancements directly to farmers' fields. 
The Ministry submitted the following: 
“Central Agricultural University wise details of laboratory research projects 
successfully implemented in farming under “Lab to Land” initiatives and their 
benefits are as under: 
Central Agricultural University, Imphal 
1. Multi-locational trial under varied agro -ecology system of Manipur were 
conducted for successful cultivation as shallow - land cultivar, Akhanphou, and 
upland cultivar, Takanu, and  found to be the potential climate resilient crops 
under the project “Identification of climate resilient food crops, traditional rice 
varieties of Manipur and their production enhancement through scientific 
manipulation having least impact to climate chang e” funded by DST, New 
Delhi.   
2. Under m4agri - Mobile Based Agro Advisory Services funded by Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY), the latest Agri/Hort., Fishery, 
and Animal Science technology of about 39,420 messages were given to the  
registered farmers through text or voice messages.  
3. The State Variety Release Committee, Meghalaya on 8th February 2024 
released three HYV rice varieties CAUR105, CAUR107 and CAUR124 for the 
state of Meghalaya.  These varieties are the outcome D BT funded projects 
specifically “ Improvement of locally adapted rice cultivars of North East Hill 
Region by incorporating Blast Resistance Genes through Marker Assisted 
Backcrossing.” 
4. Under DBT, GoI funded projects (Project 1: Scaling-up of Organic 
Technologies thro ugh Development of Model Organic Farm in Aspirational 
Districts of NE India , Project 2: Utilization of soil and plant microbial resources 
for enhancing the productivity of cropping systems and soil health under jhum 
and terrace/valley agroecosystems of Eastern and North -Western Indian 
Himalayas; Project 3: Establishment of organic hub for sup porting organic and 
alike farming through promotion of bioinputs technologies in farmers’ fields of 
North East India and Project 4: Multi-institutional approach on development of 
technology driven bio -input product clusters for mass production pf 
biofertilizers and biopesticides for promotion of eco -friendly farming with 
collateral development of bio -entrepreneurship in vegetable, spices and small 
tea grower of NER of India for better livelihood ), the following biofertilizers and 
biopesticides technologies were developed: 
1. CAU Bioenhancer, 2. CAU Jhum Bioenhancer, 3. NPKZnIAA Biofertilizer 
Consortium, 4. Um-Azoto, 5. Um-Azospi, 6. Um-PSB, 7. Um-Comb, 8. Um-
Tricho, 9. Um-Vir, 10. Um-met 
These biological inputs technologies for organic and natural farming were 
transferred through MoA to: 

31 
 
a. Directorate of Agriculture, Govt. of Meghalaya 
b. Dept. of Soil and Water Conservation, Govt. of Nagaland 
These technologies were also licensed to agripreneurs namely 
a) M/S Larry Enterprise, Tura, Meghalaya 
b) M/S JVES, Siliguri, West Bengal 
Altogether, 2800 farmers were benefitted through skill development training on 
application of bioinoculants for organic and natural production systems of 
selected field crops in NE hilly states of India during 2022-2024. 
2. Under NICRA project for clim ate resilient six technologies were transferred  
such as 
a.  Polymuching of vegetables to reduce weed and moisture loss problem. 
b. Ssp-p method in paddy was demonstrated for reducing p fertilizer by 50 
percent. 
c. Pea cultivation in paddy fallow to improve soil status. 
d. Drought and flood resistant paddy varieties, like Ranjit sub was demonstrated. 
e. Bio fortified varieties like CR D han 311 and 310 was demonstrated for 
nutritional security. 
f. Short duration paddy variety like Gomati was also demonstrated. 
Under the incubation centre (RABI) - promoted agribusiness and 
agripreneurship in the north east region by incubating 133 incubatees (115 
idea/pre-seed stage and 18 seed stage). Innovative ideas and technologies of 
the agripreneurs were mentored and helped them in estab lishing their startup 
ventures which in turn help the farmers with their innovative products/services. 
Further, 32 startups are being supported with Rs. 224 lakh (total sanctioned 
amount) as Grant-in-aids from the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare 
under RKVY-RAFTAAR Scheme. 
Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central Agricultural University, Pusa 
Under RPCAU, Pusa, a total of 30 externally funded projects and 33 AICRP 
projects have been implemented, focusing on farmer -centric research. These 
projects provide advisory services on weather conditions, honey production, 
mushroom cultivation, biofertilizer use, and other products at the farm level. 
Additionally, a dedicated center has been established for millet production and 
value chain development. Several proje cts focus on animal conservation and 
improvement, while others target the development of SC & ST communities. 
Climate-resilient programs are also underway, demonstrating advanced 
technologies and crop varieties directly in farmers' fields. 
To address the question regarding the successful implementation of laboratory 
research projects by Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central Agricultural University, Pusa, 
Bihar under the "Lab to Land" initiatives, here is an overview: 
The Lab to Land  initiative is a key component of a gricultural development in 
India, aimed at translating laboratory research into practical applications on 

32 
 
farms. Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central Agricultural University, Pusa, Bihar has 
been actively participating in this program to ensure that scientific 
advancements benefit farmers directly. 
1. Crop Varieties: RPCAU Pusa has developed Twenty-three (23) improved 
crop varieties with higher yield potential, disease resistance, and climate 
adaptability. These varieties are now being adopted by farmers. The details are 
given below: 
SI. 
No. 
Crop Variety Released From 
1 Wheat Rajendra Genhu-1 SVRC-2019 
2 Rajendra Genhu-3 (WB02) CVRC-2021 
3 Rajendra Genhu-4 SVRC-2023 
4 Rice Rajendra Nilam CVRC-2017 
5 Rajendra Saraswati CVRC-2020 
6 Maize Rajendra Hybrid Makka-4 SVRC-2020 
7 Rajendra Baby Corn-1 SVRC-2023 
8 Rajendra Pop Corn-1 SVRC-2023 
9 Shaktiman-5 CVRC-2018  
10 Small Millet Rajendra Kauni-1 CVRC-2017 
11 Finger Millet Rajendra Madua-1 SVRC-2023 
12 Pigeon pea Rajendra Arhar 1 SVRC-2019 
13 Rajendra Arhar 2 CVRC-2021 
14 Coriander Rajendra Dhania-1 CVRC-2019 
15 Rajendra Dhania-2 SVRC-2018 
16 Garlic Rajendra Lahsun-1 SVRC-2023 
17 Sweet Potato Rajendra Sakarkand-7 SVRC-2023 
18 Yambeen Rajendra Mishrikand-3 SVRC-2023 
19 Arvi Rajendra Arvi-2 SVRC-2023 
20 Sugarcane Rajendra Ganna -1 (CoP 
16437) 
CVRC-2020 
21 Rajendra Ganna -2 (CoP 
09437) 
CVRC-2021 
22 Rajendra Ganna -5 (CoP 
11438) 
CVRC-2023 
23 Mushroom Rajendra Mushroom Dudhia 
-1 
SVRC-2021 
 
2. Technology developed: RPCAU Pusa has developed 28 innovative 
technologies that have been successfully implemented in farmers' fields. 
These technologies aim to enhance livelihoods, improve crop quality, boost 
productivity, increase profitability, and raise farmers' incomes. The specific 
details of these technologies are provided below: 
Sl. 
No. Name of Technology 
1 Integrated Management of Panama Wilt disease of Banana (Race 1 & 
2) 
2 Standardization of Planting Method of Tulsi (Ocimum sanctum L) 

33 
 
3 Management of Papaya ring spot virus disease  of Papaya under Agro-
ecological condition of Bihar. 
4 Impact of tillage and nutrient management practices on kharif Maize 
5 Rajendra Matsya Bandhu - Solar powered Fish Preservation - Selling 
Cart. 
6 Impact of tillage practices in Kharif Rice 
7 Impact of tillage practices in Rabi Maize 
8 Paired row Planting of Pigeonpea + Urdbean 
9 Design & Development of Ground Water Recharge cum Drainage Unit 
10 Yam Bean Seed Extract as a Safer insecticide for management of 
aphid in mustard. 
11 Raised Bed Planting of Pigeon Pea 
12 Standardization of Planting time of Crop geometry in Tulsi 
13 Low-cost production technology for liquid bio-fertilizer at village level 
14 Rajendra Pusa Mushroom Paneer Production Technology 
15 Rajendra Mushroom substrate sterilizer. 
16 Rajendra Pusa Salty Mushroom Biscuit. 
17 Rajendra Pusa Mushroom Gulab Jamun 
18 Hand Cranked Improved Chakki 
19 Manual Cabbage Harvesting Machine. 
20 Boat based solar photovoltaic pumping system for irrigation. 
21 Effect of irrigation and nutrient management on the performance of  
Different Maize-pulse based intercropping. 
22 Litchi waste based low-cost fish feed. 
23 Development of hand tool for okra (Bhindi) harvesting. 
24 Thematic Color-Codedd Hybrid Quick Response Code 
25 Induces Breeding Technology to Indian Spiny Eel/Gainchi: 
Macrognathus acculeatus 
26 Pond Polyhouse for survival & culture of fresh water giant Prawn larvae 
during winter months. 
27 Taro crop sowing implement. 
28 Mushroom Badi Production Technology 
 
 

34 
 
3. GI Tag: RPCAU, Pusa also received one GI tag on Marcha Dhan. 
Sl. 
No. Name of Crop/Product GI No. Date of GI Tag 
1 Rice (Marcha Dhan) 801 29.11.2021 
 
4. Patents: RPCAU, Pusa granted eleven patents. The details are given below: 
Sl. 
No. Title of Patent Patent No. Date of 
Patent 
1 A Self -Propelled Rotary Power Paddy 
Weeder 379307 13/10/2021 
2 Hand Cranked Improved Chakki 342101-001 28/03/2022 
3 Hand tool for Okra harvesting with 
collection Hopper 415931 29/12/2022 
4 A power -driven device for shelling and 
hulling of grains 417406 10/01/2023 
5 Mushroom substrate Pasteurizer 358116-001 19/01/2023 
6 Method and composition of unique 
Mushroom Samosa 419887 31/01/2023 
7 Multi-Crop Seeder 425659 17/03/2023 
8 
Energy Dense Nutritive Food Having 
Balanced Nutritional Composition and 
Process for Preparation 
448601 31/08/2023 
9 A Solar Powered Fish Preservation and 
Transportation Cart 472593 23/11/2023 
10 Design of Food Cart 342333-001 29/08/2022 
11 Mushroom Biscuit and Preparation 518386 01/03/2024 
 
5. Climate Resilient Agriculture Programme:  
SI. 
No. 
Technology Demonstrations Area 
covered 
(acre) 
No. of 
Demonstration
s 
1 Laser land levelling 300 300 
2 Direct Seeded Rice 4250 4250 
3 Raised Bed planting arhar 620 620 
4 Maize with Arhar Intercropping 785 785 

35 
 
5 Alternate Wetting/drying in rice  785 785 
6 Water harvesting and filed bunding 690 690 
7 Raised bed planting Maize 330 330 
8 Zero Tillage of  Wheat 3300 3300 
9 Raised bed planting Wheat 825 825 
10 Zero Tillage Lentil 550 550 
11 Zero Tillage Mung bean 2750 2750 
12 Nutrient Expert/Green Seeker 
based nutrient Management 700 700 
13 Community Irrigation 220 220 
14. Raised bed planting of Mustard 550 550 
15. Potato based farming system 33 33 
 TOTAL 16688 16688 
 
Overall, the "Lab to Land" initiatives by RPCAU, Pusa has played a crucial role 
in advancing agricultural practices, improving farm productivity, and 
contributing to the economic and environmental sustainability of farming 
communities. 
Rani Lakshmi Bai Central Agricultural University, Jhansi 
1. Total 2415 technology demonstrations were conducted at farmers field 
covering on wide range of crops including cereals (Wheat, Maize), Pulses 
(Chickpea, black gram, green gram), Oilseeds (Groundnut, Mustard), 
vegetables (Potato, tomato, Okra, Brinjal) and fruit crops. Improved crop 
varieties and improved crop management practices were transferred from lab 
to land through these demonstrations. 
2. During the past year more than 64 trainings were organized in which more 
than 3230 farmers were trained on scientific production of crops (cereals, 
pulse, oilseed, amaranth, pomegranate, onion, veg etable, fruit, tomato, 
mushroom production), livestock production and management, bee keeping, 
mushroom cultivation seed production, FSSAI certification, plant diagnostics, 
Agro-forestry, Fisheries etc.  
3. University organized Regional Agriculture Fair (Nort h) during 8 -10 February, 
2024 in which more than 125 institutions including 25 ICAR institutes across 
the country displayed the technologies. More than 10,000 farmers from Jammu 
and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana, Uttarakhand, Uttar 
Pradesh, Delhi and Chandigarh participated and benefited from it. 

36 
 
4. The University produced 2167 quintals of quality seeds during the year 2023 -
24, most of which was produced in participatory mode at farmers’ fields. This 
included improved seeds of Shree Ann (10), whea t (810), barley (25), Sesame 
(40), mustard (376), gram (359), green gram (98), Lentil (176) and peas (291). 
The major impact of lab to land activities has been on scaling up of moong 
bean, groundnuts and mustard”. 
  

37 
 
CHAPTER-V 
KRISHI VIGYAN KENDRAS AND THEIR ROLE 
5.1  Krishi Vigyan Kendra ( KVK) is an integral part of the National Agricultural 
Research System (NARS), aims at assessment of location specific technology 
modules in agriculture and allied enterprises,  through technology assessment and 
demonstrations. KVKs have been functioning as Knowledge and Resource Centre of 
agricultural technology supporting initiatives of public, private and voluntary sector for 
improving the agricultural economy of the district and are linking the NARS with 
extension system and farmers. The KVK scheme is fully financed by Govt. of India and 
the KVKs are sanctioned to Agricultural Universities, ICAR institutes, related 
Government Departments and Non -Government Organizations (NGOs) working in 
Agriculture. There are 731 KVKs est ablished so far. The mandate of KVK is  Single 
Window Agricultural Knowledge, Research and Capacity Development Centre. 
5.2 KVKs’ Role in Agricultural Outreach and Farmers Assistance 
While examining the subject, the Committee enquired about the coordination 
between the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare, State Agriculture 
Departments, and KVKs in supporting farmers, including achievements and 
challenges. It also e nquired whether KVKs effectively demonstrate new agricul tural 
techniques, their reach to farmers, and overall impact. The Ministry replied as under: 
“KVKs are working in coordination and convergence with Department of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (DAFW) of Government of India for 
implementation of various pr ogrammes like, Cluster Frontline Demonstrations 
on Oilseeds and Pulses; Crop Residue management , Agri Drones, Natural 
farming etc. The KVKs also have close linkage with different district level line 
departments of State Government. Heads of district level line departments are 
members of Scientific Advisory Committee of the KVKs which is for planning 
and implementation monitoring of KVK activities. The KVKs are member in the 
management committee of ATMA at district level. KVK and ATMA jointly carry 
out diagn ostic visits at farmers’ fields in case of any disease or insect 
infestation. 
Farmers are receiving adequate information on farm machinery/ agricultural 
equipment during fairs and exhibitions organized by KVKs. The KVKs take the 
initiative to invite variou s agricultural machinery companies to set up stalls at 
farmer fairs and exhibitions. Printed handouts on various technologies are 
distributed. Talks, discussion sessions, farmer -scientist interaction meetings 
are organized during fairs/exhibitions. This pr ovides an excellent platform for 
farmers to interact directly with experts. Through these stalls, farmers gain 
valuable insights into the latest advancements, innovations, and applications of 
various farm equipment, helping them make informed decisions. Th e KVKs 
have also established custom -hiring centres of machines which provide 
information and hired service to farmers. 
Feedback received from farmers are being addressed by the scientists of 
KVKs and also forwarded to the Research System like State Agricul tural 
Universities, ICAR Institutes etc. 
ICAR-ATARIs and the Directors of Extension Education of Agricultural 
Universities obtain information on new varieties/agro -technologies developed 
by ICAR Institutes and Agr icultural Universities, compile  in the form  of 
Technology Inventory and provide  to the concerned KVKs. Through various 

38 
 
activities including Scientific Advisory Committee Meetings, Action Plan 
Meetings, Zonal workshops etc. these varieties and technologies are included 
in the Action Plan of the KVKs . After assessment of these varieties and 
technologies through On Farm Testing, the suitable ones are demonstrated 
through Frontline Demonstrations. The technologies are further propagated 
through training programmes and various extension activities. Succe ssful 
technologies are passed on to the main -stream system of the State 
Departments through the Extension Officials for further transfer to the farmers 
in the district at large scale. Seeds and planting materials of successful 
technologies, breeds of lives tock and poultry are produced by the KVKs and 
provided to the farmers for propagation. As a result, the production and 
productivity of different crops/livestock and fishes have been substantially 
increased in the respective districts. 
About 4.5 – 5.0 crore farmers are connected with the KVKs through various 
activities namely, On Farm Testing, Frontline Demonstrations, Training 
Programmes, field days, farmers’ fairs, exhibitions and other extension 
activities. To connect with other farmers of the district, K VKs are using social 
media groups, local newspapers, radio and television channels, Kisan Sarathi, 
etc. to disseminate information about agricultural techniques”. 
The Committee also sought details on farmer participation, efforts to expand 
access to agricu ltural information, and whether farmers receive sufficient guidance 
through KVK fairs and demonstrations. They also examined how concerns raised by 
farmers and KVK staff are addressed, measures to facilitate farmer participation from 
distant areas, includi ng transportation support, and the systems in place for timely 
intervention by KVK scientists in cases of crop diseases. The Ministry replied as 
under: 
“The Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC) of each KVK comprises of 
representatives of farmers, farm women  and agri -entrepreneurs of the 
district. The SAC meets twice a year during which the concerns and 
suggestions of farmers are collected. KVK staff visit villages and farmers’ 
fields for conducting demonstrations, awareness campaigns, animal camps, 
diagnostic visits etc. during which the concerns and suggestions are 
collected. During SAC meetings, scientists from ICAR Institutes and 
Agricultural Universities, various state department officials, who are members 
of SAC, also take a note of the concerns and sugg estions. During the Action 
plan meetings, the concerns and suggestions are considered and the 
activities of the KVK for the forthcoming year including demonstrations, 
trainings and awareness programmes are planned. Social media groups, 
Kisan Mobile Advisory System, Kisan Sarathi, mass media including print and 
electronic media are utilized to provide advisories to farmers to solve 
common issues. Participatory appraisal programmes are conducted by 
KVKs. Market and weather -related advisories and alerts are is sued through 
social media, print and electronic media pro -actively. The Head of KVK 
attends the district level monthly Farmers Grievances Redressal meeting 
conducted by the District Collector where solutions for issues raised by 
farmers are provided. Resea rchable issues received from farmers are 
communicated to the State Agricultural and allied universities and ICAR 
Institutes. Schemes and government programmes related issues are 
conveyed to the concerned state officials. The concerns of KVK staff are 
addressed by the concerned Host Organizations/ICAR as per rule. 

39 
 
Farmers from distant areas are encouraged to attend demonstrations and 
trainings at the KVK Premises, farmers’ fields and research institutes. Off -
campus trainings and demonstrations are conducted at distant locations to 
facilitate local farmers to participate. Transportation charges to reach the 
demonstration, training, field day venue are also provided to farmers 
depending on the provisions in the programme. It is ensured that all the 
blocks in th e district are covered by any of the activities of KVK. 
Transportation cost is provided by KVK to the farmers attending various 
demonstrations, trainings and field days depending on the provisions in the 
programme. 
KVK scientists make diagnostic fi eld visits to villages and farmers’ fields to 
identify the issues and provide on the spot solutions. The visits are made on 
demand basis as well as pro -actively based on the messages received 
through various sources. Joint diagnostic field visits are also made alo ng with 
state department officials and scientists of Universities and ICAR Institutes in 
case of severe insect/disease infestation. Solutions are provided on the spot 
for identifiable issues. Soil and plant samples are sent to laboratories of 
Research Institutes/ Universities for further analysis and confirmation of the 
problems. Group meetings and farmer scientist interaction meetings are 
conducted periodically. Irrespective of any report on disease outbreak, crop 
and animal health is continuously monitored in adopted villages.” 
5.3 Attracting and Retaining Youth in Agriculture (ARYA)  
In response to the Committee's enquiry on addressing the reluctance of 
farmers' children to pursue agriculture as a career, the Ministry provided the following 
information: 
“KVKs are organizing vocational training programmes from rural youth and 
school dropouts. During 2023 -24, 11106 such programmes were organized 
with 3.03 lakh participants. Besides, a project namely Attracting and 
Retaining Youth in Agriculture (ARYA) is be ing implemented by 100 KVKs 
since 2017 -18. A total of 85531 rural youth have been trained and 19014 
agro-enterprises have been established involving 34790 trainees under the 
project. In addition to this, selected KVKs are organizing National Skill 
Qualification Framework aligned skill development training programmes of 
more than 200 hours since 2016 -17 with funding support from the 
Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Government of India.  In all, 
44296 rural youth have been trained under the programme. 
5.4 Existing Staff Strength of KVKs  
The Committee sought details from the Ministry on the existing staff strength of 
all KVKs, including vacancies, and enquired whether there is a proposal to enhance 
staff strength in view of the nature, extent, an d volume of new tasks assigned to them. 
The Ministry replied as under: 
 “The total sanctioned staff strength across all KVKs is 11,696, with 
3,499 vacancies, reflecting a 29.91% vacancy rate. 
Presently each KVK has a total of 16 staff - Senior Scientist & Head: 1; 
Subject Matter Specialists (SMS)/T -6: 6; T -4: 3 (Farm Manager, Program 
Assistant-Computer, Program Assistant -Lab), Assistant: 1, Stenographer 
grade III: 1, Driver/T -1: 2 and Skilled Support Staff: 2. Considering the 
increased facets and dimensions of technological interventions envisaged, it 

40 
 
is felt to enhance staff strength to 20 per KVK from the present sanctioned 
strength of 16. The proposed staff details in each KVK are - Senior Scientist 
& Head: 1; SMS/ T -6: 6; T-4: 3 (Farm manager - 1, Program Assistant - 2); 
Technical Assistant (T3): 4; Accountant: 1; Office Assistant: 1; Driver/T -1: 2 
and Skilled Support Staff: 2.” 
5.5 Ranking of KVKs 
The Committee enquired whether the Ministry is considering district -wise 
ranking of KVKs based on their productivity, achievements, and subject -specific 
performance. The Ministry replied as under: 
“The Ministry, in 2018, got the KVKs evaluated for their categorization by Third 
Party, National Institute of Labour Economics Research and Development (NILERD) 
an autonomous organization of NITI Aayog, based on in -depth examination of 
functioning of KVKs established till XII Five Years Plan looking into their infrastructural 
set-up, mandated activities, impact of such activities, and allied functions. The 
highlights of evaluation study are as under: 
 43% KVKs were in A category and 48% KVKs in B category. 
 Only 8% KVKs were in C category and 1% KVKs in D category.   
The reason of KVKs placed under C & D category might be attributed to vacant 
staff positions and infras tructure as these KVKs were new and are under 
establishment stage.” 
5.6 Funding of KVKs 
The Ministry has provided details regarding the funding structure of Krishi Vigyan 
Kendras (KVKs), which is allocated under the budget heads of "General" and "Salary" 
and disbursed to the respective Host Organizations responsible for the management 
and operations of KVKs. The funding also includes allocations under the "Capital" 
budget head to support infrastructure development, equipment procurement, and 
other essential resources required for the effective functioning of KVKs. 
The Revised Estimates (RE)  for KVK funding over the last five financial years 
are as follows: 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
The Committee further enquired whether KVKs across the country are 
adequately funded and, if not, what measures the Ministry plan to take to address this 
issue. The Ministry replied as under: 
“To meet the aspirations of “Viksit Bharat” through effective technology 
dissemination, enhanced availability of quality seeds and planting materials, 
PPP, convergence with departments, diagnostic services and digital solutions, 
Years Revised 
Estimate (Rs in 
lakhs) 
2019-20 22298.47 
2020-21 23749.00 
2021-22 28400.00 
2022-23 24372.00 
2023-24 25000.00 

41 
 
one time grant of Rs. 2500 crores including Rs. 2000 crores as capital and Rs. 
500 crores as General is required for Administrative control of all KVKs under 
ICAR; Implementation of PPP mode; Increase in staff strength for effective 
implementation; Uniformity of rules and regulations for all KVKs.” 
5.7 Review of performance of KVKs 
When the Committee sought to know whether the performance and functioning 
of KVKs are reviewed by third parties and, the Ministry submitted the following details: 
“Third Party evaluation of performance of KVKs is done from time to time. 
Previously the Third Party Evaluation was done by High Level Committee (January, 
2015); NITI Aayog Institute - National Institute of Labour Economics Research and 
Development (NILERD) in 2017 -18; International Food Policy Research Institute 
(IFPRI) in 2019 and Indian Society of Agribusiness Professionals (ISAPs) in 2021-22. 
The findings of these reviews in last five years are: 
Third Party Evaluation by International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) 
(2019) 
 KVKs generated an additional net farm income of Rs. 5752/ha  
 Rate of return to expenditure on KVKs is very high  
 One year of incremental gain covers about 12 years of   expenditure on KVKs  
 Benefit Cost Ratio for expenditure on KVK is 11.78. 
Third Party Evaluation by Indian Society of Agribusiness Professionals 
(ISAPs) in 2021-22 
 Impact of On-farm Trials and Frontline demonstrations is excellent. 
 Impact of the IFS models is seen manifolds as compared to other extension 
activities. 
 As per the feedback received from the farmers, demonstration of precision 
agriculture in farmers’ fields should also be taken up in good numbers by 
KVKs. 
 It is required to give demonstrations on improved tools and farm implements 
including drudgery reduction tools by KVKs. 
 KVKs should be Promoted and fully equipped for the promotion of 
entrepreneurs for Agri-clinics and supply systems.” 
 
5.8 Guidelines, Policy decisions and Service Conditions of KVK employees 
The Committee expressed serious concerns regarding service conditions of 
KVKs employees and asked the Ministry to furnish details regarding the guidelines 
and policy decisions  related to the service conditions of KVK and ICAR employees . 
The Ministry submitted the following details: 
“The Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK) is a scheme (“Strengthening of Krishi Vigyan 
Kendra”) sanctioned and approved by Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
(CCEA) for five years (or Plan period) through the Expenditure Finance 
Committee and further extension, i f any, thereof is also done in the same 
manner. The budget of KVK Scheme is approved and sanctioned by Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs. All the funds for KVK Scheme are granted to 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR)by the Department of 

42 
 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, Government of India. KVKs are hosted by 
different Host Organizations and working under administrative control of 
State/Central Agricultural Universities, NGOs, ICAR Institutes, State 
Governments Departments, Deemed Universiti es, Central Universities, Public 
Sector Undertakings and other educational institutions. 
The ICAR is the nodal agency for implementation of KVK Scheme. The 
guidelines of the KVK Scheme are to be implemented strictly as per the 
Memorandum of Understanding ( MOU) and sanction order (issued byICAR) 
with Rules & Bye-Laws of ICAR. 
The service conditions of KVK employees are decided by the respective 
employer/host organizations. The service conditions of ICAR KVKs are 
governed by the ICAR rules and regulations and  as per the rules of ICAR the 
ICAR KVKs staff get salary (Salary + DA @applicable for other employees of 
ICAR + HRA @ applicable for other employees of ICAR) and all other 
allowances as applicable to the other employees of ICAR. The service 
conditions incl uding promotion, retirement age (62 years for Senior Scientist 
and Head, 60 years for all other staff) and retirement benefits are also 
extended to the ICAR KVK staff. 
The service conditions of KVK employees of Non -ICAR KVKs are decided by 
their respective  employer/host organization. Their salary and allowances are 
not directly paid by the ICAR. There is no employee - employer relationship 
between KVK employees of non-ICAR KVKs and ICAR. The limited co-relation 
is that the host organizations other than ICAR , which are the employer of KVK 
employees of non -ICAR KVKs, pays salary and allowances to them through 
grant in aid received from ICAR as per terms of MOU read with sanction order, 
KVK Scheme and Government of India Rules. 
Vide letter F.No.A.Extn .4 I 18 1 20 I9-AE.III(e-52000)Dated 20th August,2024, 
It is clarified that all the employees working in any KVK of State 
AgriculturalUniversities (SAUs) are temporary/project -based employees 
whoservices are co -terminus with the KVK project. Services of 
suchtemporary/project-based employees of KVKs cannot be equated either 
with services of regular employees of ICAR or regular Teachers/Assistant 
Professors/Associate Professors/Professors/ employees ofSAUs and for same 
reasons temporary/project -based employees ofKVKs h ave no right to claim 
parity either with any regular staff ofICAR or any regular staff of SAUs. 
The KVK employees of SAUs cannot be treated as "Teachers/Assistant 
Professors / Associate Professors / Professors" because Teaching is not the 
mandate of KVK. T he staffing pattern and mandate for the KVKs does not 
envisage for the Teachers/Assistant Professors/Associate 
Professors/Professors.  
All the posts of KVKs are non -teaching posts including Senor Scientist and 
Head and therefore, the financial liability of  ICAR is restricted to a maximum 
superannuation age of 60 years only (which is also the age of superannuation 
of nonteaching staff of the SAUs). The SAUs can decide retirement age less 
than those of ICAR's policies and then in that case ICAR will fund upto  that 
age. Nevertheless, the SAU cannot exceed the superannuation age to more 
than that of its other non -teaching staff. The SAUs, with the consent of its 
competent authority / respective State Government can also decide the 
retirement age more than those of ICAR's policies and then in that case, the 

43 
 
additional salary of employees, for working additional number of years, is to be 
funded by the SAU itself. 
The KVK employees of SAUs are only entitled to Salary + DA (@applicable for 
other employees of SAUs) + HRA (@ applicable for other employees of SAUs) 
under the KVK scheme. 
No promotion, pension, gratuity and leave encashment, higher pay scale or 
any other financial benefit (which as not been sanctioned and approved under 
KVK Scheme) can be granted to KVK employees of SAUs from Government of 
India or/and ICAR funds. Same policy is applicable for all non -ICAR host 
organizations.” 
The Committee further enquired about the disparities in service conditions , 
including leave rules, medical benefits, pensionary bene fits, retirement age, gratuity, 
and other entitlements , between employees of ICAR-funded KVKs and those under 
State Governments, Agricultural Universities, and other host organizations . They 
sought details on these differences and whether the Ministry is c onsidering 
standardizing employment conditions  across all KVKs. If not, the Committee sought 
clarification on the Ministry’s plan to address this issue. The Ministry submitted as 
under: 
“KVK staff are employees of their respective Host Organizations , as 
established in the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)/Agreement  signed 
between ICAR and Host Organizations at the time of KVK establishment. The 
administrative control, service conditions, and benefits  of KVK staff are 
governed by the rules of their respectiv e Host Organizations, and ICAR’s role 
is limited to providing financial assistance  for salaries and operational costs. 
This position was reiterated in ICAR’s Circular dated 17.06.2015  and upheld 
by judicial rulings, including the Hon’ble CAT, Bangalore (Or der dated 
05.01.2024) and the Hon’ble High Court of Uttarakhand (Order dated 
15.09.2017). 
The KVK scheme, approved by the Cabinet Secretariat , includes Host 
Organizations such as State Governments, Agricultural Universities, Public 
Sector Undertakings (PSUs), Non-Government Organizations (NGOs), Central 
and Deemed Universities, and ICAR Institutes . MoUs are not required for 
KVKs under ICAR Institutes . The Ministry submitted that due to legal and 
administrative constraints, ICAR cannot standardize service co nditions across 
different Host Organizations. 
While some Host Organizations provide additional benefits  from their own 
resources, the Ministry had earlier urged State Governments (letters dated 
02.08.2019 & 05.08.2019)  to extend post -retirement and promoti onal benefits 
to KVK employees. Recently, the Tripura Government (Notification dated 
22.02.2024) agreed to fund the NPS employer contribution for KVK staff under 
its administration.” 
During the post -evidence sitting, the Secretary, Department of Agricultur al 
Research and Education, and Director General (ICAR), in his oral submission before 
the Committee, made the following statement regarding the strengthening of KVKs: 
 “हमार े  क ृ षि षिज्ञान क ें द्रों कर  षकस तरह  से स्ट् रेन्दन षकया  जाए , इसक े बार े  में षिछले क ु छ 
महीनरों से हम माननीय  क ृ षि मोंत्रीजी के साथ  चचाा  कर  रहे  हैं। एक-दर  कमेटीज़ भी हमने 
बनाई  थी ों, एक कमेटी के चेयरमैन  डॉ.  देिेश चतुिेदी साहब  खुद थे। इसमें स्ट्ाफ िृद्धि से 

44 
 
लेकर  फ ों षडग सिरटा, स्ट्ेट्स के साथ  षमलकर  क ै से काम  षकया  जाए , क ृ षि षिज्ञान क ें द्रों की 
ओिर ऑल स्ट् रेद्धन्दषनोंग के बार े  में हम काम  कर  रहे  हैं। हमें आशा  है षक क ृ षि षिज्ञान क ें द्रों कर  
इम्प्रूि करने  के षलए एक-डेढ़ महीने के अोंदर हम एक िूर्ा रूि -र े खा  आिक े समक्ष ला  
िाए ों गे, षजसक े माध्यम से षडमॉन्सट रेशन और  एक्सटेंशन का  जर  काम  है, उसकर  और  सुचारू  
तरीक े  से हम आगे ले जा  िाए ों गे।“ 
 Furthermore, the Secretary, Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, 
specifically addressed the service conditions of KVK employees as follows: 
“..तीन-चार  प्रकार  के क ृ षि षिज्ञान क ें द् चल रहे  हैं। क ु छ आईसीएआर  के अधीन हैं, क ु छ 
राज्य  के क ृ षि षिश्वषिद्यालयरों के अधीन हैं और  क ु छ षनजी सैक्टर  के भी चल रहे  हैं। सबकी 
सषिास कन्डीशन्स अलग-अलग हरने  की िजह से एक समस्या रहती  है षक कही ों िर न्यू िेंशन 
स्कीम में आईसीएआर  के इोंद्धस्ट्ट्यूशन्स हैं, बाकी  स्कीम में नही ों हैं। कई राज्यरों ने दे दी है, 
जबषक क ु छ राज्य  नही ों देते हैं, िे सरचते  हैं षक भारत  सरकार  से जर  िैसा  आ  रहा  है, िही 
षदया  जाए।  इस षडस्क ों टेंटमेंट की िजह से थरड़े  करटा  के सेज़ रहते  थे। एक ररक्मनडेशन  यह 
थी षक क ै से भी हर , इसकर  यूषनफॉमा बनाया  जाए , षजससे षक िूर े षसस्ट्म में  न क े िल िेंशन 
स्कीम बद्धि प्रमरशन्स के चाोंसेज़ भी यूषनफॉमा रहें, षजससे ये लरग  मनरयरग  से काम  कर  
सक ें ।“  
 
  

45 
 
PART-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
1. Financial Allocation and Expenditure under NICRA 
The Committee observe that over the past five years, the National 
Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) project has seen a steady 
increase in both funding and spending for its demonstration and research 
activities. This shows the Government’s growing commitment to strengthening 
agricultural resilience against climate cha nge. The Committee note that  during 
2019-2024, the total allocation for NICRA was ₹231.85 crore and the total 
expenditure was ₹219.25 crore, which thus has been an impressive utilization 
rate of about 95%. While there were some small gaps between allocated  and 
used funds in the early years (88.2% in 2019 –20 and 89.8% in 2020 –21), the 
program has significantly improved, with utilization consistently exceeding 95% 
in recent years. This suggests that the planning, monitoring, and execution 
processes are gettin g better. The Committee also note that spending on 
research has consistently outpaced spending on demonstrations, which reflect 
a scientific and research -driven approach to building resilience. However, 
despite this efficiency, the limited budget has restr icted the scope of adaptation 
efforts, particularly in regions most vulnerable to climate change. 
 Further, the Committee observe that risk and vulnerability assessments 
have been conducted for 573 of the 651 agricultural districts in the country, as 
per t he guidelines of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 
The assessments reveal that 109 districts are categorized as "very highly 
vulnerable" and 201 as "highly vulnerable," indicating that 310 districts are at 
significant risk from climate change. However, due to budget constraints, 
NICRA’s adaptation activities have only been implemented in only 151 of these 
high-risk districts, leaving a large number of vulnerable areas unaddressed. The 
Committee express their concern to note that so many regions are being 
neglected due to financial constraints, particularly when the very survival of 
agricultural livelihoods in these areas is at risk. This is a glaring shortfall, 
considering the scale of the challenges that these districts face.  
Given thes e limitations, the Committee strongly recommend that the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare adopt a phased and rotational 

46 
 
approach to extend climate adaptation support to all 310 vulnerable districts. 
This approach would involve regularly reassess ing climate risks and ensuring 
that resources are directed to areas where they are most needed. Districts that 
show significant improvement in resilience could gradually transition out of the 
program, freeing up resources to focus on newly identified high -risk areas. The 
Committee feel that this phased approach would ensure that adaptation support 
is dynamic and can adjust to changing climatic conditions and evolving 
challenges over time. 
The Committee further recommend a substantial increase in funding for  
NICRA to effectively meet the scale of the challenges it seeks to address. The 
current budgetary allocation is woefully insufficient to address the scale of the 
crisis, and restrict the effectiveness of the program. Increased funding would 
not only allow for more region -specific interventions but would also enable the 
increase in of community -based resilience programmes, which are crucial for 
building long-term climate resilience at the grassroots level.  
The Committee also desire that the Ministry must en sure that funds are 
disbursed in a timely manner, with careful planning and active involvement from 
all relevant stakeholders. Inefficient fund distribution and delays in 
implementation can undermine the effectiveness of such programmes, limiting 
their pot ential impact. The Committee feel that, by ensuring prompt 
disbursement and active participation from local communities, the Ministry can 
significantly enhance the efficacy of NICRA and ensure that the programme 
delivers tangible benefits to farmers facing  climate-related challenges. Further, 
the Committee feel that, while the NICRA project has made commendable 
strides in strengthening agricultural resilience, the Ministry must address the 
glaring gaps in its reach and funding. A more comprehensive, well -funded, and 
dynamic approach with clear road map is needed to ensure that all vulnerable 
districts are supported and that climate resilience efforts are truly inclusive.  
2. Adoption of Climate-Resilient Seed Varieties 
The Committee are aware with the increasing frequency of droughts and 
floods, developing and disseminating climate -resilient seed varieties is 
important for helping farmers adapt to these changing conditions. Through the 
NICRA initiative, drought - and floo d-resistant varieties for crops such as rice, 

47 
 
wheat, and maize have been developed and introduced to farmers through 
Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs). However, the Committee note that significant 
challenges remain, including low farmer awareness, slow adoption  of new seed 
varieties, limited distribution networks, gaps in coordination at the state level, 
and the lack of large -scale assessments to measure the true impact of these 
efforts on agricultural resilience. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Min istry should prioritize 
improving seed distribution systems to ensure timely and easy access for 
farmers. The Committee feel that one effective way of doing this could be the 
establishment of decentralized seed hubs and the promotion of seed village 
programmes. These initiatives would improve the availability of climate -resilient 
seeds at the local level, making it easier for farmers to access them when 
needed most. In addition, the Committee are of the view that the Ministry should 
step up efforts to incre ase awareness among farmers regarding the benefits of 
these new seed varieties. This could be achieved through hands -on 
demonstrations, field trials involving farmers, and localized training 
programmes designed to suit specific climate conditions and farming practices.  
The Committee also feel that there is a need for increasing coordination 
between important stakeholders, such as the Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research (ICAR), state governments, seed companies, and other relevant 
agencies. Increased cooperation will ensure that climate -resilient seed varieties 
reach a wider group of farmers. Further, the Committee recommend that large -
scale assessments must be conducted to see how widely these varieties are 
being used and how they affect productivity an d resilience and to identify if 
there are  problems with implementation which can readily be addressed. To 
help farmers adopt these changes, the Committee also recommend that the 
Ministry should use digital tools to share information more easily. Mobile ap ps, 
SMS updates, community radio, and Agri -tech platforms can all help send 
important and timely information to farmers. Digital platforms can also provide 
valuable updates on seed availability, best practices for crop management, and 
current weather forec asts, all of which are crucial for farmers to adapt to the 
changing climate. The Committee are of the view that by implementing the 
aforementioned measures more farmers will adopt climate-resilient seeds.  

48 
 
3. Standardizing and Expanding Natural Farming 
The Committee note that Natural Farming (NF) is a chemical -free 
agricultural practice rooted in traditional Indian farming knowledge, integrating 
livestock with diverse crop systems. NF focuses on improving soil health, 
reducing input costs, and enhancing cli mate resilience. It relies on locally 
available on -farm resources, such as livestock and plants, without the use of 
purchased bio -fertilizers or mined minerals. The Committee also note that 
National Mission on Natural Farming (NMNF) is a centrally sponsore d initiative 
that collaborates with States and Union Territories to identify districts for 
implementation. The mission targets regions with varying levels of input use 
and areas where NF is already being practiced. Special priority is given to the 5 
km cor ridor along the Ganga under the Namami Gange program, as well as 
areas with strong traditional NF practices, experienced farmers, and supporting 
institutions like State Rural Livelihood Missions (SRLMs), Farmer Producer 
Organizations (FPOs), and Primary Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS). To help 
in the adoption of NF, model farms will be set up for training, demonstrations, 
and documentation, all tailored to local agro -ecological conditions. States 
actively involved in NF include Andhra Pradesh, Himachal  Pradesh, Gujarat, 
Kerala, Jharkhand, Odisha, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, and 
Tamil Nadu. 
Given the diverse agricultural conditions across the country, the 
Committee feel that the Ministry must focus on standardizing NF while ensuring 
it remains adaptable to regional variations. The All India Network Programme on 
Organic Farming, which began in Kharif 2020, is testing NF practices across 
different agro-ecological settings in 16 states. The programme is focused on key 
NF techniques, such as con coctions (e.g., jeevamrit, beejamrit, and 
ghanjeevamrit), intercropping, mulching, and multi -variate crop -based green 
manuring during fallow periods. However, regional -specific factors —such as 
crop selection, varieties, mulching materials, trap crops, and traditional inputs—
must be carefully evaluated to ensure the practices are effective in local 
contexts. The Committee recommend that, based on the results of these 
experiments, a standardized yet flexible NF protocol should be developed in 
consultation wit h stakeholders, including farmers, agricultural experts, and 
local institutions. 

49 
 
The Committee feel that the Ministry need to expand NF efforts beyond 
the 5 km Ganga corridor. While this area is of significant importance, NF should 
be promoted in ecologically sensitive zones and areas facing high-input farming 
practices. Introducing NF in regions affected by soil degradation, water scarcity, 
and excessive chemical use can further enhance agricultural sustainability and 
climate resilience. The Committee are of the view that expanding NF to areas 
where soil health is compromised and where agricultural systems are heavily 
dependent on chemical inputs would be a transformative step toward 
sustainable farming. 
The Committee also feel that focusing on regions with  a solid foundation 
of NF practices, active farmer involvement, and strong local institutions is 
crucial for accelerating NF adoption. Strengthening training programmes and 
raising awareness through traditional and digital platforms will help farmers 
better understand the benefits of NF and encourage them to adopt which will 
improve agricultural productivity and environmental health. Collaboration with 
local farmers' organizations, rural development agencies, and other 
stakeholders will ensure the transitio n to NF is inclusive and sustainable.  
Further, the Committee are of the view that increasing the reach of NF, adapting 
it to local needs, and providing more resources and training will enable the 
Ministry to drive a nationwide shift toward more resilient, sustainable farming. 
The Committee also observed that KVKs in certain parts of country are 
primarily engaged in chemical farming, utilizing all available land, with little or 
no demonstrations on natural farming.  The Committee believe that farmers can 
truly understand the significant advantages of natural farming only if the KVKs 
take the initiative in promoting it. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the 
Ministry issue instructions to all KVKs to encourage natural farming in order to 
effectively communicate its benefits to the farming community. 
4. Enhancing Natural Farming Adoption 
The Committee note that the project "Out -Scaling of Natural Farming 
through Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs)" has made commendable progress by 
conducting 11,341 awareness programs that reached 11.37 lakh farmers and 
stakeholders. It also organised 2,476 training sessions for 1.02 lakh farmers and 
7,592 field demonstrations, providing valuable insights into the preparation of 
natural inputs like Beejamrit, Jeevamrit, and Ghanjeevamrit. These efforts have 
contributed to reduced cultivation costs (ranging from 3% to 55%), improved 
soil health, and better water retention in the soil. However, despite these 
promising results, concerns regarding stable income persist. While awareness 
and adoption have increased, financial security remains a significant barrier to 
the widespread adoption of Natural Farming (NF). 

50 
 
To address this, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should 
conduct a more detailed study among NF practitioners to track adoption rates, 
crop yields, and profitability. This study should gather data on th e long -term 
financial sustainability of NF, including cost savings, potential income 
improvements, and any challenges faced by farmers. The Committee feel that 
the results will provide a clearer understanding of the financial benefits of NF, 
helping to gui de future initiatives and ensure that the benefits of NF are both 
practical and financially viable for farmers. 
Further, the Committee recommend that the Ministry must focus on 
strengthening market linkages and developing premium pricing mechanisms for 
natural produce. As the demand for organic and natural produce is growing, and 
the Ministry should capitalize on this by connecting NF farmers with market 
players that are willing to pay a premium for their produce. Introducing support 
schemes, including fina ncial incentives and risk mitigation measures such as 
crop insurance or price guarantees, will help ease the financial risks involved in 
transitioning to NF. 
The Committee also recommend providing financial support, such as 
subsidies for input costs or low-interest loans for farmers transitioning to NF, to 
encourage wider adoption. These measures will help reduce the financial 
barriers that farmers face when shifting from chemical -based farming to natural 
farming. The Committee feel that with a clearer path way to financial security, 
more farmers are likely to adopt NF, ultimately leading to more sustainable and 
resilient farming systems across the country. 
5. Support Mechanism and Incentives for Organic Farming Transition 
The Committee observe that the Minis try has taken several commendable 
steps to support farmers transitioning from conventional to organic farming, 
such as the Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY), the Mission Organic 
Value Chain Development for the North Eastern Region (MOVCDNER), the PM -
PRANAM scheme, and the Financial Assistance through Direct Benefit Transfer 
(DBT) scheme. While these initiatives have yielded positive results, the 
Committee feel that a more robust and expanded support system is required to 
make the shift from convention al to organic farming more feasible and 
sustainable for farmers, particularly during the critical transition period. The 

51 
 
current financial support of ₹31,500 to ₹46,500 per hectare over three years, 
although a step in the right direction, might not be sufficient to fully alleviate the 
financial strain farmers experience during the first three to four years, a period 
in which yields tend to be lower and the economic burden heavier. 
To address this, the Committee recommend that the Ministry must 
increase the direct financial incentives under DBT for organic inputs and 
consider extending the support period beyond the current three years. This 
extended financial security will help ensure that farmers remain economically 
stable throughout the transition period. M oreover, to further strengthen market 
linkages, the Committee recommend that the Ministry invest in improving local 
marketing channels, enhance digital outreach, and establish premium pricing 
for organic products to make them more attractive to consumers a nd help 
farmers secure better returns for their produce. Strengthening platforms like the 
Jaivik Kheti portal, which has already benefited over 6.22 lakh farmers, would be 
an important step in this direction. The Committee also recommend reviewing 
and incr easing the current subsidy of ₹1,500 per metric ton (MT) under the 
Market Development Assistance (MDA) scheme to ensure that small and 
marginal farmers also benefit from this support. 
The Committee are also of the view that the PM -PRANAM scheme, which 
provides 50% of fertilizer subsidy savings to states that reduce chemical 
fertilizer use, should adopt a performance-based grants incentive structure. This 
would offer increased grants to states that make significant and sustained 
reductions in chemical fertil izer use, motivating a stronger shift toward 
sustainable farming practices. These performance -based grants should be 
allocated to capacity building, developing organic farming infrastructure, and 
creating local organic markets. The Committee believe that t his strategy will not 
only accelerate the adoption of organic farming but also promote long -term soil 
health, environmental sustainability, and economic stability for farming 
communities 
6. Sikkim Model of Organic Farming 
The Committee acknowledge the success of the Sikkim model, which 
highlights the potential of organic farming when supported by comprehensive 
strategies focused on increasing yields, reducing costs, improving market 

52 
 
access, and securing better pricing for o rganic produce. Notable successes of 
this model include stable productivity, improved soil health, and a shift towards 
high-value crops like cardamom, ginger, turmeric, and oranges. The emergence 
of "Organic Tourism" has also created new income opportuniti es for farmers. 
However, challenges such as high labour costs, difficult terrain, limited market 
access, and the shortage of essential organic inputs, particularly bio -fertilizers, 
continue to hinder profitability. The scarcity of quality bio -fertilizers r emains a 
significant concern, as it affects both productivity and the long -term 
sustainability of organic farming. 
To overcome these challenges and replicate the Sikkim model to other 
regions, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should enhance financ ial 
support for organic inputs, certification, and infrastructure development under 
schemes like the Mission Organic Value Chain Development for the North 
Eastern Region (MOVCDNER). The Ministry should focus on subsidizing labor -
intensive processes and addressing the shortage of bio-fertilizers. They  should 
also provide logistical support to overcome the challenges posed by difficult 
terrain, ensuring more efficient and reliable supply chains. In addition, the 
Committee also recommend the establishment of local bio-fertilizer production 
units to ensure a consistent and affordable supply of organic inputs. This would 
reduce reliance on external sources and help lower overall farming costs. The 
Ministry should also focus on strengthening market linkages, both  online and 
offline, and create dedicated organic retail outlets in urban centers to improve 
market access and ensure fair pricing for organic produce. To formalize fair 
pricing, the Committee recommend that the existing 20 –30% premium for 
organic products  be institutionalized through a system of minimum support 
prices (MSP) for key organic crops, ensuring that farmers are adequately 
compensated for their efforts. 
The Committee feel that eco -tourism is a valuable opportunity to support 
organic farming by gi ving farmers extra income. Adding organic farm visits to 
tourism packages could attract tourists, both local and international, and raise 
awareness about organic farming. This would help farmers earn more money 
and create greater demand for organic product s. The Committee are of the view 
that linking farming with tourism, organic farming can gain more recognition 
and benefit both farmers and the local community. 

53 
 
7. Strengthening Organic Certification and Market Access for Farmers 
The Committee recognize the  significant role played by the Ministry in 
implementing two key certification systems — the National Programme for 
Organic Production (NPOP) and the Participatory Guarantee System (PGS -
India)—to promote organic food quality in India. NPOP, managed by the Ministry 
of Commerce, is aimed at both domestic and export markets with third -party 
certification, while PGS -India, managed by the Ministry of Agriculture, is a 
decentralized, cost -effective, farmer -centric system tailored to the domestic 
market. Together, these systems have contributed greatly to the growth of 
organic agriculture in India, ensuring compliance with organic standards and 
increasing transparency in the market. 
However, the Committee feel that there are opportunities to improve the 
certification processes, especially to make them more accessible for small-scale 
farmers. While NPOP and PGS -India have proven effective, the certification 
procedures can be complex and expensive, posing a significant barrier for 
smaller farmers. The Committee recomme nd that the Ministry must explore 
ways to simplify the certification process, including reducing paperwork, 
lowering certification costs, and providing financial assistance or subsidies, 
particularly for farmers using the PGS -India system. PGS-India, being designed 
for small-scale producers, can benefit from these adjustments, but NPOP also 
needs to be made more accessible for smaller operations. The Ministry should 
consider introducing tiered certification models under NPOP, which would make 
it easier for small farmers to access markets and receive premium prices for 
their organic products. 
To further improve the organic certification process, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to establish a unified organic label for both NPOP and 
PGS-India certified products. This would create consistency in marketing, 
enhance consumer confidence, and sim plify the identification of authentic 
organic products. The Committee also desire that the Ministry should focus on 
simplifying the certification procedure, by reducing costs, and exploring digital 
solutions to streamline the application process and monito ring, ensuring 
accessibility for small farmers. The Committee feel that this comprehensive 

54 
 
approach would not only improve the certification process but also promote 
transparency and foster greater trust in India’s organic products. 
The Committee also feel that, despite the availability of these certification 
systems, many farmers may still not fully understand their benefits or the 
certification process itself. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry 
to increase awareness campaigns to educate farm ers—particularly in rural 
areas—about the importance of certification and its long -term advantages. 
Further, the Committee desire that the Ministry should explore the possibility of 
fully digitizing the certification process for both NPOP and PGS -India. An online 
platform could streamline the application process, reduce paperwork, increase 
transparency, and make it easier for farmers to track their certification status. A 
digital system could also facilitate remote inspections or audits, especially in 
areas with limited access to certification bodies, enabling more efficient and 
cost-effective monitoring. 
8. Cold Storage infrastructure for perishable Crops 
The Ministry has made notable progress in addressing storage losses, 
particularly for perishable crops like onions, through the development of 
controlled atmosphere storage facilities under the Public -Private Partnership 
(PPP) model. The Controlled Atmosphere Onion and Multi -Product Storage 
Facility has proven successful, maintaining optimal conditions (tem perature at 
27 ± 2°C and relative humidity at 60 -65%) and significantly reducing storage 
losses to less than 15%, compared to the 40 -60% losses typically seen with 
traditional storage methods. The Committee also note that CONCOR (Container 
Corporation of I ndia) has been involved in improving the transportation of 
perishable goods by providing refrigerated container logistics. This partnership 
has increased the efficiency of moving stored products to market while 
preserving quality. However, the Committee no te that the adoption and 
availability of such facilities for other perishable crops, such as fruits, 
vegetables, and high -value crops like tomatoes, potatoes, and leafy greens, 
remain limited. 
The Committee recommend that the successful model of the onion 
storage facility developed by ICAR -DOGR and Kala Biotech be replicated and 
scaled up for a wider range of perishable crops. The Committee feel that 

55 
 
expanding controlled atmosphere storage for various crops would help reduce 
post-harvest losses significantl y. The Committee desire that the Government 
should work closely with the private sector to expand these facilities, 
prioritizing high-production areas where storage losses are the most significant. 
To further encourage private sector participation in build ing cold storage 
infrastructure, the Committee desire that the Government should explore the 
possibilities of providing financial incentives, such as subsidies, tax breaks, or 
low-interest loans, specifically aimed at the establishment of controlled 
atmosphere storage facilities. These incentives would help reduce the financial 
burden on private stakeholders and encourage them to build more storage units 
in rural and peri -urban areas, thereby benefitting small farmers who currently 
lack adequate storage options. 
The Committee also acknowledge that different crops have varying 
requirements when it comes to temperature and humidity for optimal storage. 
To address this, the Committee recommend the Ministry to initiate research into 
crop-specific controlled atmo sphere storage technologies that are required to 
the unique needs of various fruits, vegetables, and grains. This would ensure 
that cold storage facilities are designed for maximum efficiency and quality 
preservation across diverse crops. 
The Committee als o desire that the Ministry must prioritize cold storage 
infrastructure development in rural and remote areas, especially in regions with 
high horticultural production. These units should be specifically designed as 
net zero controlled cold storage atmosphe re houses. This will not only save 
carbon emission but will reduce the cost of storage of perishable goods. This 
will help small scale farmer by reducing post -harvest losses. The Ministry also 
needs to collaborate with Ministry of New and Renewable under PM Surya Ghar 
Scheme for energy solutions and other related benefits. Further, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to expand the PPP model used for onion storage to 
include multi-crop storage facilities. In this model, the Government could act as 
a facilitator by providing land, subsidies, and technical support, while the 
private sector manages the operations. This partnership approach would help 
maximize resource utilization and ensure the availability of efficient cold storage 
facilities across the country, ultimately benefiting both farmers and consumers 
by reducing food wastage and improving market access. 

56 
 
9. Promoting Efficient Fertilizer Use and Distribution Systems 
The C ommittee note the adverse effects of excessive and imbalanced 
fertilizer use on soil health, crop productivity, and livestock nutrition. The 
Committee also note about the Ministry's ongoing efforts to address these 
issues, through research and the promotio n of integrated nutrient management 
(INM). The use of soil test based nutrient application and a mix of organic and 
inorganic sources has been found to help maintain soil fertility and improve 
sustainability. 
In their submission, the Ministry explained tha t fertilizer distribution from 
manufacturers to farmers is monitored through an online process. The system 
will soon be fully digitized, including the sale of fertilizers from licensed 
manufacturers to retailers, to increase transparency. Efforts are also being 
made to generate online receipts, which will address issues like missing 
receipts due to GST -related problems, making the process smoother for both 
retailers and farmers. Any transaction that occurs outside of this system will be 
considered unauthorized, ensuring stricter control over fertilizer distribution. 
In order to increase efficiency in fertilizer use, the Committee feel that the 
Ministry must intensify efforts to promote soil test -based nutrient management, 
and advocate for balanced fertilizer  use, incorporating organic matter, and 
improving nutrient delivery methods. Modern approaches like precision nutrient 
management should be encouraged to make fertilizer use more efficient and 
reduce dependency on chemical fertilizers. Further, the Ministr y should focus 
on developing and promoting climate -resilient crop varieties that require fewer 
nutrients, ensuring more sustainable agricultural practices. The Committee 
desire that the Ministry should develop a clear action plan, with specific 
timeframes to promote the large -scale adoption of these practices, and regular 
impact assessments should be conducted to evaluate their effectiveness in 
improving soil health, sustaining crop yields, and minimizing environmental 
harm. 
The Committee appreciate the Min istry’s move towards an online system 
for fertilizer distribution, which enhances transparency and helps prevent 
unauthorized transactions. However, considering the challenges in areas with 
limited internet access and among marginal farmers who may lack di gital 
literacy, the system may face obstacles, cause delays or errors in fertilizer 

57 
 
distribution in such areas.  The Committee therefore urge the Ministry to put in 
place contingency plans to manage potential technical issues and ensure the 
continuous flow  of fertilizer distribution. Capacity -building initiatives should 
also be rolled out to help farmers, retailers, and other stakeholders to better 
navigate the online system. In addition, a real -time monitoring and grievance 
redressal system should be set u p to address any issues related to fertilizer 
transactions and ensure quick resolution of any discrepancies.  
10. Promotion and Adoption of Nano Fertilizers  
The Committee note that the promotion of Nano Fertilizers is actively 
being pursued through variou s initiatives aimed at reducing the reliance on 
traditional fertilizers while improving agricultural productivity. These efforts 
include awareness campaigns, webinars, street plays ( nukkad nataks ), field 
demonstrations, Kisan Sammelans, and regional -language films, all designed to 
educate farmers about the benefits of Nano Fertilizers. These fertilizers are 
available at Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samridhi Kendras (PMKSKs) and are included 
in the monthly supply plan issued by the Department of Fertilizers. The Ind ian 
Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) has also conducted a national 
campaign on the "Efficient and Balanced Use of Fertilizer," which highlights 
Nano Fertilizers. This campaign is supported under the Viksit Bharat Sankalp 
Yatra (VBSY), launched in November 2023. 
The Committee appreciate the innovative efforts to facilitate the use of 
Nano Fertilizers, including the use of agricultural drones operated by women 
from Self-Help Groups (SHGs) and battery -operated sprayers, available at retail 
points. The Central Sector Scheme "NAMO Drone Didi," approved by the 
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA), has provided 1,094 drones in 
its first phase to women in SHGs, enabling a broader application of Nano 
Fertilizers using drone technology. This initiative  has the potential to make 
Nano Fertilizers more accessible and practical for farmers, especially in rural 
areas. 
In response to the Committee’s concerns about reducing reliance on 
traditional fertilizers, the Ministry shared results from field studies conducted by 
ICAR-IARI, which showed that Nano Fertilizers can reduce nitrogen use by up to 
25%. The study demonstrat ed that two sprays of Nano -N could achieve the 
same results as the recommended nitrogen dose, pointing to potential cost 

58 
 
savings. However, the Ministry also acknowledged the need for further research 
to fully understand the long -term benefits of Nano Ferti lizers, particularly in 
terms of nutrient budgeting. 
The Committee feel that Nano Fertilizers can offer substantial savings for 
farmers. Since only half a litre of Nano Fertilizer can deliver the same results as 
five kilograms of traditional fertilizer, fa rmers can significantly reduce costs. 
This also has the added benefit of reducing India’s dependence on fertilizer 
imports, contributing to national savings. However, the Committee feel that the 
message about the potential savings and environmental benefit s of Nano 
Fertilizers has not been adequately communicated to farmers. Much more needs 
to be done to raise awareness about these advantages. 
To address this, the Committee recommend that the Ministry take urgent 
action to improve outreach and communication  about Nano Fertilizers. This 
should include expanding awareness campaigns, creating clear and easy -to-
understand educational materials in local languages, and conducting hands -on 
training programmes that directly engage farmers, especially in rural and 
remote areas. The Ministry should also focus on establishing more local 
distribution channels for Nano Fertilizers, ensuring that they are easily 
accessible to farmers. Further, the Ministry must intensify efforts to 
communicate the cost -saving potential of Nano Fertilizers, ensuring that 
farmers fully understand how they can lower their fertilizer expenses. The 
Committee feel that these efforts are crucial not only for maximizing the benefits 
of Nano Fertilizers but also for achieving long -term agricultural sustainability 
and reducing India’s reliance on imported fertilizers. 
11. Safe Pest Management Practices and Promoting Non-Chemical Alternatives 
The Committee expressed serious concerns about the excessive use of 
pesticides and sought clarification from th e Ministry on the measures being 
taken to ensure their safe and responsible use. In response, the Ministry 
explained that pesticide recommendations, approved by the Central Insecticide 
Board & Registration Committee (CIB&RC), are based on extensive multi -year 
trials conducted through the All India Coordinated Research Projects (AICRP). 
These trials focus on specific pest -crop combinations across different regions. 
The resulting recommendations are incorporated into state specific agricultural 
practices afte r being validated through Adaptive Trials on farmers' fields. The 

59 
 
Ministry also highlighted efforts to promote registered bio -pesticides as safer 
alternatives to chemical pesticides. However, the Committee expressed 
dissatisfaction with the Ministry's inab ility to effectively implement these 
recommendations, leading to continued overuse of pesticides, which remains a 
significant issue. 
The Committee are of the view that an effective and coordinated 
approach, involving state governments and other stakeholder s, is crucial to 
curbing the widespread and often irresponsible use of pesticides. The 
Committee believe that this requires not only stricter implementation of CIB&RC 
recommendations but also a concerted effort to raise awareness among farmers 
about the sa fe application of pesticides. Regular training sessions, television 
broadcasts, and radio programmes could help disseminate this knowledge more 
widely. 
The Committee are also of the view that there is an urgent need to 
increase adoption of biological pest management technologies developed by 
the ICAR -National Bureau of Agricultural Insect Resources (NBAIR) as a 
sustainable alternative to chemical pesticides. The Committee are concerned 
about the persistently high levels of pesticide residues found in variou s food 
products like vegetables, grains, fruits, and animal feed, which pose serious 
health risks, including cancer and other life -threatening diseases. While the 
Ministry acknowledged the need for promoting good agricultural practices, 
educating farmers a bout recommended pesticide dosages, encouraging bio -
pesticide use, and integrating pest management practices, the Committee feel 
that these efforts have not been effective in reducing harmful pesticide residue 
levels. 
The Ministry also informed the Committ ee about the Monitoring of 
Pesticide Residues at the National Level (MPRNL) project, which has been 
running since 2005 -06. This project monitors pesticide residues through 35 
participating laboratories across multiple institutions, including the Ministry o f 
Agriculture, ICAR, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Environment, CSIR, Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers, and State Agricultural Universities. The data 
generated from this project is shared with state agriculture departments to 
guide farmers in the sa fe use of pesticides. However, the Committee expressed 
disappointment that despite these initiatives, pesticide residues continue to be 

60 
 
detected in various food products such as vegetables, fruits, spices, cereals, 
meat, eggs, milk, fish, tea and marine products. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to take immediate and 
effective action to ensure that the recommendations of CIB&RC are better 
implemented, with visible results on the ground. It is essential to reduce harmful 
pesticide residues and protect both public health and agricultural produce from 
contamination. To this end, the Committee recommend that the Ministry review 
and strengthen the enforcement of provisions under the Insecticides Act, 1968. 
The Committee feel that a more robust enf orcement mechanism is needed to 
prevent the excessive and harmful use of pesticides, ensuring compliance with 
safety guidelines and mitigating associated health risks. 
12. Preventing the Use of Fake Pesticides and Insecticides 
The Committee raised serious concerns about the widespread issue of 
counterfeit pesticides and their harmful effects on agriculture. They sought 
clarification from the Ministry on the measures being taken to address this 
problem and protect agricultural produce from the damage caused by fake 
pesticides.  In response, the Ministry outlined the existing regulatory framework 
under the Insecticides Act, 1968 , where the Registration Committee (RC), a 
technical body, evaluates the safety and effectiveness of pesticides. The RC has 
established comprehensive guidelines covering chemistry, bio-efficacy, toxicity, 
packaging, and legal standards to ensure the quality of pesticides. The Ministry 
also informed the Committee that there are 11,080 state -level Insecticide 
Inspectors across 25 states an d 2 Union Territories, with an annual testing 
capacity of 77,040 samples. The Central Government deploys 207 Central 
Insecticide Inspectors, and there are two Regional Pesticide Testing 
Laboratories in Chandigarh and Kanpur with a combined annual capacity of 
3,100 samples. Any disputed samples are sent to the Central Insecticides 
Laboratory (CIL) in Faridabad, which processes 1,600 samples annually. If 
samples fail to meet the required standards, prosecution is initiated. 
 The Committee are of the view that there is a need to increase the number 
of Insecticide Inspectors at the state level and strengthening the capacity of 
overseeing officers at the central level. They also emphasized the need to 
expand and improve testing facilities, both in terms of quanti ty and quality, to 
ensure better monitoring and control of pesticide quality. 

61 
 
The Committee also note that the penalties for offences related to 
"misbranded" insecticides under Section 29 of the Insecticides Act, 1968, are 
insufficient to deter offenders. The Committee find that, between 2019 -2020 and 
2023-2024, out of 3,60,614 samples analyzed, 9,233 were found to be 
misbranded, leading to 2,588 prosecutions and only 185 convictions. The 
Committee are very concerned over the low conviction rate and stresse d the 
urgent need for stronger regulations to tackle violations under the Insecticides 
Act. The Committee recommend tightening regulations to curb the production, 
distribution, and use of counterfeit pesticides by amending the Insecticides Act, 
1968 to include provisions for stringent penalties to ensure repeat offenders are 
held accountable. 
13.  District-Wise Ranking of KVKs 
The Committee note that in 2018, the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers' 
Welfare (MoA&FW) commissioned a third -party evaluation of Krishi Vigyan 
Kendras (KVKs) through the National Institute of Labour Economics Research 
and Development (NILERD), an autonomous organization of NITI Aayog. This 
evaluation focused on KVKs established during the XII Five -Year Plan (2012 -
2017), examining factors like infrastructure, impact, and the quality of activities. 
The findings show that 43% of KVKs were placed in the A category, 48% in the B 
category, while 8% and 1% were in the C and D categories, respectively. The 
underperformance of KVKs in the C a nd D categories was attributed to 
challenges like vacant staff positions and incomplete infrastructure, particularly 
in newly established centers that were still under development. 
The Committee also note that the last ranking of KVKs was conducted 
during the XII Five -Year Plan, and no subsequent evaluations have been done. 
This has created a gap in tracking KVK performance and providing appropriate 
support. Without regular updates, it is difficult to assess whether KVKs in lower 
categories have improved or continue to face the same challenges. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry must implement a 
district-wise ranking system for KVKs periodically for a more precise and 
effective performance assessment. The Committee desire that this system 
should categorize KVKs not just based on overall performance but also evaluate 
them according to specific subject areas, productivity, and impact on local 
farming communities. The Committee feel that a district -wise approach is 

62 
 
important as it helps provid e help based on each KVK’s unique needs and 
strengths. It will allow for better tracking of region -specific issues and ensures 
that the Ministry can respond to the unique needs of farmers in different areas.  
The Committee also feel that district -wise rank ing system will also help 
identify high-performing KVKs, which can then be incentivized for their success, 
further motivating them to maintain their standards and share best practices 
with other centers. It will also highlight underperforming KVKs, particu larly 
those in the C and D categories, so they can receive focused support, whether 
it's through staffing, infrastructure, or training. The ranking system would also 
allow for continuous monitoring, making it easier to track improvements and 
assess whether the resources allocated are being effectively utilized. 
The Committee are of the view that regular rankings will ensure 
accountability, providing greater transparency and enabling the Ministry to 
assess KVK performance over time. This will create a system  of healthy 
competition among KVKs and offer a clear picture of where further 
improvements are needed. This will not only help the Ministry monitor and 
support KVKs more effectively but also empower farmers to access the most 
relevant, timely, and effective support available. 
14. Ensuring Effectiveness of KVKs through Regular Performance Reviews 
The Committee appreciate the periodic third -party evaluations of KVKs 
conducted by various institutions such as the High-Level Committee (2015), NITI 
Aayog, NILERD(2017-18), IFPRI (2019), and ISAPs (2021 -22). These evaluations 
have shown positive results, including an additional net farm income of Rs. 
5,752 per hectare and a benefit cost ratio of 11.78, as reported by IFPRI. The 
ISAPs evaluation highlighted the succe ss of on -farm trials, frontline 
demonstrations, and Integrated Farming Systems (IFS) models. The Committee 
note that feedback from farmers pointed to a strong demand for more 
demonstrations of precision agriculture, improved farm tools, and technologies 
to reduce drudgery. There was also a call for KVKs to play a more prominent 
role in promoting entrepreneurship through Agri -clinics and agri -business 
supply systems. 
In the light of these findings, the Committee recommend that KVK 
performance may be regularl y evaluated to ensure that their programmes 
remain relevant and effective in addressing the evolving challenges of 

63 
 
agriculture. These evaluations should not only focus on quantitative outcomes, 
like net farm income and benefit -cost ratios, but also on qual itative aspects 
such as the impact on sustainability, soil health, and climate -resilient practices. 
The Committee feel that KVKs should place greater emphasis on showcasing 
innovative technologies, such as precision farming, climate smart agriculture, 
and tools that reduce farm labour. The Committee also stress the importance of 
promoting entrepreneurship, especially in Agri -clinics and agri -business 
ventures, and encourages stronger collaboration with local research 
institutions, NGOs, and farmer producer organizations (FPOs) to ensure the 
programs meet the real needs of the farming community. 
15. Need for Adequate and Consistent Funding for KVKs 
 The Committee observed from the Revised Estimates (RE) provided by 
the Ministry for Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) over the last five years that while 
the budget allocation has seen an increase, the funding trajectory remains 
insufficient for the growing demands and challenges KVKs face. The budget 
allocation increased from Rs. 22,298.47 lakhs in 2019 -20 to Rs. 28,400.00 lakhs 
in 2021 -22. However, this increase was followed by a slight decrease to Rs. 
24,372.00 lakhs in 2022 -23 and only a marginal rise to Rs. 25,000.00 lakhs in 
2023-24. While the Ministry highlights this as a positive movement, the reality is 
that the funding still falls short of what is needed to meet the evolving demands 
of KVKs, especially as they continue to face pressure for improved 
infrastructure, technology, and capacity-building to support farmers effectively. 
 Despite this gradual increase, the Ministry’s proposal for a one -time grant 
of Rs. 2,500 crores to address capital expenditure and staff enhancement needs 
seem to indicate ongoing challenges KVKs face in securing sufficient funds for 
infrastructure development and other essential. T he Committee feel that this 
one-time grant is merely a short -term patch and does not address the 
underlying issue of underfunding. The resources currently available are clearly 
insufficient to meet the growing needs of KVKs to modernize their infrastructur e 
and adopt new technologies. 
 The Committee feel that the Ministry need to establish a robust and 
consistent funding strategy with long -term vision for the development of KVKs. 
While the proposed one -time grant of Rs. 2,500 crores may provide some 

64 
 
immediate relief, it cannot serve as a substitute for predictable, annual funding 
increases that reflect the evolving needs of KVKs. The current funding model 
appears to be reactionary rather than proactive, and the Committee are 
concerned that such piecemeal inc reases will leave KVKs unable to keep pace 
with infrastructure and technological demands, as well as their increasing 
responsibilities in supporting farmers. 
 The Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry move beyond short-
term fixes and commit to a s ustainable, long-term funding plan for KVKs. The 
funding increases must be substantial, consistent, and in tune with the evolving 
needs of KVKs. This approach is essential to ensure that KVKs remain viable, 
effective, and relevant as centers of agricultural innovation and training. 
   The Committee also recommend that a significant portion of the funding 
should be allocated to infrastructure development, including modernizing 
laboratories, procuring advanced agricultural technologies, and establishing 
digital platforms for efficient knowledge dissemination.  Further, the Committee 
also desire that a robust monitoring mechanism should be established to 
ensure that allocated funds are used efficiently and transparently. Regular 
audits, progress reviews, and impact assessments will enabl e the Ministry to 
track the effectiveness of the funds, ensuring they have the desired impact on 
KVK operations. The Committee feel that, this oversight is crucial to maintain 
accountability and ensure that the funding is being utilized to meet the growing  
needs of agricultural development. 
 16. Standardization of Service Conditions across all KVKs 
The Committee note that the service conditions of KVK employees are 
determined by the respective employer/host organizations as per the approved 
KVK Scheme by th e Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) for a 
period of five years (or Plan period) through the Expenditure Finance Committee 
(EFC). The ICAR serves as the nodal agency for the implementation of the KVK 
Scheme. The guidelines of the KVK Scheme are s trictly implemented as per the 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) and the sanction order issued by ICAR, 
in compliance with the Rules and Bye-Laws of ICAR. 

65 
 
The Committee further note that ICAR does not directly pay the salary and 
allowances of KVK employees . There is no employer -employee relationship 
between ICAR and the employees of non -ICAR KVKs. The limited connection is 
that the host organizations, other than ICAR, which are the actual employers of 
KVK employees in non-ICAR KVKs, pay the salaries and allowances through the 
grant-in-aid received from ICAR, as per the terms of the MoU, the sanction 
order, and the guidelines under the KVK Scheme and Government of India 
Rules. 
The Committee expressed serious concerns about the lack of 
standardization in the s ervice conditions and operational guidelines across 
Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) due to the varying host organizations. This 
inconsistency in service conditions has led to disparities in employee benefits 
and operational procedures, which, if left unaddres sed, could negatively impact 
the morale and effectiveness of KVK employees. The service conditions for 
employees in ICAR KVKs differ from those in non -ICAR KVKs, creating an 
unequal work environment. The Ministry, during their oral submissions, have 
also a ssured the Committee that the issue of disparities in service conditions 
among KVKs is being actively addressed, and necessary corrective measures 
are being incorporated.  
The Committee are of the view that the disparities between the service 
conditions and benefits offered to employees of ICAR and non -ICAR KVKs have 
created a significant divide, leading to potential dissatisfaction and a decrease 
in employee morale. These discrepancies have the potential to hinder the 
productivity and success of KVKs acros s the country. The absence of 
uniformity in employee benefits, staff roles, promotion policies, and other 
critical aspects reflects a lack of coherence in the operation of the KVK Scheme. 
This inconsistency not only affects employee satisfaction but also r aises 
concerns about the overall efficiency of KVKs in fulfilling their objectives. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry must urgently 
address these disparities and establish standardized service conditions across 
all KVKs. To resolve this issue, the Committee recommend revising the terms of 
the MoU governing non -ICAR KVKs, particularly those hosted by State 
Agricultural Universities (SAUs) and other organizations. These revisions 
should ensure that service conditions and benefits are broug ht in line with 

66 
 
those provided to ICAR KVK employees. SAUs should extend the same benefits 
to KVK employees as those provided to state government employees, and other 
host organizations should be required to provide same service conditions 
accordingly. The  Committee also recommend that the uniformity in service 
conditions be made a mandatory pre -condition for any host organization to 
receive grant-in-aid from ICAR. The Committee desire that the Ministry should 
take swift and decisive action to create a fair , consistent, and cohesive working 
environment for all KVK employees across the country. 
17. Need for Staff Augmentation at KVKs 
 The Committee are deeply concerned about the critical staff shortages at 
Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs), with approximately 30% of positions unfilled, 
totaling around 3,500 vacancies. This staff shortfall is significantly impairing the 
KVKs' ability to effec tively carry out their core functions, which include 
providing expert guidance, conducting training programmes, supporting 
research, and facilitating the adoption of new agricultural technologies.  The 
Committee note that the  Ministry has proposed to incr ease staff numbers from 
16 to 20 per KVK . The Committee feel that while this is a welcome step, it will 
not be effective unless vacancies are filled promptly.  
 The Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry must initiate an 
immediate recruitment driv e to fill the existing vacancies with a focus to hiring 
qualified professionals, such as Subject Matter Specialists (SMS) and Technical 
Assistants (T-3), who are essential for providing farmers with expert advice on a 
range of agricultural issues, from cro p management to soil health. These 
professionals are also crucial for facilitating the transfer of technology from 
research to practical applications on the ground.  
In addition to filling vacancies, the Committee feel that KVKs need staff 
with expertise i n emerging agricultural technologies. Positions such as 
Precision Agriculture Specialists, Agricultural Data Analysts, and Tech Support 
Staff are essential for helping farmers adopt tools like AI, remote sensing, and 
precision farming. Multi -skilled roles should also be created to allow staff to 
address a wider range of challenges, from research to farmer outreach. 
The Committee also desire that the Ministry should undertake a review of 
the current staff roles to enhance efficiency. There may be areas of ov erlap or 

67 
 
tasks that can be streamlined to help KVKs operate more effectively with the 
existing workforce. For example, scientists could take on additional 
responsibilities, such as creating digital content for online training, as virtual 
platforms become more prevalent.  Further, the Committee recommend that the 
Ministry should create a long term staffing plan that anticipates the evolving 
needs of KVKs. This plan should be based on workload data, technology 
adoption, and regional challenges. Regular review s of staffing levels will also 
ensure that KVKs are adequately equipped to meet both current and future 
demands. Further, the Ministry should explore the possibility of associating 
expert staff, research fellows, and senior students from Central and State 
Agricultural Universities to assist in imparting trainings at KVKs. This approach 
could not only address the issue of staff shortages at KVKs but also ensure that 
the training programmes remain aligned with the latest trends and 
advancements in sustainable agriculture. 
18. Harnessing AI and digital Tech in Agriculture 
 The Committee commends the Ministry’s efforts through NICRA (National 
Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture) in addressing the challenges 
climate change poses to agriculture. Through t he development of climate -
resilient crop varieties, comprehensive risk assessments, and capacity -building 
programmes, NICRA has significantly enhanced farmers' ability to adapt to 
changing climatic conditions. Further, the Ministry's commitment to integrat ing 
digital technologies, particularly AI -driven predictive models, is a significant 
step forward and should be further supported and expanded to maximize its 
potential benefits. 
 The Committee are of the view that using AI and machine learning in 
agriculture can greatly benefit farmers by providing real -time information on 
weather patterns, pest outbreaks, and crop health. AI -based early warning 
systems can help farmers prepare for extreme weather events like floods or 
droughts, and quickly respond to pest  issues, reducing losses and improving 
resilience.  AI can also work with precision farming to optimize resource use, 
such as water, fertilizers, and pesticides, leading to better sustainability and 
higher productivity. 

68 
 
 As AI technology continues to evolve, the Committee recommend that the 
Ministry should explore partnerships with tech companies, agricultural 
universities, and research institutions. These collaborations could help make AI 
tools more accessible to farmers in remote and disadvantaged areas, ensuring 
that all farmers, regardless of location, can benefit from these innovations. It is 
essential for Ministry to ensure that AI tools are both affordable and user -
friendly to increase their adoption. The Ministry should also focus on providing 
training programmes to equip farmers with the skills needed to effectively use 
AI technologies. This will empower farmers to make the most of these 
advancements, ensuring they can improve their farm practices. Further, the 
Committee feel that it is important to ensure that the necessary infrastructure, 
such as reliable internet and mobile connectivity, is available in rural areas to 
support these technologies. 
19. “Lab to Land” Initiatives 
 The Committee are happy to note that the “Lab to Land” initiatives under 
ICAR and the Central Agricultural Universities (CAUs) have made a significant 
impact in improving agricultural productivity and promoting climate -resilient 
farming practices.  Institutions such as the Central Agricultural University 
(Imphal), RPCAU (Pusa) and Rani Lakshmi Bai Central Agricultural University 
(Jhansi) have successfully translated research into practical solutions that 
directly benefit farmers.  Through field trials, demonstrations and localized 
adaptations of research, these initiatives have contributed to increasing 
farmers’ access to modern technologies and improved farming methods. 
 However, the Committee are of the view that, while the initial 
demonstrations and trials have shown positive outcomes, consistent follow -up 
support is important  for the long -term adoption of these new practices.  Many 
farmers face challenges when transitioning to new technologies and without 
continuous support, they may struggle to fully implement or maintain these 
practices.  The Committee recommend that there m ust be regular follow -ups by 
extension officers, Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK) staff and field experts who can 
address the issues farmers might be facing such as pest control, weather -
related challenges and technological difficulties.  The Committee feel that  
establishing a system where farmers can access continuous guidance, through 
in-person visits, phone consultations or digital platforms, would significantly 

69 
 
enhance the effectiveness of the “Lab to Land” initiatives.  Such a system will 
help build farmers’  confidence and ensure the continuity of the new practices 
being introduced. 
 The Committee also recommend that successful pilot projects and 
innovations resulting from these initiatives must be augmented to reach a large 
number of farmers.  Expanding the scope of these trails and rolling out 
innovations on a broader scale will maximize their impact and benefit a greater 
number of agricultural communities.  For augmenting these innovations, the 
Committee feel that it is essential to foster stronger collabor ation between 
research institutions, government bodies, and the private sector.  Public -Private 
Partnerships can facilitate the wider dissemination of research outcome and 
help integrate innovative technologies into farming systems more effectively. 
 The C ommittee are of the view that promoting farmer -to-farmer 
knowledge exchange is a valuable way to strengthen the impact of these 
initiatives.  Farmers who have successfully adopted new technologies can serve 
as mentors or lead demonstrations for others in t heir communities, promoting a 
grassroots approach to adoption and adaption.  The Committee feel that peer -
learning model will be effective in rural areas, where trust and community-based 
collaboration are strong. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                     DR. SANJAY JAISWAL 
03 April  2025                  CHAIRPERSON 
13 Chaitra 1947 (Saka)                       COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
  

70 
 
Annexure I 
Drought/Moisture Stress tolerant varieties released during 2014 to 2024 
Total Crop Varieties  Varieties (Total 323 varieties) 
CEREALS (198)  
Rice (110) 
 
 
 
1. IR-64 Drt I (IET 22836)  
2. BirsaVikasDhan 111  
3. BirsaVikasDhan 203  
4. Sabour Shree (RAU 724-48-33)  
5. Kalachampa 
6. DRR Dhan 44 (IET 22081)  
7. DRR Dhan 43 (IET 22080)  
8. ADV 8301 (IET22410) Hybrid  
9. CR Dhan 101 (Ankit) (CR 2702) (IET 21627)  
10. DRR Dhan 46  
11. JRH 19 Hybrid  
12. PAC 129 (Arize 6129) Hybrid  
13. BS 129G (Arize 6129 Gold) Hybrid  
14. NandyalaSona (NDLR 7) (IET 23715)  
15. Daksha (KMP-175)  
16. 28P67 PR 14105 (IET 24879) Hybrid 
17. DRR Dhan 47 (IET 23356) 
18. DRR Dhan 50 (IET 25671)  
19. CAU-RI (IET 23544)  
20. Him Palam Lal Dhan-1 (HPR 2795)  
21. Tripura Hakuchuk – 2  
22. Tripura Khara -2  
23. Tripura Khara -1  
24. Tripura Hakuchuk – 1  
25. Tripura Aush -1  
26. VNR-2111 PLUS (IET 24075) (VNR 212)  
27. ADT 51 (AD 09367) (IET 23617)  
28. JGL 11727 (Pranahitha) 
29. CR Dhan 801 (IET 25667)  
30. DRR Dhan 52 (IET 23354)  
31. Ratnagiri-8 (RTN 28-1-5-3-2) (IET 25493)  
32. CR Dhan 802 (SUBHAS) (IET 25673)  
33. Uttar Sona UBKVR-1 (IET 24171)  
34. MP 3030 (IET 25764)  
35. CR Dhan 102 (IET 25121)  
36. CO 53 (CB 06803 (IET 24057)  
37. PNPH 24  
38. DRR Dhan 54 (IET25653)  
39. SabourSampannaDhan (lET 25960)  
40. DRR Dhan 57 
41. SwarnaSukhaDhan (IET 24692)  

71 
 
42. Sava 300  
43. Sava 200  
44. ICAR-NEH NICRA Hill Rice 2022-2  
45. Pusa Basmati 1882 (IET 28788) 
46. SwarnaPurviDhan 3 (IET 28329) 
47. Uttar Sugandhi (UBKVRA-2 (IET 24616) 
48. CR Dhan 415 (Kamesh) (IET 22097)  
49. CR Dhan 103 (Pramod)) (IET 22020)  
50. CR Dhan 107 (UnnatVandana (IET 26337)  
51. TKM 15 [TM 12077] (IET 26645) 
52. SwarnaShuskDhan  
53. SwarnaPurviDhan 1  
54. Swarna Purvi  Dhan 2 (RCPR 46-IR93827-29-1-1-2)  
55. OUAT Kalinga Rice 5 (Nabanna) (IET 25140)  
56. CR Dhan 804 (IET 28032) (CRR 751-1-7-B-B) 
57. CR Dhan 808 (IET 28834) (CRR 809-11-1-9-B) 
58. ICAR NEH NICRA Aerobic Dhan 2 (IET 29409) 
59. SwarnaPurviDhan 4 IET 29405  
60. SwarnaPurviDhan 5 IET 29036  
61. CR Dhan 108 (IET29052) 
62. CSR 105 (IET-30004) 
63. DRR Dhan 77 (IET 28636) 
64. DRR Dhan 79 (IET 29859) 
65. BRR 2183 (Sabour Vijay Dhan) (IET 30029) 
66. BRR 2184 (Sabour Narendra Dhan) 
67. CR Dhan 201 
68. CR Dhan 202 
69. VL Dhan 68 (VL 31611) 
70. Indira Aerobic-1 
71. DRR Dhan 41 
72. KRH 4 (Karnataka Rice CSRC Hybrid 4) Hybrid 
73. CR Dhan 203 (Sachala) (IET 21920) 
74. CR Dhan 206 (Gopinath) (IET 22731) 
75. Chhattisgarh Zinc rice 1 (CGZR-1) 
76. Gujarat Anand Rice 3 (GAR-3) 
77. Swarna Shreya 
78. KPH 272 Hybrid 
79. GK 5022 (IET 23445) Hybrid 
80. Gujarat Anand Rice-3 (GAR-3) (NWGR-4005) 
81. SabourArdhjal (BRR 0007) (IET 24036) 
82. Rajendra Nilam (RAU-1484-Aer-04) (IET 24010) 
83. Srimati (CR Dhan 207 (IET 23448) 
84. Priya (CR Dhan 209) 
85. Daksha (KMP-175) 
86. CR Dhan 510 (IET 23895) (CR2593-1-1-1-1) 
87. CR Dhan 306 (IET 22084) 

72 
 
88. Swarna Shakti Dhan (IET 25640)  
89. US 380 (IET 25728) 
90. PR 127 (RYT 3316) 
91. Him PalamDhan 1 (HPR 2656) 
92. CR Dhan 210 (IET 23449) 
93. TRC 2015-5 (IET 26178) Aerobic Dhan- I 
94. DRR Dhan 55 (RP559)-123-16-2 (IET 26194) 
95. DRR Dhan 54 (IET 25653)  
96. DRR Dhan 57 
97. GNR-8 (Aarti) 
98. Kalinga Dhan 1204 (IET 25620) 
99. ICAR NEH NICRA-BoroDhan 1 (TRC 2016-14)) 
100. DRRH-4 (IET 27937) 
101. SwarnaPurviDhan 3 (IET 28329) 
102. SwarnaShuskDhan 
103. Swarna Purvi Dhan 1  
104. CR Dhan 211 (IET 29411) 
105. CR Dhan 212 (IET 29424) 
106. CR Dhan 214 (IET 29436)  
107. DRR Dhan 70 (IET 29415)  
108. DRR Dhan 71 (IET 29421) ( 
109. TRC 2020-14 (IET 29409) 
110. Gujarat Aerobic Rice 201 (AnandAksha 1)  
Wheat (27)  1. WH 1124  
2. DBW 107  
3. WH 1142  
4. UAS 347  
5. Chhattisgarh Genhu 4 (CG 1015)  
6. SabourNirjal (BRW 3723)  
7. DBW 173  
8. Pusa Wheat 1612 (HI 1612)  
9. Pusa Wheat 8777 (HI 8777)  
10. HUW 669 (Malviya 669)  
11. AAI-W9 (SHIATS-W9)  
12. AAI-W10 (SHIATS-W10)  
13. Karan Shriya (DBW 252)  
14. Pusa Wheat 1621 (HI 1621)  
15. DDW 47  
16. Gujarat Wheat 1346 (GW 1346)  
17. Pusa Wheat 8802 (HI 8802)  
18. Pusa Wheat 8805 (HI 8805)  
19. UAS-466  
20. JKW-261 (Birsa Gehun-4) 
21. DBW 296 (Karan Aishwaraya) 
22. MP (JW ) 1358 
23. DBW 327 (Karan Shivani) 

73 
 
24. HUW 711 (Malviya 711) 
25. Krishidhara Surya (UAS 478 
26. Mavanti (CG 1040) 
27. PusaGehunSharbati (HI 1665) 
 Maize (22) 1. DHM 121 (BH 41009) Hybrid 
2. KMH-7148 Hybrid  
3. Candy (KSCH-333) Hybrid  
4. D2244 (DAS-Maharashtra-501) Hybrid  
5. HTMH 5402 Hybrid 
6. GK 3150 Hybrid  
7. DRONA (Kmaharashtra-2589) Hybrid  
8. MH 9344 (DMH 192)  Hybrid 
9. HTMH 5109 (HT 51412616) Hybrid 
10. JKMH 4222 (Hybrid) 
11. MAH-14-5  
12. PusaJawahar Hybrid Maize-1  
13. RCRMH-2 
14. PAC 745 Gold  
15. RCRMH-4  
16. Shalimar Maize Composite-8 (KDMH-103) 
17. RC Manichujak-2 
18. CP.999 
19. Rajendra Baby Corn- 1 (MBC-11-15) 
20. Rajendra Pop Corn 1 (MPC-1-15) 
21. AH-8181 Pusa Jawahar Hybrid Maize (R) – 3   
22. Maize VGIH (M) 2 (VaMH-12013) 
 Sorghum (9) 1. CSV 32F (SPV 2128)  
2. PhuleRohini (RPASV3)  
3. PhuleMadhur (RSSGV 46)  
4. RVICSH 28 (Hybrid)  
5. CSV 42(SPV 2423)  
6. PalemPachaJonna 1 (PYPS-2)  
7. TandurJonna 1(SVT-68) 
8. K13 
9. PhulePurva (RSV- 2371) 
 Pearl Millet (13) 1. NBH 5061 (MH 1812) Hybrid  
2. NBH 5767 (MH 1785) Hybrid  
3. PBH – 306 (MH 1962) Hybrid  
4. AHB 1200 Fe (MH 2072 (AHB 1200) hybrid  
5. PB 1705 (MH 2008) Hybrid  
6. BHB-1202 (Bikaner Hybrid Bajra-1202) (MH 1831)  
7. PA 9072 (MH 2082) (PB 1756) 
8. PB 1852 (MH 2224) 
9. ProagroMarutej (XMT 1358)  
10. HHB 67 Improved 2  
11. GHB 538 (EDV:DM) (Marua Sona)  

74 
 
12. Central Pearl Millet Hybrid MPMH 42 (Shree Anna Bajri 
42)  
13. Central Pearl Millet Hybrid GHB 1294 (MaruMoti)  
 Little millet (3) 1. JawaharKutki 4 (JK 4)  
2. ATL 1TNPsu 177  
3. Chhattisgarh Sonkutki (BL-41-3)  
Kodo millet (5) 1. JawaharKodo 137  
2. Chhattisgarh Kodo-03 (BK-36)  
3. ATL 1 (TNPsc 176)  
4. JK- 9-l (JawaharKodo 9-l- (DPS 9-l)  
5. CKMV 4 (ATL3) KMV558(TNPsc313) 
Barnyard Millet (1) 1. ATL I (TNEf 3 1 7) (Kudiraivali) 
Finger Millet (7) 1.   Vakula (PPR 2700)  
2. Chhattisgarh Ragi-2 (BR-36)  
3. Chhattisgarh Ragi-3 (FMV-1102) (BR-14-3)  
4. ATL 1 (TNEc 1285)  
5. BirsaMarua 3 
6. ML-322 
7. ATL 2  (TNEc -1294) 
Foxtail Millet (1) 1. ATL 2  (TNSi -337) 
OILSEEDS (23)  
Soybean (5) 1.  Pant Soybean 24 (PS 1477)  
2.  Shalimar Soybean – 1 (AGR/538)  
3.Indore Soy 136 (IS 136)NRC 136  
4. RSC 10-71 
5. Chhattisgarh Soya 11-15 
Groundnut (5) 1. GKVK 5  
2. KadiriAmaravathi (K1535)  
3. Dh 256  
4. Kalinga Groundnut 101 (ICGV 02266)  
5. Girnar 6 (NRCGCS 637) 
Sesame (2) 1. CUMS-17 (Suprava)  
2. JagtialaTil 2 (JCS 2454)  
Indian Mustard (6) 1.   RGN-298  
2.   GM-3 (Gujarat Mustard-3)  
3.   DRMR 1165-40  
4.   RCH 1 
5.   Pusa Double Zero Mustard 33 
6.   BirsaBhabha Mustard 1(BBM1) 
 1. JNS 2016-1413 
 Toria (2) 1.   Raj VijayToria 1  
2.   Tapeshwari (TK 06-1)  
Taramira (1) 1.  Krishna Tara (RTM-1624) 
Linseed (1) 1.  UteraAlsi (RLC-143) 
PULSES (39)  

75 
 
Urdbean/ blackgram 
(3) 
1. IPU 11-02  
2. BirsaUrd 2 (RUB 12-02) 
3. TJU 130 (TrombayJawaharUrd 130)  
Pigeonopea/ Red gram 
(14) 
1. Prakash (IPA 203)  
2. Gujarat Junagadh Pigeonpea-1 (GJP-1)  
3. Ujwala (PRG 176)  
4. MannemkondaKandi (ICPH 2740) Hybrid  
5. GT-102  
6. BRG 5  
7. Amaravathi (LRG-52)  
8. BDN 716 (BDN 2008-7)  
9. GRG 811 (Dharamaraj)  
10. Warangal Kandi-1 (WRGE-97)  
11. Krishna (LRG 105)  
12. TirupatiKandi 59 (TRG-59)  
13. Gujarat Tur 105 (GT-105: Janki)  
14. Birsa Arhar-2 (BAUPP09-22)  
Horse gram (2) 1. PhuleSakas (SHG 0628-4) 
2. BilasaKulthi (BSP 15-1)  
Cluster bean (Guar) (1) 1.    Karan Guar 1 (RGr-12-1)  
Chickpea (9) 1. Pusa 3043 (BG 3043)  
2. Pusa Chickpea 10216 (BGM 10216)  
3. Super Annigeri-1 (MABC-WR-SAI)  
4. IPCL 4-14 (IPCMAS-1) 
5. Pusa Chickpea 4005 
6. Pusa JG 16 (BGM 10221 (DTIL) 
7. ADVTKA (NC 7)  
8. Saatvik (NC 9) [IC 650347] 
9. KCD-11 (KCD 2019-05) 
Lentil (2) 1. Kota Masoor 2 (RKL 14-20)  
2. Kota Masoor 3 (RKL 605-03)  
Cowpea (2) 1.   Karan Chanwla 1 (CPD 119) 
2.   Shalimar Cowpea-2 (SKUA-WCP-149) 
Mothbean (1) 1.   RMO-2251 (Marudhar)  
Faba Bean (1) 1. Swarna Suraksha  
Rajmash (1) 1. Shalimar Rajmash-3 (SKAU-WB-1634) 
Green gram/ 
mung bean (2) 
1. PMD-9 
2. PMD-10 
Winged Bean (1) 1. BirsaKamrenga – 1 (RWB-13) 
FIBER CROPS (13)  
Cotton (10) 1. GN.Cot.25  
2. SVPR 1 (TSHH-0629) Hybrid  
3. Nirmal-433 (NACH-433)  
4. Raj Vijay Kapas 67 (RVK 67) IH 67 (HR)  
5. LAHB Cotton – 1  

76 
 
6. Nandyal Cotton- 23 (NDLH 2028-2)  
7. TSH 387 (SVPR 7) 
8. CICR-A NC Cotton 67 (CNA 1092) 
9. KCH 9122 BGII 
10. C 9314 BG-II 
Jute (1) 1.   JRO 2407 (Samapti)Tossajute 
Mesta Roselle (2) 1. Sampurna (CRIJAFR 8)  
2. Central Roselle Ratna (CRIJAF R-5)  
FORAGES (16)  
Pearl Millet (2) 1. MotiBajra (APFB-09-1)  
2. IGPM 5-2  
Forage Sorghum (2) 1. Fodder Sorghum CO 31 (TNFS 0952)  
2. CSV 40F (SPV 2387)  
Forage Maize (1) 1. Shalimar Fodder Maize – 1 (KDFM -1) 
Forage Cowpea (1)       1.    CO 9 
Napier Bajra Hybrid (1) 1. DHN-15 
FescueGrass  (1) 1.    Palam Fescue Grass-2 (Hima 14)  
Guinea Grass (2) 1. Bundel Guinea -4 (JHGG 08-1)  
2. Dharwad Guinea Grass 1 (DGG-1) (RSDGG-1)  
Rice bean (2) 1.    JRBJ 05-2  
2.    Shyamalima (JCR-7-20)  
Marvel Grass (1) 1.    PhuleGovardhan - (Marvel -2008-1)  
Anjan Grass (1) 1.    CAZRI Anjan-358 (CAZRI 358)  
Forage Sewan Grass 
(1) 
1.    CAZRI Sewan-1 (CAZRI 30-5)  
Setaria Grass (1) 1.    Him Palam Setaria Grass 2 (S 25)  
SUGARCROPS (32)  
Sugarcane (32) 1. Sankeshwar 049 (Co Snk 05103) 
2. Sankeshwar 814 (Co Snk 05104) 
3. CoBIn 02173(22/94) D01YANG  
4. CO 0212  
5. Gujarat Sugarcane 5 (CoN 05071)  
6. Revathi (2000 A 225 (CoA 05323) 
7. Co 09004 (Amritha)  
8. SNK-632 (CoSnK 03632)  
9. CoVSI 03102  
10. CoVC 99463  
11. Ikshu - 4 (CoLk 11206)  
12. Sugarcane CO 06022  
13. CoOr 10346  (Charchika)  
14. SNK 07680 (CoSnk 13103) Hiranyakeshi 
15. Uphar (Co 10026)  
16. CoLk 12209 (Ikshu-7)  
17. Phule-10001 (MS 10001)  
18. VSI 12121 (VSI 08005)  

77 
 
19. Swarnamukhi (2005T16)  
20. Co 13013 (Akshaya)  
21. CoVC 16061 
22. IKSHU – 8 (CoLK 14204)  
23. IKSHU-10 (CoLK 14201)  
24. Kalinga Sugarcane - 346 
25. CoVC 16062 
26. Co 14012 (AVANI) 
27. Co 11015 (Atulya)  
28. Co 14005 (Arunima)  
29. Phule Sugarcane 13007 (MS 14082)  
30. Divyashi - CoN 15071 (GNS-12) 
31. IKHSU-16 (CoLk 16202) 
32. SNK 09227 (CoSnk-15104) 
Others Crop  (2)  
Kalingada  (1) 1.  CAZRI Kalingada – 1 (CAZJK-13-2) (Water Melon)  
Grain Amaranth  (1) 1. Charu (KBGA-15)  
 
  

78 
 
Annexure-II 
State-wise data of Pesticide samples tested in last five (5) years from 2019-
20 to 2023-24 
 
State name Analyzed Misbranded Prosecution Launched Accused convicted 
Andhra Pradesh 35395 358 83 0 
Arunachal Pradesh 11 0 0 0 
Assam 123 0 0 5 
Bihar 3069 14 8 0 
Chhattisgarh 2042 134 11 0 
Delhi 77 18 5 5 
Goa 13 0 0 0 
Gujarat 23858 787 285 21 
Haryana 8603 594 163 12 
Himachal Pradesh 1548 0 0 0 
Jammu Kashmir 6615 166 106 56 
Jharkhand 218 6 2 0 
Karnataka 26854 411 105 0 
Kerala 9428 12 0 0 
Lakshadweep 0 0 0 0 
Madhya Pradesh 6633 1098 25 0 
Maharashtra 45837 1753 329 2 
Manipur 2 0 0 0 
Meghalaya 0 0 0 0 
Mizoram 0 0 0 0 
Odisha 5004 52 1 1 
Pondicherry 400 0 0 0 
Punjab 14807 400 41 0 
Rajasthan 16505 701 52 0 
Sikkim 0 0 0 0 
Tamil Nadu 100439 723 100 0 
Telangana 17707 120 3 0 
Tripura 352 4 0 0 
Uttarakhand 1859 91 91 0 
Uttar Pradesh 28888 1705 1178 83 
West Bengal 4327 86 0 0 
Total 360614 9233 (2.56% ) 2588 185 
 
  

79 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2024-25) 
 
The third sitting of the Committee was held on Thursday , 26 th September, 
2024 at 1100 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe,                      
New Delhi-110001 
 
PRESENT 
Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson 
Members 
2.  Shri Brijmohan Agrawal  
3.  Shri M. Mallesh Babu  
4.  Shri Pradan Baruah  
5.  Shri Charanjit Singh Channi  
6.  Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
7.  Shri Devusinh Chauhan  
8.  Ms. Iqra Choudhary  
9.  Shri Sudheer Gupta   
10.  Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo  
11.  Shri Naveen Jindal  
12.  Shri B.K. Parthasarathi  
13.  Shri Awadhesh Prasad  
14.  Shri M. K. Raghavan  
15.  Shri Bishnu Pada Ray  
16.  Shri Y.S. Avinash Reddy  
17.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy  
18.  Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan  
19.  Thiru Dayanidhi Maran  
20.  Dr. Bhola Singh  
21.  Dr. Indra Hang Subba  
22.  Shri Manoj Tiwari  
23.  Shri Ve Vaithilingam  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 1.      Shri Santosh Kumar -   Joint Secretary 
  2.      Shri Lalkithang -   Director 
 
 

80 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMER 
WELFARE 
Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
1. Shri Devesh Chaturvedi Secretary 
2. Ms. Yogita Rana Joint Secretary 
3.      Shri Franklin L. Khobung Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Sanjay Kumar Director 
 
       Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
1.  Shri Sanjay Garg AS (DARE) & Secy. (ICAR) 
2.  Dr. S.K. Chaudhari Dy. Director General (NRM), ICAR 
3.  Dr.U.S. Gautam Dy. Director General (Extn.), ICAR 
4.  Dr. A.K. Singh Vice Chancellor, RLBCAU, Jhansi 
5.  Dr. A.K. Singh Director of Research, RPCAU, Samastipur 
6.  Dr. Anjani Kumar Director, ICAR- ATARI, Zone-IV, Patna 
7.  Dr. Rajarshi Roy Burman Assistant Director General (Extn.), ICAR 
8.  Dr. Rajbir Singh Assistant Director General (NRM), ICAR 
9.  Dr. Anil Kumar Assistant Director General (Coordination), 
ICAR 
 
2.  At the outset, Hon'ble Chairperson, Committee on Estimates welcomed the 
Members and other officials of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare to the 
Sitting of the Committee convened to have briefing on the subject ‘Promotion of 
Climate Resilient Agriculture, Natural and Organic Farming through KVKs’. The ir 
attention was also drawn to the Direction 55(1) of ‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok 
Sabha’ about the confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee. 
 
3.  Dr. S.K. Chaudhari, Deputy Director General, ICAR made a presentation on the 
subject followed b y a brief introduction on Natural and Organic Farming by the 
Secretary, Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare. The presentation 
highlighted the climate resilient technologies to minimize climatic stresses, flood 
tolerant improved crop varieties, st rategies for improving fodder availability, 
interventions for livestock, integrated farming systems, promotion of natural farming 
and their demonstrations through KVKs, capacity development of scientists, science of 
intercropping/multi-cropping and using concoctions, etc. 
 
4.  The Chairperson and other Members of the Committee, then raised several 
queries relating to the subject. The queries inter alia  were related to government 
initiatives to promote natural and organic farming, strategies to enhance yields in 

81 
 
these practices, benefits of the Pradhan Mantri Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) , 
disadvantages of overuse of fertilizers, pesticides and insecticides , promotion of nano 
fertilizers, commercialization of bio -fertilizers, increasing funding of KVKs under 
various heads, pay parity of all types of KVK employees, imparting more trainings with 
farmers by KVKs, providing comprehensive data on soil sample testing, etc. 
 
5.    The representatives of the Ministry responded to the queries raised by the 
Members. The Chairperson thanked the representatives of the Ministry and asked 
them to furnish written replies, on the points, for which information was not readily  
available, within fifteen weeks. 
 
6.  The witnesses, then, withdrew. 
 
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

82 
 
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2024-25) 
 
The eleventh sitting of the Committee was held on Monday , 3rd February, 
2024 at 1500 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe,                      
New Delhi-110001 
 
PRESENT 
Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson 
Members 
2.  Shri M. Mallesh Babu  
3.  Shri Kalyan Banerjee  
4.  Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
5.  Ms. Iqra Choudhary  
6.  Shri Sudheer Gupta   
7.  Shri Manish Jaiswal  
8.  Thiru Dayanidhi Maran  
9.  Shri M. K. Raghavan  
10.  Shri Y.S. Avinash Reddy  
11.  Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan  
12.  Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant  
13.  Dr. Indra Hang Subba  
14.  Shri Ve Vaithilingam  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 1.      Shri Y.M. Kandpal -   Joint Secretary 
 2.      Shri Lalkithang -        Director 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS 
WELFARE 
Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
1. Shri Devesh Chaturvedi Secretary 
2.      Shri Franklin L. Khobung Joint Secretary 
        
 

83 
 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
 
3.  Dr. Himanshu Pathak Secretary (DARE) & DG (ICAR) 
4.  Shri Sanjay Garg AS (DARE) & Secy. (ICAR) 
5.  Dr. Anjani Kumar Director, ICAR- ATARI, Zone-IV, Patna 
6.  Dr. P. S. Pandey Vice Chancellor, RPCAU, Samastipur 
7.  Dr. Rajarshi Roy Burman Assistant Director General (Extn.), ICAR 
8.  Dr. Rajbir Singh Assistant Director General (NRM), ICAR 
 
2.  At the outset, Hon'ble Chairperson, Committee on Estimates welcomed the 
Members and representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare to 
the Sitting of the Committee convened to examine the subject ‘Promotion of Climate 
Resilient Agriculture, Natural and Organic Farming thro ugh KVKs’. Their attention was 
also drawn to the Direction 55(1) of ‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’ about the 
confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee. 
 
3.  Dr. Himanshu Pathak, Secretary (DARE) & DG ICAR made a presentation 
focusing on t he challenges posed by climate change on agriculture. He emphasized 
strategies to address extreme weather conditions such as heavy rainfall, storms, 
droughts, heatwaves, and cold stress. Dr. Pathak also outlined initiatives like on -site 
demonstrations and capacity-building programs for farmers, the development of 
climate-resistant crop varieties, soil testing, nutrition management for livestock, and 
the breeding of new poultry and piggery varieties  as well as an update on the 
progress of natural farming an d organic farming through KVKs. Shri Devesh 
Chaturvendi, Secretary of the Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, briefed 
the Committee on the status of service conditions for KVKs employees. He discussed 
the coordination of KVKs with state agricult ure departments and the usage of land 
under KVKs. 
 
4.  The Chairperson and members the Committee, then raised several queries 
related to the subject. These included concerns about the impact of urban 
infrastructure development on agriculture, the timely is suance of weather forecasts, 
and district -wise impact evaluations of the National Initiative on Climate Resilient 
Agriculture (NICRA), support for agricultural entrepreneurs, development of model 
KVKs, expansion of the KVKs network, the shortage of manpowe r at KVKs, the need 

84 
 
to simplify the process of Geographical Identification (GI) for crops, the current status 
of KVK Hazaribagh, harmful effects of pesticides, the overuse of fertilizers, measures 
to control the sale of banned fertilizers, ensuring the ava ilability of bio -compost and 
other agricultural nutrients at affordable prices. Other concerns included the promotion 
of nano -fertilizers, lack of incentives and challenges faced by farmers in adopting 
organic farming, simplifying the certification process  for organic produce, the 
establishment of the new KVKs, and the strengthening of existing KVKs through 
increased funding, enhancing KVK outreach efforts to farmers, and improving the 
service conditions of KVK employees, etc. 
 
5.    The representatives of the Ministry responded to the queries raised by the 
Members. The Chairperson thanked the representatives of the Ministry and asked 
them to furnish written replies, on the points, for which information was not readily 
available, within fifteen days. 
 
6.  The witnesses, then, withdrew. 
 
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

85 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
ESTIMATES (2024-2025) 
  
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 3rd April, 2025 from 1030 hrs. to 1050 hrs. 
in Committee Room No. 3, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
      PRESENT 
  Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson 
 
          Members 
 
   
2.  Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
3. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
4. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
5. Shri Manish Jaiswal 
6. Shri Naveen Jindal 
7. Shri Jugal Kishore 
8. Shri P. C. Mohan 
9. Shri B. K. Parthasarathi 
10. Shri Awadhesh Prasad 
11. Shri M. K. Raghavan 
12. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
13. Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan 
14. Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
15. Kumari Selja 
16. Dr. Bhola Singh 
17. Dr. Indra Hang Subba 
18. Shri Ve Vaithilingam 
 
Secretariat 
 
 1. Shri Y.M. Kandpal     -       Additional Secretary 
 2. Shri Lalkithang                -       Director 
   
 
 
  

86 
 
2.         At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee , then, took up for consideration and adoption of the draft 
Report on the subject ‘Promotion of Climate Resilient Agriculture, Natural and Organic 
Farming through KVKs’. 
 
3.       The Committee after due deliber ations adopted the draft Report . The 
Committee, then, authorised the Chairpers on to finalize the draft Report  on the basis 
of factual verification received from the concerned Ministry and present the same to 
Lok Sabha. 
    
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 