 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION 
 
 
 
BUDGET AND POLICY ASPECTS FOR PROVIDING AFFORDABLE AND 
QUALITY EDUCATION IN THE COUNTRY INCLUDING REVIEW OF 
CENTRAL BOARD OF SECONDARY EDUCATION 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2026-27) 
 
 
 
TENTH REPORT 
____________________________________________________________ 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  

 
 
TENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2026-27) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
           MINISTRY OF EDUCATION 
 
BUDGET AND POLICY ASPECTS FOR PROVIDING 
AFFORDABLE AND QUALITY EDUCATION IN THE 
COUNTRY INCLUDING REVIEW OF CENTRAL BOARD 
OF SECONDARY EDUCATION 
 
 
 
(Presented to Lok Sabha on 12.08.2026) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
12 August, 2026/ Sravana 21, 1948 (Saka) 
 

 
 
 
     CONTENTS         Page No. 
Composition of the Committee on Estimates (2025-26)    (ii) 
Composition of the Committee on Estimates (2026-27)    (iii) 
Introduction           (v) 
           
PART-I 
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTORY 1 
CHAPTER 2: NARRATION 4 
i.  Policy Frameworks in School Education 4 
ii.  Principles of New Education Policy 2020 4 
iii.  The Vision of NEP 2020 6 
iv.  School Education in India 7 
v.  Early Childhood Care and Education 17 
vi.  Foundational Literacy and Numeracy (NIPUN Bharat) 18 
vii.  Inclusiveness in Education 23 
viii.  Kendriya Vidyalaya (KV) 30 
ix.  Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya (JNV) 36 
x.  PM Schools for Rising India (PM SHRI) 39 
xi.  Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalaya (KGBV) 47 
xii.  Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose Awasiya Vidyalaya  51 
xiii.  PM POSHAN 56 
xiv.  Skill Development and Vocational Training 63 
xv.  Digital Literacy and Technology 68 
xvi.  Policy on mental health of students 71 
xvii.  Empowering teachers through training 76 
xviii.  Mother Tongue & Multilingualism 79 
xix.  Development of Common Curriculum 83 

 
 
xx.  Education Boards in the Country 85 
xxi.  NCERT 90 
xxii.  Structure and the Organogram 91 
xxiii.  Roles and Functions 93 
xxiv.  Vidyanjali Initiative 96 
xxv.  The Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) 100 
xxvi.  Renewal of Affiliation 112 
xxvii.  Development of Curriculum and syllabi for examination 121 
xxviii.  Conduct of Board Examination 123 
xxix.  Promotion of Skill Education 128 
xxx.  Capacity building of Teacher of affiliated schools 129 
  
PART-II 
Observations/Recommendations      133 
    
PART-III 
Annexures 
Annexure I State-wise Details of Budgetary Allocation and Utilization of ECCE 198 
Annexure II State/UT-wise Allocation and Expenditure for NIPUN Bharat Mission 
(FY 2024–25) 
199 
Annexure III Average Scores (%) in Language and Mathematics for Grade 3 
Students in PARAKH 2024 
200 
Annexure IV State-wise GER and NER of Boys and Girls Students 201 
Annexure V State-wise Enrolment Data of Students from SC/ST/OBC 
Communities 
203 
Annexure VI Sanctions Made for Bridge Course/Special Training for Migrant 
Children (2024–25) 
204 
Annexure VII State-wise Details of Special Training Centres for Migrant Children 205 
Annexure VIII State/UT-wise Distribution of CwSN Enrolment (UDISE+ 2024–25) 206 
Annexure IX State/UT-wise Availability of CwSN Infrastructure (UDISE+ 2024–25) 207 
Annexure X Approval and Progress Details of CWSN Friendly Infrastructure 
(2024-25) & (2025-26) 
208 

 
 
Annexure XI Approval and Progress Details of Special Educators under Samagra 
Shiksha (2024-25) & (2025-26) 
209 
Annexure XII State-wise Details of Total No. of Districts and No. of Kendriya 
Vidyalayas  
210 
Annexure XIII State/UT-wise Sanctioned and Vacant Posts of Teaching Staff in 
KVS (as on 01.11.2025) 
211 
Annexure XIV State-wise Details of Total No. of Districts and No. of Jawahar 
Navodaya Vidyalayas (JNVs) 
212 
Annexure XV State-wise Details of Non-Functional / Proposed JNVs 213 
Annexure XVI State-wise Available Seats and Admitted Students in JNVs (Since 
2020–21) 
215 
Annexure XVII State/UT-wise Sanctioned Strength and Vacancies of Teaching Staff 
in JNVs 
217 
Annexure XVIII State/UT-wise Details of Functional Kasturba Gandhi Balika 
Vidyalayas (KGBVs) 
218 
Annexure XIX Year-wise Allocation and Expenditure under Netaji Subhash Chandra 
Bose Awasiya Vidyalaya 
219 
Annexure XX State-wise Budgetary Allocation and Utilization for PM POSHAN 
Scheme (2024-25) 
222 
Annexure XXI State-wise Number of Schools and Children Covered under PM 
POSHAN Scheme 
223 
Annexure XXII Details of e-Courses and Digital Content Available on DIKSHA 
Platform 
224 
Annexure XXIII Details regarding the number of teachers trained under NISHTHA 225 
Annexure XXIV State-wise details of physical achievements of NMM 227 
Annexure XXV Details of Surprise Inspection conducted by CBSE in the year 
223,2024,2025 
229 
 
APPENDICES 
(i) Minutes of the Committee on Estimates held on 9th October, 2025  230 
(ii) Minutes of the Committee on Estimates held on 8th January, 2026  233 
(iIi) Minutes of the Committee on Estimates held on 10th August, 2026  238 
 
 

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2025-26) 
Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson  
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4. Shri Pradan Baruah 
5. Shri Charanjit Singh Channi 
6. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
7. Shri Chandan Chauhan 
8. Shri Devusinh Chauhan 
9. Ms. Iqra Choudhary 
10. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
11. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
12. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
13. Shri Manish Jaiswal 
14. Shri Naveen Jindal 
15. Shri Jugal Kishore 
16. Thiru Dayanidhi Maran 
17. Shri P. C. Mohan 
18. Shri B. K. Parthasarathi 
19. Shri Vishaldada Prakashbapu Patil 
20. Shri Awadhesh Prasad 
21. Shri M. K. Raghavan 
22. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
23. Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy 
24. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
25. Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
26. Kumari Selja 
27. Dr. Bhola Singh 
28. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
29. Shri Ve Vaithilingam 
30. Shri Surendra Prasad Yadav 

iii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2026-2027) 
Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson  
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri M. Mallesh Babu 
4. Shri Pradan Baruah 
5. Shri Charanjit Singh Channi 
6. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
7. Shri Chandan Chauhan 
8. Shri Devusinh Chauhan 
9. Ms. Iqra Choudhary 
10. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
11. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
12. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
13. Shri Manish Jaiswal 
14. Shri Naveen Jindal 
15. Shri Jugal Kishore 
16. Thiru Dayanidhi Maran 
17. Shri P. C. Mohan 
18. Shri B. K. Parthasarathi 
19. Smt. Pratima Mondal 
20. Shri Awadhesh Prasad 
21. Shri M. K. Raghavan 
22. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
23. Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy 
24. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
25. Shri Anil Yeshwant Desai 
26. Kumari Selja 
27. Dr. Bhola Singh 
28. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
29. Shri Ve Vaithilingam 
30. Shri Surendra Prasad Yadav 
  

iv 
 
 
Secretariat 
  1. Smt. Juby Amar  - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri Shangreiso Zimik - Director 
  3. Smt. Sonia Khanna   - Deputy Secretary  
   
   
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
     I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Estimates, having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, do present this 10th Report (18 th Lok 
Sabha) on the subject ‘Budget and Policy aspects for providing Affordable and Quality 
Education in the Country including Review of Central Board of Secondary Education’. 
2.  The school system stands at the vanguard of the national mission on education. It 
is within the corridors of our schools that the seeds of innovation, civic responsibility, and 
democratic values are sown. By facilitating the holistic development of young minds, 
encompassing intellectual rigour, physical well -being, and ethical grounding, the 
education system provides the foundational strength required to build a self -reliant and 
globally competitive nation. Every classroom is a foundation where the future of the nation 
is forged, and every child empowered through quality learning becomes a stakeholder in 
the country’s journey toward excellence. The vision of a "Viksit Bharat" is fundamentally 
predicated on an inclusive and high -quality educational ecosys tem that leaves no child 
behind, ensuring that the light of knowledge reaches the furthest corners of our diverse 
landscape. 
3.  In the aforesaid backdrop, the Committee on Estimates (2025 -26) selected the 
subject ‘Budget and Policy aspects for providing Affordable and Quality Education in the 
Country including Review of Central Board of Secondary Education’ for in -depth 
examination on the progress made in realizing the full potential of India’s Education 
system and report to the House. The Committee on Estimates (2026 -27) continued with 
examination of the subject. 
4.  In this Report, the Committee have undertaken a comprehensive examination of 
various aspects related to education system in India such as need for effective 
implementation of New Education Policy, 2020, non -utilization of Central funds for RTE 
entitlements by various states, increasing the public expenditure on education sector, 
strengthening coordination mechanism between Centre and States, facilities for Divyang 
students to achieve inclusive education across the Country, addressing the institutional 
bottleneck to prevent high student attrition in Higher School Education, Special Training 
Centres for children of migrant labours in all the states, universalization and structural 
strengthening of Early Childhood Care and Education (ECCE), addressing regio nal 
disparities in Higher Secondary Enrolment, operational challenges and future roadmap 
for Kendriya Vidyalayas, Non -Functional Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas and Measures 
for their Early Operationalization, accelerating School Transformation through effecti ve 
implementation of the PM SHRI Scheme, need for evolving an effective policy on Mental 
health of the students, standardization of School Education Boards in India, funding of 
NCERT, CBSE etc. The Committee have analyzed these issues/points in detail and have 
made observations/recommendations in the Report. 

vi 
 
5.  The Committee held two sittings on 09 -10-2025 and 08 -01-2026 to take oral 
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Education (Department of School 
education and Literacy) on the subject. The draft Report was considered and adopted by 
the Committee on Estimates (2026-27) at their sitting held on 10.08.2026. 
6.  The Committee wish to place on record their appreciation of the assistance 
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat. The Committee also wish 
to place on record their sincere thanks to the representatives of the Ministry of Education 
(Department of School education and Literacy) and  Central Board of Secondary 
Education (CBSE), Navodaya Vidyalaya Samitis(NVS), Kendriya Vidyalaya 
Sangathan(KVS), National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT), 
National Council for Teacher E ducation(NCTE) and National Institute of Open 
Schooling(NIOS) for placing their considered views and requisite information required in 
connection with the examination of the subject.  
7.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold in Part-II of the Report 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
10 August, 2026              
Sravana 19, 1948 (Saka) 
             DR. SANJAY JAISWAL  
                                   CHAIRPERSON 
                COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER 1  
INTRODUCTORY 
  
Education constitutes the transformative force for the growth of a nation, 
serving as the definitive catalyst for its socio -economic metamorphosis and the 
primary architect of its future. In the contemporary era, where knowledge is the 
ultimate curr ency of power and progress, the calibre of a nation ’s educational 
framework is the single most significant determinant of its enduring prosperity and 
strategic resilience. It is not merely a mechanism for the dissemination of academic 
knowledge but a profo und social investment in the intellectual capital and moral 
character of the citizens. As we navigate through the complexities of the twenty -first 
century, characterized by rapid technological advancements, the role of education as 
an engine of equitable growth and social cohesion has never been more paramount. 
1.2. Furthermore, education serves as the most potent instrument for achieving 
social justice and bridging historical divides. It is the great equalizer that provides a 
pathway for the marginalized to tra nscend systemic barriers and participate 
meaningfully in the nation ’s growth story. A visionary educational policy does not 
merely aim for literacy; it strives for empowerment, fostering a spirit of enquiry and a 
capacity for critical thinking that allows individuals to contribute to the collective good. 
By investing in robust school infrastructure, teacher excellence, and digital readiness, 
we need to reaffirm our commitment to nurturing a generation that is not only 
equipped for the modern workforce but also deeply rooted in the cultural and ethical 
ethos of our heritage. 
1.3. The Constitution (Eighty-sixth Amendment) Act, 2002 inserted Article 21 -A in 
the Constitution of India to provide free and compulsory education of all children in 
the age group of six to fourteen years as a Fundamental Right in such a manner as 
the State may, by law, determine. The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory 
Education (RTE) Act, 2009, which represents the consequential legislation envisaged 
under Article 21-A, means that every child has a right to full time elementary education 
of satisfactory and equitable quality in a formal school which satisfies certain essential 
norms and standards. 
1.4. Article 21-A and the RTE Act came into effect on 1 April 2010. The title of the 
RTE Act incorporates the words ‘free and compulsory’. ‘Free education’ means that 

2 
 
no child, other than a child who has been admitted by his or her parents to a school 
which is not supported by the appropriate Government, shall be liable to pay any kind 
of fee or cha rges or expenses which may prevent him or her from pursuing and 
completing elementary education. ‘Compulsory education’ casts an obligation on the 
appropriate Government and local authorities to provide and ensure admission, 
attendance and completion of el ementary education by all children in the 6 -14 age 
group. With this, India has moved forward to a rights -based framework that casts a 
legal obligation on the Central and State Governments to implement this fundamental 
child right as enshrined in the Article 21A of the Constitution, in accordance with the 
provisions of the RTE Act. The RTE Act provides for the: 
 Right of children to free and compulsory education till completion of elementary 
education in a neighbourhood school. 
 It clarifies that ‘compulsory e ducation’ means obligation of the appropriate 
government to provide free elementary education and ensure compulsory admission, 
attendance and completion of elementary education to every child in the six to 
fourteen age group. ‘Free’ means that no child sha ll be liable to pay any kind of fee 
or charges or expenses which may prevent him or her from pursuing and completing 
elementary education. 
 It makes provisions for a non -admitted child to be admitted to an age-
appropriate class. 
 It specifies the duties and responsibilities of appropriate Governments, local 
authority and parents in providing free and compulsory education, and sharing of 
financial and other responsibilities between the Central and State Governments. 
 It lays down the norms and standards relating inter alia to Pupil Teacher Ratios 
(PTRs), buildings and infrastructure, school-working days, teacher-working hours. 
 It provides for rational deployment of teachers by ensuring that the specified 
pupil teacher ratio is maintained for each school, rather than just as an average for 
the State or District or Block, thus ensuring that there is no urban -rural imbalance in 
teacher postings. It also provides for prohibition of deployment of teachers for non -
educational work, other than decennial census, election s to local authority, state 
legislatures and parliament, and disaster relief. 

3 
 
 It provides for appointment of appropriately trained teachers, i.e. teachers with 
the requisite entry and academic qualifications. 
 It prohibits (a) physical punishment and mental  harassment; (b) screening 
procedures for admission of children; (c) capitation fee; (d) private tuition by teachers 
and (e) running of schools without recognition, 
 It provides for development of curriculum in consonance with the values 
enshrined in the Constitution, and which would ensure the all -round development of 
the child, building on the child ’s knowledge, potentiality and talent and making the 
child free of fe ar, trauma and anxiety through a system of child friendly and child 
centred learning. 
1.5. The school system stands at the vanguard of the national mission  on 
education. It is within the corridors of our schools that the seeds of innovation, civic 
responsibility, and democratic values are sown. By facilitating the holistic 
development of young minds—encompassing intellectual rigour, physical well-being, 
and ethical grounding —the education system provides the foundational strength 
required to build a self -reliant and globally competitive nation. Every classroom is a 
foundation where the future of the nation is forged, and every child empowered 
through quality learning becomes a stakeholder in the country ’s journey toward 
excellence. The vision of a "Viksit Bharat" is fundamentally predicated on an inclusive 
and high-quality educational ecosystem that leaves no child behind, ensuring that the 
light of knowledge reaches the furthest corners of our diverse landscape. 
1.6. The department of School education and Literacy (Do SEL) under Ministry of 
Education has been entrusted to monitor various aspects of school education in India. 
Various institutions entrusted with different aspects of school education under the 
DoSEL are as under: -  
 Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti 
 Kendriya Vidyalaya Sansathan 
 National Council of Education Research and Training 
 National Institute for Open Learning 
 Central Board of Secondary Education 
 National Council for Teacher Education 
 National Bal Bhawan
  

4 
 
CHAPTER 2 
School Education in India 
 
(i) Policy Frameworks in School Education 
2.1. Education Policy lays particular emphasis on the development of the creative 
potential of each individual. It is based on the principle that education must develop 
not only cognitive capacities - both the ‘foundational capacitie s ’of literacy and 
numeracy and ‘higher-order’ cognitive capacities,  such as critical thinking and 
problem solving – but also social, ethical, and emotional capacities and dispositions. 
The new education policy must provide to all students, irrespective of  their place of 
residence, a  quality education system, with particular focus on historically 
marginalized, disadvantaged, and  underrepresented groups. Education is a great 
leveller and is the best tool for achieving economic and social mobility, inclusion, and 
equality. Initiatives must be in place to ensure that all students from  such groups, 
despite inherent obstacles, are provided various targeted opportunities to enter and 
excel in the educational system.  These elements must be incorporated taking into 
account the local and global needs of the country,  and with a respect for and 
deference to its rich diversity and culture. Instilling knowledge of India and  its varied 
social, cultural, and technological needs, its inimitable artistic, language, and 
knowledge traditions, and its strong ethics in India ’s young people is considered 
critical for purposes of national  pride, self-confidence, self-knowledge, cooperation, 
and integration. The implementation of previous policies on education has focused 
largely on issues of access and equity. A major development since the last Policy of 
1986/92 has been the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act 2009 
which laid down legal underpinnings for achieving universal elementary education.  
The unfinished agen da of the National Policy on Education 1986, modified in 1992 
(NPE 1986/92), is appropriately dealt with in the NEP 2020 Policy. 
 
(ii) Principles of New Education Policy 2020 
2.2 The purpose of the education system is to develop good human beings , 
capable of rational thought  and action, possessing compassion and empathy, 
courage and resilience, scientific temper , creative imagination, with sound  ethical 
moorings and values. It aims at producing engaged,  productive, and contributing 

5 
 
citizens for building an equitable, inclusive, and plural society as  envisaged by our 
Constitution. A good education institution is one in which every student feels 
welcomed and cared for, where a  safe and stimulating learning environment exists, 
where a wide range of learning experiences are  offered, and where good physical 
infrastructure and appropriate resources conducive to learning are  available to all 
students. Attaining these qualities must be the goal of every educational institution.  
However, at the same time, there must also be seamless integration and coordination 
across institutions and across all stages of education. The fundamental principles that 
will guide both the education system at large, as well as the  individual institutions 
within it are: 
• recognizing, identifying, and fostering the unique capabilities of each student, by 
sensitizing teachers as well as parents to promote each student ’s holistic 
development in both academic and non-academic spheres; 
• according the highest priority to achieving Foundational Literacy and Numeracy by 
all students by Grade 3; 
• flexibility, so that learners have the ability to choose their learning trajectories and 
programmes, and thereby choose their own paths in life according to their talents and 
interests; 
• no hard separations between arts and sciences, between curricular and extra -
curricular activities, between vocational and academic streams, etc. in order to 
eliminate harmful hierarchies among, and silos between different areas of learning; 
• multidisciplinary and a holistic education across the sciences, social sciences, arts, 
humanities, and sports for a multidisciplinary world in order to ensure the unity and 
integrity of all knowledge; 
• emphasis on conceptual understanding rather than rote learning and learning -for-
exams; 
• creativity and critical thinking to encourage logical decision-making and innovation; 
• ethics and human & Constitutional values like empathy, respect for others, 
cleanliness, courtesy, democratic spirit, spirit of service, respect for public property, 
scientific temper, liberty, responsibility, pluralism, equality, and justice; 
• promoting multilingualism and the power of language in teaching and learning; 
• life skills such as communication, cooperation, teamwork, and resilience; 
• focus on regular formative assessment for learning rather than the summative 
assessment that encourages today’s ‘coaching culture’; 

6 
 
• extensive use of technology in teaching and learning, removing language barriers, 
increasing access for Divyang students, and educational planning and management; 
• respect for diversity and respect for the local context in all curriculum, pedagogy, 
and policy, always keeping in mind that education is a concurrent subject; 
• full equity and inclusion as the cornerstone of all educational decisions to ensure 
that all students are able to thrive in the education system; 
• synergy in curriculum across all levels of education from ea rly childhood care and  
education to school education to higher education; 
• teachers and faculty as the heart of the learning process – their recruitment, 
continuous professional development, positive working environments and service 
conditions; 
• a ‘light but tight’ regulatory framework to ensure integrity, transparency, and resource 
efficiency of the educational system through audit and public disclosure while 
encouraging innovation and out -of-the-box ideas through autonomy, good 
governance, and empowerment; 
• outstanding research as a corequisite for outstanding education and development; 
• continuous review of progress based on sustained research and regular 
assessment by educational experts; 
• a rootedness and pride in India, and its rich, diverse, anci ent and modern culture 
and knowledge systems and traditions; 
• education is a public service; access to quality education must be considered a 
basic right of every child; 
• substantial investment in a strong, vibrant public education system as well as the 
encouragement and facilitation of true philanthropic private and community 
participation. 
(iii) The Vision of this Policy  
2.3 This National Education Policy envisions an education system rooted in Indian 
ethos that contributes directly to transforming India, that is Bharat, sustainably into an 
equitable and vibrant knowledge  society, by providing high -quality education to all, 
and thereby making India a global knowledge superpower. The Policy envisages that 
the curriculum and pedagogy of our institutions must develop among the students a 
deep sense of respect towards the Fundamental Duties and  Constitutional values, 
bonding with one ’s country, and a conscious awareness of one ’s roles  and 

7 
 
responsibilities in a changing world. The visio n of the Policy is to instill among the  
learners a deep -rooted pride in being Indian, not only in thought, but also in spirit, 
intellect, and deeds, as well as to develop knowledge, skills, values, and dispositions 
that support responsible commitment to human rights, sustainable development and 
living, and global well-being, thereby reflecting a truly global citizen. 
(iv) 
 School Education in India 
2.4 Education is in the concurrent list of the Constitution and majority of the 
schools are under the administrative domain of the respective States and UT 
Governments - which are the appropriate government under the RTE Act. Although 
responsibility of imple mentation of NEP 2020 lies with State/UT government, 
Department of School Education & Literacy supports them through financial 
assistance as per the guideline of Department of Expenditure under various Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes such as Samagra Shiksha, PM SHRI, PM POSHAN and ULLAS 
to achieve the objectives of NEP. The annual plans are prepared by the States and 
UTs as per their requirements/ priority. These plans are then appraised and approved 
by the Project Approval Board (PAB) in the Department of Scho ol Education & 
Literacy in consultation with the States and UT s as per the programmatic and financial 
norms of the scheme and physical and financial progress of the State for the 
interventions approved earlier. Samagra Shiksha scheme is flagship scheme for NEP 
implementation and is in the last year of its current implementation (2018-19 to 2025-
26). Proactive initiatives are already underway and shall be further undertaken to 
strengthen critical areas identified during the consultative process with all the 
stakeholders including states/UTs while revising the scheme guidelines for its next 
phase of implementation. During the consultation process, requirement of funds, 
education infrastructure, manpower requirement and training, etc. to implement NEP 
shall also be analyzed.  
 
2.5 On a query regarding the number of schools with secondary and higher 
secondary classes, the Ministry submitted that  

8 
 
“देश में क ु ल ममलाकर ऐसे तीन लाख स्क ू ल्स हैं, जहाां पर सेक ें ड् र ी और हायर सेक ें ड् र ी स्तर की पढाई 
होती है। उन तीन लाख स्क ू ल्स में से 1 लाख 27 हजार स्क ू ल्स राज्य सरकार के प्रबांधन के अधीन 
हैं।“ 
 
Indicators by Level of School Education -Overall 
Indicators 
Primary Upper Primary Secondary  Higher Secondary Total 
UDISE+ 
2014-15 
   
UDISE+ 
2024-25 
UDISE+ 
2014-
15 
   
UDISE+ 
2024-25 
UDISE+ 
2014-15 
   
UDISE+ 
2024-25 
UDISE+ 
2014-15 
   UDISE+ 
2024-25 
UDISE+ 
2014-15 
   
UDISE+ 
2024-25 
Schools 864985 730518 422080 434013 142592 142749 87235 164193 1516892 1471473 
Teachers 2786550 2368195 2618696 2892682 1488150 1604358 1668525 3257185 8561921 10122420 
Enrolment 140617099 118428427 67165774 63695100 38301599 37165436 23501798 27643717 269583714 246932680 
GER 106.85 90.9 88.24 90.3 75.68 78.7 46.37 58.4 -  - 
NER 93.35 76.9 70.1 67.3 47.31 47.5 28.69 35.8 -  - 
Dropout 
Rate 1.45 0.3 3.02 3.5 12.61 11.5  -  - -  - 
Pupil 
Teacher 
Ratio 
29 20 26 17 26 15 38 23 - -  
 
2.6 The Committee asked the Ministry abou t the initiatives taken to achieve 
objectives as outlined in New Education Policy  vis-à-vis the progress achieve d in 
objectives of NEP so far. The Ministry have submitted:
 
“In School Education, a series of significant initiatives have been undertaken 
in line with the vision of National Education Policy 2020 (NEP 2020) such as:  
 Samagra Shiksha, an overarching programme for the school education 
sector extending from preschool to class 12 aims for improving school 
effectiveness measured in terms of equal opportunities for schooling and 
equitable learning outcomes, has b een fully aligned with the National 
Education Policy 2020. 

9 
 
 National Curriculum Framework for Foundational Stage (NCF FS) was 
launched on 20th October, 2022. Based on this, Learning Teaching Material 
(Jadui Pitara) and Textbooks for classes I and II have been released. 
 National Curriculum Framework for School Education (NCF -SE) was 
released on 23rd August 2023. Under NCF -SE, the curriculum has been 
aligned with the National Education Policy 2020, emphasizing the 5+3+3+4 
design of schooling. This framework ad dresses the entire educational 
journey from the foundational to secondary stages. Textbooks for classes 3 
to 8 as per NCF-SE (2023) have been released. 
 National Mission for universalizing Foundational Literacy and 
Numeracy called National Initiative for Pr oficiency in Reading with 
Understanding and Numeracy (NIPUN BHARAT) was launched on 5th July 
2021 for ensuring that every child in the country necessarily attains 
foundational literacy and numeracy by the end of Grade 3, by 2026-27. This 
Mission, launched under the aegis of the centrally sponsored scheme of 
Samagra Shiksha, focusses on providing access and retaining children in 
foundational years of schooling; teacher capacity building; development of 
high quality and diversified Student and Teacher Resourc es/Learning 
Materials; and tracking the progress of each child in achieving learning 
outcomes. 
 Vidya Pravesh (VP), a 3 Months Play Based School Preparation Module 
was developed and launched on 29th July, 2021. The module is of 12 weeks 
with developmentally  appropriate instruction for the children entering of 
Grade I to bolster a child ’s pre-literacy, pre-numeracy, cognitive and social 
skills. Vidya Pravesh is now an annual calendar and more than 4.2 crore 
children in Grade I have been benefitted from VP. 
 Norms and standards for 4 -year integrated Teacher Education 
Programme (ITEP) has been notified vide gazette notification dated 
22.10.2021 by NCTE. From 2023 -24 to 2024 -25, 64 institutions granted 
recognition for 4-year integrated Teacher Education Programme (ITEP) with 
an intake of 6,100. 
 Vidya Sameeksha Kendra (VSK) was launched on 06.09.2020. 
 National Initiative for School Heads ’ and Teachers ’ Holistic 
Advancement (NISHTHA) launched on 21st August 2019 and extended to 

10 
 
cover teachers at all levels of schooling including training of master trainers 
for ECCE. 
 PARAKH (Performance Assessment, Review, and Analysis of 
Knowledge for Holistic Development) was set up on 8th February, 2023, to 
fulfil the objectives of setting norms, standards, guidelines and implement 
activities related to student assessment. 
 PARAKH Rashtriya Sarvekshan was conducted on 4th December 2024 
covering the entire spectrum of schools, including Government Schools 
(Central and State Government), Government -Aided Schools, and Private 
Schools across all 36 States and UTs. The primary aim of this nationwide 
survey was to assess the foundational, preparatory, and middle stages of 
schooling by assessing sampled students in Grades 3, 6, and 9. 
 National Professional Standards for Teachers (NPST) defines the work 
of teachers and makes explicit elements of high -quality, effective teaching 
in 21st century schools that will improve educational outcomes for students. 
NCTE has developed a guiding document that outlines the competencies 
that teachers sho uld possess to effectively  perform their roles. NPST 
guiding document released on 9th March 2024 and is now available in 22 
Indian Scheduled languages and Braille Version & Audio format. 
 National Mission for Mentoring (NMM) is about the creation of a large  
pool of outstanding professionals willing to provide mentoring to school 
teachers. The ‘Bluebook on NMM’ was released on 9th March 2024 and is 
now available in 22 Indian Scheduled languages and Braille Version & Audio 
format. 
 Under PM e -VIDYA, DIKSHA is t he one nation, one digital education 
infrastructure. All states/UTs have been onboarded in DIKSHA. This digital 
infrastructure is artificial intelligence based and is highly scalable. This 
infrastructure is also being utilized for creating Energized Textbooks (ETBs) 
and presently 7,497 ETBs are published on DIKSHA. There are total of 
3,74,460 e-contents available on DIKSHA and eContent available in 135 
languages (128 Indian + 7 Foreign Languages). 
 DTH Channels of SWAYAM PRABHA have been expanded to 200 
channels and are for School Education, meant to support and reach those 
who do not have access to the internet with a total of 92,147 Video Contents 

11 
 
equals 30585 hours of telecast received from States/UTs/ABs in 30 
languages. 
 PM Schools for Rising India (PM SH RI) scheme was launched on 7th 
September 2022 with an aim to develop more than 14500 selected schools 
as exemplar schools that offers leadership to other schools in the 
neighbourhood, showcasing all the initiatives of NEP 2020. 
 PM POSHAN Scheme: Pradhan Ma ntri Poshan Shakti Nirman (PM 
POSHAN) Scheme has been revamped and extended to cover students of 
Balvatika in addition to students of Classes I -VIII in Government and 
Government-Aided Schools. In a pivotal move, setting up of School Nutrition 
Gardens (SNG)  are encouraged in all schools and to further strengthen 
community participation, a special initiative named ‘Tithi Bhojan’ has been 
initiated. 
 ULLAS (Understanding of Lifelong Learning for All in Society), a 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme on Adult Education, aligns with NEP 2020 and 
aims to provide educational opportunities to the non -literates of aged 15 
years and above. A dedicated Mobile App was launched on 29.07.2023 for 
registering learners and volunteer teachers and also enable teaching 
learning process by providing access to primers in 26 languages. More than 
3.09 crore Learners and 46.52 lakh Volunteer Teachers (VTs) have been 
registered. Till date, 5 States/UTs i.e. Ladakh, Goa, Mizoram, Tripura and 
Himachal Pradesh have been declared fully literate. 
 District Institutes of Education and Training (DIETs) are being 
developed as centres of excellence in a phased manner in the next five 
years for strengthening teacher training.” 
2.7   Asked about the mechanism devised by the Ministry for coordination with State 
Governments for implementation of NEP, the Ministry submitted following information:  
“The implementation of the Policy requires multiple initiatives and actions, 
which are bein g taken up in a synchronized and systematic manner, by 
multiple bodies including Ministry of Education, State/UT Governments, State 
Departments of Education, Boards, the regulatory bodies of school education, 
NCERT, SCERTs and schools. To create awareness and discuss innovative 
ideas for NEP implementation, a series of workshops / consultation -cum-

12 
 
review meetings have been held with States/UTs, Educational Institutions, 
other stakeholders from time to time. There has been extensive outreach 
surrounding NEP 2020, eliciting a positive and encouraging response from 
stakeholders. Throughout the Consultation -cum-review meetings, there has 
been a robust exchange of ideas, discussions on state -wise initiatives, the 
adoption of best practices by various states, as w ell as deliberations on 
challenges and strategies for implementing NEP 2020. Implementation of NEP 
2020 was discussed in National Education Ministers' Conference held in June 
2022; National Conference of Chief Secretaries held in June 2022, December.” 
 
2.8 Asked about the allocation of funds and utilization for implementation of SSA, 
the Ministry submitted following information: -  
“Education is in the Concurrent List of the Constitution and majority of schools 
are under the jurisdiction of the respective State Government and Union 
Territory Administration which are the approp riate Government for 
implementation of the provision of NEP and the Right of Children to Free and 
Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 2009.  Public Expenditure on Education in 
India is 4.1% and % share of DoSEL budget to total budget outlay in 2024 -25 
is 1.52%. To fulfil the objectives of NEP-2020, financial support is provided to 
States & UTs under various Schemes of the Department, namely, Samagra 
Shiksha, PM SHRI, ULLAS, PM POSHAN, etc.  The Right to Free and 
Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 2009, mandates that  all children between 
the age of 6 and 14 years have the right to free and compulsory education. 
RTE Entitlements is one of the major interventions across all levels of school 
education under the Centrally sponsored Samagra Shiksha Scheme. The 
amount of re imbursement for implementing section 12(1)(c) of the RTE Act, 
2009 is released under Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Samagra Shiksha. 
The States/UTs first make their expenditure from the State funds for 
expenditure towards reimbursement under section 12(1)(c ) of the RTE Act, 
2009. Thereafter, States/UTs claim the funds for reimbursement under 12(1)(c) 
of the RTE Act, 2009 from Centre in their respective Annual Work Plan and 
Budget (AWP&B). Based on their proposal, the Project Approval Board (PAB) 
in the Minis try of Education approves an estimate as per the programmatic 

13 
 
and financial norms of the scheme. The release of Central share are subject 
to, amongst other things, the mandatory submission of the requisite 
documents such as utilization certificate, up -to d ate expenditure statement, 
audit report, the release of commensurate state share by States and the 
availability of budgetary resources at the Budget Estimate/Revised Estimate 
stage. The Central share is released to State/UTs is based on approved 
funding pa ttern and not intervention wise.  Financial support is provided to 
States/UTs also for RTE entitlements comprising of free uniforms; free 
textbooks along with reimbursement towards expenditure incurred for 25% of 
admissions under Section 12 (1) (c), RTE Act, etc. Education is in Concurrent 
list of the Constitution and State Government is the appropriate Government 
for implementation of the Act within the schools in that State.” 
In addition, this Department monitors the different NEP aligned 
schemes through monthly review meetings, quarterly review meetings and 
Project Approval Board (PAB) meetings. Further, Education is in the concurrent 
list of the constitution and majority of the schools are under the administrative 
domain of the respective State and UT Go vernment. Furthermore, the major 
responsibility of implementation of NEP 2020 following prescribed norms and 
standards falls under the domain of the respective State/UT Governments.” 
 
2.9 Asked as to whether the Ministry has prepared any guidelines for 
implementation of SSA, the Ministry submitted following information: -  
“To facilitate effective implementation of the revised and redesigned Samagra 
Shiksha Scheme by States and UTs, framework for implementation of the 
Scheme has been prepared and share with all the States/UTs vide DO dated 
12.10.22.”  
 
2.10 The representative of the Ministry during the course of the sitting, informed the 
Committee that regarding the Samagra Shiksha budget, it has been increasing 
steadily from approximately Rs.30,891 crore in 2018 -19 to a Budget Estimate of 
Rs.37,500 crore in 2024 -25, with Revised Estimates around Rs.37,010 crore. For 
2025-26, there is a sig nificant increase, with a budget estimate of Rs.41,250 crore. 
This highlights the emphasis on affordable education and its promotion through 

14 
 
Samagra Shiksha. Under RTE Section 12(1)(C), private unaided institutions and 
special category schools must provide  free and compulsory education to at least 25 
per cent of children from disadvantaged and weaker sections. Samagra Shiksha 
provides financial support for this. The number of children covered under this 
provision has increased from 16.76 lakh in 2018 -19 to 38.96 lakh currently. This 
means education essentials like uniforms and textbooks are provided through 
Samagra Shiksha. The free uniforms being provided at Rs.600 for student in classes 
1 to 8, free textbooks at Rs.250 for classes 1 to 5 and Rs.400 for cla sses 6 to 8. 
These education essentials like uniforms and textbooks are provided through 
Samagra Shiksha Scheme. 
  
2.11 When the Committee desired to know whether Ministry has fixed any limit for 
utilization of funds for each sub- component of SSA or States are free to utilize funds 
according to their requirements, the Ministry submitted following information: -  
“The framework lays down detailed guidelines (programmatic/financial) for 
various interventions of the scheme reinforcing the commitment to ensure that 
all children have access to quality education with an equitable and inclusive 
classroom environment taking care of their diverse background, multilingual 
needs, different academic abilities and make the active participants in the 
learning process as envisaged in the NEP, 2020. Annual plans are prepared 
by the respective States and UTs based on their requirements and priority and 
this is reflected in their respective Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWP&B) 
Proposals. These plans are then appraised and appr oved/estimated by the 
Project Approval Board (PAB) in the Department of School Education & 
Literacy in consultation with the States and UTs as per the programmatic and 
financial norms of the scheme, and physical and financial progress of the State 
for the interventions approved earlier. Further, financial assistance is provided 
to the States and UTs in a wholesome manner and not district -wise or 
intervention-wise.” 

15 
 
2.12 The Committee enquired if any complaints have been received by the Ministry 
regarding mis-utilization or diversion of funds allocated for implementation of SSA to 
States and the action taken on the same.  In this regard the Ministry submitted 
following information:  
“Whenever complaint is received, it is forwarded to the appropriate Govt. for 
necessary action. Some of the cases where legal action has been taken are 
as follows: 
West Bengal – In West Bengal, an amount of Rs. 5.18 crore was fraudulently 
withdrawn by eight officials in one district, where the CID has arrested seven 
persons and proceedings are underway. Latest communication to submit the 
latest status on the case has been issued by the department on 17.12.2025. 
Maharashtra - In Maharashtra, an embezzlement of Rs. 89.42lakh in 2010-11 
and fraudulent withdrawal of Rs. 10 lakhs in 2 011-12 was reported where the 
State has ordered investigation and FIR has also been lodged. Latest 
communication to submit the latest status on the case has been issued by the 
department on 03.09.2025. 
Assam- In Assam during 2010-11, fraudulent transaction of Rs. 140 lakhs has 
been reported and the case is under investigation even though the amount has 
been credited back. Latest communication to submit the latest status on the 
case has been issued by the department on 17.12.2025. 
Uttar Pradesh - In Uttar Pradesh during 20ll -12, in District Pratapgarh, an 
amount of Rs. 2.41 lakhs was fraudulently withdrawn and inquiry has been 
ordered and the matter is under investigation. Latest communication to submit 
the latest status on the case  has been issued by the department on 
17.12.2025. 
Kerala - In Kerala there was unauthorized withdrawal of Rs. 10.00 lakhs and 
the case is under investigation. Latest communication to submit the latest 
status on the case has been issued by the department on 17.12.2025. 
Bihar - In 2010-11, Bihar, an embezzlement of Rs. 80.39 lakhs was reported 
in Nalanda Bihar Sharif District and the matter is under investigation by the 
State Vigilance Department. Latest communication to submit the latest status 
on the case has been issued by the department on 17.12.2025”. 

16 
 
2.13 On the study conducted by Ministry and CAG to review the effectiveness 
of SSA, the Ministry submitted following information: -   
“A Third-party evaluation was conducted by NITI Aayog. The overall summary 
of report with reference to Samagra Shiksha is as follows: 
Sl. No. 
 Parameters 
 Inferences and findings 
 
1. 
 
Relevance 
The Samagra  Shiksha interventions align closely with NEP 2020 objectives, 
particularly in FLN, digital learning, and vocational education. Bal Vatika and 
inclusive education efforts directly respond to foundational and equity needs. 
 
2. 
 
Effectiveness 
There were mixed results as infrastructure upgrades and digital rollouts lag, while 
teacher training and community outreach show promise but require scaling. 
Dropout prevention and NAS preparedness are effective when implemented. 
 
3. 
 
Efficiency 
The scheme faces challenges of low fund uti lization, teacher shortages, and 
limited independent monitoring, which together hinder its effectiveness in 
delivering quality and equitable school education. 
 
 
4. 
 
 
Sustainability 
The scheme benefits from strong institutional foundations and consistent policy 
alignment, its long -term viability is constrained by systemic issues such as 
delayed fund flow, uneven implementation capacity, and limited decentralization. 
To ensure sustained impact, targeted efforts are required to strengthen financial 
management, institutional accountability, and responsiveness at the local level. 
5. 
 Impact 
Positive early impact was visible in student engagement, digital teaching 
perceptions, and parental satisfaction in better -performing States. Vocational 
outcomes and life skills show potential. 
 
6. 
 
Equity 
While the scheme design focuses on equity, significant disparities persist — 
across States and within districts —in access to entitlements, inclusive 
infrastructure, and vocational education. CWSN and minority outreach are weak 
in many areas. 
 
7. 
 
Coherence 
The scheme is highly internally and externally coherent but struggles with 
convergence. The implementation shows partial coherence with other national 
schemes (e.g., Anganwadi, Skill India), though integration remains weak in areas 
like FLN- Anganwadi convergence and DBT tracking. 
 
Further, the cross -sectional themes presented in the report show both, the 
holistic approach and implementation complexity of the scheme, requir ing 
targeted interventions for effective outcomes. The scheme is in the last year of 
its current implementation (2018-19 to 2025-26). Proactive initiatives are  
 

17 
 
already underway and shall be further undertaken to strengthen critical areas 
identified in th e evaluation while revising the scheme guidelines for its next 
phase of implementation.” 
 
(v) 
 Early Childhood Care and Education:  
2.14 When asked about the policy of the Ministry to promote early childhood care 
and education, the Ministry furnished following information: -
  
“NEP 2020 recognizes 3 years of preschool (Bal Vatika) as a part of the 
education continuum, in the 5+3+3+4 structure where the foundat ional stage 
is 3 years of preschool and Grade 1 & 2. Consequently, the Preschool access 
has expanded rapidly as per UDISE 2024–25 data. 
After convergence efforts with the Ministry of Women and Child Development 
(MoWCD), out of 9,11,035 Government and Gover nment-aided schools with 
Grade 1, a total of 4,81,004 schools (52.79%) has some form of preschool 
education facility. 
22 states/UTs conducted joint activities between AWWs and school teachers 
and 7 States/UTs conducted joint training for AWWs and school teachers. 
The Ministry is also establishing Balvatikas as model early learning centres in 
CBSE and Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan (KVS) schools, with 496 functional 
Balvatikas already operational across KVs in the country. 
These efforts ensure a seamless ear ly learning continuum from preschool to 
Grade 2 within the formal schooling system. 
A Joint Task Force for ECCE was formed on 27.09.2021 in accordance with 
NEP 2020, Para 1.9 with representatives from all line ministries; Ministry of 
Women & Child Development, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs, Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship, Ministry of 
Defence, Department of Social Justice and Empowerment, Department of 
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities and Departme nt of Sports for 
universalization of quality ECCE in schools. 
NISHTHA ECCE online course has been designed by NCERT for the ECCE 
educators. Development of ECCE training modules for Anganwadi workers is 
under consideration. Around 1.69 lakh ECCE teachers ha ve completed 

18 
 
NISHTHA ECCE training programme online. 
The requisite State-wise details of budgetary allocation and utilization of ECCE 
is at Annexure – 1”.  
2.15   The details of the numbers of Anganwadi, children attending Anganwadi and 
Anganwadi workers in the Country fall under the purview of Ministry of Women and 
Child Development as available on
   
www.poshantracker.in/statistics as updated on 
12.03.2026
  are as under
: -  
States/UT s 
 36 
Districts 
 781 
Project 
 7,237* 
Sector 
 52,634 
Anganwadi Centers 
 14,03,152 
Anganwadi Workers 
 13,36,552 
Eligible Beneficiaries 
 8,97,86,567 
central approved projects 
 *7,074 
Remaining are state approved projects.” 
 
(vi) 
 Foundational Literacy and Numeracy (NIPUN) 
2.16 As per NEP 2020, the highest priority of the education system will be to achieve 
universal foundational literacy and numeracy in primary school by 2025. The Ministry 
in their briefing has stated that they are implementing National Initiative for Proficiency 
in Reading with Understanding and Numeracy (NIPUN) to achieve this goal.  The 
objectives of National Initiative for Proficiency in Reading with Understanding and 
Numeracy (NIPUN) are as under:-  
o National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 is a landmark document which places 
critical importance on Foundational Literacy and Numeracy in the education 
system. Para 2.1 of NEP 2020 states that the ability to read and write, and 
perform basic operations with numbers, is a necessary foundation and an 
indispensable prerequisite for all future schooling and lifelong learning. 
o In order to achieve it, the Government of India launched the National Initiative 

19 
 
for Proficiency in Reading with Understanding and Numeracy (NIPUN) Bharat 
in July 2021. It is a national mission to ensure that every child attains 
fundamental literacy and numeracy skills by the en d of Grade 2, by the 
academic year 2026-27. 
o The National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 recognizes FLN as a critical and 
urgent national priority. Through initiatives like Vidya Pravesh, Jaadui Pitara, 
e-Jaadui Pitara, NISHTHA training, Play Based Textbooks, Primers etc. and 
the adoption of the National Curricular Framework for the Foundational Stage 
(NCF-FS), a strong foundation for lifelong learning for every child in the country 
is being laid. 
 
2.17 When asked about the details of the mechanism adopted to implement NIPUN, 
the Ministry submitted the following: 
“Implementation mechanism includes large -scale teacher capacity building 
under NISHTHA -FLN; development and dissemination of age -appropriate 
learning resources through platforms such as DIKSHA and Jaadui Pitara, e -
Jaadui Pitara (e-JP) and continuous academic support by NCERT, SCERTs, 
and DIETs. NCERT/SCERT curricula are bring aligned with the NCF -FS. For 
assessment and monitoring, PARAKH (Performance Assessment, Review, 
and Analysis of Knowledge for Holistic Development) has bee n established 
under NCERT to conduct national-level assessments, including the PARAKH 
Rashtriya Sarvekshan, to evaluate learning outcomes in Foundational Literacy 
and Numeracy, language, and mathematics at the end of the Foundational, 
Preparatory, and Middle stages (Grades 3, 6, and 9).  
Key initiatives include: 
 Jaadui Pitara (JP): is a collection of 53 Learning -Teaching Materials (LTM) 
(toys, games, puzzles, story cards, etc.), launched on 20th February 2023, for 
children aged 3-6 years. It includes resources translated into 22 languages, a 
Trainer’s Handbook ‘Unmukh’, and an Activity Book ‘Anand’ for integrated 
worksheets. 
 e-Jaadui Pitara (e-JP): Launched on 10th February 2024, this app and website 
extend JP’s reach beyond classrooms, providing interactive content in multiple 
languages with AI -driven bots —Katha Sakhi (storyteller), Teacher Tara 

20 
 
(educator guide), and Parent Tara (parent sup port). It has over 1,000 stories 
and is accessible via https://ejaaduipitara.ncert.gov.in/. 
 National Curricular Framework for Foundational Stage (NCF -FS): Released 
on 20th October 2022, providing syllabus structure, teacher training 
guidelines, and learning materials. 
 Play-based Textbooks: For Grades 1 and 2, textbooks have been developed 
in multiple languages, aligning with NEP 2020 and National Curricular 
Framework for Foundational Stage (NCF-FS). 
 Primers in 121 Local Languages: Developed for foundational  literacy and 
numeracy in mother tongues spoken by populations of at least 10,000. 
 Vidya Pravesh: The National Education Policy (NEP 2020) emphasizes on 
developing the relevant concepts and attaining requisite competencies to 
facilitate optimal learning when children start schooling. Keeping in focus the 
holistic development, NCERT has developed a 3 Months Play Based ‘School 
Preparation Module and Guidelines’ for Grade I named ‘Vidya Pravesh’ which 
was launched on 29th July, 2021. The goal of Vidya Pravesh programme is to 
promote school preparedness in all children coming to Grade - I from diverse 
backgrounds, to ensure a smooth transition of children to Grade -I, to provide 
play based, age and developmentally appropriate learning experiences in a 
joyful and s timulating environment leading to holistic  development. The 12 -
week module contains developmentally appropriate instructions for the 
children entering Grade 1 to bolster a child ’s pre -literacy, pre -numeracy, 
cognitive and social skills. At present, all 36 States and UTs have implemented 
Vidya Pravesh Programme. More than 4.2 crore students have been benefitted 
in 8.94 lakh schools, so far. (*As reported by States/UTs) 
 The Government of India has introduced the Holistic Progress Card (HPC) as 
a formative ass essment tool offering a 360 -degree view of student 
development, covering academics, co-curricular, and socio-emotional aspects. 
It supports evidence- based interventions to ensure equitable progress. 
 Monitoring and Training: A concise monitoring format (NB MPIT) was 
introduced for progress tracking. NISHTHA online training via the DIKSHA 
platform has trained over 15.45 lakh teachers, focusing on FLN and Early 
Childhood Care and Education (ECCE). 
 As part of the 'One Nation, One Student ID' initiative under NE P 2020, the 

21 
 
Automated Permanent Academic Account Registry (APAAR) provides each 
student with a lifelong digital ID. It tracks their academic journey from 
foundational stages, including achievements, skills, and basic health records, 
helping reduce dropouts and improving continuity in learning and is integrated 
with Vidya Samiksha Kendra (VSK) and HPC. 
 PARAKH (National Assessment): PARAKH assesses student competencies in 
foundational literacy, numeracy, language, and mathematics at key 
educational stages.” 
 
2.18 Asked about the approach of the Ministry in implementation of NIPUN by 
involving Children, Teacher and Parents, the Ministry submitted following information:  
“The NIPUN Bharat Mission follows a whole -school and community -based 
approach to ensure the active involvement of children, teachers, and parents 
in achieving Foundational Literacy and Numeracy (FLN). It emphasizes child-
centric, joyful, and activity -based learning through age -appropriate and 
contextualized Teaching Learning Materials (TLMs), sup ported by regular 
classroom-level assessments to monitor learning progress and AI-driven bots 
such as Katha Sakhi (storyteller), Teacher Tara (educator guide), and Parent 
Tara (parent support).Teachers and academic resource persons are 
strengthened through continuous capacity building, academic mentoring and 
competency-based pedagogy to support effective FLN implementation. 
Parents and community members, through SMC/SCMC, support schools by 
promoting learning at home and community ownership.  Janbhagidari events 
were conducted from 1 June 2023 to 15 June 2023, in this large-scale initiative 
led by the Ministry of Education, over 5.25 crore people were mobilized across 
16.78 lakh schools, reinforcing collective responsibility for foundational 
learning.” 
 
2.19 As regards the allocation of Funds, the Ministry has submitted that the funds 
for implementation of the NIPUN Bharat Mission are provided under the Samagra 
Shiksha framework. As per data available on the PRABANDH portal for FY 2024– 25, 
a total outlay of ₹ 3,02,926.82 lakh has been approved at the national level, against 
which an expenditure of ₹1,84,707.58 lakh has been reported. The State/UT -wise 
allocation and actual expenditure is at Annexure – 2. (Annexure 18 of original)  

22 
 
2.20 The Committee asked w hether the Ministry has conducted any survey to 
assess the impact of NIPUN in enhancing the standard of foundational literacy and 
numeracy in primary school s in the Country. The Ministry in this regard , submitted 
following information:  
“To evaluate childr en’s progress and learning competencies, Department of 
School Education & Literacy (DoSE&L), Ministry of Education has been 
implementing a rolling programme of sample based National Achievement 
Survey (NAS) aimed at classes III, V, VIII and X with an interval of three years. 
It acts as an indicator of the health of the education  system, so as to take 
appropriate steps for remedial actions at different levels. About 34 lakh 
students of 1.18 lakh schools of 720 districts from both rural and urban areas 
were assessed from Government and Private Schools. Further, National, State 
and District report card of NAS -2021 demonstrating the performance of 
students from each type of schools have been released in public domain on 
25.05.2022 at http://nas.gov.in. PARAKH (Performance Assessment, Review, 
and Analysis of Knowledge for Holistic Development) has been setup under 
National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT). It has 
conducted State Educational Achievement Surv ey (SEAS) in the year 2023. 
The primary objective of this survey is to evaluate the learning competencies 
of students in Foundational Literacy, Foundational Numeracy, Language and 
Mathematics at the end of each of the educational stages i.e. Foundational, 
Preparatory, and Middle. The SEAS-23 has included blocks in the sample to 
cover of students to understand the learning gaps at the block level, a strategic 
shift from district. Approximately, 84 lakh students and 6 lakh teachers, of 4 
lakh schools of 6,416  educational blocks were assessed in SEAS -23. The 
latest round of NAS, the PARAKH Rashtriya Sarvekshan 2024 was conducted 
on December 4, 2024 by the National Assessment Centre, PARAKH under the 
aegis of the Ministry of Education. This survey marks a significant 
advancement in India's assessment framework, aligning with the objectives of 
the National Educat ion Policy (NEP) 2020, which emphasizes competency -
based learning and assessment reforms. The survey was designed to provide 
a detailed, granular understanding of student learning, at the end of 
Foundational, Preparatory and Middle stages, across different socio-economic 

23 
 
backgrounds and regional contexts, ensuring that educational policies are 
data-driven and targeted towards equitable learning improvements. With 
participation of 74,000 Schools, 2.70 lakh teachers and 21 lakh students from 
Government, Aided  and Private Schools, the survey's data collection and 
analysis are expected to yield significant insights into student learning 
competencies and the effectiveness of various interventions undertaken at the 
District, State and National levels. The findings  will contribute to refining 
teacher training programs, curriculum reforms and state -specific strategies to 
bridge learning gaps.  Average scores (%) in Language and Mathematics for 
Grade 3 students in PARAKH 2024 (State/UT wise) is at Annexure 3 
(Annexure – 19 of the Original). 
The survey shows improvement in learning achievements of the 
students and further reflects the success of NIPUN Bharat Mission across the 
Country. It reflects that the performance of children in Grade 3 in rural school 
is better than urban schools and clear improvement in learning outcomes from 
previous survey. This can be accessed at 
https://dashboard.parakh.ncert.gov.in/en”. 
 
(vii) Inclusiveness in education 
2.21 The Committee asked about the s teps being taken to promote school 
education for girls in the Country and the State-wise details of GER and NER of boys’ 
and girls' students in the Country, the Ministry furnished following information: -  
“Department of School Education and Literacy (DoSEL), Ministry of Education 
is implementing the scheme of Samagra Shiksha, effective from 2018 -19, for 
universalization of quality education throughout the country in coordination 
with the States and UTs. It is an overarching progr amme for the school 
education sector extending from pre -school to class XII and aims to ensure 
inclusive and equitable quality education at all levels of school education.  
Bridging gender and social category gaps at all levels of school education is 
one of the major objectives of Samagra Shiksha. The scheme reaches out to 
girls, and children belonging to SC, ST, minority communities and transgender. 
In order to ensure greater participation of girls in school education, under 

24 
 
Samagra Shiksha, various interventions have been targeted, which include 
free uniform and text -books to girls up to Class VIII, additional teachers and 
residential quarters for te achers in remote/hilly areas, appointment of 
additional teachers including women teachers, stipend to CWSN girls from 
class I to class XII, separate toilets for girls, teachers sensitization programmes 
to promote girls participation, gender -sensitive teach ing-learning materials 
including text books.  Further, special state specific projects for varied 
interventions under equity are also emphasized for enhancing access, 
retention and quality for girls by promoting enrolment  drives, retention and 
motivation camps, gender sensitization modules etc. Such projects include life 
skills, awareness programmes, incinerators, sanitary pad vending machines 
etc. 
In addition, to reduce gender gaps at all levels of school education and 
ensure access and quality education to girls, under Samagra Shiksha, there is 
a provision of Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalayas (KGBVs) which are 
residential schools for girls from class VI to XII from age 10-18 years belonging 
to disadvantaged groups such as SC, ST, OBC, etc. In order to ensure safety 
and security of girls, empower girls to tackle risk of assault and for boosting 
their self -confidence, there is a provision of 'Rani Laxmi Bai Atma Raksha 
Prashikshan' under Samagra Shiksha. Under this, Self defence training is 
imparted to girls o f class VI to XII studying in Government Schools.  Further, 
NEP 2020 focuses on ‘Equitable and Inclusive Education’ which reverberates 
the idea that no child should be left behind in terms of educational opportunity 
because of their background and socio-cultural identities.” 
 
2.22 Separate Girls’ Toilets for Schools- DoSEL has also implemented the Swachh 
Vidyalaya Initiative (SVI) in collaboration with State and UT Governments, Public 
Sector Undertakings (PSUs) & Private Corporates for the provision of separate toilets 
for girls and boys in all Government Schools in 2014 -15. Continued support is given 
for the provision of an adequate number of toilets in schools as per enrolment & for 
their maintenance. 97.1% of Government Schools have separate Girls’ toilets as per 
UDISE+ 2023-24. State-wise details of GER and NER of boys and girls' students in 
the Country is at Annexure 4 (Annexure – 7of the original). 
 

25 
 
2.23 Asked about the policy of the Ministry to promote school education for students 
from disadvantageous section of our society and the State-wise details of students 
from SC/ST/OBC communities, the Ministry furnished following information: -  
“Department of School Education and Literacy (DoSEL), Ministry of Education is 
implementing Samagra Shiksha scheme, effective from 2018 -19. Bridging gender 
and social category gaps at all levels of school education is one of the major 
objectives of the scheme. The Scheme reaches out to girls, and children belonging 
to Socio-Economically Disadvantaged Groups (SEDGs) such as Schedule Tribe, 
Schedule Caste, Other Backward Class, Economically Weaker Section among 
others. The major interventions of Samagra Shiksha include RTE entitlements 
under which two sets of uniforms for all girls, and children belonging to SC/ST/BPL 
families in Government schools up to class VIII are provided and provision is also 
made for textbooks to all children including SC/ST in Government/Local Body and 
Government aided schools, including Madarsas. 
Under RTE Act, 2009, “child belonging to disadvantaged group ” means a child 
with disability or a child belonging to the Scheduled Caste, the Scheduled Tribe, 
the socially and educationally backward class or such other group having 
disadvantage owing to soc ial, cultural, economic, geographical, linguistic, gender 
or such other factor, as may be specified by the appropriate Government, by 
notification. Further, “child belonging to weaker section” means a child belonging to 
such parent or guardian whose annual  income is lower than the minimum limit 
specified by the appropriate Government, by notification. The provisions under RTE 
Act, 2009 are: 
i. As per section 8(c) and 9(c) of the Act, the appropriate Government and the local 
authority shall ensure that the chil d belonging to weaker section and the child  
belonging to disadvantaged group are not discriminated against and prevented 
from pursuing and completing elementary education on any grounds. 
ii. As per section 12(1)(c) of the RTE Act, 2009, a school specified in sub-clauses (iii) 
and (iv) of clause (n) of section 2 shall admit in class I, to the extent of at least 
twenty-five per cent of the strength of that class, children belonging to weaker 
section and disadvantaged group in the neighbourhood and provide free a nd 
compulsory elementary education till its completion. 
iii. Financial support is also provided to States/UTs also for RTE entitlements 
comprising of free uniforms; free textbooks along with reimbursement towards 

26 
 
expenditure incurred for 25% of admissions under  Section 12 (1) (c), RTE Act, 
special training for age -appropriate admission of out -of-school children at the 
elementary level, etc. 
Further, the Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalayas (KGBVs) are residential schools 
for girls belonging to SEDGs such as Schedul e Tribe, Schedule Caste, Other 
Backward Class, Economically Weaker Section of the society in Educationally 
Backward Blocks (EBBs). The objective of the scheme is to ensure access to 
quality education for girls from SEDGs and reduce the gender gap at the 
elementary to senior secondary level by setting up residential schools with boarding 
facilities. The State -wise data of students from SC/ST/OBC communities is at 
Annexure 5 (Annexure –11 of the original).” 
2.24 On enquiring about the arrangements made by the  Ministry to cover 
children of migrant labourers in the Country  and the budgetary allocations for this 
purpose, the Ministry furnished following information: -  
“Under the Samagra Shiksha Scheme, to ensure that children of migrant 
labourers and other child ren who are dropping out of school due to various 
circumstances are brought back into mainstream education, there is a 
provision for ensuring special training of Out of School Children. States/UT 
conducted enrolment drives and household surveys to identify  dropouts, Out 
of School children and children of migrant labourers.  The following financial 
support is provided through Samagra Shiksha for providing bridge 
course/special training to children of migrant labourers 
● Up to ₹ 6,000/- per child per annum for non-residential courses. 
● Up to ₹ 20,000/- per child per annum for residential courses. 
The sanctions made for the year 2024 -25 is at Annexure 6 (Annexure –12 of 
the original).” 
2.25 The State -wise details of Special Training Centres established for migrant 
children is at Annexure 7 (Annexure – 13 of the original).                                                                                                                                
  

27 
 
2.26 The State -wise details of Divyang students in the Country is as the 
State/UT-wise distribution of CwSN enrolment as per UDISE+ 2024-25 is at Annexure 
8 (Annexure –14 of the original).  
  
2.27 When asked about the policy of the Ministry to promote school education 
for Divyang students, the Ministry submitted following information: -  
“The Ministry of Education promotes school education for Divyang children 
through a strong legal and policy framework that ensures their right to access, 
participation, and learning in an inclusive school environment. The Right of 
Children to Free and Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 2009, under Section 
3(1), guarantees free and compulsory education to all children in the age group 
of 6–14 years, including children with disabilities. Further, Section 2(d) of the 
Act recognizes children with disabilities as part of the “disadvantaged group,” 
and Section 8(c) places responsibility on the appropriate Government to 
ensure that such children are provided access to elementary education without 
discrimination. This right is further strengthened by the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities (RPwD) Act, 2016, which provides a clear statutory mandate for 
inclusive education. Section 16 of the Act requires the  Government to ensure 
an inclusive education system at all levels. It specifically provides that children 
with benchmark disabilities are entitled to free education up to the age of 18 
years and mandates measures such as barrier -free access to schools, 
reasonable accommodation in curriculum and assessment, individualized 
support, accessible learning materials including Braille and sign language, and 
training of teachers in inclusive education. These provisions ensure that 
Divyang children are not only enrol led in schools but are also able to 
participate meaningfully in the learning process. The National Education Policy 
(NEP) 2020 further reinforces this commitment by placing inclusion and equity 
at the core of the education system. NEP 2020 emphasizes a Zer o Rejection 
Policy for children with disabilities, ensuring that no child is denied schooling 
on account of disability. It advocates early identification and intervention, 
flexible curriculum and assessment practices through Universal Design for 
Learning ( UDL), and the use of assistive technologies to support diverse 
learning needs. The policy also underscores the importance of preparing and 

28 
 
training teachers to handle inclusive classrooms effectively. 
The above legal and policy provisions are operationaliz ed through the 
Samagra Shiksha scheme, which is the Government of India ’s flagship 
scheme for school education from pre - school to senior secondary level. In 
alignment with the RTE Act and Section 16 of the RPwD Act, Samagra Shiksha 
provides targeted inter ventions for Children with Special Needs (CwSN), 
including financial support for assistive aids and appliances, deployment of 
special educators, development of resource rooms, transport and escort 
allowances, and early identification and assessment, stipen d for CwSN girls 
etc. The scheme also supports the creation of barrier -free infrastructure in 
schools, such as ramps, handrails, and accessible toilets, to ensure physical 
accessibility and safe participation of Divyang students. 
In essence, the Ministry’s approach to promoting education for Divyang 
children is rights- based, inclusive, and holistic. While the RTE Act establishes 
the legal right to education, the RPwD Act 2016 ensures accessibility and 
reasonable accommodation, NEP 2020 provides a progressi ve and inclusive 
policy vision, and Samagra Shiksha translates these commitments into 
concrete actions at the school level. Together, these frameworks ensure that 
Divyang children are not left behind and are supported to achieve their full 
educational potential.” 
  
2.28 When asked to furnish details of the support being provided by the Ministry to 
State Governments to make infrastructure arrangements and to appoint special 
teachers for Divyang Students along with the budgetary allocation and utilization for 
this purpose. In this regard, the ministry submitted following information: -  
“The Ministry of Education provides financial support to State Governments 
and Union Territories to strengthen infrastructure and human resources for 
inclusive education of Divyang students under the Samagra Shiksha scheme. 
To improve physical accessibility  of schools, the scheme includes specific 
provisions for the creation of barrier -free and differently -abled-friendly 
infrastructure, such as ramps, handrails, and accessible toilets, so that children 
with disabilities can move safely and participate fully in school activities. 
Financial assistance for these interventions is provided to States and UTs 
based on their requirements and proposals submitted annually to the 

29 
 
Department through the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWP&B) process, 
which is examined and approved in consultation with the States/UTs. 
Further, in line with the National Educational Policy 2020 and Goal-4 of 
SDG 2030 of providing inclusive and equitable education to all, in consultation 
with stakeholders and  Office of Chief Commissioner for Per sons with 
Disabilities, Accessibility Code for Educational Institutions has been notified by 
DoSEL in the Gazette of India on January 10th, 2024 which has also been 
notified in the RPwD Rules 2017 on 20th June 2024. The Accessibility Code 
for Educational I nstitutions inter -alia includes accessibility standards, 
identification of barriers to access, and guidelines for conducting accessibility 
audit of existing buildings and vetting of plans of upcoming/ new constructions. 
The Code also provides for a checkli st for undertaking Accessibility Audit of 
institutions and websites. 
 As per UDISE+ 2024-25, the details of the number of all management 
schools having Disabled friendly Toilets, Ramps and Ramps with Handrails is 
as under: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
State/UT wise availability of CwSN infrastructure as per UDISE+ 2024-25 is at 
Annexure 9 (Annexure – 15 of the original). 
In addition to infrastructure support, the Ministry has taken significant 
steps to strengthen the availability of special educators in general schools for 
supporting Divyang students. In compliance with the Hon ’ble Supreme Court 
order dated 28.10.2021 in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 132 of 2016, the Department 
notified norms and standards for Pupil Teacher Ratio (PTR) for Special 
Educators in general schools. Accordingly, an amendment to the Schedule of 
the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 2009 was 
issued vide notification dated 21.09.2022, prescribing a PTR of 10:1 at the 
Total Schools (National Level) 14,71,473 
Schools with CWSN Toilet 
facilities 
5,23,143 
Ramps 11,64,274 
Ramps with Handrails 8,08,460 

30 
 
primary level and 15:1 at the upper primary level for special education 
teachers. These revised norms were circulated to all States and Union 
Territories in October 2022 for necessary action. 
Since education is a subject in the Concurrent List of the Constitution, 
the recruitment and service matters of teachers, including Special Educators, 
fall within the domain of the respective State and UT Governments. In this 
context, the Hon ’ble Supreme Court, vide its order dated 07.03.2025, has 
directed all States and UTs to undertake recruitment of Special Educators as 
per the notified PTR norms in a time-bound manner. The Hon’ble Court is also 
closely monitoring compliance by the States and UTs to ensure that adequate 
numbers of Special Educators are deployed in schools to support inclusive 
education. The Ministry also supports the engagement of Special Educators 
for children with special needs. Financial assistance for Spe cial Educators is 
provided to States and UTs under Samagra Shiksha, subject to approved 
norms, to meet immediate and transitional requirements in schools and at the 
block resource centres.  Budgetary allocation and utilization figures for 
infrastructure arrangements and appointment of special teachers for 2024 -25 
and 2025-26, as per PRABANDH portal is at Annexure 10 (Annexure – 16 of 
the original) and Annexure 11 (Annexure – 17of the original) respectively.” 
  
(viii) Kendriya Vidyalaya (KV) 
2.29 The Scheme of Kendriya Vidyalayas (Central Schools) was approved in 
November 1962 by the Govt. of India on the recommendations of the Second Central 
Pay Commission. It recommended that the Government should develop a scheme to 
provide uninterrupted educati on to the wards of transferable Central Government 
employees. Consequently, Central School Organization was started as a unit of the 
Ministry of Education of the Govt. of India. Initially, 20 Regimental Schools, then 
functioning at places having large conc entration of defence personnel, were taken 
over as Central Schools during the academic year 1963-64. The Kendriya Vidyalaya 
Sangathan was registered as a society under the Societies Registration Act (XXI of 
1860) on 15th December 1965. The primary aim of t he Sangathan is to provide, 
establish, endow, maintain, control and manage the Central Schools (Kendriya 
Vidyalayas) located all over India and abroad. The Government of India wholly 

31 
 
finances the Sangathan. Over the years, the number of Kendriya Vidyalayas steadily 
increased to 1248 as on 30.06.2021.  The objectives of Kendriya Vidyalayas are as 
under: -  
 To cater to the educational needs of children of transferable Central Government 
employees including Defence and Para -military personnel by providing a 
common programme of education; 
 To pursue excellence and set the pace in the field of school education; 
 To initiate and promote experimentation and innovations in education in 
collaboration with other bodies like the Central Board of Secondary Education 
(CBSE) and the National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) 
etc. 
 To develop the spirit of national integration and create a sense of “Indianness” 
among children. 
 To provide, establish, endow, maintain, control and manage schools, hereinafter 
called the ‘Kendriya Vidyalaya’ for the children of transferable employees of the  
Government of India, floating population and others including those living in 
remote and undeveloped locations of the country and to do all acts and things 
necessary for providing a conducive atmosphere in schools. 
  
2.30 The Ministry has further submitted that there are categories 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 in 
Kendriya Vidyalas. The first two categories are for Central Government; 3 and 4 are 
for the State Governments. (1200/RTU/KN) Category 5 is for others. But due to RTE 
Act, 25 per cent of seats in schools are reserved for students from EWS. Although it 
is exempt from the RTE Act, but voluntarily Kendriya Vidhalaya fulfils this mandate as 
well. So, only 75 per cent seats are filled through the government quotas.  
        
2.31 In pursuance of the above objectives, the Kendriya Vidyalayas system has 
following features and norms: 
 Common textbooks and bilingual (English & Hindi) medium of instruction for 
all Kendriya Vidyalayas. 
 All Kendriya Vidyalayas are affiliated to Central Board of Secondary 
Education (CBSE). 
 All Kendriya Vidyalayas are co-educational, composite schools. 

32 
 
 KVS strives to maintain excellence in academic pursuits. 
2.32 Budgetary Allocation and Expenditure for KVS during 2020-21 to 2025-26 are 
as under:  
 (Rs.in Crore) 
 
*Grant received/Expenditure upto December-2025 
^Wherever the expenditure are more than the Budgetary Allocations, the same has 
been met out of Internal Receipts of KVS” 
  
Year 
 Head 
 Grant Received 
 Expenditure" 
 
2020-21 
Salary 
 4363.38 
 4361.99 
General 
 1799.30 
 1972.29 
Capital 
 275.00 
 279.30 
Total 
 6437.68 
 6613.58 
2021-22 
Salary 
 4700.00 
 4721.23 
General 
 1600.00 
 1697.73 
Capital 
 500.00 
 499.99 
Total 
 6800.00 
 6918.95 
2022-23 
Salary 
 4995.59 
 5057.07 
General 
 1765.41 
 1854.92 
Capital 
 700.25 
 700.07 
Total 
 7461.25 
 7612.06 
 
2023-24 
Salary 
 5154.00 
 5243.17 
General 
 2164.50 
 2273.25 
Capital 
 1181.50 
 1181.71 
Total 
 8500.00 
 8698.13 
2024-25 
Salary 
 5720.00 
 5838.25 
General 
 2185.44 
 2262.61 
Capital 
 821.56 
 821.49 
Total 
 8727.00 
 8922.35 
2025-26* 
Salary 
 4646.77 
 4646.77 
General 
 1723.00 
 1723.00 
Capital 
 758.10 
 450.00 
Total 
 7127.87 
 6819.77 

33 
 
 
2.33 The State-wise details of Total No. of Districts and No. of Kendriya Vidyalayas 
in each State is at Annexure 12 (Annexure – 20 of the original). 
2.34 When asked about the policy of the Ministry  regarding establishment of 
KV in each District of Country, the Ministry submitted following information: -  
“As far as KVS is concerned, KVs are opened primarily to cater to the 
educational needs of the wards of transferable Central Government Employees 
including Defence & Para -military personnel, Central Autono mous Bodies, 
Central Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) and Central Institute of Higher 
Learning (IHL) by providing a common programme of education throughout the 
country. Proposals for opening of new KVs may be sponsored by Ministries or 
Departments of the Government of India / State Governments / Union Territories 
(UTs) Administrations, with commitment to provide requisite extent of land free 
of cost, suitable rent -free temporary accommodation and concentration of 
requisite number of central government emp loyees at the place of proposed 
new KV. The proposals are examined as per the established parameters.” 
         
2.35 Asked about the details of projects for establishment of KVs are struck due to 
operational issues, the Ministry submitted following information: - 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
State/ UT 
Name of 
Kendriya Vidyalaya 
Year of 
Sanction 
Remarks 
1. 
 Uttar Pradesh 
 Banda 
Distt. Banda 
2018 
 Land Measuring 8.02 acres has been accepted in March, 2021 
and there is litigation on the accepted land in the District Court, 
Banda. The Sponsoring Authority has been requested for 
allotment  of  alternate  land  and  Temporary  
Accommodation. 
2. 
 Bihar 
 Devkund, Distt. 
Aurangabad 
2018 
 Sanction for transfer of Land measuring 4.00 Acres received by 
Govt. of Bihar on dated 19.05.2025. Land has been accepted 
by KVS in November, 2025 by relaxing in land norms. Lease 
Deed has been signed and registration is under process on the 
part of the Sponsoring Authority. The temporary 
accommodation is found suitable. The KV will start functioning 
from the session 2026-27. 

34 
 
3. 
 Bihar 
 Nawada, Distt. Nawada 
(LWE) 
2018 
 Land measuring 5.00 Acres has been identified by the District 
Administration. Land Transfer is awaited from Govt. of Bihar.
The temporary accommodation is to be provided by 
the Sponsoring Authority. 
 
  
 
2.36 As regards the admission process, the Ministry has submitted that Kendriya 
Vidyalayas are established primarily to provide uninterrupted education to the 
children of transferable Central Government employees. Accordingly, admissions are 
carried out as per the extant KVS Admission Guidelines through online registration 
followed by a centralised computer -based lottery system, with priority given to 
children of transferable and non -transferable Central Government employees, 
followed by childre n of employees of Central Government Public Sector 
Undertakings, State Government employees, State Government Public Sector 
Undertakings, and thereafter other categories including private sector employees and 
the floating population, subject to availability of seats. 
Further, admissions are governed by the provisions of the Right of Children to 
Free and Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 2009 and include reservations for 
children belonging to SC, ST and OBC -NCL categories as per Government of India 
norms, ensuring equity, inclusiveness, and transparency in the admission process.  
The admission schedule and related details are widely publicised through the official 
KVS website and prominent/local newspapers across the country to ensure 
transparency, uniformity, and fairness in the admission process. 
                 
2.37 When asked about the details of institutional mechanism established by the 
Ministry to ensure transparency in admission procedure in KVs , the Ministry 
4. 
 Kerala 
 Thrikkakara, Distt. 
Ernakulam 
2019 
 The 5.2825 hectare land proposed for opening of KV 
Thrikkakara has been allotted to another Govt. Department – 
NDRF by the Sponsoring Authority and alternate land and 
Temporary Accommodation are yet to be provided by the 
Sponsoring Authority. 
5. 
 Maharashtra 
 Gadchiroli (LWE),Distt. 
Gadchiroli 
2019 
 Land has been registered in favour  of KVS. Temporary 
Accommodation is yet to be provided by the Sponsoring 
Authority. The KV will start functioning from the session 2026 -
27. 

35 
 
submitted following information: -  
“Mechanism to ensure transparency in admission procedure in KVs: 
 Centralised online admission system with uniform application 
procedures across all KVs. 
 Computer-based centralised lottery conducted as per prescribed 
priority categories and reservation norms. 
 Uniform KVS Admission Guidelines applicable nationwide. 
 Public disclosure of admission schedules, criteria, and lottery results on 
the KVS website and at school level.” 
  
2.38 When asked as to w hether the Ministry has received any complaints for 
irregularity in admission procedure in KVs , the Ministry submitted that n o major 
complaints regarding irregularities in the admission procedure of Kendriya Vidyalayas 
have been received except a few minor and procedural complaints related to issues 
such as clarification of priority category, documentation, or technical aspects of online 
registration. All such complaints are forwarded to KVS (HQ) with the request to 
address such complaints at the appropriate level in accordance with the extant rules. 
Corrective and preventive measures, including system -based checks, clarifications 
to KVs/Regions, and grievance redressal are taken by KVS (HQ) to ensure strict 
compliance with rules and to maintain transparency and fairness in the admission 
process. 
  
2.39 With regard to the availability of the adequate teaching faculties, the Ministry 
submitted the State/UT-wise details of Sanctioned and vacant posts of teaching staff 
in KVS across the country as on 01.11.2025 which is at Annexure 13 (Annexure – 22 
of the original).  
  
 

36 
 
2.40 Asked about the policy of Ministry to provide additional incentives to teachers 
and other staffs of KVs posted in difficult areas such as hilly States , the Ministry 
informed that the emoluments to teachers and faculties are provided as per GoI Rules.  
  
(ix) Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya (JNV) 
2.41 The National Policy on Education, 1986 envisaged setting up of pace setting 
residential schools, to be called as Navodaya Vidyalayas one in each district, with an 
aim of providing good quality modern education coupled with equity and social justice, 
and bring out the best of rural talents. These Navodaya Vidyalayas are run by the 
Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti, which is an autonomous organization under the Ministry 
of Education, Govt. of India and has been registered as a Society, under the Societies 
Registration Act XXI of 1860 at New Delhi on 28 th February, 1986. The objectives of 
the society are as under: 
 To establish, endow, maintain, control, and manage schools (hereinafter called 
the ‘Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas’) and to do all acts and things necessary 
for or conducive to the promotion of such schools which will have the following 
objectives: 
 To provide good quality modern education – including a strong component of 
inculcation of values, awareness of the environment, adventure activities and 
physical education – to the talented children predominantly from the rural 
areas without regard to their family’s socio-economic condition. 
 To provide facilities, at a suitable stage, for instruction through a common 
medium, viz. Hindi and English, all over the country. 
 Offer a common core -curriculum for ensuring comparability in standards and 
to facilitate and understandi ng of the common and composite heritage of our 
people. 
 To progressively bring students from one part of the country to another in each 
school to promote national integration and enrich social content. 

37 
 
 To serve as a focal point for improvement in quality of school education through 
training of teachers in live situations and sharing of experiences and facilities. 
 To establish, develop, maintain and manage hostels for the residence of 
students of Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas; 
 To aid, establish and conduct othe r institutions as may be required for the 
furtherance of the Society’s objects in any part of India; 
 To do all such things as may be considered necessary, incidental, or conducive 
to the attainment of all or any of the objects of the Society. 
  
2.42 The details of budgetary allocation and expenditure for all JNVs since 2020 -
21 are detailed below:   
 
 
 
 
 
                   (Rs. in crore) 
  
2.43  As per Navodaya Vidyalaya Scheme one JNV in each district of the country is 
to be established. At present 689 JNVs have been sanctioned in 666 districts 
including 23 additional (second) JNVs in 23 districts. The State-wise details of 
Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas (JNVs) in the prescribed format is at Annexure 1 4 
(Annexure – 23 of the original). 
          
2.44 When asked about the details of the proposed projects of JNVs which could 
not be established, the Ministry submitted that out of 689 JNVs, total 665 JNVs are 
Year Budget Allocation Expenditure 
2020-21 2730.11 2495.22 
2021-22 3286.34 3150.64 
2022-23 4103.58 3829.09 
2023-24 4788.45 4199.65 
2024-25 4659.85 4461.31 

38 
 
functional and 24 JNVs are non -functional. The State-wise details of the JNVs that 
have been proposed but could not be established as on date is at Annexure 1 5 
(Annexure – 24 of the original).  
          
2.45 The Ministry informed that the admission of students in Jawahar Navodaya 
Vidyalayas takes place at Class - VI level on the basis of selection test designed and 
conducted by the CBSE. 
 At least 75% of the seats in a district will be filled by candidates provisionally 
selected from rural areas of the district concerned. The remaining seats are 
open which will be filled up from both urban and rural area candidates of the 
district concerned. 
 Reservation for SC & ST as per actual population in the district concerned 
subject to a minimum of national average (i.e. 15% for SCs and 7.5% for STs) 
but subject to a maximum of 50% for both the categories (SC & ST) taken 
together. 
 1/3rd of the seats are reserved for girl students. 
 There is a provision for re servation of 3 seats out of 80 seats for Divyang 
Children. 
 There is a provision of 27% reservation to the OBC candidates. The 
reservations to the OBC candidates is as per central list as applicable from 
time to time. 
 For optimal utilization of the infrastr ucture and staff facilities, vacant seats, if 
any, are filled up at Class – IX and XI through a Lateral Entry Scheme. 
2.46 The State-wise details of the number of seats available and students admitted 
in JNVs since 2020–21 is at Annexure 16 (Annexure – 25 of the original).  
  
2.47 Asked as to whether the Ministry has received any complaints for irregularity 
in admission procedure in JNVs, the Ministry submitted following information: -  
“No major complaints regarding irregularities in the admission procedure of 
Jawahar Navodaya have been received except a few routine complaints which 
are forwarded to NVS (HQ) with the request to address such complaints at the 

39 
 
appropriate level in accordance with the extant rules/guidelines.” 
  
2.48 The Committee enquired whether the JNVs have adequate teaching faculties 
along with the state-wise sanctioned and actual strength of teaching staff in JNVs. In 
rthis regard the State-wise details of the sanctioned strength of teachers and existing 
vacancies in JNVs across the country as submitted by the Ministry is at Annexure 17 
(Annexure – 26 of the original).                                                                                    
  
2.49 The Committee enquired about the policy of Ministry to provide additional 
incentives to teachers and other staffs of JNVs posted in difficult areas such as hilly 
and tribal areas. In this regard, the Ministry submitted following information: -   
“Additional incentives to teachers and other staffs of JNVs posted in difficult 
areas such as hilly and tribal areas are provided as per the Government of 
India guidelines issued from time to time.”  
  
(x) PM SHRI Scheme         
2.50 PM SHRI Schools are set up by strengthening the existing schools from 
amongst schools managed by Central government/State/UT Government/local 
bodies. These schools are to showcase all the initiatives of National Education Policy 
2020. They provide leadership in their respective regions in providing high -quality 
education in an equitable, inclusive and joyful school environment that takes care of 
the diverse background, multilingual needs, and different ac ademic abilities of 
children and makes them active participants in their own learning process as per the 
vision of NEP 2020. The major features in the PM SHRI Scheme are: 
 Quality and Innovation (Usage of Teaching Learning Material, Learning 
Enhancement Pro gramme, Holistic Progress Card, Innovative 
Pedagogies, Rashtriya Aavishkar Abhiyan, Bagless days, Internships 
with Local artisans, Capacity building, etc.) 
 Early Childhood Care and Education including Balvatika and 

40 
 
Foundational Literacy and Numeracy 
 Equity and Inclusion including provision of safe and appropriate 
infrastructure for girls and children with special needs (CwSN). 
 Encouraging flexibility in choice of subjects offered to students. 
 Encouraging mother tongue as medium of instruction 
using technological interventions to help bridge language barriers 
between teachers and students. 
 ICT, smart classrooms and digital libraries for using digital pedagogy. 
 Establishing fully equipped Atal tinkering labs 
 Strengthening of existing infrastructure- science labs 
 Mental health and Career Guidance and counselling 
 Green school activities 
 Vocational interventions & enhancing internship/entrepreneurship 
opportunities especially with local industry. Mapping of skills with 
developmental projects/nearby indus try and develop 
courses/curriculum accordingly. 
 Beneficiary oriented Entitlements under Right to Education (RTE) Act. 
 Annual School Grants (Composite School grants, Library grant, Sports 
grant) 
 PM SHRI schools are expected to emerge as leaders in education and 
will offer guidance to neighbourhood schools to achieve the 
benchmarks of PM SHRI schools over time.” 
        
2.51 When asked about the criteria for selecting any school for PM SHRI Scheme, 
the Ministry submitted following reply: -       
“Selection of PM SHRI schools is based on the Challenge Method wherein 
Schools compete for support to become exemplar schools. Selection is done 
through a three-stage process with definite time lines, which is as follows: - 
Stage-1: States/UTs sign an MoU with Centre l aying down the commitments 
for supporting these schools for achieving specified quality assurance as PM 
SHRI schools. 

41 
 
Stage-2: In this stage, a pool of schools that are eligible to be selected as PM 
SHRI Schools are identified based on prescribed minimum benchmark through 
UDISE+ data. 
These benchmarks are automatically populated from UDISE+ portal based on 
the latest data. The minimum benchmarks that the school fulfils are as follows: 
 The school should have its own pucca building in good condition. 
 Barrier free access -Ramp. 
 The school must be safety oriented. 
 The enrolment of students at Elementary (Class 1 -5/1-8) level and 
Senior Secondary (Class 6 -12/ 6-10/ 1-10/ 1-12) level must be more 
than the state average enrolment, for the category. 
 The school shoul d have at least one separate toilet each for boys & 
girls. 
 The school must have potable drinking water facility. 
 The school must have separate hand washing facility. 
 All teachers should have Photo ID Card as per extant guidelines. 
 Electricity supply should be in working condition. 
 School should have Library/library corner facilities and Sports 
equipment. 
Stage-3: This stage is based on the challenge method for fulfilling certain 
criteria. Schools in urban areas need to score a minimum of 70%, whereas 
schools in rural areas need to score a minimum of 60% to be selected as PM 
SHRI Schools. Fulfilment of conditions has to be certified by States/UTs 
through physical inspection. 
The domains of Challenge Process are listed below: 
Section Domains Sub Domain 
A Infrastructure / Physical Facilities & School  
Safety 
16 
B Teaching Staff and Capacity Building 10 
C PM Poshan Scheme 17 

42 
 
D Learning Outcomes, LEP, Pedagogy 11 
E Vocational Education under National
 Skill Qualifications Framework 
(NSQF) (Only for Sr. Secondary levels) 
4 
F Green Initiatives/ Activities by School 7 
G Commitment of Stakeholders 7 
Total 72 
2.52 States/UTs are required to recommend the list of schools to Ministry of 
Education and an Expert committee headed by Secretary (SE&L), at Ministry of 
Education, Government of India, has been constituted to make the final school 
selections through challenge method. 
  
2.53 When asked about the details of facilities provided in schools selected for PM 
SHRI Scheme, the Ministry furnished following information: -  
“Under PM SHRI scheme, there is provision to upgrade and saturate PM SHRI 
schools with various components such as computer lab/ICT lab/smart 
classrooms, library with good furniture, internet facility, voca tional skill 
education, guidance and career counselling, fully equipped integrated science 
lab/physics lab/chemistry lab/biology lab, playground with well - equipped 
sports facilities, school innovation council, youth and eco club for mission life, 
BaLa features and jaadui pitara for primary school children, 10 bagless days 
for students, child tracking software for tracking the children attendance, fully 
functioning handwashing facility and toilets, green school features etc.” 
2.54 Asked about the responsibilities envisaged for different stakeholders viz. 
Central Government, State Governments and Schools for implementation of PM 
SHRI Scheme, the Ministry submitted following information:-  
“The PM SHRI Scheme is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme with a total funding 
of ₹27360 crore spread over a period of 5 years which includes central share 

43 
 
of ₹18,128 crore and state share of ₹9232 crores. The present funding pattern 
is 60:40 between Centre and State Governments and UTs with legislature 
(except J&K). The sharing pattern is 90(Centre):10 (State) for North Eastern 
and Himalayan states and UT of J&K and 100% for Union Territories without 
legislature. Under the Scheme, the Ministry of Education provides the overall 
policy framework, issues guidelines, releases the Central share of funds, and 
oversees implementation. The Project Approval Board (PAB) headed by the 
Secretary, Department of School Education and Literacy, which are 
responsible for approval of plans and ensuring effective implementation. The 
PAB approves the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWP&B) of States/UTs and 
appraises component-wise proposals in accordance with prescribed financial 
and programmatic norms. The Ministry also constitutes an Expert Committee 
for final selection of schools. It ensures n ational-level monitoring through 
platforms such as School Quality Assessment Framework (SQAF), UDISE+, 
PRABANDH, etc.  The State Governments/UT Administrations sign a 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the Centre committing to support 
selected schools i n achieving prescribed quality benchmarks. They identify 
eligible schools using UDISE+ data, verify fulfilment of challenge conditions 
through physical inspection, and recommend schools for selection. States/UTs 
prepare and implement the Annual Work Plan a nd Budget, provide the 
corresponding State share, ensure deployment of trained teachers as per 
norms, address infrastructure and academic gaps, and undertake regular 
monitoring through State and District level committees. 
The PM SHRI schools self -apply through the online challenge mode and are 
selected based on minimum benchmarks relating to infrastructure, safety, 
enrolment, basic facilities and resources. Selected schools implement 
targeted, inclusive and NEP 2020–aligned interventions, including green 
school practices, innovative pedagogies, ICT and smart classrooms, 
vocational exposure and holistic assessment practices. Schools are required 
to report progress under SQAF and ensure optimal utilization of resources. PM 
SHRI schools function as exemplar sch ools, providing leadership in their 
regions by mentoring and handholding neighboring schools and contributing 
to the wider implementation of NEP 2020.” 

44 
 
        
2.55 The year wise details of allocation of fund and central releases under PM SHRI 
scheme are as follows: 
(Rs. in crores) 
Financial Year RE Total Central 
Releases 
2023-24 2800 1216.70 
2024-25 4500 3576.40 
2025-26 5800 473.20 
* In FY 2025-26, PM SHRI scheme has been onboarded on SNA SPARSH platform 
and 1st Mother Sanction of Rs. 2,273.07 crore has been issued for implementation 
of the scheme. 
  
2.56 PM SHRI scheme aims to establish more than 14500 schools by strengthening 
the existing schools from amongst those managed by Central government/State/UT 
Government/local bodies. A maximum two schools  are selected per block/ULB with 
upper limit of number of total schools across India. So far, 13076 schools have been 
selected from 33 States/UTs along with KVS/NVS/NCERT.   The total number of 
schools selected under the PM SHRI scheme from 33 States/UTs al ong with 
KVS/NVS/NCERT are 13076. The State/UT/NVS/KVS/NCERT wise and category 
wise bifurcation is as follows: 
 
PM SHRI – SCHOOLS SELECTED 
S. No. States/UTs/KVS/NVS/NCERT Total Schools 
1 Andaman and Nicobar Islands 16 
2 Andhra Pradesh 935 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 93 

45 
 
4 Assam 382 
5 Bihar 836 
6 Chandigarh 2 
7 Chhattisgarh 341 
8 Dadra & Nagar Haveli & Daman & Diu 7 
9 Delhi 6 
10 Goa 28 
11 Gujarat 463 
12 Haryana 250 
13 Himachal Pradesh 199 
14 Jammu And Kashmir 396 
15 Jharkhand 363 
16 Karnataka 585 
17 KVS 913 
18 Ladakh 37 
19 Lakshadweep 11 
20 Madhya Pradesh 799 
21 Maharashtra 860 
22 Manipur 121 
23 Meghalaya 65 
24 Mizoram 35 
25 Nagaland 49 
26 NCERT 4 
27 NVS 620 

46 
 
28 Odisha 762 
29 Puducherry 12 
30 Punjab 356 
31 Rajasthan 639 
32 Sikkim 47 
33 Telangana 794 
34 Tripura 84 
35 Uttar Pradesh 1725 
36 Uttarakhand 241 
 Total 13076 
  
2.57 Asked as to w hether the Ministry has envisaged any additional training 
facilities for teachers in PM SHRI Schools , the Ministry submitted following 
information:-  
“Teacher training under the PM SHRI Scheme is strengthened through District 
Institutes of Education and Training (DIETs), which provide continuous 
professional development programmes focused on modern pedagogical 
practices such as experienti al and competency -based learning, along with 
effective use of digital tools in teaching. DIETs also impart training on 
competency-based education, Holistic Progress Cards, school safety, mental 
well-being, and ICT integration, thereby strengthening pedagogical strategies, 
data- informed instructional planning, and classroom assessment practices, 
leading to improved student learning outcomes. The scheme provides financial 
support of up to ₹3.00 lakh per DIET for undertaking capacity -building 
programmes in PM SHRI Schools, along with capacity building of teachers at 
up to ₹2,500 per teacher for all teachers.” 
  

47 
 
2.58 The Committee enquired about the impact observed in performance of 
students in PM SHRI schools . In this regard, the Ministry submitted following 
information: -  
“Although PM SHRI Schools constitute less than 1% of schools nationwide, 
they accounted for 5% of the total ideas submitted under the Viksit Bharat 
Buildathon 2025. Students from PM SHRI Schools secured 8% of the 
scholarships awarded under t he NMM Scheme through competitive exam, 
despite these schools representing only about 1% of Government schools 
across the country. Further, at the secondary level, 92% of PM SHRI Schools 
students have integrated skill education course, compared to only 19% of other 
Government schools.” 
(xi) Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalaya 
2.59 The Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalayas (KGBVs) are residential schools for 
girls belonging to Socio -Economically Disadvantaged Groups (SEDGs) such as 
Schedule Tribe, Schedule Caste, Other Backward Class, Economically Weaker 
Section of the society in Educationally Backward Blocks (EBBs).  In this regard, 
proposals are prepared by the States and UT s based on their requirements. These 
proposals are then appraised/approved by PAB in consul tation with the States and 
UTs as per the programmatic and financial norms of the Scheme and availability of 
budgetary resources. The objective of the scheme is to ensure access to quality 
education for girls from SEDGs and reduce the gender gap at the ele mentary to 
senior secondary level by setting up residential schools with boarding facilities. 
  
2.60 The funds allocated for implementation of Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalaya  
along with year-wise actual expenditure are as under: -  
 
S. No. Financial Year Approval (Rs. in lakh) Expenditure (Rs. in lakh) 
1 2023-24 548205.62 38494.82 

48 
 
2 2024-25 455138.02 238667.72 
3 2025-26* 447966.02 189426.53 
*As o17.12.25 Source: PRABNDH 
  
2.61 KGBVs can also be hostels attached with nearby school and facilities provided 
thereunder are as follows: - 
 Free Education 
 Lodging and boarding 
 Text books & Stationary 
 Stipend 
 Medical care/contingencies 
 Self-defence training 
 Vocational Training/Specific Skill training 
2.62 Asked about the responsibilities envisaged for different stakeholders viz. 
Central Government, State Governments and Schools for implementation of 
Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalaya, the Ministry submitted following information: -  
“KGBV is an intervention under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Samagra 
Shiksha. This intervention is implemented by the Central Government with 
collaboration of States/UTs. The scheme has detailed guideline “Framework 
for Implementation of the Samagra Shiksha ” for implementation of the 
Scheme. The Department of School Education & Literacy (DoSEL) implements 
at National level. The responsibilities of the Department are as under: - 
 To scrutinize the proposals of Samagra Shiksha including KGBV for the 
approval of funds under Samagra Shiksha. The Annual Work Plan and 
Budget of the State and UTs are considered during the PAB meetings. 
 Funds are approved for incurring recurring & non-recurring costs. 
 Policy and guidelines are shared with States/UTs for adopting or 

49 
 
adapting. 
 States/UTs have propose funds for various requirements for functioning 
of KGBV as a part of Samagra Shiksha within the available resources. 
States/UTs are given flexibility to utilize the approved amount as per the 
needs/requirements. 
 DoSEL regularly reviews the implementation of KGBVs as part of 
Samagra Shiksha th rough PAB meeting, half -yearly meetings with 
Education Secretaries/State Project Directors of each State/UT and 
through other mechanisms to ensure smooth implementation of KGBV 
in States/UTs; 
Further, the matters related to operationalization and functioning of KGBVs, 
including matters related to recruitment of teachers and staff in KGBVs, come 
under the purview of concerned State/UT Government.” 
  
2.63 A number of 5269 KGBVs are functional in 30 States/UTs. State/UT -wise 
details of functional KGBVs are at Annexure 18 (Annexure – 27 of the original). 
         
2.64 Asked as to w hether the Ministry has envisaged any additional training 
facilities for teachers in Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalaya , the Ministry submitted 
following information: -  
“The Department of School Education and Literacy, in collaboration with the 
National Institute of Educational Planning and Administration (NIEPA), has 
developed a comprehensive handbook for the Training Programme for 
Empowering KGBV Wardens 2025 -26. This traini ng programme covers key 
areas such as administrative procedures, safety and security, health and 
hygiene, socio -emotional well -being, gender sensitization, financial 
management, and community engagement to enhance the skills and capacity 
of wardens. Further, the States/UTs have been advised to impart in -service 
training to all KGBV teachers at par with regular government school teachers.” 

50 
 
  
2.65 The Committee asked about the impact observed in performance of students 
in Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalaya. In this regard, ministry submitted as under: -   
The Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalayas (KGBVs) were started in 2004. It has 
got wide recognition and acclamation among girls and families belonging to 
SEDGs, and its benefits are reaping gradually among students, as evident 
from the success stories from across the country. The Department has 
received numerous representations seeking an increase in the capacity of 
KGBVs. In recent times, many KGBV girls have been selected for various 
government jobs and ha ve also qualified in the State Public Service 
Commissions, NEET, Police, judiciary and JEE examinations. Some girls have 
also claimed awards and achieved recognition in sports. Inspired by these 
KGBV alumni, many girls now aspire to seek admission to KGBVs. 
The Department have also documented some success stories of KGBV girls 
and they are available on Ministry’s youtube channel and may be accessed on 
following links: - 
Sr. 
No. 
Brief Description Youtube 
1 Ms. Chand Chaturvedi, Gatka sports person, 
Chhattisgarh 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NywbD
mRCa6M 
2 Ms. Jageshwari Thakur, Martial 
Artist, Chhatisgarh 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zq1VUc
YOim8 
3 Ms. Dasa Hetal Nebhabhai, Horticulture
 Teacher, Gujarat 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZGgSm
8yFQDY&t=29s 
4 Ms. Chhaya Bhagirath Shelake,
 Pharmacist, Maharashtra 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BpkYJz
sAgoY 
5 Ms. Archana Nishad, Cricketer, 
Uttar Pradesh 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YfmWQ
w22g9Q 
6 Ms. Pratima Ambadas Panchal, Forest 
Guard, Maharashtra 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M95S5
WJqFS8&t=1s 

51 
 
  
(xii) Netaji Subhash Chandra Awasiya Vidyalaya 
2.66 Samagra Shiksha supports the provision of residential facilities under the 
intervention entitled Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose Awasiya Vidyalaya, with the 
primary purpose of reaching out to girls, urban deprived and other disadvantaged 
children and creating  equitable access to school education in remote, sparsely 
populated and difficult to reach areas, hilly terrains, areas affected by LWE, large 
uninhabited areas with natural barriers like forests, waterways, rivers, etc. Ministry of 
Education renamed Resid ential Schools and Hostels funded under Samagra 
Shiksha, as “Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose Residential Schools and Hostels ” in 
February, 2021. The Key Objectives of NSCAV are as under:       
 Ensure enrolment and schooling for children in remote, hilly, tribal, or sparsely 
populated areas where regular schools aren't viable. 
 Provide shelter and education for urban deprived children, child labourers, 
migrant children, and those without adult protection or affected by 
conflict/calamities. 
 Offer holistic growth through quality residential facilities, nutrition, skill training 
(Specific Skill Training), self-defence, and medical care. 
 Focus on Socio -Economically Disadvantaged Groups (SEDGs), including 
girls, in Educationally Backward Blocks (EBBs) and NITI Aayog's Aspirational 
Districts. 
 Integrate out-of-school children into the formal education system. 
  
2.67 When asked about the criteria for selecting any school for Netaji Subhash 
Chandra Awasiya Vidyalaya, the Ministry submitted following information: -   
“Samagra Shiksha supports the provision of residential facilities under the 
intervention entitled Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose Awasiya Vidyalaya, with 
the primary purpose of reaching out to girls, urban deprived and other 
disadvantaged children and creating equitable access to school education in 
remote, sparsely populated and difficult to reach areas, hilly terrains, areas 
affected by LWE, large uninhabited areas with natural barriers like forests, 

52 
 
waterways, rivers, etc., 
 Rationale for actual need of the residential school/hostel. 
 A survey should be conducted at the district/state level or as per latest 
UDISE report for enrollment projection. 
 As per survey report for establishing a new/upgraded residential 
school/hostel, minimum enrollment should be ensured as per above 
norms. 
 A survey report of identified children to be graduated in the schools and 
enrolment in the hostel duly verified by the district authority 
(DEOs/DPOs/ZEOs) alongwith details of availability of schools within 5-
7 Km range; 
 Are solution in  the meeting of SMCs/SMDCs of the existing schools 
pertaining to the requirement of up-gradation. 
 Availability of land/space along with land acquisition 
certificate/availability proof/khasra number. 
 School mapping details indicating entire habitation information in 
respect of feeder schools ’ availability, feasibility of mainstreaming 
OoSC (age -appropriate admission) in the proposed schools/hostels. 
The same may be done through GIS mapping followed up by a field 
level survey on the actual requirement and share the report of the same 
in the proposal. 
 Details in respect to the number of children belonging to all categories 
including BPL and migrant children. 
 Photograph of the proposed location of schools/hostels along with civil 
works details in case construction is involved. The design of the 
buildings should be inclusive to serve children with disabilities as well. 
 
It is also mentioned that broad norms are indicated in the Samagra Shiksha 
Framework and provision may be made for each State/UT keeping in mind the 
geographical, socio-cultural, linguistic and demographic condition of not just 
the State/UT but also, wherever necessary, of the locality. State/UT also needs 
to explore convergence with the Department of Tribal Affairs, Ministry of Social 

53 
 
Justice and Empowerment and Ministry of Minority Affairs for availing the 
facility of residential schools and hostels respectively at least for the 
SC/ST/Minority concentrated districts.” 
         
2.68 The Committee asked whether the Ministry has set State -specific target for 
establishment of Netaji Subhash Chandra Awasiya Vidyalaya, the Ministry submitted 
following information: -  
“During the Project Approval Board meeting, proposals including NSCBAV are 
submitted by the States/UTs as per requirement. No State-specific targets are 
set for establishing NSCBAVs by the Department.”     
  
2.69 Year wise details of allocation and expenditure under the Netaji Subhash 
Chandra Bose Awasiya Vidyalaya is at Annexure 19 (Annexure – 28 of the original).  
  
2.70 For the NSCBAVs, which are set up under Samagra  Shiksha, assistance for 
construction of hostels, recurring expenditure including manpower cost based on 
KGBVs/Girls Hostel norms has been provisioned. Major activities include: 
 Furniture/Equipment including kitchen equipment 
 Incinerators and Sanitary Pad vending machines in all KGBVs 
 Teaching Learning Material and equipment including Library books. 
 Bedding (replacement of Bedding after 3 years) 
 Replacement of Kitchen equipment as per requirement. 
 Food and lodging 
 Stipend for girl students 
 Supplementary TLM, stationery, and other educational material 
 Examination fee 
 Salaries 
 For existing NSCBAVs (1 warden, 4-5 full-time teachers as per RTE norms,1 

54 
 
head teacher in case the enrollment  exceeds 100, 2 Urdu teachers (only for 
blocks with Muslim population above 20% and select urban areas), if required, 
3 part-time teachers, Accountant/Assistant, Peon, Cooks. 
 For teachers of secondary and higher secondary classes, State norms for such 
classes may be followed. 
The norms of recruitment and service matters of Teaching and Non -teaching staff 
shall be decided by the respective States/UTs. 
 Skill training/specific skill training 
 Electricity/ water charges 
 Medical care/Contingencies 
 Maintenance 
 Self-defence training 
 PTAs/ school functions 
 Provision of Rent 
 Capacity building 
 Miscellaneous etc.; 
         
2.71 Asked about the responsibilities envisaged for different stakeholders viz. 
Central Government. State Governments and Schools for implementation of Netaji 
Subhash Chandra Awasiya Vidyalaya, the Ministry submitted following information: -  
“Samagra Shiksha supports the provision of residential facilities under Non-
Recurring component which may be in the form of construction of hostels, 
construction of standalone hostels, refurbishing of unused buildings & opening 
a residential school. 
For the Residential schools/ Hostels, which are set up under this scheme, 
assistance for Recurring Expenditure including manpower cost has also been 
provisioned. Financial assistance for these interventions follows standardized 
fund sharing patterns between the Centre and State /UTs in the ratio of 60:40, 
90:10 & 100%, as the case may be. However, education is in the Concurrent 
List of the Constitution and management and establishment related issues of 

55 
 
these hostels come under the purview of the respective State and UT 
Governments.”                                 
  
2.72 A total of 1140 NSCBAV are functional across the country. The list is as follows: 
Netaji Residential School and Hostels Status 2025-26  
S. No. State/UT Functional 
1. ANDHRA PRADESH 18 
2. ARUNACHAL PRADESH 212 
3. ASSAM 14 
4. BIHAR 15 
5. CHHATTISGARH 156 
6. HARYANA 2 
7. JHARKHAND 26 
8. KARNATAKA 6 
9. KERALA 6 
10. LADAKH 29 
11. MADHYA PRADESH 390 
12. MAHARASHTRA 10 
13. MANIPUR 25 
14. MIZORAM 26 
15. NAGALAND 13 
16. ODISHA 21 
17. PUNJAB 5 
18. RAJASTHAN 41 
19. SIKKIM 7 
20. TAMIL NADU 19 

56 
 
21. TELANGANA 33 
22. TRIPURA 16 
23. UTTARAKHAND 19 
24. WEST BENGAL 31 
TOTAL 1140 
 
2.73 When asked about any additional training facilities being organised for 
teachers in Netaji Subhash Chandra Awasiya Vidyalaya, the Ministry submitted that 
DIKSHA Portal has various online courses for continuous professional development 
of teachers. NSCBAV teachers can avail these facilities.      
  
2.74 Asked about the impact observed in performance of students in Netaji 
Subhash Chandra Awasiya Vidyalaya the Ministry submitted following information: -  
 “NSCBAV provides a conducive environment for learning to students. 
The overall pass percentage for students of class 10th and 12th is 96% and 
91%, respectively, in 2024-25.” 
  
(xiii) PM POSHAN 
2.75  Pradhan Mantri Poshan Shakti Nirman (PM POSHAN) earlier known as 
the National Programme of Mid -Day Meal in Schools is one of the foremost rights 
based Centrally Sponsored Schemes under the National Food Security Act, 2013 
(NFSA). The primary objective of the scheme is to improve the nutritional status of 
children studying in classes I-VIII in eligible schools. Nutrition and food norms under 
the scheme are as under: 

57 
 
Nutrition norm per child per day 
Level Calorie Portion 
Primary 450 12 gms 
Upper Primary 700 20 gms 
 
Food norms per child per day 
Level Food 
grains Pulses Vegetables Oil & 
Fats Salts & condiments 
Primary 100 gms 20 
gms 50 gms 5 gms As per need 
Upper 
Primary 150 gms 30 
gms 75 gms 7.5 
gms As per need 
The main aspects of the PM POSHAN Scheme 
Food Grains: Supply of food grains @ 100 grams per child per school day for primary 
and 150 grams for upper primary at NFSA rate i.e. ₹ 1 per kg for coarse grains, ₹ 2 
per kg for wheat and ₹ 3 per kg for rice. 
 Cooking Cost: It includes cost of ingredients, e.g. pulses, vegetables, cooking 
oil, other condiments and fuel. The per child per day cooking cost is ₹ 4.97 for 
primary and ₹ 7.45 for upper primary w.e.f. 1st April, 2020. 
 Honorarium to Cook -cum-Helpers: @ ₹ 1000 per month for 10 months in a 
year. 
 Transportation Assistance: As per PDS rate for transportation of food grains 
from FCI godown to school door steps. Maximum₹ 1500 per MT for 
transportation of food grains from FCI godown to school door steps for States 
other than NER and 2 Himalayan States and 2 UTs. 

58 
 
 Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (MME): @ 3% of aggreg ate of cost 
of foodgrains, cooking cost, Honorarium to Cook -cum-Helpers and 
Transportation Assistance. 
 Provision of Meals during summer vacations in drought/ disaster affected 
areas. 
 Kitchen-cum-store: As per plinth area norm and State Schedule of Rates. 2 0 
sq meter for schools having enrolment of 100 students. Additional 4 sq meter 
for every addition of up to 100 students. 
 Kitchen devices: Linked with enrolment. 
 Repair of kitchen-cum-stores: ₹ 10,000/- per unit, for the kitchen -cum-stores, 
which were constructed 10 years ago. 
 Fortification of food items: Fortification of food items in a systematic manner 
through Food Corporation of India (FCI). 
 Innovation / Flexibility component with no separate budgetary support: Five 
percent of the aggregate of the cost o f foodgrains, cooking cost, transport 
assistance, honorarium to cook -cum-helpers, and MME with no separate 
additional budgetary support for this component. The requirement of funds 
under this component will be met from available funds and implemented as per 
Department of Expenditure’s OM No. 55(5)/PF-II/2011 dated 06.09.2016. 
 Provision of meal to preparatory classes or Balvatika (that is before class I) in 
primary schools as covered in Samagra Shiksha as envisaged underNational 
Education Policy. 
The objectives of the Scheme are to address two of the pressing problems for 
majority of children in India, viz. hunger and education by: 
 Improving the nutritional status of eligible children in Government and 
Government aided schools. 
 Encouraging poor children, belo nging to disadvantaged sections, to attend 
school more regularly and help them concentrate on classroom activities. 

59 
 
 Providing nutritional support to children of elementary stage in drought -
affected and disaster affected areas during summer vacation. 
      
2.76 State-wise budgetary allocation and utilization for implementation of PM 
POSHAN scheme is at Annexure 20 (Annexure – 29 of the original). 
  
2.77 State-wise Number of schools and children covered under PM  POSHAN 
Scheme is at Annexure 21 (Annexure – 30 of the original). 
  
2.78 The Committee wanted to be apprised about the steps taken  to ensure 
serving of  nutritious food to children based on locally available food material. The 
Committee also wished to be apprised about the steps  have been taken by the 
Ministry to ensure transparency and proper utilization of funds under the scheme 
and the monitoring of the scheme in school. The Ministry submitted following 
information: -  
“Pradhan Mantri Poshan Shakti Nirman (PM POSHAN) is one of the foremost 
rights based Centrally Sponsored Schemes under the National Food 
Security Act, 2013 (NFSA). About 11 crore students studying in Bal Vatika 
and classes I to VIII in 10.35 lakh Govt and Govt aided schools are covered 
under the PM POSHA N Scheme and more than 24 lakh Cook -cum-Helpers 
are engaged for preparation of the meals. 
Implementation of the Scheme: The overall responsibility for providing 
cooked and nutritious meal to eligible children lies with the State Governments 
and Union Territory Administrations. States/ UTs have to ensure that all logistic 
and administrative arrangements are made to ensure regular serving of 
wholesome, nutritious and cooked meal in every eligible school. This includes 
development of adequate infrastructure viz. construction of kitchen-cum-store, 
and procurement of kitchen devices, through funding made available under the 
scheme and mobilization of additional resources through convergence with 

60 
 
other developmental programmes of other departments etc. Food grains  
allocation is made in advance and the FCI is responsible for ensuring 
continuous availability of adequate food grains in its Depots and in Principal 
Distribution Centres in the case of North East Region. Every school/cooking 
agency is to maintain a buffer stock of food grains for one month requirement. 
 
Task of Cooking: The cooking/supply of cooked meal is assigned to local 
women’s/mothers’ Self-Help Group or local Youth Club etc. In urban areas, 
where there is shortage of space for construction of the kitchen shed, cooking 
is done in centralized kitchen and cooked hot meal then transported under 
hygienic conditions through a reliable transport system to various schools. 
  
2.79 Asked as to whether any steps have been taken  to involve parents for 
monitoring of schemes in school, the Ministry submitted that:    
“The Govt. of India has  put in a place proper monitoring system to ensure 
healthy and nutritious meal to school students. 
i. Quality of meal largely depends on the quality of food grains.  FCI is  
responsible for issue of food grains of best available quality, which will in any 
case be at least of Fair Average Quality (FAQ). FCI appoints a Nodal Officer 
for each State to take care of various problems in supply of food grains under 
the PM -POSHAN Sch eme. The District Collector/CEO of Zila Panchayat 
ensures that food grains of at least FAQ are lifted after joint inspection by a 
team consisting of FCI and the nominee of the Collector and/or Chief Executive 
Officer, District Panchayat, and confirmation b y them that the grain conforms 
to at least FAQ norms. 
ii. The Central Government has issued detailed guidelines to ensure setting up 
of an effective Management Structure for the PM POSHAN Scheme at 
various levels; 
iii. Mandatory tasting of the meal by 2 -3 adults in cluding at least one  teacher 
before it is served to the children. 
iv. Convening of District Level Committee meeting under the Chairmanship of 
senior most Member of Parliament from the district. 
v. Management Information System  (MIS): Web enabled PM POSHAN -MIS 

61 
 
has been launched for effective online monitoring of the Scheme. The portal 
captures information on important parameters like category wise Enrolment, 
Teacher (looking after PM POSHAN) details, Cook -cum-Helpers details with 
social composition, availability of Kitchen-cum-stores & Kitchen devices, mode 
of cooking, drinking water, toilet facilities etc. on annual and monthly basis. 
vi. Automated Monitoring System (AMS): This department has put in place an 
Automated System of data collection for real time monitoring of PM POSHAN 
Scheme. Such data (on number of meals served on that particular day and 
reasons if meals not served) is being captured from schools with no cost to 
school Head Master/Teacher. 
vii. Contingency Plan for Medical Emergency: The State/CSO/NGO should 
have a Contingency Plan for any untoward incident. The names and telephone 
numbers of the nearest hospitals, Primary Health Centre, Ambulance, Police, 
Fire-brigade should be displayed at prominent places. 
viii. Display of Information : In order to ensure transparen cy and accountability, 
all schools and centers, where the programme is being implemented, are 
required to display the following information at a visible place in the campus 
for the notice of the general public: 
a. Quantity of food grains received, date of receipt. 
b. Quantity of food grains utilized 
c. Other ingredients purchased, utilized 
d. Number of children given meal. 
e. Daily Menu 
f. Roster of Community Members for supervision and monitoring. 
ix. Block Level Committee: A broad-based Steering-cum-Monitoring Committee 
also monitors implementation of the Scheme. 
x. Inspections by State Government Officers : Officers of the State 
Governments/UTs belonging to the Departments of Revenue, Rural 
Development, Education and other related sectors, such as Women and Child 
Development, Food, Health etc. are also inspect schools and centres where 
the programme is being implemented. 
xi. District Level Committee : A District Level Steering -cum-Monitoring 
Committee, under the Chairmanship of District Collector has also been 
constituted to monitor the scheme on monthly basis. 

62 
 
xii. Grievance Redressal : States and Union Territories have mechanism for 
public grievance redressal. 
xiii. State level Monitoring: States and UT Administrations are having Steering -
cum- Monitoring Committee at the State/UT level under the chairmanship of 
Chief Secretary to oversee the implementation of the Scheme. 
xiv. National Level Monitoring: 
a. Empowered Committee on PM POSHAN has been set up under the 
Chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister, Ministry of Education. 
b. Executive Council of the National Mi ssion for Samagra Shiksha (SS) headed 
by the Hon’ble Minister, Ministry of Education. 
c. National Level Steering -cum-Monitoring Committee (NSMC), Programme 
Approval Board (PAB) under the Chairpersonship of the Secretary (DoSE&L). 
d. National Review Meetings are held on monthly basis under the Chairmanship 
of the Secretary (DoSE&L) with Secretaries and Commissioners/Directors (PM 
POSHAN) of all States & UTs. 
x. Joint Review Mission: Visits of JRM are made in selected States and UTs. 
xi. Social Audit of PM-POSHAN Scheme: As per the PM POSHAN guidelines, 
it is mandatory to conduct Social Audit in at least 2% of the schools covered 
under the scheme or 20 schools, whichever is higher in all districts. 
xii. Testing of Meals: is being carried out through accredited laboratories. 
As per the instructions of Ministry of Finance regarding procedure of release 
of funds under PFMS, there will be no ad -hoc release and no revalidation of 
funds. The amount lying with the SNA at the closure of financial year may be 
used in the next Financial year without the need for any revalidation. However, 
if any amount of the central funds released during the financial year is still 
remaining with the State treasury, which has not been transferred to the SNA, 
the same will be returned to the Consolidated Fund of India (CFI) through RBI 
Advice. Entire amount of central share released to States/UTs till 31st March 
of the previous year in full has to be transferred to the SNA  account. If some 
amount is still remaining with the  State treasury, which has not been 
transferred to the SNA, the same will be returned to the Consolidated Fund of 
India (CFI) through RBI Advice. However, the amount lying with the SNA may 
be used in the next Financial year without the need for any revalidation. Entire 

63 
 
due State share against the Central share released in previous year has been 
released by State Government from their treasury to SNA. Funds available in 
the SNA account including State share at the time of release of funds should 
not be more than the instalment of Central share likely to be released. In case 
of UT without legislature, Letter of  Authorisation (LoA) should be  issued and 
the UT shall work directly in PFMS without transferring fund to the SNA. State 
has to utilise at least 75% of the funds released (both Central share as well as 
corresponding State share in the prescribed ratios). Mapping of 100% 
Implementing Agencies (IA) with the SNA.” 
  
 
(xiv) Skill Development and Vocational Training 
2.80 The Government of India has adopted National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 
to promote skill education across the country, with the objective of improving 
employability, enhancing workforce readiness, and integrating skill education with 
mainstream education. In pursuance of NEP 2020, skill education at the school level 
is being systematically implemented through Samagra Shiksha , a Centrally 
Sponsored scheme . Under this  initiative, vocational and skill -based training is 
provided in government and government - aided schools from Classes VI to XII , 
directly aligning with the policy’s objective to eliminate the silos between academic 
and vocational streams. By in troducing students to "hands -on" learning early, the 
program ensures that the national goal is met: by 2030, every learner graduating 
from the 12th grade will be equipped with at least one market - relevant skill, 
fostering a generation of self-reliant and employable youth. 
 
2.81 All skill education courses offered under Samagra Shiksha are aligned with the 
National Skill Qualification Framework (NSQF), which ensures standardized learning 
outcomes, uniform levels, and quality assurance across sectors. The NSQF 
framework enables clear progression pathways, certification, and mobility between 
school education, vocational training, and higher education. 
In this context, the Pandit Sunderlal Sharma Central Institute of Vocational 
Education (PSSCIVE), Bhopal, a constituent unit of NCERT, plays a key role in the 
academic and curriculum -related aspects of school -level skill education. PSSCIVE 

64 
 
supports the system through the development and revision of skill curricula m, 
identification and design of new job roles rel evant to emerging sectors, preparation 
of teaching-learning materials, and academic inputs for capacity building of teachers. 
These efforts help ensure  that skill courses offered in schools remain relevant, 
updated, and aligned with national priorities. 
The Government of India provides financial and technical support to States 
and Union Territories under Samagra Shiksha for infrastructure, teacher training, 
assessment, certification, industry exposure, and monitoring of NSQF -aligned skill 
courses. Industry participation is encouraged for curriculum alignment and practical 
training. In addition, coordination mechanisms with skill development agencies and 
regulatory bodies are in place to ensure that skill education remains relevant to labour 
market needs and supports employability. 
Thus, vocational and skill education is being promoted through a structured 
policy framework wherein NEP 2020 provides the policy direction, Samagra Shiksha 
serves as the implementation vehicle, and NSQF ensures standardization and quality 
of skill education across the country. 
  
2.82 When asked about the steps taken by the Ministry to impart  the skill 
education in schools, the Ministry submitted following information: -         
“The Department of School Education & Literacy, Ministry of Education 
provides financial assistance to States for giving exposure to Skill Education 
to students of Grades VI to VIII and introduction of Skill courses from Grades 
IX to XII, which are aligned with the National Skills Qualifications Framewo rk 
(NSQF) notified by the Government of India in 2013.  Assistance is also 
provided for the introduction of Skill Education in schools, capacity building of 
Skill Education teachers/skill trainers, development of competency -based 
curriculum and teaching lea rning material, development of management 
information system for monitoring and evaluation, and taking up innovative 
programmes under Skill Education. The aim of the Programme is: 
 
 Integration of Skill Education with general academic education in all schools. 
 Enhancing the employability and entrepreneurial abilities of the students and 

65 
 
providing exposure to the work environment. 
 Generating awareness amongst students about various career options to 
enable them to choose in accordance with their aptitude, competence, and 
aspirations. 
The provision for Hub and Spoke Model has been introduced, under 
which, the infrastructure available  in the Hub schools are  utilized by the 
students of nearby schools (spoke schools) for Skill training. ITIs, Polytechnics 
etc. are also be used as hubs. 
NEP 2020 also recommends that all students participate in a 10 -day 
bagless period during Grades 6-8 where they intern with local experts such as 
carpenters, gardeners, potters, artists, etc. In pursuance of this 
recommendation, the Government in consultation with concerned 
stakeholders has developed guidelines for 10 bagless days. These guidelines 
aim at providing children of classes 6 -8 an exposure to skill education using 
experiential learning pedagogy and to make learn ing at schools joyful and 
stress free. 
The implementation of Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) 
in schools represents a strategic convergence between the Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) and the Department of School 
Education & Literacy (DoSEL). By fostering cross -departmental synergy, the 
scheme transforms existing school infrastructure into active ‘Skill Hubs’ during 
non-working hours. This collaborative model targets school dropouts and 
unemployed youth (ages 15-45), providing them with demand-driven, industry- 
linked training. Through this unified approach, the program seamlessly bridges 
the gap between traditional education and professional employability, aligning 
Skill training with the modern career aspirations of India’s youth.”  
           
  

66 
 
2.83 On enquiring about the year -wise details of allocation of funds and actual 
expenditure for skill education since 2020 -21 skill education in the Country , the 
Ministry furnished following information: -   
(Source: PRABANDH portal) 
  
 2.84 Asked as to whether the Ministry has assessed impact of its existing 
schemes for promoting skill education in school , the Ministry submitted following 
information: -  
“Over the last five years, there has been a significant expansion in approvals 
based on the states proposals for skill education under Samagra Shiksha, 
rising from 14,385 schools in 2021 -22 to 17,736 schools in 2024 -25, before 
stabilizing at a 23, 132 appro vals in 2025 -26. This steady increase reflects 
growing acceptance of Skill education in the school system, wider coverage of 
NSQF-aligned job roles, and stronger  integration of employability -oriented 
courses at the secondary and senior secondary levels, thereby enhancing 
students’ access to industry -relevant skills and improving school -to-work 
transitions.” 
       
 
F.Y. Funds allocation central 
share (in Lakhs) 
Funds utilization (in 
Lakhs) 
2020-21 147477.86 - 
2021-22 120771.60 7275.66 
2022-23 162779.70 6743.10 
2023-24 240035.63 152657.58 
2024-25 329025.25 135161.6 
2025-26 341094.94 135243.53 
(As on 03.11.2025) 

67 
 
2.85 The Committee enquired about the steps have been taken by the 
Government to collaborate with the various stakeholders to promote skill education 
as per requirement of Indian Industries. In this regard, the Ministry submitted following 
information: -  
“The Government has taken the following steps: 
 Job roles under school-level skill education are developed in consultation with 
industry and relevant Sector Skill Councils, ensuring alignment with industry 
requirements. 
 All such job roles are approved by the National Council for  Vocational 
Education and Training (NCVET) to ensure quality and national recognition. 
 Pandit Sunderlal Sharma Central Institute of Vocational Education (PSSCIVE), 
a constituent unit of NCERT, supports the academic development, review, and 
updation of curricula and job roles, incl uding creation of new job roles based 
on sectoral and emerging skill needs. 
 A dual awarding body mechanism has been enabled, wherein State School 
Education Boards are encouraged to become Awarding and Assessing Bodies 
under NCVET, alongside Sector Skill Councils and other NCVET- recognized 
bodies, allowing flexibility while maintaining national standards.” 
       
 
2.86 The Committee asked whether the Ministry is collaborating with State 
Governments and other stakeholders for promoting skill education at school level, the 
Ministry submitted following information: -  
“Under Samagra Shiksha, financial assistance is provided to States and UTs 
for implementing skill education as per the programmatic norms for Skill 
Education, which include support for teacher training, curriculum development, 
lab equipment, on -the-job training, and ass essments aligned with NSQF. 
States and UTs propose skill activities under Samagra Shiksha through their  
Annual Work Plan & Budget (AWP&B) presented before the Project Approval 
Board (PAB) for approval and implementation of Skill courses in schools, 
ensuring demand-driven job roles and industry linkages. Also, the Ministry is 
facilitating encouraging States and State Boards of School Education to seek 
recognition as Awarding Bodies and/or  Assessment Agencies, which would 

68 
 
enable them to develop, assess, and c ertify NSQF-aligned job roles relevant 
to local industry and regional skill needs, while remaining aligned with national 
standards.” 
  
(xv) Digital Literacy & Technology 
2.87 The Committee asked about the steps taken to emphasize on the 
integration of technology (e- courses, virtual labs) ensuring access and digital literacy 
for all students, including those in rural areas with limited connectivity. In this regard, 
the Ministry replied as under: - 
“Education is part of the Concurrent List of the Constitution and most of the 
Government schools and School Boards are under the administration of the 
State Government and its bodies. Ministry of Education (MoE) announced the 
National Education Policy 2020 (NEP 2020) on 29.07.2020 as the first education 
policy of the 21st century that aims to address the many growing developmental 
imperatives of our country. The Ministry of Education  implements ICT and 
Digital initiatives under Samagra Shiksha, aligned with National Education 
Policy (NEP) 2020, to enhance digital learning in Government schools across 
the country. 
A comprehensive initiative called PM eVidya was initiated as part of 
‘Atmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyaan’ on 17th May, 2020, which unifies all efforts 
related to digital/online/on -air education to enable multi -mode access to 
education across the country under the aegis of National Education Policy 
(NEP) 2020. States/Union Territories (UTs) co llaborate with NCERT to utilise, 
monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of these initiatives as per their 
requirements in mother tongue/local/regional languages. PM eVidya includes 
200 DTH TV Channels allotted to States/UTs/Autonomous Bodies (ABs)/Other 
Ministries in Government of India and 400 Radio channels to enable them to 
provide supplementary education as per their requirement in various Indian 
languages for classes 1-12. 
Digital Infrastructure for Knowledge Sharing (DIKSHA) is the Nation’s One 
Nation, One Digital platform for providing quality e-content for school education 
in States/UTs along with QR coded Energised Textbooks (ETBs) for all grades. 

69 
 
DIKSHA Offline supports areas with limited or no internet connectivity. In 
addition to e -content, the s takeholders have access to more than 450 Virtual 
Labs and 100 Virtual skill labs (in Hindi and English) on DIKSHA. 
The Union Budget 2025 included a provision under the BharatNet project 
to extend broadband connectivity to rural government secondary schools  in a 
phased manner, to help ensure equitable access to technology. 
DIKSHA (Digital Infrastructure for Knowledge Sharing) is a national 
platform for school education under PMeVidya an initiative of the National 
Council for Education Research and Training  (NCERT), under the aegis of the 
Ministry of Education (MoE), Government of India (GoI). Launched in 2017 by 
the Hon'ble Vice President of India – Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu, DIKSHA has been 
adopted by all the States/UTs, central autonomous bodies/boards, includ ing 
CBSE and NIOS. DIKSHA  platform hosts various e -courses, e -contents, 
Energized Textbooks and has a separate vertical for Virtual labs, currently 529 
generic and 50 skill related Virtual Lab experiments are available on DIKSHA. 
The details of e -courses on DIKSHA have been shown in Annexure 22 
(Annexure – 31 of the original).” 
  
2.88 Asked about the challenges faced during the implementation in rural 
areas to help the Ministry identify specific resource gaps, the Ministry submitted 
following information: -  
“Few challenges in rural areas that the Ministry is considering for identifying 
resource gaps are i) Digital infrastructure, ii) Internet connectivity and iii) 
Availability of content in local languages. 
The Ministry of Education implements ICT and Digital initiatives under 
Samagra Shiksha to enhance digital learning in Government schools across the 
country. The initiatives aim to enhance the quality of education by integrating 
technology into teaching and learning processes. Under the scheme, funds are 
provided for setting up ICT Labs and Smart Classrooms according to the 
requirement of State submitted in the Annual Work Plan & Budget (AWP&B) 
through two options: 
1. Option I: Schools without prior ICT facilities can choose ICT labs or 

70 
 
smart classrooms. Schools with over 700 students may get an additional ICT 
lab. States/UTs can procure hardware, software, tablets, laptops, and training 
resources, supporting digital boards, virtual classrooms, and DTH channels. 
2. Option II: Schools with existing ICT facilities can access smart  
classrooms or tablets under the scheme norms. 
3. To address internet connectivity, the Union Budget 2025 included a 
provision under the BharatNet project to extend broadband connectivity to rural 
government secondary schools in a phased manner, to help ensure equitable 
access to technology. 
4. PM eVidya DTH TV channels and DIKSHA  offer content in all major 
Indian languages. As tenants, States/UTs are encouraged to adapt/adopt 
NCERT content or generate and upload regional/local/mother tongue based 
content relevant to their geography.”    
  
 
2.89 In view of the prevalent "digital divide" in India, the Committee asked the 
Ministry about the mechanisms available to ensure  equitable access to technology 
and internet connectivity for all students, preventi ng further marginalization of those 
from low-income families. In this regard, the Ministry submitted that to bridge digital 
divide for socio - economically disadvantaged group (SEDG), the government has 
created and embarked upon several digital initiatives such as PM eVidya, Swayam, 
Swayamprabha and DIKSHA. Providing access to high quality education is also 
ensured through better connectivity (like 4G) to remotest places, Common Service 
Centres (CSCs) etc. PM eVidya DTH TV channels reaches areas that do not have 
access to internet connectivity. DIKSHA Offline supports areas with limited or no 
internet connectivity.  
As per UDISE+ 2024 -25 data, 5,93,615 Government Schools (58.6 %) are 
equipped with internet connection.”    
  
2.90  For the past few years, schools undergo hybrid/ online mode of 
education due to extreme  weather or pollution related issues. Asked about the  
mechanisms a v a i l a b l e  for providing   education as the economically weaker 

71 
 
sections are not equipped with the infrastructure like laptops/ tablets to attend online 
classes vis a vis other section of society, the Ministry submitted following information:-   
“Education is part of the Concurrent List of the Constitution and the majo rity of 
schools are administered by the respective State Governments. To bridge the 
digital divide for socio -economically disadvantaged groups (SEDGs), the 
Government has launched and implemented  several digital initiatives such as 
PM eVidya, SWAYAM, SWAYAM Prabha and DIKSHA. Access to high -quality 
education is further strengthened through improved digital connectivity including 
4G services in remote areas and facilities such as Common Service Centres 
(CSCs). 
Under the hybrid mode of schooling, student s are able to access 
classroom learning in local/mother tongue/ regional languages through PM 
eVidya 200 DTH television channels, where educational content is broadcast by 
States/UTs and NCERT that can be accessed using existing infrastructure.” 
  
(xvi) Policy on mental health of students 
2.91 Asked about the policy of the Government  for promoting mental health 
of students, the Ministry submitted following reply:-  
“Drawing from the vision of the National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 which 
emphasizes joyful learning, community involvement, rationalization of academic 
burden, and creation of awareness about mental health issues for optimal  
learning outcomes, this Department has put into place comprehensive 
measures to promote the mental health and emotional -wellbeing of students in 
schools. Primary among these measures is the Manodarpan initiative aimed at 
providing psychosocial support to all stakeholders in the schooling ecosystem, 
Pariksha Pe Charcha – a unique interactive program for discussing and 
overcoming stress associated with examinations, and development of useful 
resources such as the UMMEED guidelines for prevention of suicides, 
handbooks for teachers and schools, advocacy materials etc, and capacity 
building of teachers and counsellors by NCERT.  
Further, the Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE), under the 

72 
 
aegis of DoSEL , has introduced comprehensive regulatory framework and 
architecture to ensure that schools affiliated to the Board remain a safe and 
welcoming space for children, as envisaged under  the NEP 2020.The 
framework includes affiliation byelaws stipulating appointment of counsellors in 
secondary and senior secondary schools, guidelines for preventing bullying and 
ragging, and ensuring physical safety, mental and emotional well -being of 
students in schools.  
Besides, in compliance of the directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in 
the Sukdeb Saha  vs State of  Andhra Pradesh case, this Department is also 
working on framing a uniform national mental health policy for schools drawing 
cues from the UMMEED Draft Guidelines, the Manodarpan initiative  and the 
National Suicide Prevention Strategy. To ensure compliance to the judgement, 
a meeting to review action taken was held with all State Education Secretaries 
on 22nd October, 2025. The states and union territories were advised to 
establish dedicated committees at both the state and district levels which would 
be tasked with monitoring and addressing mental health issues and the overall 
well-being of students. Additionally, States and UTs were advised to develop 
guidelines for recruiting trained counsellors in schools to fa cilitate their 
engagement. 
Subsequently, a National level Committee has been constituted with the 
first meeting being held on 23rd October, 2025 to decide the outline of the 
National Mental Health Policy. Committee members include State Education 
Secretaries, subject -matter experts from  IBHAS, NIMHANS and NCERT, 
school administrators and other experts.  A sub-committee has  also been 
formed to draft the initial version of the policy for placing in the National Level 
Committee; preliminary meeting of the sub-committee has been held on 26th 
November, 2025.” 
  
 
2.92 When asked about the changes that are being implemented to reduce the 
immense academic and societal pressure on students to pursue only conventional 
careers (eg , engineering/ medicine) and encourage diverse talents, the Ministry 
submitted following information: -  
“With assistance from the Samagra Shiksha and PMSHRI schemes, 

73 
 
States/UTs are being supported in implementing key features of the National 
Education Policy (NEP) 2020 which endorses flexibility in learning trajectories, 
multi-disciplinarity and holistic education, no hard separation within academic 
streams and between vocational and academic streams, and focus on 
conceptual learning, creativity and critical thinking. Through interventions and 
resources such as the 10 bagless days initiative, support for engagement of 
career counsellors, My Career  Advisor app and Career  Guidance Book, 
students are being provided exposure  to alternative careers best suited to 
their interests and aptitudes.”     
  
2.93 The Committee enquired about the steps being taken by the Ministry to 
control use of mobile phone by students in schools and to enhance awareness among 
students about harmful effects of social media on mental health. In this regard, the 
Ministry submitted following reply:-  
“Some of the key measures taken by the Department to introduce digital safety 
concepts and enhance awareness among students and schools on the harmful 
effects of social media to so as to encourage the balanced use of technology 
include: 
1. Guidelines on School Safety and Security: DoSEL issued a detailed guideline 
on the school  safety in 2021. It aims to build a safe, secure, and inclusive 
environment for  all children in schools. The document emphasizes the 
importance of involving all stakeholders - students, parents, teachers, school 
management, and education authorities —in co -creating a culture of safety. 
The guidelines recommend that digital learning include cyber safety measures 
for both students and teachers. 
2. Implementing the PRAGYATA Guidelines for Digital Education to ensure safe 
and efficient use of digital platforms for learning. They focus on safe, inclusive, 
and balanced learning for students from pre -primary to Class 12. Key points 
include recommended screen time limits, planning structured digital learning 
using the “Plan- Review-Arrange-Guide-YakAssign-Track-Appreciate” model, 
and ensuring physic al and mental well -being. The guidelines promote cyber 
safety, equitable access, and a blend of online and offline activities. 

74 
 
3. Manodarpan, through its toll -free helpline (844 -8440632) provides 
psychosocial support to students, teachers and families dealing  with various 
mental health and emotional well -being concerns including mobile phone 
addiction/ excessive use of mobile phones. On the helpline, trained 
counsellors address a range of concerns, including mobile phone addiction, 
and provide strategies for h ealthier digital habits through  their guidance and 
support. Besides, through daily and weekly live  interactive sessions with 
counsellors- ‘Sahyog’ and ‘Paricharcha’- telecast on PM e Vidya channels, 
Manodarpan addresses issues related to excessive mobile p hone use, 
exploring its impact on academic life, sleep, and emotional well-being, raising 
awareness about digital well-being and promoting self-regulation. 
4. National Summit of School Counsellors - A National Summit of School 
Counsellors on ‘Sharing practices for Whole School Approach towards Mental 
Well-being in Schools’ was organised on 4th-6th March, 2025 at NCERT, New 
Delhi for the  second consecutive year. Approximately 200 practitioners and 
counsellors working in different school settings participated in this 3 -day 
summit. The summit provided a platform for counsellors to share their insights 
and experiences on different themes wherein  counsellors shared school-
level strategies to address digital addiction, including behaviour 
management plans and peer engagement activities focused on digital well -
being. 
5. Development of Resource Materials for teacher capacity building by NCERT - 
“Early Identification and Intervention for Mental Health Concerns in School 
Going Children and Adolescents (2024)” handbook for T eachers and Allied 
Stakeholders equips teachers to identify signs of digital addiction, understand 
its impact, and implement classroom strategies to address it. It includes 
suggested activities for students that foster  balanced technology use. 
‘Promoting M ental Health and  Well-Being in School - A Guide for Teachers ’ 
(2024), has been published with the aim to empower teachers to enhance and 
strengthen their well-being, promoting skills and capacities. The guide includes 
a dedicated section on digital technology overuse, offering practical strategies 
and reflection activities for both teachers and students. 
Other measures being taken up by NCERT under the aegis of DoSEL to 
strengthen cybersafety and awareness include: 

75 
 
a. An online course on Safety in  Cyberspace, for class 9 to 12 students as  well 
as for teachers is under development. It will be piloted during February and 
March 2026 and released for all students and teachers through DIKSHA and 
SWAYAM portal from April 2026. 
b. A dedicated module on Cyber Safety and social media for all teachers is being 
prepared as part of the NISHTHA training package. 
c. To continuously upgrade the knowledge of teachers on the areas related to 
cyber safety & security and to integrate these concerns into the classroom, five 
hours training  is being organised by NCERT regularly in the first (english 
version) and third (hindi version) week of every month. Additionally Nano 
Course has also been launched based on the training at the end of the training. 
d. NCERT is developing a handbook as well as  cyberclub activities for students 
of class 9 to 12 during 2025-26. These materials are proposed to be released 
during safer internet day i.e., 10 February, 2026 after pilot so that this can be 
integrated in the actual curriculum implementation for the academic year 2026-
27.” 
       
2.94 Asked about the policy of Ministry regarding mandatory counselling 
mechanism in schools for counselling children with regard to curriculum anxiety, 
adolescence issues and health, the Ministry submitted following information: - 
“The Hon’ble Supreme Court, in its recent judgment in Sukdeb Saha vs. State 
of Andhra Pradesh, has reaffirmed that mental health is an inseparable part of 
the right to life under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. The Hon’ble Court, 
exercising the powers conferred under Article 32 of the Constitution of India for 
the enforcement of fundamental rights, has inter -alia issued guidelines for 
students' mental well - being for appropriate adoption by DoSEL,  Autonomous 
Organisations, and States, which shall remain in force and be binding until such 
time as appropriate legislation or regulatory frameworks are enacted by the 
competent authority. The guidelines inter -alia requires mandatory appointment 
of counsellor in schools with above 100 enrolm ents and setting up referral 
systems in schools with enrolment below 100 as also maintaining optimal 
student counsellor ratios. 

76 
 
To ensure compliance to the judgement, a meeting to review action taken 
was held with all State Education Secretaries on 22nd October, 2025. The states 
and union territories were advised to establish dedicated committees at both the 
state and district levels which would be tasked with monitoring and addressing 
mental health issues and the overall well-being of students. Additionally, States 
and UTs were advised to develop guidelines for recruiting trained counsellors in 
schools to facilitate their engagement. 
Subsequently, a National level Committee has been constituted with the 
first meeting being held on 23rd October, 2025 to decide the outline of the 
National Mental Health Policy. 
Committee members include State Education Secretaries, subject -matter 
experts from IBHAS, NIMHANS and NCERT, school administrators and other 
experts. A sub-committee has also been formed to draft the initial version of the 
policy for placing in the National Level Committee; preliminary meeting of the 
sub-committee has been held on 26th November, 2025. 
Notably, the Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE), under the 
aegis of DoSEL, has already intro duced comprehensive regulatory framework 
and architecture to ensure that schools affiliated to the Board remain a safe and 
welcoming space for children, as envisaged under the NEP 2020.The 
framework includes affiliation byelaws stipulating appointment of counsellors in 
secondary and senior secondary schools.”   
  
(xvii) Empowering teachers through training 
2.95  Asked about the policy of the Ministry for enhancing competency of 
teachers, the Ministry submitted following information: -  
The National Education Policy, 2020 emphasizes that the teacher must be at 
the center of the fundamental reforms in the education system. Accordingly, 
NEP 2020 recommends that teachers be given continuous opportunities for self-
improvement and to learn the latest innovations and advances in their 
profession. 
For in-service training, the country has a large network of teacher training 
institutions (TTIs) inclu ding SCERTs and DIETs, which provide annual in -

77 
 
service training to school teachers. The spread of these TTIs is both vertical and 
horizontal. At the National Level, the NCERT, along with its 5 Regional Institutes 
of Education (RIEs) prepares a host of training modules and undertakes specific 
programmes for training of teachers and teacher educators. Institutional support 
is also provided by the National Institute on Educational Planning and 
Administration (NIEPA). 
At the state level, the SCERTs prepare modu les for teacher training and 
conduct some specialized courses for teacher educators and school teachers.  
At the district level, in -service training  is provided by the DIETs. The Block 
Resource Centres (BRCs) and Cluster Resource Centres  (CRCs) form the 
grassroots level of institutions in the vertical hierarchy for  providing in-service 
training to school teachers. 
Financial support is provided under Samagra Shiksha for the 
strengthening of SCERTs/DIETs/BRCs/CRCs as per Scheme norms. 
For Continuous Professional Development (CPD) opportunities covering 
the latest pedagogies regarding foundational literacy and numeracy, formative 
and adaptive assessment of learning outcomes, competency -based learning, 
and related pedagogies such as  experiential learning, arts -integrated, sports-
integrated, and storytelling -based approaches,  etc. NISHTHA  integrated 
training programme 1.0, 2.0, and 3.0 online for different stages of school 
education has been initiated for different stages of school education: - 
▪ NISHTHA 1.0 for Elementary level (Classes I-VIII) 
▪ NISHTHA 2.0 for Secondary level (Classes IX-XII) 
▪ NISHTHA 3.0 for NIPUN Bharat (ECCE to Class V) 
DIKSHA - National Digital Infrastructure for Teachers is uploaded with lesson 
plans, worksheets and activities to create enjoyable classroom experiences. On 
DIKSHA, Teachers can find interactive and engaging teaching materials; see 
and share best practices with other 
 teachers; join courses to further professional development and earn badges  
and certificates on completion etc. for self-paced professional learning. 
NCTE has developed National Professional Standards for Teachers 
(NPST), which is a public statement of what constitutes teaching quality. It 
covers expectations and the competencies required from a teacher at different 

78 
 
levels of expertise and/or experience at various stages of their career. 
National Mission for Mentoring (NMM) has been l aunched by NCTE for 
structured mentoring support by experienced professionals for teachers’  
professional growth.  Details regarding the  number of teachers trained  under 
NISHTHA are at Annexure 23 (Annexure – 32 of the original).  
  
2.96  The Committee asked  about the State -wise details of physical 
achievements of National Mission for Mentoring (NMM), National Initiative for School 
Heads and Teachers' Holistic Advancement (NISHTHA) and DIETs of Excellence 
schemes. In this regard, the Ministry submitted follow ing information  
:-  
“National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 in Para 15.11 recommends establishing 
a large pool of outstanding professionals, who would be willing to provide short-
and-long-term professional support to school teachers. 
The National Mission for  Mentoring (NMM), as outlined in Para 15.11 of 
NEP 2020, aims to create a large pool of outstanding professionals willing to 
mentor schoolteachers. This initiative  emphasizes both  short and long-term 
professional support and cross-learning among individual s, contributing to 
continuous professional development. 
There is no separate budgetary allocation for NMM. Financial support is 
provided to NCTE under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Samagra Shiksha 
for NMM. 
State-wise details of  physical achievements of NMM are at Annexure 24 
(Annexure – 33 of the original). 
a. Mentors: 2734 
b. Mentees: 5601 
c. Mentoring Sessions: 1417 
d. Domains: 30” 
  
 
 

79 
 
(xviii) Mother Tongue & Multilingualism 
2.97  National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 strongly promotes 
multilingualism in India by emphasizing the mother tongue/regional language as the 
medium of instruction in carty grades (ideally until Grade 5/8) to boost cognitive 
development, aiming for better learning outcomes and global readiness through 
cognitive flexibility and enriched cultural understanding. 
2.98 Asked  about the  action plan for  implementing above stated objective   
of NEP on use of native language at early grades and promotion of multilingualism, 
the Ministry submitted following information:- 
“As per the recommendation of NEP 2020 implementation of mother tongue/ 
regional language in schools as pedagogic process has been promoted 
through; 
1. Curriculum and syllabi from preprimary Foundational Literacy and Numeracy 
Preparatory Middle and Secondary stages. States and UTs follow flexible 
Three Language Formula and mother tongue - based multilingualism to 
recognize and accommodate languages of children in the process of teaching 
and learning. 
2. As per the guidelines of the policy it is ensured that children opt for native 
Indian languages at all stages of school education. 
3. The introduction of the concept of languages as R1 R2 R3 is implemented in 
the development of syllabi and assessment. This will give impetus to learning 
Indian Languages as mother tongues/ regional languages at the stages of  
school education. 
4. Textbooks and textual materials are being developed with the vision of 
promoting languages native to India. The content is rooted to Indianness, and 
is also derived from Indian Knowledge System. 
5. Textbooks are being developed in all the scheduled languages. 
6. Textbooks in different disciplines are being translated in regional languages. 
7. In Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan (KVS), the objectives of NEP 2020 relating 
to the use of native/mother tongue and promotion of multilingualism are 
implemented in accordance with Article 112 of the KVS Education Code, which 
provides for additional arrangements for tea ching regional language/mother 
tongue wherever there is sufficient demand. Further, based on the 

80 
 
recommendations of the 126th meeting of the Board of Governors (BoG), KVs 
have been instructed to engage local/regional language teachers on 
contractual basis to support children at the foundational and preparatory 
stages, particularly where learners face difficulties in understanding concepts 
taught in Hindi or English.” 
  
2.99  The Ministry further informed that  Textbooks, Textual materials, 
Handbooks are being developed and shared with States and UTs. 
  
2.100 Asked about the status of progress has been achieved by the Ministry in 
use of native language at early grades in schools in the Country in general and 
schools under department (KVs, JNV and defence schools) in particular, the Ministry 
submitted following reply:  
“The following initiatives are taken up with the collaboration of States /UTs 
/KVS/NVS: 
 Textbooks for Foundational, Preparatory, Middle and secondary stage are 
being developed and these textbooks signify a paradigm shift in the curriculum 
and prioritises Indian content and context to create a more culturally relevant 
learning experience. The books are also intellectually designed activities not 
only enhance language skills but also promote key skills like creativity, critical 
thinking, collaboration, and problem solving. 
 Handbooks for Foundational, Preparatory  and Middle stages  are being 
developed. 
 Modules for teacher training on Language pedagogy are being developed. 
 Development of Primers in all Indian languages: Primers are available on 
NCERT and Ministry of Education Website. https://ncert.nic.in/primers.php  
Central Institute of Indian Languages (CIIL), Mysuru and NCERT have jointly 
developed Primers in all 121 mother tongues listed in the Census of India. The 
Primers are aimed at documenting and teaching the languages in school. 
 Bhasha Sangam under Ek Bharat and Shreshtha Bharat : Government of 
India initiated a nationwide programme to promote all Indian language through 
the programme of Bhasha Sangam. Children in school learn 100 sentences 

81 
 
in the 22 scheduled languages with audio and video support. The progarmme 
has been in implementation last seven years and schools across the country 
are participating and learning the Indian languages. The programmes. Both 
textual and audio -video materials are available on DIKSHA portal at 
https://ncert.nic.in/bs-2021.php 
 Multilingual Jadui Pitara: Jaadui Pitara has been developed as an exemplar 
of content needed in any school for the Foundational Stage. It represents a 
wide range of useful content and demonstrates the sensibilities (age -
appropriate, sensory experience and local) to be kept in mind while developing 
such content. The Pitara has toys, games, puzzles, puppets, posters, 
flashcards, story cards, story books, playbooks for students, and 
teacher handbooks. The core transformative aspect of NCF -FS is ‘learn 
through play ’. The NCF -FS describes how children at this stage learn best 
through play – through activity and doing. Children enjoy learning in several 
ways - talking, listening, using toys, working with material, painting, drawing, 
singing, dancing, running, and jumpi ng. Jaadui Pitara is available in 22 
Indian languages and also on NCERT website 
https://diksha.gov.in/jadoo/explore.html Jaadui Pitara has also been converted 
into digital form and available in 22 languages on 
https://ejaaduipitara.ncert.gov.in/explorejaadu.html 
 Translation of Content Textbooks into 22 Scheduled languages: The 
textbooks developed as a follow up to the NEP  and NCF_SE 2023 are made 
available in the 22 languages. Content subject textbooks of NCERT viz. 
Science, Mathematics, Social Science, Art  Education, Environmental 
Education, Health and Well -being, etc. developed have been translated into 
22 Indian language and in English 
 Bridge courses for Grades VI and VIII in Hindi, English, Urdu, and Sanskrit 
have been developed to help students for smooth transition from the previous 
curriculum to the new one. These courses focus on experiential learning and 
activity-based learning, ensuring a holistic learning environment in language 
education. 
 E-content – E-content based on the curriculum and textual m aterials is 
developed in Hindi and Indian languages. The content is created with 

82 
 
academic inputs and interest of the learners at different stages of school 
education. The e content is disseminated through NCERT website. 
 PM e -Vidya Programme - The programmes  on content and pedagogy are 
made available on regular basis. These programmes are in interactive mode. 
Learners and teachers have been participating in these programmes. 
NISHTHA and DIKSHA portals have also been used for providing academic 
inputs to teachers in the area language teaching and learning. 
 Bhartiya Bhasha Utsav: Government of Indian has directed all educational 
institutions and schools to celebrate Great Tamil poet, Subramania Bhartathi’s 
birthday as Bhartiya Bhasha Utsav on 11th December every year with lots of 
activities. Schools, teacher education and other educational institutions 
celebrate Indian Language Day through various cultural, ethnic and social and 
academic activities. 
 Samvaad is one of the programmes for disseminating literary and linguistic 
thoughts. It aims to organize a series of lectures / workshops / performances 
by eminent  scholars and artists on the features of linguistic diversity as a 
resource and issues related to language and language education in the Indian 
context. 
 Celebration of Bharatiya Bhasha Diwas on 11th December to promote the 
rich linguistic diversity of India and foster language harmony. NCERT as 
directed by Ministry of Education celebrates Bharatiya Bhasha Diwas with 
cultural and literary activities in collaboration with States. 
In KVS, progress is reflected through the systematic use of home language as 
a pedagogical support at early grades, engagement of regional language 
teachers, and adoption of multilingual teaching practices to improve 
comprehension and in clusion. Progress is monitored institutionally under a 
centralised framework.” 
  
2.101  On enquiring about the preparedness of KVs, JNV and defence 
schools to have adequate availability of teachers for  ensuring native language as 
medium of instruction, the Ministry submitted following information:  
“In KVS, adequate arrangements are made as per requirement by engaging 
regional/mother tongue teachers on contractual basis, wherever there is 

83 
 
demand, to supp ort students at the foundational and preparatory stages.
 Total 18 Bharatiya Bhashas are being taught across Jawahar 
Navodaya Vidyalayas and language teachers are available in JNVs to impart 
instruction in these languages.” 
       
2.102  The Committee enquired as to how the bal an c e between promoting 
regional languages and need for English proficiency in a global job market being 
managed, in this regard, the Ministry submitted following information: -  
“Teaching- learning of English is being taken up as second and third language. 
Textbooks and handbooks are being developed as per the recommended 
pedagogy such as rootedness to India, incorporating areas - environment, 
values, peace, ethics, etc. The emphasis is also placed on developing English 
language com petency for developing global perspective. KVS adopts a  
balanced multilingual  approach, wherein regional/mother  tongue languages 
are used to support learning, while English proficiency is systematically 
developed to ensure global competitiveness alongside cultural rootedness. 
Wherever students are comfortable, English is used as medium of instruction.” 
  
(xix) Development of Common Curriculum 
2.103 The Committee enquired about the steps taken for  development of 
common curriculum to ensure provision of standard education for children in the 
Country. In this regard, the Ministry submitted following information: -  
“NCERT, as a follow-up to the National Education Policy (NEP) 2020, has 
brought out the National Curriculum Framework (NCF) for the Foundational 
Stage in 2022 and the NCF for School Education in 2023.  These NCFs define 
national-level learning standards, competencies, and learning progression. 
Based on the learning standards prescribed in the NCFs, NCERT has 
developed new textbooks for Grades 1 to 8 across subject areas and is currently 
in the process of developing textbooks for Grades 9 to 12. 
The learning standards are  shared through the NCFs and the Learning 
Outcomes documents, providing flexibility to States for adaptation within the 

84 
 
national framework. State-specific adaptations within the national framework is 
in the process, along with Orientation & academic suppor t to SCERTs and 
Boards. NEP-aligned textbooks & teacher resources are being introduced. 
  
2.104 The Committee asked the Ministry to submit the details of States which 
have constituted School Standard Setting Authority. The information submitted by the 
Ministry is as under: -  
“Para 8.5 of the National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 recommends the 
creation of a State  School Standards Authority (SSSA) in every State and UT, 
as an independent regulatory body to ensure that all schools, whether public or 
private, comply with basic quality, safety and professional standards.  In 
pursuance of the above, Ministry of Education has notified the Central Board of 
Secondary Education (CBSE) vide notification dated 3 Feb, 2022, as the School 
Standard Authority for the schools affiliated to CBSE and functioning under the 
control of various Ministries/Departments of the Central Government. Moreover, 
CBSE has introduced its version of SQAAF to guide continuous improvement in 
affiliated schools through self- assessment, reflection and introspection.  
As on 3.1.2025, a total of 18 States/UTs have established a School 
Standards Authority to look into areas of quality assurance and accreditation. 
Details are given in table given below: 
 
List of States/UTs which have designated SSSA 
Sl No. State/UT Authority designated as SSSA 
1 Mizoram  
 
State Education Board 
2 Himachal Pradesh 
3 Jammu and Kashmir 
4 Bihar 
5 Andhra Pradesh 
6 Dadra and  Nagar Haveli and  Daman and 
Diu 
CBSE 
7 Arunachal Pradesh 
8 Ladakh 

85 
 
9 Chandigarh 
10 Maharashtra  
SCERT 11 Uttarakhand 
12 Punjab 
13 Assam  
 
 
Independent Body 
14 Meghalaya 
15 Goa 
16 Andaman & Nicobar Islands 
17 Sikkim 
18 Nagaland 
RTE compliance. 
  
(xx) Education Boards in the Country 
2.105  There are over 65 school education boards functional in India. These 
are divided into regular and open school boards that operate at national and state 
levels. 
Key details regarding education boards in India: 
 National Boards: The major national-level boards include the Central Board of 
Secondary Education (CBSE), the Council for the Indian School Certificate 
Examinations (CISCE), and the National Institute of Open Schooling (NIOS). 
 State Boards:  Every state in India has its own education department that 
conducts board exams for classes 10 and 12. 
 International Boards:  Boards like the International Baccalaureate (IB) and 
Cambridge Assessment International Education (CAIE) also operate in India. 
 Total Count: Sources indicate more than 35 to over 65 school boards are 
present, including state-specific boards. 
Top Functional Boards 
 CBSE: The most widespread board, managing over 27,000 schools in India and 
240 schools in 26 foreign countries. 
 CISCE: Governs the ICSE (Class 10) and ISC (Class 12) exams, with over 
2,300 schools. 
 NIOS: The largest open schooling system in India, offering flexible, 

86 
 
distance learning. 
 State Boards: Examples include UPMSP (Uttar Pradesh), BSEH (Haryana), 
and MSBSHSE (Maharashtra). 
  
2.106 When asked about the procedure for creation of functioning of private 
education Boards in the Country, the Ministry submitted following information: -  
“Creating a private education board in India is a highly regulated, complex 
process focused on non -profit operation, rather than a straightforward 
administrative application. The establishment of such boar ds typically stems 
from governmental resolutions, executive  orders, or high -level approvals, 
rather than standard business registration. 
Core Rules for Creation and Structure 
 Non-Profit Entity Requirement:  The board must be established as a non -
profit organization, specifically registered as a Society under the Societies 
Registration Act of 1860, a Trust under the Indian Trusts Act of 1882, or a 
Section 8 Company under the Companies Act of 2013. 
 Governmental Sanction: A key route to recognition is being constituted by an 
Act of Parliament, State Legislature, or through an executive order by the 
Central or State Government. 
 Equivalency & COBSE Membership: To be recognized nationally, the board 
often needs to be recognized by or equivalent to other governm ent boards. 
Many private boards seek membership with the Council of Boards of School 
Education in India (COBSE) , which requires submitting the board's 
memorandum, rules, and regulations. 
 Educational Purpose: The entity must have a clear, non-proprietary character 
with the primary goal of providing education as a community service, not for 
profit.” 
  
2.107  Rules for Functioning and Operation 
 Curriculum Alignment:  The syllabus must align with the  National 
Curriculum Framework (NCF), as guided by NCERT and NEP 2020. 

87 
 
 Assessment  Standards: Private  boards  must  conform  to  standards  
set by  PARAKH (Performance Assessment, Review, and Analysis of 
Knowledge for Holistic Development) to ensure consistent, equitable 
assessment patterns. 
 Transparency and Complia nce: The board must maintain high financial 
transparency, adhere to labor laws, and comply with the Right to Education 
(RTE) Act. 
 Inspection Rights: Bodies like COBSE hold the right to withdraw membership 
if the board fails to comply with issued orders or provides misleading 
information.” 
2.108 Asked about the regulatory mechanism established in the country for 
monitoring of functioning of international education Boards (IB and Cambridge 
(CAIE), the Ministry submitted following information: -  
“In India, international boards like IB and Cambridge operate under a mixed 
regulatory framework, where the  Ministry of Education (and UGC/AIU for 
higher ed)  sets overarching rules requiring adherence to the  Right to 
Education (RTE) Act, State Education Departments handle local recognition, 
and CBSE mandates compliance with national laws, while bodies like the  
Council of International Schools (CIS)  provide independent accreditation, 
with recent directives pushing for alignment with Indian standards. 
Key Regulatory Bodies & Mechanisms: 
1. Ministry of Education (Govt. of India) & UGC/AIU: The central government 
oversees education policy, with the University Grants Commission (UGC) and 
Association of International Universities (AIU) recognizing these boards for 
higher education entry, ensuring pathways to Indian universities. 
2. CBSE & National Laws: The Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) 
has directed international boards to follow India's RTE Act and state laws, 
indicating a push for standardization, notes Careers360. 
3. State Education Departments : These bodies manage primary and 
secondary education, grant recognition to schools (including international 
ones), and enforce state -level regulations, according to Research And 

88 
 
Analysis Journals. 
4. Association of International Schools (AIS) & Other Accreditations: While 
not government bodies, organizations like the Council of International Schools 
(CIS) accredit many international schools, ensuring quality standards, says 
School Serv. 
5. Monitoring & Compliance: 
 Accreditation & Recognition: Schools must be recognized by the 
respective state government and often seek accreditation from 
international bodies like CIS or IB itself. 
 Curriculum Alignment: Directives from CBSE and the  Ministry of  
Education aim to ensure international cu rricula align with national goals, 
notes Careers360. 
 Internal Quality Assurance: Bodies like NAAC focus on quality, though 
more on higher education, with similar principles applied. 
In essence, while IB and Cambridge have internal quality checks, Indian 
regulatory oversight ensures they and their affiliated schools’ function within 
the national legal framework, particularly concerning the RTE Act, with 
increasing convergence efforts, according to Careers360 and Research and 
Analysis Journals.” 
  
2.109  The Committee enquired about the mechanism available to ensure 
adherence to RTE Act by schools following IB and Cambridge (CAIE). In this 
regard, the Ministry submitted following information: -  
“The Ministry of Education ensures IB & Cambridge (CAIE) schools follow 
India's RTE Act  through affiliation mandates, guidelines, and regulatory 
oversight, requiring compliance with provisions like free education for 
disadvantaged groups (Section 12(1)(c)), prohibiting capitation fees (Section 
13), and ensuring teacher qualifications/ pupil-teacher ratios, with the NCERT 
and CBSE directing adherence, although specific enforcement on international 
boards needs stronger policy definition. 
 

89 
 
Key Mechanisms for Adherence: 
1. Affiliation & Accreditation: 
 Board Directives:  Boards like CBSE issue directions to international 
boards (IB, Cambridge) emphasizing mandatory compliance with the RTE 
Act for schools operating in India. 
 Nodal Agencies:  Bodies like CBSE ensure their affiliation process is 
aligned with RTE, pushing for transparency and accountability. 
2. Regulatory Framework & Guidelines: 
 Central Government & State Governments: Issue guidelines and 
directions for effective implementation, with power to make rules. 
 Mandatory Provisions: Schools must adhere to core RTE clauses, 
including: 
 Free & Compulsory Education: Ensuring no  child is denied  basic 
education. 
 No Capitation Fees: Prohibiting extra charges beyond notified fees. 
 Pupil-Teacher Ratio (PTR) & Teacher Qualifications: Maintaining 
standards set by the government. 
3. Oversight & Grievance Redressal: 
 School Management Committees (SMCs):  First level for grievance 
redressal at the school level. 
 National Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR): 
Monitors RTE implementation and safeguards children's rights. 
 State-Level Tribunals: For teacher-related grievances. 
4. Challenges & Future Steps: 
 Need for Specific Policies:  While existing rules apply, there's a 
recognized need for clearer, specific policies to regulate international 
schools, defining minimum requirements for student -teacher ratios, fee 
structures, and student demographics. 
 Monitoring:  Audits (like by the CAG) sometimes reveal non-compliance, 
highlighting ongoing enforcement needs.” 
  
 

90 
 
(xxi) NCERT 
 
2.210 The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) 
is an autonomous organisation set up by the Government of India in 1961 to assist 
and advise the Ministry in the implementation of its policies and major programmes 
in school education and teacher education. It provides academic and technical 
support for qualitative improvement in school education and undertakes programmes 
related to educational research, development of model textbooks and supplementary 
materials; conducts various training programmes, including pre -service and in -
service training, and undertakes various extension activities. It disseminates 
innovative educational techniques and practices, collaborates to advise State 
educational departments, universities, NGOs, and other educational institutions, and 
acts as a clearing house for ideas and information in matters related to school 
education. NCERT al so interacts and works in collaboration with international 
organisations, foreign delegations, and offers training programmes to educational 
personnel from developing countries. 
The constituent units of NCERT are: National Institute of Education (NIE), New 
Delhi; Central Institute of Educational Technology (CIET), New Delhi; Pandit 
Sunderlal Sharma Central Institute of Vocational Education (PSSCIVE), Bhopal; 
Regional Institutes of Education (RIE) at  Ajmer, Bhopal, Bhubaneswar, Mysuru, 
Nellore; and North-East Regional Institute of Education (NERIE), Umiam (Shillong). 
NCERT, being an apex institution in the field of school education, shares the 
national vision of ensuring inclusive and quality education for all. NCERT would strive 
towards preparing a school ed ucation system that meets the aspirations of the 
changing society, focusing on the quality dimension as well as Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs), and also equipping the system with professionals to 
cater to diverse educational needs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

91 
 
 
(xxii) Structure and the Organogram 
2.211 The organisational structure of the Council is as under: - 
 
The NCERT headquarters (including NIE and CIET) is located on 63.22 acres 
of land at New Delhi. The NIE has several blocks to house the academic, technical, 
and administrative staff; library; laboratories and resource centres; besides a science 
park, herbal park, canteen, warehouses, sports complex, etc. Also located in the NIE 
campus are a guest house, hostel, daily utility shops, residential quarters, community 
centre, etc. There is a residential campus in Nasirpur, Dwarka, New Delhi as well. 
The NIE at New Delhi comprises 17 Departments/Divisions, namely: 
Department of Elementary Education (DEE); Department of Education in Languages 
(DEL); Department of Education of Groups with Special Needs (DEGSN); 
Department of Gender Studies (DGS); Department of Education in Social Sciences 
(DESS); Department of Education in Science and Mathematics (DESM); Department 
of Curriculum Studies and Development (DCS&D); Department of Education in Art 
and Aesthetics (DEAA); Division of Educational Kits  (DEK); Department of 
Educational Psychology and Foundations of Education (DEPFE); Division of 
Educational Research (DER); Department of Teacher Education (DTE); Educational 
Survey Division (ESD); International Relations Division (IRD); Library and 
Documentation Division (LDD); Planning and Monitoring Division (PMD); Publication 
Division (PD); and Cells, viz., M anodarpan Cell and Cell for National Centre for 
Literacy (CNCL) and PARAKH (Performance Assessment, Review, and Analysis of 


92 
 
Knowledge for Holistic Development), which aims to set up assessment guidelines 
for all boards, has recently been established in NCE RT. The Publication Division is 
supported by its four Regional Production -cum-Distribution Centers (RPDC) at 
Kolkata, Bengaluru, Ahmedabad, and Guwahati. 
The Central Institute of Educational Technology (CIET), New Delhi, has media 
production units, satelli te networks, telecast facility for 
transmission/telecast/broadcast, and educational audio -visual programmes on 
SWAYAM PRABHA, DTH TV channels, FM Radio, etc. It also has ICT laboratories 
for developing  e-contents and their dissemination through DIKSHA, PM e-Vidya, 
SWAYAM PRABHA DTH Channels, NCERT Official YouTube Channels, etc. NCERT 
has operationalized the National Vidya Samiksha Kendra to support research, 
development, and capacity -building programs. Currently, the National Vidya 
Samiksha Kendra has been  integrated with its counterparts in States/Union 
Territories. It now provides visibility, insights, and actionable measures across 12 
programs, including NISHTHA, DIKSHA Energized Textbooks (ETBs), NIPUN 
Bharat, National Achievement Survey, Performance Gr ading Index, UDISE+, PM 
Poshan, National Curriculum Framework, Micro - Improvements Program, NCERT 
Quizzes, PRASHAST, and PM SHRI schools. 
 The Regional Institutes of Education (RIEs) at Ajmer, Bhopal, Bhubaneswar, 
Mysuru, and Nellore  have campuses spread over approximately 100 acres of 
land each, with multi-storied buildings to  run the graduate and post -graduate 
courses, library and laboratories, ICT studio, workshops,  hostels, guest houses, 
dispensaries, playgrounds, and residential  quarters. These campuses also have 
Demonstration Multi-purpose Schools (DMS) from foundational to secondary classes. 
 The North-East Regional Institute of Education (NERIE) at Umiam, Shillong, 
is located on 8 acres of land, housing an academic -cum-administrative block, 
including a library, ICT studio (3138 sq. mtrs),  students’ hostel, and residential 
quarters. 
 Pandit Sunderlal Sharma Central Institute of Vocational Education (PSSCIVE), 
Bhopal, is located  within the RIE, Bhopal campus, having academic an d 
administrative buildings, students’ hostel, guest house, and residential quarters. 

93 
 
(xxiii) Roles and Functions 
2.212 As a national apex body, NCERT has been instrumental in rethinking and 
reshaping education in a manner that is national in scope, while promoting the 
diverse cultures and languages of India. While NCERT is widely known for its work in 
textbook development, its role extends far beyond that. It has been deeply involved 
in educational research, the implementation of innovative teacher training programs, 
and providing academic support to state -level educational bodies such as SCERTs 
and DIETs. NCERT has published textbooks across subjects such as science, 
mathematics, social sciences, and languages, including the latest textbooks aligned 
with the National Curriculum Framework for Foundational Stage 2022 and National 
Curriculum Framework for School Education 2023. 
NCERT has also played a key role in shaping educational policies in India. It 
provided significant research and development inputs for  the National Policy on 
Education (NPE) in 1986 and the Programme of  Action (POA) in 1992. In alignment 
with these policies, NCERT developed the 'National Curriculum for Elementary and 
Secondary Education:  A Framework' (1988) and subsequently released guid elines 
and syllabi for all stages of school education. NCERT also contributed to the 
formulation of the National Education Policy 2020, which aims to revolutionize 
education in India. In consonance with the vision of NEP 2020, the Council has 
developed the National Curriculum Framework for Foundational Stage (NCFFS) and 
the National Curriculum Framework for School Education (NCFSE), and has initiated 
the process of developing syllabi and textbooks based on these frameworks. 
NCERT has consistently focused on  teacher education. Through its Regional 
Institutes of Education (RIEs), it offers pre -service teacher education courses such 
as B.Sc. B.Ed./B.Sc. Ed.,  B.A.B.Ed./B.A.Ed., M.Sc.Ed.(PCM), M.Ed., ITEP 
B.Sc.B.Ed., ITEP B.Sc.Ed., B.Ed. and B.Ed.M.Ed. programs and RIE, Nellore offers 
M.A. in Educational Technology. The Council also offers a one -year postgraduate 
diploma course in Guidance and Counselling at NIE, New Delhi, and the RIEs. The 
Council organizes short-term in-service teacher training programs to kee p teachers 
updated on the latest developments in education. NCERT's efforts to encourage 
excellence and innovation in students have led to the promotion of science, social 
science, environmental education, Global Citizenship Education (GCED), and more. 
In addition to its textbooks and teacher training programs, NCERT has 

94 
 
developed a wide range of supplementary materials, both in print and digital formats, 
for teachers and students. It has also produced kits and equipment for conducting 
experiments in scienc e and mathematics. By promoting active and hands -on 
learning, NCERT continues to influence school education and make learning more 
engaging and relevant to real life. 
NCERT has been involved in several central -sector projects and schemes. 
These include Voc ationalisation of Secondary Education, Non -Formal Education 
Programs, Special Orientation Program for School Teachers (SOPT), the Scheme for 
Improvement of Science Education in Schools, Environmental Orientation of School 
Education, the Computer  Literacy a nd Studies in Schools (CLASS) program, the 
Operation Blackboard (OB) scheme, Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA), Rashtriya 
Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan (RMSA), and Samagra Shiksha, among others. NCERT 
has also promoted yoga and health education by organizing ‘Yoga O lympiad’ and 
under the School Health Programme of Ayushman Bharat, the National Population 
Education Project (NPEP) developed curriculum, training resources, and activity 
books on health and wellness for school children. This joint initiative of the Ministries 
of Education and Health equips children with age -appropriate knowledge and life 
skills for informed and responsible decision-making 
  
2.213 The year-wise budgetary allocation and actual expenditure of NCERT 
since 2021-21 is as under: -       Fig. in Crores 
S.No. Year Budgetary Allocation 
(Excl. OB) 
Actual Expenditure 
1. 2021-22 319.74 338.41 
2. 2022-23 398.30 394.29 
3. 2023-24 349.97 335.54 
4. 2024-25 517.44 517.19 
  
2.214  The Ministry further informed that at present, NCERT is in the process 
of developing syllabus for Grades 9 to 12 and textbooks for Grades and 9 & 11. They 
will be made available for the next academic year 2026-27.  
  

95 
 
2.215 The Committee further asked about the process followed by N CERT is 
ensuring availability of school books in Indian Language as per NEP. In this regard, 
the Ministry submitted following information: -  
“Based on NEP 2020, there has been a concerted effort to facilitate education 
in multiple languages, commencing from the foundational stage and extending 
onwards. NCERT has also developed  textbooks for Classes 1, 2, 3  and 6 for  
all subjects in 22 scheduled languages (Assamese, Bengali, Bodo, Dogri, 
Gujarati, Hindi, Kannada, Kashmiri, Konkani, Malayalam, Manipuri, Marathi, 
Maithili, Nepali, Oriya, Punjabi, S anskrit, Santhali, Sindhi,  Tamil, Telugu and 
Urdu) to provide education in child’s own language which are also available on 
NCERT portal (https://ncert.nic.in/textbook.php) for ease of learning. 
NCERT, has undertaken the translation of Balvatika books and the teacher 
trainers’ handbook, known as Anand and Unmukh respectively, into scheduled 
languages. Among these translated materials, Anand (hand base for teachers) 
are available in 22 languages (Assamese, Bengali, Bodo, Dogri, Gujarati, Hindi, 
Kannada, Kash miri, Konkani, Maithili, Malayalam, Manipur]i, Marathi, Nepali, 
Odia, Punjabi, Sanskrit, Santhali, Sindhi, Tamil, Telugu and Urdu) and Unmukh 
is available in 22 languages (Assamese, Bengali, Bodo, Dogri, Gujarati, Hindi, 
Kannada, Kashmiri, Konkani, Maithili, Malayalam, Manipur]i, Marathi, Nepali, 
Odia, Punjabi, Sanskrit, Santhali, Sindhi, Tamil, Telugu and Urdu), and  these 
are uploaded and readily accessible on the DIKSHA and NCERT portals.” 
  
2.216 Asked about whether the NCERT has adequate staff st rength as per 
their mandate? Please furnish details of staff and vacancies in NCERT for various 
grades, the Ministry replied as under: -  
“Human Resource Position as on October, 2025 
Posts Academic School 
Teaching 
Ministerial Ancillary Total 
Sanctioned 529 271 1444 600 2844 
Filled 384 140 528 196 1248 
Vacancies 145 131 916 404 1596 

96 
 
In addition to the above, the following is apprised – 
 363 Nos. of various posts (Administrative & Ancillary) are outsourced. 
 264 Nos. posts (Administrative & Ancillary) vacant under rationalization. 
 173 Nos. of various posts (Administrative & Ancillary) are recently advertised. 
 45 Nos. of deputation posts (Technical/Ancillary) are being advertised. 
 Also, some posts under promotion are  vacant due to non-eligibility in feeder 
cadre.” 
  
(xxiv) Vidyanjali Initiative 
2.217     Vidyanjali is a school volunteer initiative of the Department of School 
Education and Literacy, Ministry of Education that intends to bring together the 
community and the government/government -aided schools through an online portal 
to facilitate volunteer contribution be they from alumni, serving and retired teachers, 
scientists, government/semi- government officials, retired armed forces personnel, 
self-employed/salaried professionals, homemakers, persons from Indian diaspora or 
any other organization/group or compa ny. The interested volunteers can contribute 
either in the form of assets or material or can participate by sharing their knowledge 
and skills in curricular, co-curricular and extra- curricular activities. 
The initiative is in alignment with NEP 2020 that recommends that efforts will be 
made to involve community and alumni in volunteer efforts for enhancing learning by 
providing at schools: one -on-one tutoring; the teaching of literacy and holding of 
extra-help sessions; teaching support and guidance for ed ucators; career guidance 
and mentoring to students; etc. 
The aim of Vidyanjali is to act as a facilitator by connecting 
volunteers/contributors/CSR directly to the schools. The effort is to bridge 
knowledge/skill/human resources gap in the government/gover nment aided schools 
by tapping the potential from the community. This is not to substitute government 
responsibility, but to complement, supplement and strengthen Government efforts to 
reach the last mile in the best possible way. 
  
2.218 The Committee enquired about the details of fund allocation for  Vidaynjali 
Inititaive. In this regard, the Ministry informed that No budgetary allocation has been 
made for the implementation of the Vidyanjali initiative. The initiative is implemented 

97 
 
as a technology-enabled, facilitative platform under the Department of School 
Education & Literacy, Ministry of Education. DoSEL through regular VC orientation 
sessions with the State/UT Nodal Officers gets this volunteer activity implemented 
and monitored in the States/UTs and ABs.  
2.219 The Committee asked about the institutional mechanism has been 
devised by the Ministry to encourage people and organization to enroll for Vidyanjali 
initiative. In this regard, the Ministry submitted following information: -  
The Department of School Education and Literacy, Ministry of Education has 
created a dedicated online portal developed with the support of the National 
Informatics Centre (NIC), to implement the Vidyanjali initiative. 
Through this portal, Government and Go vernment-aided schools register 
themselves and upload their requirements, such as need for activities or assets 
in their schools. The Volunteers, NGOs, CSR, PSUs, Government Departments, 
Industry associations etc also register on the same Vidyanjali platform and can 
choose the schools where they want to participate for volunteering. The actual 
contribution or service activity is done in physical mode at the school. No 
monetary contribution is accepted through the portal. 
The portal solicits participation of volunteers in schools through four different 
modules: 
Individual Volunteer Module: 
Individual volunteer expresses interest in contributing asset, material or service 
to a school of their choice and schools accepting the request of the volunteer. 
Schools r eceive support in the form of activities (such as teaching support, 
mentoring, sports, yoga, career guidance) and assets (such as computers, 
furniture, sports equipment, etc.). 
CSR Bulk Project Module: 
Under this module, States identify priority gap areas and create CSR projects at 
the district level by combining the needs of multiple schools in the district and 
after due verification by the State are uploaded on the portal. CSR organizations 
after registration on the portal can express interest in supporting these projects. 
Under this module, CSR gets the opportunity to contribute to multiple schools 
through a single intervention. The contribution of assets or materials is done in 

98 
 
physical form at the school level. 
Adopt-a-School Module: 
In this module, CSR organizations or institutions can adopt a school for a longer 
period, generally from one to five years. In the adopted school the volunteer can 
contribute to multiple activities over a longer period. T he adopting organization 
supports the school in multiple ways based on its needs, rather than providing 
one-time assistance. 
Twinning of Schools Module: 
Under this module, resource -rich schools act as mentors and support other 
Government or Government-aided schools by sharing good practices, 
organizing joint activities, or contributing assets. 
The portal provides dashboards, location -based matching, user manuals 
and approval workflows. Safety and transparency are ensured through 
verification processes and direct coordination between schools and 
contributors. All acts of volunteer contribution are done in physical form at the 
school level. 
        
2.220  The Ministry further appraised the Committee that  since its launch in 
September 2021, Vidyanjali has created a structured system for community and CSR 
participation in school education, in line with the National Education Policy (NEP) 
2020.  
“As on date More than 8.4 lakh Government and Government-aided schools 
are registered on the Vidyanjali portal. 
• Over 5.5 lakh volunteers and more than 2,500 CSR 
organizations/NGOs/Institutions have registered. 
• Around 2 crore students have benefitted across the country. 
Achievements under different modules: 
• Individual Volunteer Module: 
Schools have completed 42,424 service-based activities such as academic 
support, mentoring, career counselling, sports, yoga, skill development, health 
and awareness programmes. 
Additionally, 30,975 asset-based contributions such as digital devices, 
classroom equipment, sports materials, sanitation facilities and infrastructure 

99 
 
support have been completed and recorded on the portal. 
• Adopt-a-School Module: 
276 schools have been adopted by organizations for long-term support. 
• CSR Bulk Project Module: 
3 CSR bulk projects have been fully completed, 4 projects are partially 
completed, and several others are under implementation. 
• Twinning of Schools Module: 
117 mentor-mentee school pairings have completed their engagements and 
have been closed on the portal.  
        
2.221  On a query regarding the steps have been taken by the Ministry to 
popularize Vidyanjali Initiative, the Ministry submitted following information: -  
“The Ministry of Education has taken several steps to make people, 
organisations and schools aware of the Vidyanjali initiative and encourage their 
participation. A dedicated online portal has been created to make registration 
and participation easy. User manuals, dashboards and digital certificates are 
provided to guide and motivate volunteers and organizations. 
The Ministry has organized national-level workshops on CSR participation 
and has taken part in  CPSE/CSR roundtable meetings organized  by the 
Department of Public Enterprises (DPE). Vidyanjali  has also been promoted 
through stalls at events such as the National Book Fair, National Education 
Policy anniversary celebrations and Samagra Shiksha programmes. 
Performance about Vidyanjali is circulated regularly through official social 
media platforms of the Ministry and through an e -newsletter. Volunteers are 
recognized through digital certificates and success stories displayed on the 
portal. 
States and Union Territories are encouraged to promote Vidyanjali locally. 
Some States and UTs have organized workshops and felicitation programmes 
(Samman program) at district and school levels to recognize volunteers and 
increase participation.”
 
        

100 
 
(xxv) The Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) 
2.222  The Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) is the National 
Level Examination conducting body functioning under the administrative control of 
Ministry of Education, Govt. of India.   The CBSE grants affiliation to schools for the 
purpose of conduct of Class X and XII Board Examination of their students. CBSE is 
the only Board in India that has a pan -India and international presence.  The board 
traces its origin back to 1929 when it was established by the then GoI as 'Board of 
High School and Intermediate Education, Rajputana' with its HQs at Ajmer. In 1952, 
Board given its present name 'Central Board of Secondary Education'. In 1962, the 
Board was reconstituted and its HQ was shifted to Delhi. A Resolution of the 
Government of India in the Foreign and Pol itical Department No. F.115-R/28, dated 
the 02.07.1929 was published to establish an organisation to supervise and regulate 
High School and Intermediate Education in Rajputana (including Ajmer - Marwara), 
Central India and Gwalior. The Board of High School and Intermediate Education, 
Rajputana (including Ajmer -Marwara), Central India and Gwalior, Ajmer was 
registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (Act XXI of 1860) on 
02.01.1935. The name of the Board was changed as “THE CENTRAL BOARD OF 
SECONDARY EDUCATION, AJMER” and it was registered under the Rajasthan 
Societies Registration Act, 1958 (Act 28 of 1958). Revised Constitution of the Central 
Board of Secondary Education was adopted by the Board in its meeting held on 11th 
February. The Mandate of the Board is as under: -  
i. To grant affiliation to schools in India and abroad for the purpose of conduct of 
examinations. 
ii. To develop Curriculum and syllabi for the purpose of conduct of Board 
Examinations.  
iii. To conduct Board Examination for Sec Schools and Sr. Sec. Schools and such 
other examinations as it may consider fit subject to the approval of the Controlling 
Authority. 
iv. To develop standards for ensuring quality in the affiliated schools 
v. To undertake professional development of teachers and organize stu dent 
enrichment 

101 
 
vi. CBSE is a self -funded autonomous body and does not receive any grant -in-
aid from ministry. 
vii.The main sources of revenue are examination, registration, affiliation, training 
and sports fees etc. 
viii. All the expenses incurred on the examination, t raining, sports and 
affiliation activities etc. including other operational expenses are met out from the 
internally generated sources of revenues.  
2.223  The prime focus of the board is to bring innovations in teaching-learning 
methodologies by devising student’s friendly and students centred paradigms, brings 
reforms in affiliation, examinations and evaluation practices, introducing skill learning 
by adding job-oriented and job-linked inputs and regularly updating the pedagogical 
skills of the teachers a nd administrators by conducting in service training 
programmes, workshops etc. Functions of CBSE are as under: - 
i. Affiliations 
Affiliation of schools is considered under ‘Affiliation Bye-Laws’ approved by the 
Board. These Bye-Laws prescribed, inter-alia, the norms & procedures for affiliation 
and various infrastructural, human resources, academic requirements and safety 
norms in affiliated schools.  
The Affiliation Bye -Laws of CBSE have been revised and shall be called as 
‘CBSE Affiliation Bye-Laws 2018.  The revamped Bye Laws depict a paradigm shift 
from the highly complex procedure to a simplified procedure based on preventing 
duplication of process, speedy, transparent and hassle –free procedure. 
The numbers of students and institutions have been increasing over the years. 
The Board demonstrates consistent concern for innovation and improvement in 
quality in CBSE schools. All the schools granted affiliation by the Board follow the 
National Curriculum Framework. The Board appoints Inspection Committee to 
conduct inspection of schools before grant of affiliation and upgradation. 
Schools affiliated to CBSE as on Date 
KVS 
 Govt 
 Govt. aided 
 IND 
 JNV 
 Foreign  
 TOTAL 
1246 
 5088 
 366 
 23510 
 650 
 266 
 31126 

102 
 
Categories 
 GOVT 
 GOVT 
AIDED 
EMRS 
 KVS 
 JNV 
 INDEPEN-
DENT 
GRAND 
TOTAL 
Middle class level 
 5 
 1 
 12 
 0 
 0 
 108 
 126 
Secondary level 
 797 
 81 
 109 
 126 
 22 
 6151 
 7286 
Senior Secondary 
level 
4012 
 283 
 330 
 1123 
 628 
 17446 
 23822 
Total 
 4814 
 365 
 451 
 1249 
 650 
 23705 
 31234 
 
Out of the above schoo ls, a total no. of 266 Schools are established in 25 
countries internationally 
 
 
 
ii. 
 EXAMINATIONS  
Central Board of Secondar y Education (CBSE) is an examination conducting body 
under the control of the Ministry of Education, Govt. of India. The CBSE grants 
3787
3982
4308
4587
4843
5114
5391
5706
6005
6293
6769
7430
8048
8409
8979
9567
10111
10836
11511
12504
13898
14974
16131
17300
18694
20354
21453
22799
25790
26904
28402
29467
30479
31234
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000NUMBER OF SCHOOLS
YEARS
GROWTH OF CBSE SCHOOLS (1992-
2025)
2025-26: Affiliated schools: 31234 as on 08.10.2025 

103 
 
affiliation to the schools for conduct of the Class X and XII Examination. As per the 
responsibilities assigned to CBSE, fo llowing examinations are conducted by the 
CBSE: 
(i) Public Examination at the end of Class X and XII 
(ii) Professional / Competitive Examinations 
(iii) Miscellaneous Examinations. 
(a) Public Examination at the end of Class X and XII 
 Schools are fixed as examination centres from amongst the sc hools affiliated 
to the Board as per the criteria and procedures laid down. Examination centres 
are also fixed keeping in view the availability of infrastructure and accessibility 
of a school.  
 Board notifies examination date -sheets for conduct of Class X and XII 
Examinations each year commencing from 15th February onward. 
 Principals and teachers working in the schools affiliated to the Board are 
appointed as Centre Superintendent and Assistant Superintendents 
(Invigilators). 
 The Guidelines for Centre Super intendents and Assistant Superintendents 
brought out by the Board each year clearly lays down the role of every single 
functionary involved in the examination. 
 Board appoints Observers at all centres based on past history of the centres 
and also deputes flying squad involving reputed teachers at sensitive centres. 
 Use of technology – at various levels – such as registration of candidates, 
monitoring of exams, admit card, results in digital lockers, etc. 
 Capacity building of teachers & evaluators through standardized modules  
CBSE Board Exam 2025 
Details 
 Class XII 
 Class X 
Examination started 
 15.02.2025 
 15.02.2025 
Result declared 
 13.05.2025 
 13.05.2025 

104 
 
No. of candidates registered 
 1704367 
 2385079 
No. of candidates appeared 
 1692797 
 2371939 
No. of candidates passed 
 1496307 
 2221636 
Pass percentage 
 88.39% 
 93.66% 
Increase in pass percentage 
 0.41% 
 0.06% 
No. of schools 
 19299 
 26675 
No. of examination centres 
 7330 
 7837 
iii. 
ACADEMIC 
  The goal of the Academic Unit of Central Board of Secondary Education is to 
achieve academic excellence by conceptualising policies and their operationa l 
planning to ensure balanced academic activities in the schools affiliated to the Board. 
The Unit strives to provide Scheme of Studies, Curriculum, Academic guidelines, 
support material, enrichment activities and capacity building programmes. The unit 
functions according to the broader objectives set in the National Curriculum 
Framework and in consonance with various policies and acts passed by the 
Government of India from time to time.  
iv. 
PROFESSIONAL & MISC. EXAMINATIONS: 
 CBSE, besides doing Affiliation and conduct of Board exami nations for Class 
X and XII, was also holding several other competitive examinations like CTET 
and Navodaya Vidyalaya Sangthan (NVS) & other examinations as assigned 
by the MoE from time time. Through a cabinet decision, the National Testing 
Agency (NTA) h ad been created which has taken over all the competitive 
examinations except CTET from CBSE. 
 Central Teachers Eligibility Test  - The Ministry of Education assigned the 
responsibility to hold the Central Teachers Eligibility Test in 2011 as stipulated 
in th e Right to Education Act, 2009.   Through this eligibility Examination, a 
candidate who secures 60% or above marks become eligible for appointment 
as a teacher to teach classes I to VIII.   

105 
 
 Recruitment examinations - KVS Recruitment 2018 conducted for about 
10000 vacancies for Principal, Vice -Principal, PGT, TGT, PRT, Librarian, 
(740000 candidates). KVS Rect. 2019 for Principal, Vice -Principal is in the 
discussion stage and being taken up shortly with Limited Dept. Exam for 
Promotions.  
 Jawahar Navodya Vidyalaya Selection Test - As per the National Policy of 
Education (1986), Government of India started Jawahar Navodya Vidyalayas 
at district level.  The admission in JNVs is made through the Jawahar Navodya 
Vidyalayas selection test in Class VI, IX and XI throughout the country.   The 
class VI test is conducted in two phases in a year in different parts of the 
country as summer bound session during January and winter bound session 
during April and class IX and XI test is conducted during February.     
v. 
 SKILL EDUCATION 
Skill Educatio n is an important aspect of the nation’s education initiative.   While 
exploring the new domain of knowledge and skills that have bright employment 
prospects as well as career opportunities, the Central Board of Secondary Education 
has over the years taken a number of initiatives in this area and introduced number 
of Skill courses at Secondary and Senior Secondary level under NSQF. 
vi. 
TRAINING: 
The Board conducts capacity building programs for teachers of private independent 
schools affiliated to it and for this opened 18 Centre of Ex cellence as the affiliation 
bye-laws of the Board stipulates for a compulsory annual in-service training for each 
teacher. The Board is working on rolling out end - to- end online solutions to all the 
training needs of schools, beginning from online applica tion for programmes on a 
centralized portal, online fee submission, online pushing of reading material, all the 
way through to centralized issuing of certificates to participants directly through their 
individual digi-lockers. The Board has made it compulsory for every school to prepare 
an annual training calendar with allocated financial and academic budget. Schools 
are free to conduct programmes in collaboration with State institutes/NCERT or 
internal trainings by involving renowned experts. Training programmes in done during 
2025 in Online and Offline mode:  

106 
 
 
 2.224  INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (IT) & PROJECTS: 
Exams related IT innovations, initiatives and implementation of various online 
systems of pre and post exam data capturing as well as online issue of admit cards, 
score cards, attendance sheets, registration list and other school and centre material 
have resulted in annual savings of crores of rupees of the Board, lacs of reams of 
papers, millions of trees, gallons of water, huge manpower, large scale carbon 
emission and environment. This has also resulted in timely and accurate declaration 
of various results despite exponential increase in number of examinees. 
2.225 SPORTS 
Board has streamlined Health and Physical Education (HPE) in schools to keep one 
period of HPE for classes (IX -XII) each day to promote holistic development as well 
as understanding the importance of physical fitness, health and wellbeing. The 
revised HPE is a comprehensive area encompassing health, hygiene and sanitation, 
indigenous sports, Self -defence yoga, NCC, self -defence, fitness and work 
education.  
2.226 PUBLIC RELATIONS  
The Public Relations Unit of the Board is primarily engaged in dissemination 
of policies and programmes, sharing information with varied audience at a global 
level. While playing a proactive role by generating understanding and acceptability it 
strives to build an environment which is positive and pro student. CBSE as a service-
oriented organization has aligned public grievance redressal process and information 
under RTI in online modes to ensure transparent and quick response.  
  
Month of January 2024 to April-2025 
No. of Online Training 
Sessions Conducted  
Total No. of 
Participants  
No. of Offline Training 
Sessions conducted 
Total No. of 
Participants 
1251 435778 11604 581487 

107 
 
2.227  The Board functions under the overall supervision of the Controlling 
Authority which is vested with the Secretary (Department of School Education & 
Literacy), Ministry of Education, Government of India. The Board has various 
statutory committees which are advisory in nature. The Governing Body of the Board 
is constituted as per its rules and regulations. The Chairperson is the Chief Executive 
of the Board and is assisted by Heads of Departments Secretary, Controller of 
Examinations, Director (Academics), Director (IT), Director (Skill Education), Director 
(Prof. Examinations), Director (Training), Di rector (Edusat, Research & 
Development), Director (CTET) & Misc. Examinations and five Regional Directors. 
The Secretary, CBSE is the Chief Administrative Officer and responsible for the 
matters relating to Administration, Audit and Accounts, Public Relati ons, Legal and 
grant of affiliation to schools.  
Details of 25 CBSE Regional Offices and their jurisdiction: 
S.No. Regional Office/COE Jurisdiction 
 Ajmer Rajasthan 
 Ahmedabad Gujarat 
 Bengaluru Karnataka 
 Bhopal Madhya Pradesh 
 Bhubaneswar Odisha & West Bengal 
 Chandigarh Punjab, UT of Jammu & Kashmir 
 Chennai Tamil Nadu, Puducherry, A&N Islands 
 Dehradun Uttarakhand and Bareilly, Bijnor, Moradabad, 
Muzaffarnagar, Rampur, Saharanpur and Shamli 
 Delhi (East) Delhi (East) 
 Delhi (West) Delhi (West) 
 Dubai All Foreign Schools Affiliated with CBSE Board 
 Guwahati Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram,
 Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura, Nagaland, 
Sikkim 

108 
 
 Gurugram Bhiwani, Charkhi Dadri, Faridabad,
 Gurugram, Jhajjar, Mahendragarh, Nuh, 
Palwal, Panipat, Rewari, Rohtak and Sonipat 
 Hyderabad Telengana 
 Kolkata To be made operational 
 Lucknow Amethi, Auraiya, Ayodhya, Bahraich, Balrampur, 
Banda, Barabanki, Etawah, Farrukhabad, Fatehpur, 
Firozabad, Gonda, Hamirpur, Hardoi, Jalaun, Jhansi, 
Kannauj, Kanpur Dehat, Kanpur Nagar, Lakhimpur 
Kheri, Lalitpur, Lucknow, Mahoba, Mainpuri, Pilibhit, 
Raebareli, Shahjahanpur, Shrawasti, Sitapur, Unnao 
 Noida Agra, Aligarh, Amroha, Baghpat, Badaun, Bulandsahar, 
Etah, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Ghaziabad, Hapur, 
Hathras, Kasganj, Mathura, Meerut and Sambhal 
 Panchkula Ambala, Fatehabad, Hissar, Jind, Kaithal, Karnal, 
Kurukshetra, Panchkula, Sirsa and Yamunanagar and 
Himachal Pradesh, UT of Chandigarh, UT of Ladakh 
 Patna Bihar 
 Prayagraj Ambedkar Nagar, Azamgarh, Ballia, Basti, Bhadohi, 
Chandauli, Chitrakoot, Deoria, Ghazipur, Gorakhpur, 
Jaunpur, Kaushambi, Kushinagar, Maharajganj, Mau, 
Mirzapur, Pratapgarh, Prayagraj, Sant Kabir Nagar, 
Siddharth Nagar, Sonbhadra, Sultanpur, Varanasi 
 Pune Maharashtra, Goa, Daman & Diu, Dadra & Nagar Haveli 
 Raipur Chhattisgarh 
 Ranchi Jharkhand 
 Thiruvananthapuram Kerala & UT of Lakshadweep 
 Vijayawada Andhra Pradesh 
 
 
 

109 
 
1) 
 Details of 05 CBSE Sub-Regional Offices: 
S. 
No. 
City 
 Jurisdiction 
 
 Agartala 
 Tripura 
 
 Gangtok 
 Sikkim 
 
 Itanagar 
 Arunachal Pradesh 
 
 Shimla 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 
 Srinagar / Jammu 
 UT of Jammu & Kashmir (to be made functional) 
  
2.228 The current staff strength of CBSE as furnished by the CBSE is as under: -   
“With increase in the number of schools and candidates, posts are increased. 
For instance, CBSE has established Regional Offices and Sub -Regional 
Offices and accordingly, 346 posts were created. The establishment is 
periodically revised in line with the growth in the number of schools and 
candidates. Temporary shortfall, if any, is met by hiring contractual manpower 
through agency. Also, recruitment process for vacant post of direct recruitment 
has been initiated” 
 
 
GROUP-WISE SANCTIONED EXISTING & VACANCY POSITION OF THE BOARD 
S.No. 
 Group 
 Sanctioned 
 Existing 
 Vacancy 
1 
 ‘A’ 
 460 
 284 
 176 
2 
 ‘B’ 
 681 
 519* 
 162 
3 
 ‘C’ 
 976 
 381 
 595 
TOTAL 
 2117 
 1184 
 933 
 

110 
 
* Including 136 posts of Su perintendent for which appointment letters have already 
been issued. 
2.229  When asked about the criteria adopted for affiliation of Schools under 
Central Board of Secondary Education, the Representative of CBSE submitted 
following information: - “The Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) has 
established a set of Affiliation Bye -Laws to guide the process of affiliating schools 
both in India and abroad. Brief of policy adopted by the CBSE for affiliation is as 
under: 
“Documents required for affiliation for Independent Schools 
 No Objection Certificate from the State Education Department to seek 
affiliation with CBSE. 
 Recognition Certificate with its validity as on date, issued by concerned 
State Education Department as per extant rules and provisions  
contained in RTE Act- 2009. 
 Land Certificate issued not more than 1 year before the date of 
application. The Competent Authority to issue the land certificate is - 
DM/ADM/SDM / Tehsildar/ Naib – Tehsildar/ Registrar/ Sub -Registrar 
or any other equivalent authority competent to issue such certificate. 
 Fire Safety Certificate to be issued by the Govt. Fire Safety Department/ 
Authorised Officer of the Local Bodies such as Municipal Corporation 
as per prescribed norms with validity (validity as on date of fina l 
submission of application) in the name of school only. 
 Building Safety Certificate issued by an officer not below the rank of an 
Assistant Engineer of the Government works department. 
 Certificate of registration of Society OR Certificate of incorporation  of 
Company OR Copy of the registered trust deed running the school, 
issued by a competent Government authority. 
 Safe Drinking Water and Sanitary Condition Certificate to be issued by 
an officer not below the rank of an Assistant Engineer of the 
Government Public Health Department  (PHED)/ Authorised Officer of 

111 
 
the Local Body (Municipality) accompanied by a water test report of the 
school from a PHED Lab. 
Infrastructure and Land Requirements 
 Schools must have adequate land with proper documentation of land 
ownership or long-term lease. 
 Adequate classrooms, laboratories, library, and playground must be 
provided. 
 The land must be used solely for educational purposes, and the 
infrastructure should comply with CBSE's safety, hygiene, and accessibility 
standards. 
2.230 Staff Requirements 
 Schools must employ qualified teachers with
 appropriate academic qualifications and experience. 
 Teacher-student ratio must adhere to CBSE standards. 
a.  Affiliation for Schools Abroad 
 Indian schools abroad can apply for CBSE affiliation if they meet the 
standards set by CBSE. 
 The school must have approval from the Indian Embassy or Consulate 
in the respective country. 
2.231 Monitoring and Inspections 
 CBSE conducts regular inspections of affiliated schools to ensure they 
maintain required standards. 
 If schools fail to meet the standards, CBSE can impose penalties or 
withdraw affiliation. 
2.232 Disciplinary Action 
• CBSE can suspend or cancel the affiliation if a school does not comply with 
the bye-laws. 

112 
 
• Non-compliance may result in warnings, temporary suspension, or 
permanent withdrawal of affiliation. 
(xxvi)  Renewal of Affiliation 
2.233 Schools must apply for renewal of affiliation at regular intervals (usually 
every 5 years for permanent affiliation). The renewal is subject to continued 
compliance with CBSE standards.” 
 
 
2.234  State-wise list of CBSE affiliated Schools (Gov ernment & Private) in 
India and abroad as on 31.12.2025 are as under:  
State Government Govt. Aided Independent 
Andhra Pradesh 1089 0 408 
Assam 149 7 232 
Bihar 96 0 1250 
Gujarat 134 0 590 
Haryana 369 1 2172 
Himachal Pradesh 150 0 311 
Jammu & Kashmir 81 1 106 
Karnataka 149 0 1602 
Kerala 64 0 1409 
Madhya Pradesh 325 1 1390 
Maharashtra 179 3 1489 
Manipur 29 2 54 
Meghalaya 23 0 9 
Nagaland 26 1 19 
Odisha 478 0 408 
Punjab 136 11 1504 

113 
 
Country Government Independent 
Kenya 0 1 
Qatar 0 20 
Indonesia 0 1 
Rajasthan 261 47 1149 
Sikkim 232 6 17 
Tamil Nadu 66 2 1701 
Tripura 158 1 44 
Uttar Pradesh 326 4 4340 
Arunachal Pradesh 248 7 105 
Mizoram 25 0 0 
West Bengal 110 2 410 
Andaman & Nicobar 101 5 21 
Chandigarh 110 4 61 
Delhi 1139 251 848 
Goa 8 0 9 
Puducherry 134 1 48 
Dadar & Nagar Haveli 11 0 11 
Daman & Diu 12 2 4 
Lakshadweep 12 0 0 
Chattisgarh 156 0 486 
Jharkhand 211 1 522 
Uttarakhand 278 5 651 
Telangana 76 0 618 
Ladakh 137 0 17 
Total 7288 365 24015 

114 
 
Nepal 1 15 
United Arab Emirates 0 109 
Yemen 0 1 
Bahrain 0 8 
Bangladesh 0 1 
Malaysia 0 4 
Russia 1 0 
Iran 1 0 
Kuwait 0 22 
Oman 0 18 
Republic Of Benin 0 1 
Thailand 0 1 
Libya 0 2 
Myanmar 0 1 
Uganda 0 1 
Ethiopia 0 7 
Ghana 0 1 
Japan 0 2 
Nigeria 0 2 
Saudi Arabia 0 41 
Singapore 0 4 
Tanzania 0 2 
Total 03 265 
 
 
2.235 When asked about the details of process of affiliation of Government and 
private sector schools by CBSE and the ways of ensuring transparenc y in the 
affiliation process, the CBSE informed that Every School seeking affiliation of CBSE 
needs to apply for fresh affiliation of School through School Affiliation Re-engineering 
and Administration System (SARAS) Portal of CBSE (URL: 

115 
 
https://saras.cbse.gov.in/), through respective Tab for different categories in the 
SARAS Portal which is an automated system with no human intervention. The 
affiliation process is streamlined via an online system for real -time tracking of 
applications and status updates. 
 
  
2.236  Asked as to whether the affiliation criteria have been standardized to 
keep pace with the introduction of latest technological advancement s being 
introduced in CBSE affiliated schools, the representatives of the CBSE, submitted 
as under
: -
 
 
“Yes. All the schools affiliated with CBSE were directed to implement the 
following revised norms regarding mandatory digital infrastructure vide 
Circular dated 02.07.2025
: 
i. Availability of computers with internet connectivity 
ii. 01 (One) Computer System per 18 (eighteen) students (Desktops/Laptops) 
inter-connected with a single LAN network with audio -video input and output
  
(Webcam/Speakers etc.) with minimum of 40 such computer systems 
including above accessories in the school computer Lab must  be available in 
schools. Existing schools shall gradually enhance their infrastructure as per 
present guidelines. 
iii. Installation of Server 
iv. Server(s) - at least 01 computer system with high configuration to be used 
as a Server for Assessment/ Examination purposes. 
v. Data Backup provisions 
vi. Data backup devices – either Cloud-based or Physical (external Hard Disc 
Device – HDD) for all kinds of data storage. 
vii. Internet Connectivity 
viii. Lease line / Wi-Fi with high-speed internet connectivity. 
ix. Accessories 
x. At least 02 printers and 02 scanners per computer lab. 

116 
 
xi. UPS - Mandatory to support all computer systems in lab for providing power 
backup to ensure uninterrupted power supply. 
Licensed Softwares, including Anti-Virus and other Security Systems for the 
Digital infrastructure. 
xii. Smart Boards- for effective classroom transactions.” 
  
2.237  When asked about the policy of CBSE for annual and surprise 
inspection of affiliated schools, The CBSE furnished following reply:  
“As per Clause No. 11.2.1 of Affiliation Bye Laws 2018 “The Board may cause 
inspection of an affiliated School done at the time of extension or after 
specified periods any time during the affiliation period. The periodicity, of such 
inspections shall be determined by the Board from time to time.” 
Further, as per 11.4 of Affiliation Bye Laws 2018 “The Board may any time get 
an affiliated school inspected by a committee of one or more members without 
giving any notice to the school.” 
The Board, on the basis of the analysis of the historical registration data and 
on th e basis of complaints, conducts surprise inspections in the schools 
affiliated with the Board to ensure that the schools are following the norms of 
the Board. The Board also conducts inspection under the above -mentioned 
provisions on the receipt of the complaints depending on their veracity.” 
  
2.238  When asked about the annual and surprise inspections carried by 
CBSE in their affiliated schools during the last five years, the CBSE submitted 
following reply:-  
“The CBSE conducts annual as well as surprise inspection as and when 
required, under the provisions of its Affiliation Bye -laws. Further, under the 
provisions of Affiliation Bye - laws/SARAS manual CBSE conducts annual 
inspection of 3% schools against the number of applications received for 
extension of affiliation based on their school report cards.” 

117 
 
  
2.239 When asked about the rules existing for schools which violate affiliation norms, 
the representatives of the CBSE submitted that If a School is found violating the 
provisions of the Affiliation Bye Laws/Examinations Bye Laws of the Board or does 
not abide by the directions of the Board, the Board shall have powers to impose 
penalties as per Clause No. 12.1 of the Affiliation Bye -Laws 2018. The Board may 
impose all or any of the penalties mentioned in clauses on any school, in the following 
cases:  
 
 For gross malpractices in examination, academic, administrative and 
financial matters. 
 Established violation, non -compliance of Court, Central Government, 
State/UT Government or Board’s directions/ instructions. 
 Established violations of the conditions laid down in the affiliation byelaws. 
 Shortcoming in the essential requirements for affiliation laid down in the 
affiliation bye-laws detected at any stage. 
 On withdrawal of Recognition by the State Government. 
 On withdrawal of No Objection Certificate issued by the state Government. 
 On express recommendation/order/request from the Central, State/UT 
Government to disaffiliate, shut down the school permanently or impose any 
other penalty. 
 On a reference/order/request received from the Central, State/UT 
Government. 
 For not sending teachers/principal for the teacher trainings as per 
requirements of these byelaws. 
 For not nominating and relieving teachers/principal/staff for the evaluation of 
answer scripts of the Board’s examinations and other ancillary activities as 
per requirements of the Board. 
 Any misconduct, negligent act/omission and non -compliance of the 
examination byelaws (including the disobeyance of the directions of the board 
in connection with the conduct of examinations) which may jeopardize the 
public examinations, evaluation of answer books, the result processing 
thereof and other ancillary activities. 

118 
 
 Any violation, by employee(s) of the school or person(s) associated with the 
school management, who are under the control of the school or the 
Trust/Society/Company running the school, of any instructions express or 
implied, issued by the Board in connection with the conduct of public 
examinations, evaluation of answer books, the result processing thereof and 
other ancillary activities which has or could have jeopardized the public 
examinations, evaluation of answer books and the result processing thereof. 
 Any violation in connection with the duties and responsibilities by the School 
or the Head of the School or Trust/Society/Company which has established 
or running the school as given in these bye -laws or directions issued from 
time to time. 
 Any violation of the provision contained in clause 7.5 regarding refund of fees 
to the students. 
 Poor academic performance of the school for three consecutive years in not 
being able to keep at least 50 per cent of passes of the general pass 
percentage. 
 
 Any other matter which the Board considers sufficiently serious for imposition 
of penalty or disaffiliation.” 
  
2.240  Asked about the state wise details of the number of schools that have 
been found violating affiliation norms during these inspections and the action taken 
on these violations, the CBSE submitted following information: -  
“After annual as well as surprise inspection, CBSE initiates action against the 
schools found violating the Affiliation Norms including admitting dummy 
students. The list of schools against whom action was taken as per the 
violation found during the inspections is attached at Annexure 25 (Annexure – 
34 of the original)” 
  
2.241  Asked about the steps being taken to control the menace of dummy 
students in CBSE affiliated schools, the CBSE furnished following information: -  

119 
 
“The Board has laid down the follo wing provisions in its Affiliation Bye Laws -
2018 and Examination Bye laws of the Board to ensure that the students 
attend regular classes in their schools: 
Clause 14.2.3 of the Affiliation Bye -Laws of the Board stipulates that “No 
affiliated school shall present the candidates to the Board’s examination who 
are enrolled in an unaffiliated School/Branch.” 
Clause 14.2.4 of the Affiliation Bye -Laws of the Board provides that “No 
affiliated school shall present the candidates to the Board’s examination who 
are on its roll but have not attended the school regularly or do not meet the 
requirement of minimum attendance for appearance in the Board’s 
examination.” 
Clause 6.5 of Examination Bye -Laws of the Board stipulated that “…. the 
candidate shall complete the required percentage of attendance (75%) for 
Class IX, X, XI & XII as per Examination Bye Laws of the Board to make him/ 
her eligible for the examinations.” 
AND Clause 13.1(i) of Examination Bye-Laws of the Board stipulated that “…. 
Candidates taking up a subject(s) involving practical shall also be required to 
have put in at least 75% of the total attendance for practical work in the subject 
in the laboratory. Heads of Institutions shall not allow a candidate who has 
offered subject(s) involving practical t o take the practical examination(s) 
unless the candidate fulfils the attendance requirements as given in this Rule.” 
It is mandatory for all the CBSE affiliated school to follow the Affiliation Bye -
laws and Examination Bye Laws of the Board mutatis mutandis. 
In the year 2024 & 2025, registration data/ LoC data of students of classes IX, 
X, XI and XII of various schools has been analyzed by the Board and 
abnormalities in the data of a few schools have been found. On this basis of 
this data, surprise inspection of these schools had been conducted by Board. 
As reported by the Inspection Committee, some of these schools were found 
indulged in the practice of sponsoring non attending students. 
Hence, after issuing Show Cause Notices to these schools and consideri ng 
their replies which were not found satisfactory, action against all these schools 

120 
 
have been taken by the Board in accordance with the provisions of Affiliation 
Bye-Laws of the Board, which includes disaffiliation of schools, down 
gradation, restriction of Sections and imposition of financial penalty.” 
  
2.242  The Committee asked whether availability of eligible teachers is a 
criterion for affiliation of schools by CBSE and the process followed by CBSE to check 
documents to ascertain eligibility of teacher in affiliated schools, the representatives 
of CBSE submitted following information: -  
“Yes, availability of eligible/ qualified teachers is an explicit and important 
criterion in CBSE’s affiliation and CBSE requires documentation relating to 
teachers as part of its compliance and inspection process. The minimu m 
qualifications for teaching staff should be in accordance with the provisions 
laid down by NCTE, or as laid down in the Recruitment Rules for teacher by 
the Appropriate Government where the school is situated or the Recruitment 
Rules for the teachers of Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan or Navodaya 
Vidyalaya Samiti. Teaching and non-teaching staff should be appointed on pay 
scales and allowances prescribed by the appropriate government.” 
  
2.243  Asked as to whether any mechanism is available for the parents t o 
check educational qualification of teachers in CBSE affiliated schools, the Board 
submitted that Parents can check the educational qualifications of teachers on 
website of CBSE affiliated schools as CBSE makes this information part of Mandatory 
Public Disclosure.  
  
2.244 The Committee enquired about the steps taken by the CBSE to ensure 
Teacher Pupil ratio in their affiliated schools, the CBSE submitted following 
information: 
“School affiliated with CBSE required to submit data related to their teachers 
and students on OASIS portal which is official CBSE digital database/portal 
used to manage and monitor information about CBSE-affiliated schools.” 
  

121 
 
(xvii) 
 Development of Curriculum and syllabi for examination 
2.245  The Committee enquired as to w hether CBSE has developed new 
curriculum for various grades as per NEP and the salient features of such curriculum, 
the CBSE submitted following reply:  
“CBSE has prescribed curriculum for classes IX -XII in alignment with NEP -
2020 and NCF-2023. 
Salient features include: 
i. Competency-based curriculum focusing on conceptual understanding, 
application, and higher-order thinking skills. 
ii. Alignment with the 5+3+3+4 curricular structure,
 ensuring age-appropriate progression of learning. 
iii. Emphasis on experiential, inquiry-based, and multidisciplinary learning, 
including integration of arts, sports, and vocational skills. 
iv. Reduction of content load by prioritising core concepts and essential 
learning outcomes. 
v. Promotion of flexibility in subject choices, especially at  the secondary 
stage. 
vi. Shift towards formative and assessment -for-learning approaches, 
supported by clear learning indicators and rubrics. 
vii. Integration of Indian Knowledge Systems, life skills, values, and 21st -
century competencies.” 
  
2.246  On a further qu ery whether CBSE has developed new syllabi for 10th 
and 12th examinations as per NEP and the salient features of the new syllabi for 
upcoming examinations, the CBSE submitted following information: -  
“CBSE prescribes NCERT textbooks compulsorily for class es IX -XII and 
reviews syllabi with changes in textbooks published by NCERT. The Board will 
revise its syllabi as and when NCERT textbooks of these classes will be 

122 
 
available. However, the current syllabi are in broad agreement with NEP-2020 
salient features of which include: 
i. Clear articulation of learning outcomes and competencies to be 
assessed. 
ii. Rationalisation of content to reduce rote learning and examination 
stress. 
iii. Greater focus on conceptual clarity, analytical ability, and real -life 
application. 
iv. Increased weightage to competency -based questions in Board 
examinations. 
v. Scope for interdisciplinary connections and contextual learning. 
vi. Alignment of curriculum, pedagogy, and assessment to ensure 
coherence and continuity. 
CBSE continues to issue timely academic circulars, sample question papers, 
and teacher support materials to facilitate smooth transition and effective 
implementation in schools.” 
  
2.247 When asked as to whether CBSE has issued any guidelines for use of NCERT 
books in affiliated schools, the CBSE furnished following replies: -  
“CBSE has issued Notification No. CBSE/Aff./Circular/2024/00976, dated 
12.08.2024, regarding the provisions for the use of textbooks. According to this 
notification: 
For Classes- I to VIII Schools are strongly adv ised to follow NCERT/ SCERT 
textbooks. Schools may use supplementary material as per their requirement 
which must be aligned with the NCF -FS and NCF -SE. Such chosen 
supplementary material must aim to contain the essential core material 
(together with discussion, analysis, examples, and applications). 
For Classes- IX to XII Schools shall mandatorily follow the NCERT textbooks 
prescribed in CBSE curriculum. For subjects in which NCERT/ SCERT books 

123 
 
are not available, CBSE books uploaded on the website must be followed. 
Schools can use supplementary material as per their requirement. Use of 
Digital Content can also be explored to augment the textbooks. The 
supplementary material and Digital Content used by the school must invariably 
be aligned with NCF-SE.” 
  
(xxviii) Conduct of Board Examination 
2.248 The details of registered and appearing students for Board examination 
conducted by CBSE is as under: -  
SECONDARY SCHOOL EXAMINATION (CLASS X) RESULT 2025 
Overall Pass Percentage (Full Subjects) 
Year 
 Registered 
 Appeared 
 passed 
 Pass% 
 Increase in pass% 
2024 
 2251812 
 2238827 
 2095467 
 93.60 
 0.06 % 
2025 
 2385079 
 2371939 
 2221636 
 93.66 
SENIOR SCHOOL CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION (CLASS XII) RESULT 2025 
  
2.249  Other Examination conducted by CBSE in addition to Board 
Examination are:- 
1. CTET 
2. JNVST exam for Class VI, IX & XI 
3. Other recruitment examinations 
Overall Pass Percentage (Full Subjects) 
Year 
 Registered 
 Appeared 
 passed 
 Pass% 
 Increase in pass% 
2024 
 1633730 
 1621224 
 1426420 
 87.98 
 0.41 % 
2025 
 1704367 
 1692794 
 1496307 
 88.39 

124 
 
  
2.250  When asked about  the reason for a sharp decline in number of 
registrations from 10th to 12 th and steps taken by the CBSE to increase the number 
of schools offering senior school certifications examination, the CBSE submitted that 
CBSE schools have been increasing in number as more schools are being affiliated 
with the Board showing an upward trend.  
  
2.251  Asked as to how the technology is being used by CBSE to monitor 
registration of candidates, conduct of exams, issue of admit cards and other aspects, 
the CBSE furnished following information: -  
“Pariksha Sangam is a major digital initiative by the Central Board of 
Secondary Education (CBSE) that brings almost all examination -related 
processes into one integrate online platform from registration/LoC to result and 
post-exam services making the system more streamlined, transparent and 
efficient. These are:- 
1. Registration/List of Candidates 
 Schools register students of class IX & XI and fill List of Candidates 
(LOC) for class X & XII through the portal. 
 It includes modules for Children with Special Needs (CWSN) to register 
and specify accommodations or exemptions online. 
 Online correction window is provided to the schools to make corrections 
within allowed windows. 
2. Admit Cards & Pre-Exam Activities 
 Admit cards are generated through the portal. 
 Pre-exam activities like roll number allocation, centre allocation and 
corrections are integrated and visible. 
3. Exam Conduct & Monitoring 

125 
 
 Centralized features help manage and track exam -related requests 
between schools, regional offices and headquarters, reducing manual follow -
ups through CMTM apps 
4. Result Declaration & Post-Exam Services 
 Students can view CBSE results via Digi locker and NIC Result 
websites 
 Post exam activities like obtaining of photocopy of answer sheets and 
re-evaluation or verification or both requests are handled through the online 
portal.” 
 
 
2.252  When asked as to CBSE charges any fee from students for board 
examination, the CBSE furnished following information: -  
FEES DETAILS 2026 Examinations 
Fee Slab 
 Examination Fee to be remitted per student in INR 
 
 India 
 Nepal 
 Other Countries 
 
 Class X & XII 
 Class X & XII 
 Class X & XII 
 
 
Normal fee 
1600/- per candidate for 
05 subjects 
5500/- per 
Candidate for 05 
subjects 
11,000/- per candidate for 05 subjects 
320/- per subject per 
candidate for additional 
Subjects 
1100/- per subject 
 2200/- per subject per candidate for 
additional subjects 
With Late 
fee 
Late Fee of 2000/- per candidate in addition to the normal fee prescribed above 
 
Practical Fee 
For Class XII only 
 
 160/ per practical subject per candidate for schools in India. 
 
 175/ per practical subject per candidate for schools in Nepal. 

126 
 
 
 375/ per practical subject per candidate for schools in other 
countries. 
Visually 
Impaired 
Candidates 
Visually Impaired candidates are 
exempted from payment of examination fees for class X and XII. 
 
2.253  Asked as to whether any relaxation of examination fee is provided for 
children from disadvantageous section of society the CBSE submitted that the 
Registration and Examination fee levied by CBSE is nominal and at par for all 
students in schools affiliated with CBSE. 
  
 
2.254  When asked about the new initiatives being planned by CBSE for 
conduct of examination and promotion of futuristic education in the affiliated schools, 
the CBSE replied as under: -  
“In so far as the promotion of futuristic education in the affiliated schools is 
concerned 
 As per provision of NEP 2020, CBSE has decided to conduct Class X board 
exams twice a year from 2025 –26 session. This aims to reduce stress, give 
students multiple opportunities to succeed and align assessments more with 
learning than one high- stakes test. 
 Board’s ongoing pursuits reflect a concerted push to make school education 
more future -ready, stude nt-centric, and aligned with global developments, 
while remaining rooted in the context of India’s NEP 2020. 
 Board has been conducting orientation program jointly with the help of NCERT 
and UNESCO on various aspects of health and wellness under Ayushmann 
Bharat Mission initiated by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare along 
with Ministry of Education. It aims to bring health and life skills education to the 
heart of school ecosystem. 

127 
 
 CBSE is working on the Training Intervention Framework Solution (TIFS ) a 
multi- tiered stakeholder ecosystem designed to : 
a. Create an integrated framework for strengthening the training life cycle in 
respect of all teachers and schools 
b. Identify training needs using robust data analytics, and school level insights 
c. Establishing content development and procurement policy to meet diverse 
training needs 
d. Facilitate scalable digitized ERP process for training life-cycle management” 
  
(xxix)  Promotion of Skill Education 
2.255  The Committee enquired about the policy of CBSE to incorporate Skill 
Education in CBSE affiliated schools. In this regard, the CBSE informed as given 
under: -  
i. “Alignment with National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 
“CBSE’s Skill Education policy is aligned with the National Education Policy 
(NEP) 2020, which focuses on integrating vocational and skill -based 
learning into school education to equip students with real -world 
competencies and 21st-century skills. In pursuance of this, CBSE is: 
 Expanding the offer ing of Skill Subjects and Skill Modules across the 
middle, secondary, and senior secondary stages. 
 Promoting experiential learning through hands -on activities, project work, 
and practical engagement to enhance employability, entrepreneurship, and 
life skills. 
 CBSE encourages schools to participate in skill -oriented events such as 
Skill Expos, Guidance Festivals, exposure visits, training workshops, and 
conferences to bridge the gap between education and industry, and to 
provide schools with exposure to real-life skills, emerging occupations, and 
contemporary pedagogical practices.” 

128 
 
ii. Introduction of Skill Subjects & Modules 
CBSE has introduced structured Skill Education offerings: 
Kaushal Bodh/Skill Modules (Classes VI-VIII) 
Implementation of Kaushal Bodh for Classes VI–VIII: Kaushal Bodh is a 
skill-based, experiential learning framework introduced by NCERT and 
adopted by CBSE in alignment with NEP 2020. It integrates vocational 
exposure and life skills at the middle- school stage to help students develop 
respect for the dignity of labour, acquire foundational vocational 
competencies, and gain exposure to the world of work. 
Under this framework, CBSE has introduced short Skill Modules of 
approximately 12 –15 hours each for Classes VI –VIII, with a strong 
emphasis on hands-on and practical learning. Students may opt for multiple 
modules sequentially, and schools may offer these through regular classes, 
hobby clubs, or skill clubs. 
Skill Subjects (Classes IX-XII) 
 CBSE has also rolled out Skill Subjects for Classes IX /X and XI/XII with a 
wide variety of vocational options (e.g., Artificial Intelligence, Information 
technology, Retail, Geospatial Technology, Design Thinking & Innovation, 
Electronics & Hardware etc ). 
 Schools do not have to pay any fee or seek special permission to introduce 
these subjects; they just update details in the CBSE OASIS portal. 
iii. Incorporation into Affiliated Schools- Composite Skill Labs 
 To ensure effective and practical delivery of Skill Education, CBSE has 
mandated the establishment of a Composite Skill Lab in all CBSE-affiliated 
schools. This lab serves as a common, multi -purpose facility to support 
hands-on training for Kaushal Bodh 
(Classes VI–VIII), Skill Modules, and Skill Subjects at the Secondary and 
Senior Secondary levels. 

129 
 
 The lab should be equipped with worktables, storage units, basic hand tools, 
consumables, safety equipment, and ICT facilities, enabling students to 
perform practical activities safely and effectively across multiple skill 
domains.” 
  
2.256  Asked as to how the CBSE is ensuring availability of adequate 
infrastructure for imparting skill education in CBSE affiliated schools, CBSE submitted 
following information:  
“CBSE ensures the availability of adequate infrastructure for imparting Skill 
Education in its affiliated schools by mandating the establishment of 
Composite Skill Labs with essential tools, equipment, and safety provisions.” 
 These labs are a requirement for new affiliations and are to be created by 
existing schools within a stipulated timeline. 
 CBSE also provides flexibility to schools to optimally utilize existing facilities, 
share resources, and collaborate with nearby institutions, industries, and Skill 
Hubs to support effective hands-on and experiential skill-based learning.” 
  
(xxx) Capacity building of Teacher of affiliated schools 
2.257  Asked about the mechanism has been devised by CBSE for capacity 
building of teachers of related schools, CBSE submitted following information: - 
“Mechanism for Capacity Building of Teacher in CBSE 
i. CBSE has created a structured teacher professional development ecosystem 
that operates through multiple components. Every school has a login for 
sponsoring its teachers for the CBP through a dedicated training portal. 
ii. CBPs include subject-wise and generic pedagogical modules such as STEM, 
value education, competency -based assessment and various other topics in 
alignment with the NEP 2020, NCFFS and NCFSE. 
iii. CBSE has established Centres of Excellence which act as key delivery centres 
for professional developm ent activities for affiliated schools. Schools are 
expected to nominate a Training Nodal Coordinator to manage all training 

130 
 
records and activities. Schools, CoEs in consultation with the District Training 
Coordinators engage themselves in: 
a. Identifying Training needs, Designing and implementing the annual 
training calendar; 
b. Coordinating with Schools and individual teachers for programme 
participation; 
c. Providing feedback on programme quality. 
iv. CBSE Training Unit in HQ oversees capacity building programmes and 
monitors the functioning of CoEs, and ensures compliance on the part of 
schools for Training. It collaborates with different organisations / institutions for 
augmenting the training activities across the regions. 
v. As per Affiliation Bye -Laws, each affiliated school must implement a training 
calendar for teachers. The compliance of the prescribed training norms is 
tracked and examined at the time of affiliation renewal etc.” 
 The details of programs conducted by CBSE for capacity building of 
teacher of completed school during the last five years are as under: -  
  
Training Data for last five years 
Year Offline Training Online Training Total Total 
 
 
  
 Number of 
training 
Number of 
Participant 
Number of 
training 
Number of 
Participant 
Training Participant 
2021 0 0 11473 4039425 11473 4039425 
2022 1259 68694 7556 5300510 8815 5369204 
2023 7105 349993 6630 328761 13735 678754 
2024 8222 405174 989 323901 9211 729075 
2025 11126 586573 374 162814 11500 749387 
 27712 1410434 27022 10155411 54734 11565845 

131 
 
2.258  Asked as to whether the CBSE charges fee for conducting programs 
for capacity building of teacher of affiliated school, the CBSE submitted following 
information: -  
“As per CBSE Affiliation Bye -laws, affiliated school must remit a Training fee 
to CBSE for the in-service training of teachers/principals. This fee supports the 
capacity- building mechanism overall. The Board is offering all its capacity 
building program entirely free for the teachers and principals of the government 
schools. However, the Board charges a nominal fee of Rs.700/ - per Teacher 
for a CBP of one day to meet its expenditure for engagement of the resource 
persons and the venue arrangement.” 
  
2.259  On being enquired about the steps taken by the CBSE for development 
of new pedagogical methods as per requirements of NEP 2020, the CBSE furnished 
following information: -  
 CBSE is transforming teaching and learning practices as part of 
comprehensive effort to fulfil the vision of NEP 2020 by equipping teachers 
with new pedagogical frameworks that cater to diverse learner needs and 
21st-century educational goals. 
 New Capacity Building Programmes: CBSE has launched several new CBPs 
specifically designed to help teachers develop modern pedagogical skills 
required under NEP 2020. These CBPs equip teachers with practical 
strategies and tools that promote critical thinking, experiential learning, and 
effective subject pedagogy - shifting away from traditional lecture -based 
methods. They focus on innovative classroom strategies, competency -
based assess ment, learning through sports, and other subject -specific 
pedagogies. 
 Modules on Structured teaching approaches for languages, Competency -
based assessment methods for Science, Mathematics, and Social Science, 
STEM teaching techniques, and Integration of creative and inclusive learning 
practices have been added. The Board’s aim is to make pedagogy 
developmentally appropriate and reinforce NEP goals of holistic and child -

132 
 
centric learning. Pedagogical Shifts promoted by CBSE support the following 
pedagogical priorities: 
 Learner-centric and activity-based learning 
 Competency and skill orientation in teaching and assessment 
 Integration of interdisciplinary and experiential learning 
 Integration of value education, sports, arts, and life skills 
 Reduction in rote le arning and shift towards critical thinking and problem -
solving 
 Enhanced Training Formulation: Board has scaled up its regular training 
sessions covering wide -range of topics. The issues like adolescent 
education, student-centred teaching approaches, and re flective practices - 
which encourage collaborative and context -responsive pedagogy are 
covered. The focus is on building teacher capacity in assessment design and 
classroom practices that go beyond memorisation. This initiative is directly 
aligned with NEP ’s shift toward regular, formative, and competency -based 
assessment systems.” 
 (Classes VI–VIII), Skill Modules, and Skill Subjects at the Secondary and 
Senior Secondary levels. 
 The lab should be equipped with worktables, storage units, basic hand tools, 
consumables, safety equipment, and ICT facilities, enabling students to 
perform practical activities safely and effectively across multiple skill 
domains. 
  

133 
 
Part-II 
Recommendation No. 1 
Increasing the public expenditure on education sector from 4.1 to 6% of GDP 
The Committee note that one of the primary objectives of the N ew Education 
Policy 2020 is to increase public expenditure on education to 6% of the Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP). The Committee however note that the current combined 
spending by the Centre and States stands at only 4.1% of the GDP, re flecting a 
persistent shortfall as NEP 2020 reaches its final year of implementation.  The Union 
Budget 2026 -27 provided an allocation of ₹1,39,286 crore to the Ministry of 
Education, which represents an 8.27% increase over the previous year.  The 
Committee further note that the budget share  of the total budgetary allocation for 
the Department of School Education and Literacy (DoSEL) during the year 2024-25 
was only 1.52% out of 4.1% of the GDP on education sector. The Committee feel 
that education forms the foundation for national growth, development, and the 
creation of a vast pool of literate and educated citizens is essential for the growth 
of the nation. The Committee, therefore, desire that the budgetary allocation should 
be adequate to meet the multi -layered challenges of expanding infrastructure, 
improving educational outcomes, and strengthening the overall quality of Indian 
education. 
The Committee , therefore, strongly recommend the Ministry of Education  to 
establish a dedicated, time-bound financial roadmap that requires both the Centre 
and the States to scale up their educational spending. To bridge the GDP gap, the 
Ministry should move away from marginal incremental budgeting and ensure a 
mandatory annual baseline increase of 10% in the education budget to gradually 
converge with the 6% GDP target.  As the second phase of the National Education 

134 
 
Policy enters the pipeline, the Committee further recommend for the creation of a 
specialised, non-lapsable educat ion fund  to secure  long-term infrastructure 
creation, digital expansion and inclusive education across consecutive fiscal years 
without the risk of budget expiration.  
  

135 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
Utilisation of funds for RTE entitlements by various States 
The Committee note that education is placed in the Concurrent List of the 
Constitution, with most schools under the jurisdiction of State Governments and 
Union Territory Administrations. State Governments and Union Territories are 
therefore responsible for  implementing the provisions of the  Right to Education 
Act, 2009 and the New Education Policy. The Committee observe that the release of 
the Centre’s share of funds depends on submission of utilisation certificates, 
expenditure Statements, audit reports, release of the matching State share, and the 
availability of budgetary resources at the Budget Estimate and Revised Estimate 
stages.   
The Committee would like to emphasize that timely availability of funds is 
crucial for the smooth implementation of th e free and compulsory education to 
children aged 6 to 14 years. At the same time, the Ministry should establish a strict 
monitoring mechanism to oversee utilisation of funds, while ensuring that the flow 
of resources is not restricted. 
 
  

136 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
Entitlements under the RTE Act to reach the target beneficiaries in time 
The Committee are concerned to note that physical targets for entitlements 
under the RTE Act were not achieved in 2024–25 in Bihar, Delhi, Haryana, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Kerala, Odisha, and Punjab. In these States and UTs, many students did 
not receive free uniforms and other amenities. The Committee further observe that 
slow fund utilisation in some cases may be linked to State-level functioning and the 
continuity of officers dealing with Centrally Sponsored Schemes in some States for 
speedy implementation of the programmes is also needed.  
The Committee therefore recommend that the Ministry to strengthen its 
monitoring to ensure that entitlements reach all eligible students in all the States 
without delay, and no child is deprived of their rightful share in education. 
 
  

137 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
To strengthen Coordination mechanism between centre and State 
The Committee recognize that the successful implementation of the New 
Education Policy requires a wide range of initiatives to be carried out in a 
coordinated and systematic manner by multiple agencies. These include the 
Ministry of Education, State Governments and Union Territory Administrations, 
State Education Departments, Boards, and regulatory bodies such as NCERT, 
NIOS, NCTE, CBSE, SCERT, along with schools themselves. The Committee further 
note that with the majority of schools under the administrative control of State and 
UT Governments, the primary responsibility for implementing NEP 2020 rests with 
the State and UT Governments. The Committee are, however, of the view that the 
Ministry of Education particularly the Department of School Education and Literacy 
has an important role to play for the successful implementation of the New 
Education Policy. The Committee emphasize that effective implementation requires 
joint efforts and shared responsibilities. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the Ministry should work in close partnership with State and UT Governments and 
strengthen coordination mechanisms among all Ministries and agencies involved, 
ensuring that schemes are executed smoothly with collaboration of all stakeholders 
in a time bound manner. 
  

138 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
Malpractices at State level in fund utilisation 
The Committee take a serious view of the financial malpractices and 
embezzlement cases reported in implementation of SSA  in West Bengal, 
Maharashtra, Assam, Uttar Pradesh, Kerala, and Bihar, where several investigations 
have remained pending for years , some since 2010 -11. The Committee urge t he 
Ministry to institute a rigorous monitoring protocol demanding mandatory, timely 
Action-Taken Reports and take proactive resolution of these long -standing legal 
cases. To ensure continuous administrative accountability and counter the lack of 
independent oversight, the Ministry m ay establish permanent, third -party 
observation panels at the district level to verify physical and digital progress.  
 
 

139 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
Modifications required before launch of Samgra Shiksha Scheme 2.0 
The Committee have thoroughly examined the NITI Aayog third-party evaluation 
regarding the implementation of the New Education Policy (NEP) 2020. Some of the 
parameters covered under the third-party evaluation are relevance, effectiveness, 
efficiency, sustainability, impact, equity and coherence .  The Committee note that 
proactive initiatives are already underway and shall be further undertaken to 
strengthen critical areas identi fied in the evaluation while revising the scheme 
guidelines for its next phase of implementation. The Committee are of the view that 
while policy formulation, curriculum restructuring via the 5+3+3+4 design, and 
digital rollouts like DIKSHA and SWAYAM PRABHA have laid a robust foundation, 
severe systemic gaps in efficiency, equity, and sustainability threaten long-term 
viability. 
The Committee feel that there is a need for overhauling of the Ministry’s school 
education initiatives as the flagship Samagra Shiksha scheme transitions into its 
next phase beyond 2025-26. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry 
immediately integrate NITI Aayog's evaluative insights into the upcoming scheme 
guidelines and consider district -level allocations that address wide regional 
disparities in digital rollouts, inclusive infrastructure, teachers’ shortages, minority 
outreaches, etc. as identified in the Third-Party Audit.  
  

140 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
Universalization and Structural Strengthening of Early Childhood Care and 
Education (ECCE) 
The Committee note that NEP 2020 recognises 3 years of preschool (Bal 
Vatika) as a part of the educational continuum, in the 5+3+3+4 structure where the 
foundational stage is 3 years of preschool and Grade 1&2. The Committee are glad 
to note that as per UDISE 2024-25 data, the preschool areas have expanded rapidly.   
After convergence efforts with the Ministry of Women and Child Development, out 
of 9,11,035 Government and Government aided schools with Grade 1, a total of 
4,81,004 schools (52.79%) have some form of pre-education facility.  496 functional 
Bal Vatikas are also already operational across Kendriya Vidyalayas (KVS).  
However, nearly half (47.21%) of the primary school network still lacks preschool 
facilities. 
The Committee note that the success of the foundational stage heavily relies 
on the capacity, training, and synchronization of its grassroots human resources. 
While the training of 1.69 lakh Early Childhood Care and Education (ECCE) teachers 
via NCERT’s online NISHTHA program is an encouraging step, it is vastly 
inadequate in comparison to the massive scale of the underlying childcare 
infrastructure, which features over 14.03 lakh Anganwadi Centres and 13.36 lakh 
Anganwadi Workers serving nearly 8.98 crore beneficiaries as of March 2026. The 
Committee view the current disparity in administrative coordination across States 
with concern, noting that while 22 States/UTs have initiated joint activities between 
Anganwadi Workers (AWWs) and primary school teachers, only 7 States/UTs have 
actually conducted unified joint training programs.  

141 
 
To address these ga ps, the Committee strongly urge  the Ministry of 
Education, to formulate a time -bound, phased roadmap to equip the remaining 
47.21% of primary schools with functional Balvatikas in coordination with the Joint 
Task Force for ECCE (established in September 2021) and provid e all the 
Government and Government aided schools in the country with preschool 
education facility, ensuring a seamless e ducational continuum from preschool till 
Grade 2 nationwide. The Committee also strongly recommend that the Ministry of 
Education immediately expedite the formulation and rollout of the customized 
ECCE training modules currently under consideration for Ang anwadi workers. 
Furthermore, the Ministry should work closely with the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development (MoWCD) to mandate and fund standardized, joint training groups 
across all 36 States and UTs to bridge the pedagogical gap between frontline care  
workers and formal primary school educators. 
  

142 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
Implementation of the NIPUN Bharat Mission 
The Committee note that the Government of India have launched the National 
Initiative for Proficiency in Reading with Understanding and Numeracy (NIPUN) 
Bharat in July 2021 as a national mission to ensure that every child attains 
foundational literacy and numeracy skills by the end of Grade 2, by the academic 
year 2026-27. The Committee agree that mastering basic reading, writing, and math 
by the end of Grade 2 is absolutely necessary for a child's future education. The 
Committee appreciate the Ministry of Education for launching the NIPUN Bharat 
Mission since July 2021, which includes the 12 -week Vidya Pravesh  school 
preparation program that has helped over 4.2 crore children across 8.94 lakh 
schools. The Committee also note the initiatives by the Ministry for introducing 
creative learning tools like the physical and digital Jaadui Pitara available in 22 
languages and school lessons printed in 121 local languages. Backed by training 
for 15.45 lakh teachers on the digital DIKSHA platform, these efforts have 
successfully modernized early classrooms and driven higher student test scores in 
the national survey of December 2024, with rural students actually performing 
better than urban students. 
To maintain the mission’s progress and address existing challenges, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry adopt the block-level monitoring approach 
used in the State Educational Achievement Survey (SEAS -2023). Using this data, 
the Ministry should design targeted remedial measures and State-specific teacher 
training programs, especially to address learning gaps in urban primary schools. 
The Committee a lso recommend the complete implementation of the student 
tracking system that combines the Holistic Progress Card (HPC) and the Automated 

143 
 
Permanent Academic Account Registry (APAAR) under the “One Nation, One 
Student ID” initiative.  The Ministry may keep the Committee apprised of all the 
progress made for successful implementation of the NIPUN. 
Despite these notable achievements, the Committee observe that there is 
substantial financial underutilization reported on the PRABANDH portal for 
Financial Year 20 24-25. Out of a total approved national budgetary outlay of 
₹3,02,926.82 lakh earmarked within the Samagra Shiksha framework for NIPUN 
Bharat, the actual expenditure stands at only ₹1,84,707.58 lakh. In many States/UTs 
like Assam, Delhi, Goa, Gujarat, Kera la, Lakshadweep, Sikkim, Punjab, Rajasthan, 
Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, utilisation of funds has been very low. The 
Committee observe that such underutilisation of funds is in direct contradiction of 
the "critical and urgent national priority" status accorded to FLN under National 
Education Policy (NEP) 2020. The Committee therefore, recommend the Ministry to 
thoroughly analyse the systemic bottlenecks causing these implementation delays 
at the State and UT levels. 
  

144 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
Achieving greater participation of girls in School education 
The Committee note that the Department of School Education and Literacy 
(DoSEL), Ministry of Education is implementing the Scheme of Samagra Shiksa, 
effective from 2018 -19, for universalization of quality education throughout the 
country in coordination with the States and UTs.  One of the major objectives of 
Samagra Shiksa is to bridge gender and social category gaps at all levels of school 
education in the country.  The Committee also note that to ensure greater 
participation of girls in school education, the Ministry has taken various measures, 
such as free uniform and text-books to girls upto Class VIII, stipend to Children with 
Special Needs ( CwSN) girls from Class I to XII, separate toilets for girls, teachers 
sensitization programmes to promote girls’ participation, gender -sensitive 
teaching-learning materials including text books, etc.  There is also a provision for 
Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalayas (KGBVs) which are residential schools for girls 
from Class VI to XII from age group 10-18 years belonging to disadvantaged groups 
such as SC, ST, OBC, etc.  While appreciating the Ministry for taking various 
interventions to ensure greater participation of girls in school education, the 
Committee would like to urge the Ministry to continue to identify various barriers 
and formulate policies to achieve greater participation of girls in school education. 
  

145 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
Provision of free books and uniforms till higher secondary to the economically 
weaker sections and socially disadvantaged groups 
The Committee note that under the Samagra Shiksha Scheme, financial 
assistance of ₹600 per child is provided for free uniforms to students of Classes I 
to VIII, while assistance for free textbooks is provided at the rate of ₹250 per child 
for Classes I to V and ₹400 per child for Classes VI to VIII. The Committee, however, 
observe that the amount of financial assistance provided under the Scheme has not 
been revised in consonance with inflation and the prevailing market prices of 
uniforms and textbooks, thereby diminishing the real value of the assistance over 
time. The Committee further observe that the Gross Enrolment Ratio declines 
significantly at the transition from middle to secondary and from secondary to 
higher secondary education. One of the reasons  for this may be the increasing 
financial burden on economically weaker families in meeting the cost of uniforms, 
textbooks and other educational necessities. 
The Committee recommend that the Ministry of Education put in place a 
mechanism for revising the financial assistance provided towards free uniforms 
and textbooks at least once every two years by taking into account inflation and the 
prevailing market prices. This would ensure that the assistance remains realistic, 
adequate and effective in meeting th e actual educational needs of students.  The 
Committee further recommend that the Ministry must examine the feasibility of 
extending the benefit of free uniforms and free textbooks to students studying 
beyond Class VIII, particularly to those students belonging to economically weaker 
and disadvantaged sections. The Committee are of the view that such support 
would reduce the financial burden on families, encourage students to continue their 

146 
 
education at the secondary and higher secondary levels, improve rete ntion and 
transition rates, and ultimately contribute to enhancing the Gross Enrolment Ratio. 
  

147 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
Special Training Centres for migrant labours in all the States 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Education has made provisions for 
the education of children of migrant labourers through special training courses to 
bring out-of-school children back into the formal education system under Samagra 
Shiksha Scheme. States/UTs are required to conduct enrolment drives and 
household surveys to identify school dropouts, out-of-school children and children 
of migrant labourers. The Committee further appreciate that financial assistance of 
up to ₹6,000 per child per annum for non-residential courses and ₹20,000 per child 
per annum for residential courses is provided under the Scheme. As per the 
information provided by the Ministry, the total number of migrant children enrolled 
during 2024-25 was 21,49,258 in the country.  The Committee however, observe that 
the distribution of Special Training Centres across the country is highly uneven. 
Out of a total of 939 Special Training Centres, Gujarat accounts for 629 centres, 
Maharashtra for 156 centres, and Assam for 98 centres, wh ile several States such 
as Bihar, Karnataka, Telangana, Tripura and West Bengal do not have any such 
centres. The Committee are of the view that this uneven distribution does not 
adequately reflect the widespread presence of migrant labourers across differ ent 
States and may adversely affect the access of migrant children to quality education 
in States where no centres have been established. 
The Committee recommend the Ministry of Education to undertake a 
comprehensive review of the distribution of Special T raining Centres under the 
Samagra Shiksha Scheme to ensure their equitable presence across all States and 
Union Territories based on the actual concentration and movement of migrant 
labourers and out -of-school children. The Ministry should prioritise the 

148 
 
establishment of Special Training Centres in States presently lacking such 
facilities, particularly Bihar, Karnataka, Telangana, Tripura and West Bengal, while 
periodically reassessing the requirement for additional centres in other States 
based on migration statistics. The Committee further recommend that the Ministry 
should strengthen the identification of migrant children through enrolment drives 
and campaigns, household surveys , etc  and ensure that  adequate financial and 
administrative support for the effective functioning of these centres are provided.  
 
  

149 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
Facilities for Divyang students to achieve inclusive education across the country 
The Committee note that  in order to achieve the objective of inclusive 
education, the  Ministry of Education provides financial support to State 
Governments and Union  Territories to strengthen infrastructure and human 
resources for inclusive education of Divyang students under the Samagra Shiksha 
scheme. To improve physical accessibility of schools, the scheme includes specific 
provisions for the creation of barrier -free and differently -abled-friendly 
infrastructure, such as ramps, handrails, and accessible toilets, so that children 
with disabilities can move safely and participate fully in school activities. Though, 
the Committee appreciate the vision of the Ministry, however, the Committee note 
that as per UDISE+ 2024 -25, out of total 14,71, 437 schools at national level, only 
5,23,143 schools have CwSN (Children with special needs) toilets, and only 8,08,466 
schools have ramps with handrails. During the year 2024-25, the budget of Rs. 482 
lakhs were allocated for construction of 186 CwSN toilets, however only 2.60 lakhs 
were actually utilised with no progress in physical targets.  The severe gap in the 
availability of CwSN friendly infrastructure shows that more than half of the schools 
across the country are devoid of CwSN friendly infrastructure.  The Committee 
further note that under the financial support for new special educators, only 80.50 
lakhs were utilised against a budgetary grant (elementary section) of 962 lakhs.  The 
Committee also note that a meagre progress was achieved in the area of recruiting/ 
retaining special educators for CwSN students.  
The Committee note that the Ministry’s approach to promoting education for 
Divyang children is right based, inclusive and holistic.  The Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities (RPnD) Act, 2016 provides that children with benchmark disabilities are 
entitled to free education upto the age of 18 years.  The NEP 2020 emphasizes a 

150 
 
Zero Rejection Policy for children with disabilities, ensuring that no child is denied 
schooling on account of disability.  The policy also underscores the importance of 
preparing and training teachers to handle inclusive classrooms effectively. In view 
of the above, the Committee strongly recommend the Ministry to adhere to yearly 
targets of budget utilisation and execution of CwSN related projects in a time bound 
manner.  The Committee recommend the Ministry to provide safe and accessible 
infrastructure to Divyang students in a time bound manner to achieve the objective 
of inclusivity in education. The Ministry sho uld also assess the requirement of 
special educators across the country and complete their recruitment at the earliest. 
 
  

151 
 
Recommendation No. 13 
Operational Challenges and Future Roadmap for Kendriya Vidyalayas 
The Committee note that Kendriya Vidyalayas (KVs) play an important role in 
providing quality and uniform education across the country, particularly to the 
children of transferable Central Government employees, including Defence and 
Para-Military personnel , central Autonomous Bodies, Central Public  Sector 
Undertakings and Central Institute of Higher Learning . The Committee appreciate 
the efforts of the Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan (KVS) in maintaining high 
educational standards and promoting national integration and create a sense of 
‘Indianness’ among children. The Committee further observe that the proposals for 
opening of new KVS are sponsored by the ministries /departments of the 
Government of India/ State governments / union territories administrations with 
commitment to provide requisite extent of land free of cost  for suitable rent-free 
temporary accommodation and concentration of requisite number of Central 
Government employees at the place of propose n ew KV. The Committee however 
note that there is no policy for establishing at least one Kendriya Vidyalaya in every 
district of the country. The opening of new KVs depends on proposals received 
from sponsoring authorities and fulfilment of prescribed norms  relating to land, 
temporary accommodation, and the availability of eligible beneficiaries. As a result, 
some districts continue to remain without a Kendriya Vidyalaya despite growing 
demand.  
The Committee recommend that the Ministry of Education, in cons ultation 
with KVS, may examine the feasibility of ensuring the presence of at least one 
Kendriya Vidyalaya in every district of the country, particularly in educationally 
backward, remote, border, tribal, and aspirational districts where access to quality 

152 
 
schooling remains limited. Since the land and other others permanent resources 
are provided by the State, the Committee also recommend that some seats must be 
reserved for students residing in a particular district. 
  

153 
 
Recommendation No. 14 
To remove bottlenecks in establishment of new Kendriya Vidyalayas 
The Committee note that a few sanctioned Kendriya Vidyalayas have not yet 
become operational due to issues such as non-transfer of land, pending litigation, 
lack of temporary accommodation, and delays by sponsoring authorities. The 
projects in Banda district of Uttar Pradesh, Devkund and Nawada in Bihar, 
Ernakulam in Kerala, and Gadchiroli district in Maharashtra were sanctioned in 
2018-2019 and are still not operational . The Committee are of the view that s uch 
delays adversely affect students and deprive eligible children of access to quality 
education. The Committee recommend that a time-bound mechanism be developed 
for resolving issues related to land transfer, litigation, and temporary 
accommodation in respect of sanctioned Kendriya Vidyalayas. Regular monitoring 
at the Ministry and State Government levels may be  undertaken to ensure that 
approved KVs become operational without undue delay. The Committe e further 
recommend that the Ministry should establish a coordination mechanism with State 
Governments and sponsoring authorities to expedite pending proposals and 
remove administrative bottlenecks affecting the establishment of new Kendriya  
Vidyalayas. 
  

154 
 
Recommendation No. 15 
Revising the budgetary grant of Kendriya Vidyalayas 
The Committee observe that the budgetary allocation and expenditure of 
KVS have increased significantly during the period from 2020-21 to 202 4-25, 
indicating the growing scale of operations and expansion of educational 
infrastructure. Excess expenditure during the period has been met through internal 
receipts. However, d uring 2025 -26, an amount of Rs.7127.87 crore had been 
allocated as Grant which was Rs. 1599.13 crore less than the amount allocated 
during the previous year.  The Committee feel that the budgetary support should be 
revised in line with the actual expenditure incurred which will help the KVS to carry 
out expansion and modernisation of infrastructure. The Committee therefore 
recommend the Ministry to analyse the budgetary grants of KVS and revi se the 
same in line with the expansions and revamping activities proposed to be 
undertaken by the KVS in the coming years. 
  

155 
 
Recommendation No. 16 
Filling up of vacancies in teaching positions in Kendriya Vidyalayas 
The Committee note that vacancies in teaching positions continue to exist in 
Kendriya Vidyalayas across various States and Union Territories. As on 01 
November, 2025, out of a total of 50414 sanctioned posts across the country, there 
are 8457 vacancies  indicating vacancies in all the States/UTs where there are 
Kendriya Vidyalayas, such as Tamil Nadu (726 vacancies), Madhya Pradesh (603 
vacancies), Odisha (587 vacancies), Karnataka (587 vacancies), Maharashtra (420 
vacancies), Kerala (364 vacancies), Assam (490 vacancies), etc. The availability of 
qualified teachers is critical to maintaining the quality of education for which KVs 
are known. The Committee also observe that teachers posted in difficult, remote, 
and hilly areas are currently governed by gen eral Government of India rules 
regarding incentives and allowances. The Committee recommend that all vacant 
teaching posts in Kendriya  Vidyalayas may be filled on priority through regular 
recruitment and other permissible arrangements to ensure that studen ts do not 
suffer due to shortage of teachers. Special attention may be given to schools 
located in remote and difficult areas where vacancies often remain unfilled for 
longer periods. The Committee further recommend  the Ministry to review the 
existing incentive structure for teachers and staff serving in difficult, remote, hilly, 
Left-Wing Extremism (LWE) -affected, and border areas. Additional financial and 
career-related incentives may be considered to attract and retain qualified 
personnel in such locations.  The Committee also recommend that KVS continue to 
strengthen innovation, digital learning, teacher training, and collaboration with 
national educational institutions so that Kendriya  Vidyalayas remain a model of 
excellence in school education across the country.  

156 
 
Recommendation No. 17 
Issues Relating to Non-Functional Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas and Measures for 
Their Early Operationalization 
The Committee have been informed that the National Policy of Education 
1986 envisaged setting up of pace setting residential schools, to be called as 
Navodya Vidyalayas one in each district, with an aim of providing good quality 
modern education coupled with equity and social justice and bring out the best of 
rural talents. The Committee note that the Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya (JNV) 
system has made significant contributions towards providing quality residential 
education to talented children, particularly from rural areas. The Committee further 
note that 689 JNVs have been sanctioned across the country, of which 665 are 
functional while 24 remain non -functional. From the information provided by the 
Ministry, the Committee note that Tamil Nadu has still not accepted the setting up 
of Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya (JNV) in 38 districts of the State. The Committee 
are concerned to note  that several sanctioned JNVs have not yet become 
operational, thereby depriving  access to eligible students to quality education. 
Some of the States having highest number of non-functional JNVs are Arunachal 
Pradesh with 8 districts; 4 Districts each in Assam, Delhi, West Bengal, etc. Delays 
have largely been attributed to non -availability of s uitable land, temporary 
accommodation, and other administrative and infrastructural issues.  The 
Committee believe that timely operationalization of all sanctioned JNVs will help 
achieve the objectives of educational equity, excellence, and national integra tion 
envisioned under the Navodaya Vidyalaya Scheme.  
The Committee recommend that the Ministry of Education, in coordination 
with State Governments and Union Territory Administrations, take urgent and time-

157 
 
bound measures to operationalize all non-functional JNVs where students continue 
to be deprived of the benefits of the scheme. The Ministry should closely monitor 
issues relating to land acquisition, temporary accommodation, and infrastructure 
development and establish a clear timeline for resolving pend ing cases. The 
Committee further recommend that periodic reviews be conducted at the highest 
level to ensure that sanctioned schools become functional without undue delay.  
The Committee would like to impress upon the Ministry to consider setting up of 
JNV in all the remaining districts where JNV has still not been set up so as to 
provide good quality modern education to students living in rural areas.  
  

158 
 
Recommendation No. 18 
Filling up of vacancies positions in teaching positions in Jawahar Navodaya 
Vidyalayas 
The Committee note that budgetary allocations for JNVs have increased 
consistently over the years and that the admission process provides adequate 
reservation for rural students, girls, SCs, STs, OBCs, and Divyang children. 
However, teacher vacancies in so me schools continue to be an area of concern. 
The Committee are constrained to note the vacancy positions in various States 
against the sanctioned post of the teachers in the Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya. 
There are numerous vacant positions in various States, such as Madhya Pradesh 
(329 vacancies), Karnataka (265 vacancies), Uttar Pradesh (268 vacancies), Bihar 
(259 Vacancies), Odisha (253 vacancies), Chhattisgarh (204 vacancies), Jammu and 
Kashmir (146 vacancies), Meghalaya (120 vacancies ), Nagaland (119 Vacancies), 
Mizoram (117 Vacancies), Tripura (76 Vacancies) and Sikkim (23 Vacancies) . The 
Committee urge the Ministry to expeditiously fill up the v acant teaching posts to 
maintain the quality of education. The Ministry should also strengthen monitoring 
of admissions, infrastructure, and academic performance across all JNVs and 
ensure that schools in remote, tribal, hilly, and border areas receive ade quate 
support and incentives.  
 
 
  

159 
 
Recommendation No. 19 
Accelerating School Transformation through Effective Implementation of the PM 
SHRI Scheme 
The Committee note that the PM SHRI (PM Schools for Rising India) Scheme 
is a flagship Centrally Sponsored Scheme aimed at transforming existing 
government schools into model institutions that embody the vision and objectives 
of the New Education Policy (NEP), 2020. The Scheme envisages strengthening 
more than 14,500 schools across the country with a total financial outlay of ₹27,360 
crore over a period of five years  with central share of Rs.18,128 crore and State 
share of Rs.9,232 crore. The Committee appreciate that 13,076 schools have already 
been selected across 33 States/UTs, including schools under Kendriy a Vidyalaya 
Sangathan (KVS), Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti (NVS), and NCERT, indicating 
substantial progress towards the intended target. The Committee further note that 
the Scheme adopts a rigorous challenge -based selection process with clearly 
defined benchm arks relating to infrastructure, safety, enrolment, teacher 
availability, and basic facilities, thereby ensuring that only schools with the 
potential to emerge as exemplar institutions are selected.  The Committee, however, 
observe that against the revised allocation of ₹2,800 crore, ₹4,500 crore and ₹5,800 
crore during 2023 -24, 2024-25 and 2025 -26 the actual Central releases have been 
₹1,216.70 crore, ₹3,576.40 crore and ₹473.20 crore , respectively, indicating that 
substantial financial commitments under t he Scheme are yet to translate into 
expenditure on infrastructure and development. While noting that the Scheme has 
recently been onboarded onto the SNA SPARSH platform and a first mother 
sanction of ₹2,273.07 crore has been issued during 2025-26, the Committee feel that 
the pace of fund utilisation and implementation requires close monitoring.  In view 

160 
 
of the above, t he Ministry should closely monitor the utilisation of funds released 
under the Scheme and establish a robust outcome-based monitoring framework to 
assess not only physical and financial progress but also measurable improvements 
in learning outcomes, foundational literacy and numeracy, digital competencies, 
vocational skills, student participation, and overall school quality. 
  

161 
 
Recommendation No. 20 
The Committee observe that the PM SHRI Scheme encompasses a 
comprehensive set of interventions including foundational literacy and numeracy, 
Balvatika and Early Childhood Care and Education, smart classrooms, ICT-enabled 
teaching, digital libraries, integrated science laboratories, Atal Tinkering Labs, 
vocational education, internships with local artisans and industries, mental health 
and career counsel ling, green school initiatives, inclusive infrastructure for girls 
and Children with Special Needs (CwSN), and innovative pedagogical practices 
aligned with competency-based learning. The Committee further note that although 
encouraging indicators have emerged, such as PM SHRI schools accounting for 5 
per cent of ideas submitted under the Viksit Bharat Buildathon 2025 and 8 per cent 
of scholarships awarded under the National Means-cum-Merit Scholarship Scheme 
despite constituting less than one per cent of schools nationally, the Scheme is still 
in its formative phase and a comprehensive assessment of its impact on learning 
outcomes, skill acquisition, inclusivity, and school transformation is yet to be 
undertaken. The Committee also note that significant res ponsibility has been 
entrusted to PM SHRI schools to serve as leaders and mentors for neighbouring 
schools, and the effectiveness of this model will need sustained institutional 
support and monitoring. 
The Committee recommend that the Ministry of Education accord the highest 
priority to timely implementation of the PM SHRI Scheme and ensure that the 
remaining target of establishing more than 14,500 PM SHRI schools may be met 
within the prescribed timeframe. Further, the Committee recommend that a 
structured framework be developed to enable PM SHRI schools to effectively 
mentor neighbouring government schools and disseminate best practices, 

162 
 
innovative pedagogies, and successful institutional models so that the benefits of 
the Scheme extend beyond the selected schools.  
  

163 
 
Recommendation No. 21 
The Committee note that 8% of the N ational Merit Means scholarships 
through competitive exams were provided to PM SHRI school even though they are 
only 1 % of the total Government schools in the country. The Committee are of the 
view that the better performance of PM SHRI schools is associated with better  
infrastructure facilities and higher levels of learning available in PM SHRI schools. 
While it is seen that a level playing field is not provided to the students of other 
government schools in scholarship tests , t he Committee  recommend that the 
Ministry should devise strategies so that students belonging to other non-PM SHRI 
Schools should be able to get equal opportunities to perform better in various 
scholarship tests. 
 
 
  

164 
 
Recommendation No. 22 
Implementation, Financial Management, and Expansion of Kasturba Gandhi Balika 
Vidyalayas (KGBVs) 
The Committee note that Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalayas (KGBVs) are 
residential schools for girls belonging to Socio-Economically Disadvantaged 
Groups (SEDGs) such as ST, SC, OBC and economically weaker sections of the 
society in Educationally Backward Blocks (EBBs). The objective of the scheme is 
to ensure access to quality education for girls from SEDGs and reduc e the gender 
gap at the elementary to senior secondary level by setting up residential school 
with boarding facilities. A number of 5269 KGBVs are functional in 30 Staes/UTs. 
The Committee are however constrained to note the underutilization of approved 
funds during the last three financial years. In 2023 -24, out of an approval of 
₹5,48,205.62 lakh, the actual expenditure stood at ₹38,494.82 lakh. During 2024-25, 
against the approved amount of Rs 4 ,55,138.02 lakh, the expenditure was Rs 
2,38,667.72 lakh, and for 2025 -26, the status of expenditure as on 17.12.2025 was 
Rs 1 ,89,426.53 lakh against the approved amount of ₹4,47,966.02 lakh . The 
Committee are of the view that underutilization of funds during the last three years 
may have affected the proper functi oning of KGBVs in various States. In order to 
obtain the full benefit of the scheme which ensures Gender parity and gives an 
opportunity to girls from socially disadvantageous backgrounds, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to formulate and streamline the guidelines and provide 
clearer, fast-tracked approvals to prevent any delay in releasing fund to States and 
UTs. 
 

165 
 
Recommendation No. 23 
To increase the student intake capacity of Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalayas 
(KGBVs) 
The Committee note that uniform teacher and warden training is crucial for 
maintaining the proper functioning of Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalayas (KGBVs). 
The Committee recommend mandating uniform teacher and warden training by 
ensuring that the 2025 -26 NIEPA training handbook for wardens is systematically 
adopted across all 30 participating States and UTs, while making in-service teacher 
training legally at par with regular government schools. The Committee also 
recommend that in light of numerous representations received seeking an increase 
in the capacity of KGBVs, and successful alumni outcomes, the Ministry should 
proactively expand school capacity based on demand by inviting targeted 
proposals from States to increase the student intake capacity of the existing 5,269 
functional KGBVs.  
  

166 
 
Recommendation No. 24 
Evaluation of Netaji Subhash Chandra Awasiya Vidyalaya 
The Committee note that Samagra Shiksha supports the provision of 
residential facilities under Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose Awa siya Vidyalaya 
(NSCBAV), with the primary purpose of reaching out to girls, urban deprived, and 
other disadvantaged children. This scheme plays an indispensable role in creating 
equitable access to school education in remote, sparsely populated, and diffic ult-
to-reach areas, including hilly terrains, Left-Wing Extremism (LWE) affected zones, 
and large uninhabited regions characterized by natural barriers like forests, 
waterways, and rivers. The Committee note that currently, 1,140 NSCBAVs are 
functional across the country, spanning 24 States and UTs. However, the Committee 
are concerned to observe the persistent underutilization of funds under this 
initiative in most of the States during the last five consecutive years. During the 
financial year 2024–25, against a total approved budget of ₹66,474.97 lakh, only 
₹44,881 lakh was actually utilized in various States. In view of the above 
observation, the Committee urge the Ministry to look into the various requirements 
in the NSCBAVs, such as recruitment of adequate number of teachers, poor 
infrastructure and living conditions, availability of adequate number of hostels, 
poor managements, etc and take appropriate measures to address th e 
requirements faced by them. The Committee also strongly recommend the Ministry 
to review the functioning of NSCBAVs and bring accountability keeping in mind the 
primary purpose for setting up the institutes is to bring the young deprived children 
in hill y and remote areas into the formal education system. The Ministry may 
apprise the Committee  of all the necessary measures taken to address the 

167 
 
difficulties faced by NSCBAVs and measures taken to improve their functioning  at 
the action taken stage.  

168 
 
Recommendation No. 25 
Strengthening Monitoring Mechanisms, Dietary Quality, and Implementation 
Efficiency under PM POSHAN 
The Committee note that the Pradhan Mantri Poshan Shakti Nirman (PM 
POSHAN) earlier known as Mid -Day meal in Schools is one of the for emost rights 
based Centrally Sponsored Scheme under the National Food Security Act, 2013 
(NFSA), specifically designed to simultaneously combat student hunger and 
enhance educational access  for children studying in classes I -VIII. The scheme 
extends essential nutritional support to approximately 11 crore students across 
10.35 lakh Government and Government -aided schools, encompassing children 
from Bal Vatika to Class VIII, while providing livelihood opportunities to over 24 lakh 
Cook-cum-Helpers. The Committee observe that an extensive multi -layered 
administrative network has been established to ensure programmatic transparency 
and operational safety. This framework incorporates a central Management 
Information System (MIS), a real-time Automated Monitoring System (AMS) for daily 
meal tracking, emergency medical contingency protocols, mandatory display 
boards at school campuses for public accountability, and a structural chain of 
Steering-cum-Monitoring Committees spanning the schoo l, block, district, State, 
and national levels.  
The Committee however note that operational success of the scheme rests 
heavily on local district authorities, women's Self -Help Groups (SHGs), and 
municipal centralized kitchens. To reinforce accountability, streamline operations, 
and guarantee the absolute safety and nutritional quality of meals, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry of Education to ensure strict regulatory enforcement 
of the monitoring system put in place by the Ministry, such as mandatory testing of 

169 
 
the meal by 2 -3 adults including one teacher, random testing of meal samples 
through accredited laboratories,  joint  pre-lifting inspections with FCI Nodal 
Officers to ensure quality of foodgrains, effective online monitoring of the scheme, 
regular inspections by State Government Officers, statutory requirement of 
conducting independent Social Audits in at least 2% of covered schools (or a 
minimum of 20 schools per district)  and making the audit findings publicly 
accessible online to drive citizen oversight.

170 
 
 
Recommendation No. 26 
Maintaining annual database of children in various age groups in the country for 
enrolling them in education system. 
The Committee note that t he Unified District Information System for 
Education Plus (UDISE +) is an educational management information system under 
the Department of School Education & Literacy, Ministry of Education under the 
Government of India. UDISE+ functions as a central plat form that enables 
respective schools to efficiently record and submit data related to its profile 
(infrastructure & facilities), individual students and teachers’ details. This is done 
in real -time mode by all recognised schools that provide formal, and sp ecial 
education in any of the school categories (that is, from pre -primary to higher 
secondary levels) throughout the country each academic year. The recorded data 
is validated by the MIS and other designated officials at the block, district and State 
levels; and monitored at four levels, including the national  and this recorded data 
forms the basis in rolling out schemes. 
The Committee are however constrained to note that the Ministry does not 
maintain any data with regard to total number of children in various age groups in 
the country  who needs to be enrolled in the education system under various 
schemes. The data available with the UDISE are only of those children who are 
already enrolled in schools and do not include children of school going age  who 
have not enrolled in schools due to lack of information and resources.  The 
Committee feel that measures should be taken by the Ministry to identify the 
number of out of school children in the country, and take appropriate measures to 
provide them with for mal education  in order to achieve the objective  of 100 % 
enrolment in schools so that no child is left out of education system in India. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to devise a data bank for the number 

171 
 
of children in different age group s across the country  to make them a part of 
education in India . This would require inter -ministerial coordination with various 
Ministries/Departments at the Central and State levels. The Ministry should also set 
target for imparting education accordingly and strive towards bringing all these 
children within the purview of  Samagra Shiksha Abhiyana or any other relevant 
scheme for the purpose.   
  

172 
 
Recommendation No. 27 
Addressing the Institutional Bottle neck to Prevent High Student Attrition in Higher 
School Education 
The Committee note that the number of schools at secondary and higher 
secondary levels  are very less when compared with the number of schools at 
Primary and Upper Primary levels. The Committee note that as per UDISE 2024-25, 
out of the total 1092671 School (including all the government and government aided 
schools), there are 91103 2  schools at primary level , 412805 schools at upper 
primary level, 1618 08 schools at secondary level, and only 90866 schools at higher 
secondary level in the country. With regard to the number of students enrolled, in 
primary classes there are 61845033, 40893978 students in upper primary classes 
(from 6 to 8 ), which  reduces to 23668220 in secondary, and  further reduced to  
16417949 in higher secondary classes.  The Committee are concerned to note this 
drastic decline in number of schools and students as education levels rises. From 
the above information, the Committee  note that out o f over 1 million government 
schools, the vast majority are only primary schools , and n early 73% of students 
drop out before finishing higher secondary.  
The Committee strongly urge the Ministry to prioritize upgrading existing 
primary and secondary schools into full higher secondary schools to ensure a high 
school is physically accessible to students belonging to different communities and 
to arrest student drop-off rate.  The Committee are of the view that there is an urgent 
need to increase the number of schools at secondary and higher secondary levels. 
Considering that education is placed in the Concurrent List of the Constitution with 
most schools under the jurisdiction of the State Governments and UT 
Administration, the Committee desire the Ministry to impress upon all the State/UT 
Government to take steps for setting up of more secondary and higher secondary 
schools so as to increase the enrolment of students in the country.  

173 
 
Recommendation No. 28 
Community-Led Monitoring: Role of Local Boards and School Management 
Committees 
The Committee note that the inspection of schools and facilities for students 
cannot just be ensured by the annual inspections by the local or State authorities. 
It can be made more effective by community led monitoring. The  Committee 
emphasize that infrastructure development in schools can be speeded up by active 
oversight at the grassroots level, specifically through School Management 
Committees (SMCs) and local Panchayati Raj institutions. Local school boards may 
be empowered to conduct infrastructure audits, ensuring that funds allocated for 
new higher-secondary classrooms, science labs, and gender-segregated toilets are 
utilized transparently without any delay. 
The Committee recommend that to tackle the massive student dropout rate, 
the Ministry may explore the possibility of engaging the community to drive 
localized enrolment campaigns. The Committee also recommend that the 
community-led social audits to monitor teacher attendance and classroom sizes,  
basic facilities where local school boards can directly report such issues to district 
administration for immediate action. 
  

174 
 
Recommendation No. 29 
Addressing Regional Disparities in Higher Secondary Enrolment 
The Committee note that the Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) at the higher 
secondary level remains below 50% in several  regions including northeastern 
States. The data provided by the Ministry shows severe  regional disparities, with 
Madhya Pradesh at GER of only 45% and Bihar dropping to an alarming 38.1%. The 
situation is equally critical across the Northeastern region, where Meghalaya 
stands at 39.7%, Nagaland at 39.8%, Assam at 43.9%, and Sikkim at 49.6%. The 
Committee note the lack of continuum in transitioning of students from secondary 
to higher secondary education in these specific geographies. The Committee feel 
that there can be multiple  reasons for high drop outs, such as shortage of senior 
secondary and  secondary schools , economic pressures on families, lack of 
localized student retention strategies and lack of proper career guidance, etc. 
To rectify these severe regional imbalances, the Committee strongly 
recommend that the Ministry of Education to work in close coordination with States 
to draw up time-bound Action Plans to increase GER in the coming years. Some of 
the Action Plans may include  financial assistance under Samagra Shiksha to be 
prioritised for these low-performing States for  opening new higher secondary 
schools and adding specialized streams (Arts, Science, and Commerce) to existing 
institutions. The Committee desire that effort should be made by the Ministry to find 
out the reasons for low GER in higher secondary level in th ese States. The 
Committee also recommend the Ministry to combat the socioeconomic factors 
driving these high dropout rates by providing student-incentive schemes in these 
States, including enhanced scholarship models, direct benefit transfers (DBT) for 
text materials, and other requirements.  

175 
 
Recommendation No. 30 
To reduce the Digital divide  
The Committee note that the Ministry of Education is implementing ICT and 
digital initiatives under Samagra  Shiksha, aligned with National Education Policy 
(NEP) 2020, to enhance digital learning in Government schools across the Country. 
The Committee appreciate that the Ministry of Education has taken positive steps 
under the National Education Policy (NEP) 20 20 with the initiatives like PM eVidya 
and the DIKSHA platform to give students access to online courses, virtual labs, 
and digital lessons. The Committee however, note that a major digital divide still 
exists across India which deprives the students in villages and far-flung areas easy 
and equal access to digital education . The Committee note that only 58.6% of 
government schools have an internet connection. Further the speed of the internet 
connection and continuous uninterrupted connectivity is a major problem in many 
areas. The Committee also note that the infrastructure such as desktops, tablets or 
laptops is not available in many households and schools and in such scenarios, 
the mere existence of internet connectivity does not help the students. Further, the 
schools sometime operate through online classrooms. In such situations, this gap 
becomes highly critical.  
The Committee , therefore, recommend  that the Ministry to work towards 
ensuring the availability of digital infrastructure in schools by opening of more ICT 
labs and smart classrooms in all the eligible schools  and necessary directions in 
this regard to all the State/UT Governments.  The Ministry may also explore the 
possibilities of amending the rules of the Samagra Shiksha scheme to allow States 
to buy and distribute low -cost tablets or laptops directly to poor students, 
prioritizing those students from villages and far-flung areas. The Committee also 

176 
 
recommend the Ministry to issue necessary directions to State/UT governments for 
regular monito ring of digital infrastructure created in schools for effective 
utilization and provide necessary financial support for replacement of digital 
infrastructure, if required.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

177 
 
Recommendation No. 31 
Policy on Mental health of the students 
The Committee note that drawing from NEP 2020, the Ministry has put in 
place comprehensive measures to promote the mental health and emotional well -
being of students in schools. Some of the school students face unprecedented 
mental health challenges due to  immense academic pressure which needs 
appropriate care and concerns from all the stakeholders. The Committee appreciate 
that the Ministry of Education has initiated vigorous steps under the National 
Education Policy to prioritize student well -being throug h programs like 
Manodarpan helpline, Pariksha Pe Charcha, and the UMMEED guidelines for suicide 
prevention and capacity building of teachers and counsellors. The Committee are 
also glad to note  that a National Mental Health Policy for schools is also under  
consideration. The Committee note that in compliance to directions of Hon ’ble 
Supreme Court in the Sukdeb Saha vs State of Andhra Pradesh case, States and 
Union Territories have been advised to establish dedicated committees at both the 
State and district levels for monitoring and addressing mental health issues and 
the overall well -being of students. Additionally, States and UTs have been  also 
advised to develop guidelines for recruiting trained counsellors in schools to 
facilitate their enga gement. However, the actual implementation of the above 
guidelines by all States/UTs remains to be seen. It imperative for the Ministry to 
ensure that these guidelines are strictly implemented by them keeping in view that 
the Hon’ble SC in its judgement has reaffirmed that mental health is an inseparable 
part of the right to life under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. The Committee 
strongly recommend that the Ministry of Education fast -track the creation of the 
National Mental Health Policy for scho ols and ensure its strict, uniform rollout 
across all States and union territories to ensure physical safety, mental and 

178 
 
emotional well-being of students in schools. The Committee urge the Ministry to 
give utmost priority to this urgent matter failing the students of the country. The 
Committee also recommend the Ministry to make the Manodarpan helpline more 
responsive and  should also give wider publicity to this helpline to increase the 
awareness among the students. 
  

179 
 
Recommendation No. 32 
Inclusion of courses on cyber safety and mobile phone addiction  
The Committee note that there is an alarming rise in mobile phone addiction 
and the harmful effects of social media on the emotional well -being and physical 
health of the students. To address this issue, the Ministry has introduced helpful 
resources like Guidelines on School safety and Security including cyber safety 
measures for both students and teachers, PRAGYATA digital guidelines for digital 
education to ensure safe and efficient use of digital platfo rms for learning, 
Manodarpan toll free helpline for providing psychological support and emotional 
well-being including mobile phone addiction, development of resource materials 
for teacher, capacity building by NCERT for early identification and interventions in 
mental health concerns, etc. The Committee desire that the enforcement of these 
policies across the States needs to be properly monitored to tackle digital addiction 
among students.  The Committee feel that there is a need for inclusion of the 
mandatory teaching on the Cyber safety guidelines for school children as they are 
the most vulnerable section to be affected by fraudulent cyber portals.  In this 
regard, the Committee strongly urge the Ministry to accelerate the launching of 
online Cyberspace Safety for class 9 to 12 students as well as for teachers. The 
Committee are of the view that course on mobile phone addiction, safety in 
cyberspace, safe internet, danger of cyber bullying and fraud, etc may be integrated 
in the curriculum, while ensuring that teachers are also properly trained to identify 
early signs of social media addiction and mental distress in classrooms. 
  

180 
 
Recommendation No. 33 
Mentoring of Mentors/teachers  
The Committee note that the Ministry of Education has taken affirmative 
actions under the National Education Policy to create a pool of learned and trained 
teachers as the centre of school reforms by providing continuous training and 
professional developme nt. Teacher trainings are being carried out by the 
institutional network of national bodies like NCERT , SCERTs, DIETs, and local 
grassroots resource centers. The Committee further note that the Ministry has 
launched curtained online training resources like  NISHTHA, providing structured 
training for teachers across different school levels , while the DIKSHA platform 
offers self-paced online courses, lesson plans, and professional certificates  are 
provided. In addition,  the launch of the National Professional Standards for 
Teachers (NPST) and the National Mission for Mentoring (NMM) represents a strong 
effort to  connect teachers with experienced professional mentors. However, the 
Committee are concerned to note that the financial structure of these crucial 
programs, particularly the National Mission for Mentoring (NMM)  which does not 
have a separate budgetary allocation  of its own, but  depends entirely on the 
budgetary allocations of the Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan.   
In order to achieve the aims of NMM to create a large pool of outstanding 
professionals to mentor school teachers, t he Committee recommend that the 
Ministry of Education  to fast-track the transformation of district training centres 
into Centres of Excellence by upgrading their infrastructure to improve the quality 
of training at the local level.  The Committee also desire  adequate budgetary 
allocation for the National Mission for Mentoring (NMM) to ensure that the mission 
does not s uffer due to fund constraints.   The Committee further desire that the 

181 
 
Ministry chalk out a plan for  continuous professional developments of teachers 
through NISHTA integrated training programme by increasing their enrolment and 
also including modern training content and aggressively promote the daily use of 
the DIKSHA platform among educators to foster cross -learning and professional 
growth.  The Ministry should also work closely with all State and Union Territory 
education departments to implement the National Professional Standards for 
Teachers (NPST) systematically, to ensure that teaching quality and educator 
performance are evaluated uniformly across the entire country.  
  

182 
 
Recommendation No. 34 
 
Transfer of teaching  and non-teaching staff salaries through Direct Benefit 
Transfer:  
The Committee note that one  of the main issues in impa cting quality 
education in schools is the recruitment and retention of learned school teachers. 
While the salaries of teachers in government-controlled schools are paid through 
proper financial channels and banks , the Committee note that the payment of 
salaries to teachers and staff, in some of the government-aided and private 
institutions have issues such as prolonged salary delays, unauthorized deductions, 
underpayment, and irregular disbursement schedules. The lack of financial security 
severely demo tivates learned teaching staff  leading to increasing attrition rates 
among qualified teachers, and discouraging excepti onal talent to continue in the 
teaching profession. Furthermore, the absence of a standardized digital payroll 
infrastructure allows school management bodies to exploit their staff. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry of 
Education to mandate a unified and universal Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) 
framework across all States and union territories for transfer of salaries to teaching 
and non-teaching personnel in government-aided and private institutions to ensure 
that their monthly salaries are credited directly into Aadhaar-seeded bank accounts 
without any third-party intermediaries.  The implementation of this mechanism by 
the Government aided and private institutions may also be strictly monitored by the 
concerned agencies. The Committee hope that strict implementation of this  

183 
 
measure by all the Government aided and private institutions will go and long way 
in providing right motivation to many talented teachers to continue in the teaching 
proportion and contribute to emerging the standard of education in the country. 
  

184 
 
Recommendation No. 35 
Mother tongue and multilingualism 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Education has taken extensive, 
practical steps under the National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 to promote mother 
tongue-based instruction and multilingualism in early school grades. The Ministry 
has successfully colla borated with States and specialized bodies to establish 
structural changes like the flexible Three -Language Formula and the new R1, R2, 
R3 language framework. The Ministry has achieved notable progress by translating 
core discipline textbooks like Mathematics, Science, and Social Sciences into all 22 
scheduled languages, alongside creating bridge courses and e -contents for 
smooth curriculum transitions. Highly innovative resources have also been 
deployed, including the "JaaduiPitara" play-based learning kits in 22 languages, the 
Bhasha Sangam nationwide language exposure program, and 121 mother -tongue 
language primers developed with the Central Institute of Indian Languages (CIIL). 
Additionally, organizations like Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan (KVS) have provided 
vital pedagogical support by hiring contractual local language teachers. However, 
despite these strong resource frameworks, the Committee note that the 
requirement of study materials, teacher training, language teaching staff etc. have 
not bee n foreseen by the Ministry . The Committee observe that from class 6 
onwards, third language formula has been introduced , however the schools have 
not been provided with enough time to prepare  e.g. recruitment of language staff, 
availability of study material, clarity on selection of language which led to stress to 
students, teachers, parents and the concerned school authorities. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to expedite development 
of Textbook, textual materials, handbooks and their translation into regional 

185 
 
languages and these may be shared with the States and UTs at the earliest.  The 
Ministry should also take all necessary measures to assist the State/UT education 
Boards for recruitment of teachers to provide instruction in native languages to 
support children at the foundational and preparatory stages.   The Committee also 
recommend that the Ministry of Education institutionalize a rigorous, State-wise 
distribution plan to ensure that translated textbooks, multilingual e -contents, and 
“Jaadui Pitara” kits reach every rural and government school before the start of 
each academic session. 
  

186 
 
Recommendation No. 36 
Development of common curriculum and setting up of School Standard Authorities 
The Committee note that NCERT, as a follow-up to the NEP 2020, has brought 
out National Curriculum Framework (NCF), which define national level learning 
standards for children across India.  U nder this initiative the NCERT has already 
created new textbooks for Grades 1 to 8 and is now working on books for Grades 9 
to 12. These books and curriculums are already being used by some State Boards. 
Additionally, as on 3rd January, 2025, 18 States and Union Territories have set up a 
State School Standards Authority (SSSA) to make sure all public and private 
schools maintain good quality , safety and professional standards . However, the 
Committee note that many States have still not adapted to this common curriculum 
and a large number of States have not yet set up their independent regulatory 
bodies.  The Committee are of the view that these may lead to unequal education 
standards across the country. 
The Committee recommend that the Ministry of Education to create a timeline 
to help the remaining States set up their State School Standards Authorities 
(SSSAs) without further delay.  The Committee also desire that the Ministry should 
give all necessary support to NCERT for developing of textbooks for Grades 9 to 12 
at the earliest for the larger benefits of the students and adoption by States and 
other agencies to ensure/equal standard education for children across the country.  
  

187 
 
Recommendation No. 37 
Standardization of School Education Boards in India 
The Committee note that there are 65 school education boards functional in 
India, divided into regular and open school boards operating at National and State 
levels.  The major National level boards are Central Board of Secondary Education 
(with over 27000 schools), Council for the Indian School Certificate Examination 
(with over 2300 schools), and the National Institute of Open Schooling.  Besides the 
national level boards, there are State boards at every State, and international boards 
like International Baccalaureate (IB) and Cambridge Assessment International 
Education (CAIE) also operate in India. The Committee observe that there is lack of 
uniformity in t he school education board system in the country  and the existing 
boards are operating under different regulatory standards. While major central 
boards like the CBSE and CISCE maintain robust quality controls across thousands 
of school institutions, many State and open schooling systems continue to operate 
with different evaluation mechanisms, curriculum standards, and operational 
efficiency. The Committee also note that a critical regulatory mechanism controlling 
the establishment and expansion of private education boards is not available. The 
Committee are of the view that t his lack of oversight might pose a direct threat to 
students future and the standardisation of secondary education across the country. 
Further, it may create dissimilarity in the knowledge of students who have to 
compete for securing seats in University and professional education. 
In view of the above, the Committee strongly recommend the Ministry of 
Education to establish a unified national regulatory framework to standardise the 
functioning, evaluation criteria, and common curriculum for all 65 education boards 
in line with the N ew Education Policy.  The Committee further recommend that in 
order to address the proliferation of unauthorized private school institutions and 
boards, the Ministry should mandate a strict, single -window clearance system 

188 
 
before any new board can be granted authorisation. The Ministry should also 
launch a public  digital repo sitory providing details of  all existing recognised 
national, State, and international boards to protect students from unrecognised 
institutions.  

189 
 
Recommendation No. 38 
Strengthening, Regulatory Collaboration, And Pedagogical Expansion of NCERT 
 The Committee note that NCERT is an autonomous organisation set up by 
the Government of India in 1961 to assist and advise the Ministry in the 
implementation of its policies and major programmes  in school education and 
teacher education.  Some of the important  activities of NCERT are educational 
research, development of model textbooks and supplementary materials, 
conducting various training programmes, providing academic support to State-
level educational bodies such as SCERTs and DIETs.  The Committee are happy to 
note that NCERT has played a key role in shaping the educational policies in India, 
including the National Educational Policy 2020 which aims to revolutionize 
education in India.  The Ministry has also informed the Committee that the Council 
has developed the National Curriculum Framework for Foundational Stage (NCFFS) 
and the National Curriculum Framework for School Education (NCFSE), and has 
initiated the process of developing syllabi and textbooks based on these 
frameworks in consonance with the vision of NEP 2020. 
 While appreciating the role of NCERT, the Committee are however concerned 
about the existence of a number of vacancies in various posts in NCERT.  The 
Committee note that as on October, 2025, against the sanctioned strength of 284 4 
posts at various branches , the actual strength was only 1248 posts, leaving 
vacancies of 1596 posts ; 145 vacancies in academic, 131 vacancies in school 
teaching, 916 vacancies in Ministerial and 404 vacancies in Ancillary.  The 
Committee are of the view that having so many posts vacant in NCERT which is an 
apex body instrumental in rethinking and reshapi ng education in a manner that is 
national in scope, deserve urgent attention of the Ministry.  The Committee desire 

190 
 
that sincere effort should be made by the Ministry for filling up of various vacancies, 
considering that education constitute the transformative force for the growth of the 
nation and the important role played by  NCERT in bringing about this 
transformation.   

191 
 
Recommendation No. 39 
Mandatory Adoption of curriculum devised by NCET under NCF by Different 
State/National/Private boards 
The Committee note that NCERT as a follow up action of National Education 
Policy (NEP) 2020, has brought out the National Curriculum framework (NCF) for 
school education in 2023. The Committee further note that 65 national, State and 
open educational board s are avai lable and the syllabus of schools under these 
boards must  align with the National Curriculum Framework (NCF) as guided by 
NCF. 
The Committee are of the view that the significant gap persists in seamless 
execution of NCERT’s benchmark curriculum models to the grass -roots level 
across all States. The Committee are also of the view that 65 national, State, and 
open education boards provide challenges in adoption of NCERT curriculum.  The 
Committee recommend that the Ministry of Education to empower NCERT as the 
core knowledge partner to standardise the educational and evaluation metrics of all 
65+ functional school education boards across the country. The Ministry may also 
consider NCERT’s PARAKH division to bridge the current disparities among 
individual State and open school systems  to achieve a curriculum based on 
common lines.  
  

192 
 
Recommendation No. 40 
Filling staff vacancies and improving operations in CBSE 
The Committee note that CBSE is the only Board in India that has a pan-India 
and international presence.  Some of the main mandates of the Board are to grant 
affiliation to schools in India and abroad, develop curriculum and syllabi, conduct 
examination for Secondary and Senior Secondary Schools, develop standards for 
ensuring quality in the affiliated schools, teachers training, etc.  The Committee 
also note that CBSE is a self -funded autonomous body and does not receive any 
grant-in-aid from the Ministry.  The Committee are glad to note that the number of 
schools affiliated with CBSE has increased from 3787 in 1992-93 to 31,234 in 2024-
25 (as on 08.10.2025). The Committee also note that the Central Board of Secondary 
Education (CBSE) has expanded well  and is now being managed through  25 
Regional Offices and 5 Sub-Regional Offices to cater to requirements of a growing 
number of students. By 2025, student numbers rose to over 1.70 million in Class XII 
and over 2.38 million in Class X.  The Committee are, however, concerned about a 
major shortage of permanent staff  in CBSE. Out of 2,117 approved positions, 933 
posts (44%) are vacant. The major shortage is seen in Group 'C' support staff with 
595 vacant positions. The Committee are further constrained to note that CBSE is 
currently relying on temporary, contractual staff to handle its daily work. The 
Committee are of the view that such shortage of permanent staff may put the safety, 
quality, and smooth running of major national board exams at serious risk.  
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the CBSE should stop 
relying on temporary contractual workers for sensitive exam works and take 

193 
 
 necessary measures to fill all vacant positions through a fast-track recruitment in 
a time bound manner.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

194 
 
Recommendation No. 41 
Designing of curriculum in CBSE affiliated schools 
The Committee observe that the Central Board of Secondary Education 
(CBSE) has onboarded the curriculum framework for Grades 9 to 12 with the goals 
of the N ew Education Policy (NEP) 2020 and the National Curriculum Framework 
(NCF) 2023. The NFC prioritises competency-based learning and multi-disciplinary 
approaches. The Committee however note that significant  gap exists between 
curriculum designing and implementation as the N CERT is still in the process of 
rolling out new textbooks for classes 9 to 12, due to which  schools are frequently 
required to teach an updated, high -order curriculum with the availability of older 
study materials. The non availability of  textbooks and newer, application -based 
Board examination patterns are creating significant academic stress and confusion 
for students especially for the students  appearing for the Class 10 and 12 
examinations. 
The Committee urge the Ministry to  take immed iate steps to resolve this 
transition gap to fast-track the development, printing, and nationwide distribution 
of the remaining new textbooks for all the grades.  The Committee also urge NCERT 
to work in tandem with CBSE to make new initiatives successful. Furthermore, the 
Committee also recommend the Ministry to launch a nationwide teacher -capacity 
building program to train educators on application-based pedagogy, 
 
  

195 
 
Recommendation No. 42 
Transparency in digital infrastructure 
The Committee note that there is a sharp decline in the number of student 
enrolments in secondary and higher secondary classes.  During 2024, 22,51,812 
students have registered for Class X exam, and only 16,33,730 students have 
registered for Class XII exam during the same period.  In 2025, 23,85,079 students 
have registered for Class X exam, and 17,04,367 students have registered for Class 
XII exam.  The Committee note that the Central Board of Secondary Education  
exempts visually impaired candidates from exam fees, however it maintains a rigid, 
uniform fee structure for all other students, which is Rs 1600/- per candidate for 05 
subjects for students appearing in India . CBSE does not provide financial 
concessions or fee waivers for socio -economically disadvantaged sections of 
society.  
The Committee recommend the Ministry to introduce targeted fee waivers/ 
exemptions for economically weaker sections and socially disadvantaged groups 
in order to lessen the financial burden and give them opportunity to continue their 
education. The Committee also recommend the Ministry to take appropriate 
measures to increase transparency in CBSE answer-sheet checking procedure by 
publishing standardised, objective evaluation and the Board's digital infrastructure 
under Pariksha Sangam may be continually upgraded to ensure foolproof security 
and efficiency, not only for Board exams but also for major national selection tests 
like Central Teacher Eligibility Test ( CTET) and Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya 
Selection Test (JNVST). 

196 
 
Recommendation No. 43 
Teacher capacity building and training framework under CBSE 
The Committee note the CBSE conducts capacity building programmes 
(CBPs) nationwide to support teachers’ development.  All teachers and principals 
are required to complete a minimum of 50 hours training per year covering core 
values and ethics, subject knowledge, teaching practices, etc.  The Committee 
appreciate CBSE for training over 11 million participants through both online and 
offline modes over the past five years, and for providing this training completely 
free of cost to government school teachers . The Committee however, note with 
concern that there has been a drastic drop in online training of teachers from over 
5.3 million teachers in 2022 to just around 162, 814 in 2025. Further, while 
government teachers get free training s, private affiliated schools in rural and 
difficult areas have to pay a general training fee plus an extra ₹700 per teacher for 
single-day workshop s. The Committee are of the view that some of the non -
government schools in  rural or semi -urban areas do not  have enough budgetary 
resources to send their teachers on paid trainings. 
The Committee , therefore, recommend that the Ministry maintain a 
continuum in teacher’s capacity building programmes and should set year wise 
targets for teachers training to be com pleted in the set timeframe. The Committee 
also recommend the Ministry to review the fee to be submitted for teacher’s training 
so that teachers from budget-constrained private schools , especially from rural 
areas can participate in the online training programme. Further the teacher training 
modules should also be revised in line with the latest curriculum and application-
based pedagogy. 
  

197 
 
Recommendation No. 44 
Promotion of skill education 
The Committee note that the NEP 2020 focuses on integrating vocational and 
skill-based learning into school education to help students with real -world 
competencies and 21st century skills. The Committee note that the Central Board of 
Secondary Education has taken positive steps to include vocational training into 
academic curriculum in consonance with the National Education Policy (NEP) 2020. 
Further, 12-to-15-hour "Kaushal Bodh" skill modules have been introduced for 
middle school students to teach the children the dignity of labour and practical life 
skills at an early age. The Committee appreciate that wide variety of skill subjects 
for higher classes such as Artificial Intelligence, Design Thinking, and Information 
Technology have been introduced by CBSE. The Committee further note that CBSE 
has issued guidelines for opening of skill labs in all the school for imparting skill 
education. The Committee, however, are of the view that the opening of skill labs 
has imposed additional financial burden of various school , especially for schools 
in rural and semi urban areas which do not have adequate financial  and land  
resources for opening of skill labs. 
The Committee recommend the Ministry of Education to closely monitor the 
establishment of skill labs and to take steps  to help schools set up this required 
infrastructure by providing special financial grants especially in rural schools. To 
make resource -sharing workable, the Ministry should actively map out local 
government ITIs (Industrial Training Institutes), polytechnics, and factories, and 
formally collaborate them with nearby CBSE schools to serve as shared regional 
training hubs.  
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
10 August, 2026              
Sravana 19, 1948 (Saka) 
             DR. SANJAY JAISWAL  
                                   CHAIRPERSON 
                COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
 

230 
 
MINUTES OF EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES        
(2025-2026) 
 
      The Eighth sitting of the Committee was held on Friday, the 09th October, 2025 from 
1100 hrs. to 1348 hrs. in Committee Room 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Ms. Iqra Choudhary 
4. Shri Naveen Jindal 
5. Shri Vishaldada Prakashbapu Patil 
6. Shri Awadhesh Prasad 
7. Shri M. K. Raghavan 
8. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
9. Shri Monoj Tiwari 
10. Shri Ve Vaithilingam 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri  Sumesh Kumar  -  Director 
2. Smt. Sonia Khanna  -  Deputy Secretary 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF EDUCATION  
(DEPARTMENT OF SCHOOL EDUCATION & LITERACY) 
1.  Shri Sanjay Kumar Secretary (SE&L) 
 
2.  Smt. Prachi Pandey Joint Secretary (I&T) 
 
3.  Shri Bhagwati Prasad Kalal Director 
 
4.  Shri Rahul Singh 
 
Chairman (CBSE) 
5.  Shri Himanshu Gupta 
 
Secretary (CBSE) 
 

231 
 
 
2. At the outset, Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members and officials of the 
Ministry of Education (Department of School Education & Literacy) to the Sitting of the 
Committee convened to have briefing on the subject “ Budget and Policy aspects for 
providing Affordable and Quality Education in the Country including Review of Central 
Board of Secondary Education”. Their attention was also drawn to the Direction 55(1) of 
‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’ about the confidentiality of the proceedings of the 
Committee. 
 
3. The Secretary, Ministry of Education (Department of School Education & Literacy), 
then, gave a brief introduction on the subject where he highlighted the existence and 
functioning of 14,71,000 schools in the country and also about schools functioning under 
Central Sector Schemes. Then the Joint Secretary (I & T), Ministry of Education made a 
power point presentation on ‘ Budget and Policy aspects for providing Affordable and 
Quality Education in the Country ’. The presentation inter-alia highlighted NEP on 
Affordable & Quality Education, School education in India: A snapshot, quality and 
affordable education through Samagra Shiksha, budget allocation of Samagra Shiksha, 
PM POSHAN for nutrition and retention, ensuring quality education, equity and inclusion, 
quality and affordable textbooks, foundational literacy and numeracy -building block of 
quality education, empowering teachers, technology, skill education, PM SHRI- Exemplar 
schools for rising India, quality education through KVs and JNVs, KVs results, JNVs 
results, Vidyanjali Initiative- Community engagement for quality education, etc. 
 
4. Thereafter, the Chairman, CBSE, made a separate power point presentation on 
CBSE. The presentation inter-alia highlighted CBSE mandate, growth of CBSE Schools 
(1992-2025), important changes for 2025-26, academic tasks done by CBSE, Structured 
Assessment For Analyzing Learning (SAFAL), genesis of skill education in CBSE, 
capacity building programme, vision, recent and ongoing initiatives, etc. 
 
5.  The Chairperson and other Members of the Committee, then, raised several 
queries relating to the subject. The queries were inter-alia related to  skill education, 
preparation and publishing of text books, PM SHRI Schools, applicability of RTE Act on 

232 
 
KVs, process of admissions to KVs, manpower of CBSE, conducting of two board exmas 
in a academic year, introduction of Kannada language paper in schools of Chhattisgarh, 
foreign language courses in schools, Budget Estimates for KVs, issues of infrastructur e 
in KVs, qualifications of teachers, basic infrastructure in rural schools, norms and criteria 
for setting up of KVs, status of proposed KV in Balussery (Kozhilide), enrolment in primary 
schools during the period 2014 -225, issues of drop out in middle and  high school of 
Puducherry, NVs performance of vocational courses in Puducherry, steps taken to 
priorities Hindi language in KVs, need for using healthy oil under mid -day meal scheme, 
need for the use of AI for holding various exams and evaluation of answer sheets, mental 
health of students, allocation of funds under NEP, steps taken to education of specially 
abled children, teacher student ration in schools under CBSE curriculum, need for 
establishing more number of PM SHRI schools, sports and other activi ties in schools, 
physical education, system of accreditation of CBSE schools, procedure of renaming of 
schools, training for teachers, Centre state funding ratio under NEP, performance of 
SAFAL and PARAKH initiatives, need for regular eye examination of ch ildren of pre -
primary level for prevention and treatment of astimatism, need for synchronizing the 
syllabus of CBSE and State boards, need for reserving seats for local students in KVs, 
regulation of fees in schools, use of social media and mobile phone by children, etc.  
 
6.    The representatives of the Ministries responded to some of the queries raised by the 
Members. Thereafter, the Chairperson thanked the representatives of the Ministry and 
asked them to furnish written replies, on the points, for which information was not readily 
available, within fifteen days. 
 
7. The witnesses, then, withdrew. 
 
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned.  
 
 
 

233 
 
 
MINUTES OF THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2025-2026) 
 
      The Thirteenth sitting of the Committee was held on Tuesday, the 08th January, 2026 
from 1500 hrs. to 1730 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
1. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
2. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
3. Shri Chandan Chauhan 
4. Shri Devusinh Chauhan 
5. Ms. Iqra Choudhary 
6. Shri P.C. Mohan 
7. Shri Awadhesh Prasad 
8. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
9. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Juby Amar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Sumesh Kumar  -  Director 
3. Smt. Sonia Khanna  -  Deputy Secretary 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF EDUCATION 
 
1.  Shri Sanjay Kumar Secretary (SE&L) 
2.  Shri Dheeraj Sahu Additional Secretary 
3.  Ms. Archana Sharma Awasthi Joint Secretary 

234 
 
4.  Dr. Amarpreet Duggal  Joint Secretary 
5.  Ms. Prachi Pandey  Joint Secretary 
6.  Smt. A Srija Economic Adviser (Eq to JS) 
7.  Dr. Pankaj KP Shreyaskar Dy. Director General 
8.  Shri Bhagwati Prasad Kalal  Director 
CBSE 
9.  Shri Rahul Singh Chairman 
10.  Shri Himanshu Gupta Secretary  
NVS, KVS, NIOS, NCTE, NCERT 
11.  Shri Rajesh Lakhani Commissioner, NVS 
12.  Shri Vikas Gupta Commissioner, KVS 
13.  Prof. Akhilesh Mishra Chairman, NIOS 
14.  Prof. Pankaj Arora Chairman, NCTE 
15.  Prof. D.P. Saklani Director, NCERT 
 
2. At the outset, Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members and officials of the 
Ministry of Education to the Sitting of the Committee convened to have briefing on the 
subject ‘Budget and Policy aspects for providing Affordable and Quality Education 
in the Country including Review of Central Board of Secondary Education '. Their 
attention was also drawn to Direction 55(1) of ‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’ 
regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee. 
 
3. Thereafter, a representative  of the Ministry of Education made a power point 
presentation on the subject. The presentation inter-alia highlighted the vision and major 
objectives of National Education Policy 2020, budgetary outlet expenditure to implement 
various components of NEP 2020, the National curriculum framework, Samagra Shiksha 
Abhiyan, NIPUN Bharat Mission, integration of skill  education in Schools, key indicators 
related to school education viz. Gross Enrolment ratio (GER), Net Enrolment Ratio  
(NER), Pupil Teacher Ratio (PTR), decadal achievement in school education indicators,  
initiatives related to early childhood care and education, such as Vidya Pravesh, initiatives 

235 
 
related to providing inclusive and equitable education, digital education initiatives such as 
PM eVidya, NISHTA, PARAKH, e - Jaadui pitara etc., mental health and well -being 
initiatives such as Manodarpan, ‘Sahyog’ live counselling sessions, national toll -free 
helpline, initiatives undertaken in providing training to teachers such as National Mission 
for mentoring(NMM), integrated teacher education programme(ITEP), initiatives to 
provide multilingual education in all schools such as Bharti Bhasha Utsav devel opment 
of primer in all Indian languages, translation of NCERT textbook into Indian languages, 
status of PM POSHAN Scheme and features and achievements of  PM SHRI and 
Vidhyanjali Scheme. 
 
4. The representative of the Ministry also informed the Committee about the details 
related to vision, mandate and objectives of CBSE, curriculum and educational standards, 
initiatives for all round development of students in CBSE affiliated schools, measures  
taken for improving the professional skills of teachers etc. 
 
5. Thereafter, the Chairperson and other Members of the Committee, raised several 
queries relating to the subject. The queries inter-alia included: 
 
i. Steps being taken to enhance enrolment rate in school; 
ii. Need to enhance coordination between State and Central Government 
to reduce dropouts rate of girl child in school; 
iii. Reasons for significant number of vacancies in Navodaya Vidyalaya s  
and Kendriya Vidyalayas and steps being taken to  fill vacancies of 
teachers; 
iv. Need to enhance seats in Kendriya Vidyalayas; 
v. Need for reservation of seats for the admission of students from the 
States/ specified districts in Kendriya Vidyalayas considering the fact that 
State governments provide land and necessary infrastructure for 
establishment of Kendriya Vidyalayas; 
vi. Issues related to gaps in implementation of the New Education Policy; 
vii. Formulation of the next phase of New Education Policy; 
viii. Need to enhance capacity building programmes for teachers; 

236 
 
ix. Need to enhance inter departmental/ministerial coordination for providing 
infrastructure and facilities in schools such as drinking water, digital 
classrooms, toilet facilities etc.; 
x. Reasons for difference between data on various facilities in schools 
available on UDISI Plus portal and ground reality;  
xi. Need for cross verification of data available on UDISI Plus portal; 
xii.  Need to make provision for playgrounds and sports facilities in 
Government schools; 
xiii. Need to take steps for attention deficit and dyslexia in Government 
schools; 
xiv. Need to control instances of Child abuse and corporal punishment in 
schools; 
xv. Digital divide in education and lack of necessary digital infrastructure in 
rural areas; 
xvi. Need to monitor claim of electricity and broadband facilities in 
Government schools through monthly bills for such facilities; 
xvii. Issue in operation of national toll-free helpline; 
xviii. Lack of counselling facilities for children in schools and need for 
monitoring of schemes for appointment of counsellors for students;   
xix. Status of reimbursement to Private schools in lieu of admission of 
students under EWS Quota under RTE Act; 
xx. Number of schools with single teachers;   
xxi. Steps being taken to upgrade syllabus/standard of State education 
board. 
xxii. Steps being taken to reduce dropout rate in higher secondary schools. 
xxiii. Need to make availability of special educators for Divyang Students; 
xxiv. Guidelines for the number of sections in schools and maintaining the right 
teacher: student ratio; 
xxv. Issue of low pupil/teacher ratio (PTR)  in Gov ernment schools across 
India; 
xxvi. Quality of teachers in Government schools especially in rural India; 

237 
 
xxvii. Poor implementation of PM SHRI scheme including low budgetary 
allocation and fund utilization; 
xxviii. Issue of teacher absenteeism in schools; 
xxix. Lack of monitoring and oversight mechanism of State Education Boards 
by the Ministry; 
xxx. Issues in implementation of PM Poshan scheme such as lack of Aadhaar 
linkage, revision of rates etc. 
xxxi. Policy of government to enhance school education in States with 
significant tribal population and forest areas such as Chhattisgarh;  
xxxii. Lack of infrastructure and facilities in schools in Left -Wing Extremist 
(LWE) affected areas; 
xxxiii. Lack of skill development programmes for students in school; and 
xxxiv. Lack of online availability of teacher’s profile and educational 
qualifications in CBSE affiliated schools. 
 
6.    The representatives of the Ministry responded to some of the queries raised by the 
Members. Thereafter, the Chairperson thanked the representatives of the Ministry and 
asked them to furnish written replies, on the points, for which information was not readily 
available, within fifteen days. 
 
(The witnesses, then, withdrew) 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept on record. 
 
 
 
 
 

238 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2026-2027) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 10th August, 2026 from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. 
in Samanvaya - 03, Parliament House (New Parliament Building), New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
                      Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal  - Chairperson 
  
  Members 
 
2.  Shri Brijmohan Agarwal 
3.  Shri M. Mallesh Babu 
4.  Shri P.P. Chaudhary 
5.  Shri Chandan Chauhan 
6.  Ms Iqra Choudhary 
7.  Shri Anil Yeshwant Desai 
8.  Shri Manish Jaiswal 
9.  Shri Jugal Kishore 
10.  Thiru Dayanidhi Maran 
11.  Smt Pratima Mondal 
12.  Shri B.K Parthasarathi 
13.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
14.  Kumari Selja 
15.  Dr Bhola Singh 
16.  Shri Ve. Vaithilingam 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
                                   1.      Smt Juby Amar            -  Joint Secretary 
                          2.     Shri Shangreiso Zimik        - Director 
      3.   Smt. Sonia Khanna   - Deputy Secretary 
 
                              

239 
 
 
 
2.         At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption of the following 
draft Report: 
“Draft Report of the Committee on the subject “ Budget and Policy aspects for 
providing Affordable and Quality Education in the Country including Review of 
Central Board of Secondary.” 
 
3.        Thereafter, the Committee adopted the Draft Report. The Committee, then, 
authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Report and present the same to Lok 
Sabha. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 