 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY 
 
Implementation of Development of Solar Parks and Ultra Mega Solar 
Power Projects - A review 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 31st 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2024-25) 
 
 
FIRST REPORT 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  

 
 
FIRST REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2024-25) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY 
 
Implementation of Development of Solar Parks and Ultra Mega Solar 
Power Projects - A review 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in the 31st Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
Estimates] 
 
(Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2024) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
.........December 2024/........ Agrahayana 1946 (Saka) 
 
 

 
 
     CONTENTS          Page No. 
 
      
Composition of the Committee on Estimates (2024-25)          (ii) 
 
Introduction           (iv) 
      
         
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Committee on Estimates held on 
16.12.2024 
 
32 
II. Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 31st Report of 
 the Committee on Estimates (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
34 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-I Report  1 
CHAPTER-II    Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government         
14 
CHAPTER-III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply 
27 
CHAPTER-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government’s replies have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
30 
CHAPTER-V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply 
of Government is still awaited 
31 

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2024-25) 
1.  Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal- Chairperson 
2.  Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3.  Shri M. Mallesh Babu 
4.  Shri Kalyan Banjerjee 
5.  Shri Pradan Baruah 
6.  Shri Charanjit Singh Channi 
7.  Shri P.P. Chaudhary 
8.  Shri Devusinh Chauhan 
9.  Ms. Iqra Choudhary 
10.  Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
11.  Shri Sudheer Gupta 
12.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
13.  Shri Manish Jaiswal 
14.  Shri Naveen Jindal 
15.  Shri Jugal Kishore 
16.  Thiru Dayanidhi Maran 
17.  Shri P.C. Mohan 
18.  Shri B.K. Parthasarathi 
19.  Shri Awadhesh Prasad 
20.  Shri M.K. Raghavan 
21.  Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
22.  Shri Y.S. Avinash Reddy 
23.  Shri Pratap Rudy 
24.  Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan 
25.  Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
26.  Kumari Selja 
27.  Dr. Bhola Singh 
28.  Dr. Indra Hang Subba 
29.  Shri Manoj Tiwari 
30.  Shri Ve Vaithilingam 

iii 
 
Secretariat 
  
1. Shri Y.M. Kandpal Joint Secretary 
2. Shri  Lalkithang Director 
3. Shri Srikanth Singh R  Assistant Executive Officer 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
            I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Estimates (2024 -25) having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, do present this First 
Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
31st Report of the Committee (2023 -24) on the subject ‘Implementation of Development 
of Solar Parks and Ultra Mega Solar Power Projects - A review’. 
 
2.  The Thirty-First Report of the Committee on Estimates (2023 -24) was presented 
to Lok Sabha on 12 th December, 2023. The Government furnished their replies 
indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in the Thirty -First Report on 
12th July, 2024. The draft report was considered and approved on 16 th December, 2024 
by the Committee. 
 
3.  An analysis of action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 31 st Report of the Committee on 
Estimates is given in Appendix-II. 
 
4.  For ease of reference, Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have 
been presented in bold letters in the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
16 December, 2024              
Agrahayana 25, 1946(Saka) 
Dr. SANJAY JAISWAL 
CHAIRPERSON 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
 
 
  
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
  
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the  Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in the Thirty First Report  
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject “Implementation of Development of Solar 
Parks and Ultra Mega Solar Power Projects - A review” pertaining to the Ministry of New 
and Renewable Energy. 
  
2.       The Thirty-First Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 12.12.2023. It contained 
12 Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Replies of the Government in 
respect to all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from the Ministry 
of New and Renewable Energy. 
 
3. Replies to the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report have 
broadly been categorised as under:-   
  
(i)       Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Recommendation. Para No. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,10 and 11    
      Total 09 
(Chapter-II) 
  
(ii)      Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s reply: 
Recommendation. Para No. 8,9 and12       
           
 Total: 03  
(Chapter-III)  
  
(iii)     Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government’s replies 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation. Nos.    NIL        
           Total-00  
(Chapter-IV) 
  
 
(iv)    Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply of 
Government is still awaited:  
 Recommendation. No.  NIL                                                                                      
                 Total: 00 
(Chapter-V)  

2 
 
4.       The Committee desire that  Action Taken Notes in respect of the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report may be 
furnished to the Committee within 06 months of the Presentation of the Report to 
the House. 
 
5.       The Committee will now deal with the Observations/Recommendations which 
require reiteration or merit further comments. 
 
 (Recommendations Para No. 1) 
 
6. In their Thirty-First Report, the Committee had noted that India, endowed with a huge 
solar energy potential, could be a game changer in mitigating the ill -effects of fossil fuel 
use. The Scheme to establish Solar Parks and Ultra Mega Solar Power Projects by 
Ministry is a critical step in right direction. The MNRE, being nodal Ministry, has to put in 
concerted efforts so that solar energy surges as the main renewable energy source in 
the times to come. The Committee observed that there is significant potential for Solar 
Energy generation under Mode 8 of the Scheme which entails collaboration with 
CPSU/State PSUs/Government organizations/their subsidiaries or the Joint Ventures. 
The Committee noted that out of 29 approved Solar Parks having aggregate capacity of 
over 24 GW, only 9.3 GW had been actually commissioned. Taking cognizance of the 
gap between actual and approved capacity, the Committee urged the Ministry to devise 
a stringent mechanism through which delays are minimized/eliminated at the first place 
itself. The Ministry  should keep periodic check (say quarterly or so) on different stages 
of development of solar parks so that the time lapse of setting up and commissioning of 
solar parks are minimized. The Committee would like to be apprised of the previous 
interventions, the Ministry made in the past and the ways and means through which it 
would continue to strengthen the process of setting up of solar parks. Therefore, the 
Committee stressed upon to have effective monitoring and review mechanism at senior 
level so that the targeted capacity could be achieved within the timeline. 
 

3 
 
7. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy in their Action Taken Reply furnished to 
the Committee, stated as follows: 
 “The Ministry issued the guidelines for development of the Solar Parks and U ltra 
Mega Solar Power Projects for setting up 20,000 MW capacity in 
December’2014. This was later enhanced to 40 GW in March’2017. To address 
the issues faced during the implementation of the scheme, Ministry had modified 
the guidelines from time to time t o ensure better implementation. In -line with this, 
the guidelines for Mode -8 of the scheme were issued by this Ministry to engage 
CPSUs/State PSUs/Government Organisations and their Joint Ventures for 
development of Solar Parks. 
Further, to address various  issues arising during Park development, Ministry has 
been conducting regular meetings with all the stakeholders like the Solar Power 
Park Developers (SPPDs), Central Transmission Utility (CTU)/ State 
Transmission Utility (STU), concerned State Government agencies etc. under the 
Chairmanship of Joint Secretary/Secretary/Hon’ble Minister. Ministry also obtains 
the periodic (monthly) progress reports for tracking the progress of the Solar 
Parks. 
As per the recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee, Ministry has  constituted a 
Solar Park monitoring unit under the chairmanship of concerned Joint Secretary 
and with senior level representatives from Ministry of Power, SECI, IREDA, CTU, 
and Grid India. The monitoring unit will periodically review the progress of the 
Solar Parks.The members of the unit will also take note of the issues being faced 
by the park developers in developing the Solar Parks and take pro -active 
measures for mitigatingthe same. 
In addition, Ministry is also developing a portal for tracking and ef fective 
monitoring of the progress of Solar Parks. This portal is under final stages of 
development”. 
 

4 
 
8. Taking cognizance of the gap between actual and approved capacity in the 
development Solar Parks and Ultra Mega Solar Power Projects, the Committee 
had urged the Ministry to devise a stringent mechanism through which delays are 
minimized/eliminated and had suggested that the Ministry should establish 
periodic check s (quarterly reviews ) to ensure setting up and commissioning of 
solar parks are completed in a timely manner . Further, the Committee had 
stressed the importance of  effective senior level monitoring and review 
mechanism to ensure that the set targets are met within the timeline. In their 
action taken reply, the Ministry have outlined several ste ps being taken to 
address various issues arising during Solar Park development such as issuance 
of guidelines to develop Solar Parks, enhancing targets to 40 GW, updating 
guidelines from time to time, development of Portal for tracking Solar Parks’ 
progress and conducting regular meetings with all the stakeholders under the 
Chairmanship of Joint Secretary/Secretary/Hon’ble Minister etc.  The Committee 
are pleased to note that the Ministry, acting on the recommendations of the 
Committee has constituted a Solar Park monitoring unit under the chairmanship 
of concerned Joint Secretary and with senior level representatives from Ministry 
of Power, SECI, IREDA, CTU, and Grid India. However, despite these efforts, the 
Committee remain concerned about the persistent gap between the approved 
capacity (24 GW) and the actual commissioned capacity (9.3 GW). While the 
Committee acknowledge the Ministry’ s efforts, the Committee feel that the 
Ministry’s reply lacks clarity on steps to address the root causes of the delays 
and the timeline for taking action. There is also no clarity on how the new 
measures, such as monitoring unit and tracking portal, will directly impact and 
accelerate development of solar projects. Therefore, the Committee feel that more 
concrete steps with strict timelines are needed to address the ongoing delays 
and challenges in Solar Park development. Hence, the Committee strongly 
reiterate their Original Recommendation and urge the Ministry to make all out 
efforts to address the systemic challenges and ensuring that the mechanism in 
place have a direct and measurable impact on the solar park development 
project. The Committee would lik e to be apprised about the latest progress made 

5 
 
in development of Portal for tracking and effective monitoring of the progress of 
Solar Parks.  
(Recommendations Para No. 3) 
9. The Committee, in their Thirty -First Report, had noted that, under the solar par k 
scheme, CPSUs/SECs were primarily the implementing agencies, designated to 
establish 7 solar parks of a combined installed capacity of 5.97 GW. Taking cognizance 
of the fact that generation/transmissions were yet to begin from these 7 solar parks, the 
Committee felt that MNRE being the nodal Ministry had to take up the responsibility of 
dedicated leadership in a way to sensitize/ motivate CPSUs like NTPC, NHPC, SECI 
etc. so that the latter gear up their operations. The Committee firmly believed that with 
combined efforts the timeline for setting up of solar parks shall be achieved without any 
further delays. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken in this 
regard. 
10. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy in their Action Taken Reply, s tated as 
follows: 
“Out of the 7 Solar Parks being developed by CPSUs like NTPC, SECI & NHPC 
as referred by the Hon’ble Committee, one Solar Park of 100 MW has been 
commissioned by SECI in Chhattisgarh. The remaining 6 Solar Parks are under 
implementation. The progress is being monitored regularly and the issues 
related to them are addressed from time to time.” 
11. Noting the delays in the establishment of Solar Parks by concerned 
CPSUs/SECs, which were primarily responsible for establishing 7 solar parks, the 
Committee felt that the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy being the nodal 
Ministry had to play a more active leadership role in sensitizing/ motivating the 
CPSUs like NTPC, NHPC, SECI etc. so that they expedite their efforts and meet 
the timelines wi thout further delays .  The Committee note from the Action taken 
reply received from the Ministry that out of the 7 Solar Parks being developed by 
CPSUs like NTPC, SECI & NHPC, only one Solar Park of 100 MW has been 
commissioned by SECI in Chhattisgarh, while the remaining 6 Sola r Parks are 

6 
 
under implementation and the progress is being monitored regularly and the 
issues related to them are addressed from time to time. The Committee are not 
satisfied with the reply of the Ministry, as it lacked clarity on the specific steps 
being taken to motivate or sensitize the CPSUs, and did not highlight any clear 
leadership initiatives or action plans to overcome delays. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their original recommendation and would also like to be 
apprised about the latest progr ess in the form of a detailed statement indicating 
the various reasons for delay in the implementation of each of the 7 Solar Parks, 
steps being taken to expedite the completion of the Solar Parks and timelines for 
the commissioning of the remaining Parks.  
(Recommendations Para No. 6) 
12.  The Committee in their Thirty -First Report had noted that  one of the challenges to 
meet the target of 40 GW by 2023 -24 is delay in finalizing Power Purchase Agreements 
(PPAs) between SPPDs and States/DISCOMS after finali zation of tenders. This delay 
can be attributed to several factors, including lack clear directions from parent Ministry, 
a protracted internal approval process, involvement of multiple Ministries, lack of prior 
experience within the Government Departments etc. The potential consequences of this 
situation are multifaceted including delay in project implementation, changes in scheme 
regulations, costs and incentives, developers withdrawing from projects and financial 
losses for the entities involved. Taking a serious view of this situation, the Committee 
recommended the Ministry to establish a single window system which would minimize 
the complexities of internal approval process reducing the involvement of multiple 
Ministries. The Committee firmly held that the Ministry should collaborate with 
specialized agencies to develop standardized model formats for PPAs and fix definite 
time period for different levels of approval. These models can serve as templates, 
simplifying the negotiation process and expediting the overall execution of Solar Power 
Projects. 
13.  The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy in their Action Taken Reply, stated as 
follows: 

7 
 
“The Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) are signed between Solar Project 
Developers and States/DISCOMs in cases of tenders being issued by State 
Agencies. For tenders issued by Renewable Energy Implementing Agencies 
(REIAs), the Power Sale Agreements (PSAs) are signed between the REIAs & 
the States/DISCOMs and the PPAs are signed back -to-back between the 
REIAs and the Solar Project Developers.  
These PPAs are bi -lateral agreements between the two entities and this 
Ministry or any other Central Government Mini stries have no direct involvement 
in execution of such PPAs.  
However, Ministry of Power has issued standard bidding guidelines under 
section 63 of the Electricity Act, 2003, for procurement of power from solar, 
wind, wind -solar hybrid, and Firm & Dispatch able Power. These standard 
bidding guidelines also provides indicative timeline for bid process. The PPAs 
are framed broadly in accordance with these guidelines”.  
14.  The Committee in their original report had highlighted that delays in finalizing 
Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) between S olar Power Parks Developers 
(SPPDs) and States/DISCOMS as one of the significant challenges in achieving 
the target of 40 GW target by 2023 -24. The Committee had attributed these delays 
to factors such as lack of clear directions from the Ministry, prolonged internal 
approval process, involvement of multiple M inistries after finalization of tenders . 
To address this, the Committee had recommended the Ministry to establish a 
single window system to minimize the complexities of internal approval process 
reducing the involvement of multiple Ministries . Further, the Committee had also 
suggested the Ministry to collaborate with specialized agencies to develop 
standardized model formats for PPAs and fix definite time period for various 
levels of approval . The Ministry of New and Renewable energy , in their action 
taken reply furnished to the Committee, stated that PPAs are bi -lateral 
agreements signed between Solar Project Developers and States/DISCOMs and 
that Ministry or any other Central Government Ministries have no direct 
involvement in their execution.  Further, the Ministry pointed out that Ministry of 

8 
 
Power has already issued standard bidding guidelines under section 63 of the 
Electricity Act, 2003 , which provide indicative timeline for bidding process. The 
Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministr y, as it does not address 
the Committee’s recommendations for simplifying the process and reducing 
bureaucratic bottlenecks. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation for establishment of  a single window system and develop 
standardized PPA templates to set definite timelines for the approval process at 
each level within the Ministry. The Committee expect the Ministry to take 
immediate action in implementing these recommendations and apprise them on 
the progress made.  
 
(Recommendations Para No. 7) 
15. In their Thirty-First Report, the Committee had noted that several Solar Projects are 
stalled due to refusal by State Electricity Regulatory Commissions (SERCs) to approve 
tariffs, even when such tariffs have been determine d through tariff based competitive 
bidding.  
Additionally, certain Solar Parks like Dholera Solar Park (1000 MW) in Gujarat and 
Kadapa Solar Park (1000 MW) in Andhra Pradesh are currently under litigation in the 
Appellate Tribunal for Electricity (APTEL), leading to further delays in completion of 
Solar Projects. While Min istry had  statedly tried to resolve the matter through various 
communication and review meetings at the highest level but the matter is yet to be 
resolved. In light of these challenges, the Committee felt that the Ministry needed to find 
a permanent solution to this problem and explore the possibility of implementing 
alternative dispute resolution mechanisms, such as arbitration and reconciliation forum 
to enable the stakeholders to reach a t mutually agreed solution; in a bid to avoid project 
delays.  
16. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy in their Action Taken Reply, stated as 
follows: 

9 
 
“Ministry had taken up the matter with the Forum of Regulators (FoR) and also 
during the review meetings held with the concerned States on various occasions. 
Similar matter was discussed in a meeting jointly chaired by Secretary, MNRE 
and Secretary, Ministry of Power (MoP) wherein it was inter alia discussed that, 
in order to avoid delays in adoption: 
i. Ministry of Power would take up the matter with CERC for not insisting on the 
signed copy of the PPA and signed copy of the PSA for adoption of tariffs under 
Section 63 of the Electricity Act, 2003. 
ii. Ministry of Power may also examine on whether adviso ry can be issued to 
SERCs for not insisting on approval by CERC under Section 63 of the Electricity 
Act, 2003, as an ab -initio pre-requisite for process for approval by SERCs under 
Section 86(1)(b) of the Electricity Act, 2003 and starting the process of a pproval 
under Section 86(1)(b) of the Electricity Act, 2003, in parallel, while the decision 
of CERC on tariff adoption under Section 63 of the Electricity Act, 2003, is 
ongoing. 
The Ministry has set up a Dispute Resolution Mechanism, which provides for an  
independent, transparent and unbiased Dispute Resolution Committee (DRC), for 
resolving the unforeseen disputes that may arise in implementation of contractual 
agreements and also for dealing with issues which are beyond the scope of 
Contractual Agreement s between Renewable Energy (RE) Power Developers/ 
EPC Contractors and SECI/ NTPC/ NHPC/ SJVN/ any other Renewable Energy 
Implementing Agency (REIA), designated by MNRE. The aforesaid Dispute 
Resolution Mechanism is also applicable for the PPAs between enti ties under 
State Governments/ UT Govts.  /Administration and RE Power Developers, 
provided the concerned State/UT Government/ entity, undertake to incur the 
sitting fee of the DRC Members and associated expenditure in respect of these 
cases before the DRC and also abide by the decisi on coming out of this 
mechanism.” 
 

10 
 
17. The Committee, in their Original Report,  had noted that several Solar Projects 
were stalled due to refusal by State Electricity Regulatory Commissions (SERCs) 
to approve tariffs, despite t hese tariffs being determined through tariff based 
competitive bidding. The Committee had also pointed out that certain Solar Parks 
like Dholera Solar Park (1000 MW) in Gujarat and Kadapa Solar Park (1000 MW) in 
Andhra Pradesh were currently under litigati on in the Appellate Tribunal for 
Electricity (APTEL), leading to further delays in completion of Solar Projects. The 
Committee had recommended the Ministry to find a permanent solution to these 
challenges by exploring alternate dispute resolution mechanism  to help 
stakeholders reach mutually agreeable solutions and avoid project delays. The 
Ministry, in their Action taken Reply, have  stated that , they have taken up the 
matter of stalled Solar Projects with the Forum of Regulators  (FoR) and Ministry 
of Power to address the tariff adoption issue. The Ministry also stated that they 
have set up a Dispute Resolution Mechanism (DRM) to resolve the disputes 
during the implementation of Solar Projects. The Committee are not satisfied with  
the reply of the Ministry, as it only addresses the dispute resolution process and 
tariff adoption through adjustments such as engaging with Central Electricity  
Regulatory Commission(CERC)  and providing advisories to SERCs. While these 
efforts are valuable, the Committee feel the Ministry’s reply does not fully address 
the permanent solution of issues leading to delays, particularly the ongoing 
litigation and tariff approval blockages. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
earlier recommendation and once again urge the Ministry to develop a clear and 
actionable strategy. Further, the Committee urge the Ministry to furnish details in 
the form of a detailed Statement about the Dispute Resolution Committee (DRC)  
setup by the Ministry for dealing with iss ues which are beyond the scope of 
Contractual Agreements between Renewable Energy (RE) , Power Developers/ 
EPC Contractors and SECI/ NTPC/ NHPC/ SJVN/ any other Renewable Energy 
Implementing Agency (REIA), designated by MNRE at the earliest.  
 
 

11 
 
(Recommendations Para No. 10) 
18. In their Thirty - First Report, the Committee noted the challenges being faced by 
several Solar Parks in Rajasthan such as Phalodi -Pokaran Solar Park (750 MW) and 
the Nokh Solar Park (925 MW) in relation to the endangered Great Indian Bustard(GIB) 
issue. These majestic birds are on the brink of extinction, with less than 100 remaining 
in the natural habitat. Given their size, any collision with the power lines proves fatal for 
such birds, and the network of power lines stemming from solar plants have also formed 
a deadly web around the GIB habitat. As a result their population has significantly 
dwindled over the last few years. Furthermore, it has been learnt that on 19.04.2021, 
Hon’ble Supreme Court has passed an order in M. K. Ranjitsi nh &Ors. V. Union of India 
&Ors., outlining direction and measures to be taken particularly regarding the 
conversion of over -head power transmission lines into underground power lines in the 
areas identified as Priority and Potential habitats for the Great  Indian Bustard (GIB). In 
this regard, Hon’ble Supreme Court had also constituted a three member Committee 
comprising of wildlife experts and Scientists for the purpose of assessing the feasibility 
of laying underground power lines. Acknowledging the gravi ty of the issue, the 
Committee fe lt the need to strike a rightful balance between wildlife conservation, 
especially Great Indian Bustard and development of Green Energy initiatives. The 
Committee urge d the Ministry to explore advanced technological methods like 
microwaves for wireless transmission of solar power from solar parks in such critical 
locations to protect these endangered species. 
19. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy in their Action T aken Note, stated as 
follows: 
“The last hearing on the GIB issue was held on 21.03.2024. Vide Order dated 
21.03.2024, Hon’ble Supreme Court has constituted an Expert Committee. The 
remit of the committee inter -alia include determining the scope, feasibility and 
extent of overhead and underground electric lines in the area identified as priority 
area in the reports of the Wild Life Institute of India in the States of Rajasthan and 
Gujarat. Further, Hon’ble Supreme Court has stated that the injunction which has 
been imposed in the Hon’ble Supreme Court order dated 19th April 2021 in 

12 
 
respect of the area described as the potential area shall accordingly stand 
relaxed subject to the condition that the Expert Committee appointed by this 
Court may lay down suitable parameters covering both the p riority and potential 
areas. The Committee shall be at liberty to impose any additional measures both 
in regard to the priority and potential areas, if it considers appropriate including 
considering the efficacy and suitability of installing bird diverters  on existing and 
future power lines. The Committee has been directed by the Hon'ble Supreme 
Court to complete its task and submit a report to the Court through the Union 
Government on or before 31st July 2024. 
As regards advanced technological methods like  wireless power transmission, it 
is submitted that this technology is currently in its early or nascent stages and 
presents certain challenges like overall efficiency degradation. The wireless 
power transmission technology is commercially not ava ilable for  large power 
transfer.” 
20. The Committee, in their Original Report, had highlighted the challenges posed 
to the Great Indian Bustard (GIB) by power transmission lines in solar parks in 
Rajasthan and emphasized the  need to strike a rightful balance between  wildlife 
conservation and development of Green Energy initiatives. Further, t he 
Committee had urged the Ministry to explore advanced technological methods 
like microwaves for wireless transmission of solar power from solar parks in 
such critical locations to protect these endangered species.  The Ministry, in their 
Action taken Reply, have informed that vide Order dated 21.03.2024,  Hon’ble 
Supreme Court has constituted an Expert Committee  for determining the scope, 
feasibility and extent of overhead and und erground electric lines in the area 
identified as priority area in the reports of the Wild Life Institute of India in the 
States of Rajasthan and Gujarat and that the Expert Committee has been directed 
by the Hon'ble Supreme Court to complete its task and submit a report to the 
Court through the Union Government on or before 31st July 2024 . The Committee 
feel that the Ministry should not just await the implementation of the expert 
Committee report but also actively explore and implement interim mitigation 

13 
 
measures, such as installation of bird diverters on existing power lines, to 
minimize risks to the Great Indian Bustard(GIB) population. Further, the 
Committee would like to be apprised about the latest status of Report of the 
Expert Committee which was due on 31st July, 2024 and the steps being taken for 
Great Indian Bustard conservation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

14 
 
Chapter – II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Observations/Recommendations(No. 1) 
 
 The Committee note that India, endowed with a huge solar energy potential, could 
be a game changer in mitigating the ill -effects of fossil fuel use. The Scheme to establish 
Solar Parks and Ultra Mega Solar Power Projects by Ministry is a critical step in r ight 
direction. The MNRE, being nodal Ministry, has to put in concerted efforts so that solar 
energy surges as the main renewable energy source in the times to come. The 
Committee observe that there is significant potential for Solar Energy generation unde r 
Mode 8 of the Scheme which entails collaboration with CPSU/State PSUs/Government 
organizations/their subsidiaries or the Joint Ventures. The Committee note with the 
approval of total of 29 Solar Parks having aggregate capacity of over 24 GW, only 9.3 
GW has been actually commissioned.  Taking cognizance of the gap between actual and 
approved capacity, the Committee urge the Ministry to devise a stringent mechanism 
through which delays are minimized/eliminated at the first place itself.  The Ministry 
should keep periodic check (say quarterly or so) on different   stages of development of 
solar parks so that the time lapse of setting up and commissioning of solar parks are 
minimized. The Committee would like to be apprised of the previous interventions, the 
Ministry made in the past and the ways and means through which it would continue to 
strengthen the process of setting up of solar parks.  Therefore, the Committee stress 
upon to have effective monitoring and review mechanism at senior level so that the 
targeted capacity could be achieved within the timeline.  
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry issued the guidelines for development of the Solar Parks and Ultra Mega 
Solar Power Projects for setting up 20,000 MW capacity in December’2014. This was 
later enhanced to 40,000 MW in March’2017. To address the issues faced during the 
implementation of the scheme, Ministry had modified the guidelines from time to time to 

15 
 
ensure better implementation. In -line with this, the guidelines for Mode -8 of the scheme 
were issued by this Ministry to engage CPSUs/State PSUs/Government Organisations 
and their Joint Ventures for development of Solar Parks. 
Further, to address various issues arising during Park development, Ministry has 
been conducting regular meetings with all the stakeholders like the Solar Power Park 
Developers (SPPDs), Central Transmissi on Utility (CTU)/ State Transmission Utility 
(STU), concerned State Government agencies etc. under the Chairmanship of Joint 
Secretary/Secretary/Hon’ble Minister. Ministry also obtains the periodic (monthly) 
progress reports for tracking the progress of the Solar Parks. 
As per the recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee, Ministry has constituted a 
Solar Park monitoring unit under the chairmanship of concerned Joint Secretary and 
with senior level representatives from Ministry of Power, SECI, IREDA, CTU, and  Grid 
India. The monitoring unit will periodically review the progress of the Solar Parks. The 
members of the unit will also take note of the issues being faced by the park developers 
in developing the Solar Parks and take pro-active measures for mitigating the same. 
In addition, Ministry is also developing a portal for tracking and effective 
monitoring of the progress of Solar Parks. This portal is under final stages of 
development. 
Comments of the Committee 
 
[Please see Para 08 of Chapter-I of the Report] 
Observations/Recommendations(No. 2) 
 
 The Committee observe that the land constitutes the crux in the development of 
Solar Parks. The requirement of land is approximately 4 -5 acres per Megawatt (MW) for 
setting up of Solar Parks. Land for the setting up o f Solar Park is generally identified by 
the State/UT Government unless the SPPD has its own land.  The Ministry in their written 
submission has stated that out of 2.2 Lakh acres identified, around 1.73 lakh acres have 
already been acquired/ allotted for ap proved Solar Parks. Further, the Committee have 

16 
 
been informed that a total of 19 Solar Parks with an approved capacity of 9596 MW are 
facing several challenges in acquirement of land including issues such as legal disputes 
and delay in land allocation by S tate Governments. The Committee strongly feel that 
assisting State Governments in providing fair and timely compensation to land owners 
would provide a great boost to the solar park developers along with ensuring ease in 
getting environmental clearances. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to take up 
the matter with the State Governments so as to ensure acquisition of land in a time 
bound manner. The Committee also suggest the Ministry to set up a monitoring Unit/Cell 
at the highest level for having  issues of stakeholders and keeping a regular check on 
Solar Park Developers. 
Reply of the Government 
Under Mode-8 of the Solar Park Scheme, in order to encourage the State Governments 
to provide necessary assistance to the park developers in identificatio n & acquisition of 
land, to facilitate in obtaining all required statutory clearances etc., a facilitation charge 
of ₹0.05/unit of power being generated from the projects in the parks, is provided to 
them. 
The issues w.r.t land are also taken up in the review meetings conducted with 
various stakeholders including the State Governments. Ministry has also written to the 
various State Governments for identifying suitable government land for the installation 
of RE projects, fixing fair compensation and its t imely payment for private lands and 
easing out land -related rules (changing the land use and making exemptions from the 
land ceiling limit) for RE projects. 
Based on the suggestion of the Hon’ble Committee, Ministry has constituted a 
Solar Park Monitoring Unit comprising of representatives from MNRE, Ministry of 
Power, SECI, IREDA, CTU and Grid India to monitor the progress of Solar Parks and 
take measures to mitigate the issues while implementation. 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 3) 
 The Committee n ote that, under the solar park scheme, CPSUs/SECs are 
primarily the implementing agencies, designated to establish 7 solar parks of a combined 

17 
 
installed capacity of 5970 MW.  Taking cognizance of the fact that  
generation/transmissions are yet to begin fro m these 7 solar parks, the Committee feel 
that MNRE being the nodal Ministry has to take up the responsibility of dedicated 
leadership in a way to sensitize/ motivate CPSUs like NTPC, NHPC, SECI etc. so that 
the latter gear up their operations. The Committ ee firmly believe that with combined 
efforts the timeline for setting up of solar parks shall be achieved without any further 
delays.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
“Out of the 7 Solar Parks being developed by CPSUs like NTPC, SECI & NHPC as 
referred by the Hon’ble Committee, one Solar Park of 100 MW has been commissioned 
by SECI in Chhattisgarh. The remaining 6 Solar Parks are under implementation. The 
progress is being monitored regula rly and the issues related to them are addressed 
from time to time.” 
Comments of the Committee 
 
[Please see Para 11 of Chapter-I of the Report] 
Observations/Recommendations(No. 4) 
 
 The Committee note that the total amount for CFA is estimated to be ₹ 4,050 
crore, yet only ₹ 1803.79 crore have actually been disbursed till date.  The Committee 
find such low disbursement as one of the major bottlenecks in the development of solar 
parks. For the setting up of solar parks, Central Financial Assistance (CFA) up to ₹ 25 
lakh per Solar Park for the preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR) is provided by 
the Ministry.  Additionally, CFA upto ₹ 20.00 lakh per Megawatt or 30% of the project 
cost, including Grid -connectivity expenses, whichever is lower, upon achieving the 
specified project milestones is also prescribed in the Scheme. Further, Solar Energy 
Corporation of India Ltd. (SECI) disburses the approved grant in line with these 
milestones. The Committee would like to urge the Ministry to analyse the reasons 
associated with lower disbursements. A strong fund flow is imperative for successful 
development of any project and the Committee would like the Ministry to put in place an 

18 
 
inherent system of audit wherein reasons for low disbursements are highlighted and the 
Ministry is in a position to take timely remedial measures for the same. They would like to 
be apprised of the steps taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
The total outla y of the scheme was initially Rs. 4050 Crore when the capacity was 
20,000 MW. Subsequently, the scheme capacity was enhanced to 40,000 MW and 
correspondingly, the CFA was revised to Rs. 8100 Crore. 
The funds are released to the concerned Solar Power Park D eveloper (SPPD) 
after they achieve the milestone stipulated in the guidelines of the Solar Park Scheme 
and subsequent verification of the same by the Implementing agencies i.e. SECI & 
IREDA. The first milestone under the scheme for release of CFA is acquisition of 50% of 
the required land by the park developer. Since land acquisition takes time, the release 
of CFA also gets delayed. 
However, the release of fund under the scheme has increased from ~Rs. 1842 
Crore from introduction of the scheme (2014 -15) till 2021-22 to ~Rs. 3410 Crore as on 
date. Hence, this indicates that the fund flow has accelerated due to the progress being 
made under the scheme. Ministry is reviewing the progress on regular basis and 
ensures that the funds are released in a time bound m anner as and when the 
milestones are achieved by the Solar Power Park Developers. 
At the beginning of the financial year, Ministry along with the scheme 
implementing agencies (SECI & IREDA) and the Solar Power Park Developers 
(SPPDs), prepares an estimate of the funds to be released along with the tentative 
milestones. Subsequently, the Ministry monitors the achievement of those milestones 
and addresses any impediments faced by the SPPDs for timely release of the CFA. 
Observations/Recommendations(No. 5) 
 
 The Committee further find that one of the major constraints in timely 
commissioning of Solar Parks is the difference in gestation period between development 

19 
 
of Solar Parks and transmission infrastructure.  The gestation period of development of 
Solar Park is 24 months, whereas the construction activities of transmission infrastructure 
require 36 to 48 months. This incongruity results in delays in the development of Solar 
Parks. The Committee are informed that the Ministry is taking several steps such as 
identification of Renewable Energy (RE) potential zones, planning for transmission 
infrastructure accordingly etc. Additionally, MNRE in collaboration with the Ministry of 
Power,  Central Electricity Agency (CEA), Central Transmission Utility (CTU) and the 
States has initiated steps to complete the Green Energy Corridor (GEC) and other 
transmission projects on time. The objective is to ensure that Solar Parks do not have to 
suffer from lack of reliable evacuation and transmission Infrastructure. The Committee 
desire to be informed about the latest progress made in development of transmission 
infrastructure like Green Energy Corridor etc. Furthermore, the Committee strongly 
recommend the speedy construction of Intra -State and Inter -State transmission systems 
to f acilitate the efficient transfer of power generated from Solar Parks. The Committee 
also urge for setting up of Solar Energy Management Centers (SEMCs) to enhance 
forecasting of Solar Power generated from Solar Parks. These centres would also 
support grid operators in managing the variability and intermittency inherent in renewable 
power sources. 
Reply of the Government 
The Government of India has taken several crucial steps to ensure the timely, effective, 
and efficient evacuation of renewable energy acros s the country. These steps are listed 
below: (i) Establishment of Green Energy Corridor (GEC): To facilitate the integration of 
large-scale renewable generation capacity in eight resource rich states —Rajasthan, 
Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, and 
Madhya Pradesh - a comprehensive plan was developed under the “Green Energy 
Corridors” initiative. This plan involves strengthening the transmission infrastructure at 
both intra -state and inter -state levels to integrate  renewable energy sources into the 
grid. Additionally, it encompassed the establishment of control infrastructure, such as 
Renewable Energy Management Centers (REMCs), which handle forecasting and 

20 
 
scheduling of renewable generation to manage the intermitte ncy and variability of RE 
capacity at the SLDC/RLDC/NLDC levels. 
Under the scheme, an Inter -State Transmission system has been developed, 
comprising 6 numbers of 765kV / 400kV substations, 3200 ckm of high -capacity lines, 
and a transformation capacity of 1 7,000 MVA facilitating integration of 6 GW of 
renewable energy generation capacity.  
Under the Intra -State Transmission System GEC Phase -I scheme, 9135ckm of 
transmission lines have been constructed and 21313 MVA capacity substations have 
been charged as on 30.06.2024 out of target of 9767 ckm lines and 22689 MVA 
substations.  
The projects  under Intra -State GEC Phase -II scheme are currently under the 
tender stage. Out of 92 packages, 68 have been tendered. Of these, 45 have been 
awarded as on 30.06.2024. 
The project under Inter -State GEC Phase -II shall enable evacuation and grid 
integration of 13 GW renewable power projects in| Ladhak through VSC based +350 kV 
HVDC transmission line from Pang (Leh) to Kaithal (Haryana) which is first of its kind 
system in world in such topography. It is expected to be completed by FY 2029-30. 
(ii) Transmissi on Scheme for Solar Power Parks: Under this initiative, POWERGRID 
has developed transmission systems totalling 1,870 ckm of transmission lines and 
established 5 pooling stations with a transformation capacity of approximately 13,500 
MVA. These systems conn ect seven solar parks with a combined capacity of 
approximately 6500 MW, namely Ananthapur (1500 MW), Pavagada (2050 MW), Rewa 
(750 MW), Bhadla -III (500 MW), Bhadla -IV (250 MW), Essel (750 MW), and 
Banaskantha (700 MW). The transmission systems for remaini ng parks are 
developed/being developed by STU/CTU. 
(iii) Status of Transmission System Development to achieve GOI target of 500GW by 
2030: India aims to integrate 50% non -fossil fuel -based power generation into its 
installed capacity mix by 2030, with a ta rget of establishing 500 GW capacity from non -

21 
 
fossil energy sources. To achieve this, the Government of India has published a 
Transmission Plan in December 2022. This plan outlines the need for 50,890 ckm of 
additional transmission lines and 4,33,575 MVA o f transformation capacity under ISTS 
to integrate planned RE capacity. Currently, 200 GW of non -fossil energy capacity is 
already connected to the grid. Out of the remaining 300 GW, approximately 199 GW will 
be connected through ISTS. Implementation of the  ISTS network for this 199 GW is 
progressing with 89 GW under construction, 47 GW under bidding, 63 GW under 
approval, and the remainder in planning stages. The phased implementation of 
transmission systems aligns with the commissioning schedules of RE pro jects and solar 
parks. 
(iv) Renewable Energy Management Centers (REMCs): To address the challenges of 
forecasting and scheduling Renewable Energy generation integrated with the existing 
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition System (SCADA), the Governmen t has 
established 12 Renewable Energy Management Centres and 1 Energy Management 
Centre co-located at SLDC/RLDC/NLDC locations across Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, 
Karnataka, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Telangana, South 
Andaman, SRLDC, W RLDC, and NRLDC. These centers are instrumental in 
forecasting, scheduling, and monitoring wind and solar Variable Renewable Energy 
(VRE) resources. 
Observations/Recommendations(No. 6) 
 
 The Committee have been informed that one of the challenges to meet t he target 
of 40 GW by 2023 -24 is delay in finalizing Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) between 
SPPDs and States/DISCOMS after finalization of tenders. This delay can be attributed to 
several factors, including lack clear directions from parent Ministry, a p rotracted internal 
approval process, involvement of multiple Ministries, lack of prior experience within the 
Government Departments etc.  The potential consequences of this situation are 
multifaceted including delay in project implementation, changes in sc heme regulations, 
costs and incentives, developers withdrawing from projects and financial losses for the 
entities involved.  Taking a serious view of this situation, the Committee recommend the 

22 
 
Ministry to establish a single window system which would mini mize the complexities of 
internal approval process reducing the involvement of multiple Ministries. The Committee 
firmly hold that the Ministry should collaborate with specialized agencies to develop 
standardized model formats for PPAs and fix definite tim e period for different levels of 
approval.  These models can serve as templates, simplifying the negotiation process and 
expediting the overall execution of Solar Power Projects.  
Reply of the Government 
The Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) are signed betw een Solar Project Developers 
and States/DISCOMs in cases of tenders being issued by State Agencies. For tenders 
issued by Renewable Energy Implementing Agencies (REIAs), the Power Sale 
Agreements (PSAs) are signed between the REIAs & the States/DISCOMs and  the 
PPAs are signed back-to-back between the REIAs and the Solar Project Developers.  
These PPAs are bi -lateral agreements between the two entities and this Ministry 
or any other Central Government Ministries have no direct involvement in execution of 
such PPAs.  
However, Ministry of Power has issued standard bidding guidelines under section 
63 of the Electricity Act, 2003, for procurement of power from solar, wind, wind -solar 
hybrid, and Firm & Dispatchable Power. These standard bidding guidelines also 
provides indicative timeline for bid process. The PPAs are framed broadly in 
accordance with these guidelines. 
Comments of the Committee 
 
[Please see Para 14 of Chapter-I of the Report] 
Observations/Recommendations(No. 7) 
 
 The Committee note that several Solar Projects are stalled due to refusal by State 
Electricity Regulatory Commissions (SERCs) to approve tariffs, even when such tariffs 
have been determined through tariff based competitive bidding. Additionally, certain Solar 
Parks like Dholera Solar Park (1000 MW) in Gujarat and Kadapa Solar Park (1000 MW) 

23 
 
in Andhra Pradesh are currently under litigation in the Appellate Tribunal for Electricity 
(APTEL), leading to further delays in completion of Solar Projects. While Mini stry have 
statedly  tried to resolve the matter through various communication and review meetings 
at the highest level but the matter is yet to be resolved. In light of these challenges, the 
Committee feel that the Ministry need to find a permanent solutio n to this problem and 
explore the possibility of implementing alternative dispute resolution mechanisms, such 
as arbitration and reconciliation forum to enable the stakeholders to reach  at mutually 
agreed solution; in a bid to avoid project delays.  
Reply of the Government 
Ministry had taken up the matter with the Forum of Regulators (FoR) and also during 
the review meetings held with the concerned States on various occasions. Similar 
matter was discussed in a meeting jointly chaired by Secretary, MNRE and  Secretary, 
Ministry of Power (MoP) wherein it was inter alia discussed that, in order to avoid delays 
in adoption: 
i. Ministry of Power would take up the matter with CERC for not insisting on the 
signed copy of the PPA and signed copy of the PSA for adoption of tariffs under Section 
63 of the Electricity Act, 2003. 
ii. Ministry of Power may also examine on whether advisory can be issued to 
SERCs for not insisting on approval by CERC under Section 63 of the Electricity Act, 
2003, as an ab -initio pre -requisite for process for approval by SERCs under Section 
86(1)(b) of the Electricity Act, 2003 and starting the process of approval under Section 
86(1)(b) of the Electricity Act, 2003, in parallel, while the decision of CERC on tariff 
adoption under Section 63 of the Electricity Act, 2003, is ongoing. 
The Ministry has set up a Dispute Resolution Mechanism, which provides for an 
independent, transparent and unbiased Dispute Resolution Committee (DRC), for 
resolving the unforeseen disputes that may arise in impleme ntation of contractual 
agreements and also for dealing with issues which are beyond the scope of Contractual 
Agreements between Renewable Energy (RE) Power Developers/ EPC Contractors and 
SECI/ NTPC/ NHPC/ SJVN/ any other Renewable Energy Implementing Agen cy 

24 
 
(REIA), designated by MNRE. The aforesaid Dispute Resolution Mechanism is also 
applicable for the PPAs between entities under State Governments/ UT Govts.  
Administration and RE Power Developers, provided the concerned State/UT 
Government/ entity, under take to incur the sitting fee of the DRC Members and 
associated expenditure in respect of these cases before the DRC and also abide by the 
decision coming out of this mechanism. 
Comments of the Committee 
 
[Please see Para 17 of Chapter-I of the Report] 
Observations/Recommendations(No. 10) 
 
 The Committee are well aware of the challenges being faced by several Solar 
Parks in Rajasthan such as Phalodi -Pokaran Solar Park (750 MW) and the Nokh Solar 
Park (925 MW) in relation to the endangered Great Indian Bu stard(GIB) issue. These 
majestic birds are on the brink of extinction, with less than 100 remaining in the natural 
habitat. Given their size, any collision with the power lines proves fatal for such birds, and 
the network of power lines stemming from solar  plants have also formed a deadly web 
around the GIB habitat. As a result their population has significantly dwindled over the 
last few years. Furthermore, it has been learnt that on 19.04.2021, Hon’ble Supreme 
Court has passed an order in M. K. Ranjitsinh  & Ors. V. Union of India & Ors., outlining 
direction and measures to be taken particularly regarding the conversion of over -head 
power transmission lines into underground power lines in the areas identified as Priority 
and Potential habitats for the Great  Indian Bustard (GIB).  In this regard, Hon’ble 
Supreme Court had also constituted a three member Committee comprising of wildlife 
experts and Scientists for the purpose of assessing the feasibility of laying underground 
power lines. Acknowledging the gravity of the issue, the Committee feel the need to strike 
a rightful balance between wildlife conservation, especially Great Indian Bustard and 
development of Green Energy initiatives. The Committee urge the Ministry to explore 
advanced technological methods  like microwaves for wireless transmission of solar 
power from solar parks in such critical locations to protect these endangered species.  

25 
 
Reply of the Government 
The last hearing on the GIB issue was held on 21.03.2024. Vide Order dated 
21.03.2024, Hon’ble Supreme Court has constituted an Expert Committee. The remit of 
the committee inter -alia include determining the scope, feasibility and extent of 
overhead and underground electric lines in the area identified as priority area in the 
reports of the Wild Life Institute of India in the States of Rajasthan and Gujarat. Further, 
Hon’ble Supreme Court has stated that the injunction which has been imposed in the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court order dated 19th April 2021 in respect of the area described as 
the potential area shall accordingly stand relaxed subject to the condition that the Expert 
Committee appointed by this Court may lay down suitable parameters covering both the 
priority and potential areas. The Committee shall be at liberty to impose any additional 
measures both in regard to the priority and potential areas, if it considers appropriate 
including considering the efficacy and suitability of installing bird diverters on existing 
and future power lines. The Committee has been directed by the Hon'ble Supreme 
Court to complete its task and submit a report to the Court through the Union 
Government on or before 31st July 2024. 
As regards advanced technological methods like wireless power transmission, it 
is submitted that this technology is currently in its early  or nascent stages and presents 
certain challenges like overall efficiency degradation. The wireless power transmission 
technology is commercially not available for large power transfer. 
Observations/Recommendations(No. 11) 
 
 The Committee note that several Solar Projects are experiencing delays in 
finalization of their external power evacuation systems and transmission infrastructure 
primarily because these projects are located in forest areas. This situation has apparently 
caused delay in implementation of projects like Barethi Solar Park (630 MW) and 
Chhatarpur Solar Park (950 MW), which are situated within Panna Tiger reserve. The 
Committee feel that the Ministry Should collaborate with all relevant stakeholders viz. 
Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change, Central Electricity Authority (CEA), 
Central Transmission Unit (CTU)/State Transmission Unit (STU), Solar Power Park 

26 
 
Developers (SSPDs) and other concerned Ministries/Departments of the Union and the 
States, to e volve a comprehensive action plan, to ensure hassle free and time bound 
external power evacuation systems and transmission infrastructure for solar parks, 
especially for those located in forest areas.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry had earlier cancelled some parks, as the land identified for development of the 
Solar Parks was falling under forest land. The Chhatarpur Solar Park (450 MW, 
previously 950 MW) was also falling under this category which led to its cancellation 
subsequently. 
Ministry h as taken up such issues (Kaza and Kinnaur Solar Parks in Himachal 
Pradesh) with Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change to provide 
relaxations, which subsequently did not materialize leading to cancellation of the Solar 
Parks.  
Accordingly, Minis try in subsequent proposals under the Solar Park Scheme, 
requests the concerned agencies to ensure that the land is free from all encumbrances 
or any constraints, including forest clearance, which may impede the development. Only 
after the same is ensured,  proposals were considered for sanctioning of capacity under 
the Solar Park Scheme. The Ministry keeps the CTU & CEA apprised of the approvals 
under the Solar Park Scheme, so that the transmission planning can be started in 
advance and minimize the delay. 
  

27 
 
CHAPTER III 
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
Observations/Recommendations(No.8) 
 
 The Committee have observed that several Solar Projects like Kalpi Solar Park (65 
MW) have been delayed because Solar Power Project Developers (SPPDs) are facing 
difficulties in acquiring Solar modules and Solar photovoltaic with a capacity of (PV) Cells 
due to levy of Basic Customs Duty(BCD). Further, on 09.03.2021, Ministry issued an 
Office Memorandum announcing the imposition of Basic Customs Duty on solar cells and 
modules. As per this announcement, w.e.f. 1 April, 2022, any import of solar PV modules 
would attract 40% basic Customs Duty (BCD), while the import of solar PV cells would 
have a 25% B CD. The Committee understand that these high import duties were 
imposed to reduce the influx of cheaper Solar components from China and to promote 
the domestic production of those items.  To encourage the growth of the domestic Solar 
module industry, the G overnment also introduced a Production -Linked Incentive (PLI) 
scheme. However, despite these measures, the domestic industry has not yet reached its 
full potential, and the combination of  high import duties and the Approved List of 
Modules and Manufacture rs (ALMM) has led to a shortage of modules in the country, 
impacting ongoing solar projects.  The Committee strongly hope   that the matter should 
be taken up with the Ministry of Finance on an urgent basis. Since the BCD rates need to 
be reevaluated, and a more balanced approach has to be taken to ensure that stalled 
Solar Projects are completed according to their planned timelines, the Committee would 
like to be  apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
It is submitted that th e 65 MW Kalpi Solar Park in Uttar Pradesh is complete and the 
projects inside the park are also commissioned. 
This Ministry has taken various policy measures and schemes such as imposition of 
Domestic Content Requirement (DCR) in certain schemes, Productio n-Linked Incentive 

28 
 
(PLI) scheme etc.to boost the domestic manufacturing of solar cells and modules in the 
country. As of June, 2024, the installed manufacturing capacity of solar module in the 
country is around 58 GW, which is more than 3.5 times the solar  power capacity installed 
in the country in FY 2023 -24. Hence, there is sufficient manufacturing capacity for solar 
PV modules in the country. 
Observations/Recommendations(No 9) 
 The Committee observe that India has made significant progress in its Solar ( PV) 
manufacturing capacity with 6 GW for solar PV Cells and approximately 38 GW for solar 
PV modules. This represents a substantial increase from 2020 when India had the  solar 
cell  capacity of 3 GW, which has doubled to 6 GW as of March 2023. Similarly t he solar 
PV module capacity, meanwhile, has grown from 15 GW to 38 GW during the same 
period of time. The Committee appreciate that Ministry has taken significant steps such 
as creating “favorable” policy environment by introducing the PLI scheme, and 
establishing a list of approved modules and manufacturers. These measures have played 
a pivotal role in doubling India’s solar cell and PV module capacity since 2020. These 
measures are expected for prospering domestic Solar manufacturing industry towards 
achieving 110 GW of solar PV module capacity by fiscal 2026, with an additional 72 GW 
of new manufacturing capacity set to come up within the next three years. This 
substantial expansion will establish self -sufficiency and make India the second -largest 
PV manu facturing country globally following China. Nevertheless, to further strengthen 
domestic manufacturing, the Committee feel that additional steps are required to be 
initiated and therefore recommend that Government should consider extending the 
existing PLI  scheme to cover other ancillary components, such as glass and ethylene 
vinyl acetate which are used in Solar panel lamination.  There need to be sufficient 
incentives to encourage electricity consumption among solar PV manufacturers, 
alongwith subsidies t o support the initial capital costs involved in setting up production 
facilities. The Committee also desire that the exemptions from excise duty and Zero 
import duty on raw materials should be implemented to reduce the manufacturing costs. 
The Ministry should also work on providing Viability Gap Funding (VGF) and low interest 
rate loans to domestic manufacturers to enhance their financial viability.  

29 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Government is implementing PLI Scheme for high efficiency solar PV modules, 
which has inherent provision for incentivizing local value addition in the country by 
providing higher PLI for higher local value addition. This in -turn incentivizes local 
sourcing of ancillary components, such as glass and ethylene vinyl acetate.  
The Government has incentivizes in the form of policy initiatives like 
announcement of 'Green Energy Open Access' Rules which inter-alia allow consumer to 
purchase renewable power thr ough open access. Further, the said rule has put a cap 
on increasing of cross -subsidy surcharge as well as the removal of additional 
surcharge, encouraging the consumers to go green. 
The Ministry regularly interacts with domestic solar PV manufacturers thr ough 
monthly meeting under the chairmanship of Secretary, MNRE to review the issues of 
Solar manufacturers, including the ancillary manufacturers. The issues of customs 
duty/GST which are highlighted are taken up with Ministry of Finance. 
Due to various ef forts taken by the Government, the solar module manufacturing 
capacity has reached around 58 GW as of June 2024. 
 
Observations/Recommendations(No. 12) 
 The Committee note that the floating Solar Parks are facing maintenance issues. 
The SECI and MNRE are re portedly deliberating highly automated solutions to address 
those. The Committee desire to be furnished the action taken on this issue. 
Reply of the Government 
The floating solar projects which are already developed are mostly setup outside the 
Solar Park Scheme. One project of 100 MW has been installed in the 600 MW 
Omkareswar Floating Solar Park under the Solar Park Scheme and no issues in 
maintenance were reported. 
However, the Ministry and SECI will monitor the progress of the floating parks, in 
collaboration with the park developers. 
  

30 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
NIL 
 
  

31 
 
CHAPTER V 
Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which final replies of Government 
are still awaited 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
16 December, 2024              
Agrahayana 25, 1946(Saka) 
Dr. SANJAY JAISWAL 
CHAIRPERSON 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
  

32 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2024-
2025) 
  
The Committee sat on Monday, the 16 th December, 2024 from 1600 hrs. to …… 
hrs. in Room No. ‘52-B’, First Floor, Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal  - Chairperson 
  
  Members 
 
2.  Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3.  Shri M. Mallesh Babu 
4.  Shri Pradan Baruah 
5.  Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
6.  Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
7.  Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
8.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
9.  Shri Manish Jaiswal 
10.  Thiru Dayanidhi Maran 
11.  Shri P. C. Mohan 
12.  Shri B.K. Parthasarathi 
13.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
14.  Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan 
15.  Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
16.  Kumari Selja 
17.  Dr. Indra Hang Subba 
18.  Shri Manoj Tiwari 
19.  Shri Ve vaithilingam 
 
   
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
                                   1.      Shri Y. M. Kandpal        -      Joint Secretary 
                             2.      Shri  Lalkithang           -       Director 
                              

33 
 
2.         At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption of the following  
draft Reports: 
(i) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 31st Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee on the subject “Implementation of Development 
of Solar Parks and Ultra Mega Solar Power Projects - A review”; 
(ii) XXX    XXX    XXX 
(iii) XXX    XXX    XXX 
(iv) XXX    XXX    XXX   and 
 
(v) XXX    XXX    XXX 
 
 
3.        Thereafter, the Committee adopted the Draft Reports without any modifications . 
The Committee, then, authorised the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports and 
present the same to Lok Sabha. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
  

34 
 
APPENDIX II 
Analysis of action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in the Thirty-First 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)  
(i) Total number of recommendations/observations 12 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
 the Government: 
(SI. NO. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,10 and 11) 
09 
 Percentage of total recommendations 75% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not  
desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply: 
(SI. NO. 8,9 and 12) 
Percentage of total recommendations 
03 
 
 
25% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government’s 
replies have not been accepted by the Committee: 
(NIL) 
Percentage of total recommendations 
00 
 
 
    00% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply of 
Government is still awaited: 
(NIL) 
Percentage of total recommendations 
00 
 
 
00% 
 
 
 
 