2 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
Review of Performance of National Rural Infrastructure Development 
Agency (NRIDA) w.r.t. Implementation of Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak 
Yojana (PMGSY) 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 32nd    
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2024-25) 
 
 
 
SECOND REPORT  
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  

SECOND REPORT  
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2024-25) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
Review of Performance of National Rural Infrastructure 
Development Agency (NRIDA) w.r.t. Implementation of 
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 32nd   
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
 
(Presented to Lok Sabha on 18 December 2024) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December 2024/Agrahayana 1946 (Saka) 
 

     CONTENTS          Page No. 
 
      
Composition of the Committee on Estimates (2024-25)          (ii) 
 
Introduction           (iv) 
      
             
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Committee on Estimates held on 
16.12.2024 
 
  41 
II. Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 32 nd   Report of the 
Committee on Estimates (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
  43 
 
 
CHAPTER-I Report   1 
 
CHAPTER-II    Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government         
20 
 
 
CHAPTER-III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply 
31 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government’s replies have not been accepted by the Committee 
35 
 
 
CHAPTER-V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply of 
Government is still awaited 
40 

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2024-25) 
1.  Dr. Sanjay Jaiwal- Chairperson 
2.  Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3.  Shri M. Mallesh Babu 
4.  Shri Kalyan Banjerjee 
5.  Shri Pradan Baruah 
6.  Shri Charanjit Singh Channi 
7.  Shri P.P. Chaudhary 
8.  Shri Devusinh Chauhan 
9.  Ms. Iqra Choudhary 
10.  Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
11.  Shri Sudheer Gupta 
12.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
13.  Shri Manish Jaiswal 
14.  Shri Naveen Jindal 
15.  Shri Jugal Kishore 
16.  Thiru Dayanidhi Maran 
17.  Shri P.C. Mohan 
18.  Shri B.K. Parthasarathi 
19.  Shri Awadhesh Prasad 
20.  Shri M.K. Raghavan 
21.  Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
22.  Shri Y.S. Avinash Reddy 
23.  Shri Pratap Rudy 
24.  Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan 
25.  Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
26.  Kumari Selja 
27.  Dr. Bhola Singh 
28.  Dr. Indra Hang Subba 
29.  Shri Manoj Tiwari 
30.  Shri Ve Vaithilingam 

iii 
 
Secretariat 
  
1. Shri Y.M. Kandpal Joint Secretary 
2. Shri  Lalkithang Director 
3. Shri Balram Sahu  Deputy Director 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
            I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Estimates (2024 -25) having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, do present this 2 nd 
Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
32nd Report of the Committee (2023 -24) on the subject ‘Review of Performance  of 
National Rural Infrastructure Development Agency (NRIDA) w.r.t. Implementation of 
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) ‘ 
 
2.  The 32nd Report of the Committee on Estimates (2023 -24) was presented to Lok 
Sabha on 2 nd February, 2026. The Government f urnished their replies indicating action 
taken on the recommendations contained in the 32 nd Report on 9 th August, 2024. The 
draft report was considered and approved on 16th December 2024 by the Committee. 
 
3.  An analysis of action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 32st Report of the Committee on Estimates is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                          DR. SANJAY JAISWAL                           
16 December 2024                                             CHAIRPERSON 
Agrahayana 25, 1946 (Saka)                COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES   
        

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirty -Second 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject “Review of Performance of National 
Rural Infrastructure Development Agency (NRIDA) w.r.t. Implementation of Pradhan 
Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)” pertaining to the Ministry of Rural Development. 
2. Thirty-Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 2 February 2024. It 
contained 12 Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Replies of the 
Government in respect to all the Observations/Recommendations have been received 
from the Ministry of Rural Development. 
3. Replies to the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report have 
broadly been categorized as under:- 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Recommendation. Para No.  1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7 
 Total -6 
(Chapter-II) 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s reply: 
Recommendation. Para No. 8, 11, 12 
                    Total -3 
(Chapter-III) 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government’s replies 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation. Para No. 3, 9, 10                     Total -3 
(Chapter-IV) 
(vi) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply of 
Government is still awaited: 
Recommendation. Para No. Nil                            
                                 Total -0 
(Chapter-V) 
 

2 
 
4. The Committee desire that  Action Taken Notes in respect of the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I may be furnished to them 
within six months of the presentation of the Report to the House. 
5. The Committee will now deal with the Observations/Recommendations which 
require reiteration or merit further comments.  
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
Need for dedicated PDs (Project Directors) 
6.     The Committee, in their Thirty -Second Report had Observed/Recommended as 
under: 
 “In the matters of national highways, Project Implementation Units (PIUs) are 
headed by a Project Director (PD), who, in turn, is supported by various other 
technical and accounts officers to oversee timely completion of the projects as 
per prescribed par ameters.  However, the Committee note that similar is not the 
case with PMGSY; roads being a State subject. The Committee have observed 
that the scheme of PMGSY is for rural roads where the implementing agencies 
are the respective State Governments, who pl ay a major role in selection of 
roads, processing bids for selection of contractors, construction of roads and 
oversee the construction of roads/bridges.  Taking cognizance of this, the 
Committee recommend the Ministry to bring a system of appointment of P Ds for 
PMGSY; dedicated leadership for a geographically demarcated area for proper 
construction vis -à-vis completion of projects. For this the Committee also 
recommend that the guidelines of PMGSY should be amended to that effect.”  
7. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Rural Development have submitted as 
under: 
‘Rural road’ is a State Subject and construction of roads is a responsibility of the 
State Governments. The Ministry of Rural Development has amended PMGSY 
guidelines to strengthen States' roles, making them responsible for overseeing 
implementation, ensuring timely completion and quality control, and coordinating 

3 
 
with stakeholders, while also empowering them to prepare and submit project 
proposals for approval, enhancing scheme implementati on efficiency and 
effectiveness. The States have duly constituted, well -established State Rural 
Roads Development Agencies for execution of PMGSY works.  
8. The Committee, recognizing the need for dedicated leadership in 
overseeing construction activities,  had recommended the Ministry to bring in a 
system of  appointment of dedicated Project Directors (PDs) for PMGSY projects, 
similar to the system followed in National Highways Sector to ensure effective 
oversight of construction and timely project completi on and also amending 
PMGSY guidelines suitably to that effect. The Ministry in their action taken reply 
have responded by reiterating that ‘Rural Roads’ being a State subject, 
construction of these roads is the responsibility of State Governments. The 
Ministry further stated that the PMGSY guidelines have already been amended to 
strengthen the role of States. The Committee are not satisfied with the response 
of the Ministry as their suggestion for appointment of PDs has not been 
addressed in the reply. The Committee therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and once again urge the Ministry to consider the appointment of 
dedicated Project Directors to enhance and oversee project management and 
ensure smoother execution of rural road projects for timel y execution of rural 
road infrastructure projects across the country. 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
Focus on all round development  
9.     The Committee in their Report had observed/recommended as under: 
 “The Committee have been informed that Under PMGSY -I, a total of 6,45,189 
kilometers of road length (comprising 1,64,686 roads and 7,484 bridges) has 
been sanctioned to provide all -weather road connectivity to previously 
unconnected habitations and 6,22,2 96 kilometers of road length (1,62,558 roads 
and 6,805 bridges) have already been completed leaving a backlog of 2,128 
roads with a total road length of 22,893 kilometers and 679 bridges.  Out of this, 

4 
 
981 kilometers of road length and 5 bridges in Chhatti sgarh, 659 kilometers of 
road length and 88 bridges in Bihar are pending for completion. Similarly, under 
the PMGSY -II, launched in 2013 with the objective of consolidating 50,000 
kilometers of eligible rural roads to facilitate more cost -effective transportation of 
goods and services, a total of 49,856 kilometers of road length (including 6,692 
roads and 763 bridges) has been sanctioned. Out of this, 48,609 kilometers 
(comprising 6,439 roads and 711 bridges) have been completed by July 12, 
2023. However, 253 roads covering a distance of 711 kilometers and 52 bridges 
are awaiting completion with the deadline of March, 2024.The Ministry has cited 
various factors contributing to this backlog, including inadequate execution and 
contracting capacity, challenging terrain, adverse weather conditions and security 
concerns, etc. 
The Committee have observed that both under PMGSY -I&II, the roads 
that are yet to be constructed, are mostly either in North East/Hilly regions or in 
States like Chhattisgarh and Bihar etc. The Committee are of the strong view that 
for a balanced development in a country like India full of different terrains, the 
onus lies on the Ministry to ensure that schemes are well framed/modulated for 
those “special” regions as well. The Committee, there fore, urge the Ministry to 
take up the matter of pendency in the construction of roads in the hilly/North East 
regions with MoDONER and should resolve the issues in conjunction with the 
State Governments. The Committee also emphasis the need to focus on 
completion of roads and bridges under PMGSY I&II in the States like 
Chhattisgarh and Bihar without further delay.”  
10. The Ministry of Rural Development, in their Action Taken Reply have submitted 
as under: 
“Under PMGSY-I, a total of 6,44,878 km of road len gth (comprising 1,64,612 roads 
and 7,469 bridges) has been sanctioned to provide all-weather road connectivity and 
6,24,430 km of road length (1,63, 420 roads and 7,120 bridges) have already been 
completed leaving a backlog of 1,192 roads with a total road  length of 4,699 km and 
349 bridges.   Similarly, under the PMGSY -II, a total of 49,834 km of road length 

5 
 
(including 6,679 roads and 759 bridges) has been sanctioned.   Out of this, 49,014 
km (comprising 6,560 roads and 746 bridges) have already been complet ed as on 
09.7.2024. However, 119 roads covering a length of 289 km and 13 bridges are 
awaiting completion.   The Ministry of Rural Development has undertaken several 
efforts to ensure the completion of sanctioned works under PMGSY-I and PMGSY-II: 
 Regular Monitoring and Review:  The Ministry conducts regular monitoring 
and review meetings with states/UTs to track the progress of the projects and 
identify any bottlenecks. The Ministry conducted a regional review meeting for 
NE Region in the month of February, 2 024, to take stock of the pace of work 
in the region and expedite project completion.  
 Timely Release of Funds:  The Ministry ensures the timely release of funds 
to states/UTs for the implementation of PMGSY projects, thereby enabling 
them to expedite the construction works. 
 Technical Support: The Ministry provides technical support to states/UTs in 
the form of guidelines, manuals, and capacity -building programs, including 
workshops on new/ green technologies, to enhance their project 
implementation capabilities. 
 Coordination with Other Stakeholders:  The Ministry coordinates with other 
stakeholders, such as Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change of India, state governments, executing agencies, 
and contractors, to streamline the project implementation process and resolve 
any issues that may arise. 
 Public Awareness Campaigns:  The Ministry conducts public awareness 
campaigns to educate the local communities about the importance of PMGSY 
projects and their role in ensuring timely completion. 
 Use of Technology:  The Ministry promotes the use of technology, such as 
GIS mapping and mobile applications, to monitor the progress of projects and 
improve transparency and accountability. 

6 
 
The Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) has prioritized the completion of 
roads and bridges under PMGSY-I and II in Chhattisgarh and Bihar. During different 
meetings, the issue has been brought to the notice of the Ministry of Development of 
North Eastern Region (MoDONER) to address issues in hilly and North East regions. 
Ministry of Rural Development has also reviewed and modified schemes to better 
suit the needs of special regions, ensuring balanced development across India's 
diverse terrains. Additionally, the Ministry has taken proactive steps to  address 
pending road construction issues in challenging regions, including regular monitoring 
and evaluation of progress.”  
11. The Committee, in their Original Report, had expressed concerns about 
significant backlog in the completion of roads and bridges constructions under 
the PMGSY-I and PMGSY -II, particularly in challenging regions like hilly terrains 
of North East India, Chha ttisgarh and Bihar. The Committee had noted that there 
are 2,128 roads with a total road length of 22,893 kms and 679 bridges pending 
under PMGSY -I and 253 roads covering a distance of 711 kms and 52 bridges 
pending under PMGSY -II. The Committee had, there fore, recommended that 
special focus must be made on resolving pendency in Chhattisgarh, Bihar and in 
the hilly North -East regions in collaboration with the Ministry of Development of 
North Eastern Region and State Governments. The Ministry, in their actio n taken 
reply, has acknowledged the backlog and have initiated several measures to 
address delays, such as monitoring, release of funds and coordination with 
various stakeholders. While acknowledging that the Ministry has made some 
progress in clearing the  backlog, the Committee are concerned  with the slow 
pace of construction work, particularly when the original deadline for completion 
of all these projects was by March, 2024. The Committee note that as on 
09.07.2024, there are 1,192 roads with a total ro ads length of 4,699 kms and 349 
bridges under PMGSY -I, and 119 roads covering 289 kms and 13 bridges still 
awaiting completion. The committee desire that the Ministry must take stronger 
and targeted actions to expedite the completion of the remaining works  under the 
scheme without any further delay and apprise them about the time bound action 
taken in this regard.  

7 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
Need to expedite Road Connectivity Project for Left Wing Extremism  
Affected Areas (RCPLWEA) 
12.     The Committee, in their Thirty -Second Report have observed/recommended as 
under: 
“The Committee are informed that out of 12,100 Km. of road length sanctioned in 
different  years since the inception of the scheme in 2017 -18  under this vertical, 
7851 Km. road length have been completed  which account for 65% (approx. ) of 
the target and the rest is to be completed by  March, 2024.  The Committee are 
of the view that establishing rural connectivity to bridge the gap in Left Wing 
Extremism Affected Areas (RCPLWEA ) with the mainstream regions is a 
challenge for the implementing agencies. However, any delay in completing the 
pending work would have adverse implications not only on the overall 
development of the region, but also in containing the Left Wing insurgency  in 
those areas. Therefore, the Committee desire that the nodal Ministry should 
collaborate with the Ministry of Home Affairs and the concerned State 
Government for better coordination and for completion of the sanctioned work 
within the targeted timeline.”  
13. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Rural Development, have submitted as 
under: 
“Under RCPLWEA, a total of 12,162 km of road length (comprising 1,345 roads 
and 705 bridges) has been sanctioned and 9,221 km of road length (892 roads 
and 417 b ridges) have already been completed leaving a backlog of 453 roads 
with a total road length of 2,845 km and 288 bridges.  
The Ministry of Rural Development has enhanced coordination with the Ministry 
of Home Affairs and State Governments to ensure timely completion of 
sanctioned work under the RCPLWEA scheme. Regular monitoring and joint 
reviews are being conducted to ensure the remaining road length is completed 

8 
 
by March 2025, with a focus on addressing challenges like inadequate 
resources, security concerns, and difficult terrain in Left Wing Extremism Affected 
Areas. To ensure successful implementation, MoRD is also buildin g the capacity 
of implementing agencies, providing necessary guidance, to complete pending 
work within the targeted timeline. Moreover, emphasis is being laid on 
constructing high -quality roads that can withstand harsh weather conditions, 
ensuring long -term connectivity and development in the region. Prioritization is 
also being given to completing roads in the most affected areas, ensuring the 
benefits of rural connectivity reach the most vulnerable populations.”  
14. The Committee, while acknowledging the  significant challenge  of 
establishing Rural Connectivity in Left Wing Extremism Affected Area (RCLWEA), 
had recommended the Ministry of Rural Development to collaborate with the 
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) and the concerned State Governments to ensure  
timely completion of road constructed under the Road Connectivity Project for 
the Left Wing Extremism affected Area (LWEA) Scheme by March, 2024. The 
Committee had stressed the importance of road connectivity in bridging gaps in 
Left Wing Extremism Affect ed Areas and its critical role in regional development 
and counter insurgency efforts. The Ministry of Rural Development, in their action 
taken reply have submitted that 76% of the target has been completed with 9221 
kms of roads and 417 bridges completed leaving a backlog of 435 roads with total 
road length of 2845 kms and 288 bridges. The Ministry cited challenges such as 
inadequate resources, security concerns and difficult terrain and have set a 
revised deadline of March, 2025 to complete the backlog. T he Ministry also 
highlighted enhanced coordination with MHA and State Governments, regular 
monitoring, capacity building measures for implementing agencies and a focus 
on constituting high quality, weather resistant road. Though the Committee 
appreciate th e efforts made by the Ministry in addressing the backlog, yet they 
find that Ministry’s reply lacks sufficient clarity on the specific steps taken, 
particularly regarding security reasons, resource allocation and coordination 
mechanisms. The Committee would like to know about the detailed framework for 
coordination between the MHA, Ministry of Rural Development, State 

9 
 
Governments and local agencies, including specific roles of each entity in 
ensuring timely completion of the sanctioned roads and resolving s ecurity 
issues. While understanding the complexities involved, the Committee urge the 
Ministry to strictly adhere to the revised deadline of March, 2025 and make every 
effort to complete the remaining roads and bridges within the extended timeline. 
The Min istry must continue to work with all stakeholders to address the 
resources, security and terrain challenges and expedite pending work. The 
Committee desire to be apprised about the status of completion of the works in 
Left Wing Extremism affected Area (LWEA) within 6 months of the presentation of 
this Report. 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
Need for stringent Quality Assurance Mechanism 
15.     The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that PMGSY envisages a three tier Quality Assurance 
Mechanism to ensure quality of roads and bridges constructed under the 
scheme. The first two tiers by PIU and independent Quality Monitors under 
respective State Governments and the third tier under NRIDA by independent 
National Quality Monitors (NQMs). The National Quality Monitors inspect projects 
selected on random basis.  To ensure credibility of inspections, independent 
monitors at second and third tier have to take at least 10 geo stamped digital 
photographs including one of the field laboratories for each work and to upload it 
on OMMAS -MIS portal. They also have to ensure that mandatory tests are 
carried out at specified intervals. In addition, district laboratories and state 
laboratories have also been established.  The Committee note that the first stage 
of quality assurance undertaken by PIU through an in -house mechanism by 
supervising the site quality control laboratory set up by the contractor for each 
package is crucial. Further, the Committee view that  inspection by NQM for 
quality control mechanism at national level  under NRIDA from 2017 -18 to 2022-
23 has been drastically reduced from 23% to 13.61% in terms of number of 

10 
 
inspections undertaken by State level  Quality Monitors under SRRDA during that 
period.  The C ommittee observe that in a comprehensive scheme like PMGSY, 
there is no unified quality monitoring mechanism, instead there are different 
quality assurance mechanism with no proper dimensions.  In view of this, the 
Committee urge the Ministry to relook int o the PMGSY guidelines and come with 
a unified monitoring mechanism which encompasses different parameters in 
place of existing fragmented monitoring mechanism. The Committee are of the 
view that a unified quality monitoring mechanism shall be indicative o f the flaws 
in the initial stages of construction so that roads and bridges constructed under 
PMGSY remain navigable till end of its life span of 10 years.  The Committee 
underlines the need for increase in number of field inspections by NQMs in 
proportion to the inspections undertaken by SQMs. They also strongly 
recommend that the nodal Ministry and NRIDA should strictly monitor action 
taken against contractors, who compromise on quality of roads and bridges 
constructed under PMGSY.  The Standard Bidding D ocument (SBD) should be 
revised in such a way so as to include stringent provision for reconstruction/ 
maintenance of damaged roads and bridges at the risk and cost of contractors 
during its life span. The nodal Ministry and NRIDA should play a proactive r ole in 
ensuring due diligence by contractors, instead of leaving it entirely on the State 
Government.”  
16. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Rural Development have submitted as 
under: 
“Quality assurance mechanism under PMGSY starts right from th e time of 
preparation of detailed project report (DPR) which is formulated based on the site 
conditions and guidelines / specifications developed by Indian Road Congress 
(IRC), which is the apex body for setting up road and bridge standards in the 
country. Best engineering practices / technology available in that part of the 
country is adopted in the DPR. Thereafter, detailed scrutiny of the technical 
provision of all DPR is carried out by the designated academic institutes, which 
are nominated as – State Technical Agencies (STA), In addition, selected DPRs 

11 
 
are also scrutinized by Principal Technical agencies (PTA), which are designated 
IITs / NITs of the country. Procurement of good contractor for executing the 
project is done through a transparent public p rocurement process using 
prescribed standard bidding document (SBD). The provisions of the bidding 
document are adequately formulated to give stress on construction of good 
quality projects. As per the SBD, non -establishment of field lab or unequipped 
field lab established by the contractor are made items of fundamental breach of 
contract and the contractor in such event is liable to face termination of contract 
and thus paying heavy penalty.  
Further, for the purpose of quality control during the execution  process, a 
three-tier quality control system has been put in place, wherein the primary 
responsibility of ensuring the quality lies with the Project Implementing Agency 
(PIU), who normally is a state officer, generally of the rank of executive engineer, 
who make payment to the contractor. PIU is primarily responsible for ensuring 
the quality of material being used in the projects and its workmanship meets the 
prescribed standards, as prescribed in the Specifications and are the part of the 
agreement betwee n him and the contractor. Since the PIU is the party to the 
legal contract (Agreement) between the department and the contractor, all 
powers to enforce the contract provision lies with him and the payment to the 
contractor is made, as per the provisions of  contract, only when the PIU is fully 
satisfied about the quality of the work done by the contractor. The second and 
third tier of quality monitoring system is essentially to strengthen the hands of the 
PIU and give appropriate suggestions to PIU to ensure  the quality of work, at 
each stage of construction. This Ministry has taken a note of the suggestions of 
the committee and would work for further strengthen the 1 st tier of quality 
monitoring mechanism, in consultation with States/ UTs for further improve ment 
in quality.    
As indicated above, the intent of both first and second tier of quality 
monitoring is to provide hand holding support to the PIU who is primarily 
responsible for maintaining quality. SQMs being managed by respective State/ 

12 
 
UT, it is req uired that SQM will inspect all works minimum three times during 
defined stages of execution. The close guidance provided by SQM will enable 
the PIU for making required interventions at appropriate time. Guidelines have 
been revised for a  unified quality m onitoring mechanism, field inspections by 
National Quality Monitors have been increased, and action taken reports are 
being intensively monitored.  
The standard bidding document (SBD) presently in vogue has inbuilt 
provision of maintaining the road for 5 y ears, post completion, which is also the 
defect liability period for the contractor who has executed the project. If there is 
any defect observed in the project during the entire defect liability period, the 
contractor is liable to rectify the defects at h is own cost. The release of 
performance security / security deposit of the contractor is structured in such a 
way that the risk of poor performance of the projects is covered appropriately. 
The Ministry of Rural Development has, accordingly, taken a series  of 
measures to enhance the quality of roads and bridges constructed under 
PMGSY, to address the Committee's concerns.”  
17. The Committee, in their original report, had raised several issues 
concerning the Quality Assurance Mechanism under the PMGSY.  Add ressing the 
fragmented three -tier quality assurance mechanism, the Committee had 
recommended the Ministry of Rural Development to adopt a uniform monitoring 
mechanism to ensure quality at each stage of the construction process. The 
Committee had also expre ssed concerns about the decrease in inspections by 
the National Quality Monitors (NQM) from 23% to 13.61% between 2017 -18 and 
2022-2023 and urged the Ministry to increase the number of inspections 
conducted by NQMs, besides ensuring strict accountability f or contractors, 
particularly in the form of stringent provisions in the standard bidding document 
(SBD) for long terms maintenance and reconstructions of damaged 
infrastructure. The Ministry while acknowledging the concerns of the Committee 
highlighted the  existing multi -tier system of quality control, with the Project 
Implementing Unit (PIU) as the primary authority for ensuring quality and the 

13 
 
State Quality Monitors (SQMs) providing  guidance and supervision. The Ministry 
also mentions efforts to increase  NQM inspections and revise guidelines to 
enhance the monitoring system. The Ministry also assured that provisions with 
SBD already hold contractors accountable for defects during the five year defeat 
liability period, with performance closely monitored.   
 The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry has taken note of the 
suggestions of the Committee and would work for further strengthening the first 
tier of quality mechanism, in consultation with States/UTs for further 
improvement of quality. The Commi ttee also appreciate the Ministry’s 
acknowledgement of the concerns expressed by the Committee and steps taken 
to enhance the quality assurance mechanism. However, the Committee reiterate 
the need for more unified and streamlined quality monitoring system,  as initially 
recommended, to eliminate fragmentation and ensure more effective and 
consistent check across all tiers of constructions. The Committee once again 
reiterate the need for tightening contractor’s accountability by revising the SBD 
to include st ringent provisions for reconstruction and maintenance of damaged 
roads throughout the entire life span of the road (i.e. 10 years), beyond the defect 
liability period.   
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
Need for planting of trees on the flanks of roads 
18.     The Committee in their Thirty -second Report have observed/recommended as 
under: 
“The Committee note that out of the sanctioned road length of 6,45,189 Km, 
6,22,003 Km. has been completed till 31 st March, 2023 under the new  
connectivity and upg radation component of PMGSY -I.  There is no mandatory 
provision for planting of trees on both sides of the roads being constructed under 
PMGSY-I&II launched in 2000 and 2013 respectively.   The reason for non 
inclusion of tree plantation along the roads co nstructed under PMGSY, as 
submitted by the Ministry, is that there is no land acquisition for PMGSY roads 

14 
 
and the land on both sides of PMGSY roads belong to the farmers.  Therefore, 
plantation can be done on land to be donated by farmers.   
The Committee have, however, observed that planting of fruit bearing and 
other substantial trees has been made mandatory under PMGSY -III launched in 
2019.  The responsibility for planting of trees has been assigned to State/UT 
Governments by using funds under MGNREGA an d other Central State 
Schemes.  Guidelines of Indian Road Congress are to be followed for plantation 
of trees on flanks of roads constructed under PMGSY -III.  The Committee note 
that construction of majority of rural roads have been completed under PMGSY -
I&II, but there is no mandatory provision for planting of trees along the roads 
constructed under it. Planting of trees along the roads have multifarious 
advantages like controlling vehicular pollution, checking soil erosion and 
consequent damage to roads e tc.  Therefore, the Committee urge the Ministry 
and NRIDA to amend the guidelines to include monetary support to State/UT 
Governments for mandatory planting of trees along rural roads constructed under 
PMGSY-I&II, rather than relying on guidelines of India n Road Congress and 
MGNREGA officers. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken 
in this regard.”  
19. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Rural Development have submitted as 
under: 
“The PMGSY guidelines (para 21.4) stipulate that planting of fruit bearing and 
other suitable trees, on both sides of the roads, is mandatorily taken up by the 
State Governments / Union Territories by using funds under Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme and other Central and State 
Schemes.  
It is also stipulated under PMGSY that Guidelines on Tree Plantation along Rural 
Roads (IRC:SP:103 -2014), published by Indian Roads Congress should be 
followed for plantation of trees along the roads constructed under PMGSY-III. 

15 
 
The State Governments are encouraged to converge with MGNREGA and other 
funds and utilize the expertise of available execution agencies for roadside 
planting and their maintenance”.   
20. The Committee, in their 32 nd Report, had expressed concerns about the 
lack of mandatory provisions for planting trees along roads constructed under 
PMGSY-I and PMGSY -II (launched in 2000 & 2013 respectively). The Committee 
pointed out that while tree plantation is mandatory under PMG SY-III, it is not so 
under phase-I & II of PMGSY, even though most rural roads have already been 
constructed under these phases. The Committee have urged the Ministry and 
National Rural Infrastructure Development Agency (NRIDA) to amend the 
guidelines for the earlier phases to ensure that the plantation is also implemented 
retrospectively. The Committee had emphasized the importance of providing 
monetary support to State/UT governments for the plantation of trees along the 
roads, rather than solely relying on voluntary participation through MGNREGA or 
other Central and State schemes. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, 
primarily discusses the provisions under PMGSY -III and the role of MGNERGA 
and other schemes in supporting the plantation of trees. Th e Committee are not 
satisfied with the Ministry’s reply as it does not fully address the Committee’s 
concerns about PMGSY -I & II, where no mandatory provision for tree plantation 
exists. The reply also does not mention how the financial support for plantin g 
trees in phase I & II will be ensured or what steps will be taken to mandate this 
action. Given the lack of clarity in the Ministry’s reply regarding the amendment 
of guidelines for PMGSY -I & II, the Committee reiterate their original 
recommendation and desire that the Ministry must take concrete steps to develop 
a clear, actionable plan that ensures the mandatory plantation of trees. The 
Committee desire to be apprised about action taken by the Ministry in this regard 
within six months of the presentation of this report.  
 
 

16 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
Need for proper maintenance of roads 
21.     The Committee in their Thirty -second Report have observed/recommended as 
under: 
“The Committee note that PMGSY guidelines stipulates that maintenance  of 
roads constructed under PMGSY is the responsibility   of State Governments.  All 
roads are to be mandatorily covered by initial 5 years of maintenance contract by 
the same contractor as per Standard Bidding Document.  Maintenance fund to 
service the co ntract are required to be budgeted by State Governments and 
placed at the disposal of State Rural Roads Development Agency (SDRRAs) in 
separate maintenance account. After 5 years, the roads are required to be 
placed under Zonal Maintenance Contracts for a further period of 5 years. Under 
PMGSY-III, Ministry signs MOU with the States for providing maintenance funds 
for 10 years. NRIDA has also prepared a Policy Framework and Guidance Note 
for maintenance of rural roads, which needs to be adopted and notified  at State 
level. Financial incentives under PMGSY -III are given to best performing States, 
which are used for maintenance of roads constructed under PMGSY.  The 
Committee are also informed that e -MARG and Performance Based 
Maintenances Contracts (PBMC) are also used for ensuring regular maintenance 
of rural roads. During deliberations, the Committee expressed dissatisfaction 
over bad condition of rural roads due to lack of maintenance. In certain cases, 
the roads are caved in or washed away due to floods and other natural calamities 
during Damage Liability Period (DLP) and the contractor is not liable under 
contractual terms for reconstruction of such roads. The Committee, therefore, are 
of the view that Ministry of RD and NRIDA should conduct a survey/data 
collection regarding all those rural roads constructed under PMGSY -I&II, which 
are not navigable due to natural calamities during DLP and those which are 
damaged or abandoned after 5 years of completion of construction. The 
Committee, further, recommend that the Ministry should include all  those roads 
which are damaged due to natural calamities during DLP for reconstruction under 

17 
 
PMGSY-III.  The Ministry should ensure that stringent action is taken against the 
contractors for unscientific and sub-substandard construction.”  
22. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Rural Development have submitted as 
under: 
“'Rural road' is a State subject and as per the programme guidelines of PMGSY, 
maintenance of roads constructed under the programme is the respon sibility of 
the State Governments and all road works are covered by initial five -year 
maintenance contracts to be entered into along with the construction contract, 
with the same contractor, as per the standard bidding document. Maintenance 
funds to servic e the contract are required to be budgeted by the State 
Governments and placed at the disposal of the State Rural Roads Development 
Agencies in a separate maintenance account. On the expiry of the 5 -year post-
construction maintenance, PMGSY roads are requi red to be placed under zonal 
maintenance contracts consisting of 5 -year maintenance including renewal as 
per maintenance cycle, from time to time, which are also financed by the State 
Governments.  
National Quality Monitors appointed by the Ministry are al so deputed to 
check the quality of maintenance work on PMGSY roads.  If any work is found 
having unsatisfactory grading, the concerned State Government is informed to 
get it rectified/ repaired. The quality grading of maintenance is monitored through 
Online Management, Monitoring and Accounting System i.e. the programme 
MIS. 
To further enhance the  focus on the maintenance of roads during the 
defect liability period and also streamline the delivery of routine maintenance of 
PMGSY roads, electronic Maintenance  of Rural Roads (eMARG) an e -
governance solution, has been introduced. 
The OMMAS and EMarg enable online monitoring of the status of road 
maintenance in the country.  

18 
 
State Governments take up repair of roads, damaged due to natural calamities, 
with the State Disaster Response Agencies. There is no such provision of funds 
under PMGSY.” 
23. The Committee had expressed concerns over the poor condition of rural 
roads constructed under PMGSY particularly after the expiration of the initial 5 
years maintenance period. They noted that some roads were rendered unusable 
due to natural calamities during the Damage Liability Period (DLP), and left 
abandoned or damaged without proper reconstructions. The Committee had, 
therefore, recommended the Ministry to conduct a  survey / data collection to 
identify roads that were not navigable during DLP or were damaged after 5 years 
and to include these roads for reconstruction under PMGSY -III. The Committee 
also urged for stringent action against contractors for substandard co nstructions 
and better enforcement of maintenance requirements. The Ministry of Rural 
Development, in their action taken reply, have reiterated that maintenance is the 
responsibility of State Governments, with an initial 5 years maintenance contract 
followed by a zonal maintenance contract. The Ministry highlighted the use of e -
MARD and OMMAS for online monitoring of road conditions and mentioned that 
repairs for damage due to natural calamities fall under the jurisdiction of State 
Disasters Response Agencies (SDRAs). The Committee are not satisfied with the 
reply of the Ministry, as it fails to address the Committee’s concerns regarding 
the lack of provision for roads damaged by natural calamities during the DLP.  
While the Ministry suggests that SDRAs hand le such repairs, it overlooks the 
need for a formalized process under PMGSY to ensure timely and effective 
reconstruction of these roads. The Ministry’s emphasis on State’s responsibility 
for maintenance, without additional financial or institutional suppo rt for roads 
damaged by natural calamities or those left in poor condition after the 
maintenance period, seems insufficient. The Committee’s recommendation for 
including such road under PMGSY -III has not been addressed by the Ministry. 
While the Ministry m entioned e -MARG and OMMAS as tools for monitoring road 
conditions and quality control, the use of these systems does not directly solve 
the core issue raised by the Committee - roads being abandoned or poorly 

19 
 
maintained post -construction. In view of this, the Committee strongly reiterate 
their original recommendation and urge the Ministry to conduct a comprehensive 
survey and ensure that these roads are included for reconstruction under 
PMGSY-III. The Committee also urge the Ministry to take immediate actio n to 
rectify the backlog of poorly maintained roads by providing State Governments 
with necessary support, including financial assistance, to restore these roads to 
a navigable condition. The Committee also desire that the Ministry should 
consider strengthening the accountability of contractors, ensuring that stringent 
measures are put in place for the reconstruction and maintenance of substandard 
roads and that action is taken against contractors who fail to meet the prescribed 
quality standards. The Commi ttee desire to be apprised about the concrete 
actions taken by the Ministry within six months of the presentation of this Report.  
 
 
  

20 
 
Chapter – II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 1) 
Role of NRIDA 
 
The committee noted that NRIDA, nodal implementation agency and technical 
arm of PMGSY Scheme, has been identified as the vehicle of  Ministry of Rural 
Development for steering the rural road projects by availing funds from internation al 
financial institutions like ADB, World Bank etc. NRIDA also plays a crucial role in setting 
benchmarks for excellence in rural road construction and  is expected to explore 
potential smart solutions to  improve delivery capacity of PMGSY on the ground by 
promoting cost effective Green/ New Technologies without time overruns and cost 
overruns. Taking into account the role of NRIDA, the committee would urge the 
implementing agency to explore and utilize IT enabled tools like e -MARG, Meri Sadak 
APP to enhance transparency across the system.  
The Committee have further noted that Meri Sadak APP has been enabled to 
register citizen feedback/complaint about non -PMGSY roads also. The Ministry has 
submitted that such feedback/complaints are forwarded to Central Pub lic Grievances 
Redressal and Monitoring  System (CPGRAMS) for necessary action. The complaints 
are forwarded to State Governments for redressal. The Committee feel that there 
should be a proper mechanism at the nodal Ministry level for analyzing the nature of 
complaints about PMGSY road registered on ‘Meri Sadak App’ and therefore, desire a 
strong redressal mechanism  at central level too.   As Research is fundamental 
requirement for excellence in any activity, the  Committee further urge Ministry of Rural 
Development to augment funds for the research and IT solutions so as to uplift the 
efficiency of the agency.  
 
 

21 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry has established a dedicated cell to analyze complaints received on 
subject matters of the Ministry. The cell also m onitors the redress of complaints on the 
'Meri Sadak App'. The cell is also supported by the programme division and NRIDA in 
taking up the grievances with the States for their timely resolution.  
Ministry has made provision for adequate funds to NRIDA duri ng 2024-25 which 
also includes funding for research and IT solutions in order to leverage technology for 
better scheme implementation and to enhance transparency, accountability and 
efficiency. The research initiatives have led to innovative solutions impr oving rural 
infrastructure and service delivery.  The Ministry, along with NRIDA, is continuously 
striving to effectively utilize these tools, making the program more efficient, transparent, 
and citizen-centric. 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 2) 
Financial Sufficiency 
 
The Committee note that under PMGSY, NRIDA is the vehicle for  execution of 
road projects and leveraging funds from different financial agencies like World Bank, 
Asian Development Bank etc. Ministry of Rural Development in their writt en submission 
has furnished figures of grant in aid received by NRIDA (from ADB & World Bank RRP -
II). Grants in Aid from ADB stood at Rs 1.5 crores (BE) for 2021 -22 while there was no 
expenditure incurred for the same period.   Further there has no allocati on for World 
Bank for 2021 -22 and 2022 -23. The Committee would urge the Ministry of Rural 
Development to explore the way out for restoration of financial assistance from 
international agencies like World Bank and ADB etc. The committee would like to be 
apprised of the steps taken by the Government in the regards.  
Reply of the Government 
The present verticals under implementation in PMGSY have full budgetary 
support as per the envisaged work programme. The suggestion of the Committee has 
been noted.  

22 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 4) 
 
Focus on All Round Development 
 
The Committee have been informed that Under PMGSY -I, a total of 6,45,189 
kilometers of road length (comprising 1,64686 roads and 7,484 bridges)   has been 
sanctioned to provide all -weather road connectivity to previously unconnected 
habitations and 6,22,296 kilometers of road length (1,62,558 roads and 6,805 bridges) 
have already been completed leaving a backlog of 2,128 roads with a total road length 
of 22,893 kilometers and 679 bridges.Out  of this, 981 kilometers of road length and 5 
bridges in Chhattisgarh, 659 kilometers of road length and 88 bridges in Bihar are 
pending for completion.    Similarly, under the PMGSY -II, launched in 2013 with the 
objective of consolidating 50,000 kilometers of eligible rural roads to facilitate more cost-
effective transportation of goods and services, a total of 49,856 kilometers of road 
length (including 6,692 roads and 763 bridges) has been sanctioned. Out of this, 48,609 
kilometers (comprising 6,439 roads  and 711 bridges) have been completed by July 12, 
2023. However, 253 roads covering a distance of 711 kilometers and 52 bridges are 
awaiting completion with the deadline of March, 2024. The Ministry has cited various 
factors contributing to this backlog, i ncluding inadequate execution and contracting 
capacity, challenging terrain, adverse weather conditions and security concerns, etc.  
The committee have observed that both under PMGSY -I&II, the roads that are 
yet to be constructed, are mostly either in North East/ Hilly regions or in States like 
Chhattisgarh and Bihar etc. The  Committee are of the strong view that for a balanced 
development in a country like India full of different terrains, the onus lies on of the 
Ministry to ensure that schemes are well framed/ modulated for those “special” regions 
as well.   The committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to take up the matter of 
pendency in the construction of roads in the hilly/ North East regions with MoDONER 
and should resolve the issues in conjunction with the State Governments.   The 
Committee also emphasized the need to focus on completion of roads and bridges and 
PMGSY I&II in the States like Chhattisgarh and Bihar without further delay.  

23 
 
Reply of the Government 
Under PMGSY-I, a total of 6,44,878 km of road length (comprising 1,64,612 roads 
and 7,469 bridges) has been sanctioned to provide all -weather road connectivity and 
6,24,430 km of road length (1,63, 420 roads and 7,120 bridges) have already been 
completed leaving a backlog of 1,192 roads with a total road length of 4,699 km and 
349 bridges.   Similarly, under the PMGSY -II, a total of 49,834 km of road length 
(including 6,679 roads  and 759 bridges) has been sanctioned.   Out of this, 49,014 km 
(comprising 6,560 roads and 746 bridges) have already been completed as on 
09.7.2024. However, 119 roads covering a length of 289 km and 13 bridges are 
awaiting completion.  The Ministry of Rural Development has undertaken several efforts 
to ensure the completion of sanctioned works under PMGSY-I and PMGSY-II: 
 Regular Monitoring and Review:  The Ministry conducts regular monitoring and 
review meetings with states/UTs to track the progress of the projects and identify 
any bottlenecks. The Ministry conducted a regional review meeting for NE 
Region in the month of February, 2024, to take stock of the pace of work in the 
region and expedite project completion.  
 Timely Release of Funds:  The Ministry en sures the timely release of funds to 
states/UTs for the implementation of PMGSY projects, thereby enabling them to 
expedite the construction works. 
 Technical Support: The Ministry provides technical support to states/UTs in the 
form of guidelines, manuals,  and capacity -building programs, including 
workshops on new/ green technologies, to enhance their project implementation 
capabilities. 
 Coordination with Other Stakeholders:  The Ministry coordinates with other 
stakeholders, such as Ministry of Home Affairs,  Ministry of Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change of India, state governments, executing agencies, and 
contractors, to streamline the project implementation process and resolve any 
issues that may arise. 

24 
 
 Public Awareness Campaigns:  The Ministry conducts public awareness 
campaigns to educate the local communities about the importance of PMGSY 
projects and their role in ensuring timely completion. 
 Use of Technology:  The Ministry promotes the use of technology, such as GIS 
mapping and mobile applications, to monitor the progress of projects and 
improve transparency and accountability. 
The Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) has prioritized the completion of roads 
and bridges under PMGSY-I and II in Chhattisgarh and Bihar. During different meetings, 
the issue has been brought to the notice of the Ministry of Development of North 
Eastern Region (MoDONER) to address issues in hilly and North East regions. MoRD 
has also reviewed and modified schemes to better suit the needs of special regio ns, 
ensuring balanced development across India's diverse terrains. Additionally, the Ministry 
has taken proactive steps to address pending road construction issues in challenging 
regions, including regular monitoring and evaluation of progress.  Comments of  the 
Committee please see para no 11 of Chapter-I of this reply.  
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 5) 
 
Need to expedite Road Connectivity Project for Left Wing Extremism Affected 
Areas (RCPLWEA) 
 
The Committee has informed that out of 12,100 km of road length sanctioned in 
different years since the inception of the scheme in 2017 -18 under this vertical, 7851 
Kmroad length have been completed which account for 65% (approx.) of the target and 
the res t is to be completed by March, 2024.   The committee are of the view that 
establishing rural connectivity to bridge the gap in Left Wing Extremism Affected Area 
(RCPLWEA) with the mainstream regions is a challenge for the implementing agencies. 
However, any  delay in completing the pending work would have adverse implications 
not only on the overall development of the region, but also in containing the Left Wing 
insurgency in those area. Therefore, the committee desire that the nodal Ministry should 
collaborate with the Ministry of Home Affairs and the concerned State Government for 

25 
 
better coordination and for completion of the sanctioned work within the targeted 
timeline.  
Reply of the Government 
Under RCPLWEA, a total of 12,162 km of road length (comprising 1,345 roads 
and 705 bridges) has been sanctioned and 9,221 km of road length (892 roads and 417 
bridges) have already been completed leaving a backlog of 453 roads with a total road 
length of 2,845 km and 288 bridges.  
The Ministry of Rural Development has  enhanced coordination with the Ministry 
of Home Affairs and State Governments to ensure timely completion of sanctioned work 
under the RCPLWEA scheme. Regular monitoring and joint reviews are being 
conducted to ensure the remaining road length is complete d by March 2025, with a 
focus on addressing challenges like inadequate resources, security concerns, and 
difficult terrain in Left Wing Extremism Affected Areas. To ensure successful 
implementation, MoRD is also building the capacity of implementing agenci es, providing 
necessary guidance, to complete pending work within the targeted timeline. Moreover, 
emphasis is being laid on constructing high -quality roads that can withstand harsh 
weather conditions, ensuring long -term connectivity and development in the  region. 
Prioritization is also being given to completing roads in the most affected areas, 
ensuring the benefits of rural connectivity reach the most vulnerable populations.  
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter – I of this Repot) 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 6) 
 
Need for Stringent Quality Assurance Mechanism 
 
The Committee note that PMGSY envisages a three tier Quality Assurance 
Mechanism to ensure quality of roads and bridges constructed under the scheme.   The 

26 
 
first two tiers by PIU and independent Quality Monitors under respective State 
Governments and the third tier under NRIDA by independent National Quality Monitors 
(NQMs).  The National Quality Monitors inspect project selected on random basis.   To 
ensure credibility of inspections, Independent monitors at second and third tier have to 
take at least 10 geostamped digital photographs including one of the field laboratories 
for each work and to upload it on OMMAS -MIS portal.  They also have to ensure that 
mandatory tests are carried out at specified intervals.   In additions, district laboratories 
and state laboratories have also been established. The Committee note that the first 
stage of quality assurance undertaken by PIU through an in -house mechanism by 
supervising the site quality control laboratory set up by the contractor for each package 
is crucial. Further, the Committee view that inspection by NQM for quality control 
mechanism at national level under NRIDA from   2017-18 to 2022 -23 has been 
drastically reduced from 23% to 13.61% in terms of number   of inspections undertaken 
by State level Quality Monitors under SRRDA during that period.    The Committee 
observe that in a comprehensive scheme like PMGSY,  there is no unified quality 
monitoring mechanism, instead there are different quality assurance mechanism with no 
proper dimensions.  In view of this, the Committee urge the Ministry to relook into the 
PMGSY guidelines and come with a unified monitoring mechanism which encompasses 
different parameters in pla ce of existing fragmented monitoring mechanism. The 
Committee are of the view that a unified quality monitoring mechanism shall be 
indicative of the flaws in the initial stages of construction so that roads and bridges 
constructed under PMGSY remain naviga ble till and of its life span of 10 years. The 
Committee underlines the need for increase in number of field inspections by NQMs in 
proportion to the inspections undertaken SQMs. They also strongly recommend that the 
nodal Ministry and NRIDA should  strictly monitor action taken against contractors, who 
compromise on quality of roads and bridges constructed under PMGSY.   The Standard 
Bidding Documents (SBD) should be revised in such a way so as to include stringent 
provision for reconstruction/ maintenance of damaged roads and bridges at the risk and 
cost of contractors during its life span.   The nodal Ministry and NRIDA should play a 
proactive role in ensuring due diligence by contractors, instead of leaving it entirely on 
the State Government.  

27 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Quality assurance mechanism under PMGSY starts right from the time of 
preparation of detailed project report (DPR) which is formulated based on the site 
conditions and guidelines / specifications developed by Indian Road Congress (IRC), 
which is the apex body for setting up road and bridge standards in the country. Best 
engineering practices / technology available in that part of the country is adopted in the 
DPR. Thereafter, detailed scrutiny of the technical provision of all DPR is carried ou t by 
the designated academic institutes, which are nominated as – State Technical Agencies 
(STA), In addition, selected DPRs are also scrutinised by Principal Technical agencies 
(PTA), which are designated IITs / NITs of the country. Procurement of good co ntractor 
for executing the project is done through a transparent public procurement process 
using prescribed standard bidding document (SBD). The provisions of the bidding 
document are adequately formulated to give stress on construction of good quality 
projects. As per the SBD, non -establishment of field lab or unequipped field lab 
established by the contractor are made items of fundamental breach of contract and the 
contractor in such event is liable to face termination of contract and thus paying heavy 
penalty.  
Further, for the purpose of quality control during the execution process, a three -
tier quality control system has been put in place, wherein the primary responsibility of 
ensuring the quality lies with the Project Implementing Agency (PIU), who no rmally is a 
state officer, generally of the rank of executive engineer, who make payment to the 
contractor. PIU is primarily responsible for ensuring the quality of material being used in 
the projects and its workmanship meets the prescribed standards, as prescribed in the 
Specifications and are the part of the agreement between him and the contractor. Since 
the PIU is the party to the legal contract (Agreement) between the department and the 
contractor, all powers to enforce the contract provision lies wit h him and the payment to 
the contractor is made, as per the provisions of contract, only when the PIU is fully 
satisfied about the quality of the work done by the contractor. The second and third tier 
of quality monitoring system is essentially to strength en the hands of the PIU and give 

28 
 
appropriate suggestions to PIU to ensure the quality of work, at each stage of 
construction. This Ministry has taken a note of the suggestions of the committee and 
would work for further strengthen the 1 st tier of quality monitoring mechanism, in 
consultation with States/ UTs for further improvement in quality.    
As indicated above, the intent of both first and second tier of quality monitoring is 
to provide hand holding support to the PIU who is primarily  responsible for maintaining 
quality. SQMs being managed by respective State/ UT, it is required that SQM will 
inspect all works minimum three times during defined stages of execution. The close 
guidance provided by SQM will enable the PIU for making requi red interventions at 
appropriate time. Guidelines have been revised for a  unified quality monitoring 
mechanism, field inspections by National Quality Monitors have been increased, and 
action taken reports are being intensively monitored.  
The standard bidding document (SBD) presently in vogue has inbuilt provision of 
maintaining the road for 5 years, post completion, which is also the defect liability period 
for the contractor who has executed the project. If there is any defect observed in the 
project duri ng the entire defect liability period, the contractor is liable to rectify the 
defects at his own cost. The release of performance security / security deposit of the 
contractor is structured in such a way that the risk of poor performance of the projects i s 
covered appropriately. 
The Ministry of Rural Development has, accordingly, taken a series of measures 
to enhance the quality of roads and bridges constructed under PMGSY, to address the 
Committee's concerns.  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter – I of this Report) 
 
 
 
 
 

29 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 7) 
Need for Participation of Stakeholders 
 
The Committee note that various provisions have been included in the PMGSY 
guidelines to ensure consultations with Hon’ble Member of Parliament in the 
Implementation of the scheme including selection and construction of roads. These 
consultation have been provisioned both at the District  Rural Plan (DRRP) finalization 
and Annual Proposals stages. In addition, at the stage of preparing D PRs, the PIU 
conducts a transect walk along the road alignment.   State Governments are required to 
arrange joint inspection of ongoing as well as completed works under PMGSY by 
Hon’ble MPs, Hon’ble MLAs and representatives of Panchayati Raj Institutions.   
Further, Comprehensive Upgradation cum consolidation Priority List (CUCPL) should be 
sent to concern MPs with the request that their proposals on the selection of works out 
of the CUCPL should be sent to the District Panchayat and 15 clear days to be given  for 
the purpose.   During the deliberations, the Committee have expressed their concern 
that though representatives of people are to be taken  on board while finalizing  the 
proposal. It has not been the practice. Rather  representatives are made to play, merely, 
a signatory role at the fag end of submission of final list to the nodal Ministry, leaving no 
time to study and propose changes by Members of Parliament.   The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Ministry to evolve a mechanism  to ensure that the procedures are 
scrupulously followed and proposals  received by Ministry of Rural Development from 
Members of Parliament which are in conformity with the needs of the region are 
finally included in the list of roads selected for construction under PMGSY. The 
Committee would   like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry in this regard.   
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of Rural Development has given high priority to the 
recommendations made by Hon'ble Members of Parliament (MPs) regarding the 
planning an d implementation of road works under PMGSY -III. The Ministry issued 
detailed advisories, including on 16-12-2019 outlining the role of Hon'ble MPs and other 
elected members in planning and implementation of road works under PMGSY, and 

30 
 
another on 2-6-2020 clarifying the role of Hon'ble MPs in planning and selection of road 
works under PMGSY-III. The guidelines were reiterated on 22 -06-2023 reiterating to all 
States. 
  

31 
 
CHAPTER III 
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No 8) 
 
Need for Promotion of FDR Technology 
 
The Committee are informed that major portion of the roads under PMGSY  are 
still constructed using conventional way, which is costlier in those regions where the 
lead/haulage charge of aggregates is on the higher side and also in those roads where 
traffic intensity is relatively higher and require substantial granular overla ys.   On the 
other hand, the roads constructed through Full Depth Reclamation (FDR) have 
increased structural durability, cost effectiveness, shortened construction schedule, 
minimal air pollution and reduced carbon footprint.   The Committee note that the use of 
FDR technology is limited to certain state like Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand, Kerala, 
Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Odisha and only 7700 Kmof   
rural roads have been/ are being constructed using this technology.   The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the nodal Ministry and NRIDA should extend expert 
training and technological support to states for faster adoption of FDR technology for 
construction/reconstruction of roads under PMGSY. 
Reply of the Government 
Full Dept h Reclamation (FDR) technology is a road rehabilitation method that 
recycles existing distressed pavement layers into a new, stronger base layer, producing 
a cemented stabilized layer that behaves like a semi -rigid pavement. A total of 10,180 
km of road le ngth has been sanctioned under FDR, with 1,892 km completed so far, 
including 7 km in Odisha and 1,885 km in Uttar Pradesh. The state -wise road length 
sanctioned includes Arunachal Pradesh (40 km), Assam (446 km), Bihar (270 km), 
Himachal Pradesh (643 km), Jharkhand (1,011 km), Kerala (276 km), Madhya Pradesh 
(21 km), Maharashtra (156 km), Manipur (50 km), Meghalaya (47 km), Mizoram (165 

32 
 
km), Nagaland (477 km), Odisha (75 km), Punjab (410 km), Tripura (237 km), and Uttar 
Pradesh (5,856 km).  
To promote the adoption of FDR technology, NRIDA has conducted workshops 
in various states, including Uttar Pradesh (22.06.2022 & 27 -28th June, 2024), Bihar 
(18.04.2023), Arunachal Pradesh (18.04.2023), Jharkhand (20.04.2023), Meghalaya 
(27.04.2023), Nagaland (11.05.2023  & 20.05.2024), Himachal Pradesh (23.05.2023), 
Maharashtra (22 -23 June’23), Odisha (07.07.2023), Punjab and Madhya Pradesh 
(25.08.2023), West Bengal (22.09.2023), and Sikkim (25.09.2023). 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 11) 
 
Amalgamation with State Policies 
 
The Committee note that rural road connectivity is a key component of 
sustainable economic activity and poverty alleviation in rural India. To achieve this 
objective, several State Governments have also launched schemes like MukhyaMantri 
Gram Sad akYojana(MMGSY) and Chief Minister Gram SadakYojana(CMGSY).   The 
Committee have observed that the objectives of these State sponsored schemes and 
PMGSY are in the tune of rural road construction itself.   Ministry of Rural Development 
has submitted that the y do not have status /role in State policies and hence cannot 
synchronise activities with State specific policies.   Taking cognizance of the fact that 
some States have their own Gram Sadak policies, which are similar to that of PMGSY, 
the Committee urge th e Ministry to work in liaison with State Governments in a bid to 
simplify and holistically select and ensure the construction of rural roads and its hassle 
free maintenance. The Committee are of the firm view that Ministry of Rural 
Development being the no dal Ministry can take a lead role and work with State 
Governments in the overall interest of building all-weather road network in rural areas.   
 
 
 

33 
 
Reply of the Government 
The selection of roads under verticals of PMGSY is undertaken through an 
elaborate a nd well defined process. The selection process takes into account the 
assessed utility of the roads and in meeting the programme objectives.   
All data pertaining to rural roads has been uploaded on PM Gati Shakti portal. 
This will ensure convergence in pl anning to maximise the efficiency of the upgraded 
rural roads network.   Required coordination is done with the State Governments and 
issues are addressed related to rural road construction and maintenance. 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 12) 
Other Issues 
 
The Committee have observed certain issues inherent in the PMGSY guidelines 
related to selection of roads and bridges constructed but rejected on the basis of 
inspection report of NQM due to unscientific and defective construction. The Committee 
are of the firm view that Ministry should investigate the status of old roads and bridges 
before choosing the new ones  for construction under scheme.   A firm overview/ status 
check of already constructed roads/ bridges (under previous schemes/ phases) would 
be a decisive factor in the matter.   A road or bridge “chosen” before hand but  yet to be 
completed should be carried forward under the scheme rather than inclusion of new 
ones. Similarly, the  Ministry should evolve a mechanism to ensure that the roads/ 
bridges constructed but rejected due to unscientific/ defective construction by the 
contractor are reconstructed by the same contractor at his own risk and cost.   
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of Rural Development has a centralized database to track project 
progress which incorporates a prioritization framework to complete unfinished projects. 
The database also tracks monitoring of quality at various stages of the project. The 
Ministry is continuously evolving innovative methods for tracking project p rogress and 
quality assurance.  

34 
 
The provisions of the PMGSY agreement have been structured in such a way 
that if any defect is observed in the projects during the 5 years of defect liability period, 
the contractor is liable to rectify the defects at his ow n cost. The release of performance 
security/ security deposit of the contractor is also structured in such a way that the risk 
of poor performance of the project is covered appropriately. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

35 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 3) 
 
Need for Dedicated PDs (Project Directors) 
 
In the matters of national highways, Project Implementation Units (PIUs) are 
headed by a Project Director ( PD), who in turn, is supported by various other technical 
and accounts officers to oversee timely completion of the projects as per prescribed 
parameters.    However, the committee note that similar is not the case with PMGSY; 
roads being a State subject. The committee have observed that the Scheme of PMGSY 
is for rural roads where the implementing agencies are  the respective State 
Governments, who play a major role in selection of roads, processing bids for selection 
of contractors, construction of roads a nd oversee the construction of roads/ bridges. 
Taking cognizance of this, the Committee recommend the Ministry to bring a system of 
appointment of PDs for PMGSY; dedicated leadership for  a geographically demarcated 
area for proper construction vis -à-vis co mpletion of projects. For this the Committee 
also recommend that the guidelines of PMGSY should be amended to that effect. 
 
Reply of the Government 
‘Rural road’ is a State Subject and construction of roads is a responsibility of the 
State Governments. The Ministry of Rural Development has amended PMGSY 
guidelines to strengthen States' roles, making them responsible for overseeing 
implementation, ensuring timely completion and quality control, and coordinating with 
stakeholders, while also empowering them to  prepare and submit project proposals for 
approval, enhancing scheme implementation efficiency and effectiveness. The States 
have duly constituted, well -established State Rural Roads Development Agencies for 
execution of PMGSY works.  

36 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter – I of this Report) 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 9) 
 
Need for Planting of Trees on The Flanks of Roads 
 
The Committee note that out of the sanctioned road length of 6,45,189 Km, 
6,22,003 km has been completed till 31 st March, 2023 under the new connectivity and 
upgradation component of PMGSY -I. There is no mandatory provision for  planting of 
trees on both sides of the roads being constructed under PMSGSY – I&II launched in 
2000 and 2013 respectively.   The reason for non -inclusion of tree plantation along the 
roads constructed under PMGSY, as submitted by the Ministry is that there is no land 
acquisition for PMGSY roads and the land on both sides of PMGSY roads belong to the 
farmers.  Therefore, plantation can be done on land to be donated by farmers.  
  
The Committee have, however, observed that planting of fruit bearing and other 
substantial trees have been made mandatory under PMGSY -III launched in 2019. The 
responsibility for planting of trees have b een assigned to State/ UT Governments by 
using funds under MGNREGA and   other Central State Schemes. Guidelines of Indian 
Road Congress are to be followed for plantation of trees on flanks of roads constructed 
under PMGSY-III.  The Committee note that construction of majority of rural roads have 
been completed under PMGSY-I & II, but there is no mandatory provision for planting of 
trees along the roads constructed under it. Planting of trees along the roads have 
multifarious advantages like controlling vehi cular pollution, checking soil erosion and 
consequent damage to roads etc. Therefore, the Committee urge the Ministry and 
NRIDA to amend the guidelines to include monetary support to State/ UT Governments 
for mandatory planting of trees along rural roads c onstructed under PMGSY –I & II, 
rather than relying on guidelines of Indian Road Congress and MGNREGA officers. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in the regards.   

37 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
The PMGSY guidelines (para 21.4) stipulat e that planting of fruit bearing and 
other suitable trees, on both sides of the roads, is mandatorily taken up by the State 
Governments / Union Territories by using funds under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Scheme and other Central and State Schemes.  
It is also stipulated under PMGSY that Guidelines on Tree Plantation along Rural 
Roads (IRC:SP:103-2014), published by Indian Roads Congress should be followed for 
plantation of trees along the roads constructed under PMGSY-III. 
The State Governments are encouraged to converge with MGNREGA and other 
funds and utilize the expertise of available execution agencies for roadside planting and 
their maintenance.   
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter – I 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 10) 
 
Need for Proper Maintenance of Roads 
 
The Committee note that PMGSY guidelines stipulates that maintenance of 
roads constructed under PMGSY is the responsibility of State Governments.   All roads 
are to be mandator ily covered by initial 5 year of maintenance contract by the same 
contractor as per Standard Bidding Document.   Maintenance fund to service the 
contract are required to be budgeted by State Governments and placed at the disposal 
of State Rural Roads Develo pment Agency (SDRRAs) in separate maintenance 
account.  After 5 year, the roads are required to be placed under Zonal Maintenance 
Contracts for a further period of 5 year.  Under PMGSY-III, Ministry signs MOU with the 
States for providing maintenance funds  for 10 year.  NRIDA has also prepared a Policy 

38 
 
Framework and Guidance Note for maintenance of rural roads,  which needs to be 
adopted and notified at State level.   Financial incentives under PMGSY -III are given to 
best performing States, which are used for  maintenance of roads constructed  under 
PMGSY.The Committee are also informed that e -MARG and Performance Based 
Maintenances Contracts (PBMC)are also used for ensuring regular maintenance of rural 
roads.During deliberations, the Committee expressed dissati sfaction over bad condition 
of rural roads due to lack of maintenance.   In certain cases, the  roads are caved in or 
washed away due to floods and other natural calamities  during Damage Liability Period 
(DLP)and the contractor is not liable under contractua l terms for reconstruction of such 
roads.  The Committee, therefore, are of the view that Ministry of RD and NRIDA should 
conduct a survey/data collection regarding all those rural roads constructed under 
PMGSY-I&II, which are not navigable due to natural calamities during DLP and those 
which are damaged or abandoned after 5 year of completion of construction. The 
Committee, further, recommend that the Ministry should include all those roads which 
are damaged due to natural calamities during DLP for reconst ruction under PMGSY-III.  
The Ministry should ensure that stringent action is taken against the contractors for 
unscientific and sub-substandard construction.  
Reply of the Government 
'Rural road' is a State subject and as per the programme guidelines of P MGSY, 
maintenance of roads constructed under the programme is the responsibility of the 
State Governments and all road works are covered by initial five -year maintenance 
contracts to be entered into along with the construction contract, with the same 
contractor, as per the standard bidding document. Maintenance funds to service the 
contract are required to be budgeted by the State Governments and placed at the 
disposal of the State Rural Roads Development Agencies in a separate maintenance 
account. On the e xpiry of the 5-year post-construction maintenance, PMGSY roads are 
required to be placed under zonal maintenance contracts consisting of 5 -year 
maintenance including renewal as per maintenance cycle, from time to time, which are 
also financed by the State Governments.  
  

39 
 
National Quality Monitors appointed by the Ministry are also deputed to check the 
quality of maintenance work on PMGSY roads.  If any work is found having 
unsatisfactory grading, the concerned State Government is informed to get it rectified / 
repaired. The quality grading of maintenance is monitored through Online Management, 
Monitoring and Accounting System i.e. the programme MIS. 
  
To further enhance the  focus on the maintenance of roads during the defect 
liability period and also streamline the delivery of routine maintenance of PMGSY roads, 
electronic Maintenance of Rural Roads (eMARG) - an e-governance solution, has been 
introduced. 
  
The OMMAS and E -Marg enable online monitoring of the status of road 
maintenance in the country.  
  
State Governments take up repair of roads, damaged due to natural calamities, 
with the State Disaster Response Agencies. There is no such provision of funds under 
PMGSY.  
 
 Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter – I of this Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

40 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                          DR. SANJAY JAISWAL                           
16 December 2024                                             CHAIRPERSON 
Agrahayana 25, 1946 (Saka)                COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
 
 
 
 
 

41 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2024-2025) 
  
The Committee sat on Monday, the 16 th December, 2024 from 1600 hrs. to 1630 
hrs. in Room No. ‘52-B’, First Floor, Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal  - Chairperson 
  
  Members 
 
2.  Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3.  Shri M. Mallesh Babu 
4.  Shri Pradan Baruah 
5.  Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
6.  Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
7.  Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
8.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
9.  Shri Manish Jaiswal 
10.  Thiru Dayanidhi Maran 
11.  Shri P. C. Mohan 
12.  Shri B.K. Parthasarathi 
13.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
14.  Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan 
15.  Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
16.  Kumari Selja 
17.  Dr. Indra Hang Subba 
18.  Shri Manoj Tiwari 
19.  Shri Ve vaithilingam 
 
   
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
                            1.      Shri Y. M. Kandpal        -       Joint Secretary 
                       2.      Shri  Lalkithang             -       Director 
                              

42 
 
2.         At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideratio n and adoption of the following 
draft Reports: 
(i) XXX                         XXX                              XXX 
(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 32nd Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee  on the subject “Review of Performance of 
National Rural Infrastructure Development Agency (NRIDA) w.r.t. 
Implementation of Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)”; 
(iii) XXX                         XXX                              XXX 
(iv) XXX                         XXX                              XXX 
 
(v) XXX                         XXX                              XXX. 
 
 
3.        Thereafter, the Committee adopted the Draft Reports without any modifications.  
The Committee, then, authorised the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports and 
present the same to Lok Sabha. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

43 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY -SECOND REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES    
 
 
(i) Total number of recommendations/observations   
   
12 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government  
(Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7)  
 
Percentage of total recommendations 
6 
 
 
 
50% 
    
(iii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’ s reply Percentage of total 
recommendations  
(Sl. No. 8, 11, 12)  
 
Percentage of total recommendations 
 
3 
 
 
 
  25%   
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government’s 
replies have not been accepted by the Committee (Sl. Nos. 3, 9, 
10)  
 
Percentage of total recommendations                                     
                        
  3 
 
 
 
 25%     
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited.  
 
Percentage of total recommendations                                                 
 0   
 
 
 
  0% 
 
 
 
 
 