 
 
5 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
 
EMPOWERMENT THROUGH PM MEGA INTEGRATED TEXTILE 
REGION AND APPAREL (PM MITRA) PARKS SCHEME AND REVIVAL 
EFFORTS FOR THE SICK TEXTILE UNITS/PSUs [BIC, NTC, CTL etc.] 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in the 37th Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
Estimates] 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2024-25) 
 
 
 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  

 
 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2024-25) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
EMPOWERMENT THROUGH PM MEGA INTEGRATED TEXTILE 
REGION AND APPAREL (PM MITRA) PARKS SCHEME AND REVIVAL 
EFFORTS FOR THE SICK TEXTILE UNITS/PSUs [BIC, NTC, CTL etc.]  
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in the 37th Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
Estimates] 
 
(Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2024) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
.........December, 2024/........Agrayana, 1946 (Saka) 
 
 

 
 
     CONTENTS          Page No. 
 
      
Composition of the Committee on Estimates (2024-25)        (ii) 
 
Introduction           (iv) 
            
     
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Committee on Estimates held 
on 16.12.2024 
30 
II. Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 37st Report of 
 the Committee on Estimates (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
32 
 
CHAPTER-I Report  1  
CHAPTER-II    Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government         
14 
CHAPTER-
III 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply 
25 
CHAPTER-
IV 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government’s replies have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
27 
CHAPTER-V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
reply of Government is still awaited 
29 

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2024-2025) 
Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson  
 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri M. Mallesh Babu 
4. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
5. Shri Pradan Baruah 
6. Shri Charanjit Singh Channi 
7. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
8. Shri Devusinh Chauhan 
9. Ms. Iqra Choudhary 
10. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
11. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
12. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
13. Shri Manish Jaiswal 
14. Shri Naveen Jindal 
15. Shri Jugal Kishore 
16. Thiru Dayanidhi Maran 
17. Shri P. C. Mohan 
18. Shri B. K. Parthasarathi 
19. Shri Awadhesh Prasad 
20. Shri M. K. Raghavan 
21. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
22. Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy 
23. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
24. Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan 
25. Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
26. Kumari Selja 
27. Dr. Bhola Singh 
28. Dr. Indra Hang Subba 
29. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
30. Shri Ve Vaithilingam  

iii 
 
Secretariat                            
  
Shri. Y.M. Kandpal          Joint Secretary 
Shri  Lalkithang Director 
Shri  Srikanth Singh R Assistant Committee Officer 
    
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

iv 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
            I, the Chairperso n of the Committee on Estimates (2024 -25) having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, do present this 5th 
Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
37th Report of the Committee ( 2023-24) on the subject “Empowerment through PM 
Mega Integrated Textile Region And Apparel (PM MITRA) Parks Scheme and Revival 
Efforts for the Sick Textile Units/PSUs [BIC, NTC, CTL etc.] ”  pertaining to the Ministry 
of Textiles. 
 
2. The 37th Report of the Committee on Estimates (2023 -24) was presented to 
Lok Sabha on 7th February, 2024 . The Government furnished their replies indicating 
action taken on the recommendations contained in the 37th Report on 18 June, 2024 . 
The draft repo rt w as conside red and approved on 16th December, 2024  by the 
Committee. 
 
3. An analysis of action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 37th Report of the Committee on Estimates is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
16 December, 2024              
Agrahayana 25, 1946(Saka) 
Dr. SANJAY JAISWAL 
CHAIRPERSON 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
  
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in the  Thirty Seventh  
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject “Empowerment through PM Mega 
Integrated Textile Region and Apparel (PM MITRA) P arks Scheme and Revival efforts 
for the Sick Textile Units/PSUs [BIC, NTC, CTL] etc ” pertaining to the Ministry of 
Textiles. 
  
2.      The Thirty Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 07.02.2024 . It 
contained 14 Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Replies of the 
Government in respect to all the Observations/Recommendations have been received  
from the Ministry of Textiles. 
 
3. Replies to the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report have 
broadly been categorised as under:-   
  
(i)       Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Recommendation. Para No. 1,2,4,7,10,11,12,13 and 14    
      Total 09 
(Chapter-II) 
  
(ii)      Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s reply: 
Recommendation. Para No.   3 & 5      
                    Total: 02  
(Chapter-III)  
  
(iii)     Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government’s replies 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation. Para No. 8 & 9             
           Total- 02 
(Chapter-IV) 
  
 
(iv)    Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply of 
Government is still awaited:  
Recommendation. Para No. 6                                                                                     
                 Total: 01
            (Chapter-V) 
  

2 
 
4.       The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes in respect of the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final Action Taken 
Reply in respect of the recommendation contained in Chapter -V for which interim 
reply have been given by the Government may be furnished to them within six 
months of the presentation of the Report to the House. 
 
5.       The Comm ittee will now deal with the Observations/Recommendations which 
require reiteration or merit further comments. 
 
(Recommendations Para No. 4) 
Need to Include State Representatives and Technical Experts in PMA 
6.   In their Thirty-Seventh Report, the Committee had noted the need to expedite the 
formation of a Project Monitoring Agency (PMA) to periodically monitor the progress of 
the projects under the scheme and also act as the Technical Arm by providing 
secretarial, managerial and implementation supp ort to the Ministry for effective and 
timely implementation of the scheme. The Committee were informed that the process of 
appointment of PMA was underway. Considering the mandate of the Project Monitoring 
Agency, the Committee had desired that the process  of appointment of the PMA should 
be completed without further delay and State Government, being the major stakeholder 
in the project, should be given due representation in the PMA. Further, the Committee 
had recommended that the possibility of roping in d omestic and international textile 
experts and technocrats in PMA should be explored. 
7.   The Ministry of Textiles in their Action Taken Reply  furnished to the Committee, 
have stated as follows: 
        “The SPV formed comprises representatives of both Cen tre and State 
Government on its Board.  Each Project will have separate Project Management 
Consultants (PMCs) for their state. Besides, for monitoring and implementation of 
Scheme, Ministry of Textiles is in the process of on -boarding a separate PMA which 
will include technical experts viz. industrial Infrastructural expert, Procurement and 
Contract Expert, Textile Expert, Corporate secretariat/ Legal Expert etc.” 
 

3 
 
8.  Recognizing t he p ivotal role of the Project Monitoring Agency (PMA) in 
overseeing the pro gress of projects under the PM -MITRA Scheme, and its 
responsibility as the technical arm of the Ministry -providing secretarial, 
managerial, and implementation support for the effective and timely execution of 
the scheme-the Committee had recommended that t he process of appointing the 
PMA be completed without further delay. The Committee also emphasized that 
the PMA should include representation from State Governments as well as 
domestic and international experts to ensure a broad and diverse range of 
perspectives. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Textiles stated that the 
Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) formed for the scheme already includes 
representatives from both the central and state governments on its board. The 
Ministry further submitted that  each project will have separate Project 
Management Consultants (PMCs) for the respective states. They have also 
informed that for monitoring and implementation of the scheme, they are in the 
process of onboarding a separate PMA, which will include technic al experts such 
as industrial infrastructure experts, procurement and contract experts, textile 
experts, and corporate secretarial/legal experts. However, given the critical role 
of the PMA in ensuring effective and timely implementation of the scheme, the  
Committee are not satisfied with the slow pace at which the PMA is being formed. 
The Committee urge  the Ministry to make immediate and concrete efforts to 
expedite the appointment of the PMA and PMCs for each of the seven states, 
without any further delay s. Moreover, the Ministry should ensure that the PMA 
includes a broad range of experts, particularly domestic and international textile 
specialists, to incorporate global best practices and ensure that the projects 
meet international standard s. The Committ ee also recommend  the Ministry to 
establish a robust coordination framework between the PMA and the PMCs to 
facilitate seamless execution of the scheme and to avoid any gaps or overlaps in 
responsibilities. The Committee desire that they may be apprised of  the latest 
progress made, including detailed updates on the timelines for the appointment 
of the PMA and PMCs, as well as the steps being taken to address the current 
delays.   
 

4 
 
(Recommendations Para No. 6) 
Need for Rationalization of Tax Regime 
9.  The Committee, in their thirty seventh Report, had recommended the following with 
regard to the need for rationalization of Tax Regime: 
“PM MITRA Parks are being set up as a joint venture of centre and State 
Governments to house the entire value chain at one p lace, aiming to attract 
domestic and foreign investment, generate employment and augment export 
potential. During the course of examination, Ministry of Textiles stated before 
the Committee that the scheme envisages robust State Govt. Support which 
includes Stamp Duty exemption of 50 -100%, concession on land rates, 3 -8% 
interest subsidy for 5 -7 years, wage subsidy of Rs.3000 -6000/workers/month 
for 5 -7 years, ESI/EPF reimbursement of 50 -100% for 3 -5 years and SGST 
reimbursement of 60%-100% for 7-10 years. While appreciating the State Govt. 
initiatives for subsidizing, financially supporting and providing tax/duty 
exemptions and reimbursements, the Committee desire the Ministry to consider 
extending similar central tax/duty exemptions including CGST reimbursem ents 
and import duty rationalizations to curb low cost/undervalued i mport of Chinese 
knitted fabric”. 
10. The Ministry of Textiles in their Action Taken Reply has stated as follows: 
        “Proposal is under examination in the Ministry.” 
11.  In order to prevent the influx of cheap imports, particularly of Chinese knitted 
fabrics, which undermines domestic manufacturing and affects the 
competitiveness of Indian textile producers, the Committee had recommended 
that the Ministry should consider extending Cen tral Tax/Duty exemptions 
including CGST reimbursements on par with state -level subsidies envisaged for 
the scheme, as well as rationalization of import duties. The Ministry in thei r 
action taken reply have  stated that 'Proposal is under examination in the 
Ministry'.  The Committee  urge the Ministry to expedite the examination of the 
proposal and also engage in  consultation with the concerned M inistries for 
evolving an effective proposal for central tax relief measures similar to incentives 

5 
 
provided by States, including GST exemptions and import duty adjustments . The 
Committee desire to be apprised about the final action taken in this regard. 
 (Recommendations Para No. 8) 
Need for Robust IT Infrastructure and E-Commerce System 
12.   With regard to the need for robust IT infrastructure and E -commerce system the 
Committee in their Thirty S eventh Original Report  have made the following 
recommendation:  
“The Committee recognize the crucial role of establishing a robust IT 
infrastructure for PM MITRA Parks, encompassing reliable hardware networks, 
data centers, and specialized software solutions. IT infrastructure is pivotal in 
providing technological support for the PM MITRA Scheme and in effectively 
managing commercial losses within the Te xtile Sector. The Committee 
acknowledge the Ministry's efforts in this direction, particularly in initiating steps 
to set up IT infrastructure for PM MITRA Parks. Notably, the creation of a 
dedicated portal for real- time monitoring of all seven projects i s underway, with 
a trial version already in place and the final version slated for imminent 
execution. The Committee, therefore, strongly urge the Ministry to explore the 
possibility of establishing end -to-end IT infrastructure for PM MITRA Parks to 
create an Integrated textile value chain right from spinning, weaving, processing 
to a robust e -commerce system for hassle free and cost effect ive selling of 
textile products” 
13. The Ministry of Textiles in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under: 
“A dedicated Dash-board on PM MITRA Park is being developed to capture real -time 
progress /developments of each Mega Park.” 
14.  The C ommittee in their original report had emphasized the role of 
establishing robust IT  infrastructure for the PM MITRA  parks to ensure effective 
monitoring management and commercial success of the parks.  The C ommittee 
had highlighted the need for an integrated IT system that would span the entire 
textile value chain from spinning and weaving to processing, along with a 

6 
 
comprehensive e -commerce platform for smooth and cost -effective se lling of 
textile products. The C ommittee further stressed the importance of creating a 
holistic end-to-end IT infrastructure that would support real-time monitoring of all 
7 PM MITRA projects. The Minis try of Textiles, in their action taken reply, 
mentions only the development of a dedicated dashboard, aimed at capturing 
real-time progress and development of each Mega Parks. Although, this is in line 
with the committee’s recommendation of real time monit oring, the Ministry’s 
response is focused solely on the dashboard for tracking progress rather than 
addressing the broader, more integrated IT infrastructure suggested by the 
Committee. The Committee had envisioned a more comprehensive IT solution 
that inc ludes not just monitoring, but also links the entire value chain. The 
Committee, therefore reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge the Ministry 
of Textiles to expedite the development and implementation of a comprehensive 
end-to-end IT  infrastructure for the PM MITRA  parks that integrates the entire 
textile value chain from -spinning, weaving and processing to an advanced e -
commerce platform for seamless selling of textile products. The Committee also 
desire to know timelines set for the dashboard to  be functional. The C ommittee 
would await the Government’s response in this regard. 
(Recommendations Para No. 9) 
Need to earmark land for safety and security establishment 
 
15. In their Thirty S eventh Report, the Committee, had noted that availability of 
minimum 1000 acres of unencumbered and contiguous land pool was one of the basic 
requirements for submission of proposals by State Government for PM MITRA Park. 
The scheme also envisaged for detailed la nd utilization plan viz. 50% area for 
manufacturing zone for entire value chain including plug and play, 20% area for 
common utilities and infrastructures, 10% area for subsidized housing, schools, 
hospitals etc. 10% area for commercial use for hotels, exh ibition, convention halls, 5% 
for specialized and value additives such as Testing Labs, Training Centre, R&D, 
Incubation Labs, startups etc. and 5% area for logistic zone and multi -model linkages 
etc. The Committee observed that there is no land earmarked for common safety and 
security establishment in the land utilisation plan. Therefore, they are of the view that 
the MITRA parks being spread over a contiguous land mass of 1000 acres, with huge 

7 
 
infrastructure costing crores of rupees, should have common sa fety and security 
establishment at a centre place. The Committee had urged the Ministry to earmark 
requisite percentage of land at a central place to establish common safety and security 
establishment and also make a provision for the SPV and Master Develo per to utilize a 
portion of the CDS for meeting the expenditure related to establishment of state -of-the-
art fire and safety installation. 
  
16. The Ministry of Textiles in their Action Taken Reply have stated as follows: 
“The minimum area required to esta blish PM MITRA Park was 1000 
acres.   The broad break-up of land-use proposed in the Mega park are: 
a. 50% area is to be demarcated for manufacturing (entire value chain 
from spinning to RMG including plug and play);  
b. 20% area for common utilities including CETPs;  
c. 10% area for social infrastructure;  
d. 10% area for Commercial Development (CD) 
e. 5% area for testing & Labs etc.;  
f. 5% area for logistics zone - multi-modal linkages, bonded areas, storage 
etc.  
 Thus, adequate arrangements have been provisioned.” 
17. The Committee in their Original report had pointed out that, while the land use 
plan included several key areas for manufacturing, utilities, commercial activities 
and infrastructure, it did not earmark land specifically for safety and security 
installations (such as for fire safety, emergency response systems etc.), which 
are crucial in such large –scale developments. The recommendations of the 
Committee had primarily addressed the issue  of safety and security in the PM 
MITRA Parks, urging the Ministry to include land for a common safety and 
security establishment, especially given the scale of the pro posed mega Parks. 
However, the Ministry in their Action Taken Reply has simply furnished the broad 
break-up of land-use proposed in the Textile Parks emphasiz ing that the existing 
land-use provisions are “adequate”.  The Committee are not satisfied with the 
Reply of the Ministry as it is completely silent on the aspect of earmarking land 

8 
 
for common safety and security establishment and feel that the Committee’s 
original recommendation regarding earmarking land for common safety and 
security establishment has not been  adequately addressed. The ministry’s vague 
assurance of adequacy is not sufficient given the scale of and complexity of the 
proposed MITRA Parks. Detailed planning for safety and security should be a 
central part of the infrastructure development to ensure the safety of everyone . 
The Committee reiterate their Recommend ation and urge s the Ministry  to 
earmark a specific portion of land w ithin the PM MITRA parks for the  
establishment of centralized safety and security infrastructure and to clarify how 
safety measures will be integrated into the overall land use plan. The Committee 
also urge the Ministry to ensure that the SPV and Master Developer to utilize a 
portion of the CDS for meeting the expenditure for creation of state -of-the-art fire 
and safety installation. The Committee desire to be apprised of the action taken 
in their regard.  
(Recommendations Para No. 11) 
 
Need for Survey in unorganized Powerloom Sector 
 
18. With regard to the need for conducting survey in the unorganized powerloom sector, 
the Committee in their Thirty S eventh Report, had recommendation the following to 
Ministry of Textile:  
 
“The Committee note that the major challenges faced in the unorganized 
Powerloom Sector include inter-alia outdated technology, inadequate capital for 
modernization, less working capital, fragmentation, fluctuating raw material 
prices, lower productivity and high cost of products etc. The Committee are 
aware that there are almost 25.74 lakh powerlooms, accounting for 58.54% 
percent of total cloth production in the country. Ministry of Texti les stated that 
they do not maintain data regarding number of Powerloom owners in the 
country. The Committee feel that to ensure holistic development of the entire 
Powerloom Sector, the Ministry needs to undertake a fresh base line survey so 
that actual ga ps of the sector are identified and the authentic data regarding 
status of Powerloom Sector is available. The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Ministry to conduct a base -line comprehensive survey covering the entire 
spectrum of Powerloom Sector inter -alia th e number of workers, their 

9 
 
salary/wage status, units location, owners details, status of functioning etc. so 
that the precious data obtained may be utilised by policy formulators to foster 
Research and Development activities in the textile sector to derive  innovation, 
modernization and increase productivity. The Committee also emphasize the 
need to establish collaborations between Textile Sector and academic 
institutions to encourage start - ups, knowledge sharing and technology 
transfer”. 
 
19. The Ministry of Textiles, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows: 
“The last survey on the Powerloom sector was conducted in 2013, revealing 
approximately 24 lakh powerlooms operating across the country. In order to update the 
data and address the evolving challenges and ensure development, the process of 
conducting a baseline study for the powerloom industries in 2024 is commenced. The 
first meeting of the stakeholders / Technical Committee was held on 16th April 2024, 
which actively deliberated on the prop osal, Terms of Reference (ToR), approach, 
methodology, etc. for conducting the study. The detailed proposal is currently under 
submission for further consideration.” 
 
20. The Committee had identified several challenges in the unorganized 
Powerloom Sector and recommended the Ministry to conduct a comprehensive 
baseline survey to collect data on workers, wages, unit locations, ownership, and 
operational status. The Committee felt that this data would help address sectoral 
gaps and inform policy for research, innovation, and modernization. The 
Committee also stressed the importance of collaboration between the textile 
sector and academic institutions to support startups, knowle dge sharing, and 
technology transfer. The Ministry in their action taken reply have informed that 
they have initiated the process of conducting a baseline study of the Powerloom 
Sector in 2024. The Ministry also informed that the first meeting of the 
stakeholders / Technical Committee was held on 16th April, 2024 which actively 
deliberated on the proposal, Terms of Reference (ToR), approach methodology 
etc. for conducting the study and that the detailed proposal is currently under 
submission for further consideration. The Committee are pleased to note that the 
Ministry has initiated the process of conducting the survey. However, they 

10 
 
remain concerned that the Ministry's action taken reply does not mention any 
concrete steps toward fostering research and deve lopment, innovation, 
technology adoption, or modernization in the textile sector. The Committee are 
also concerned that the Ministry have  not addressed the recommendation to 
promote collaboration between the textile sector and academic institutions to 
encourage startups, knowledge sharing, and technology transfer. The 
Committee, while expressing their unhappiness over incomplete informa tion 
furnished by the Ministry,  reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge  the 
Ministry to take urgent actions and app rise them about the steps taken in this 
regard. Furthermore, the Committee desire the Ministry to expedite the process 
of finalizing the survey's methodology and set a clear timeline for completing the 
baseline survey and publishing the results to ensure t hat the findings are 
immediately useable by policymakers, stakeholders and the textile industry to 
address critical challenges. 
(Recommendations Para No. 13) 
 
Need for expeditious resolution for revival of sick textile units 
 
21. The Committee, in their Thirty Seventh Report, had recommended the following with 
regard to the need for expeditious resolution for revival of sick textile units: 
 
“In the later part of 1960, a crisis emerged in the Indian textile industry as 
numerous mills became financially unstable, ceased operations, and faced 
imminent collapse, posing a severe economic imbalance and disrupted the 
employment scenario. To address t his turmoil, Government intervention led to 
nationalization of 103 sick textile undertakings in 1974 under the Sick Textile 
Undertaking (Nationalization) Act 1974. Subsequent enactments viz. Swadeshi 
Cotton Mill Co. Ltd. (Acquisition and transfer of Undert akings) Act, 1986 and the 
Textile Undertakings (Nationalisation) Act, 1995 nationalised 6 mills and 15 mills 
respectively. The amendment to the above Acts in 1995 & 2014 respectively 
empowered the National Textile Corporation to transfer or dispose of asse ts for 
better management, modernization, restructuring, or revival of sick textile 
undertakings. Out of these 124 NTC mills nationalized, 5 mills were 
closed/merged and 119 mills referred to Board for Industrial and Financial 
Reconstruction (BIFR). British India Corporation Ltd. (BIC) was acquired by Govt. 

11 
 
of India through BIC (Acquisition of Shares) Act, 1981. BIC has two units viz. 
Cawnpur woolen Mills, Kanpur and New Egerton Woolen Mills, Dhariwal, Punjab 
and three subsidiaries viz. Elgin Mills Ltd., Caw npur Textiles Ltd. and Brushware 
Ltd. Owing to continuous lo sses, BIC was referred to BIFR in 1991 and was 
declared sick in 1992. The Cabinet approved a revival scheme on 21.11.2001 
(BIFR sanctioned on 18.12.2002) at a cost of Rs.211 crore which was to be  met 
by sale of surplus land and assets. However, the scheme was declared as failed 
in 2005 because BIC could not infuse fund. The Cabinet gave “In principle” 
approval to the revival plan of BIC on 09.06.2011 at a total cost of Rs. 338.04 
crore through infusion of funds to be provided by the Government of India subject 
to the condition that permission is first obtained for sale of surplus land from 
Govt. of UP. This revival Scheme of BIC could not take off as UP Govt. is yet to 
convert the land of BIC lease  hold. The Committee observe that the revival  
efforts made by Government could not produce desired results due to various  
reasons such as prolonged litigations, technical obsolescence, excess 
manpower, abour issues, high production cost and lack of effective management, 
delay in  implementation of revival plans, delay in resolving land related issues 
between Centre and State Governments etc. The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Ministry to prepare an action plan for a time bound resolution of issues related to  
each sick textile units  across the country by involving all stakeholders. Steps 
should be taken for expeditious settlement of land related issues between Centre 
and State  Governments. Legal experts should be engaged for settling the 
disputes through  Alternate Dispute Resolution mechanism, wherever possible. 
Once Government has  obtained the dispute free title of the properties of sick 
textile undertakings/units,  which are non -operational, revival efforts should be 
undertaken through private  investment inclu ding establishment of PM MITRA 
PARKS. The Committee further  recommend that the Ministry should take 
effective pro -labour measures for providing  relief and rehabilitation of workers 
rendered jobless due to closure of NTC, BIC and  Non-SSI Textile Mills in pr ivate 
sector. The Ministry should maintain online data  regarding workers rendered 
jobless in Textile Sector, details of workmen availed  relief measures like salary, 
VRS package, pension etc., details of remaining workers  and number of workers 
registered/benefited from Rajiv Gandhi Shramik Kalyan  Yojana (RGSKY) under 
Ministry of Labour and Employment etc”. 
 
 
 

12 
 
22. The Ministry of Textiles in their Action Taken Reply have stated as follows: 
“The Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) in accordance with its guidelines 
dated 13.12.2021, has been entrusted with the responsibility to identifying 
CPSEs for closure or privatization in non -strategic sector in consultation with the 
stakeholders admin istrative Ministries/Departments.  In line with this mandate, 
DPE constituted Committee of Group of Officers (CGO), which further constituted 
a Sub -Committee.  The Sub -committee after analysing the feasibility of 
disinvestment of some of NTC mills as well as the feasibility of transfer of equity 
of subsidiaries/Joint Venture mills of NTC to the respective private JV Partners or 
closure, opined that it is prudent to close all 23 NTC working mills.   Based on the 
report of the Sub -Committee, CGO recommended c losure of NTC along with its 
23 operating mills. Since NTC is running losses with negative net worth and not 
undertaking any significant business, the revival efforts made in the past have not 
yielded the desired result in the past. DPE in consultation wit h NITI Aayog, 
Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure, Department of Economic Affairs, 
DIPAM etc. is taking the matter forward in this regard in a time bound manner.  
  
          As regards settlement of land related issues between Centre and State 
Governments, engagement of Legal Experts for settling the disputes through 
Alternate Dispute Resolution Mechanism (ADRM), and establishment of PM Mitra 
Parks, Ministry of Textiles in consultation with DPE will take the process forward 
and complete the same  by creating a Special Cell closure of PSUs of MoT and 
will contest the legal cases of these CPSEs and their subsidiary companies/ 
associated companies. 
  
          As regard to pro -labour measures providing relief and rehabilitation of 
workers rendered jobless due to closure of NTC and BIC, the same will be done 
as per DPE guidelines in this regard.” 
 
23. The Committee, in their original report, had urged the Ministry of Textiles to 
prepare a time -bound action plan for the resolution of issues related to s ick 
textile units across the country, including expeditious settlement of land disputes 

13 
 
between the Centre and State Governments, and the engagement of legal experts 
for dispute resolution through the Alternate Dispute Resolution Mechanism 
(ADRM). The Comm ittee are concerned to note that the Ministry in their action 
taken reply have only indicated that consultations with other stake holders are 
ongoing without providing clear timelines for resolving the land issues or using 
ADR mechanisms effectively. The Ministry also referred to closure of NTC Mills in 
their reply but did not provide any action plan for resolution of all sick textile 
units nationwide. Further, the Committee had stressed the need for revival efforts 
through private investment, particularly the establishment of PM MITRA Parks to 
support non -operational textile units. However, the Ministry's response only 
indicated ongoing consultations with various departments, including the 
Department of Public Enterprises (DPE), NITI Aayog, and the Ministry  of Finance, 
without outlining any specific roadmap or concrete steps to attract private 
investment or develop these parks. Regarding the rehabilitation of workers 
rendered jobless due to the closure of NTC, BIC, and other mills, the Committee 
had recommen ded pro -labour measures to provide relief and rehabilitation, 
including maintaining an online database of affected workers and tracking the 
relief measures provided to them, such as salary, VRS packages, and number of 
workers registered under Rajiv Gandhi Shramik Kalyan Yojana (RGSKY). While 
the Ministry acknowledged the need for such relief according to DPE guidelines, 
it did not provide any detailed plan for tracking, supporting, or rehabilitating 
workers, especially those outside the RGSKY scheme. In lig ht of the responses 
provided by the Ministry in their action taken  reply, the Committee reiterate  their 
original reco mmendations. The Committee urge  the Ministry to take immediate 
and concrete actions to address the issues raised, and to provide a detailed  
update on the steps taken in this regard. 
  

14 
 
Chapter – II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 1) 
 
Need to Frame a Comprehensive National Textile Policy  
Indian Textile Industry is facing major problems like technological obsolesce, high input 
cost (power and capital), poor access to credit, fragmented units, absence of fiber 
neutrality, unskilled labourers and low investment etc. In order to overcome these 
hurdles, Govt. of India ha s launched several schemes to support Textile & Apparel 
Sector viz. Knitting and Knitwear Sector scheme, Amended Technology upgradation 
Fund Scheme (ATUFs), National Handloom Development programme, Integrated 
Textile Parks Scheme (SITP), PLI Scheme etc. Go vernment has launched the 
ambitious PM Mega Integrated Textile Region and Apparel (PM MITRA) Parks Scheme 
with a strong emphasis on making the Indian textile industry globally competitive by 
reducing input cost, increasing economy of scale, higher producti vity and Free Trade 
Agreements (FTA). Inspired by the 5F vision (Farm to Fiber to Factory to Fashion to 
Foreign) of the Hon’ble Prime Minister, the PM MITRA Parks are a way forward in 
making India a global hub for Textile manufacturing and exports. These P arks are 
aimed to achieve higher size and scale alongwith creation of modern and integrated 
value chain with world class infrastructure and plug and play facilities to attract large 
investment and to boost employment generation. The Committee are aware tha t 
several States have different textile policies and Schemes to address the challenges 
faced by Textile Industry and to further boost its growth. The Committee are of the view 
that the successful implementation of PM MITRA PARK Scheme to a large extent 
depend on aligning the industry oriented and pro -active State Textile Policies/schemes 
with National Textile Policy. Therefore, the Committee urge the Ministry to frame a 
comprehensive National Textile Policy, with a view to make Indian textile Industry 
globally competitive by incorporating the best international practices and industry 
oriented pro-active aspects of  State Textile Policies/Schemes. 
 

15 
 
Reply of the Government 
The status of National Textile Policy is as under:- 
          Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT) being a nodal 
Department is finalizing a comprehensive Industrial Policy to establish a broad 
framework for all sectors including the Textile Sector. 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 2) 
 
Need for Review of Selection Procedure  
PM MITRA Parks are being set up at textile oriented and strategic locations within the 
country which has the existing favourable environment and ecosystem required for its 
successful implementation. The Ministry, in one of its written submis sions, stated that 
eligible States and sites were evaluated using a transparent challenge method based 
on objective criteria, taking into account a variety of factors such as connectivity, 
existing eco -system, textile industry policy, infrastructure, utili ty services etc. PM Gati 
Shakti National Master Plan for multi model connectivity was also used for validation. 
State Govts. were expected to submit Preliminary Project Report (PPR) with minimum 
1000 acres unencumbered and contiguous land parcel and to con firm permission for 
industrial and commercial land use for 10% of the area and support for environment 
clearance for the project. The Committee note that out of the 18 proposals received 
from 13 States, only 7 proposals received from States viz. Tamil Nadu , Telegana, 
Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Maharashtra have been 
selected by the Project Approval Committee (PAC). The Committee are of the view that 
the huge land bank available with the defunct units of NTC, BIC and others should b e 
utilized for setting up PM MITRA Parks to revive the textile sector, instead of selling it 
for a meager sum. The Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry should review 
the selection procedure with a view to set up more PM MITRA Parks to enable spee dy 
recovery of the Indian Textile Sector. Further, more than 1000 acres of land available 
with Barachakia Unit and 174 acres land available with Chanpatia Unit of Champaran 
Sugar Company Ltd. can be utilized for the purpose.  
 

16 
 
 Reply of the Government  
The Selection procedure is as per approval accorded by the Cabinet.  However, for 
future schemes or for any additional Parks under this Scheme, the suggestions of the 
Committee are noted for due consideration. 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 4) 
 
Need to Include State Representatives and Technical Experts in PMA 
Ministry of Textiles, in their written reply has submitted that they will periodically monitor 
the progress of the projects under the scheme. A Project Monitoring Agency (PMA) will 
be appointed for  the purpose, which will act as the Technical Arm by providing 
secretarial, managerial and implementation support to the Ministry for effective and 
timely implementation of the scheme. The Committee are informed that the process of 
appointment of PMA is un derway. Considering the mandate of the Project Monitoring 
Agency, the Committee desire that the process of appointment of the PMA should be 
completed without further delay and State Government, being the major stakeholder in 
the project, should be given du e representation in the PMA. Further, the Committee 
recommend that the possibility of roping in domestic and international textile experts 
and technocrats in PMA should be explored.  
Reply of the Government 
The SPV formed comprises representatives of both Centre and State Government on 
its Board.  Each Project will have separate Project Management Consultants (PMCs) 
for their state. Besides, for monitoring and implementation of Scheme, Ministry of 
Textiles is in the process of on-boarding a separate PMA which will include technical 
experts viz. industrial Infrastructural expert, Procurement and Contract Expert, Textile 
Expert, Corporate secretariat/ Legal Expert etc. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para no.8 of Chapter I) 
 
 

17 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 7) 
 
Need for special incentives for all women manufacturing units and female 
workers. 
 Traditionally, Textile Industry has been engaging large number of skilled and 
unskilled workers and artisans. One of the major objectives of PM MITRA Park Scheme 
is to generate employment opportunities. The scheme also provides for huge budgetary 
support for setting up of such parks to attract investments. The Committee note that the 
Indian Textile Industry engages significant female workforce, particularly in the 
handloom/powerloom segments and production units for ready -made Garments. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that in a scheme like PM MITRA, there should be 
provision for special incentives to attract women entrepreneurs and the Ministry should 
make m andatory provision for basic amenities for female workers such as restroom, 
crèche facility, medical care, options for part -time work, flexible working hours to 
maintain a work -life balance. Further, they should also be provided technical and 
managerial assistance for setting up all women manufacturing units/parks. 
Reply of the Government 
Textile Sector employs a large number of women especially in the garmenting segment. 
Suitable facilities for workforce including women workers will be duly considered in t he 
PM MITRA Parks.   
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 10) 
 
Need for vertical integration in Powerloom Sector  
 The Committee note that presently the work relating to fibre, yarn, processing of 
cloth, printing, garmenting, etc. is spread over various p laces across the country. The 
Committee have been apprised that lack of integration decreases competitiveness and 
also minimizes diversification, which has direct impact on the cost of product. As a 
result, apparels produced by Indian Textile Sector are fa cing tough competition in 
domestic as well as international markets. The Committee are of the considered opinion 
that establishment of PM -MITRA Parks would address the  issue of lack of vertical 
integration faced by Powerloom Sector. The Committee, therefo re, urge the Ministry to 

18 
 
take proactive steps to ensure vertical integration of Powerloom Sector beyond the 
ambit of PM MITRA Parks to convert the Indian textile and apparel industry from 
fragmented to integrated and from un -organised to organised so that Indian apparel 
sector may be able to face the escalating global competition from countries like 
Bangladesh, China and Turkey.  
Reply of the Government 
The PM Mega Integrated Textile Region and Apparel (PM MITRA) Parks Scheme 
would lead to creation of a modern, integrated large scale, world class industrial 
infrastructure including plug and play facilities. The scheme is to develop integrated 
large scale and modern industrial infrastructure facility for entire value -chain of the 
textile industry.  
Apart from PM MITRA, Scheme for Integrated Textile Parks(SITP), addresses the issue 
of lack of vertical integration faced by Powerloom sector. 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 11) 
 
Need for Survey in unorganized Powerloom Sector  
 
The Committee note that the major challenges faced in the unorganized Powerloom 
Sector include inter-alia outdated technology, inadequate capital for modernization, less 
working cap ital, fragmentation, fluctuating raw material prices, lower productivity and 
high cost of products etc. The Committee are aware that there are almost 25.74 lakh 
powerlooms, accounting for 58.54% percent of total cloth production in the country. 
Ministry of  Textiles stated that they do not maintain data regarding number of 
Powerloom owners in the country. The Committee feel that to ensure holistic 
development of the entire Powerloom Sector, the Ministry needs to undertake a fresh 
base line survey so that act ual gaps of the sector are identified and the authentic data 
regarding status of Powerloom Sector is available. The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Ministry to conduct a base -line comprehensive survey covering the entire spectrum of 
Powerloom Sector inter -alia the number of workers, their salary/wage status, units 
location, owners details, status of functioning etc. so that the precious data obtained 
may be utilised by policy formulators to foster Research and Development activities in 

19 
 
the textile sector to derive innovation, modernisation and increase productivity. The 
Committee also emphasise the need to establish collaborations between Textile Sector 
and academic institutions to encourage startups, knowledge sharing and technology 
transfer. 
Reply of the Government 
The last survey on the Powerloom sector was conducted in 2013, revealing 
approximately 24 lakh powerlooms operating across the country. In order to update the 
data and address the evolving challenges and ensure development, the process of 
conducting a baseline study for the powerloom industries in 2024 is commenced. The 
first meeting of the stakeholders / Technical Committee was held on 16th April 2024, 
which actively deliberated on the proposal, Terms of Reference (ToR), approach, 
methodology, etc . for conducting the study. The detailed proposal is currently under 
submission for further consideration. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para no.20 of Chapter I) 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 12) 
 
Need for effective Pollution Control and effluent Management System  
Textile industry is known for its sound, air and water pollution. It uses hazardous 
substances in the process of dyeing and fabric finishing. These include  acids, ionic 
chemicals, alkaline solutions and enzymes, which are harmful not only to the workers 
and employees who are directly engaged in the industry, but also for the eco -system in 
the surrounding area. The workers are prone to various chronic illness like lung cancer, 
respiratory, musculoskeletal and osteoarthritis. The Textile Industry’s large scale usage 
of solvents and its exposure to harmful substances in the water bodies causes Typhoid, 
Cholera, Jaundice etc. among those living near textile mills. The Committee urge the 
Ministry of Textiles to conduct Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) of each 
approved park and put in place adequate provision to make it mandatory for the SPVs 
and Master Developers (MD) to ensure that Common Effluent Treatment Plant (ETP), 

20 
 
Sewage Treatment Pl ant (STP), Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP) are made 
operational along with parks/mills. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
action taken in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
The PM Mega Integrated Textile Region and Apparel (PM MITRA) Parks Scheme 
would lead to creation of a modern, integrated large scale, world class industrial 
infrastructure including plug and play facilities.  It is envisaged to help India in achieving 
the United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 9 (“Build resilie nt infrastructure, 
promote sustainable industrialization and foster innovation”). The scheme is to develop 
integrated large scale and modern industrial infrastructure facility for entire value -chain 
of the textile industry including that of effective Pollu tion Control and effluent 
Management System. 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 13) 
 
Need for expeditious resolution for revival of sick textile units 
In the later part of 1960, a crisis emerged in the Indian textile industry as numerous 
mills became fi nancially unstable, ceased operations, and faced imminent collapse, 
posing a severe economic imbalance and disrupted the employment scenario. To 
address this turmoil, Government intervention led to nationalization of 103 sick textile 
undertakings in 1974 u nder the Sick Textile Undertaking (Nationalization) Act 1974. 
Subsequent enactments viz. Swadeshi Cotton Mill Co. Ltd. (Acquisition and transfer of 
Undertakings) Act, 1986 and the Textile Undertakings (Nationalisation) Act, 1995 
nationalised 6 mills and 15  mills respectively. The amendment to the above Acts in 
1995 & 2014 respectively empowered the National Textile Corporation to transfer or 
dispose of assets for better management, modernization, restructuring, or revival of sick 
textile undertakings. Out o f these 124 NTC mills nationalized, 5 mills were 
closed/merged and 119 mills referred to Board for Industrial and Financial 
Reconstruction (BIFR).  
British India Corporation Ltd. (BIC) was acquired by Govt. of India through BIC 
(Acquisition of Shares) Act, 1981. BIC has two units viz. Cawnpur woolen Mills, Kanpur 

21 
 
and New Egerton Woolen Mills, Dhariwal, Punjab and three subsidiaries viz. Elgin Mills 
Ltd., Cawnpur Textiles Ltd. and Brushware Ltd. Owing to continuous  losses, BIC was 
referred to BIFR in 1991 and was declared sick in 1992. The Cabinet approved a revival 
scheme on 21.11.2001 (BIFR sanctioned on 18.12.2002) at a cost of Rs.211 crore 
which was to be met by sale of surplus land and assets. However, the scheme was 
declared as failed in 2005 because B IC could not infuse fund. The Cabinet gave “In 
principle” approval to the revival plan of BIC on 09.06.2011 at a total cost of Rs. 338.04 
crore through infusion of funds to be provided by the Government of India subject to the 
condition that permission is first obtained for sale of surplus land from Govt. of UP. This 
revival Scheme of BIC could not take off as UP Govt. is yet to convert the land of BIC 
lease hold. The Committee observe that the revival efforts made by Government could 
not produce desired re sults due to various reasons such as prolonged litigations, 
technical obsolescence, excess manpower, labour issues, high production cost and 
lack of effective management, delay in implementation of revival plans, delay in 
resolving land related issues betw een Centre and State Governments etc. The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to prepare an action plan for a time bound 
resolution of issues related to each sick textile units across the country by involving all 
stakeholders. Steps should be taken for  expeditious settlement of land related issues 
between Centre and State Governments. Legal experts should be engaged for settling 
the disputes through Alternate Dispute Resolution mechanism, wherever possible. 
Once Government has obtained the dispute free title of the properties of sick textile 
undertakings/units, which are non -operational, revival efforts should be undertaken 
through private investment including establishment of PM MITRA PARKS. The 
Committee further recommend that the Ministry should take effective pro -labour 
measures for providing relief and rehabilitation of workers rendered jobless due to 
closure of NTC, BIC and Non -SSI Textile Mills in private sector. The Ministry should 
maintain online data regarding workers rendered jobless in Textile  Sector, details of 
workmen availed relief measures like salary, VRS package, pension etc., details of 
remaining workers and number of workers registered/benefited from Rajiv Gandhi 
Shramik Kalyan Yojana (RGSKY) under Ministry of Labour and Employment etc. 
 
 

22 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) in accordance with its guidelines dated 
13.12.2021, has been entrusted with the responsibility to identifying CPSEs for closure 
or privatization in non -strategic sector in consultation w ith the stakeholders 
administrative Ministries/Departments.  In line with this mandate, DPE constituted 
Committee of Group of Officers (CGO), which further constituted a Sub -Committee.  
The Sub-committee after analysing the feasibility of disinvestment of some of NTC mills 
as well as the feasibility of transfer of equity of subsidiaries/Joint Venture mills of NTC 
to the respective private JV Partners or closure, opined that it is prudent to close all 23 
NTC working mills.   Based on the report of the Sub -Committee, CGO recommended 
closure of NTC along with its 23 operating mills. Since NTC is running losses with 
negative net worth and not undertaking any significant business, the revival efforts 
made in the past have not yielded the desired result in the pas t. DPE in consultation 
with NITI Aayog, Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure, Department of 
Economic Affairs, DIPAM etc. is taking the matter forward in this regard in a time bound 
manner.  
          As regards settlement of land related issues b etween Centre and State 
Governments, engagement of Legal Experts for settling the disputes through Alternate 
Dispute Resolution Mechanism (ADRM), and establishment of PM Mitra Parks, Ministry 
of Textiles in consultation with DPE will take the process forwa rd and complete the 
same by creating a Special Cell closure of PSUs of MoT and will contest the legal 
cases of these CPSEs and their subsidiary companies/ associated companies. 
          As regard to pro -labour measures providing relief and rehabilitation of workers 
rendered jobless due to closure of NTC and BIC, the same will be done as per DPE 
guidelines in this regard. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para no.23 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 

23 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 14) 
 
Need to take over control/possession of Champaran Sugar Company Ltd. (CSCL)  
Champaran Sugar Company Ltd. (CSCL), an associate Company with 41.83% share 
holding with its headquarters at Kanpur has two units in Bihar, i.e. Barachakia Unit with 
land assets o f 1008.20 acres and Chanpatia Unit with land assets of 174.24 acres. 
Since the CSCL was running in huge losses, Board of Industrial and Financial 
Reconstruction (BIFR) recommended for its winding up, which was accepted by the 
Hon’ble Company Court on 5 Sep tember, 1994. Barachakia Unit was put on sale and 
the Auction Purchaser took over the possession and the sale deed was executed 
between the Official Liquidator (OL) and the Auction Purchaser for a total sale 
consideration of Rs.8,10,40,000/ -. But the regis tration process could not be completed 
as the Registering Authority had doubt regarding valuation and the court directed 
Collector in December, 2013 to take appropriate decision in the matter. Ministry of 
Textiles have requested their Senior Advocate to ar range for sale certificates issued by 
OL in the matter of Barachakia and Chanpatia Sugar Mills. OL invited bids for sale of 
Chanpatia Unit and Hon’ble Company Judge accepted the highest offer for 2.01 crore. 
The Auction Purchaser failed to deposit the amou nt. However, Hon’ble High Court, 
Allahabad directed the Auction Purchaser to run the factory under the supervision of 
Official Liquidator (OL). On receipt of Bank Draft of Rs. 25 lakh and cheque amounting 
to Rs.1.76 crore, physical possession of the factor y was handed over to the Auction 
Purchaser on 24.5.2006. However, OL has reported that the Auction Purchaser has 
failed to implement the main object of the auction, which was to run the factory and 
retain the employment of its employees. OL further stated that the sale was not 
confirmed in his favour as the payment was not made on time. DM, West Champaran, 
in response to a letter dated 9.3.2022 informed Ministry of Textiles that due to lack of 
security, the property has been encroached by local people. The Auction Purchaser has 
been informed to submit all relevant document to prove his ownership of the mill and its 
assets. He has not responded to it. The Hon’ble Company Court, Allahabad has 
admitted an application filed by Ministry of Textiles on 17.5.2023 u nder Section 466 of 
Companies Act, 1956 for recalling its order dated 22.11.2002 as the Auction Purchaser 
and OL has failed to comply with it. The Committee note that even after more than 20 

24 
 
years, Ministry of  Textiles has given no solution. This has resu lted not only in non -
operationalisation of the mill but also encroachment of the property. The Committee feel 
that the land available with sugar units at Chanpatia and Barachakia may be utilized for 
PM MITRA/Mini Textile Park. The Committee, therefore, urg e the Ministry of Textiles to 
work for taking over control/possession of CSCL with the permission of concerned 
Court, as the huge land mass of Barachakia and Chanpatia Units of CSCL could be 
considered for development of a PM MITRA/Mini Textile Park withou t further loss of 
time. 
Reply of the Government 
Champaran Sugar Company Limited (CSCL) an Associate Company of BIC, having its 
two units i.e., Barachakia Sugar Mill at East Champaran & Chanpatia Sugar Mill at 
West Champaran Bihar, was ordered for winding u p by the Hon'ble High Court 
Allahabad in its order dated 05.09.1994 and Official Liquidator (OL) was appointed for 
liquidation.  
       OL vide letter dated 23.02.2021 & 09.07.2022 has informed that: - The assets of 
Barachakia Sugar Mill was sold on 12.11.2008, in compliance of Hon'ble Supreme court 
order. The assets (Movable and Immovable assets) had been handed over to the 
Auction Purchaser after confirmation of sale. 
The possession of Chanpatia Sugar Unit was given to Auction Purchaser for 
running the Mill but he failed, the sale of this unit was not confirmed. 
       In this regard, Ministry on behalf of Union of India has filed application on 
05.04.2023, before Hon'ble Company Court/High court Allahabad, under section 466 of 
the Companies Act, for recal ling the winding up order of Champaran Sugar Company 
Limited (CSCL) dated 05.09.1994 and to take the assets of Chanpatia Sugar Mill unit of 
CSCL. 
       In so far as the Committee’s advice/suggestion with respect to taking back of the 
control/possession of land assets of CSCL is concerned, since the matter is presently 
sub-judice before the Hon’ble High Court of Allahabad, hence, the advice/suggestion of 
the Committee shall be considered upon a favourable order/decree of the Hon’ble 
Company Court. Furthermo re, the Ministry is actively pursuing/contesting the matter 
through their legal team so as to bring about a favourable outcome without any 
unnecessary delay. 

25 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 (Recommendations Para No. 3) 
 
Need for expediting formation of SPVs 
 
The Committee note that Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) is a joint venture between the 
State and Central Government, registered under Companies Act, 2013 for each PM 
MITRA Park with a paid up capital of ₹10 Crore. The Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) 
will be a legal entity with 51% equity shareholding of State Government and 49% of 
Central Government, set up by the State Government for the purpose of implementing 
the PM M ITRA Park Project. SPV will be responsible for appointment of Master 
Developer (MD) and to engage them through a Concession Agreement. The Master 
Developer will be responsible for designing, planning, building, financing, operating and 
maintaining the MITR A Parks. SPV will be responsible for overall development, 
governance and administration of the Parks. The Committee note that SPV formation is 
a crucial stage. However, out of the 7 proposals approved, only 2 States viz. Gujarat 
and Uttar Pradesh have inco rporated SPVs so far and other States are still in the 
process. The Committee are informed that review meetings with State Government 
representatives are being held regularly at the level of Secretary, the Chairperson of 
Project Approval Committee. Besides , a dedicated portal has also been created by the 
Ministry of Textiles for monitoring progress of all 7 projects on real -time basis. The 
Committee, while underlining the importance of formation of SPVs at the earliest for 
establishing the PM MITRA Parks, d esire that the Ministry should adopt a more 
proactive role particularly in finding out the reasons for delay in formation of SPVs in 
remaining States and also in assisting them for SPV formation at the earliest so that the 
process of establishing the PM MI TRA Parks is put on fast track to attract domestic as 
well as foreign investments. 
 
 

26 
 
Reply of the Government 
SPVs of all 5 Greenfield sites have been incorporated while the existing SPVs in 
respect of 2 Brownfield sites shall continue.  Thus institutional arrangements for all 7 
Mega Parks are in place. 
(Recommendations Para No. 5) 
 
Need to make adequate Budgetary Provision 
The Committee have been apprised that Government has approved setting up of 7 PM 
MITRA parks on Greenfield/Brownfield sites to develop w orld class infrastructure 
including plug and play facility with an outlay of Rs.4,445 crore during the period of 7 
years from 2021 -22 to 2027 -28. Central Government will provide Development Capital 
Support (DCS) of Rs.300 crore and Rs.200 crore in Phase -I and II respectively for 
Greenfield sites and Rs.200 crores and Rs.100 crores in phase -I&II respectively for 
Brownfield sites. DCS is given for creation of core infrastructure for plug and play 
facilities viz. developing factory sites, Incubation Centre, ro ads, power, water etc. In 
addition, there is a provision for Competitive Incentive Support (CIS) of Rs.300 crore for 
incentivising manufacturing units get established early in PM MITRA park. The 
Committee observe that the budgetary provision for PM MITRA p arks in BE for 2021-22 
was Rs.0.50 crore, 2022 -23 was Rs.15 crore and for 2023 -24 is Rs.200 crore. The 
Committee recommend that there is a need for more budgetary provision adequate 
enough for timely release of DCS for creation of core infrastructure in ea ch of the 7 
approved MITRA Park so that potential investors are attracted for early establishment 
and production. 
Reply of the Government 
An outlay of Rs.4,445 crore has been allotted by the Government for its implementation.  
Besides, in FY 2024-25, Budgetary Provision of Rs.300 crore has been provided. 
 
 
 

27 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No.8) 
 
Need for Robust IT Infrastructure and E-Commerce System  
 The Committee recognize the crucial role of establishing a robust IT 
infrastructure for PM MITRA Parks, encompassing reliable hardware networks, data 
centers, and specialized software solutions. IT infrastructure is pivotal in providing 
technological support for the PM MITRA Scheme and in effectively managing 
commercial losses within the Textile Sector. The Committee acknowledge the Ministry's 
efforts in this direction, particularly in initiating ste ps to set up IT infrastructure for PM 
MITRA Parks. Notably, the creation of a dedicated portal for realtime monitoring of all 
seven projects is underway, with a trial version already in place and the final version 
slated for imminent execution. The Committ ee, therefore, strongly urge the Ministry to 
explore the possibility of establishing end -to-end IT infrastructure for PM MITRA Parks 
to create an Integrated textile value chain right from spinning, weaving, processing to a 
robust e-commerce system for hassle free and cost effective selling of textile products. 
Reply of the Government 
 A dedicated Dash-board on PM MITRA Park is being developed to capture real -
time progress /developments of each Mega Park. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para no.14 of Chapter I) 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 9) 
Need to earmark land for safety and security establishment  
The Committee note that availability of minimum 1000 acres of unencumbered and 
contiguous land pool is one of the basic requirements for submissi on of proposals by 

28 
 
State Government for PM MITRA Park. The scheme also envisages for detailed land 
utilization plan viz. 50% area for manufacturing zone for entire value chain including 
plug and play, 20% area for common utilities and infrastructures, 10% area for 
subsidized housing, schools, hospitals etc. 10% area for commercial use for hotels, 
exhibition, convention halls, 5% for specialized and value additives such as Testing 
Labs, Training Centre, R&D, Incubation Labs, startups etc. and 5% area for log istic 
zone and multi -model linkages etc. The Committee observe that there is no land 
earmarked for common safety and security establishment in the land utilisation plan. 
Therefore, they are of the view that the MITRA parks being spread over a contiguous 
land mass of 1000 acres, with huge infrastructure costing crores of rupees, should have 
common safety and security establishment at a centre place. The Committee urge the 
Ministry to earmark requisite percentage of land at a central place to establish common  
safety and security establishment and also make a provision for the SPV and Master 
Developer to utilize a portion of the CDS for meeting the expenditure related to 
establishment of state-of-the-art fire and safety installation. 
Reply of the Government 
The minimum area required to establish PM MITRA Park was 1000 acres.    The broad 
break-up of land-use proposed in the Mega park are: 
a. 50% area is to be demarcated for manufacturing (entire value chain from 
spinning to RMG including plug and play);  
b. 20% area for common utilities including CETPs;  
c. 10% area for social infrastructure;  
d. 10% area for Commercial Development (CD) 
e. 5% area for testing & Labs etc.;  
f. 5% area for logistics zone - multi-modal linkages, bonded areas, storage etc.  
 Thus, adequate arrangements have been provisioned. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para no.17 of Chapter I) 
  

29 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 6) 
Need for Rationalization of Tax Regime 
 PM MITRA Parks are being set up as a joint venture of centre and State 
Governments to house the entire value chain at one place, aiming to attract domestic 
and foreign investment, generate employment and augment export potential. During the 
course of examination, Ministry of Textiles stated before the Committee that the 
scheme envisages robust State Govt. Support which includes Stamp Duty exemption of 
50-100%, concession on land rates, 3 -8% interest subsidy for 5 -7 years, wage subsidy 
of Rs.3000-6000/workers/month for 5-7 years, ESI/EPF reimbursement of 50 - 100% for 
3-5 years and SGST reimbursement of 60% -100% for 7 -10 years. While appreciating 
the State Govt. initiatives for subsidizing, financially supporting and providing ta x/duty 
exemptions and reimbursements, the Committee desire the Ministry to consider 
extending similar central tax/duty exemptions including CGST reimbursements and 
import duty rationalizations to curb low cost/undervalued import of Chinese knitted 
fabric. 
Reply of the Government 
Proposal is under examination in the Ministry. 
  Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para no.11 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
16 December, 2024              
Agrahayana 25, 1946(Saka) 
Dr. SANJAY JAISWAL 
CHAIRPERSON 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
 
 
 

30 
 
APPENDIX I 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2024-
2025) 
  
The Committee sat on Monday, the 16 th December, 2024 from 1600 hrs. to …… 
hrs. in Room No. ‘52-B’, First Floor, Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal  - Chairperson 
  
  Members 
 
2.  Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3.  Shri M. Mallesh Babu 
4.  Shri Pradan Baruah 
5.  Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
6.  Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
7.  Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
8.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
9.  Shri Manish Jaiswal 
10.  Thiru Dayanidhi Maran 
11.  Shri P. C. Mohan 
12.  Shri B.K. Parthasarathi 
13.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
14.  Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan 
15.  Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
16.  Kumari Selja 
17.  Dr. Indra Hang Subba 
18.  Shri Manoj Tiwari 
19.  Shri Ve vaithilingam 
 
   
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
                                   1.      Shri Y. M. Kandpal        -      Joint Secretary 
                             2.      Shri  Lalkithang           -       Director 
                              

31 
 
2.         At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption of the following  
draft Reports: 
(i) XXX    XXX    XXX 
(ii) XXX    XXX    XXX  
(iii) XXX    XXX    XXX  
(iv) XXX    XXX    XXX  and 
 
(v) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 37th Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee on the subject “Empowerment through PM 
Mega Integrated Textile Region and Apparel (PM MITRA) Parks Scheme  
and Revival efforts for sick textile Units/PSUs [BIC, NTC, CTL etc.]”. 
 
 
3.        Thereafter, the Committee adopted the Draft Reports without any modifications. 
The Committee, then, authorised the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports and 
present the same to Lok Sabha. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
  

32 
 
 
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 37 TH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON ESTIMATES (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
(i) Total number of recommendations/observations 14 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
 the Government: 
(SI. NO. 1,2,4,7,10,11,12,13, and 14) 
09 
 Percentage of total recommendations 64.28% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not  
desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply: 
(Sl. NO. 3 and 5) 
Percentage of total recommendations 
2 
 
 
14.28% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government’s 
replies have not been accepted by the Committee: 
(Sl. NO. 8 and 9) 
 
Percentage of total recommendations 
2 
 
 
 
14.28% 
    
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply of 
Government is still awaited: 
Sl. NO. 6 
Percentage of total recommendations 
1 
 
 
07.14% 
 
 