3 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS 
 
Assessment of various projects including Green Highways under 
National Highways Development Project (NHDP) 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 33rd 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2024-25) 
 
 
 
THIRD REPORT 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  

THIRD REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2024-25) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS 
 
Assessment of various projects including Green Highways 
under National Highways Development Project (NHDP) 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 33rd 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
 
(Presented to Lok Sabha on 18 December 2024) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December 2024 / Agrahayana 1946 (Saka) 
 

     CONTENTS          Page No. 
 
      
Composition of the Committee on Estimates (2024-25)            (ii) 
 
Introduction             (iv) 
      
             
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Committee on Estimates held on 
16.12.2024 
 
    46 
II. Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 33 rd Report of   the 
Committee on Estimates (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
    48 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
Annexure –I                                                                                                                                            49  
 
Annexure-II                           50 
  
 
CHAPTER-I Report      1  
CHAPTER-II    Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government         
 20 
  
CHAPTER-III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply 
 36 
  
CHAPTER-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government’s replies have not been accepted by the Committee 
 37 
  
CHAPTER-V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply of 
Government is still awaited 
 41 

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2024-25) 
1.  Dr. Sanjay Jaiwal- Chairperson 
2.  Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3.  Shri M. Mallesh Babu 
4.  Shri Kalyan Banjerjee 
5.  Shri Pradan Baruah 
6.  Shri Charanjit Singh Channi 
7.  Shri P.P. Chaudhary 
8.  Shri Devusinh Chauhan 
9.  Ms. Iqra Choudhary 
10.  Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
11.  Shri Sudheer Gupta 
12.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
13.  Shri Manish Jaiswal 
14.  Shri Naveen Jindal 
15.  Shri Jugal Kishore 
16.  Thiru Dayanidhi Maran 
17.  Shri P.C. Mohan 
18.  Shri B.K. Parthasarathi 
19.  Shri Awadhesh Prasad 
20.  Shri M.K. Raghavan 
21.  Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
22.  Shri Y.S. Avinash Reddy 
23.  Shri Pratap Rudy 
24.  Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan 
25.  Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
26.  Kumari Selja 
27.  Dr. Bhola Singh 
28.  Dr. Indra Hang Subba 
29.  Shri Manoj Tiwari 
30.  Shri Ve Vaithilingam 

iii 
 
Secretariat 
  
1. Shri Y. M. Kandpal Joint Secretary 
2. Shri  Lalkithang Director 
3. Shri Kuldeep Pegu Under Secretary 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
            I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Estimates (2024 -25) having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, do present this third 
Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
33rd Report of the Committee (2023 -24) on the subject ‘Assessment of various projects 
including Green Highways under National Highways Development Project (NHDP)’. 
 
2.  The 33rd Report of the Committee on Estimates (2023 -24) was presented to Lok 
Sabha on 2 nd February, 2024. The Government furnished their replies indicating action 
taken on the recommendations contained in the 33 rd Report on 6 th September, 2024. 
The draft report was considered and approved on  16 December, 2024 by the 
Committee. 
 
3.  An analysis of action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 33rd Report of the Committee on Estimates is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
16 December, 2024 
 Agrahayana 25, 1946(Saka) 
 
DR. SANJAY JAISWAL 
CHAIRPERSON 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
  
 
 
  

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
  
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in the Thirty -Third 
Report(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject “Assessment of various projects 
including Green Highways under National Highways Development Project (NHDP)” 
pertaining to the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways.  
2.       The Thirty-Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 02.02.2024. It contained 
15 Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Replies of the Government in 
respect to all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from the Ministry 
of Road Transport and Highways. 
 
3. Replies to the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report have 
broadly been categorized as under:-   
  
(i)       Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Recommendation Para No 1,2,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12 and 13 
    
      Total: 11 
(Chapter-II) 
  
(ii)      Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s reply: 
Recommendation NIL         
       Total: 00 
(Chapter-III)  
  
(iii)     Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government’s replies 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation   Para No 3 and 14       
       Total:02 
(Chapter-IV) 
  
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply of 
Government is still awaited:  
   Recommendation Para No 4, and 15           
      Total: 02 
(Chapter-V) 
  

2 
 
 
4.       The Committee desire that  Action Taken Notes in respect of the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I may be furnished to them 
within six months of the presentation of the Report to the House. 
 
5.       The Committee will now deal with the Observations/Recommendations which 
require reiteration or merit further comments. 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 1) 
Finances of NHAI 
6. The Committee in their Thirty Third Report, recommended as under: - 
“The Committee have noted the information furnished by the Ministry on BE,RE 
and actual expenditure during the last three financial years, with regard to 
projects under NHDP and it is observed that a huge portion of the expenditure is 
related to debt servicing, which is further showing an increasing trend with every 
passing financial year. The Committee have also learnt that the NHAI has 
become debt ridden mainly due to the fact that huge funds are being raised from 
market borrowing through IEBR ( Internal a nd Extra Budgetary Resources) and 
that the total debt of NHAI stood at around Rs. 2 Lakh crore (approx.) at the end 
of the financial year 2022 -23. Consequently, the Government increased 
allocation of Rs. 1,62,207 crore as budgetary support to NHAI in FY -2023-24 and 
that 20.38% of the allocation has been earmarked for debt servicing. The 
Committee are concerned to note the burden of debt that NHAI is facing as a 
result of market borrowings and payment of interest thereon and are of the view 
that corrective measures must be taken immediately to ensure that NHAI remain 
capable of repaying the debt without compounding the interest on delayed 
repayment. In this perspective, funds through IEBR has been reduced from Rs. 
65,150 crore during FY 2021 -22 to Rs 798 crore during FY 2022 -23. In such a 
situation, higher budgetary support from the Government is a commendable step 
to revitalize the finances and overall functioning of NHAI. Private Sector 
investment is another op tion. The Committee, therefore, urge upon the 
Government to consider taking steps like increasing private sector investments in 

3 
 
projects, speedy award of work for approved projects and popularize the NHAI 
InvIT bonds to further boost the finances of NHAI and recapitalize the balance 
sheet of the organization.” 
 
7. The Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways have in their Action Taken Reply, 
submitted as under: 
“NHAI has stopped borrowing since 2022, so the debt liability has not increased 
thereafter. Further, the NHAI has also swapped higher -cost bank loan, which has 
helped in reducing the debt liability to some extent. 
As regards the recommendations of the committee to popularize the 
NHAI InvIT, it is submitted that under NHAI InvIT, Rs.10,200 crores was realized 
up to March 2023 and Rs.15,700 crore has been realized in FY 2023-24, which is 
appx. 20% above the target of Rs. 13,000 crore. NHAI has also monetized the 
road asset through TOT mode and realized Rs. 26,366 crores up to March 2023 
and further mobilized Rs 15,968 Crore in FY 2023 -24. Thus, the total asset 
monetization under TOT model till March 2024 is Rs 42,334 Crore.” 
 
8.  The Committee in their original Report had observed that the NHAI had closed 
their balance sheet at the end of FY 2022 -23 with a heavy debt burden of around 
Rs. 2 lakh crore and that consequently 20.38% of the budgetary allocation for 
NHAI during the FY 2023 -24 was earmarked for debt -servicing. Thus, the 
Committee had felt the need to revitalize the organization and recommended 
steps like increasing private sector investments, speedy award of work for 
approved projects and popularizing the NHAI InvIT bo nds to boost its finances. 
The Committee are happy to note from the reply of the Ministry that the NHAI has 
managed to raise funds to the tune of Rs. 15,700 crore during the FY 2023 -24 
through InvIT bonds, which is 20% more than the target set and that Rs 42,334 
crore have been raised through asset monetization. The Committee, urge the 
Ministry to maintain the momentum and explore more such revenue generating 
avenues to raise funds for increasing number of projects all over the country, 
instead of resorting to high interest market borrowings. The Committee, also note 

4 
 
with satisfaction that the debt liability of NHAI has reduced considerably as it had 
stopped borrowing since the year 2022. The Committee, would like to be apprised 
of the total amount of debt burden on NHAI as well as on NHIDCL at the end of FY 
2023-24 and the targets/ timelines fixed to wipe out the pending debt liabilities in 
respect of both the organizations.  
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 3) 
Need for streamlining of toll-plazas 
9.  The Committee in their Thirty Third Report, recommended as under:  
“The Committee have noted the submission of the Ministry that the distance 
between two fee/toll plaza on National Highway is regulated as per National 
Highway Fee Rules, 2008.  Accordingly, the distance between two toll plazas 
shall be not less than sixty kms, unless the executing Authority deems it 
necessary to establish another plaza within a distance of sixty kms. However, the 
Committee observe that toll plazas are being established in less than 60 kms. 
distance and also within the limits of Municipal area or within the city  on 
Highways passing through highly populated villages, municipalities   and 
townships. One such instance is the functioning of two such plazas within 60 km 
of each other on the Path ankot-Srinagar stretch of NH -44. The Committee feel 
that in the absence of alternate roads, collecting fees from residents of villages, 
municipalities or townships adjoining a toll plaza for using the Highway for their 
day to day work/activities is not justifiable as this is an additional burden on them. 
Thus, the Committee would like the Government to review the instant provisions 
on establishing toll plazas and recommend that a mechanism should be put in 
place to facilitate  free movement of people/inhabitants residing 
nearby/surrounding area of a toll plaza or within the Municipality/city or exempt 
them from payment of toll fees for commuting/using the highway. The Committee 
also feel that the location of toll plaza should be invariably shown at the stage of 
Detailed Project Report (DPR) itself. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the changes/amendments brought into the instant guidelines for the above 
purpose.  

5 
 
The Committee, further urge upon the Government to conduct a study on 
the feasibility of installing Electronic Toll Collection device in conjunction with the 
GPS system of vehicles, so that toll fees gets deducted electronically when a 
vehicle enters or exits a National Highway/Expressway. Such a measure, if 
proved successful, may eventually help in phasing out toll gates/plazas in the 
long run and thereby easing the movement of vehicles on National 
Highways/Expressways and reducing carbon emission to a large extent.” 
10. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways in their Action Taken Reply, has 
stated as under: 
“The distance criteria for establishment of a fee plaza has come into existence 
after NH Fee Rules 2008 and there was no such criteria in earlier NH Fee Rules, 
1997. As per Rule 8(2) of NH Fee Rules 2008: 
 
"(2) Any other toll plaza on the same section of national highway and in the same 
direction shall not be established within a distance of sixty kilometers: 
 
Provided that where the executing authority deems necessary, it may for reasons 
to be recorded in writing, establish or allow the concessionaire to establish 
another toll plaza within a distance of sixty kilometres: 
 
Provided further that a toll plaza may be established within a distance of sixty 
kilometers from another toll plaza if such toll plaza is for co llection of fee for a 
permanent bridge, bypass or tunnel." 
Therefore, the restriction of 60 km distance between two fee plazas is applicable 
only when two fee plazas are situated on the same section of a national highway. 
Further, where a fee plaza is to be established for collection of fee for a 
bypass/permanent bridge/tunnel, it may be established within 60 km distance 
from another fee plaza. 
As regards the recommendation of the committee to facilitate free movement of 
people/inhabitants residing nearby/surrounding area of a toll plaza, Rule 9(3) of 
NH Fee Rules, 2008, provides that a person residing within a distance of twenty 

6 
 
kilometers from the toll plaza who owns a mechanical vehicle registered for non - 
commercial purposes and uses it as such for commuting on a section of national 
highway, permanent bridge, bypass or tunnel, may obtain a pass, on payment of 
fee at the base rate for the year 2007 -2008 of Rupees one hundred and ﬁfty per 
calendar month and revised annually in accordance with rule 5, authorising it to 
cross the toll plaza speciﬁed in such pass (Monthly pass rate for Financial Year 
2023-24 is Rs 330/-). 
As a policy decision, the location of toll plazas is now decided at the corridor 
level rather than the project level so that the distance between the toll plazas is 
optimized. Moreover, the location of fee plaza is ascertained at the time of 
preparation of DPR which is also apprised to PATSC/IAC (Project Appraisal 
Committee). Project is approved, subsequent to concurrence of the appraisal 
committee. 
The technology of GNSS (Global Navigational Satellite System) based 
Tolling is being explored by NHAI at NH Fee Plazas. As India is already having 
RFID FASTag based Tolling system in place, the option of having a hybrid 
system is being explored where GNSS based Tolling can be done along with the 
existing system of Tolling. In this regards, Technology Tests are being conducted 
to have GNSS as an added facility with existing Tolling system. Based on the 
results from the Technology Tests, the system will be implemented.” 
 
11. The Committee had noted in their original Report the submission of the 
Ministry that distances between two toll plazas are regulated as per National 
Highway Fee Rules, 2008. According to the extant fee rules, the distance between 
two toll plazas shall be not less than sixty kms unless the Executing Authority 
deems it otherwise. In this context, the Committee were of the considered view 
that collecting tolls from people residing near a toll plaza is not justifiable and 
recommended the Govt. to put in pla ce a mechanism to facilitate free movement 
of people/ inhabitants residing near toll plazas for using the highway. The 
Ministry in their Action Taken reply has stated that non -commercial vehicles of 
persons residing within a distance of twenty kms from the toll plaza may obtain a 

7 
 
monthly pass on payment of fee for commuting on a section of a Highway. The 
Committee are constraint to state that while they are aware of the rules and 
position on toll fees as stated by the Ministry,  they had emphasized in their 
recommendation the need to review the extant provisions to facilitate free 
movement of people residing nearby toll plazas for commuting/using the 
Highway. Many such inhabitants may have been living in those areas long before 
any Highway or Expressway was conceptualized for being built in those area or 
regions. As such, the Committee are of the firm opinion that collecting fees from 
those inhabitants is an additional and avoidable financial burden on them. While 
reiterating their earlier recommendation, the Committee once again urge the 
Ministry to review the extant provisions in the larger interest of people residing 
near toll plazas. 
 The Committee had also urged the Ministry to ensure that location of toll 
plazas be shown at the DPR stage itself and to conduct a study on the feasibility 
of installing Electronic Toll Collection device in Conjunction with the GPS system 
of vehicles so that toll fees get deducted electronically when a vehicle enters or 
exits a National Highway/Expressway. The Committee are happy to note from the 
reply of the Ministry that the location of a fee plaza in ascertained at the time of 
preparation of DPR and also that Global Navigational Satellite System (GNSS) 
based tolling is being explored by NHAI for toll plazas. The Committee would like 
to be updated on the outcomes of the technology tests being conducted to 
implement GNSS based toll collection System which the Committee believes will 
revolutionalize the toll collection system in the country and ease the movement of 
vehicles on Highways. 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 4) 
Completion of Projects 
12.  The Committee in their Thirty Third Report, recommended as under:  
“The Committee have been informed that the National Highways Development 
Project (NHDP) started in the year 2000 in a pha sed manner (Phase I to VII) and 
in the year 2017, all those projects under NHDP were subsumed under a 

8 
 
different concept called Bharatmala Project. The Committee have also noted that 
when Bharatmala project was launched, work on 30,000 kms of roads were 
completed under NHDP, while 13,000 Kms of roads were under implementation 
and the remaining 10,000 Kms which were still to be sanctioned were included 
under the Bharatmala Pariyojana. The Committee have further taken note of the 
various administrative initiatives taken by the Ministry, including launch of the 
Bhumi Rashi portal and sharing unresolved issues w ith stakeholders on 
PRAGATI platform to ensure timely implementation and completion of projects. 
The Committee, while appreciating  the various initiatives taken by the Ministry, 
are concerned to note that around 674 National Highway projects are delayed 
and many of them are facing time and cost overruns. To highlight a few, the 
implementation of the project on NH -727AA, and two Expressway corridor 
projects- (a) Gorakhpur-Siliguri and (b) Raxaul-Haldia which are part of phase IIA 
of Bharatmala Pariyojana, have been under implementation for a long time.  With 
regard to projects which are delayed due to administrative and other related 
issues, the Committee feel that urgent corrective action should be taken by the 
concerned Ministries/Departments, other stakeholders to resolve outstanding 
issues on priority basis. The Ministry has informed that a period of 2 -3 years is 
considered ideal for completion of a National Highway project. However, the 
Committee have observed that most of the projects take more than 3 yea rs for 
completion. The Committee, therefore, urge upon the Government to ensure 
better coordination amongst all stakeholders and establish single window  system 
with online monitoring mechanism for sorting out issues without much time lag.   
The Committee are also of the opinion that the Government should prepare an 
SOP and resolve all inter -ministerial, Centre-State and intra -States issues in a 
time bound manner. A case in point is the proposal/need for construction of a 
Road overbridge (ROB) at the railway crossing point between the railway station 
and office of the Collectorate under Betiah Municipal Corporation on NH -727, 
which is understood to be under consideration for the last many years. The 
Committee urges the Ministry to undertake a study on the above stretch and take 
steps to construct a ROB accordingly, at the earliest, for the convenience of the 

9 
 
people living in the Betiah Municipal Corporation area and also to ease the heavy 
traffic congestion on that stretch of NH -727. Further, a mechanism must also be 
put in place so that projects are reviewed at regular intervals, if possible, every 
month, in the presence of all stakeholders. The Committee also recommend the 
Ministry to consider introducing incentives  to project developers/firms who 
complete projects as per the timelines or before the target date of completion.  
The Committee, while noting the submission of the Ministry that there are 
674 Projects facing delay in completion and all delayed projects do not face cost 
overruns, desire the Ministry to furnish details of projects where NHAI has 
incurred cost escalation (including total amount paid to project developers and 
other expenses) during the last 10 years.” 
13. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways have in their Action Taken Reply, 
submitted as under: 
“Gorakhpur-Siliguri and Raxaul -Haldia Corridors were earlier part of the 
proposed Phase IIA of the Bharatmala Pariyojana, appraised by PIB in July 
2022. However, the work of DPR could not be taken up for want of further 
approval of Competent Authority. It is to submit that Master Plan with High 
Speed Corridors utilizing the PM Gatishakti Frame Work as part of Vision 
2047 is under consideration. The aforesaid two Corridors are part of the 
Phase I of the proposed Master Plan of National Highways. 
Regarding the suggestion of the Committee to ensure better 
coordination amongst all stakeholders and establish single window system 
with online monitoring mechanism for sorting out issues without much time 
lag, project monitoring is currently being done by NHIDCL through PMIS 
portal, which is a single window online monitoring platform. Regarding the 
suggestion for putting in place a mechanism for review of project at regular 
intervals, it may be mentioned that NHIDCL has put in place a system to 
review the ongoing projects on weekly, fortnightly and monthly basis both at 
ﬁeld and Hqtrs level. It is also to be noted that the Ministry has impressed 

10 
 
upon all its agencies to award work and ﬁx Appointed Date only after securing 
the minimum mandated land and other clearances. 
With regard to the recommendation of the committee to consider 
introducing incentives to project developers/ﬁrms who complete projects as 
per the timelines or before the target date of completion, it may be mentioned 
that there’s a provision in the EPC contract agreement for payment of bonus 
for early completion of projects before the schedule completion date.” 
 
14. The committee had observed that a large number of highway projects are 
facing time and cost overruns due to various factors and had therefore urged the 
Ministry to ensure better co -ordination amongst all stakeholders by preparing an 
SOP for  resolving  all inter-ministerial, centre-state and intra-state issues, so that 
the implementation  of projects are not delayed. The committee note with 
satisfaction the mechanism, as detailed by the Ministry in their Action Taken 
reply, for better co -ordination amongst stakeholders including review of projects 
on weekly, fortnightly and monthly basis and payment of bonus to project 
developers/firms for completing of projects as per the timelines.  The Committee, 
in their Report, had also highlighted numerous cases of projects which were 
either still under implementation or consideration for number of years. One such 
case highlighted by the Committee was the proposal for construction of a Road 
Over bridge (ROB) at the railway crossing point between the railwa y station and 
the Collectorate under Bettiah Municipal Corporation on NH -727, in the State of 
Bihar. The committee had further requested the Ministry to furnish details of NHAI 
projects that have incurred cost escalation during the last 10 years. The reply of 
the Ministry is however silent on these two aspects. The Committee, therefore, 
once again urge the Ministry to furnish- (a) the status of the proposal to construct 
a ROB on NH -727 under Bettiah Municipal Corporation, which the Committee feel 
will ease the heavy traffic congestion on that stretch of the highway and (b) the 
details of NHAI projects which have incurred cost escalation du ring the last 10 
years, within six months of presentation of this Report.   

11 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 11) 
Maintenance of National Highways  
15.  The Committee in their Thirty Third Report, recommended as under:   
“The Committee have taken note of the submission of the Ministry regarding 
steps taken to ensure the durability of National Highways such as engagement of 
Supervision Consultants to supervise quality and durability of NHs, monitoring of 
construction work and quality of material being used by Engineers of 
NHAI/NHIDCL, frequent visits of Special Project Monitor - SPM to inspect the 
quality of NH network, etc. However, the Committee have observed that timely 
maintenance and renovation of existing Highways are far from satisfactory. 
Damaged roads characterised by huge potholes, lack of proper signages on 
roads, shabby road dividers and barriers, etc. are common sights on Highways, 
specially in the far-flung areas of the country. Maintenance of National Highways 
are as important as construction of new Expressways and Highways.  Absence 
of stringent monitoring mechanism is one of the reasons for which time bound 
maintenance is not taking place. The Committee observe that proper monitoring 
of Highway maintenance is not being done by the concerned ROs/PIUs under 
NHAI. The Committee, therefore, are of the strong view that the existing 
contracts for maintenance of National Highways need a thorough review and 
stringent penalty provisions must be included in the contracts for improper 
maintenance. NHAI must be proactive and a timeline should be drawn up for 
inspection of Highways on monthly or fortnightly basis, so that maintenance or 
rectification work can be taken up on time.  
Taking further note of the submission of the Ministry that maintenance of 
the roads at high altitudes and dense mountainous regions being undertaken by 
National Highways Infrastructure Development Corporation Ltd (NHIDCL), is a 
big challenge owing to the undulating topography and harsh climatic conditions 
almost throughout the year, the Committee feel that the Government  should 
adopt international  best practices in construction and maintenance of Highways 

12 
 
in high altitudes, specially of those roads in high altitude regions of Europe, 
Russia and China.” 
16. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways have in their Action Taken Reply, 
submitted as under: 
“There is a provision in the EPC contract documents specifying the maintenance 
requirements of the project highway by the contractor and penalty for failing to do 
so. In case of termination of contract due to non -rectiﬁcation of defects by the 
contractor, there is a provision for encashment of Performance security. 
Moreover, Ministry vide circular dated 06.102.2021 issued guidelines for 
declaring contractors/concessionaire non -performer and debarment from 
participating in the future projects of MoRTH/NHIDCL/NHAI for certain period 
which include failure to maintenance of the project road by the 
contractor/concessionaire. 
Other suggestion of the committee on adoption of international best 
practices of construction and maintenance of Highways in high altitudes has 
been noted for compliance.” 
 
17. The Committee in their original Report, had observed that maintenance and 
renovation of Highways are far from satisfactory with frequent issues such as 
huge potholes, lack of signages, poorly maintained road dividers and barriers, etc 
which are common sights on most highways. In the light of these concerns the 
Committee had strongly urged the Ministry to review the existing contracts for 
maintenance of National Highways and to include stringent penalty provisions for 
improper maintenance. The Committee had also urged the NHAI to be proactive in 
inspecting Highways to ensure timely maintenance or rectification work. In their 
Action Taken reply, the Ministry has informed that there is a provision for 
imposing penalty on contractors for improper maintenance of Highways and also 
that contractors/concessionaire are now liable to be debarred from participating 
in future projects for a certain period for improper maintenance of roads. While 
the Committee appreciate  the steps taken by the Ministry, they expect these  

13 
 
provisions and guidelines to be implemented in letter and spirit, as despite the 
existing provisions, improper maintenance characterized by dilapidated roads 
and huge pot holes,  remains a common Phenomena on Highways across the 
country. The Committee strongly feel that the Ministry, including the NHAI and 
NHIDCL, must pay adequate attention towards review and inspection of Highways 
to ensure their proper and timely maintenance. Poor or negligent maintenance of 
Highways poses serious safety hazards for both commuters and vehicles and 
also have other cascading effects on the economy, such as decreased lifespan of 
roads, increased vehicle operating cost, etc.  
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 12) 
Compensation for land acquisition 
18.  The Committee in their Thirty Third Report, recommended as under:  
“The Committee, appreciate the launch of the Bhoomi Rashi portal and its 
integration with the Public Finance Management System (PFMS), to fast track 
online payment of compensation for land acquisition for NH projects and It is 
noteworthy that  payment of Rs. 1,317 crore for the projects executed by NHAI 
and Rs. 3,546 crore for the projects executed through State PWDs have been 
processed since launch of the portal. However, the Committee observe that 
payment of compensation to land owners are still delayed and at times it takes 
months/years, for final settlement. The Committee note that such  delays are not 
specific to any  region or State, but wherever land is being acquired for 
development of highways, the time lag between the date of award for 
compensation and actual release of payment is a matter of concern for every 
landowners as they lose their rig hts over the land once the land  is notified for 
compensation. In such circumstances, the land owners face a peculiar situation 
where they can neither use the land nor are they in the receipt of the 
compensation amount to invest the same for some other productive purposes. 
 It is understood that interest is being paid for the time -gap/period of delay 
between the date of notification of acquisition of land and date o f award of 
compensation and not for the period between date of award of compensation and 

14 
 
the date of actual release of payment. The Committee, therefore, emphasize the 
need for review of the process of payment of compensation for land acquisition 
so as to have actual release of compensation in time and recommend that the 
Government should consider a provision for payment of interest on delayed 
payment of compensation being paid to the land owners, on the pa ttern of 
interest being paid on refund of Income Tax.  The Committee believe that such a 
step would protect the rights of land owners, who are otherwise at a 
disadvantageous position, owing to delay in receiving the  compensation for 
years, while the price of land increases day by day.” 
19. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways have in their Action Taken Reply, 
submitted as under: 
“As per the Section 3 (a) contained in the  'The National Highways (Manner of 
Depositing the Amount by the Central Government with the Competent Authority 
for Acquisition of Land) Rules, 1998 " (as amended from time to time), the 
acquiring agency is required to deposit the compensation amount in 15 days on 
demand made by the CALA and the CALA, in turn, is required to tender such 
amount to the landowners or the persons interested in such land. 
However, there is no provision for payment of any such interest on 
account of delayed disbursement of compensation. Such delay has been mostly 
found on the part of the landowners as they may not come forward to accept the 
compensation amount to challenge the award further. Therefore, no interest is 
payable in respect of any delays in disbursement of compensation amount qua 
the Award announced by the CALA. However, PFMS -based compensation 
payment has brought about unprecedented speed and transparency in the land 
acquisition process for the benefit of the landholders.” 
 
20. The Committee in their original Report had observed that there is a 
significant time lag between the date of award of compensation and actual 
disbursement of payment for land acquisition. In some cases, it takes years for 
final settlement, putting the landowners in a very disadvantageous position, as 

15 
 
they lose their rights over the land once it is notified for compensation. The 
Committee, therefore, felt the need for payment of interest to landowners for the 
period of delay between the date of award of compensation and the date of actual 
release of payment, and accordingly made this recommendation to the Ministry. 
The Ministry, in their Action Taken reply, has stated that there is no provision for 
payment of interest on a ccount of delayed disbursement of compensation and 
placed the responsibility for delays on the landowners. The Ministry has also 
informed that PFMS based payment of compensation has brought unprecedented 
speed and transparency in the land acquisition process. While the Committee 
appreciate the introduction of PFMS based payment of compensation, they are 
not convinced by the reply of the Ministry that delays in disbursement of 
compensation are caused by landowners. It is e vident that, on most occasions,  
delays in disbursement result from bureaucratic bottlenecks often caused by lack 
of co -ordination between NHAI/NHDCL and district authorities. The Committee 
feel that the landowners cannot be blamed for such delays. Nonetheless, the 
Committee once again urge the Ministry to review the current provisions and 
consider the payment of interest to landowners in cases of delayed 
disbursements. The Committee are of the view that such a measure will ease the 
economic hardships of landowners who are already deprived of possession once 
the land is notified for compensation.  
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 14) 
Encroachment on NHs 
 
21.  The Committee in their Thirty Third Report, recommended as under:  
“The Committee have noted the submission of the Ministry that all powers for 
tackling issues of encroachment have been delegated to Regional Officers and 
Project Directors of NHAI since September, 2019 and that all such matters are 
being pursued regularly with State Government Authorities. The Committee, 
however, have observed that encroachments and re -encroachments are 
common along most Highways of the Country. In most cases, the encroachments 
are do ne by road side vendors selling eateries,  vegetables, pan -masala etc. 

16 
 
There are also instances of people encroaching upon even the road dividers and 
growing vegetables on them. All such encroachments apart from compromising 
the safety of both motorists and encroachers, also give a very shabby look to 
Highways at a time when the Government is working with a vision to make 
Highways at par with roads of advanced countries. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the officials of NHAI along with concerned enforcement 
agencies of the State Governments must regularly monitor those stretches of 
Highways which are prone to encroachments and take immediate steps to 
remove encr oachments at the initial stage and protect it from further 
encroachment. The Committee, further recommend introduction of strong 
punitive measures viz. heavy penalties, imprisonments of repeated offenders.” 
22. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways have in their Action Taken Reply, 
submitted as under: 
“As regards encroachments on NHs, NHAI provided the feature to capture the 
encroachments along the NHs in Rajmarg Yatra mobile application through the 
road users. Further, policy to undertake regular inspections to identify 
encroachments and monitor the same digitally is also being prepared besides the 
existing provisions of noting encroachments in O&M projects given in Policy 
Circular No. 18.55 dated 08.10.2020. The ATR/monitoring of the same shall be 
done through a separate Datalake module which is also under development. The 
Ministry has been holding regular review of removal of unauthorized occupations 
and encroachments on National Highways under the Control of National 
Highways (Land and Traﬃc) Act, 2002, especially the enforcement of Sec 26 of 
the Act and all Chief Secretaries have been requested to provide the assistance 
of local police and magistracy to the designated Highways Administrations.” 
 
23. The Committee had observed that encroachments and re -encroachments 
along most Highways are a common problem and recommended the Ministry to 
introduce strong punitive measures against offenders. The Ministry, in their 
Action Taken reply, has merely detailed the existing provisions and mechanisms 

17 
 
available to deal with encroachers, but there appears to be no concrete plan of 
action to find a permanent solution to this chronic problem. While reiterating their 
earlier recommendation, the Committee, once again, urge the Ministry to take 
steps to duly strengthen the monitoring mechanism. The Ministry must instill a 
sense of fear of the law and law enforcement authorities among encroachers. As 
evident from numerous cases of re-encroachments, the Committee are of the firm 
opinion that unless strong punitive measures, such as heavy penalties and 
imprisonments are introduced, the problem will persist. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the views of the Ministry on this matter and the further 
action taken thereon. The Committee would also like to be further updated on the 
progress of the Datalake module being developed for monitoring encroachments.                   
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 15) 
Manpower 
24.  The Committee in their Thirty Third Report, recommended as under:  
“The Committee are concerned to note that around 38% of the sanctioned 
strength of various posts of Group A, B and C under NHAI and 103 numbers of 
both technical and non-technical posts under NHIDCL are lying vacant. However, 
the Ministry is silent with regard to steps taken for ﬁlling up the huge number of 
vacant posts in these two organizations. The Committee note that hundreds of 
NH projects are under implementation all over the country, specially under NHAI 
and it is quite surprising that the organizati on is functioning with little over half of 
its sanctioned strength. NHAI, being a project implementing and monitoring 
Authority, needs to function in full strength to achieve the desired results. The 
Committee are aware that the oﬃcials of the ROs/PIUs, apart from doing work 
related to planning and execution of projects, are also engaged in monitoring the 
maintenance of NHs, which the Committee believe require constant visits to the 
projects sites, some of which are located at very far ﬂung areas. The Commi ttee, 
are of the view that without suﬃcient manpower, the NHAI and NHIDCL may not 
be able to produce the desired results in a time bound manner due to 
unbalanced workload on incumbent oﬃcials. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Government to take immediate steps to ﬁll up all vacant posts in 

18 
 
a time bound manner and pursue strongly with the concerned recruitment agency 
to complete the process expeditiously. The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the action taken by the Government in this regard.” 
 
25. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways have in their Action Taken Reply, 
submitted as under: 
“With respect to the staﬀ insuﬃciency in NHAI, it is submitted that the vacancy 
status of NHAI as on 31.05.2024 along with recruitment status of vacant posts 
is enclosed as Annexure-I. Apart from the above, the current status of ongoing 
recruitment against the vacant posts in all cadres is enclosed as Annexure-II. 
NHIDCL does not have its regular cadre of manpower till date and it is 
worth mentioning that manpower requirement is managed either by appointing 
Government oﬃcials on Deputation basis or by engaging retired Govt oﬃcials 
on Contract basis. Accordingly, for ﬁlling up the existing and the anticipated 
vacancies on deputation/contract basis, 03 vacancy Circulars have already 
been issued on 15 Jan 2024, 07 Feb 2024 and 29 Feb 2024 for 139 Technical 
/Non Technical posts. The ﬁnalization of recruitment process against these 
vacancies may take 2 -3 months. As soon as the recruitment process is 
completed, NHIDCL will be in a position to fill up the vacant post. 
The process for creating the Permanent Cadre in NHIDCL has already been  
initiated and is under consideration for approval. NHIDCL is also in the process of 
making policy for hiring people on Contract basis. 
It is for information that the following eﬀorts for managing manpower 
requirements were made in the Year 2023:- 
a. Chief Secretaries of various States were requested for nominating / sponsoring 
the trained manpower on deputation basis. 
b. For skilled / trained manpower in the ﬁeld of Finance Cadre, CGDA/CAG / 
Department of Telecommunication were requested to nominate / sponsor the 
names of trained manpower. 
c. DoP&T /MOD/Ministry of Railways were also requested for PPS/ PS / PA 
Cadre. 

19 
 
It is also to be brought out that review of the vacancy positions are done on 
regular basis in NHIDCL and appropriate action for ﬁlling up the vacant posts is 
taken on PRIORITY.” 
 
26. Taking note of the significant number of vacancies in both NHAI and 
NHIDCL, the Committee had stressed the importance of filling all vacant positions 
promptly to ensure that the functioning of these organizations and the 
implementation of projects are not hindered due to insufficient manpower. The 
Committee acknowledge and appreciate  the steps taken by the Ministry to 
address for filling up these vacancies and urge the Ministry to adhere to the 
timeline for completing the recruitment process. If the recruitment process has 
been outsourced to any recruitment departments/agencies, the Ministry should 
take proactive measures to expedite the process so that the new recruits can be 
inducted without delay. The Committee further suggest that advertisements for 
anticipated vacancies must be published well in advance to avoid prolonged 
vacancies in crucial positions. The Committee also appreciate the initiative taken 
by the NHIDCL to create its own permanent cadre and desire to be updated on the 
outcome of the process, as well as the status of completion of the current 
recruitment process in both NHAI and NHIDCL. 
 Further, based on the recruitment details furnished by the Ministry for 
NHAI, the Committee note that a significant number of senior and crucial 
positions such as CGM(tech), GM(tech), DGM(Tech/admin), manager(Tech) etc. to 
name a few, are being recruited/posted on deputation basis. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the reasons for filling/recruiting such a large number 
of senior positions in NHAI on deputation basis, instead of posting or promoting 
officers from within the existing cadre.  
 
 
 

20 
 
Chapter – II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 1) 
 
Finances of NHAI 
The Committee have noted the information furnished by the Ministry on BE,RE 
and actual expenditure during the last three financial years, with regard to projects 
under NHDP and it is observed that a huge portion of the expenditure is related to debt 
servicing, which is further showing an increasing trend with every passing financial year. 
The Committee have also learnt that the NHAI has become debt ridden mainly due to 
the fact that huge funds are being raised from market borrowing through IEBR ( Internal 
and Extra Budgetary Resources) and that the total debt of NHAI stood at around Rs. 2 
Lakh crore (approx.) at the end of the financial year 2022 -23. Consequently, the 
Government increased allocation of Rs. 1,62,207 crore as budgetary support to NHAI in 
FY-2023-24 and that 20.05% of the allocation has been earmarked for debt servicing. 
The Committee are concerned to note the burden of debt that NHAI is facing as a result 
of market borrowings and payment of interest thereon and are of the view that 
corrective measures must be taken immediately to ensure that NHAI remain capable of 
repaying th e debt without compounding the interest on delayed repayment. In this 
perspective, funds through IEBR has been reduced from Rs. 65,150 crore during FY 
2021-22 to Rs 798 crore during FY 2022 -23. In such a situation, higher budgetary 
support from the Government is a commendable step to revitalize the finances and 
overall functioning of NHAI. Private Sector investment is another op tion. The 
Committee, therefore,  urge upon the Government to consider taking steps like 
increasing private sector investments in projects, speedy award of work for approved 
projects and popularize the NHAI InvIT bonds to further boost the finances of NHAI and 
recapitalize the balance sheet of the organisation.  
 

21 
 
Reply of the Government 
NHAI has stopped borrowing since 2022, so the debt liability has not increased 
thereafter. Further, the NHAI has also swapped higher -cost bank loan, which has 
helped in reducing the debt liability to some extent. 
As regards the recommendations of the committee to popularize the NHAI 
InvIT, it is submitted that under NHAI InvIT, Rs.10,200 crores was realized up to March 
2023 and Rs.15,700 crore has been realized in FY 2023 -24, which is appx. 20% above 
the target of Rs. 13,000 crore. NHAI has also monetized the road asset through TOT 
mode and realized Rs. 26,366 crores up to March 2023 and further mobilized Rs 15,968 
Crore in FY 2023 -24. Thus, the total asset monetization under TOT model till March 
2024 is Rs 42,334 Crore. 
Comments of the Committee 
[Please see Para 08 of Chapter-I of the Report] 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 2) 
Surrender of Funds 
The Committee have noted the submission of the Ministry regarding details of BE, RE 
and Actual Expenditure from Financial Year 2020 -21 till 31 st May, 2023. However, the 
Committee are concerned to note that an amount of Rs. 176.08 crore earmarked for 
NHDP projects were surrendered on 31.03.2023 due to PFMS error, at a time when all 
Government transactions are being completed electronically. The Committee desire to 
be apprised of the details and nature of PFMS error, which resulted in such a huge 
amount being surrendered/lapsed on the last day of the financial year. 
Reply of the Government 
NHAI has started the payments through TSA-PFMS in middle of year i.e., from October, 
2022, with 02 nos. of CNA Accounts & 26 nos. of SNA Accounts under TSA System. 
NHAI used PFMS-CNA for a huge volume of transactions (more than ₹1,60,500 crore). 
Many bugs in the software were observed during day -to-day working and the same 
were resolved through close interaction and vigorous pursuit with the PFMS team. 
Under TSA system, during bill processing process, it was observed that some bills after 

22 
 
approval by “Data Approver”, could not be released using DSC application and left as 
‘Bill approved’ which were paid subsequently by creation of new bill.   Ideally such 
unpaid bills were to be rejected at DSC -1 level to restore the TSA assignment limit. It 
was later understood that once a bill in TSA is approved, it reduces the limit to that 
extent and once the Financial Year is over and such ‘unpaid bills’ remaining unspent (no 
DSC approved) stand surrendered. Being the ﬁrst time for the implementation of the 
new system which is also evolving, the “unpaid but approved bills” were not rejected by 
few users and ultimately resulted in surrender of the limit. 
 
Moreover, in the initial stages the users have faced many network errors, system -
hangouts, login failures etc. Most of the times, the issue/problem was not described on 
window screen but a message appeared simply saying “Contact Admin”. NHAI had 
regularly followed up on such errors and got them rectiﬁed on the day -to-day basis. 
Moreover, there was no option at that time to return the limit by SNA to CNA, which also 
caused some surrenders. 
 
Most speciﬁcally during the last week of March 2023 the system took much time to 
clear the transactions and the reports also could not be downloaded in time. It may be 
seen that such lapses/issues occurred during current year, i.e. FY 2023 -24 also. 
However, with support of PFMS team and updation of software at various stages and 
continuous monitoring of approved but DSC not applied bills. Now PFMS reports also 
provide information of such not paid bills which consume limit. NHAI had managed NIL 
surrender in accounts at CNA and SNA levels in FY 2023-24. 
 
It may also be seen that the surrendered amount in FY 2022 -23 is 0.11% only of 
the total limit provided to NHAI. It is therefore requested that the committee kindly 
accept the clariﬁcations on the matter submitted above. NHAI has now mastered the 
PFMS system in a way to manage balances in limits and control actual cash outgo 
positions for further operations of TSA system. 
 
 

23 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 5) 
Quality of National Highways 
The Committee have noted the submission of the Ministry regarding 
Policy/Mechanism put in place to check the quality of National Highways. With regard to 
measures being taken by the Ministry to make the National Highways at par with 
international standards, the Committee further note that contractors/concessionaires 
have the freedom to design and build roads and bridges as per international standards 
such as AASHTO, ASTM, Euro Codes and British Codes, etc. However, condition of 
many National Highways does not seem to meet the required standards as mentioned 
by the Ministry. There are numerous instances of newly built roads caving-in within days 
of their inauguration/commissioning. The caving -in of NH -66 bypass at 
Thampuranmukku (Kerala) in the month of November,  2023, 150 metre stretch of 
Gangotri NH near Chinyalisaur in Uttarkashi (Uttarakhand) in the month of August, 2023 
and in Kishtwar Pathar area of Banihal (UT of J&K) on Jammu -Srinagar NH in the 
month of November, 2023 are some such recent instances. There are also many 
stretches of National Highways, specially those covered by branches of large trees 
along the roads.  Further roads are getting damaged because of rain and other factors. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Government should conduct a study/analysis 
of all such stretches of High ways to identify unscientific/ substandard construction, 
rectify the same  and ensure  effective monitoring mechanism  right from construction 
stage. The Committee also recommend to pe nalize and blacklist the construction 
agency/firm found deviated from the laid down norms/standards of construction or 
violated the standard Bidding Document/Contractual term s which results in putting the 
life and property of commuters in danger.  
Reply of the Government 
The Quality control during road construction and operation & maintenance period is 
exercised by engaging supervision Consultants (Authority Engineer/ Independent 
Engineer). The provisions of equipment -based monitoring, using Network Survey 
Vehicle (NSV), Falling Weight Deﬂectometer (FWD), and Mobile Bridge Inspection Unit 

24 
 
(MBIU) etc. at speciﬁed intervals, have been incorporated in the contract agreements 
for work to assess the condition of existing road/structure during maintenance period. 
The tests for quality control are being done by Supervision consultant on regular basis 
as speciﬁed in MoRTH speciﬁcation / IRC guidelines and some of tests are also 
witnessed by oﬃcials of NHAI. Further, NHAI HQ has also engaged no. of quality 
monitors at head quarter level to conduct regular inspection during construction of 
project. 
 
NHAI vide Policy Guideline No 16.11/2021 dated 16 th November 2021 has issued 
Standard operating procedure to debar / penalize / declare as Non - Performer 
Contractor in National Highways projects. 
 
The stretch of Kishtwar Pathar area, as stated in Sr no. 5, Quality of National 
Highway comes under scheme/ Phase of Bharatmala Pariyojana to be built in national 
highways NH -44 under the project naming “Construction of four laning of part of 
Ramban to Banihal section of NH – 1A (Now NH-44), from CH. 165+092 to Ch 171+855 
(North Bound) and from Ch 166+895 to Ch. 173+638 (South bound), Excluding section 
from Ch 166+610 to Ch. 167+150 (North Bou nd), Ch 168+425 to Ch 168+935 ( South 
bound) and section F rom Ch. 167+960 to Ch 168+168 ( North Bound), Ch. 169+745 to 
Ch. 169+951 ( South bound) (Package – III) in the UT of Jammu & Kashmir on EPC 
Mode”. 
The contract for above said work was signed on 08.10.2021 and appointed date is 
04.02.2022. The project is still under construction stage and around 25 % of work has 
been completed. Therefore, the view that the newly built road has been damaged at this 
place is not factually correct. 
Till date, number of slides have occurred at the said location as this stretch faces a 
heavy & prolonged rainfalls due to which slopes becomes unstable and also forming a 
zone of weakness or fragility, thus the said location is geologically disturbed. In spite of 
such incidents, NHAI is trying its best and putting all its eﬀort into expediting the 
progress of the work. The project on the said NH constitutes four lanes i.e., two lanes 

25 
 
for North bound carriageway by provision of via ducts which is in progress and two 
lanes for South bound carriageway by widening of existing highway. The construction of 
South Bound has not been started yet as it can only be taken up after diversion of traﬃc 
from North bound i.e. after construction of the viaduct. 
As regards to the identiﬁcation of unscientiﬁc/ substandard construction, it is to 
mention that all the relevant guidelines/ IRC etc are being followed while construction of 
the said stretch. 
The mentioned location is coming in stretch between 4 laning of Kazhakuttoom 
(Ch.000) to Mukkola (Ch. 26+500) of NH -66. PCC was issued to M/s KNR construction 
Pvt. Ltd. on 23.10.2018 and Defect Liability Period ended on 22.10.2022. 
In 2023, Kerala Water Authority (KWA) requested NHAI for permission for laying 
of Water pipelines through HDD method. Permissions were given subjected to the 
conditions of proper execution of work. KWA commenced the work on 11.11.2023. 
During the execution of work, a big hole formed in MCW at Thampuranmukku 
Ch.4+600. Highway Response Team mobilized and noticed that during execution of 
KWA works, while carrying out HDD, the subgrade, sub -base and base course of the 
MCW washed away. The incident was intimated to KWA oﬃcials immediately and 
rectiﬁcation works were commenced and completed by KWA under the supervision of 
the Authority’s Engineer. At present, the stretch is without any defects and traffic plying 
smoothly. 
Regarding the penalty provision in the contract to blacklist the construction 
agency/ﬁrm found deviating from the laid down norms/standards of construction or 
violating the standard Bidding Document/Contractual provisions, there is a provision in 
the EPC contract documents issued by MoRTH for encashment of Performance security 
in case of termination of contract due to non -rectiﬁcation of defects. Moreover, Ministry 
vide circular dated 06.102.2021 issued guidelines for declaring 
contractors/concessionaire non -performer and debarment from participating in the 
future projects of MoRTH/NHIDCL/NHAI for certain period. 
Other suggestions of the committee regarding study/ analysis of stretches of 
Highways to identify any unscientiﬁc/ substandard construction and subsequently 
rectification of the same have been noted for compliance. 

26 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 6) 
Height of NH roads. 
 The Committee have observed that the height of National Highways passing 
through certain towns and cities is creating civic problems like water -logging in the 
areas adjacent to these roads, even in short spells of rains which cause huge 
inconvenience to v arious establishments and  people residing there. In certain places, 
the height of the roads without proper cross -drainage creates artificial floods in the 
adjoining areas during monsoon season.  The height of Nation al Highways also creates 
severe traffic congestion and even lead to accidents at traffic crossings/junctio ns.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to review the structure, design and 
height of National Highway passing through busy townships or market/business areas, 
so as to ensure that adequate number of cross drain age/bridges are made available for 
unhindered flow of water. This should also b e planned at DPR stage so that National 
Highways do not create civic bottlenecks and artificial floods. The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the action taken by the Government in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
Drains of adequate length/size along the national highways and no. of cross drainage 
structures as per the extant guidelines/ codes, technical suitability and site requirements 
are provisioned during construction of National highways to avoid water logging 
problems. Further, as per site requirements for ongoing works, if required, additional 
provisions for the same are considered as change of scope. 
Regarding the suggestion of the committee to review the structure, design and 
height of National Highway passing through busy townships or market/business areas, 
so as to ensure that adequate number of cross drainage/bridges are made available for 
unhindered ﬂow of water, adequate provisions are allowed in the DPR based on the 
detailed survey and site requirement. 
 
 
 
 

27 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 7) 
Aligning of new road with old/existing road 
 The Committee have observed that in many cases, when a highway project is 
sanctioned for a particular stretch, the existing road/highway on that stretch or area, if 
any, is not taken into consideration for aligning the same with the new project or 
developing/expanding the new project on  already existing road. The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Government that in all such cases, efforts must be made to 
implement the new project by subsuming the already existing road. The Committee are 
of the considered view that such a step would be in consonance with financial 
prudence, as less budgetary provisions will be required in implementing the project. 
Further, it will be in the interest of both the Government and residents of the area, viz. 
there will be minimal requirement of   land  acquisition and cost involved so that the 
project could be completed faster and opened for traffic.  
Reply of the Government 
The alignment of project highway is ﬁnalized after analyzing all the alignment options, 
on the PM GatiShakti National Master Plan, including greenfield, brownﬁeld expansion 
and/or combination of both considering technical suitability and cost beneﬁt analysis in 
consultation with all stakeholders. Sometimes during brownﬁeld expansion, it becomes 
very diﬃcult to acquire additional land and LA cost is significant higher due to built -up 
structures. 
The suggestion/ recommendations of the committee are very relevant and are kept 
in consideration at the alignment finalization stage for highway expansion. 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 8) 
Widening/Renovation of existing roads. 
 It has also been observed that roads are generally damaged when a new project 
is about to be implemented on an already existing Highway or when road widening is 
undertaken. The concerned project implementation agencies do not pay proper 
attention to upkeep, maintenance or give proper traffic diversion during construction 

28 
 
period of such Highway projects. The Committee, therefore, urge upon the Government 
to take necessary measures to make it incumbent upon the concerned agencies   to 
undertake proper upkeep and maintenance of existing highways which are likely to be 
included in new projects and also make proper traffic diversion, keeping in view the 
safety of the motorists, traffic congestion and resultant environmental pollution.  
Reply of the Government 
As per clause 10.4 of EPC Agreement and Clause 12.4 of HAM Agreement, the  
Contractor/Concessionaire are obligated to maintain the existing project highway in 
traffic worthy condition during construction period also. The same is being ensured by 
IE/AE/PD. 
NHAI has issued several Policy guidelines from time to time regarding maintenance 
including diversion roads during the construction/widening of the roads. Accordingly, 
RO/PD are taking actions from time to time to keep the existing highway traffic worthy 
conditions including diversion of roads. 
The suggestions/ recommendations of the committee are noted for compliance. 
However, the existing roads which are proposed for widening/ upgradation are 
maintained in traﬃc worthy conditions by the contractors during the execution of the 
work as per the provisions of the Contract Agreement. 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 9) 
Connectivity of new projects to township 
 The Committee have observed that construction of National Highways under 
Greenfield projects do not consider the issue of connectivity of the projects with the 
nearby townships that they are passing through. For instance in the State of Uttar 
Pradesh, it is understood that the proposed Greenfield NH project from Shamli to 
Gorakhpur (via Lakhimpur and Bahraich), has not included the religious town/city of 
Basti under the purview of the project. The Committee are, therefore,  of the opinion that 
Greenfield projects must be designed or aligned in such a way that the nearby 
townships or cities along which a project is passing through gets some means of 
connectivity through link road to that particular Highway. Such measures will give a 

29 
 
huge fillip to the overall economic activity of those cities and townships, apart from 
contributing to the swift mobility of people residing in those areas.  
Reply of the Government 
During project planning inter-ministerial consultation is done for integrated infrastructure 
planning in line with the PM Gati Shakti principles. Based on consultations, alignments 
are optimized for improved connectivity with economic / social / tourist / religious nodes 
and to minimize ecological impact. Additionally, provision of providing spurs to important 
nodes is also considered while planning. 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 10) 
Amenities on National Highways 
 The Committee note that the Ministry has adopted a policy in the year 2021, for 
development of wayside amenities along Greenfield/Brownfield Expressways and 
National Highways which are under development, on need basis. However, the 
Committee observe that there is no guidelines or policy for developing such amenities 
on existing Highways and Expressways. Further, the condition of such facilities on these 
roads are in very bad shape and there is an urgent need for improvement of such 
facilities, specially th e conditions of rest rooms and location of refueling including EV 
charging stations. The distance between the location of such facilities are very far and 
very congested. It is also pertinent to highlight here that there are no wayside amenities 
on the newly inaugurated Bengaluru -Mysuru National Highway, creating huge 
inconvenience for motorists using the highway. The Committee urge the Government to 
reduce the distance between wayside amenities and also prevail upon the service 
providers to increase the nu mber of units, specially that of restrooms and eateries, to 
cater to the increasing volume of traffic on Expressways. The Committee underline the 
need to identify all such National Highways and urgent steps should be taken for 
developing wayside amenities at the earliest. The Committee,  also recommend that 
refueling including EV charging stations on Expressways/Highways must be along such 
roads and not far away from the Expressways/Highways. In addition, childcare rooms 
should also be developed at such faci lities for the convenience of lactating women. The 

30 
 
Committee strongly  hold that these measures would go a long way in improving the 
commuting experience on National Highways and Expressways.  
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways (MoRT&H) has issued the policy circular no. 
RW/NH-33044/14/2003-S&R(R)-Pt. dated 11th February. 2021, the Policy guidelines for 
development of wayside amenities and the provision of all mandatory and permissible 
facilities. NHAI has also issued the Standard Operating procedure (SOP) for award of 
wayside amenities along National Highways and Expressways vide NHAI/Policy 
guidelines/ Misc. Technical – Wayside Amenities/2022 Policy circular No. 18.79 dated 
11th March 2022. 
At present, 50 nos. of Wayside Amenities are operational on various National 
Highways/ Expressways. The amenities include facilities for passengers such as Fuel 
Station, Electric Charging Facilities, Restaurants, Food Court, Retail Shops, ATM, 
Toilets with baby care room, Children Playing Area, First Aid facilities, Village Haat for 
local handicrafts etc. Keeping in view the speciﬁc requirements of truckers, separate 
‘Truckers Blocks are developed at wayside amenities which include Truck and Trailer 
Parking, Auto Workshop, Truckers Dormitory, Cooking and Washing area, Toilets with 
shower etc. Regular maintenance is being carried out by the developers for the 
operational Wayside Amenities. 
Electric charging stations are mandatory across all WSAs. The speciﬁcations of 
the EV charging are being complied as per the guidelines issued by Ministry of Power. 
Minimum 1 no. of Type 2 AC charging facility (Min. 22 kW) and minimum 1 no. of CCS-2 
DC charging facility (Min. 50 kW) are being provided. 
As per the study carried out, there is a frequency of stopping by the travellers at 
30-50 Km for a break. Accordingly, the Wayside Amenities are being developed at 
interval of every 40-60 Km on National Highways/ Expressways. 
As per the development plan of Bangalore Mysuru Highway, no additional land 
has been acquired for development of WSA. NHAI has planned Trucker’s facilities, 

31 
 
Toilet facilities and Highway Mini Nest on Bangalore Mysuru Highway which is under 
construction. 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 11) 
Maintenance of National Highways  
 The Committee have taken note of the submission of the Ministry regarding steps 
taken to ensure the durability of National Highways such as engagement of Supervision 
Consultants to supervise quality and durability of NHs, monitoring of construction work 
and quality of material being used by Engineers of NHAI/NHIDCL, frequent visits of 
Special Project Monitor - SPM to inspect the quality of NH network, etc. However, the 
Committee have observed that timely maintenance and renovation of existing Highways 
are far from satisfactory. Damaged roads characterised by huge potholes, lack of proper 
signages on roads, shabby road dividers and barriers, etc. are common sights on 
Highways, specially in the far -flung areas of the country. Maintenance of National 
Highways are as important as construction of new Expressways and Highways.  
Absence of stringent monitoring mechanism is one of the reasons for which time bound 
maintenance is not taking place. The Committee observe that proper monitoring of 
Highway maintenance is not being done by the concerned ROs/PIUs under NHAI. The 
Committee, therefore,  are of the strong view that the existing contracts for maintenance 
of National Highways need a thorough review and stringent penalty provisions must be 
included in the contracts for improper maintenance. NHAI must be proactive and a 
timeline should be drawn up for inspection of Highways o n monthly or fortnightly basis,  
so that maintenance or rectification work can be taken up on time.  
Taking further note of the submission of the Ministry that maintenance of the 
roads at high altitudes and dense mountainous regions being undertaken by National 
Highways Infrastructure Development Corporation Ltd (NHIDCL), is a big challenge 
owing to the undulating topography and harsh climatic conditions almost throughout the 
year, the Committee feel that the Government  should adopt international  best 
practices in construction and maintenance of Highways in high altitudes, specially of 
those roads in high altitude regions of Europe, Russia and China. 
 

32 
 
Reply of the Government 
There is a provision in the EPC contract documents specifying the maintenance 
requirements of the project highway by the contractor and penalty for failing to do so. In 
case of termination of contract due to non-rectiﬁcation of defects by the contractor, there 
is a provision for encashment of Performance security. Moreover, Ministry vide circular 
dated 06.102.2021 issued guidelines for declaring contractors/concessionaire non -
performer and debarment from participating in the future projects of 
MoRTH/NHIDCL/NHAI for certain period which include failure to maintenance of the 
project road by the contractor/concessionaire. 
Other suggestion of the committee on adoption of international best practices of 
construction and maintenance of Highways in high altitudes has been noted for 
compliance. 
Comments of the Committee 
[Please see Para 17 of Chapter-I of the Report] 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 12 ) 
Compensation for land acquisition. 
 The Committee, appreciate the launch of the Bhoomi Rashi portal and its 
integration with the Public Finance Management System (PFMS), to fast track online 
payment of compensation for land acquisition for NH projects and It is noteworthy that 
payment of Rs. 1,317 crore for the projects executed by NHAI and Rs. 3,546 crore for 
the projects executed through State PWDs have been processed since launch of the 
portal. However, the Committee observe that payment of compensation to land owners 
are still delayed and at times it takes months/years, for final settlement. The Committee 
note that such delays are not specific to any region or State, but wherever land is being 
acquired for development of highways, the time lag between the date of award for 
compensation and actual release of payment is a matter of concern for every 
landowners as they lose their righ ts over the land once the land is notified for 
compensation. In such circumstances, the land owners face a peculiar situation where 
they can neither use the land nor are they in the receipt of the compensation amount to 
invest the same for some other productive purposes. 

33 
 
 It is understood that interest is being paid for the time -gap/period of delay 
between the date of notification of acquisition of land and date of  award of 
compensation and not for the period between date of award of compensation and the 
date of actual release of payment. The Committee, therefore, emphasize the need for 
review of the process of payment of compensation for land acquisition so as to have 
actual release of compensation in time and recommend that the Government should 
consider a provision for payment of interest on delayed payment of compensation being 
paid to the land owners, on the pattern of int erest being paid on refund of Income Tax.  
The Committee believe that such a step would protect the rights of land owners, who 
are otherwise at a disadvantageous position, owing to delay in receiving the 
compensation for years, while  the price of land  increases day by day. 
Reply of the Government 
As per the Section 3 (a) contained in the  'The National Highways (Manner of Depositing 
the Amount by the Central Government with the Competent Authority for Acquisition of 
Land) Rules, 1998" (as amended from time to time), the acquiring agency is required to 
deposit the compensation amount in 15 days on demand made by the CALA and the 
CALA, in turn, is required to tender such amount to the landowners or the persons 
interested in such land. However, there is no provision for payment of any such interest 
on account of delayed disbursement of compensation. Such delay has been mostly 
found on the part of the landowners as they may not come forward to accept the 
compensation amount to challenge the award further. Therefore, no interest is payable 
in respect of any delays in disbursement of compensation amount qua the Award 
announced by the CALA. However, PFMS -based compensation payment has brought 
about unprecedented speed and transparency in the land acquisition process for the 
benefit of the landholders. 
Comments of the Committee 
[Please see Para 20 of Chapter-I of the Report] 
 
 
 

34 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 13) 
 
Plantation on NHs. 
 The Committee have been informed that around 71.5 lakhs trees have been 
planted along the national highways during financial year (2022 -23) as part of ‘Azadi ka 
Amrit Mahotsav’. While lauding the initiative, the Com mittee urge upon the Government  
to replicate the same along all the Highways of the country, in a phased manner, which 
apart from enhancing the ambience and beauty of National Highways, will also 
contribute in protecting and improving the environment. The plantation drives on road 
dividers of 4/6/8 lane Highways, will project motorist driving at night from high beam 
lights of vehicles coming from t he opposite direction blurring the vision of drivers which 
may lead to fatal mishaps. The ministry should also involve the Mi nistry of Environment, 
Forests and Climate Change and Social Forestry Department of the States for such 
plantation initiatives. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways (MoRTH) has promulgated Green 
Highways (Plantation, Transplantation, Beautiﬁcation & Maintenance) Policy in 2015 to 
develop green corridors along National Highways across the country and there are IRC: 
SP-21 guidelines for design, planning, implementation and maintenance for sustainable 
plantation programme. 
Accordingly, NHAI has planted about 400 lakh plants by way of Annual Plantation 
Action Plans on available median and roadside ROW land in post Green Highways 
Policy years. The Annual Plantation Action Plan of 2023 -24 is under implementation in 
which 54.05 lakh plants have been planted up to February, 2024 against the target of 
56.03 lakh plants. The plantation drive covers the road dividers in which median land of 
highways is saturated with ornamental ﬂowering shrub plants to create an aesthetic 
view and to prevent high beam glare of lights from the vehicles coming from the 
opposite direction. In Annual Plantation Action Plan of 2023 -24, 27.66 lakhs shrub 
plants have been planted on road divider median land of National Highways only. 

35 
 
The plantation activities involves all stakeholders - Concessionaires, private 
plantation agencies, NGOs and State Forest Departments & Forest Development 
Corporations. Presently, 14 State Forest Departments are implementing various 
plantation projects carried out under different year’s plantation program. 
 
  

36 
 
CHAPTER III 
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
NIL 
 
  

37 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 3) 
Need for streamlining of toll-plazas 
The Committee have noted the submission of the Ministry that the distance 
between two fee/toll plaza on National Highway is regulated as per National Highway 
Fee Rules, 2008.  Accordingly, the distance between two toll plazas shall be not less 
than sixty kms, unless the executing Authority deems it necessary to establish another 
plaza within a distance of sixty kms. However, the Committee observe that toll plazas 
are being established in less than 60 kms. distance and also within the limits of 
Municipal area or within the city on Highways passing through highly populated villages, 
municipalities   and townships. One such instance is the functioning of two such plazas 
within 60 km of each other on the Pathankot -Srinagar stretch of NH-44. The Committee 
feel that in the absence of alternate roads, collecting fees from residents of villages, 
municipalities or townships adjoining a toll plaza for using the Highway for their day to 
day work/activities is not justifiable as this is an additional burden on them. Thus, the 
Committee would like the Government to review the instant provisions on establishing 
toll plazas and recommend that a mechanism should be put in place to facilitate  free 
movement of people/inhabitants residing nearby/surrounding area of a toll plaza or 
within the Municipality/city or exempt them from payment of toll fees for 
commuting/using the highway. The Committee also feel that the location of toll plaza 
should be invariably shown at the stage of Detailed Project Report (DPR) itself. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the changes/amendments brought into the 
instant guidelines for the above purpose.  
The Committee, further urge upon the Government to conduct a study on the 
feasibility of installing Electronic Toll Collection device in conjunction with the GPS 
system of vehicles, so that toll fees gets deducted electronically when a vehicle enters 

38 
 
or exits a National Highway/Expressway. Such a measure, if proved successful, may 
eventually help in phasing out toll gates/plazas in the long run and thereby easing the 
movement of vehicles on National Highways/Expressways and reducing carbon 
emission to a large extent. 
Reply of the Government 
The distance criteria for establishment of a fee plaza has come into existence after NH 
Fee Rules 2008 and there was no such criteria in earlier NH Fee Rules, 1997. As per 
Rule 8(2) of NH Fee Rules 2008: 
"(2) Any other toll plaza on the same section of national highway and in the same 
direction shall not be established within a distance of sixty kilometers: 
 
Provided that where the executing authority deems necessary, it may for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, establish or allow the concessionaire to establish another toll plaza 
within a distance of sixty kilometres: 
 
Provided further that a toll plaza may be established within a distance of sixty kilometres 
from another toll plaza if such toll plaza is for collection of fee for a permanent bridge, 
bypass or tunnel." 
Therefore, the restriction of 60 km distance between two fee plazas is applicable 
only when two fee plazas are situated on the same section of a national highway. 
Further, where a fee plaza is to be established for collection of fee for a 
bypass/permanent bridge/tunnel, it may be established within 60 km distance from 
another fee plaza. 
As regards the recommendation of the committee to facilitate free movement of 
people/inhabitants residing nearby/surrounding area of a toll plaza, Rule 9(3) of NH Fee 
Rules, 2008, provides that a person residing within a distance of twenty kilometres from 
the toll plaza who owns a mechanical vehicle registered for non - commercial purposes 
and uses it as such for commuting on a section of national highway, permanent bridge, 
bypass or tunnel, may obtain a pass, on payment of fee at the base rate for the year 
2007-2008 of Rupees one hundred and ﬁfty per calendar month and revised annually in 

39 
 
accordance with rule 5, authorising it to cross the toll plaza speciﬁed in such pass 
(Monthly pass rate for Financial Year 2023-24 is Rs 330/-). 
As a policy decision, the location of toll plazas is now decided at the corridor level 
rather than the project level so that the distance between the toll plazas is optimized. 
Moreover, the location of fee plaza is ascertained at the time of preparation of DPR 
which is also apprised to PATSC/IAC (Project Appraisal Committee). Project is 
approved, subsequent to concurrence of the appraisal committee. 
The technology of GNSS (Global Navigational Satellite System) based Tolling is 
being explored by NHAI at NH Fee Plazas. As India is already having RFID FASTag 
based Tolling system in place, the option of having a hybrid system is being explored 
where GNSS based Tolling can be done along with the existing system of Tolling. In this 
regards, Technology Tests are being conducted to have GNSS as an added facility with 
existing Tolling system. Based on the results from the Technology Tests, the system will 
be implemented. 
Comments of the Committee 
[Please see Para 11 of Chapter-I of the Report] 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 14) 
Encroachment on NHs 
The Committee have noted the submission of the Ministry that all powers for 
tackling issues of encroachment have been delegated to Regional Officers and Project 
Directors of NHAI since September, 2019 and that all such matters are being pursued 
regularly with State Government Authorities. The Committee, however, have observed 
that encroachments and re -encroachments are common along most Highways of the 
Country. In most cases, the encroachments are do ne by road side vendors selling 
eateries, vegetables, pan-masala etc. There are also instances of people encroaching 
upon even the road dividers and growing vegetables on them. All such encroachments 
apart from compromising the safety of both motorists and encroachers, also give a very 
shabby look to Highways at a time when the Government is working with a vision to 
make Highways at par with roads of advanced countries. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the officials of NHAI along with concerned enforcement agencies of the 

40 
 
State Governments must regularly monitor those stretches of Highways which are prone 
to encroachments and take immediate steps to remove encr oachments at the initial 
stage and protect it from further encroachment. The Committee, further recommend 
introduction of strong punitive measures viz. heavy penalties, imprisonments of 
repeated offenders.” 
Reply of the Government 
As regards encroachments on NHs, NHAI provided the feature to capture the 
encroachments along the NHs in Rajmarg Yatra mobile application through the road 
users. Further, policy to undertake regular inspections to identify encroachments and 
monitor the same digitally is also being prepared besides the existing provisions of 
noting encroachments in O&M projects given in Policy Circular No. 18.55 dated 
08.10.2020. The ATR/monitoring of the same shall be done through a separate 
Datalake module which is also under development. The Ministry has been holding 
regular review of removal of unauthorized occupations and encroachments on National 
Highways under the Control of National Highways (Land and Traﬃc) Act, 2002, 
especially the enforcement of Sec 26 of the Act and all Chief Secretaries have been 
requested to provide the assistance of local police and magistracy to the designated 
Highways Administrations. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
[Please see Para 23 of Chapter-I of the Report] 
 
  

41 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No 4) 
Completion of Projects 
The Committee have been informed that the National Highways Development 
Project (NHDP) started in the year 2000 in a pha sed manner (Phase I to VII) and  in the 
year 2017, all those projects under NHDP were subsumed under a different concept 
called Bharatmala Project. The Committee have also noted that when Bharatmala 
project was launched, work on 30,000 kms of roads were completed under NHDP, while 
13,000 Kms of roads were under implementation and the remaining 10,000 Kms which 
were still to be sanctioned we re included under the Bharatmala Pariyojana. The 
Committee have further taken note of the various administrative initiatives taken by the 
Ministry, including launch of the Bhumi Rashi portal and sharing unresolved issues with 
stakeholders on PRAGATI platform to ensure timely implementation and completion of 
projects. The Committee, while appreciating the various initiatives taken by the Ministry, 
are concerned to note that around 674 National Highway projects are delayed and 
many of them are facing time and  cost overruns. To highlight a few, the implementation 
of the project on NH -727AA, and two Expressway corridor projects - (a) Gorakhpur -
Siliguri and (b) Raxaul -Haldia which are part of phase IIA of Bharatmala Pariyojana, 
have been under implementation for a long time.  With regard to projects which are 
delayed due to administrative and other related issues, the Committee feel that urgent 
corrective action should be taken by the concerned Ministries/Departments, other 
stakeholders to resolve outstanding issues on priority basis. The Ministry has informed 
that a period of 2 -3 years is considered ideal for completion of a National Highway 
project. However, the Committee have observed that most of the projects take more 
than 3 years for completion. The Committee, therefore, urge upon t he Government to 
ensure better coordination amongst all stakehold ers and establish single window  
system with online monitoring mechanism for sorting out issues without much time lag.   
The Committee are also of the opinion that the Government should prepare an SOP 
and resolve all inter -ministerial, Centre-State and intra -States issues in a time bound 

42 
 
manner. A case in point is the proposal/need for construction of a Road overbridge  
(ROB) at the railway crossing point between the railway station and office of the 
Collectorate under Betiah Municipal Corporation on NH -727, which is understood to be 
under consideration for the last many years. The Committee urges the Ministry to 
undertake a study on the above stretch and take steps to construct a ROB accordingly, 
at the earliest, for the convenience of the people living in the Betiah Municipal 
Corporation area and also to ease the heavy traffic congestion on that stretch of NH -
727. Further, a mechanism must also be put in place so that projects are reviewed at 
regular intervals, if possible, every month, in the presence of all stakeholders. The 
Committee also recommend the M inistry to consider introducing incentives  to project 
developers/firms who complete projects as per the timelines or before the target date of 
completion.  
The Committee, while noting the submission of the Ministry that there are 674 
Projects facing delay in completion and all delayed projects do not face cost overruns, 
desire the Ministry to furnish details of projects where NHAI has incurred cost escalation 
(including total amount paid to project developers and other expenses) during the last 
10 years. 
Reply of the Government 
Gorakhpur-Siliguri and Raxaul -Haldia Corridors were earlier part of the 
proposed Phase IIA of the Bharatmala Pariyojana, appraised by PIB in July 2022. 
However, the work of DPR could not be taken up for want of further approval of 
Competent Authority. It is to submit that Master Plan with High Speed Corridors 
utilizing the PM Gatishakti Frame Work as part of Vision 2047 is under 
consideration. The aforesaid two Corridors are part of the Phase I of the proposed 
Master Plan of National Highways. 
Regarding the suggestion of the Committee to ensure better coordination 
amongst all stakeholders and establish single window system with online monitoring 
mechanism for sorting out issues without much time lag, project monitoring is 
currently being done by NHIDCL through PMIS portal, which is a single window 
online monitoring platform. Regarding the suggestion for putting in place a 

43 
 
mechanism for review of project at regular intervals, it may be mentioned that 
NHIDCL has put in place a system to review the ongoing projects on weekly, 
fortnightly and monthly basis both at ﬁeld and Hqtrs level. It is also to be noted that 
the Ministry has impressed upon all its agencies to award work and ﬁx Appointed 
Date only after securing the minimum mandated land and other clearances. 
With regard to the recommendation of the committee to consider introducing 
incentives to project developers/ﬁrms who complete projects as per the timelines or 
before the target date of completion, it may be mentioned that there’s a provision in 
the EPC contract agreement for payment of bonus for early completion of projects 
before the schedule completion date. 
Comments of the Committee 
[Please see Para 14 of Chapter-I of the Report] 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 15) 
Manpower 
The Committee are concerned to note that around 38% of the sanctioned 
strength of various posts of Group A, B and C under NHAI and 103 numbers of both 
technical and non -technical posts under NHIDCL are lying vacant. However, the 
Ministry is silent with regard to steps taken for ﬁlling up the huge number of vacant 
posts in these two organizations. The Committee note that hundreds of NH projects are 
under implementation all over the country, specially under NHAI and it is quite 
surprising that the organizatio n is functioning with little over half of its sanctioned 
strength. NHAI, being a project implementing and monitoring Authority, needs to 
function in full strength to achieve the desired results. The Committee are aware that 
the oﬃcials of the ROs/PIUs, apart from doing work related to planning and execution of 
projects, are also engaged in monitoring the maintenance of NHs, which the Committee 
believe require constant visits to the projects sites, some of which are located at very far 
ﬂung areas. The Committee, are of the view that without suﬃcient manpower, the NHAI 
and NHIDCL may not be able to produce the desired results in a time bound manner 
due to unbalanced workload on incumbent oﬃcials. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Government to take immediate steps to ﬁll up all vacant posts in a time 
bound manner and pursue strongly with the concerned recruitment agency to complete 

44 
 
the process expeditiously. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken 
by the Government in this regard.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 With respect to the staﬀ insuﬃciency in NHAI, it is submitted that the vacancy status of 
NHAI as on 31.05.2024 along with recruitment status of vacant posts is enclosed as 
Annexure-I. Apart from the above, the current status of ongoing recruitment against the 
vacant posts in all cadres is enclosed as Annexure-II. 
NHIDCL does not have its regular cadre of manpower till date and it is worth 
mentioning that manpower requirement is managed either by appointing Government 
oﬃcials on Deputation basis or by engaging retired Govt oﬃcials on Contract basis. 
Accordingly, for ﬁlling up the existing and the anticipated vacancies on 
deputation/contract basis, 03 vacancy Circulars have already been issued on 15 Jan 
2024, 07 Feb 2024 and 29 Feb 2024 for 139 Technical /Non Technical posts. The 
ﬁnalization of recruitment process against these vacancies may take 2 -3 months. As 
soon as the recruitment process is completed, NHIDCL will be in a position to fill up the 
vacant post. 
The process for creating the Permanent Cadre in NHIDCL has already been  
initiated and is under consideration for approval. NHIDCL is also in the process of 
making policy for hiring people on Contract basis. 
It is for information that the following eﬀorts for managing manpower requirements were 
made in the Year 2023:- 
b. Chief Secretaries of various States were requested for nominating / sponsoring 
the trained manpower on deputation basis. 
c. For skilled / trained manpower in the ﬁeld of Finance Cadre, CGDA/CAG / 
Department of Telecommunication were requested to nominate / sponsor the names of 
trained manpower. 
d. DoP&T /MOD/Ministry of Railways were also requested for PPS/ PS / PA Cadre. 
 

45 
 
It is also to be brought out that review of the vacancy positions are done on regular 
basis in NHIDCL and appropriate action for ﬁlling up the vacant posts is taken on 
PRIORITY.” 
Comments of the Committee 
[Please see Para 26 of Chapter-I of the Report] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                          DR. SANJAY JAISWAL                            
16 December 2024                                             CHAIRPERSON 
Agrahayana 25, 1946 (Saka)                COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

46 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2024-2025) 
  
The Committee sat on Monday, the 16 th December, 2024 from 1600 hrs. to 1630 
hrs. in Room No. ‘52-B’, First Floor, Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal  - Chairperson 
  
  Members 
 
2.  Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3.  Shri M. Mallesh Babu 
4.  Shri Pradan Baruah 
5.  Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
6.  Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
7.  Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
8.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
9.  Shri Manish Jaiswal 
10.  Thiru Dayanidhi Maran 
11.  Shri P. C. Mohan 
12.  Shri B.K. Parthasarathi 
13.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
14.  Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan 
15.  Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
16.  Kumari Selja 
17.  Dr. Indra Hang Subba 
18.  Shri Manoj Tiwari 
19.  Shri Ve vaithilingam 
   
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
                            1.      Shri Y. M. Kandpal        -      Joint Secretary 
                       2.      Shri  Lalkithang           -       Director 
                              

47 
 
2.         At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration  and adoption of the following 
draft Reports: 
(i) XXX                       XXX                     XXX 
(ii) XXX                       XXX                     XXX 
(iii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 33rd Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee on the subject “Assessment of various projects 
including Green Highways under National Highways Development Project 
(NHDP)”; 
(iv) XXX                       XXX                     XXX 
 
(v) XXX                       XXX                     XXX 
 
 
3.        Thereafter, the Committee adopted the Draft Reports without any modifications.  
The Committee, then, authorised the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports and 
present the same to Lok Sabha. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

48 
 
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THE 
THIRTY-THIRD REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)  
(i) Total number of recommendations/observations 15 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
 the Government: 
(SI. NO. 1,2,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12 and 13) 
11 
 Percentage of total recommendations 73.33% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not  
desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply: 
(NIL) 
Percentage of total recommendations 
00 
 
 
00% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government’s 
replies have not been accepted by the Committee: 
(SI. No. 3 and 14) 
Percentage of total recommendations 
02 
 
 
    
13.33% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply of 
Government is still awaited: 
(SI. No. 4 and 15) 
Percentage of total recommendations 
02 
 
 
13.33% 
 
 
 
 

49 
 
 


50 
 
 


51 
 
 


52 
 
 
