 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2022-23) 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
  
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
Review of Implementation of CBG (SATAT) 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
19th December, 2022 /28th Agrahayana 1944 (Saka) 


CP&NG NO.     
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2022-23) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
[‘Review of Implementation of CBG (SATAT)’] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.12.2022 
 
  Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.12.2022  
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
19 December, 2022 / 28th Agrahayana 1944 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 


 
 CONTENTS 
 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-23) ……………... (iii) 
 
 INTRODUCTION ......…………………………………………… (iv) 
 
 
REPORT 
 
 
 PART - I  
I. INTRODUCTION 1 
II. COMPRESSED BIO GAS (CBG) 2 
III. CURRENT STATUS UNDER SATAT 2 
IV. COORDINATION MECHANISM 4 
V. CHALLENGES IN SETTING-UP CBG PLANTS  8 
VI. SINGLE WINDOW CLEARANCE 12 
VII. LETTERS OF INTENT (LOIS) FOR CBG PLANTS 14 
VIII. BANKING ASSISTANCE TO CBG PLANTS  19 
IX. COLLATERAL SECURITY FOR CBG PLANTS 21 
X. FINANCING FOR CBG PROJECTS  23 
XI. COST OF CBG PLANTS  24 
XII. PRICING OF CBG  25 
XIII. GAS SYNCHRONISATION SCHEME  27 
XIV. TAXATION STRUCTURE ON CBG INDUSTRY  30 
XV GST ISSUES IN CBG PLANTS  32 
XVI CENTRAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO CBG PLANTS  35 
XVII ROLE OF KVK, FPOS AND CHC IN CBG PLANTS  37 
XVIII BIO-MANURE OFFTAKE ISSUES  38 
XIX MARKET DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE FOR CBG  39 
XX TRAINING AND MANPOWER  40 
XXI RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT 42 
   
  
PART – II 
 
 
 
Observations / Recommendations of the Committee ............. 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES  
ANNEXURE I Minutes of the seventh sitting of the Committee (2021-22) 
held on 05.01.2022 
 
ANNEXURE II Minutes of the fifteenth sitting of the Committee (2021-22) 
held on 08.06.2022 
 
ANNEXURE III Minutes of the nineteenth sitting of the Committee (2021-22) 
held on 28.07.2022 
 
ANNEXURE IV Minutes of the twentieth sitting of the Committee (2021-22) 
held on 04.08.2022 
 
ANNEXURE V Minutes of the Sixth sitting of the Committee (2022-23) held 
on 19.12.2022 
 
 APPENDIXES  
APPENDIX I List of Operational CBG Plants  

(iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL 
GAS (2022-23) 
 
Sl. No. Name of Members 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
Shri Ramesh Bidhuri - Chairperson 
 
2 Dr. Ramesh Chand Bind 
3 Shri Pradyut Bordoloi 
4 Shri Girish Chandra 
5 Smt. Chinta Anuradha 
6 Shri Dilip Saikia 
7 Shri Topon Kumar Gogoi  
8 Shri Naranbhai Bhikhabhai Kachhadiya 
9 Dr. Kalanidhi Veeraswamy 
10 Shri Santosh Kumar 
11 Shri Rodmal Nagar 
12 Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
13 Shri Unmesh Bhaiyyasaheb Patil  
14 Shri M.K. Raghavan 
15 Shri Chandra Sekhar Sahu 
16 Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar 
17 Dr. Bharatiben Dhirubhai Shiyal 
18 Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
19 Shri Lallu Singh 
20 Shri Vinod Kumar Sonkar 
21 Shri Ajay Tamta 
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
23 Smt. Kanta Kardam 
24 Shri Mithlesh Kumar 
25 Shri Pabitra Margherita 
26 Shri Rambhai Harjibhai Mokariya 
27 Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
28 Dr. Sasmit Patra 
29 Shri Subhas Chandra Bose Pilli 
30 Dr. V. Sivadasan 
31 Shri Ravichandra Vaddiraju 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1 Shri Y.M. Kandpal Joint Secretary 
2 Shri H. Ram Prakash Director 
3 Shri Deepak Kumar Assistant Executive Officer 
 
 

(iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas having 
been authorised by the Committee, to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Seventeenth Report on the subject ‘Review of Implementation of CBG (SATAT)’. 
 
2. The Committee took briefing of the representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas/PSUs, the Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Financial Services and Deptt. of 
Revenue), Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Deptt. of Fertilizers), Ministry of 
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers 
Welfare) and Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, Indian Biogas Association and 
entrepreneurs of CBG plants in connection with examination of the subject Review of 
Implementation of CBG (SATAT) at their sittings held on  05.01.2022, 08.06.2022, 
28.07.2022 & 04.08.2022.   
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas on 19.12.2022.  
 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas/PSUs and other Ministries/stakeholders for placing their 
views before them and furnishing the information desired in connection with 
examination of the subject.     
 
5. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to 
the Committee. 
  
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
_19th December, 2022 
28th Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka)     
RAMESH BIDHURI, 
                          Chairperson,  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                        
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 

CHAPTER-1 
Introduction  
          
India is one of the fastest growing economies in the world and energy availability 
is a major component of the growth paradigm. Considering the domestic availability of 
fuels and India’s import dependence in fossil fuels, India’s energy security will remain 
vulnerable until alternative fuels to substitute/supplement petro-based fuels are 
developed based on indigenously produced renewable feedstock. To address these 
concerns, Government has set a target to reduce the import dependency by 10 per cent 
by 2022. Government has prepared a road map to reduce the import dependency in Oil 
& Gas sector by adopting a five-pronged strategy which includes, increasing Domestic 
Production, Adopting biofuels & Renewables, Energy Efficiency Norms, Improvement 
in Refinery Processes and Demand Substitution.  
1.1 In this regard, National Policy on Biofuels - 2018 aims to increase usage of 
biofuels in the energy and transportation sectors of the country during the coming 
decade. The Policy creates a synergy with the ongoing initiatives of the Government 
such as Make in India & Swachh Bharat Abhiyan and offers great opportunity to 
integrate with the ambitious targets of doubling of Farmers Income, Import Reduction, 
Employment Generation, Waste to Wealth Creation. The scope of the Policy 
encompasses ‘bio-CNG’ as a biofuel which can be used as transportation fuel or in 
stationary applications. Bio-CNG has been defined as Purified form of bio-Gas whose 
composition & energy potential is similar to that of fossil based natural gas and is 
produced from agricultural residues, animal dung, food waste, MSW and Sewage water.  
 As part of initiative under the National Biofuel Policy, 2018, Ministry of Petroleum 
& Natural Gas has launched the Sustainable Alternative Towards Affordable 
Transportation (SATAT) initiative in October, 2018 for promoting use of Compressed 
bio gas (bio-CNG) in the CNG (transport) and PNG (Domestic) sector of City Gas 
Distribution (CGD) supplies of natural gas. SATAT was launched on 1st October 2018 
aiming to establish an ecosystem for production of CBG from various waste/ biomass 
sources in the country. SATAT has envisaged developing 5000 CBG plants with total 
CBG production capacity of 15 Million Metric Tonne Per Annum (MMTPA) i.e. 
equivalent to 54 MMSCMD of gas by 2023-24. SATAT initiative offers a potential for 
investment of about Rs. 1.75 lakh crores (5000 Plants) and generating about 75,000 

direct employment opportunity. This initiative synergizes with Swachh Bharat 
Mission/COP-21/COP-26 commitments/ AtmaNirbhar Bharat. 
1.2 Compressed Bio Gas (CBG) :Waste / 
Bio-mass sources like agricultural residue, 
cattle dung, sugarcane press mud, municipal 
solid waste and sewage treatment plant waste, 
etc. produce bio-gas through the process of 
anaerobic decomposition. The bio-gas is 
purified to remove hydrogen sulfide (H2S), carbon dioxide (CO2), water vapor and 
compressed as Compressed Bio Gas (CBG), which has methane (CH4) content of more 
than 90%.  
1.3 CBG has calorific value and other properties similar to CNG and hence the same 
can be utilized as an environment-friendly fuel in usage of transport & 
industrial/commercial sector. Production of CBG would have multiple benefits viz. 
reduction of natural gas import, reduction of GHG emission, reduction in burning of 
agriculture residues, remunerative income to farmers, employment generation, effective 
waste management etc. Further, bio manure is a coproduct of CBG production process 
which contains micro and macro nutrients as well as organic carbon. The same can be 
utilized in agriculture sector to promote organic farming and reduce the uses of 
chemical fertilizer.   
Current Status under SATAT:  
1.4 Oil and Gas Marketing Companies (OGMCs) viz. IndianOil, HPCL, BPCL, GAIL 
and IGL have been inviting EoI from potential investors/entrepreneurs to procure CBG 
for further selling to automotive and commercial customers.   Oil & Gas Companies are 
signing Commercial Agreements for 15 years for procurement of CBG, to be further 
extended mutually. As per SATAT initiative, procurement price of CBG purified as per IS 
16087: 2016 standards, compressed at 250 bar pressure and delivered to OMC Retail 
Outlets in cascades was fixed at Rs. 46/kg + applicable taxes for period from 1.10.2018 
to 31.3.2024. Minimum procurement price will not be lower than Rs. 46/kg + applicable 
taxes up to 31.3.2029. Recently, due to rise in Retail Selling Price (RSP) of CNG and 
other factors, representation was received from CBG Plant owners to increase the 
procurement price of CBG. Detailed deliberations were held with Oil & Gas Marketing 
Companies and other stakeholders on SATAT scheme. Based on the discussions, Oil & 
Fig. 1 : Components of biogas 

Gas Companies had offered a revised procurement price of CBG which is indexed to 
the CNG price. The details of the revised procurement price of CBG are provided 
below:- 
 The minimum procurement price of CBG will not be lower than Rs. 46/kg + 
applicable taxes for the period up to 31.3.2029. 
 The Retail Selling Price of CBG in a market shall be at par with RSP of CNG (as 
provided by the authorized CGD entity). 
1.5 In order to ensure offtake of CBG, MoPNG has issued guidelines for 
synchronization of CBG in CGD network. The CBG –CGD Synchronization Scheme has 
been successfully implemented on a pan India basis from 19.04.2021. At present, 24 
Tripartite Agreements have been signed with various CBG producers and CGD entities 
across the country for supply of Biogas/CBG to CGD networks.  
1.6  In accordance with MoP&NG policy guidelines dated 26.10.2021, GAIL had 
commenced supplies of APM/NAPM gas and Biogas to all CGD entities at the Weighted 
Average Price. Subsequently, the MoP&NG policy guidelines dated 6.5.2022 has also 
been implemented from 16.05.2022 for supply of pooled natural gas and Biogas to CGD 
entities at Uniform Base Price.  
 Further, the procurement price of Biogas offered to CBG Producers under CBG –
CGD Synchronization Scheme has been revised upwards to Rs 1082/MMBTU + taxes. 
In addition, the Producers would receive compressions charges/pipeline compression 
charges/transportation charges as applicable for the Biogas/CBG supplied. 
1.7 Around 40 additional CBG plants are expected to be commissioned by March, 
2023.  
Coordination Mechanism 
1.8  The Committee desired to know the role of CBG in the objectives of the Natural 
Policy in Biofuel in India to which MoPNG in their written reply have submitted the 
following:- 
“ The National Policy on Biofuels announced in the year 2018 by Government 
of India put thrusts on the productions of advanced biofuels such as 2nd 
Generation (2G) Ethanol, Compressed Biogas (CBG), Waste to Fuels, Drop-
in fuels etc. through utilization of indigenous feedstocks. Further, Government 

of India has set a target to increase the share of gas in the energy mix from 
the current about 6.5 per cent to 15 per cent in 2030 to make India a Gas 
based economy. Augmentation of CBG shall help in achieving this target. 
Production of CBG shall increase the green energy mix, reduce import 
dependence, create employment, especially in semi urban & rural areas and 
reduce pollution. This will create value and employment in the rural economy 
across the supply chain from biomass collection to plant operation. CBG has 
zero associated carbon emissions. Usage of CBG shall assist in achieving 
climate change goals of India as per the Paris Agreement 2015/2022. 
The production of CBG is in alignment with Government of India schemes like 
Atmanirbhar Bharat, Make in India and Swachh Bharat. The CBG production 
also be in alignment with GOBAR-DHAN Scheme to effectively utilize cattle 
dung. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The various feedstocks of biogas are waste / bio-mass sources like agricultural 
 residue, cattle dung, sugarcane press mud, municipal solid waste, etc. 
 The various feedstock wise CBG potential are as under: - 
The above table is indicative and CBG production shall vary as per technology, 
feedstock quality, etc.  
So far 37 CBG/biogas plants have been commissioned under SATAT initiative. 
Designed CBG production capacity of these plants is around 225 ton per day. 
These plants are supplying their produced CBG from 51 stand-alone CBG Retail 
Outlets; 12 Geographical Areas under CBG-CNG synchronization scheme and 
also to industrial customers. List of CBG/biogas plants is at Annexure-I”.   
1.9 The Committee sought to know the current share of bio-gas in the country and the 
targets fixed by the Ministry to which MoPNG in their written reply have stated the 
following:- 
“Under the SATAT initiative the government envisages the setting up of 5,000 
CBG plants with a production target of 15 MMTPA of CBG by 2023-24.  
However, as on 1st August 2022, only 37 CBG/ biogas plants have been 
Feedstock 
Tentative Feedstock 
Requirement for production of 1 
Ton CBG as per Conventional 
Technology 
Agriculture 
Residue 10 ton 
Press Mud 25 ton 
Spent Wash 10 KL 
Municipal 
Solid Waste 20 ton 
Cattle Dung 50 ton 
Napier Grass 10 ton 

commissioned. So far OGMCs have sold around 9000 tons of CBG. MoPNG is 
continuously coordinating with stakeholders to increase the production of CBG”. 
1.10 Asked by the Committee as to whether any review has been conducted by the 
Ministry regarding implementation of SATAT and if so, its major findings, the MoPNG in 
their written reply, have furnished the following:- 
 “Periodic review meetings are being held by MoPNG and OGMCs on implementation 
of  SATAT initiative. It has been observed that the CBG sector is still in developing stage 
in  the country. It needs to be supported with various fiscal incentive and policy 
interventions. Major finding emerged during the review meetings with stakeholders are as 
under: 
a. Considering the various environmental, social and economic benefits, 
enhanced focus is required to improve the production of CBG. 
b. Production of CBG is required to meet the incremental demand of the 
Natural Gas in the country. 
c. Expeditious financing and lower interest and lower collateral is required for 
propogation of CBG projects. 
d. Support of State Government is required to ensure long term supply of 
biomass at a reasonable price. 
e. Biomanure is a coproduct and revenue stream of CBG projects. Assured 
offtake of biomanure is required to improve viability of the projects. 
f. Assured offtake of entire quantity of CBG with long term agreement is 
imperative to attract investment in this sector. 
g. Allocation of land for CBG projects and biomass storage by the State 
Government. 
h. Expansion of Pipeline infrastructure for injection of CBG in CGD network”. 
1.11 The Committee enquired as to whether any technology for CBG production is 
available in the country to which MoPNG in their written reply have stated the following:- 
“Waste / Bio-mass sources like agricultural residue, cattle dung, sugarcane press 
mud, municipal solid waste and sewage treatment plant waste, etc. produce bio-
gas through the process of anaerobic decomposition. The bio-gas is purified to 
remove hydrogen sulfide (H2S), carbon dioxide (CO2), water vapor and 
compressed as Compressed Bio Gas (CBG), which has methane (CH4) content of 
more than 90%. 
There are various technologies available for production of CBG. Anaerobic 
Digestion is used for the production of Biogas which includes technologies 
like continuous stirred tank reactor (CSTR), plug flow, 2 stage reactors, Upflow 
Anaerobic Sludge Blanket (UASB), etc. 
Further, various technologies are used for removal of hydrogen sulfide, such as 
Biological Fixation, Iron chloride dosing, Water scrubbing, Activated Carbon, Iron 
Hydroxide or Oxide and Sodium Hydroxide etc. 

 Technologies used for removal of Carbon dioxide, are Pressure Swing Adsorption 
(PSA), Water Scrubbing, Membrane Separation, Chemical Scrubbing - Mono Ethyl 
Amine (MEA), Di Ethyl Amine (DEA) Methyl Di-Ethyl Amine (MDEA) etc. 
The gas is compressed through a compressor. Various national and global 
technology providers are working in this field. Depending upon the requirement, 
combinations of these technologies are being used by CBG project developers". 
 1.12 The Committee sought to know whether the oil PSUs can invest in setting up of CBG 
Plants as part of their regular business operations to which the MoPNG in their written 
reply have stated that:- 
 “Under SATAT initiative PSU Oil & Gas Marketing Companies (OGMCs) namely 
IOCL, HPCL, BPCL, GAIL and IGL are inviting Expression of Interest (EoI) from 
potential entrepreneurs to set up CBG plants and to procure CBG from them for 
sale as automotive & industrial fuel.IndianOil is working as National Coordinator 
of SATAT initiative and GAIL is acting as Coordinator for synchronization of CBG 
with CNG.Beside this role of OGMCs are: 
1. Handholding of prospective entrepreneurs in technology, financing, statutory 
approvals and other aspects to facilitate setting up CBG Plants. 
2. Coordination with various Government Departments/Agencies; Financial 
institutions; State Government and other stake holders to arrange and implement 
various enablers for development of CBG sector.  
3. Arrangement of CBG equipment through coordination and inviting Global 
Expression of Interest for identification of technology providers and equipment 
suppliers. 
4. R&D work e.g.Indian Oil R&D Centre has developed IBG-Max, IBG-Plus and Bio-
Xceed technologies on CBG. IndianOil is finalizing offering of technology for 
setting up of CBG Plants, inoculums for enhancing CBG production from CBG 
Plants and additives for enhancing quality of Fermented Organic Manure.  
5. To create awareness among entrepreneurs and investors. 
 In addition, OGMCs have planned to set up few CBG and Biogas Plants to 
 encourage entrepreneurs for setting up CBG projects. Construction activities 
 are in progress at few places. Further, OGMCs are making investment on 
 installation of CBG dispensing equipment viz. Compressor, Cascade and 
 Dispensing Unit for marketing of CBG”. 
“Oil PSUs have planned to set up few CBG and Biogas Plants as demonstration 
projects. Some of them are as follows: 
 
S 
No. 
Oil 
PSUs Location Feedstock 
CBG / 
Biogas 
production 
capacity 
Status of 
project 
1 IOCL Hingonia, Jaipur, 
Rajasthan 
100 TPD Cattle 
Dung 6-8 TPD Work in 
progress 
2 IOCL Gorakhpur,  
Uttar Pradesh 
200 TPD Paddy 
Straw + 40 TPD 28 TPD Work in 
progress 

Cattle Dung 
3 IOCL Betul,  
Madhya Pradesh 5 TPD Cattle Dung 200 m3/day Commissioned 
4 IOCL Hoshangabad, Madhya 
Pradesh 5 TPD Cattle Dung 200m3 
/day Commissioned 
5 IOCL Gorakhpur,  
Uttar Pradesh 5 TPD Cattle Dung 200 m3/day Commissioned 
6 GAIL Ranchi, Jharkhand 150 TPD MSW 5 TPD 
CBG Work initiated 
7 HPCL  Badaun,  
Uttar Pradesh 140 TPD biomass 14 TPD Work initiated 
In addition, Indian Oil is also in discussion with a German CBG Plant operator for 
setting up agriculture residue to CBG Plants through a Joint Venture Company”.  
1.13 The Indian Biogas Association (IBA) submitted the following representation on 
SATAT to the Committee:- 
(i) Periodic upward revision of Bio-CNG/ CBG price by indexing it to the CNG 
market price.  
(ii) Creation of ‘Bio-gas-Fertilizer Fund” to provide credit guarantee and Generation 
Based Subsidy (GBI) to this sector 
(iii) Building decentralized Bio-CNG gas grid infrastructure and integration with CGD 
and national natural gas grid infrastructure. 
(iv) Policy for injection of CBG to CGD and replacement of LPG cylinders under 
UjjawalaYojna with bio-CNG under SATAT initiative. 
(v) Introducing Policy for statutory mixing of CBG in the natural gas mix.  
(vi) Creation of “Organic Fertilizer distribution and utilization Infrastructure” for 
doubling farmers income. 
Challenges in setting-up CBG Plants 
1.14 The Committee inquired about the kind of risks associated with CBG plants to 
which the MoPNG in their written reply have furnished that:- 
 “ The following are some of the perceived risks of CBG Plants: - 
(i) Lack of steady supply of feedstock at long term stable price. 
(ii) Discontinuation of available subsidies viz. Central Financial Assistance  by         
MNRE 
 (iii) Demand of CBG in the region and competition with other replaceable  fuel 
 (iv) Marketing of Bio manure (FOM/LFOM) at remunerative price”. 
 (v) The tentative Internal Rate of Return (IRR) of CBG projects is about 7-9% 
 (without CFA)”. 
 
Submitting about the general problems being faced by CBG plant entrepreneurs and the 
kind of ecosystem required for the viability of the plant, the representative of M/s Verbio 
Enterprises, during the oral evidence submitted the following:- 

“The very fact that SATAT has a target of 5,000 plants until 2023, and less than 
one per cent has been erected or under implementation, that means that there 
is no gap but there is a fundamental disconnect over here as far as business 
case is concerned……….. There is also a very clear lack of understanding or 
limitation of experience, in Satark, one size fits all is the approach. आप कोई भी 
वेː  लाए ं, फ ू ड वेː , वेिजटेबल वेː , एमएसडɲ ू, एŤी वेː , सभी को एक समान टŌीट िकया 
जाता है. जबिक food waste is a revenue stream, MSW is a revenue stream for the 
producer. ʄ ूिनसपैिलटी से छ: सौ से सात सौ Ŝपए टन Ůोǰ ुससŊ को िमलता है। हमŐ तीन 
हजार से साढ़े तीन हजार Ŝपए Ůित टन खचŊ करना पड़ता है। मेरे िलए वह कॉː  है, तो िकसी 
क े िलए वह रेवेɊू है। फ ू ड वेː  और वेिजटेबल वेː  वाला Ǜ ादा क̱ɘेन नहीं करेगा, because 
if I am their side, I would also not complain. I don’t want to pinpoint anybody but 
this is the gaps we are having. ː बल बिनōग की बŠत Ůॉɰ म है, अगर हम यह फ ं डामŐटल 
पॉइंट नहीं समझŐगे, तो यह सॉʢ  नहीं हो सकता है। Differential pricing, feed stock-based 
pricing हमŐ करनी पड़ेगी या िकसी तरह से Ůोǰ ुसर को वह कॉɼ नसेट िकया जाए। मœ पराली 
क े िलए जो खचŊ कर रहा šं, तीन हजार से साढ़े तीन हजार Ŝपए हमारा लœडेड, ůॉम फामŊ ट ू 
फीड है। यह िसफŊ कलेƕ न कॉː  नहीं है। हमने इसमŐ पूरी कॉː  इंƑ ूड की है, जो मुझे साल 
भर ː ोर करना है, उसे बचा कर रखना है, कवर करना है, हम ने अपने ɘ ांट मŐ वेदर ː ेशन 
लगाया है। Ɛ ोंिक मœ िडİː Ō ƃ लेवल वेदर मॉिनटįरंग पर िडपŐड नहीं कर सकता šं, Ɛ ोंिक मुझे 
अपने ɘ ांट क े लोक े शन पर पता होना चािहए िक िकस िदन बाįरश होने वाली है। जैसे आज-
कल-परसों,  we have the rain probability of 80 to 100 percent, that means, I have 
to keep them covered. हमŐ अनकवर भी करना पड़ता है, अगर मॉ̾चर हाई होता है, तो हमŐ 
उसे सूखने का मौका भी देना पड़ता है। अनकवįरंग-कवįरंग मैक े िनǚ  हम पूरा मैनेज करता हœ। 
Feed stock is very complex thing. बŠत कॉɼ लैƛ  है। हमŐ इसकी मैनेजमŐट बŠत ȯ ान 
से करनी पड़ती है। पूरा ː ोरेज इंůाː Ō Ɓर और जो पूरा Ůोटेƕ न है, वह हमारा है। हमŐ ː ेट 
और सŐटर से क ु छ नहीं िमलता है। हमारा ɘ ांट 20 एकड़ की जमीन पर है। इसक े अलावा हमने 
40 एकड़ satellite storage locations की है। अभी हमारा ɘ ांट फ ु ल क ै पेिसटी पर नहीं है। 
हमारा ɘ ांट िसफŊ 25 Ůितशत क ै पेिसटी पर है। जब यह 100 Ůितशत क ै पेिसटी पर आएगा, तो 
मुझे लगभग 80 एकड़ से सौ एकड़ जमीन चािहए होगी, िजसमŐ पराली ː ोर होगी और यह 
इसको फीड करेगा। 
  जो एमएनआरई की तरफ से जो था, वह एकदम से बीच मŐ िडसकİȴɊू कर 
िदया गया है, जब हम ने इंवेː  कर िदया,  this assistance was withdrawn. अभी सुनने को 
िमल रहा है िक यह अŮूव हो गया है और इसको दोबारा रीइंː ेट करŐगे, लेिकन मुझे इस चीज 
की Ƒ ैįरटी नहीं है िक जो ɘ ांट इस दौरान बने हœ, वे इसक े िलए ऐİɘक े बल रहŐगे या नहीं। 
That is not clear.  
 The next very major point is, हमŐ यह चीज बŠत अǅ ी तरह समझनी पड़ेगी, यह 
इंिडया का क े स नहीं है, यह वʒŊवाइड है िक यह Ůोडƃ  अपने दम पर कमिशŊयली खड़ा नहीं 
हो सकता है। इसक े तीन रेवेɊू ː Ōीम चािहए। सबसे पहले gas-crafted, जो हमारा 
आईओसीएल क े साथ है, that is a good arrangement. Second is bio manure. अक े ला 
गैस पर इसकी कमिशŊयल वायिबिलटी नहीं है। यह िसफŊ िह̢दुˑ ान मŐ नहीं है, हर जगह यही 
है।  Bio Manure is carbon rich product.  हमारी सॉयल क े िलए यह बŠत अǅ ा Ůोडƃ  
है। मœ आपको उदाहरण देता šं। जमŊनी मŐ एक बŠत ही िसɼ ल पॉिलसी है, जो अपनी जमीन से 
िलया है, आपको उसे वापस करना है। 

…….. there is no provision for offtake of biomanure. छ: सौ से साढ़े छ: सौ टन 
Ůितिदन, अगर इतने वॉʞ ूम मŐ फ ु ल कपैिसटी मŐ जेनरेट होगा, तो आप सोच सकते हœ िक इसक े 
िलए हमŐ िकतना ː ोरेज एįरया चािहए होगा, इसक े साथ ही इसक े हœडिलंग की ʩ व̾था भी 
करनी होगी। यह इसका एक मेजर पॉइंट है, जो अभी हमारे क े स मŐ तो सॉʢ  नहीं Šआ है। 27 
मई को एक िमिनː Ōी ऑफ क े िमकल ए ं ड फिटŊलाइजर से एक नोिटिफक े शन आई थी, िजसमŐ 
यह मैनडेट िकया गया है िक  fertilizer companies have been mandated to offtake 
this manure. But that notification does not detail any implementation िक िकस 
Ůाइस पर जाएगा, Ɛ ा लॉिजİːƛ  रहŐगे, उसमŐ क ु छ नहीं है। कौन-सी कɼ िनयाँ हœ, कब से वह 
इफ ेƃ  मŐ आ गया, so, there is no clarity. At the moment, this manure which is a 
very rich product as far as carbon is concerned is just lying on our locations”.  
1.15 When the Committee asked about any successful CBG Plant model that can be 
replicated, the representatives of M/s Ever Enviro during the oral evidence submitted 
that:-  
“..... हमने एिशया का क ू ड़ा वेː  ɘ ांट, जो हमारा वेट वेː  होता है, इंदौर मŐ लगाया और 
Ůितिदन 17 हजार क े जी बायो सीएनजी Ůोǰ ूज कर रहे हœ, िजससे िक इंदौर शहर की 400 
बसेस Ůितिदन चल रही हœ। जहां तक क ू ड़े की बात है, यह माडल सƛ ेसफ ु ल है। हम अबŊन 
लोकल बॉडी इंदौर ʄ ूिनिसपल कापŖरेशन को ढाई करोड़ Ŝपये ŮितवषŊ रायʐ ी दे रहे हœ।  
 हम ढाई करोड़ Ŝपये ŮितवषŊ रॉयʐ ी दे रहे हœ, हमŐ एक भी पैसा अबŊन लोकल बॉडी से 
नहीं िमल रहा है। हमारा जो बायो सीएनजी मॉडल है, िजसे माननीय Ůधान मंũी जी ने जबसे 
इनॉŤेट िकया है, तब से आज तक 72 देशों ने इस मॉडल को एƛ ेɐ िकया है। वʒŊ बœक से 
लेकर आईएफसी तक ने इसे एƛ ेɐ िकया है। मœ एक सƛ ेसफ ु ल मॉडल की बात कर रहा šं। 
जैसा िक मœने बताया िक हम लोगों को 100 ɘ ांट्स को वषŊ 2025 तक ऑपरेशनल करक े 
िदखाने का मैनडेट िदया गया है और उस कड़ी मŐ हम क ू ड़े क े ɘ ांट्स लगा रहे हœ। िदʟ ी मŐ 
ऑलरे डी एक ɘ ांट बन रहा है, भोपाल मŐ बन रहा है, उȅर Ůदेश मŐ 16 ɘ ांट्स आ रहे हœ। 
एŤीक̵चर वेː   क े हमारे 11 ɘ ांट्स पंजाब मŐ पराली क े ऊपर बन रहे हœ, जो अगले साल जून 
तक ऑपरेशनल हो जाए ं गे। हम उȅर Ůदेश, कनाŊटक तथा अɊ Ůदेशों मŐ जो शुगर िमʤ  से 
िनकलता है, उसक े िलए Ůेस मड क े भी ɘ ांट्स रहे हœ। 
 सर, इसक े अलावा माननीय Ůधान मंũी जी ने जो गोवधŊन ˋ ीम अनाउंस की, उसक े 
बेिसस पर भी हम क ै टल डंग को भी यूज कर रहे हœ और साथ ही साथ एनजŎ Ţॉप हेतु साउथ 
इंिडया मŐ हम ɘ ांट्स लगा रहे हœ। हमारा मैनडेट यह है िक 80 लाख टन काबŊन डाई ऑƛ ाइड 
का एिमशन करने से हम रोकŐगे और कॉप-26 मŐ हमारे Ůधान मंũी जी ने जो किमटमŐट िदया है, 
उसमŐ हम बŠत बड़े भागीदार हœ। आज जब हमारे 100 ɘ ांट्स चलŐगे, तो उससे 75 हजार लोगों 
को रोजगार िमलेगा और 10 करोड़ लोगों को एिमशन से डायरेƃ ली या इनडायरेƃ ली फायदा 
होगा। यह एक bird’s eye view है। इंदौर मŐ 15 एकड़ ɘ ांट, िजसका माननीय Ůधान मंũी जी 
ने 19 फरवरी को उद ् घाटन िकया था। जब ɘ ांट का कॉɍ Ō ƕन चल रहा था, तब आदरणीय ŵी 
धमŒū Ůधान जी ने भी िविजट िकया था। अगर हम देखŐ तो 5 हजार Ůोजेƃ ्स लगाने का जो 
टागőट है, वह पॉिसबल है। इसमŐ कोई डाउट नहीं है। आज की डेट मŐ जो Ůाइिजंग मैक े िनज्  म दी 
गयी है, we put our record िक पीएनजी ने और ːœिडंग कमेटी क े िलए we put our 
appreciation िक इस मैक े िनǚ  से Ůोजेƃ ्स से वायबल हœ, लेिकन जैसा िक हमारे क ु लीग ने 
बोला िक जो पॉिलसीज बनाई गई हœ, उनका इ̱ɘीमŐटेशन Ťाउंड पर नहीं हो रहा है।  

 ..... सर, ओवरऑल मœ यह कहना चाहता šँ िक ऑलरे डी सब पॉिलसीज हœ, दे आर इन 
ɘ ेस, उनका Ťाउंड मŐ इ̱ɘीमŐटेशन होना जŝ री है। यह िदन द ू र नहीं है िक सचमुच वषŊ 2023 
तक 5 हजार ɘ ांट्स का सपना जŝ र साकार होगा। हम इसमŐ सƗम हœ। हम लोग इस बात क े 
िलए हœ और हम आगे से आगे इिनिशएिटव लŐगे। धɊ वाद”। 
1.16 Elaborating on the future and possibility of achieving CBG production as envisaged 
in the SATAT and the steps required for the same, the representative of the Indian Bio-
gas Association made  this following submission during the oral evidence:- 
“हम िडसŐटŌलाइǕ  गैस फीʒ ्स की बात कर रहे हœ। हम यह चाह रहे हœ िक पूरे िह̢दुˑ ान क े 
अंदर पेटŌोिलयम गैस का सɵ ीǨ ूशन, ट ू ए वैरी गुड एƛ टœट, हम इसमŐ दे पाए ं । हमने इस नाते 
कहा है िक ये िडसŐटŌलाइǕ  गैस फीʒ ्स होंगे। तमाम सद˟ ों ने जो-जो सम˟ ाए ं बताई हœ, 
उनका इसमŐ समावेश होगा। मœ यह कहना चाह रहा šं िक यह एक बायो įरफाइनरी होगी। जैसे 
उसमŐ हमने यह कहा, मœ कोट करता हॅू ं िक यह िसफŊ बायोगैस ɘ ांट नहीं है, यह बायोगैस 
फटŎलाइज़र ɘ ांट भी है। यह साथ मŐ एƛ क े वŐजर है। सर, हम िकतनी भी तरſ ी कर लŐ, अगर 
हमको साफ-सफाई या ˢǅ  भारत िमशन क े अंदर सारे वेː  को िड˙ ोज़ करना है, िजससे हम 
ˢ̾थ रह सकŐ तो wet and loose leafy bio-mass, only one technology is there 
which is affordable even today and it is doable technology. Nothing is to be 
imported. वह बायोगैस टैƋ ोलॉजी है। तो यह scavanging का काम करेगा। हम पॉʞ ुशन 
की बात करते हœ, पॉलयुशन एबेटमŐट की बात करते हœ, एनवायरमŐट ů Őडली की बात करते हœ, 
पीएम ने जो किमट िकया Šआ है, उसमŐ िकतने पसŒट तक हम इसे कर सकते हœ, लेिकन उसक े 
िलए हमको नए िसरे से, अǅ े तरीक े से इंिटŤेिटड तरीक े से सोचने की जŝ रत है। सर, इसमŐ 
हमने जो बातŐ िलखीं, पहले जो टाइटल इटसेʚ  है, उसमŐ हमने तमाम शɨ ों का समावेश 
इसीिलए िकया है तािक एक ही टाइटल मŐ यह पता लग जाए िक Ɛ ा-Ɛ ा इसमŐ इनƑ ूिडड है। 
हम इससे क ै िमकʤ  बना सकते हœ। एक समय आएगा, अगर पैटŌोिलयम मŐ काफी कमी आई तो 
हमको क ै िमकʤ  क े िलए बायोįरसोसőज़ पर वापस जाना पड़ेगा। वे सारे कॉɌ ेɐ हम अभी शुŝ  
कर सकते हœ, टेː  कर सकते हœ। सर, यह देखŐ इस वाले को, बड़ी िविचũ बात है िक हम सबसे 
नए सेƃ र हœ, हमारे पास कोई सपोटŊ नहीं है, हमारी कोई इंडː Ōी नहीं है, लेिकन जो दाम हमको 
िदया जा रहा है, इसको अभी एक-दो लोग कह रहे थे िक बढ़ा बिढ़या है। ज़रा तुलना कर लेते हœ। 
यहां पर हमŐ जो Ůाइस दी जा रही है, इथेनॉल की क ै लोįरिफक वैʞ ू, बायोसीएनजी की 
क ै लोįरिफक वैʞ ू से हाफ है, लेिकन इस टेबल मŐ देखŐ उनको हमसे ढाई गुना Ǜ ादा पैसा िदया 
जा रहा है, लेिकन हीट वैʞ ू हमसे आधी है तो करीब चार गुना पैसा हम इनको Ǜ ादा दे रहे हœ। 
हमŐ Ɛ ों नहीं िदया जा रहा है? जो सीएनजी क े साथ हम कɼ ीट करते हœ, िजसमŐ सैकड़ों सालों 
से तमाम देशों ने, टैƋ ोलॉजी ने, हमारी इंिडयन ऑयल कɼ नीज़ ने, िजसमŐ भारत सरकार ने 
इनवेː  िकया है, इतना बड़ा इ̢ůाː Ō Ɓर खड़ा िकया है, तब जा कर आज की तारीख मŐ हम 
सीएनजी को इɼ ोटŊ कर क े, क ु छ डॉमेİːक Ůोǰ ूज़ कर क े इस लैवल पर दे पा रहे हœ। हमारे 
वाले सैƃ र क े िलए वह इनवेː मŐट कहां से आएगा? जब तक वह नहीं आएगा यह खड़ा नहीं 
होगा। अगर यूŢे न और ईरान जैसी लड़ाई हो गई तो हमारे िडफŐस क े िलए, जो ː Ōेटेिजक वैल 
įरƓायरमŐट है, वही अवेलेबल नहीं होगा। लेिकन अगर हम डीसŐटŌलाइज़ गैस बना रहे हœ, 
बायोमास बे̾ड, वह ː Ōेटेिजक ɡ ूल हम इसमŐ पा सकते हœ, अदर दैन एɼ लॉयमŐट और सब जो 
Šआ वह तो होगा ही होगा, उसको तो हम िडनाइ ही नहीं करते हœ, लोकल लैवल पर 
डीसŐटŌलाइज़ लैवल पर। सर, इसमŐ पाए ं िक हमको सबसे पूअरेː  क ै टेगरी मŐ रखा गया है। 1.04 
हमŐ दे रहे हœ और द ू सरों को ढाई दे रहे हœ या िकसी को क ु छ दे रहे हœ। आİखर ऐसा Ɛ ों?  

......उसमŐ यह है िक टैƋ ोलॉजी सकी mixed fuel feeding and not single fuel feeding. 
Today, those options are there and that is where technologies’ intervention will 
also be required. It is not so simple. तो कभी िसफŊ पराली क े बेस पर हम नहीं कर सकते 
हœ। आगे हमने Ůाइस मŐ कहा है अभी जो Ůाइस सतत मŐ िमली Šई है, वह भी इɎोंने कम क े 
करक े आंका Šआ है। वह िसफŊ क ै टलडंग और काओमैɊोर क े ऊपर जो Ůाइस आ सकती है, 
उस पर इɎोंने िफƛ  िकया है।  
 ........ सर, ‘इंटरवे̢शंस नीडेड’ मŐ हमने यह कहा िक हम लॉȳ  करŐगे। तमाम िमशɌ  
लॉȳ  हो गए। बायोमास िमशन, िजसमŐ जला दŐगे, वह भी लॉȳ हो गया। बŠत सारे िमशɌ  लॉȳ  
हो गए। यहां तक िक ‘ˢǅ  भारत’ िमशन भी लॉȳ हो गया। जब हम मंũालय मŐ थे, वषŊ 2008 
से हम यह कहते आ रहे हœ िक हमारे िलए बायोगैस फिटŊलाइज़र िमशन आप बना दीिजए। पता 
नहीं लोगों को Ɛ ा तकलीफ है िक आज तक बायोगैस फिटŊलाइज़र िमशन नहीं बना। खैर, अभी 
हमने उसे थोड़ा-सा मोिडफाई िकया है िक अब हम उसको बायो-įरफाइनरी िमशन लॉȳ करŐगे। 
पेटŌोिलयम एवं Ůाक ृ ितक गैस मंũालय की जो बायो-ɡ ूएल पॉिलसी है, वह क े वल िलİƓड ɡ ूएल 
और गैिसयस ɡ ूएल की बात करती है। एम.एन.आर.ई. की जो बायो-ɡ ूएल पॉिलसी थी, वह 
क े वल िलİƓड ɡ ूएल की बात करती थी। अभी भी बायो-ɡ ूएल पॉिलसी मŐ सॉिलड ɡ ूएल 
इ̢Ƒूडेड नहीं है। हम यह कह रहे हœ िक solid fuel, liquid fuel and gases fuel and all 
these three types of fuels are available through our biomass resources”. 
Single Window Clearance  
1.17 Various statutory approvals required for setting up CBG Plants, are  detailed as 
under: - 
1. Change in Land Use (applicable for non-industrial land) 
2. District Industry Centre registration 
3. NOC and Licence from Fire Department 
4. NOC and Licence from Health & Safety 
5. Approval fromDistrict Town & Country Planning 
6. Approval from Local Panchayat 
7. Plant running licence fromBlock Development Officer 
8. Consent to Establish & Operate from Pollution Control Board 
9. Consent to Establish & Operate from Petroleum and Explosives Safety 
Organization, etc. 
 The above list may vary as per State specific requirements. Many approvals 
 are required before setting up of the Plant. (LOP Q7) 
 
1.18 The Committee enquired about the role of various Ministries in the implementation 
of CBG Plants and steps being envisaged by MoPNG for coordinating with other 
Ministries and Agencies, the Ministry in their written reply have submitted that:- 
 “Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas is coordinating with various ministries to 
create enabling ecosystem for CBG projects under SATAT initiative. MoPNG has 
conducted many meetings with stakeholder Ministries as and when required and 

written number of letters to them. With the rigorous efforts of MoPNG and its 
PSUs Dept. of Agriculture & Farmer Welfare (DA&FW) has included bio manure 
produced from CBG plants as Fermented Organic Manure (FOM) and Liquid 
Fermented Organic Manure (LFOM) under Fertilizer Control Order; RBI has 
included CBG projects under Priority Sector Lending; CPCB has categorized 
CBG projects under ‘White Category’ on case to case basis; MNRE has provided 
list of institutes for technology evaluation and validation of Detailed Project 
Reports; Canara Bank has been nominated as the lead bank for CBG activities. 
Further, this Ministry is coordinating with MNRE for continuation of Central 
Financial Assistance scheme under Waste to Energy Programme; DA&FW to 
promote FOM/LFOM; Department of Fertilizer to seek Market Development 
Assistance and assured off-take of Bio-manure; Dept. of External Affaris for 
external financial assistance; Department of Expenditure for continuation of CFA 
of MNRE; Department of Revenue to resolve tax related issue in CBG blended 
with CNG; MoHUA for MSW based CBG projects; DHI to promote manufacturing 
of CNG/CBG vehicles.” 
 
1.19 The Committee sought to know the efforts by MoPNG to coordinate with 
State Governments, urban municipal bodies, local bodies, etc. in setting up of CBG 
plants under SATAT scheme to which the Ministry in the written reply have furnished 
that:-   
“MoPNG has sought support of State Governments through various letters and 
series of meetings. MoPNG has requested various State Governments to form 
Coordination Committee for effective implementation and monitoring of SATAT 
initiative. At present, State Level Coordination Committees have been formed in 
the State of Haryana, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Andhra Pradesh 
to discuss and create ease in statutory approvals and regulatory clearances for 
CBG Plants. IndianOil has posted Nodal Officers in State Capitals to assist CBG 
Plant owners and facilitate clearances”. 
1.20 The Committee desired to know the response so far from State Governments, 
Urban Municipal Bodies, Local Bodies, etc. towards setting up of CBG plants under 
SATAT scheme to which the MoPNG in their written reply have furnished that: - 
“State Level Committees have been constituted for implementation and 
monitoring of SATAT initiative in States of Haryana, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh and 
Chhattisgarh. Government of Haryana has notified biomass clusters in the state 
to enable steady supply of biomass. 
OGMCs have been coordinating with various Municipal Bodies, Local Bodies, 
etc. and some of them have responded positively for putting up CBG plants in 
their jurisdictions. 
Assistance is required from State Governments, Municipal Bodies, Local Bodies, 
etc. to ensure larger deployment of CBG Plants. For the same, following enablers 
are requested from State Governments: - 
1. Encourage use of Municipal Solid Waste, Sewage Treatment Plant Waste, 
Press Mud and Bagasse etc. for production of CBG. 

2. Creation of robust biomass and waste supply chain with policy to ensure 
steady supply of Biomass at sustainable long-term price.  
3. Providing subsidies on biomass aggregation & storage equipments under 
Sub Mission on Agricultural Mechanization (SMAM) Scheme.  
4. Creation of enabling ecosystem for marketing and application of Bio-
manure (FOM/LFOM). 
5. Removal of double taxation on CNG sales through CBG outlets and vice 
versa (CBG is under GST and CNG is under VAT). 
6. Promotion of CBG / CNG vehicle in locations with upcoming CBG plants 
and conversion of existing vehicle & tractors into CBG/CNG”. 
 
1.21 The Committee enquired about any scheme for allotment of land for setting up a 
CBG plant to which the Ministry in the written reply have furnished that:- 
“This Ministry has requested various State Government to allocate land for CBG 
plant and for storage of biomass. OGMCs are also taking up the matter with state 
Government as per requirement.   IndianOil has nominated Nodal officers at 
various states to facilitate LOI holders in dealing with various local authorities for 
acquiring land”. 
1.22   The following are some of the similar schemes like SATAT:- 
1. GOBAR-DHAN Scheme by Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation promotes 
conversion of bio waste to ensure cleanliness which includes Individual 
Household, Community, Cluster and Commercial CBG projects. 
2. Scheme for Energy from Urban, Industrial and Agricultural Waste/ Residue by 
Ministry of New & Renewable Energy) provided Central Financial Assistance 
(CFA) for setting up CBG Plants. The CFA scheme was valid up to 31.3.2021.  
SATAT initiative promotes entrepreneurs to set up CBG Plants with off-take and 
marketing of CBG by Oil & Gas Marketing Companies. 
1.23 The Committee wanted to know whether MoPNG has conducted any meetings 
with Industry Bodies, Association of Industries for promotion of CBG plant to which the 
MoPNG in their written reply have stated that:- 
 “ Number of meetings at Ministry level as well as at industry level have been 
conducted with Indian Sugar Mill Association (ISMA), Federation of Indian 
Chambers of Commerce & Industry (FICCI), Confederation of Indian Industry 
(CII), Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India (ASSOCHAM) 
and other Industry bodies to promote CBG. Meetings have also been held with 
State Level chapters of the Industry Associations to create awareness on CBG”.  
Letters of intent (LoIs) for CBG Plants 
 
1.24 When the Committee sought details about the number of LoIs issued under 
 SATAT by OGMCs the following information was furnished (Background  note 
 06.06.2022):- 

 
1.25 The Committee wanted to know the reasons for delay in commissioning of plants 
as the number of applications is 3263 and only 35 have been completed to which the 
MoPNG in their written reply have submitted that:- 
1. “Since the launch of SATAT initiative, initially the investor sentiment was slow 
because of lack of familiarity with the sector which delayed financial closure. 
After that, due to advent of COVID-19 pandemic, entrepreneurs setting up CBG 
Plants were affected to a great extent which delayed the setting up of CBG 
Plants. Now it is picking up momentum. So far 16 Plants have been 
commissioned and initiated supply of CBG. 37 more Plants are in various stages 
of construction. 
2. In addition, setting up of CBG Plants have been constrained due to various 
factors including lack of availability of biomass/ waste at reasonable price on long 
term basis, non-extension of Central Financial Assistance by Ministry of New & 
Renewable Energy, lack of low-cost financing for CBG Plants, lack of enablers 
from State Governments, issues in marketing of Solid & Liquid Fermented 
Organic Manure, etc.  
3. For development of CBG sector in the country following enablers are requested:- 
a. Arrangement of low-cost finance  
b. Extension of CFA scheme of MNRE 
c. Market Development Assistance for Bio manure marketing; Benchmark 
pricing and assured off-take of bio manure by Department of Fertilizer 
d. Creation of robust biomass supply chain to ensure sustainable supply at a 
reasonable price.  
e. Resolving of issue of double taxation on sale of CBG from CNG RO and 
vice versa as well as CBG blended with CNG”. 
Company 
Number 
of LOIs 
issued 
Land 
Finalized 
Financial 
Closure 
CBG plant 
commissioned/ 
sale initiated 
(No. of CBG 
Plants) 
CBG 
sale 
initiated 
(No. of 
Retail 
Outlets) 
CBG sale 
initiated 
(No. of 
CBG 
injection 
points) 
IOCL 2249 156 37 18 31 0 
BPCL 299 37 7 7 12 0 
HPCL 413 64 28 3 1 0 
GAIL 255 45 18 6 1 1 
IGL 47 26 7 1 0 1 
Total 3263 328 97 35 45 2 

 Some of the enablers required to improve the conversion rate of LoIs are as 
 under:- 
i. Financing of CBG projects: Because of thin margin and risk perceived, banks 
and financial institutions are sceptical about CBG projects. Low-cost funding at 
lower collateral is imperative for expeditious development of this sector. Further, 
risk sharing facility along with credit guarantee scheme need to be introduced to 
improve the availability of finance at lower interest rates and lower collateral. 
j. Bioamss/feed stock supply chain: Support of State Government is required to 
establish biomass to ensure availability of feedstock at an assured price on long 
term basis. State government should provide subsidies on biomass aggregation 
equipment; notify biomass clusters for CBG plants; engage Farmers Producers 
Organizations/ Custom Hiring Centres (FPOs/CHCs) etc. for aggregation and 
storage of biomass in the catchment areas of CBG plants and provide them 
incentive on operative expenses of biomass equipment; State Government 
should also encourage production of CBG from other feed stocks such as press 
mud, MSW, sewage water etc. 
k. Bio manure Marketing: At present there is no established mechanism for offtake 
of biomanure (FOM/LFOM) which is a major co product and revenue stream for 
CBG plants. Department of Fertilizer has been requested to provide Market 
Development Assistance on sale of FOM, fixing of benchmark price and suitable 
modalities for mandatory offtake of FOM by fertilizer companies. ICAR, State 
Agriculture Universities, Research Centres, KVKs etc. should take up research, 
demonstration and extension activities for promotion of FOM/LFOM among 
farming community. 
l. Physical incentive: Central Financial Assistance (CFA) by MNRE is one of the 
major incentives/subsidies for setting up of CBG plants. However, the 
continuation of the CFA beyond March 2021 under Waste to Energy Programme 
of MNRE is still pending. MNRE may issue the notification and guidelines for 
continuation of CFA. 
m. Assured Offtake of CBG: OGMCs are signing long term commercial agreement 
for offtake of CBG.  Government has issued the guidelines for co-mingling of 
domestic gas with CBG for CNG (T)/PNG (D) segments of CGD network to 
facilitate offtake additional quantity. Further, State Government should promote 
CNG/CBG vehicles and tractors to enhance consumption of CBG. 
n. Land: Expeditious allocation of land to CBG producers by the State Government 
would be helpful in developing CBG Projects. 
o. Issue of double taxation: Exemption of Central Excise Duty and VAT or bringing 
NG/CNG under the ambit of GST to solve the problem of double taxation when 
CBG is comingled and sold in CNG(T) and PNG(D) sectors.  
Other Enablers:  State Specific subsidies on CBG Plants during initial phase; 
Facilitate entrepreneurs in obtaining necessary permission / registration / 
approvals etc. for establishment of CBG plants; Single window clearance 
towards CBG Plants; Courses on CBG technology, feedstock management, 
manure enrichment, marketing, O&M in State universities / technical institutes 
/ Agricultural institutes”. 

1.26 The Committee further enquired whether any duration for validity of Lol has been        
fixed to which the Ministry in the written reply have stated that:-  
“Yes, OGMCs have fixed the period of validity between three months to two 
years from the date of issuance of LOIs. Beyond that the extension is being 
given on case-to-case basis”. 
1.27 The Committee sought to know the mechanism and criteria followed by Oil PSUs for 
issue of Lol to which the Ministry in the written reply have submitted that:- 
“Entrepreneur has to apply EOI (Expression of Interest) online on the website of 
chosen respective OGMC. Qualification criteria has been fixed by OGMCs and is 
available in the EOI floated. The evaluation methodology adopted by 
OGMCs (IOCL, HPCL, BPCL& IGL) is given below. The EOI applicants have to 
obtain 35 marks to qualify for obtaining LOI under SATAT initiative. 
 
S.No. QualificationCriteria 
(i) Number of Years’Experience of the Firm in any sector 
As on date of application 
a)  More than or equal to 5 years  
b)  More than or equal to 2 years, but less than 5 years  
c)  Less than 2 years  
 
 
(ii) 
Past Experience in preceding 10 years (As on date of application) of 
project execution including supply, installation, commissioning of 
Facilities to produce biogas or past experience in any other project 
working 
energy/healthcare/social/welfare/infrastructure/power/biomass/transport.
a)  Minimum 1 project with investment between   INR 5 – INR 10 crore 
each  
b)  Minimum 1 project with investment between INR2–INR5 Crore each  
c)  Minimum1project with investment between INR1–INR2 crore each  
d)  Minimum1project with investment of upto INR1 crore 
(iii) Turn over(Average of last 3 Financial years as per audited balance 
sheet) 
a)  More than or equal to INR 5 crore 

b)  More than or equal to INR 3 crore, but less than INR 5 crore  
c)  More than or equal to INR 1 crore, but less than INR 3 crore  
d)  Less than INR 1 crore  
(iv) Technical competencies & tie-ups 
a)  Possessing in-house technical know-how/Tie up with technology 
provider on digester 
b)  Possessing in-house technical know-how / Tie up with technology 
provider on purification system  
 
c)  
Possessing in-house technical know-how / Tie up with technology 
provider on compressor  
On receipt of EOI, OGMCs evaluate the details submitted and award LOI to 
successful applicants”. 
1.28 The Committee desired to know whether Ministry has held any meeting with Lol 
holders about the reasons for not starting the project to which the MoPNG in their 
written reply have furnished that:- 
”MoPNG and OGMCs have conducted meetings with LoI holders on the progress 
of the CBG projects. OGMCs have deputed dedicated team of officers to 
coordinate with LoI holders. Based on inputs received from LoI 
holders/entrepreneurs various enablers like assured price for offtake of CBG with 
long term agreements by OGMCs; inclusion of bio manures produced from CBG 
plants as Fermented Organic Manure and Liquid Fermented Organic Manure 
under Fertilizer Control Order 1985; inclusion of CBG projects under ‘White 
Category’ by CPCB; inclusion of CBG projects under Priority Sector Lending by 
RBI;loan products from various Banks for financing of CBG projects have been 
provided. In addition, MoPNG has issued policy guidelines for co-mingling of 
CBG with Natural Gas in CGD network to facilitate marketing of CBG. Further, 
MoPNG is regularly coordinating with LoI holders to resolve their issue and to 
encourage development of CBG projects”. 
1.29 The Committee wanted to know whether Sugar Mills have been roped in to set up 
CBG plants as adequate feedstock may be available with them to which the MoPNG in 
their written reply have stated that:-  
 “Meetings/conferences has been held with Indian Sugar Mill Association (ISMA) 
to create awareness among sugar mill owners to set up CBG Plants. Meeting 
was held with sugar industry & Indian Sugar Mill Association (ISMA) on 
22.1.2019 to provide details on SATAT initiative to sugar mills. A conference on 
CBG for sugar mill owners was held in Meerut, Uttar Pradesh on 5.10.2021 to 

promote setting up of CBG Plants. In addition, regular interactions are held 
through various Biofuels and Ethanol forums with Sugar Mill owners to 
encourage them to set up CBG Plants.  
 Based on the various interactions, 9 CBG Plants using sugarmill press mud as 
feedstock have been commissioned under SATAT initiative. Various other CBG 
Plants are under construction / being planned on press mud/spent wash-based 
feedstock”.  
Banking Assistance to CBG Plants:- 
1.30 The Committee discussed difficulty in getting institutional credit facility for CBG 
projects and sought desirability of bringing a credit guarantee scheme for the CBG 
sector to improve the performance of SATAT scheme to which Department of Finanical 
Services (DFS) in their written reply have submitted that:-  
“CBG Projects are being considered for finance by Banks and provided finance 
after techno-commercial appraisal based on their viability. Nevertheless, 
availability of Credit Guarantee Schemes for CBG financing mayprovide 
additional comfort to banks and help in enhancingflow of credit to CBG projects. 
Credit Guarantee scheme is administered by the concerned Ministry/Department 
implementing the loan/credit scheme. A few examples of such schemes vis-à-vis 
their credit programme and governing Ministry/Department are tabulated below. 
Credit Guarantee 
Scheme 
Loan/Credit 
Scheme 
Ministry/Departme
nt 
Credit Guarantee 
Fund Trust for 
Micro and Small 
Enterprises 
Loans to 
MSME 
Sector 
Ministry of Micro, 
Small and Medium 
Enterprises 
Credit Guarantee 
Fund for Micro 
Units (CGFMU) 
Pradhan 
Mantri 
Mudra 
Yojana 
(PMMY) 
Ministry of Finance 
Credit Guarantee 
Fund for Skill 
Development 
Skill Loan 
Scheme 
Ministry of Skill 
Development and 
Entrepreneurship 

(CGFSSD) 
Credit Guarantee 
Fund for Education 
Loans (CGSEL) 
Education 
Loans 
Ministry of HRD 
Loan Guarantee 
Scheme for the 
Covid affected 
Tourism Service 
Sector 
(LGSCATSS) 
Loans to 
tourism 
sector 
Ministry of Tourism 
 
1.31 The Committee desired to know whether Reserve Bank of India has included CBG 
Projects under priority lending and if yes, how much loan has been disbursed to projects 
under SATAT by the Indian Banking Sector to which DFS in their written reply have 
submitted that:-  
As per extant guidelines of Reserve Bank of India (RBI) on Priority  Sector 
Lending (PSL), loans for Agriculture Infrastructure category  subject to an 
aggregate sanctioned limit of Rs 100 crore per borrower from the banking 
systemis classified under Priority Sector. Agriculture  Infrastructure, inter-alia, 
include:- 
(i) Loans for construction of oil extraction/processing units for production of 
bio-fuels, their storage and distribution infrastructure. 
(ii) Loans to entrepreneurs for setting up of Compressed Bio Gas (CBG) 
plants”.  
 Details of Loan Disbursed Under CBG Projects by Banks.  
Project Sanctioned Disbursed 
 
No of 
Accounts 
Amount 
in crore 
Amt in croreas on 
18.08.2022 
13 169 185 
 
1.32 The Committee desired to know the rate of interest of scheduled commercial banks 
for priority sector lending to which DFS in their written reply have submitted that:-   

 “The rate of interest (RoI) charged on priority sector loans by banks has been 
 deregulated, as per directives issued by Department of Regulation (DoR),  RBI. 
As RoI is deregulated, respective Banks are offering rate of interest as  per their 
Board approved policy. 
 As intimated by banks, Rate of Interest in case of CBG Projects is linked with 
 Marginal Cost of Funds Based Lending Rate (MCLR)/Repo linked lending rate 
 (RLLR) and it depends on borrower rating and security coverage”. 
1.33 Elaborating about the problems being faced by CBG plants in taking loans from 
banks, the representative from M/s Phoenix India during the oral evidence submitted:- 
“सर, मेन पॉइंट बœिक ं ग सेƃ र से आता है। बœिक ं ग सेƃ र क े बारे मŐ हम दो-तीन चीजों का िजŢ 
करना चाहŐगे। सीिनयसŊ Űीफ कर दŐगे। सर, सबसे पहले, िजसक े पास एक से Ǜ ादा एलओआई 
हœ, जैसे मेरे पास एचपीसीएल क े बŠत सारे एलओआई हœ। िजसक े पास एक से Ǜ ादा एलओआई 
हœ, उनको बœक से कहा जा रहा है िक आप एक-एक करक े लोन एɘ ाई कįरए, उसको चुकता 
कįरए, िफर द ू सरा लोन पास होगा। अगर ऐसा है तो िजसक े पास बीस एलओआई हœ और जैसे मेरे 
पास िफलहाल 54 एलओआई हœ। अगर हम इस तरह से लोन लŐगे तो हम मर जाए ं गे, उसक े बाद 
Ůोजेƃ  बनेगा। यह क ै से हो पाएगा? यह पहला पॉइंट है। मœ तीन-चार पॉइंट ही बोलूंगा, Ǜ ादा नहीं 
बोलूंगा। द ू सरा पॉइंट कोलैटरल िसƐ ोįरटी का है। एक मािजŊन क े बाद कोलैटरल िसƐ ोįरटी 
मांगी जा रही है िक कोलैटरल िसƐ ोįरटी क े िबना बœक लोन देना नहीं चाहती है। हालांिक, हम 
लोग जानते थे िक जब įरज़वŊ बœक ऑफ इंिडया का Ƒ ॉज आया था, जो हम लोगों को पेपर भेजा 
गया था, उसमŐ यह İƑयर था िक कोलैटरल िसƐ ोįरटी नहीं लगेगी। यह द ू सरा पॉइंट है। तीसरा 
पॉइंट यह है िक हर जगह पर हर िकसी को बœक ए ं टरटेन नहीं कर रहा है। िजन-िजन बœकों का 
िजŢ िकया गया है, वहां बोला जा रहा है िक जहां पर ɘ ान बनेगा, उसक े बगल वाली जो Űांच है, 
वहीं पर अɘ ाई करने क े िलए बोला जा रहा है। ऐसी बŠत सारी Űांचेज़ हœ। मœ खुद ऐसी 50 Űांचेज़ 
को जानता šं। मœ खासकर िबहार और झारखǷ  ː ेट की बात कर रहा šं। इसमŐ बœक ए ं टरटेन 
नहीं कर रहा है”। 
Collateral Security for CBG Plants 
1.34 The Committee sought details of collateral security and for financing CBG projects, 
the Ministry may also provide information on the and terms and conditions of the banks 
for project financing and also whether there is purchase agreement between OMCs and 
CBG plant for offtake of CBG gas taken at collateral by finance institutions to which DFS 
in their written reply have submitted that:- 
“Information on the terms and conditions of the banks for project financing in 
general are as follows: 
The requirement and aspects may differ from case-to-case basis depending on 
the industry and project type.Banks undertake project finance proposals after 
careful consideration of various aspects like:- 
(i) Debt-Equity ratio  
(ii) Project Cost  
(iii) Source of Finance 
(iv) Infrastructural requirements (technological aspects, plant & machinery, 
raw material, power, water, manpower, statutory approvals, etc.)  
(v) Marketability  
(vi) Financial viability 
(vii) Arrangements for the Product Offtake 
      (viii)Cash flows from the Project 

     (ix) Repayment mechanism etc.  
 
B. For financing CBG projects, the banks demand collateral security 
There is no specific requirement forobtaining Collateral Security for 
financing CBG projects, subject to mortgageability of the Project land. In the 
cases, where Primary Security of Project land is not mortgageable, an equivalent 
amount of collateral has been stipulated, as a risk mitigant measure”. 
C. Consideration of the purchase agreement between OMCs and CBG plant for 
offtake of CBG gas as a collateral.  
“The Purchase agreement between OMCs and CBG plant for offtake of CBG gas 
cannot be considered as a collateral by financial institutions. However, a firm 
commitment / agreement for offtake of CBG will definitely provide adequate 
comfort by the OMCs, for sanctioning of the loans by the Banks for CBG 
projects”. 
1.35 The Committee wanted to know whether Ministry is planning to access cheap 
credit for SATAT from international financing agencies to which DFS in their written 
reply have submitted that:- 
“All matters related to lending from international agencies are being handled by 
the Department of Economic affairs, Ministry of Finance. Ministry of Petroleum 
may take up the matter regardinglending from agencies like World Bank, Asian 
Development Bank with Department of Economic Affairs”. 
1.36 The Committee desired to know whether NABARD is refinancing loans extended 
by banks to CBG projects to which DFS in their written reply have submitted that:- 
“All activities made eligible under priority sector lending definition of RBI can be 
refinanced by NABARD to the eligible lending institutions. Construction of oil 
extraction /processing units for production of bio fuels, their storage / distribution 
of infrastructure and setting up of compressed bio gas plant are also eligible for 
NABARD’s refinance”. 
1.37 The Committee desired to know the viability of Insertion of 'Escrow Clause' in the 
agreement between LOl holder and OMC/CGD to which MoPNG in their written reply have 
submitted that:- 
“The escrow clause in the commercial agreement between LOI holder and OMCs 
has been included on request from State Bank of India to make the CBG 
agreements bankable. The escrow clause provides provision of an escrow 
account where the proceeds from the sale of CBG shall be deposited by OMCs. 
The escrow account shall be used first for repayment of loan amount to banks 
and subsequent payment shall be made to CBG Plant owner. This shall ensure 
loan repayment and bankability of the CBG Plants”. 
 
1.38 The Committee pointed out that the CBG entrepreneurs are facing difficulties in 
obtaining loans as banks are imposing severe conditions of collateral security, the 
representative of DFS during the oral evidence submitted that:- 

“…..हर लोन बœक उस Ůोजेƃ  की कॉमिशŊयल वायिबʐ ी की बेिसस पर देता है। चाहे वे 40 हों, 
एक हो या पांच हों, हर Ůोजेƃ  को नॉमŊली इवैʞ ूएट िकया जाता है िक वह Ůोजेƃ  वायबल है िक 
नहीं। हो सकता है िक िकसी एक आंũेिŮɊोर ने अगर इकǧे 40 एलओआई िलए हों तो बœक को 
ऐसा लगता हो िक इनमŐ से सारे 40 Ůोजेƃ ्स अभी वायबल नहीं हœ और उɎोंने सोचा हो िक आप 
एक Ůोजेƃ  का चला लीिजए, उसकी वायिबʐ ी िदखा दीिजए। 
उस एक Ůोजेƃ  क े बाद बœक मŐ भी कांिफडŐस बनता है िक हाँ, यह ʩİƅ  इस तरह क े िबजनेस 
को चला सकता है, तो हम अगले लोन क े िलए सोचŐ। ….सर, आपने जो द ू सरी बात लैǷ  को 
कोलैटŌल रखने क े बारे मŐ कही है, हमारे पास बœकों से जो फीडबैक है, वह यह है िक इस तरह क े 
जो Ǜ ादातर एलओआई होʒ सŊ हœ, उनक े पास लीज़होʒ  लैǷ  है। अगर आपक े पास लीज़होʒ  
लैǷ  है तो उसे कोलैटŌल परपज क े िलए मॉगőज नहीं िकया जा सकता है। बœक क े िलए दो चीजŐ 
आती हœ, यह लोन की वैʞ ू क े ऊपर होता है िक िकतना लोन िदया जा रहा है तो उसक े अनुसार 
बœक चाहेगा िक जो Ůाइमरी िसƐ ोįरटी क े ŝ प मŐ आपकी ɘ ांट ए ं ड मशीनरी उनक े पास 
हाइपोिथक े ट हो। उसक े अलावा अगर कोई गैप रह जाता है तो उसक े िलए कोई कोलैटŌल ŮॉपटŎ 
मांगते हœ। यह बœिक ं ग का अपना तरीका है, उसमŐ उɎŐ एक िसƐ ोįरटी चािहए होती है। उसक े 
िलए अƛ र लैǷ  की बात की जाती है। अगर लैǷ  लीज़होʒ  है, िजसक े ऊपर वह अपना ɘ ांट 
लगा रहा है तो लीज़होʒ  लैǷ  को बœक िसƐ ोįरटी क े तौर पर नहीं रख सकता है। उसक े िलए 
ůीहोʒ  लैǷ  चािहए। इसिलए अƛ र ɘ ांट ŮॉपटŎ क े अितįरƅ  लैǷ  कीजŝ रत उनको पड़ 
जाती है। सर, आपने इसमŐ एक अɊ मुȞा बताया था, जो डायरेƃ ली हमसे 
संबंिधत नहीं है, आपने Ţे िडट गारȴी फǷ  की बात कही थी। यिद Ţे िडट गारȴी फǷ  जैसी 
कोई चीज बनती है तो उससे भी बœकों मŐ थोड़ा कांिफडŐस आएगा िक अगर लोन मŐ िडफाʐ  होता 
है तो शायद उनको उतना कोलैटŌल न लेना पड़ा और उसमŐ उनक े पैसे की भरपाई होने की कोई 
उʃ ीद बनती है। यही मेरी िटɔ णी है”।  
Financing for CBG Projects:-  
1.39 When the Committee wanted to know about the standardization and quality control 
of the plant and machinery and finance schemes made available by IREDA, the 
representative of the MNRE during the oral evidence stated that:-  
 “Sir, from MNRE perspective, the earlier scheme ‘Waste-to-Energy’, in which 
CBG was one of the components, had the validity up to 31st March, 2021. After 
that, we went with the National Bio Energy Programme to the Ministry of Finance. 
We got the decision in September 2022 that we could continue the programme to 
meet only the earlier liabilities.जो लाइिबिलटीज िŢएट की गई थीं, उसक े िलए हम पांच सौ 
करोड़ Ŝपये दे रहे हœ। But, Sir, we continued our follow up. जून महीने मŐ िमिनː Ōी ऑफ 
फाइनŐस ने एक ईएफसी वापस बुलाई थी। उसमŐ वह ˋ ीम अŮूव हो चुकी है। Now, we will 
continue the programme with additional outlay which will have CBG as the 
component also. उसकी जो गाइडलाइɌ  हœ, वे अभी अŮूवल ː ेज मŐ हœ। वह भी जʗ ी įरलीज 
हो जाएगी। 
 Secondly, Sir, you mentioned about IREDA. IREDA is giving loan for CBG 
projects also.अभी įरसŐटली उɎोंने बŠत सारे Ůोजेƃ ्स िलए हœ, including PFC, REC. For 
this also, we will recommend them. But IREDA, which is under MNRE, is 
definitely giving loans for CBG projects. 
 सर, हमने नेशनल इंİːǨूट ऑफ बॉयोएनजŎ मŐ ːœडड्Ŋस बनाने क े िलए एक कमेटी बनाई थी। 
उɎोंने अभी उस ːœडड्Ŋस का फːŊडŌाɝ  िदया है। We have submitted it to BIS.वह बी 
आईएस क े įरʩ ू मŐ है। उसक े बाद, एक Ůोसेस से, we will come into the making of 
standards for CBG as well”. 

1.40 When the Committee wanted o know Whether IREDA is refinancing loans 
extended to CBG projects, the  Ministry have submitted that:-  
“IREDA has financed greenfield CBG projects after due diligence. Moreover, it 
may be noted that IREDA Policy for financing CBG projects include both 
Greenfield and commissioned projects. However, no Company has approached 
IREDA for refinancing of commissioned projects till date”. 
Cost of CBG Plants 
1.41 The Committee wanted to know the cost of a CBG plant as worked out by the 
Ministry and gestation period for CBG plants to which the MoPNG in their written reply 
have furnished that:- 
 “The capital cost for setting up a CBG Plant varies largely as per capacity, 
feedstock, technology, location and other factors. Tentative project costs based 
on various feedstocks are provided below: 
 
The construction period for a CBG Plant is about 12-18 months”.  
1.42 The Committee sought to know information/details have been brought out by the 
Ministry/PSUs about the CBG plants under SATAT giving details regarding the 
availability of technology, equipments, skilled manpower, raw material etc. in the 
country to which the MoPNG in their written reply have furnished that:- 
 “ Oil PSUs have brought out information/details about the CBG plants under 
SATAT giving details regarding the availability of technology, equipments, raw 
material etc. The same are detailed below: - 
1. IndianOil has created a dedicated portal on SATAT initiative (https://satat.co.in). 
The portal has details on SATAT initiative documents, financing of CBG Plants, 
technology providers, enablers on CBG, Government Policies, Frequently Asked 
Questions, details on manure marketing. The portal has detailed learning 
S. 
No. 
Feedstock Plant 
Capacity 
CBG 
Output 
Project 
cost 
1 
Paddy 
Straw 
100 TPD 
12 
TPD 
70-80 Cr 
2 Press Mud  100 TPD 5 TPD 25-30 Cr 
3 
Cow Dung 
/ Chicken 
Litter 
100 TPD 5 TPD ~31 Cr 

modules on CBG technology and financing. The portal also offers learning 
opportunities in plant operation & maintenance, equipment suppliers, technology, 
manure, etc. and is regularly updated with latest details.  
2. A detailed white paper on CBG detailing CBG production process, technologies, 
enablers, etc. has been prepared. The same has been provided as part of 
Expression of Interest on SATAT initiative”. 
PRICING OF CBG 
1.43 The Committee sought a comparative statement for pricing of natural gas from 
different sources as targeted by OMCs for marketing/sale of CBG to which the MoPNG 
in their written reply have stated that:-  
 “ Oil & Gas Companies have offered a procurement price of CBG of Rs. 46/kg + 
applicable taxes purified as per IS 16087: 2016 standards, compressed to 250 
bar pressure and delivered to Retail Outlets in cascades. The procurement price 
of CBG shall remain valid from 1.10.2018 to 31.3.2024. There will be periodic 
revision in procurement price with effect from 1.4.2024, however minimum 
procurement price will not be lower than Rs. 46/kg + applicable taxes for the 
period from 1.4.2024 to 31.3.2029. 
 The price of CBG including compression charges, at Rs. 46/Kg + GST translates 
to approximately USD 12.4/MMBTU. 
 The price of Domestic Natural Gas (01.10.2021 to 31.03.2022) declared by 
PPAC is USD 2.90/MMBTU.  
 The cumulative monthly average price of DES West India Marker, as per Platts 
LNG daily dated 24.01.2022, is USD 20.538 / MMBTU”. 
1.44 The Committee wanted to know and breakup of price payable by OGMCs to CBG 
plants to which the MoPNG in their written reply have stated that:- 
“As per the SATAT initiative, procurement price of CBG purified as per IS 16087: 2016 
standards, compressed at 250 bar pressure and delivered to OMC Retail Outlets in 
cascades was revised from 1.6.2022 and is detailed as under: - 
 The minimum procurement price of CBG will not be lower than Rs. 46/kg + 
applicable taxes for the period up to 31.3.2029. 
 The Retail Selling Price of CBG in a market shall be at par with RSP of CNG (as 
provided by the authorized CGD entity). 
 The following slabs for CBG procurement price have been decided, which will be 
the procurement price of CBG delivered at Retail Outlet of OGMCs situated at 
any distance (up to 75 km one way) as per IS 16087 2016 specification (or its 
latest version) and compressed at 250 bar pressure: - 
S No Lower Retail Selling Higher Retail Selling Procurement Procurement 

Price of CBG in Slab Price of CBG in Slab price of CBG price of CBG 
  including tax including tax Without GST With GST 
  Rs./kg Rs./kg Rs./kg Rs./kg 
1 Retail Selling Price of CBG up to 70 54.00 56.70 
2 70.01 75.00 55.25 58.01 
3 75.01 80.00 59.06 62.01 
4 80.01 85.00 62.86 66.01 
5 85.01 90.00 66.67 70.01 
6 90.01 95.00 70.48 74.01 
7 95.01 100.00 74.29 78.01 
 Note: For further increase in slabs beyond Rs. 100/kg, procurement price will be 
extrapolated as per the above. If the RSP of CBG falls below Rs. 70/kg, there will 
be immediate revision in the procurement pricing. 
Additional transportation cost for transportation of CBG beyond 75 km (one-way 
distance) from CBG Plant shall be paid separately as per agreed slabs, based on 
mutual discussion: - 
One way Distance of CBG Plant 
to Retail Outlet / Selling Point 
Additional cost 
of transportation of CBG 
Rs./kg (without GST) 
Above 75 km – upto 100 km 5.0 
Above 100 km – upto 125 km 6.4 
Above 125 km – upto 150 km 7.8 

 CBG-CGD Synchronization – The procurement price of Biogas offered to CBG 
Producers under CBG–CGD Synchronisation Scheme is Rs 1082/MMBTU + 
taxes. In addition, the Producers would receive compressions charges/pipeline 
compression charges/transportation charges as applicable for the Biogas/CBG 
supplied”. 
1.45 The Committee wanted to know the mechanism for fixing the CBG price based on 
feedstock basis or calorific value of the gas to which the MoPNG in their written reply 
have stated that:- 
“Under CBG-CGD Synchronization scheme, the procurement price of CBG paid 
to CBG producers has been revised to Rs.1082/MMBTU w.e.f 01.06.2022. This 
price is equivalent to ~Rs 46/Kg excluding compression charges (i.e. 54 Rs/Kg 
– 8 Rs /Kg), with methane content of ~90% in Biogas]. In addition, CBG 
producers would receive Biogas compression charge of Rs.8/Kg (at 200-250 
bar pressure) for delivery at Retail Outlet OR Compression charge of Rs.2/Kg 
for injecting in the MDPE/Steel pipeline of CGD entity. 
The procurement price of Bio-CNG/biomethane to the CBG producers will be 
increased on a pro rata basis depending on the purity (higher percentage of 
methane content) of Bio-CNG/biomethane received”. 
1.46 The Committee wanted to vis-a-vis has been price of CNG and whether the 
Ministry has plans to review pricing at periodic intervals given the high volatility in 
international prices for natural gas to which the MoPNG in their written reply have 
submitted the following:- 
“CBG price are decided by OGMCs participating in SATAT.  As per the present 
CBG pricing mechanism, CBG pricing is indexed to the Retail Selling Price (RSP) 
of CNG in the market. With an increase in the Natural Gas price, there shall be 
an increase in RSP of CNG and an automatic increase in CBG procurement price 
as per the slabs mentioned above. Accordingly, there shall be an automatic 
review and increase of CBG procurement price once there is increase in CNG 
price. 
The procurement price of CBG shall be valid for one year or till next revision 
(which may arise out of dip in CNG price, etc.) whichever is earlier. If the RSP of 
CNG falls below Rs 70/Kg, CBG procurement price will be reviewed on industry 
basis”. 
Gas Synchronisation Scheme 
Bio-methane Injection to Gas-Pipelines 
1.47 The Committee desired to know the difference in price of CBG under SATAT 
Scheme and gas synchronisation scheme by OMCs and GAIL respectively, to which the 
MoPNG in their written reply have submitted that:- 

“The procurement price of CBG by GAIL under CBG CGD Synchronisation 
Scheme is a single price across India which discounts the compression charge 
component. The same is included in case of sale of CBG through cascades (at 
200-250 bar) under SATAT initiative”. 
1.47A The Committee asked whether there is any phase-wise (short term and long 
term) plans for blending quota/mix of co-mingled CBG in the total domestic gas supply 
to the CGD sector to which MoPNG in their written reply submitted that:- 
(i) “Domestic natural gas is supplied to CGD entities at a Uniform Base Price (UBP) 
on a pan India basis. However, the Retail Selling Price of PNG/CNG is fixed by 
the CGD entities based on their respective cost structure and margins, CAPEX, 
OPEX, demand, etc. in a particular GA. 
(ii) The CBG-CGD synchronization scheme envisages the share of co-mingled CBG 
in the total domestic gas supplied to CNG (T) and PNG (D) segment of CGD 
sector reach up to 10%. The scheme will be reviewed after a period of three 
years or as and when the percentage of CBG in the overall mix of 
CNG(T)/PNG(D) in the CGD sector reaches 10% whichever is earlier”. 
1.48 The Committee sought to know the infrastructure transportation of CBG from plant 
to the injection points and whether the plans of integrating pipeline infrastructure with 
CBG plants to which MoPNG in their written reply submitted that:- 
“As regards the connectivity for injection of CBG in CGD network under the CBG-
CGD Synchronization Scheme, the responsibility of connecting the CBG plant 
with the CGD network and ancillary activities up to a distance of 10 KMs from the 
plant to the injection point would lie with the Biogas/CBG producers. In this 
regard, it is also envisaged that with the progressive development of CGD 
network in the GAs the issue of connectivity, especially for distance of 10 km and 
above shall be taken care of.  Further, CGD entities are being sensitized about 
planning their pipeline and other infrastructure in synergy with the upcoming CBG 
plants so as to promote the injection of CBG in their network”. 
1.49 The Committee wanted to know the initiatives undertaken for biomethane injection 
quota in Natural gas grid, and CNG to which MoPNG in their written reply submitted 
that:- 
“For injection of CBG, GAIL has come up with the CBG CGD Synchronization 
Scheme for blending CBG into local CGD network for sale in CNG(T) and 
PNG(D) sectors. Currently, CBG blending is <1% of CNG consumed which 
progressively expected to go up to 10% as more and more CBG plants are 
commissioned. This Ministry is working for further streamlining of CBG-CGD 
synchronization scheme”. 
1.50 The Committee wanted to know OMCs by CBG about differential price mechanism 
for delivery of gas at different locations to which the MoPNG in their written reply have 
stated that:- 

 “ Oil& Gas Companies have offered a procurement price of CBG of Rs. 46/kg + 
applicable taxes purified as per IS 16087: 2016 standards, compressed to 250 
bar pressure and delivered to Retail Outlets in cascades (within 25 Km). The 
procurement price of CBG shall remain valid from 1.10.2018 to 31.3.2024. There 
will be periodic revision in procurement price with effect from 1.4.2024, however 
minimum procurement price will not be lower than Rs. 46/kg + applicable taxes 
for the period from 1.4.2024 to 31.3.2029. 
 The above-mentioned pricing under SATAT initiative is uniform across India”. 
1.51 The Committed sought to know the price offered to buy CBG is attractive enough 
for the investors to which the MoPNG in their written reply have stated that:- 
 “ The pricing offered under SATAT initiative has resulted in 16 commissioned 
CBG Plants and 37 more Plants are in various stages of construction. However, 
at various forums entrepreneurs have requested for increasing CBG procurement 
price under SATAT”. 
 Elaborating about the CBG pricing during oral evidence the representative of 
Phoenix India submitted that:- 
 “.............the gas pricing is good and we have no problem with that. The problem 
is that right now there is no value for the bio-manure. That is why, I was 
suggesting that if we are getting a price of anything between Rs. 4 to 6 per 
kilogram of bio-manure which is getting produced, that will make the business 
case extremely viable. If there is a carbon value on top of it, that definitely makes 
it very attractive. But let us go step by step. I think the first thing to be done is the 
bio-manure inclusion and acknowledgement”. 
1.52 The Committee pointed out that the GAIL India Ltd. is finalising the 
operational modalities for the supply of CBG blended with domestic gas and whether it 
includes setting a uniform price of City gas / PNG across all CGD entities 
(private/PSUs) to which the MoPNG in their written reply have stated that:-  
“Domestic natural gas is supplied to CGD entities at a Uniform Base Price (UBP) 
on a pan India basis. However, the Retail Selling Price of PNG/CNG is fixed by 
the CGD entities based on their respective cost structure and margins, CAPEX, 
OPEX, demand, etc. in a particular GA”. 
1.53 The Committee desired to know the quality specifications fixed for CBG by OMCs 
and how is the quality checked, to which the MoPNG in their written reply have stated 
that:-  
  “ The quality of CBG supplied by the CBG Plant is of automotive grade and in 
conformity to IS 16087:2016 standards or its latest version. Additionally following 
shall also be met 
i. CBG shall be free from liquids over the entire range of temperature and 
pressure encountered in storage and dispensing system. 
ii. The CBG shall be free from particulate matter such as dirt, dust, etc. 

iii. CBG delivered shall be odorized similar to a level found in local 
distribution (ref. IS 15319) 
 CBG Plants have online Gas Chromatograph/ Gas Analyzer and all relevant 
testing equipment to ensure that the quality of each cascade of CBG delivered to 
OGMCs meets all parameters of the above said BIS Standards. Test reports/ 
quality certificates duly certified by the CBG Plant owner accompanies with every 
Cascade of CBG supply”.  
1.54 The Committee wanted to know the difference in the pricing of CBG depending on 
the various feedstocks, the representative of Ever Enviro submitted that:- 
 “ यह फीड ː ॉक ट ू फीड ː ॉक िडपŐड करता है। पराली मŐ आउटपुट Ǜ ादा है, लेिकन कॉː  है। 
जैसे ʄ ुिनिसपल सॉिलड वेː  मŐ है, अगर मेरे पास 100 टन ʄ ुिनिसपल सॉिलड वेː  है, तो उससे 
3.2टन गैस िनकलेगी और अगर मेरे पास 100 टन पराली है तो उससे 14 टन गैस िनकलेगी। 
ʄ ुिनिसपल सॉिलड वेː  मŐ, जैसे मœ तो रॉयʐ ी दे रहा šँ, Ɛ ोंिक मेरा ɘ ांट इतना बड़ा है। जो 
Ůोडƕ न की कॉː  आती है, नंबर वन, वह ɘ ांट साइज पर िडपŐड करती है, छोटा ɘ ांट वायबल 
नहीं है। नंबर ट ू, आपका ऑɝ ेक िकतनी द ू री पर है। आज जो हमारी ˋ ीम आयी है, वह 75 
िकलोमीटर तक का एक रेट एक समान है। िकसी का अगर 10 िकलोमीटर है तो उसक े िलए 
वायबल हो जाएगा, लेिकन अगर उसे 75 िकलोमीटर जाना है तो रेट वायबल नहीं होगा। यह 
टेƋ ोलॉजी क े ऊपर, आपक े ɘ ांट की क ै पेिसटी क े ऊपर िडपेȵŐट है, 2.5 Ŝपये का कोई मतलब 
ही नहीं है। अगर 2.5 Ŝपये होता तो आज 5 लाख ɘ ांट लग जाते”।  
1.55 The Committee asked about the potential end consumers and calorific value of 
CBG to which the MoPNG in their written reply have stated that:-  
“The potential customers of CBG are vehicles and industries towards 
replacement of petrol, diesel and CNG. CBG is also sold to commercial 
customers as replacement of LPG”.   
 “ The calorific values of CBG and Natural Gas are as under: 
 The typical calorific value range for CBG is 8100-8800 Kcal/SM3 (GCV). 
The typical calorific value range for Natural Gas (Domestic & Imported) is 9150-
9800 Kcal/SM3”    
Taxation structure on CBG Industry 
1.56 The Committee wanted to know various types of taxes imposed on CBG and its by 
products like Liquid fermented organic manure and what steps are being taken for 
rationalization of the same. 
 “Presently, CBG/biogas is covered under GST @ 5%.  Branded and packed 
Fermented Organic Manure is covered under GST @5%. However, Natural gas 
is outside GST and is liable to State VAT / Central Sales Tax. Further, 
conversion of natural gas to CNG is liable to Central Excise Duty. Accordingly, 
when Biogas is mixed with natural gas for compression to CNG, the same may 
be taxed for Excise Duty and VAT, apart from GST on Biogas. This Ministry has 
requested Department of Revenue to exempt the excise duty on the quantity of 
CBG blended with CNG until Natural Gas is bring under the ambit of GST”. 

A. Income Tax Issues:- 
1.57 The Committee sought to know the impact of recent amendments in the Income 
Tax Act, 1961, leading to an ambiguity on the continuance of exemption available to 
CBG plants in respect of corporate tax under Section 80 JJA and whether exemption 
from payment of corporate tax is still available toCBG plants under section 80 JJA of 
Income Tax Act to which Department of Revenue (DoR) have in the written reply have 
submitted that:- 
 “With regard to the above it may be noted that section 80JJA of the Income-tax 
Act, 1961 (the Act) provides for deduction of 100% from the profits and gains 
derived from the business of collecting and processing or treating of 
biodegradablewaste for generating power or producing bio-fertilizers, bio-
pesticides orother biological agents or for producing bio-gas or making pellets or 
briquettes forfuel or organic manure for a period of five consecutive assessment 
years beginningwith the assessment year in which such business commences. 
 Accordingly, all the assessees, including corporates engaged in production ofbio 
gas may avail of the deduction under section 80JJA of the Act for a period of 
fiveconsecutive assessment years beginning with the assessment year in which 
suchbusiness commences. It may be pertinent to note that at present there is no 
sunsetclause applicable to the profit linked deduction under section 80JJA of the 
Act. 
 It may be pertinent to mention that if the domestic companies engaged in 
thebusiness of producing bio-gas have opted for the concessional taxation 
regime of 22% (plus applicable surcharge and cess) under section 115BAA of 
the Act or theconcessional taxation regime, applicable to new domestic 
manufacturing companies,of 15 % ( plus applicable surcharge and cess) under 
section 115BAB of the Act, theyshall not be eligible to claim the deduction under 
section 80JJA of the Act as theoption under the concessional taxation regimes is 
available to domestic companiessubject to the condition that they, inter-alia, do 
not avail any specified exemptionsand deductions under the Act”. 
1.58 Elaborating further on the issue whether the exemption is available to all plants or 
the same is subject to some eligibility conditions and whether the Ministry proposes to 
extend the duration of exemption in view of poor performance of SATAT scheme and 
development of domestic courses of energy to which DoR have in the written reply have 
submitted that:- 
 
“Under section 80JJA ofthe Act 100% profit linked deduction is applicable to all 
assessees on their incomederived from the business of collecting and processing 
or treating of bio-degradablewaste for generating power or producing bio-
fertilizers, bio-pesticides or otherbiological agents or for producing bio-gas or 
making pellets or briquettes for fuel ororganic manure for a period of five 
consecutive assessment years beginning with theassessment year in which such 
business commences. The other condition for availingthis deduction is that the 

return for the assessment year is required to be filed beforethe due date for such 
assessment year. 
 
The deduction under section 80JJA of the Act can be availed by theassessee for 
a period of five consecutive assessment years beginning with theassessment 
year in which the business of collecting and processing or treating of 
biodegradablewaste for generating power or producing bio-fertilizers, bio-
pesticides orother biological agents or for producing bio-gas or making pellets or 
briquettes for fuel or organic manure commences. 
 
An assessee is eligible to claim deduction under section 80JJA of the Actif he 
has profits or gains derived from the business of collecting and processing 
ortreating of bio-degradable waste for generating power or producing bio-
fertilizers,bio-pesticides or other biological agents or for producing bio-gas or 
making pellets orbriquettes for fuel or organic manure. As mentioned above the 
return is also required to be filed before the due date. 
 
There is no proposal to extend the period of exemption regime as the deduction 
is available from the year of commencement of production of bio-gas.” 
 
B. GST issues in CBG Plants:-  
1.59 When the Committee wanted to know as to what steps are being taken by the 
Department of Revenue to address the concerns of the CBG entrepreneurs,  regarding 
harmonization of tax structure related to CBG the representative of the DoR during the 
oral evidence submitted that:- 
“क ु छ Ůʲ जीएसटी, एƛ ाइज, वाएİɰटी ऑफ ɘ ांट्स इȑािद पर Šए। मœ माननीय सिमित का 
ȯ ान इस ओर आक ृʼ करना चाšंगा िक जो बायोगैस ɘ ांट्स थे और įरɊुएबल क े और ɘ ांट्स हœ, 
जैसे सोलर पावर और सोलर पावर जेनरेटर, इन सबको एक साथ Ƒ ब करक े उन पर जीएसटी 
लगता था। पहली बार जीएसटी की दर 5 Ůितशत थी। पर, सम˟ ा यह थी िक यह 5 Ůितशत की 
दर देखने मŐ अǅ ी लगे िक शायद वह इनकी हेʙ  कर सक े, पर तȚ  यह है िक अगर आप इन 
ɘ ांट्स पर या मशीनरी पर या मैɊुफ ैƁįरंग आइटʈ  पर 5 Ůितशत की दर लगाए ं गे तो वाˑ व मŐ 
यह नुकसानदेह है। इससे होता यह है िक जैसे बायोगैस ɘ ांट्स या सोलर सेʤ  या और जो 
įरɊुएबल हœ, इनक े सारे इनपुट्स और इनपुट सिवŊस और क ै िपटल गुड्स, सभी पर 18 Ůितशत 
का जीएसटी लगता है। अब अगर इस पर भी 5 Ůितशत लगे तो जो एƐ ुमुलेटेड आईटीसी क े 
इʴ ूज आते हœ, उसकी वजह से डोमेİːक मैɊूफ ैƁįरंग वाएबल नहीं रहता है और इसका 
मतलब यह है िक अगर डोमेİːक मैɊूफ ैƁįरंग वाएबल न रहे और उनक े एƐ ुमुलेटेड आईटीसी 
रहŐ तो 5 Ůितशत करने का मतलब है िक िफर ये आइटʈ  देश मŐ नहीं बनŐगे। िफर आपको उसे 
इɼ ोटŊ ही करना पड़ेगा Ɛ ोंिक domestic manufacturing cannot survive the unlevel 
playing field which is created vis-à-vis imports. इसक े पįरणामˢŝ प, इɋटőड ǰ ूटी 
ː Ō Ɓर मŐ जीएसटी मŐ आने क े बाद बŠत काम Šए हœ। आपने देखा होगा िक दो-तीन सालों मŐ  
हमने जीएसटी मŐ काफी सारे आइटʈ  की रेट्स को क ै िलŰेट िकया है। इसका मतलब िक इनपुट 
साइड पर जो जीएसटी रेट्स हœ, वे आउटपुट साइड क े रेट्स से कम न हों। आउटपुट साइड क े 
रेट्स हमेशा Ǜ ादा होना चािहए तािक पीछ े से जो Ţे िडट आ रहा है, वे यूज हो सकŐ। हम लोगों ने 
क े वल बायोगैस ɘ ांट्स क े िलए कोई ˙ ेशल िड˙ ेनसेशन नहीं िकया है।  

 ...सर, आपने द ू सरा इʴ ू यह भी उठाया था िक बायोगैस पलांट्स क े जो इİƓɖŐट्स हœ, उनमŐ Ɛ ा 
आता है, इसमŐ क ु छ सȽेह है और जब असेसमŐट की बारी आती है, जैसे अगर कɽ ेसर आया या 
इस तरह क े आइटʈ  आए तो असेिसंग ऑिफसर Ȫारा सȽेह ʩƅ  होता है औरउसमŐ िववाद 
पैदा होता है। पर, हमारी जो नोिटिफक े शन है, उसे हम दोबारा Ƒ ैįरफाई भी कर सकते हœ। जैसा 
िक कमेटी कह रही है, हम इस िवषय को Ƒ ैįरफाई करने की कोिशश करŐगे। बेिसकली, इसमŐ 
हमने तीन चैɐसŊ क े नाम िदए हœ – 84, 85 और 94। उस पर आने वाले जो भी आइटʈ  हœ, िजसमŐ 
मेजॉįरटी ऑफ आइटʈ  आते हœ,  
उन सब पर अगर बायो गैस ɘ ांट क े िलए इनपुट है और अगर वेएनǰ ूस क े िलए  िदए जा रहे हœ 
तो उस पर  Ůितशत का ही रेट है। हम लोग इसे उिचत तरीक े सेƑ ैįरफाई करने की कोिशश 
करŐगे।  
 सर, तीसरा इʴ ू यह था िक बायोगैस जीएसटी क े दायरे मŐ है, सीएनजी एƛ ाइज क े दायरे मŐ है 
और एक आइटम बायोगैस जीएसटी क े दायरे मŐ और द ू सरा सीएनजी एƛ ाइज क े दायरे मŐ होने 
से शायद इस पर डबल टैƛ ेशन होता है Ɛ ोंिक इसमŐ होता यह है िक मान लीिजए िक बायोगैस 
पर 5 Ůितशत जीएसटी लगा। उसक े बाद बायोगैस को कɽ ेस करक े सीएनजी क े साथ िमƛ  
िकया गया और फाइनली सीएनजी िबकी तो सीएनजी पर 14 Ůितशत की एƛ ाइज ǰ ूटी लगती 
है और वैट भी लगता है। इसिलए मंũालय का Ůˑाव है या उȨोगों का जो सुझाव है, उनका यह 
कहना है िक चूंिक बायोगैस िमƛ  होकर अʐ ीमेटली सीएनजी बनता है और बायोगैस मŐ जीएसटी 
अगर लग गया है तो उतना वेवर बाद मŐ िमलना चािहए। आप यह कह सकते हœ िक दोनों चीजŐ 
अगर ǰ ूटी पेड हœ और िमƛ  हो रही हœ तो शायद दोबारा से एƛ ाइज ǰ ूटी न लगे। पेटŌोल और 
डीजल मŐ एथेनॉल ɰŐिडंग और जो बायो-डीजल ɰŐिडंग होती है, उसमŐ इस तरह क े क ं सेशन हœ 
क ि अगर दोनों िमƛ  होकर आए ं तो उसमŐ दोबारा एƛ ाइज ǰ ूटी नहीं लगाते हœ। इस िवषय मŐ 
हम एमओपीएनजी से बात कर रहे हœ। इस िवषय मŐ क ु छ तȚ  हœ, जो आपक े िलए जानना जŝ री 
है। जब अगर कोई ǰ ूटी įरडƕ न होता है या क ं सैशन हम देते हœ, तो उसकी संभावना यह होती 
है क ि वह पास ऑन होगा, तब तो उस क ं सैशन को देने का फायदा है। अगर ऐसी संभावना बनती 
है िक वह पास ऑन नहीं होगा, वह एɥ ा̺डŊ हो जाएगा, तब िवȅ मंũालय को िवचार करना पड़ेगा 
िक इसमŐ िकसका फायदा हो रहा है। …… एमओपीएनजी को हमने įरसŐटली िलखा भी है। इस 
पर िवचार करक े हम लोग आपक े पास आए ं गे िक हमने Ɛ ा िवषय िलया और जʗ ी कोिशश 
करŐगे िक इस काम को करŐ। मूलभूत मुȞा यह है क ि Ɛ ा नेचुरल गैस को जीएसटी मŐ लाया जाए 
और Ɛ ा उससे समाधान होगा? यह सच है क ि जब तक जीएसटी मŐ नहीं आएगा, यह क ै सक े िडंग 
इʴ ूज़ क ु छ-क ु छ रहŐगे। मान लीिजए आपने सीबीजी कर भी िदया, तो ɘ ांट मŐ जो टैƛ  लगा रहा 
है, जो 12 पसŒट जीएसटी लग रहा है, वह तो िफर भी इम्  बेड होगी और सिवŊसेज़ मŐ जो जीएसटी 
लग रही है, वह भी इɾ ेड होगी। इसिलए वह क ै सक े िडंग तो होगी, जब तक यह एक चीज न बने। 
इʴ ू यह है क ि ː ेट्स को नेचुरल गैस से काफी रेवेɊू िमलता है, सŐटर को कोई खास रेवेɊू नहीं 
िमलता है। हमारे िलए रेवेɊू का मुȞा नहीं है। 1500 से 2000 करोड़ Ŝपये का ही रेवेɊू ही िसफŊ 
हमŐ िमलता है। ː ेट्स को अगर आप देखŐ तो करीब दस हजार करोड़ Ŝपये का रेवेɊू इसमŐ 
आएगा। उनक े िलए जीएसटी काउंिसल मŐ आकर यह मानना िक नेचुरल गैस को जीएसटी मŐ लाए ं, 
यह एक बड़ा मुȞा है। इसमŐ इनफॉमŊल चचाŊ नहीं हो पाई। उनकी तरह से बŠत Ǜ ादा यह नहीं है 
क ि वे पेटŌोिलयम Ůोडƃ ्स को लाना चाहŐगे। हम लोग Ůयास करते हœ, हमने िडˋ स िकया है। हो 
सकता है क ि भिवˈ  मŐ ऐसा हो पाए।”। 
1.60 The Committee desired to know the GST slab for biogas plant-related equipment & 
parts to which the Ministry submitted the following:- 
 
“GST rate on all renewable energy devices (including CBG plants) and the parts 
for their manufacture has been increased from 5% to 12% as per the 

recommendations of the 45th GST Council. This was done in order to remove the 
inverted duty structure as most of the inputs for these renewable energy devices 
and their parts attract a GST rate of 18%”. 
 
1.61 The Committee further enquired whether the increase in GST slab has resulted in 
higher GST mop up and the quantum  in GST mop up to which the Ministry submitted 
the following:- 
 
“The increase in GST rate on all renewable energy devices (including CBG 
plants) was done to address the inverted duty structure vis-à-vis the inputs for 
these equipment which attract 18% rate of GST and not to increase in GST mop 
up”. 
 
Continuing further, the Committee sough to know input credit scheme under GST for 
CBG plant & machinery to which the Ministry submitted the following:- 
“Under GST regime, Suppliers are entitled to take credit of input tax paid on 
 their inputs, input services or/ and capital goods which are used or intended to 
 be used in the course or furtherance of his business, subject to such 
 conditions and restrictions as are prescribed under the GST law and rules  made 
thereunder. Such eligible input tax credit can be availed and utilized for  offsetting tax 
liability on outward supply”. 
 
1.62 The Committee pointed out that on CBG both VAT and GST are levied to which 
the Ministry have submitted that:- 
“There are no items on which both GST and VAT is levied. Only GST is levied 
 on biogas at a concessional rate of 5%”. 
 
1.63 The Committee sought to know the structure of duty on ethanol which is also an 
energy product and whether both VAT & GST are levied on ethanol and how duty 
structure of CBG is different from that of ethanol, to which the Ministry have furnished 
the following in their written reply:- 
“Ethanol attracts GST at the rate of 5% when supplied to Oil Marketing 
 Companies for blending with motor spirit. Otherwise, ethanol attracts 18%  GST. 
VAT is not levied on ethanol”. 
 
1.64 The Committee sought clarity in the definition of biogas plant under GST Act. and 
at times falling under the scanner of Indirect Taxation Officials due to the certain items 
such as compressor, up-gradation units, balloons (membranes), etc., when procured at 
concessional GST rate, to which the Ministry have furnished the following in their written 
reply:- 
 “GST rate on the parts for manufacture of renewable energy devices, including 
CBG plants, covered under S. No. 201A of notification No. 01/2017-CT (Rate) 
(Annexure) attract GST rate of 12%. Therefore, if items like compressor, 
upgradation units, and balloons (membranes) are procured for use in 

manufacture of Bio-Gas plant or waste-to-energy device plant/ devices, they will 
attract a GST rate of 12%”. 
 
1.65 The Committee sought to know the steps taken to bringing a uniform tax regime for 
CBG and its likely substitute petroleum products (NG, PNG, LPG) as this creates an 
anomaly (particularly for marketing companies) in the swift substitution/ switching/ 
blending of CBG with petroleum products, to which the Ministry have furnished the 
following in their written reply:- 
 
“Currently, while biogas and LPG attract GST levy, Natural gas attracts central 
 excise duty and VAT. 
 
Article 279 A (5) of the Constitution prescribes that the Goods and Service Tax 
Council shall recommend the date on which the goods and services tax shall be 
levied on petroleum crude, high speed diesel, motor spirit (commonly known as 
petrol), natural gas and aviation turbine fuel (ATF). Further, as per section 9(2) of 
the CGST Act, inclusion of these products in GST will require the 
recommendation of the GST Council. 
 
So far, the GST Council, in which the States are also represented, has not made 
any recommendation for inclusion of natural gas under GST”. 
 
1.66 The Committee desired to know the different GST rate for Turnkey contract of the 
biogas plant wherein the supply is charged at 12% GST and service at 18%. And the 
steps taken to bring a uniform tax regime for procurements in CBG projects to which the 
Ministry have furnished the following in their written reply:- 
“If renewable energy devices are supplied, by a supplier, along with supplies of 
services related to construction or engineering or installation or other technical 
services for these renewable energy devices, then the value of supply of goods 
shall be deemed as 70% and the value of supply of services shall be deemed as 
30%. (S. No. 201A of notification No. 01/2017-CT (Rate) refers). Further, GST 
rates are decided by the GST Council in its meetings and no recommendation 
has been made by the Council regarding change in GST rates for procurements 
made in CBG projects. No inputs have been received in this regard from the line 
Ministry i.e. Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, either”. 
 
Central Financial Assistance to CBG Plants:- 
1.67 When the committee have come to know the reasons for discontinuing Central 
Financial Assistance which was earlier provided to CBG plants and Whether the 
Ministry proposes to restart the Central Financial Assistance to CBG plants in view of 
pathetic performance of SATAT scheme to which MNRE in writeen reply hav submitted 
that:- 
“The Ministry of New and Renewable had been implementing “Programme on 
Energy from Urban, Industrial and Agricultural Wastes / Residues” till 31.03.2021. 

Under the programme, Central Financial Assistance (CFA) was provided for 
setting up of CBG plants.  
 Further, for continuation of scheme beyond 31.03.2021 till 2025-26, a 
consolidated proposal named National Bio-Energy Programme was submitted to 
EFC. Now, EFC has recommended Phase-1 of the Program with a budget outlay 
of Rs. 858 Crore, which also includes the committed liabilities. While, the 
National Bioenergy Program will be implemented in two phases with a total 
budget outlay of Rs. 1715 Crore from 2021-22 to 2025-26”.  
1.68 Further, the Committee wanted to know Whether the Ministry proposes to enhance 
the central financial assistance to offset the rising inflation and thereby cost of setting up 
the plant, to which MNRE in their written reply stated that:- 
“Further, it is to mention that performance evaluation of “Programme on Energy 
from Urban, Industrial and Agricultural Wastes / Residues” implemented during 
FY 2018-19 to FY2020-21, Third Party recommended to keep the rate of CFA for 
CBG projects unchanged. Accordingly, CFA rates for CBG projects implemented 
under National Bio-Energy Programme will remain unchanged as i.e. Rs. 4.00 
crore for 4800 kg per day of CBG”.  
1.69 The Committee further wanted to know the status of formulation of standards for 
terms and definitions, construction and design, operation, technical specs, emission 
standards, safety etc. and by when the same is expected to be made enforceable that 
by the Ministry. In this regard, the Ministry have submitted that:- 
“The draft biogas plant standards and guidelines have already been submitted to 
BIS by MNRE on 20th Apr 2022. Now, BIS has constituted three sub-committees 
to finalize the draft for small-, medium- and large-scale biogas plants separately 
and as informed by BIS, it is expected to finalize the draft and publish it by Dec 
2022”. 
1.70 The Committee wanted o know the steps being taken to provide carbon credits and 
its trading and offset mechanism in general and also in specific with respect to CBG 
plants to which the  Ministry have submitted that:- 
“The Energy Conservation (Amendment) Bill, 2022, administered by Ministry of 
Power and introduced in the Parliament, inter alia, seeks toto establish carbon 
credit markets in India. The bill proposes to insert a new clause (w) in section 14 
of the principal Act,after clause (v) as given below:–– 
(w) specify the carbon credit trading scheme” 
1.71 When the Committee wanted to know whether the CBG plant owners are also 
applying for carbon credits and what is the mechanism adopted for the same the 
representative of the Verbio industries during the oral evidence informed that:- 
“The question is, what is the value we are getting for that claim? For example, we 
did this exercise. There is a consulting firm based out of Indore. They did our 
complete evaluation. They gave a value of $5 per tonne of carbon dioxide for one 
carbon credit. To be honest, with the effort which will go into this and getting $5 
for one tonne is not really worth the effort. That is why we did not proceed with 
that topic. So, right now, there is no institutionalised mechanism wherein a fair 

value can be allocated for that carbon credit. Yes, we can get it but then there 
has to be a fair value allocation”.  
Role of KVK, FPOs and CHC in CBG plants:- 
1.72 When the Committee discussed agricultural extension machinery including Krishi 
Vikas Kendras (KVK), FPO, etc. to make special efforts to propagate utilization of 
‘Organic Ferment Manure’ the representative of the Ministry submitted that:- 
“आपने जो Ůʲ िकया है, उसमŐ तीन क ं पोनŐट्स हœ। आपने एƛ टŐशन क े बारे मŐ जानना चाहा है िक 
जो जैिवक अपिशʼ है, उसक े उपयोग को बढ़ावा देने क े िलए क ृ िष मंũालय Ɛ ा कदम उठा 
रहा है। हमारा जो एƛ टŐशन िवंग है, उसक े दो क ं पोनŐट्स हœ। एक ː ेट का एƛ टŐशन िवंग है और 
द ू सरा आईसीएआर का क ृ िष िवǒान क ेȾ  क े माȯ म से एƛ टŐशन िवंग है। उनक े जो सं̾थान हœ, 
उनक े माȯ म से िडमॉɍ Ōेशंस िकए जाते हœ। जैिवक खेती की बढ़ोतरी क े िलए जो 
आईसीएआर क े नेटवकŊ ऑफ इंː ीǨ ूट्स हœ, िजनक े माȯ म से जैिवक क ृ िष को बढ़ावा िदया 
जाता है। उसक े अंतगŊत िविभɄ Ţॉɛ  हœ, उनक े पैक े ज ऑफ Ůैİƃसेज़ बनाए गए हœ। इनक े जो 
पैक े ज ऑफ Ůैİƃसेज़ हœ, इसमŐ क ै से-क ै से जैिवक इनपुट्स का उपयोग होगा, उसक े बारे मŐ 
क े वीक े एज़ क े माȯ म से जानकारी Ůदान की जाती है और फॉमŊर फीड िडमॉɍ Ōेशंस िकए जाते 
हœ। द ू सरा, आपने एफपीओज़ का िजŢ िकया है। भारत सरकार जैिवक खेती की दो पįरयोजनाए ं 
िŢयाİɋत करती है। एक पीक े वीवाई नाम सेपरंपरागत क ृ िष िवकास योजना है। द ू सरा िमशन 
ऑगőिनक वैʞ ू चेनडेवलेपमŐट फॉर नॉथŊ-ईː  रीज़न है। उȅर पूवŎ Ɨेũ क े िलए एक िवशेष 
पįरयोजना है। इन दोनों पįरयोजनाओं क े अंदर िकसानों क े समूह बनाए जाते हœ। इन समूहों क े 
अंतगŊत जैिवक खेती को बढ़ावा देने क े िलए इनपुट्स को सपोटŊ िदया जाता है। उनको टेƋ ोलॉजी, 
वैʞ ू एिडशन और सारी चीजŐ Ůोवाइड की जाती हœ। इसी पįरयोजना क े अंदर कː म हायįरंग 
सŐटसŊ का भी Ůावधान है, जो जैिवक इनपुट्स हœ, उसक े माȯ म से िकसानों और Ƒː सŊ मŐ 
Ůोवाइड कराए जाते हœ। महोदय, मœ यह भी िनवेदन करना चाšंगा िक जब क ंŮे̾ड बॉयो गैस संयंũों 
की बात आई थी, तो उससे दो तरह क े आउटपुट्स आते हœ। एक तो फमőȴेड ऑगőिनक मैɊोर है 
और द ू सरा िलİƓड फमőȴेड आगőिनक मैɊ ोर है। िकसी भी खाद इनपुट को बाजार मŐ बेचने से 
पहले आवʴ क है िक एक फिटŊलाइजर क ं टŌोल ऑडŊर है, जो िक एसŐिशयल कमोिडटीज़ एƃ  क े 
अंतगŊत Ůचिलत Šआ है, उसमŐ इन खादों को शािमल िकया जाता है। क ृ िष मंũालय ने वषŊ 2020 
मŐ इनको फिटŊलाइजर क ं टŌोल ऑडŊर क े अंतगŊत शािमल िकया है। जो िलİƓड और सॉिलड जैिवक 
इनपुट्स जेनरेट हो रहे हœ, इनको कोई भी इंटरŮेɊोर अपने माकőिटंग चैनल क े जįरए पूरे देश क े 
िकसानों को बेच सकता है। उसमŐ िकसी तरह की पाबंदी नहीं है”। 
Elobarating further on the issue:- 
 “मœने िनवेदन िकया है िक इसक े अंदर इनपुट खरीदने का Ůावधान है, िजसक े िलए िकसानों को 
पįरयोजना क े माȯ म से सपोटŊ िदया जाता है। िकसानों क े िलए बाजार मŐ िजतने तरह क े जैिवक 
इनपुट्स उपलɩ  हœ, उनको ůीडम है िक वे उसमŐ से Ɛ ा चुनŐ। जो आउटपुट आ रहा है, संयंũों से 
जो खाद आ रही है, उनको उसका िडमांː Ōेशन क े वीक े और क ृ िष िवʷिवȨालयों क े माȯ म से हम 
करा सकते हœ, तािक उनकी Ɨमता क े बारे मŐ िकसानों को जानकारी हो सक े और वे इनको भी 
चूज कर सकŐ। साथ ही, क ं पनीज को भी इसमŐ आगे आना पड़ेगा, तािक इसकी माकőिटंग हो और 
इसक े बारे मŐ िकसानों को बताया जा सक े”। 
1.73 When the Committee further wanted to know about the demonstration projects for 
management of crop stubble and agriculture residue. The representatives of MoA 
submitted that:- 

“मœने टेƋ ोलॉजी की बात की है िक मंũालय Ȫारा जैिवक खेती मŐ िकस तरह क े टेƋ ोलॉजी और 
िकस तरह क े पैक े ज ऑफ Ůैİƃस तैयार िकए गए हœ, िजससे िकसान अलग-अलग तरह क े Ţॉɛ  
ले सकते हœ। वह ːœडडाŊइजेशन क ृ िष मंũालय Ȫारा िकया गया है। इनपुट का जो इंिडपŐडस है, वह 
िकसानों पर छोड़ा गया है और ˋ ीम क े अंदर इनपुट क े िलए पैसा िकसानों को Ůोवाइड िकया जा 
रहा है। मœने यह िनवेदन िकया है”।  
1.74 The Committee further wanted to know about the role of NABARD in providing 
assistance to CBG plants, the representative of MoA submitted that:-  
“गवनŊमŐट्स को लŐिडंग करते हœ या ː ेट गवनŊमŐट्स क े कारपोरेशंस को लŐिडंग करते हœ। इसक े 
अलावा, नाबाडŊ Ǜ ादातर बœƛ को रीफाइनŐस करता है तािक वे बœƛ आगे एŤीक̵चर क े Ɨेũ मŐ 
लŐिडंग कर सकŐ, िजनमŐ को-ऑपरेिटव बœƛ, रीजनल ŝ रल बœƛ हœ”। 
Bio-manure offtake issues:- 
1.75 The Committee desired to know whether Agriculture and Fertilizer Ministries have 
been involved for off take of bio-manure so that the financial viability of CBG plants are 
improved upon to which the MoPNG in the written reply have submitted that:-  
 “ Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Chemical & Fertilizer are yet to create any 
policy for off-take of bio-manure. Ministry of Fertilizer has been requested to 
provide Market Development Assistance for FOM (@Rs. 1500/ton) and direct 
Fertilizer Companies for mandatory off-take of Fermented Organic Manure 
(FOM) / bio-manure along with chemical fertilizer. Ministry of Agriculture has 
been requested to create enabling ecosystem for promotion of bio-manure 
through research and extension activities. Such measures will increase viability 
of CBG Plants under SATAT initiative”. 
 
1.76 When the Committee wanted to know about the market for fermented organic 
manure/digested bio-gas slurry and the price and if any subsidy is provided by the 
government, the representative of Department of Fertilizers (DoF) during the oral 
evidence submitted that:- 
 “फमŒटेड बायो मैɊ ोर को िपछले साल ही एफसीओ क े अȽर लाया गया था। अगर आप एफसीओ 
मŐ देखŐगे, तो इसमŐ 10 से Ǜ ादा ऑगőिनक फिटŊलाइजसŊ हœ, उनमŐ फमŒटेड ऑगőिनक मैɊ ोर भी हœ। 
जहाँ तक इसमŐ सİɵडी या सपोटŊ की बात है, हमारे यहाँ पहले एक माकőट डेवलपमŐट अिसːŐस 
होता था, वह िसफŊ िसटी कɼ ोː  क े िलए था। िसटी कɼ ोː  का Ǜ ादा खचŊ नहीं हो रहा था और 
उसकी Ɠािलटी मŐ भी क ु छ फॉʐ  थी, इसिलए एमडीए चला नहीं, इसिलए हमŐ डीओई ने बताया 
िक उसको बȽ  कर िदया जाए। वह बȽ हो गया है। अब आगे क े िलए हमने एक एमडीए ˋ ीम 
बनाया है, िजसमŐ सारे ऑगőिनक और बायो फिटŊलाइजसŊ इंƑ ूिडंग फमŒटेड बायो मैɊोर क े िलए 
हमने एक ईएफसी नोट बनाकर डीओई को भेजा है। अभी यह िवचाराधीन है। द ू सरी बात, इसमŐ 
जहाँ तक ऑगőिनक मैɊ ोर की बात है, तो उसमŐ 1500 Ŝपए Ůित मीिटŌक टन माकőट डेवलपमŐट 
अिसːŐस देने का Ůावधान है। यह तो चल ही रहा है। इसक े अलावा, हमने सारे पीएसयूज और 
हमारी कɼ नी को, जहाँ पर कɽ े̾ड बायो गैस क े ɘ ांट्स लगे हœ, उनक े िलː  देते Šए, हमने 
उनको कहा है िक जो वहाँ से मैɊ ोर बनता है, आप इनको बाˋ े ट एŮोच मŐ सारे ː ेट्स या 
फामŊसŊ को अपने आउटलेट्स मŐ उपलɩ  कराए ं गे।  
 
 यह द ू सरी चीज है, जो हमने की है। इसकी मॉिनटįरंग अभी शुŝ  नहीं की है। हाल ही मŐ िमिनː Ōी 
ऑफ पेटŌोिलयम ए ं ड नेचुरल गैस क े साथ एक मीिटंग Šई थी। थडŊ पॉइंट है, जैसा िक Ůाइस क े 

बारे मŐ कहा जा रहा है, Ůाइस तो हम िकसी का भी िनधाŊįरत नहीं करते, अनलेस यूįरया एक ही है, 
िडपाटŊमŐट ऑफ फिटŊलाइजसŊ Ůाइस िफƛ  करता है, अदरवाइज सारे माकőट फोसŊ क े िहसाब से 
ही हœ। इसक े संबंध मŐ िमिनː Ōी ऑफ पेटŌोिलयम ए ं ड नेचुरल गैस क े साथ एक मीिटंग करŐगे। इसे 
देख लŐगे िक इसे िकस तरह करŐ, िजससे जो भी इंटरŮेɊोसŊ उसमŐ जो भी लगाए ं, उनको फायदा 
हो।  इसमŐ आगे कायŊवाही की जाएगी, लेिकन हमारे ˑ र से एमडीए क े िलए और बाˋ े ट 
एŮोच क े िलए हमने सबको बता िदया है। जहां तक फामसŊ का इʴ ू है, एŤीक̵चर क े जॉइंट 
सेŢे टŌी यहां पर हœ। इनसे पहले मœ वहां जॉइंट सेŢे टŌी थी। वहां ऑगőिनक फािमōग की ˋ ी̱ज हœ, 
िजनमŐ फामŊसŊ को एक ˋ ीम क े अंतगŊत एक परंपरागत क ृ िष िवकास योजना है, िजसक े तहत 
उɎŐ यह िमलता है, हम माकőट डेवलपमŐट अिसːŐस देते हœ। अत: दोनों तरफ से हम इसको 
बढ़ावा देने की कोिशश कर रहे हœ”। 
 
MARKET DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE FOR CBG  
 
1.77 The Committee note that a market development assistance of at least rupees 
1500/- per tone was earlier being given to the manufacturers of city compost under the 
Swach Bharat Mission Scheme. The Committee desired to know whether the above 
market development assistance is available for CBG plants based on municipal solid 
waste to which MoPNG in their written reply submitted that:- 
“The Government had approved the policy on promotion of city compost which 
was notified by the Department of Fertilizers on 10.02.2016 wherein Market 
Development Assistance of Rs. 1500/- was provided for scaling up production 
and consumption of city compost. 
  
The scheme of Market Development Assistance (MDA) for scaling up production 
and consumption of city compost has been discontinued after 30th September, 
2021 based on the review of the MDA Policy and recommendations of 
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) in its meeting dated 2nd August, 2021”.  
 
1.78 The Committee desired to know whether assistance from Fertilizers companies 
towards co-marketing of digestate along with chemical fertilizers through their dealers 
network and other related marketing entities to be extended to all the organic manure 
(including biogas plants) producing  plants registered with Department of Fertilizers 
sector to which MoPNG in their written reply submitted that:- 
“Vide letters dated 7.1.2022, 11.5.2022, 27.5.2022 and 19.7.2022, all fertilizer 
marketing companies have been requested to arrange for off-take of Fermented 
Organic Manure (FOM) and other organic and bio-fertilizers with chemical 
fertilizers as a “Basket Approach” to ensure balanced and integrated nutrient 
management for the crops. 
A concept note to promote organic and bio-fertilizers by extending Market 
development Assistance (MDA)   for organic fertilizers and   bio-fertilizers has 
been sent to Department of Expenditure for In-principle Approval. Response from 
Department of Expenditure is awaited.                
 

Training and Manpower 
1.79 The Committee wanted to know whether Ministry has taken up with Ministry of Skill 
Development or oil PSUs for training programme to address the issues of lack of 
sufficient trained manpower to which the MoPNG in their written reply have stated that:- 
 “ Oil PSUs have taken various steps to enhance skill development for CBG 
 sector: 
1. They are offering handholding in technology, financing and other aspects to 
facilitate CBG Plants under SATAT initiative being set up by entrepreneurs. 
Various technical sessions have been held for prospective entrepreneurs with 
involvement of eminent technology institutes like IITs, IISc, etc. and technology 
providers to provide details on SATAT initiative to existing and new applicants.   
2. A dedicated web portal on SATAT initiative (https://satat.co.in) has been 
developed. The portal has details on SATAT initiative documents, financing of 
CBG Plants, technology providers, enablers on CBG, Government Policies, 
Frequently Asked Questions, details on manure marketing. The portal has 
detailed learning modules on CBG technology and financing. The portal also 
offers learning opportunities in plant operation & maintenance, equipment 
suppliers, technology, manure, etc. and is regularly updated with latest details.  
3. IndianOil is in discussion with Skill Council of Green Jobs for development of 
National Occupational Standards and Qualification Packages (QPs) for CBG 
sector. Skill Council for Green Jobs has developed various Qualification Packs 
on different job roles for production and utilization of Compressed Biogas. The 
training packages have been submitted for feedback from various Ministries 
which are expected to be finalized during meeting proposed on 27.1.2022 by 
Ministry of Skill Development”.  
1.80 The Committee inquired into the efforts that have been done by MoPNG to create 
awareness among industries and prospective investors about the SATAT initiative and 
whether any meeting has been done with Industry Associations, Chambers, etc to which 
the MoPNG in their written reply have submitted that:- 
 (i)”The following are the various outreach programmes undertaken to increase 
awareness and popularity of SATAT initiative. 
1. Series of Road shows on CBG & SATAT initiative were organized at various 
cities wherein Industry Associations, Chambers prospective investors, State 
Government officials, prospective entrepreneurs, students, academia etc. have 
participated.   
2. A dedicated portal on SATAT initiative (https://satat.co.in) has been prepared. 
The portal has details on SATAT initiative documents, financing of CBG Plants, 
technology providers, enablers on CBG, Government Policies, Frequently Asked 
Questions, details on manure marketing. The portal has detailed learning 
modules on CBG technology and financing. Entrepreneurs can pose questions 
on the portal for clarification on SATAT initiative. Grievances can also be 
submitted at the portal for time bound resolution.  

3. Series of Technical Seminars conducted for Industries, entrepreneurs, supply 
chain networks, etc. on various aspects of CBG Plants including technology, 
finance and marketing. 
4. Radio Jingle in Hindi and regional languages (Marathi, Tamil, Telugu, Kananda, 
Bengali, Oriya, Malayalam etc) has been broadcasted on SATAT initiative. 
5. Environment Day Celebrations were held on SATAT initiative where Hon’ble 
Prime Minister held live discussions with CBG Plants in presence of various 
stakeholders.  
6. City wise exhibitions are being held on Biofuels & SATAT as part of Azadi Ka 
Amrit Mahotsav celebrations.  
7. A Biofuels exhibition was held at Mahoba, Uttar Pradesh on Biofuels Day viz. 
10.8.2021 which was inaugurated by Hon’ble Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh. 
SATAT initiative was prominently displayed at the exhibition. 
8. Awareness on SATAT initiative is being generated through social media”. 
 
 
Research & Development 
1.81 The Committee sought to know whether any research and development is being 
undertaken by any agencies to reduce the cost of production of CBG and improve 
efficiencies of the CBG plant so that the rate of return is made more attractive for the 
entrepreneurs to which the MoPNG in the written reply have submitted that:-  
“IndianOil R&D Centre has developed IBG-Max, IBG-Plus and BioXeed 
technologies on CBG. IndianOil is finalizing offering of technology for setting up 
of CBG Plants, inoculums for enhancing CBG production from CBG Plants and 
additives for enhancing quality of Fermented Organic Manure. This shall increase 
the viability of CBG Plants and provide more attractive returns to entrepreneurs. 
HPCL R & D has undertaken research activities related to the development of a 
technology for converting lignocellulosic biomass into CBG. The technology 
called as HP-RAMP is being scaled up. Various Government Institutes like IIT 
Delhi, IICT-Hyderabad and other private agencies are also engaged in R&D work 
on CBG”. 
In order to facilitate off-take of CBG, MoPNG has issued guidelines for 
synchronization of CBG produced under the SATAT initiative meeting the 
technical standards with the natural gas in CGD network. GAIL has been given 
responsibility for operationalization of the guidelines. As a consequence of the 
same CBG Injection of CBG in CGD network has been started at Nadiad, Gujarat 
and about 0.16 MMS CM CBG supplied”.  

 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
PART II 
RECOMMENDATION NO.1 
IMPLEMENTATION OF SATAT 
The Committee note that India is one of the fast growing economies in the 
world and energy availability is a major component for any growing economy.  
Considering that the country is dependent to a large extent  on import of crude oil 
for its hydrocarbon needs, it is vulnerable to the volatility of crude oil prices in 
the international market and this necessitates the nation to develop a strategy to 
insulate the economy by developing domestic ally produced alternative  fuels. 
The Government of India has planned to promote usage of natural gas and to 
increase the share in energy mix from the current level of around 6.7 percent to 
15 percent by 2030. 
The Committee further note that the National Policy of Bio fuels 2018 aims 
to increase the role of Bio fuels in the energy and transport sector of the country 
and that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has launched the Sustainable 
Alternative Towards Affordable Transportation (SATAT) initiative in October 2018 
which envisages developing 5000 CBG plants with total production capacity 
equivalent to 54 MMSCMD of gas by 2023-24.  SATAT offers an investment 
potential of Rs. 1.75 lakh crores and generate about 75,000 direct employment. 
The initiative promotes use of Compressed Bio Gas (CBG) in the CNG 
(transport) and PNG (Piped Natural Gas) sector of City Gas Distribution (CGD) 
supplies and is produced from agriculture residues, animal dung, food waste, 
Municipal Solid waste (MSW) and sewage water.  This initiative also integrates the 
other objectives of the government namely doubling of farmers income, import 
reduction, employment generation, waste to wealth creation, etc, and which can 
help the country in meeting the commitments.  
The Committee however note with regret that out of an ambitious target of 
developing 5000 CBG plants by 2023-24, only about 40 CBG plants have been set 
up so far which indicates that lots of ground need to be covered under SATAT 
scheme which is burdened by lack of clarity, procedural hurdles and has not 
enthused the investors/entrepreneurs to come forward to establish CBG plants 
so far. The Committee while observing that MoPNG is approaching this scheme 

as a waste to energy or waste Management initiative for agricultural residue, 
desire that the Ministry should change its vision of SATAT as an initiative to 
produce natural gas domestically in a green and clean form. 
The Committee, appreciate SATAT as a path breaking and transformational 
initiative of the Ministry and hope that if successfully implemented, SATAT would 
strengthen self reliance to meet the energy demands of the country. The 
Committee would, however, caution the Ministry not to rest on its laurels on the 
success in Ethanol Blended Petrol (EBP) programme but take proactive steps and 
be responsive to make the SATAT initiative successful too and recommend  that 
it should ensure successful implementation  by reviewing the progress  at regular 
intervals and address various impediments that pulls back achieving of targets 
set under this initiative. 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 2 
REVIEW OF LETTER OF INTENTS 
  The Committee note that under the SATAT initiative, the production 
of CBG would have multiple benefits vis-à-vis reduction of natural gas import, 
reduction of green house gas (GHG) emissions, reduction in burning of 
agriculture residues, effective waste management, etc. The Committee  further 
note that Oil and Gas Marketing Companies (OGMCs) invite Expression of 
Interest (EOI) from potential investors/entrepreneurs to procure CBG for further 
selling to automotive and commercial customers. Indian Oil Corporation is the 
nodal company for SATAT coordination.                                                                                
  The Committee have been informed by the Ministry that as on 1st 
June 2022, a total of 3263 Letter of Intents (LoIs) have been issued by the Oil 
PSU's.  Number of cases where land has been finalized is 328 and 97 LoIs have 
achieved financial closure.  The Committee observe that 35 CBG plants have 
been commissioned so far and around 40 plants are expected to be 
commissioned by March 2023.  
  The Committee observe that the same entrepreneur/investor has been 
issued a large number of Letters of Intents (Lols) and the reason given for issue 
of such multiple LoIs is that the project involves getting clearances, approvals 
and many other supply chain issues and the plant can be set up as and when the 
necessary approvals are available in a given location. However the Committee 
have been informed by the entrepreneurs that the banks are not extending loans 

for more than one project to the entrepreneur who is holding multiple Letters of 
Intents (Lols). The Department of Financial Services state that PSU Banks would 
like to see the execution of a few CBG plants to which they have already extended 
the loan.   
However, the Committee suspect that the PSUs had issued multiple Letters 
of Intents (Lols) just to show that the targets under SATAT are on course of being 
achieved as it is evident that the same entrepreneur will not get finance for 
different projects from banks without providing adequate security and 
guarantees. The fact that out of 3263 Letters of Intents (Lols), hardly 40 plants 
have been commissioned with less than 24 months to go speak volumes of the 
progress made. Therefore, the Committee desire that there should be proper 
guidelines for issuance of Letters of Intents (Lols) to entrepreneurs including at 
multiple locations 
The Committee deplore MoPNG/ PSU’s for such deceptive methods to 
mislead about the targets and show that the progress under SATAT is good.  The 
Committee while acknowledging the impact of COVID, would like the Ministry to 
review the Letters of Intents (Lols)  issued so far in terms of progress made and 
take all corrective actions and aggressively attract new investors/entrepreneurs. 
The Committee, therefore recommend that the Ministry should set up a 
Committee to review the Letters of Intents (Lols) issued and also to frame 
guidelines for issue of fresh Letters of Intents (Lols). 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 3 
NBCC COORDINATION MECHANISM 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas is 
implementing the National Policy of Bio Fuels 2018 which aims to increase use of 
bio fuel in the country. The Committee also note that the success of CBG 
(SATAT) scheme is very much contingent on the well coordinated efforts among 
various Ministries/Stakeholders/Organizations by resolving the challenges and 
bottlenecks in a time bound manner. This can be achieved by establishing a two-
way communication between stakeholders and Govt. and within govt. bodies.  
There are roles for several Ministries for successful implementation of the CBG 
project and coordination amongst different Ministries is essential. 
The Committee observe that the National Bio Fuel Coordination 
Committee(NBCC) is already in place as a coordination mechanism which has 

representatives from various Ministries and headed by the Hon’ble Minister of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas to provide overall coordination, effective end-to-end 
implementation and monitoring of bio fuels.  The Committee, however, find it 
surprising to note that since its inception, NBCC has held only one meeting till 
date which refletcts the lack of seriousness by the Ministry to this mechanism for 
SATAT initiative. The Committee would, therefore, recommend that the MoPNG 
should convene meetings of NBCC at regular intervals to sort out issues in 
implementation of the programme and may also form sub committees involving 
the concerned Ministries to sort out specific and pointed issues.   
RECOMMENDATION NO. 4 
SINGLE WINDOW CLEARANCE  
 The Committee note that the Compressed Bio-Gas (CBG) plants need 
various approvals and clearances from different agencies  of  Central, State Govt. 
and local administration. The Committee note that the implementation of CBG 
(SATAT) has been delayed due to multiplicity of agencies involved in granting 
clearances and permissions. Self certification and undertaking may also be 
studied for feasibility in place of mandatory approvals and NOCs etc. as the case 
may be.   
 The Committee exhort the Ministry to consider issuing a blanket approval 
or with a half-yearly/yearly reconciliation mechanism and a forum for joint 
consultative mechanism involving elected representatives from local and 
state/district level should be evolved to iron out all the differences arising among 
various agencies and in this regard, there can be a “Infrastructure Approvals 
Committee” at State/District level which can take up such clearances and fast 
track them. The Committee observe that the Ministry should Coordinate with 
various Government Departments/Agencies including Financial institutions, State 
Governments and other stake holders to arrange and implement various enablers 
for development of CBG sector and  Expeditious allocation of land to CBG 
producers by the State Government would be helpful in developing CBG Projects. 
 CBG (SATAT) is of national importance and therefore, there is a need to 
bring uniformity in permissions and clearances from various central / state / local 
bodies / departments to lay pipeline network.   In order to streamline the process 
of approvals, the Committee desire that deemed approval mechanism should be 
put into place so that the necessary clearances and NoCs may be obtained in a 

defined time period. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry 
should strive for a single-window mechanism for a fast track system of obtaining 
approvals and clearances which will help in reducing the time to process such 
permissions.  
RECOMMENDATION  NO. 5 
CENTRAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE (CFA)  
 The Committee note that Ministry of New & Renewable Energy (MNRE) was 
implementing a scheme called Central Financial Assistance (CFA) for extending 
support to new and renewable energy projects. The Committee note that since 
April 2021, the Central Financial Assistance program for biogas/CBG projects has 
been discontinued and this has served as a major setback to the industry. The 
Committee have learnt that the CBG plants fall under new and renewable energy 
category and hence these plants are entitled for CFA.  However, as the scheme is 
not in place, this facility is denied to entrepreneurs who come forward to set up 
CBG plants.  The Committee strongly feel that to mainstream the industry, which 
is still in its introductory/nascent stage, the continuation of CFA scheme is 
important. The Committee recommend that MOPNG should take up with MNRE 
and Ministry of Finance for reintroduction of this Central Financial Assistance 
Scheme to incentivise and enthuse entrepreneur to set-up of CBG plants in the 
country. 
  The Committee also desire that MoPNG may consider to move towards Generation 
Based Incentive (GBI) instead of Capex-based subsidy for CBG plants which will provide 
incentives for producing gas and keep the plants running and functional rather than just 
setting up the plant. The Committee would like determination of appropriate GBI 
(price/per Kg of CBG) under different feedstocks to be estimated by the Ministry in this 
regard.  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 6 
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FOR PETROLEUM SECTOR 
 The Committee note that there are many projects which are being 
implemented by the MOPNG to enhance the energy security of the country in the 
hydro carbon area including bio fuel projects for blending with petrol, diesel and 
gas.  The Committee feel that with the plethora of initiatives being taken up by the 
Ministry, there is a need for financing these activities particularly at the initial 

stage by understanding the risks and reward associated with the project for 
which the expertise is available in the Oil PSUs who are operating for a long time 
in this sector.  The Committee, therefore desire that the Oil PSUs which have 
strong cash flows and healthy balance sheets and consistently profit making 
should come forward to setup a financial institution for financing all bio-fuel and 
clean energy projects that are launched or likely to be launched in the future by 
the Ministry.  
 There are institutions like Power Finance Corporation (PFC), Rural 
Electrification Corporation (REC), Housing & Urban Development. Corporation 
(HUDCO), Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency (IREDA) etc. in different 
Ministries of the Government for financing and monitoring specific sector 
projects. The Committee would desire the MoPNG should nudge the petroleum 
sector oil PSUs to establish a financial institution owned and managed by them 
as  shareholders which will focus on clean, green and renewable energy bio fuel 
projects taken up by Ministry of PNG like Ethanol production for Ethanol Blended 
Petrol (EBP), Bio-diesel Projects, CBG projects, etc,. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that Ministry should set up a PSU financial institution for funding oil 
and gas sector project under its administrative control. 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 7 
BIO FUEL INFRASTRCUTURE FUND 
 The Committee note that the SATAT scheme is a laudable and ambitious 
initiative of the Government which can help the country to meet its energy 
requirements and strengthen the energy security.  However, the action taken by 
the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas to implement the scheme have been very 
lukewarm and indifferent.  The Committee would still give the benefit of doubt to 
the Ministry as the country was fighting the Covid pandemic during the last two 
years.  However, as the situation has improved to a considerable extent and 
economic activities have picked up, the Ministry should now focus on taking 
necessary steps to see that the SATAT initiative is implemented and all objectives 
and targets are met.  
 The Committee note that an scheme that may be replicated in this regard is 
the AIF (Agriculture Infrastructure Fund) facilitated by NABARD and the Ministry 
of Agriculture. In this regard, the Committee are of the view that a fund in the 
name of Bio Fuel Infrastructure fund in the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 

may be created in a suitable way either from Oil Industry Development Board 
(OIDB) funds or budgetary allocations for development of this sector quickly and 
without waiting for other government agencies to finance them.  Ministry may 
furnish the action taken in this regard. 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 8 
COLLATERAL SECURITY FOR CBG PROJECTS 
 The Committee note that Reserve Bank of India has included CBG projects 
under Priority Sector Lending and public sector banks are extending loans to 
CBG plants. Canara Bank has been nominated as Nodal Banker under SATAT. 
State Bank of India, Bank of Baroda, Canara Bank and some other banks have 
developed exclusive loan product for financing of CBG projects. World Bank, 
ADB and JICA are working for Detailed Project Report for multilateral cheaper 
credit to CBG plants.  
 However, the Committee note that the banks are not extending loans for 
more than one project to the same entrepreneur who is holding multiple LoI 
issued by Oil and Gas Marketing (OGMCs) companies. The Department of 
Financial Services state that they would like to see the execution of these plants 
to which they have already extended the loan.  One of the hurdles faced by 
entrepreneurs is that the banks seek collateral security for financing the projects. 
The Committee have been informed by the entrepreneurs that the gas purchase 
agreement between the Oil and Gas Marketing Companies (OGMCs) and CBG 
plant operators for taking up the entire off-take of the gas at pre-determined price 
should also be taken into consideration by the Banks as a means of security and 
if required an escrow account between the three parties namely, CBG Plants 
Management, OGMCs and banks can be entered into where the banks may get 
their loan service from this account.  The Committee are of the view that there is 
merit in this suggestion and recommend that MOPNG should hold consultation 
with Ministry of Finance on this issue and ease the collateral security burden on 
the entrepreneurs as in done under Ethanol Blended Petrol (EBP) Progamme. 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 9 
INVESTMENT IN CBG PROJECTS BY OIL PSUS 
 The Committee note that CBG projects are being implemented with the 
expectation that private entrepreneurs and investors will come forward and the 
role of oil PSUs shall be to provide support to these projects in the form of 

assured offtake of CBG produced from these plants.    The Committee observe 
that IOC has invested in 5 CBG projects and GAIL and HPCL in one each whereas 
the upstream PSUs like ONGC and  OIL  which have specific mandate relating to 
production of natural gas and marketing of natural gas respectively have not 
invested in any project so far. The Committee find it surprising to note that PSUs 
are not interested in setting up of CBG projects on their own despite domestic 
natural gas production being a mandate of the upstream oil PSUs. The 
Committee, therefore, would like Oil PSUs to aggressively enter into CBG sector 
through company owned company operated (COCO) model or joint ventures with 
other OMCs/entrepreneurs.  
Further, the OMCs also have a responsibility to meet the LPG demand in 
the country both in domestic and commercial sector and  a large part of their LPG 
requirement   is imported to meet the demand .These companies have restricted 
themselves to buy the Bio- gas from the CBG projects.  The Committee feel this is 
unacceptable and want all the PSUs to invest and promote CBG projects 
seriously with their own investment.  The Committee also expect that the Ministry 
should persuade the oil PSUs particularly upstream oil PSU's like ONGC, OIL and  
GAIL in particular to set up a good number of CBG projects in the country as this 
falls within their mandate of producing natural gas.  The PSU's with their 
professional and project management competence should set aside sizeable fund 
for investment in these projects and able to execute the projects in time bound 
and efficient manner.  This will also demonstrate the viability of these projects 
and will give confidence to investors.  This will also allow the PSUs and the 
Ministry to gain valuable experience to sort out various issues and put in place 
required policy measures to ensure that the CBG initiative is successfully 
implemented and enhance the energy security of the nation. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that all the OIL PSU's should seriously look into SATAT 
initiative and invest in CBG plants with their own funds. 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 10 
ESTABLISHING A CREDIT GUARANTEE FUND (CGF) 
 The Committee note the Entrepreneurs are facing huge problems in getting 
financial assistance for CBG plants. The Committee feel that lack of credit is one of the 
major factors due to which not many CBG plants have come up and therefore there is an 
urgent need to address access to credit by evolving innovative financial 

mechanisms/products. The Committee suggest that there should be a Credit Guarantee 
Fund (CGF) established for CBG project financing, like the one launched under Credit 
Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE) by Small Industries 
Development Bank of India (SIDBI) and Government of India for stimulating collateral-
free lending to Micro Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) borrowers and the same can 
be thought for CBG projects as well. This shall enable risk reduction of and instill 
confidence in the Financial Institutions for undertaking credit exposure in the CBG 
industry.   
 The Committee also recommend that there can be refinancing of loans by Indian 
Renewable Energy Development Agency Limited (IREDA) under MNRE that can directly 
enter into MoU with Public Sector Banks wherein every CBG project that meets certain 
basic needs (for being qualified as a potent project) would be provided the benefit of 
concessional rate lending by IREDA via the bank/NBFC for onward lending.  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 11 
ASSURED BIO-MANURE OFFTAKE  
 
 The Committee note that one of the major by-products of the CBG plants is the Bio-
manure and there is no assurance for off take of bio manure or any other long term 
supply agreements at a reasonable and marketable price. The CBG plants cannot 
sustain themselves solely through production and marketing of Bio-gas and hence sale of 
bio manure will enhance the financial viability of CBG plants. The Committee also note 
that this bio-manure can solve the problems of nutrients of soil and also improve the soil 
health bringing innumerable benefits to the agriculture sector also. The Committee feel 
that a holistic view must be taken off the CBG plants and Bio-manure must be seen as 
revenue stream of CBG projects. The Committee further desire that in order to promote 
and popularize use of organic manure there should be clear earmarking ‘Production 
date’ and ‘Best used before date, safety measures and means to prevent nutrient loss 
during transportation and similar other measures to educate and create awareness in 
the public domain so that there is no apprehension regarding their use. 
 MOPNG in coordination with Ministry of Agriculture through its agricultural 
extension machinery including Krishi Vikas Kendras (KVK), FPO, etc. must make 
special efforts to propagate utilization of ‘Organic Ferment Manure’ on farmland. The 
Committee therefore recommend that MoPNG should devise a mechanism in 

consultation with Dept of Agriculture and Dept of Fertilisers to ensure assured off-take 
of bio-manure of entire quantity of CBG with long term agreement including the price 
and agencies assigned for purchase of bio manure to attract investment in this sector.  
   
RECOMMENDATION NO. 12 
QUOTA FOR BIOMETHANE INJECTION IN NATURAL GAS GRID 
 The Committee feel that Ministry should  reorient its approach and the various 
facets of the scheme must be fully addressed and utilized. As the sources of CBG are 
diversed and scattered, the CBG plants must be seen as decentralized gas fields. The 
Committee feel that this will enhance the domestic gas production as the targets under 
CBG (SATAT) are equal to the current domestic natural gas production. The success of 
SATAT for sure will reduce dependence on import of natural gas and simultaneously 
generating new sources of income and employment within the country.  
 The Committee desire that the CBG plants with varying capacities must be 
channelized/synchronized with National Gas Grid. The Committee has learnt that Gas 
Utility major, GAIL (India) Limited is already in the process of finalizing the operational 
modalities for the supply of CBG co-mingled with domestic gas. The Committee suggest 
that while the process for the same may be expedited, there should be a uniform price of 
City gas/ PNG across all CGD entities (private/PSUs). One such mechanism to arrive at a 
uniform gas price may be through a gas pool pricing mechanism, as is presently applicable 
for Natural Gas supply to Fertilizer plants.    
 The Committee also recommend that there should be phase-wise (short term and 
long term) blending quota/mix of co-mingled CBG in the total domestic gas supply to the 
CGD sector. The success of ethanol blended petrol and diesel has already laid the 
precedent and the same may be adopted in this case as well. 

 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 13 
CBG OFF-TAKE PRICE  
 The Committee note that the CBG plants have very low internal rate of return 
(IRR) and the CBG pricing needs to be remunerative to the marketing companies. The 
Committee appreciate the efforts made by the Ministry in raising the CBG prices to Rs. 
54/kg plus GST and also pegging CBG prices with that of CNG this is expected to provide a 
cushion to marketing companies. The Committee however, are concerned to observe that 
this pricing does not take into account the feedstock by which CBG is produced. The 
Committee have learnt that this uniform pricing incentivizes certain feedstocks while 
discouraging others. The present benchmarking of CBG prices under SATAT to the CNG 
prices is a much-appreciated initiative towards achieving fair pricing of CBG. However, 
the pricing needs to be more robust and flexible upon factoring in the cost economics of a 
CBG plant for different feed stocks as well.  
  The Committee desire that a  guideline needs to be issued by MoPNG in 
coordination with various agencies w.r.t. appropriate Market price for CBG that ensures 
the viability of a CBG plant, creating transparency in rational price discovery and 
promoting long-term investment plans of investors/promoters. The Committee further 
recommend that the Ministry should establish the pricing mechanism of CBG produced 
from different types of feed stocks and cues can be taken from the differential pricing 
(FRP) mechanism for bio-ethanol from different grades of molasses and a similar approach 
can be replicated in the case of CBG sector as well. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 14 
MARKET DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE FOR BIO MANURE 
 The Committee note that in the CBG plants, one of the revenue streams is 
selling of Bio-manure which is a bye product in the production of CBG. The 
Committee further note that the OGMCs under the MoPNG have already 
announced the price for purchase of CBG. The Ministry of Chemical and 
Fertilizers has also issued notification under Fertilser Control Order (FCO) to treat 
the Bio-slurry as organic Bio-manure. The Committee note that the market 
development assistance was provided by the Department of Fertilisers for 
promotion and consumption of city compost has been discontinued after 30 
September 2021. Therefore, the MoPNG should take the matter with Department 
of Fertilizers/Department of Expenditure for continuation of market development 

assistance for offtake of fermented Bio-manure to ensure balance and integrated 
nutrient management for the crops. The Committee therefore recommend that the 
MoPNG to persuade Ministry of Finance for MDA for incentivizing CBG 
entrepreneurs.        
RECOMMENDATION NO. 15 
FEEDSTOCKS ISSUES FOR CBG PRODUCTION 
 The Committee note that the Biomass sources like municipal solid waste, 
sewage treatment plant waste, cattle dung, sugarcane press mud, agricultural 
residue etc. are some of the feedstocks to produce Biogas through the process of 
an aerobic decomposition. The availability of these feedstocks are varied in 
nature as the municipal solid waste and sugarcane press mud are available for 
most of the year, whereas, agriculture residue would be available only for couple 
of months in a year. This necessitates that CBG plants which use agricultural 
residue as feedstocks may also need huge land parcel to store the agriculture 
residue for the remaining part of the year as the residue is available only during 
harvest period.  
 Entrepreneurs who appeared before the Committee stated that there is 
huge uncertainty over the supply and price of agriculture residue as the farmers 
demand a higher price to supply to the CBG plant. The entrepreneur has limited 
choice as the feedstock has to be sourced from neighbouring region and 
transportation from longer distances will add the cost of feedstock. The 
entrepreneurs demand support from State Governments in the form of assured 
raw material supply and also land availability at concessional price for long term 
to store  the feedstocks. However, the Committee note in the case of municipal 
solid waste there are no such problems as most of the cities and towns have 
huge land fills with the municipal wastes. Similarly, the sugar factories also has 
sugar press mud.  
 Therefore, the Ministry should focus on municipal solid waste and sugar 
press mud as the preferred feedstock for setting-up of CBG plant all over the 
country which the Committee feel is a low hanging fruit. The MoPNG should hold 
consultation/discussions with Ministry of Urban Development for nudging urban 
local bodies to setup CBG plant with the support of Oil PSU's / State 
Governments and use Muncipal Solid Waste as feedstock. The CBG from these 
plants can be used for urban transport and City Gas Distribution (CGD) network 

in these cities. Similarly, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  should 
discuss with concerned Ministry/Indian Sugar Mills Association (ISMA)/ Sugar 
mills to encourage them to invest in CBG plants as well, and  sell them to OMCs 
with whom they already have good relationship due to ethanol blending 
programme, The Committee, therefore,recommend that MoPNG should prioritise 
its focus on municipal solid waste and sugarcane press mud as feed stocks to 
promote the CBG projects and make it  a reality and successful rather than focus 
on agriculture residue which is saddled with problems . 
 The Ministry may also rope in urban municipal bodies, agriculture mandis, 
cooperative sector, fertilizer companies, Farmers’ Producer Organisations 
(FPOs), Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK), NAFED etc. to promote CBG projects in their 
area of operations.    
 The Committee recommend the MOPNG to hold consultations with State 
Governments and endeavour to constitute State level coordination Committee in 
all states and to try to impress upon them to fix price for different types of bio 
mass so that there shall be no uncertainty about pricing and availability of bio 
mass for the CBG plants. 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 16 
GST  ISSUES IN CBG 
The Committee note that the Compressed Bio Gas under SATAT is 
basically used for bio CNG in transport sector and PNG in the domestic sector.  
The Ministry has also permitted the CBG produced from the CBG plants to be 
injected into the CGD network under the CBG-CGD Synchronization Scheme and 
the responsibility of connecting the CBG plant to the CGD network within a 
distance of 10 kms. would lie with bio gas producers. 
 The Committee note that at present various petroleum products are coming 
under different tax regimes.  Bio gas is under GST and CNG is under excise duty 
and when CBG is mixed with CNG which is permitted , then it attracts double 
taxation as VAT is also levied in addition to excise duty.  This cascading tax 
structure create confusions and the same gas attracts different tax application 
which may create complications and litigations and increase the tax burden and 
end price.  The Committee desire that there is a need to have uniformity in the tax 
structure on the products likely CBG, CNG, PNG and when CBG is mixed with as 

a CNG or PNG.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas should hold consultations with Department of 
Revenue for clarity, rationalizing the tax structure and determination of applicable 
tax and if required, approach GST Council where required.   
RECOMMENDATION NO. 17 
TAX ISSUES FOR CBG PLANTS 
 The Committee note that Section 80JJA of the Income-tax Act, 1961 provides for 
deduction of 100% from the profits and gains derived from the business of collecting and 
processing or treating of biodegradable waste for generating power or producing bio-
fertilizers, bio-pesticides or other biological agents or for producing bio-gas or making 
pellets or briquettes for fuel or organic manure for a period of five consecutive assessment 
years beginning with the assessment year in which such business commences. 
 The Committee feel that CBG plants must be seen as a sunrise industry and 
recommend that special concessions must be provided at nascent stage and unambiguous 
continuation of the 80JJA scheme under the new sections in the IT amendment shall be 
provided for the ten years which will serve as the much-needed impetus, particularly to the 
entrepreneurs/ Start-Ups foraying into the industry.  
 The Committee observe that the GST Council recently notified of escalation of GST 
slab from 5% to 12% for biogas plant-related equipment and their parts. This is expected 
to provide incentive to the domestic industry to avail the input tax credit under GST 
regime. However, the Committee note that, due to these ambiguities, clarifications are 
sought by Indirect Tax Officials from CBG plants.  
 The Committee note that clarity in tax issues goes a long way in attracting 
investments in a sector. The disparity intax structure for CBG Plants needs to be bridged 
with uniformity in the taxation of Goods and Services for all procurements in CBG 
projects. The Committee therefore recommend that these issues should be addressed by 
MoPNG in consultation with Department of Revenue. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 18 
AWARENESS AND TRAINED MANPOWER 
 The Committee note that the CBG sector is still in its infancy and there are many 
risks involved in the business leading to a lot of hardships being faced by entrepreneurs 
and promoters. There is a lack of credit supply to the CBG sector and it is also plagued by 
structural constraints and not yet in a position to come up with a definite revenue stream. 

The Committee therefore feel that there is an urgent need to create awareness among 
financial institutions regarding the viability and potentialities of CBG sector in generating 
employment and income opportunities, however, the gestation period is not fully developed 
or understood. The Committee also desire that all the bottlenecks and challenges facing the 
industry must be identified and modalities and solutions to them be properly identified and 
disseminated to the various stakeholders in a coordinated and time bound manner. The 
Committee therefore recommend that a proper plan has to be formulated to train the 
Financial Institution Officials (across the hierarchy) to dispel the notion of the undue 
inherent risk associated with CBG industry. 
 The Committee further note that the sector is still evolving and there is a lack of 
sufficient trained manpower and recommend  that MoPNG in consultation with Ministry 
of Skill Development should prepare a curriculum/training module to impart skills in the 
sector to take care of the future manpower needs.  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 19 
CARBON TRADING 
 The Committee note that CBG (SATAT) scheme has immense potential in waste 
management in the country.  CBG plants have a potential for an efficient management of 
stubble burning which causes immense environmental damage and consequently damaging 
the image of the country as a whole. An important feature of the CBG plants is that it 
converts bio-gas out of multiple feedstocks including waste material and therefore can 
contribute immensely towards Swachch Bharat Mission as well.  
 The Committee recommend that MoPNG in coordination with the MNRE 
should evolve a mechanism whereby they assess the carbon footprint that would 
be generated had CBG plants not managed the waste material. This will help the 
nation in achieving India’s commitments of  carbon net zero by 2070 made at 
COP-26 Glasgow. The carbon credits so generated by CBG plants can be 
monetized and improve its financial viability and revenue stream accordingly 
which  provides a win-win situation for all the stakeholders .  
RECOMMENDATION NO. 20 
Global Cooperation on Biofuels 
 The Committee note that India is the third-largest consumer and importer 
of oil in the world. The Committee note that the Government has announced 
National Policy on Biofuels 2018 to promote and include biofuels in the country’s 

energy basket to target climate change concerns and also to reduce dependence 
on import of crude oil. The NPB-2018 envisages production and blending of 
ethanol, biodiesel and CBG as alternative fuels with traditional fuels like Petrol, 
Diesel and Natural Gas.  
 The Committee appreciate the efforts in achieving the 10 per cent ethanol 
blended petrol and hope that with a slew of measures being undertaken the target 
of 20 per cent blending can be achieved by 2024-25. This is expected to give a 
general boost to Biofuels which will also help achieve carbon reduction goals and 
commitments made at CoP26, Glasgow.  
 The Committee note that many of the countries like Brazil, US, Indonesia, 
China and Germany produce biofuels. It is hoped an alliance among such 
countries would create an ecosystem for fuel standards and engines as well as 
cooperation for a quicker adoption of latest state of the art technologies. This will 
pave way for global cooperation, funding and technology development which will 
help other countries also to fight carbon emission and climate change concerns. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that India should pitch for a global 
cooperation on Biofuels on the lines of The International Solar Alliance (ISA).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
 19th December, 2022 
 28th Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka)     
RAMESH BIDHURI, 
                          Chairperson,  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                        
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 

ANNEXURE-I 
MINUTES  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2021-22) 
 
SEVENTH SITTING 
(05.01.2022) 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 5 January, 2022 from 1100 hrs. to 
1300 hrs. in Main Committee Room, PHA, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Ramesh Bidhuri - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Smt. Chinta Anuradha 
3.  Dr. Ramesh Chand Bind 
4.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya 
5.  Shri Santosh Kumar 
6.  Shri Rodmal Nagar 
7.  Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
8.  Shri Unmesh Bhaiyyasaheb Patil 
9.  Shri Chandra Sekhar Sahu 
10.  Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
11.  Dr. Kalanidhi Veeraswamy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12.  Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
13.  Shri Ripun Bora 
14.  Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
15.  Shri Rambhai Mokariya 
16.  Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
17.  Dr. V. Sivadasan 
18.  Shri A. Vijaykumar 
19.  Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri H. Ram Prakash - Director  
3. Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Mohan Arumala - Under Secretary 
 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of P&NG 
1. Shri Pankaj Jain - Secretary 
2. Dr. Navneet Mohan Kothari - Joint Secretary (Marketing) 

 
 
Representatives of IOCL 
 
1. Shri S.M. Vaidya - Chairman 
2. Shri S.S. Pandita  ED (Coord.) 
 
Representatives of BPCL 
 
1. Shri P.S. Ravi - ED (Retail) 
 
Representatives of HPCL 
 
1. Shri D.K. Pattanaik - ED 
 
GAIL 
 
1. Shri Manoj Jain - CMD 
2. Shri Sanjay Kumar - ED 
 
 
2.   At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed Members of the 
Committee and representatives of the Ministry of P&NG/Oil PSUs to the sitting of 
the Committee and informed that the sitting was convened to have a briefing on 
the subject "Review of Implementation of CBG (SATAT)”.  Thereafter, the 
representatives of the Ministry got themselves introduced to the Committee and 
then, made a power point presentation on the subject. 
 
3.   Thereafter, Members of the Committee raised several issues related to the 
subject such as progress made in meeting the targets of CBG, various 
bottlenecks being faced in the implementation of the scheme, efforts made to 
popularize the scheme, number of entrepreneurs and CBG plants under the 
scheme, financial incentives to promote participation, involving MoHUA and 
MNRE for an effective implementation of the scheme, timeline for commissioning 
of Letters of Intent (LoIs), reasons for setting up of only 16 CBG plants against 
2744, utilization of CSR funds for promotion of the scheme, evolving inter-
departmental coordination for monitoring, revival of closed biogas plants, 
management of stubble burning and agricultural waste through CBG, financial 

viability of CBG plants for promotion of entrepreneurship, cluster based approach 
involving various villages for CBG plants, integrated processing of biomass 
including municipal solid waste, training of manpower in coordination with the 
Ministry of Skill Development.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Thereafter, the Chairperson thanked representatives of the Ministry of P&NG/Oil 
PSUs for expressing their views and answering queries raised by the Members of the 
Committee.  Further, to the queries where replies were not readily available, the Ministry 
was instructed to furnish the same to the Secretariat within ten days. 
 
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings is kept in the Branch for record. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
**** 
 
 

ANNEXURE-II 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2021-22) 
 
FIFTEENTH SITTING 
(08.06.2022) 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 8th June, 2022 from 1200 hrs. to 1320 
hrs. in Main Committee Room, PHA, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Ramesh Bidhuri - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Dr. Ramesh Chand Bind 
3.  Shri Girish Chandra 
4.  Shri Topon Kumar Gogoi 
5.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya 
6.  Shri Unmesh Bhaiyyasaheb Patil 
7.  Shri M.K. Raghavan 
8.  Dr. Bharatiben Dhirubhai Shiyal 
9.  Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
10.  Dr. Kalanidhi Veeraswamy 
                      RAJYA SABHA 
11. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
12. Smt. Kanta Kardam 
13. Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
14. Shri Rambhai Mokariya 
15. Dr. V. Sivadasan 
16. Shri A. Vijayakumar 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Y. M. Kandpal - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Brajesh Kumar Singh - Deputy Secretary 
 

Representatives of the Ministry of P&NG 
IOCL 
 
1. Shri S.M. Vaidya - Chairman, IOCL  
2. Shri Shantanu Gupta - Exe. Director (AE&SD) 
3. Shri J.S. Oberoi - Exe. Director (Coordn) 
4. Shri Rajesh Nayyar - CGM (Coordn) 
 
Representatives of GAIL  
 
1. Shri Manoj Jain - CMD  
2. Shri M V Iyer - Director (BD) 
 
Representative of HPCL 
 
1. Shri Pushp K. Joshi - CMD 
 
Representative of BPCL 
 
1. Shri Arun Kumar Singh - C&MD  
 
Representatives of IGL  
 
1. Shri Sanjay Kumar - MD  
2. Shri Sanjeev Bhatia - VP 
 
 
2.  At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed Members of the Committee 
and apprised them about the agenda of the sitting i.e. "Review of Implementation of 
CBG (SATAT)”.  
 
3.   Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of petroleum & Natural Gas 
and Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs), GAIL and IGL were called in. After 
customary introduction, the representatives of the Ministry made a power point 
presentation to the Committee on progress made in the implementation of 
SATAT scheme since last sitting of the Committee held on 05.01.2022.  
 
4. Thereafter, Members of the Committee raised several issues related to 
very slow progress of the scheme, very poor response to the Letter of Intents 
(LoIs) issued by OMCs, availability of finance to entrepreneurs, withdrawal of 
government subsidy to CBG plants, coordination with various Ministries, setting 
1. Shri Pankaj Jain - Secretary 
2. Dr. Navneet Mohan Kothari - Joint Secretary 

up of single window for regulatory clearances, status of planned CBG projects in 
Delhi, prices of CBG being given to producers and mechanism of its fixation, total 
production of CBG etc.  
 
5. Further, the Committee also discussed various issues affecting the 
success of the SATAT scheme such as supply and pricing of organic manure 
and slurry, laying of infrastructure for taking off CBG from plants, injection of 
CBG into CNG pipeline, profitability of CBG plants etc.   
 
6. The representatives of the Ministry/OMCs furnished clarifications to the 
queries raised by the Members. On some of the points on which the information  
was not readily available with the representatives, the Chairperson asked them to 
furnish written replies on the same within 7 days to the Lok Sabha Secretariat.                                       
 
7.  The Chairperson then thanked the representatives of the MoPNG/OMCs for 
giving valuable information on the subject before the Committee.  
 
8. The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
9. A copy of the verbatim proceedings is kept in the Branch for record. 
  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
 
 

ANNEXURE-III  
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2021-22) 
 
NINETEENTH SITTING 
(28.07.2022) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, 28th July, 2022 at 1700 hrs. in Committee 
Room ‘D’, PHA New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Ramesh Bidhuri - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Ramesh Chand Bind 
3.  Shri Pradyut Bordoloi 
4.  Shri Girish Chandra 
5.  Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
6.  Shri Unmesh Bhaiyyasaheb Patil 
7.  Shri M. K. Raghavan 
8.  Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
9.  Shri Lallu Singh 
10.  Shri Ajay Tamta 
                      RAJYA SABHA 
11. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
12. Shri Rambhai Mokariya 
13. Shri Subhas Chandra Bose Pilli 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Y. M. Kandpal - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri H. Ram Prakash - Director 
3. Shri Brajesh Kumar Singh - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
Representatives and entrepreneurs from CBG Plants 
 
1 Dr. Jyoti Prakash Das 
 
- Phoenix India R&D Group 
 
2 Shri Deepak Agarwal - IL&FS Environmental Infrastructure & 

  Services Limited 
 
 
3 Shri Rohit Chauhan 
 
4 Shri Ashish kumar - Verbio India Pvt. Ltd. 
 
5 Dr. A.R. Shukla 
 
- Indian Biogas Association 
6 Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
 
7 Shri Atul Kharate - IOT Biogas Pvt. Ltd. 
 
 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of P&NG 
 
 
Representatives of PSUs  
 
 
1 Shri S.M. Vaidya - Chairman, IOCL 
2 Shri Arun Kumar Singh - CMD, BPCL 
3 Shri Pushp K. Joshi - CMD, HPCL 
4 Shri Manoj Jain - CMD, GAIL 
5 Shri Sanjay Jain - MD, IGL 
6 Shri M.V. Iyer - Director, GAIL 
7 Shri Sukhmal Jain - ED, BPCL 
8 Shri P.S. Ravi - ED, BPCL 
9 Shri Shantanu Gupta - ED, IOCL 
10 Shri Dilip K. Pattanaik - ED, HPCL 
11 Shri Alok K. Gupta - ED, HPCL 
12 Shri Shuvendu Gupta - ED, HPCL 
 
2.   At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed Members of the Committee 
and apprised them about the agenda of the sitting i.e. "Review of Implementation of 
CBG (SATAT)”. 
3. In the first instance, the stakeholders of CBG plants were called in to give oral 
evidence to the Committee. After customary introduction, the representatives of the 
CBG plants gave a Power Point presentation with respect to functioning of the CBG 
plants. The Committee was also apprised of the various challenges / bottlenecks being 
faced in running CBG plants viz discontinuation of Central Finance Assistance (CFA), 
non-harmonised GST structure, issues of income tax on CBG, Financial Assistance for 
setting up CBG plants, need for pricing on calorific value, introducing interest 
subvention scheme, issues of collateral security, indexation of CBG price to CNG etc,. 
1. Shri Pankaj Jain - Secretary 
2. Dr. Navneet Mohan Kothari - JS (Marketing & Gas Pricing) 

Subsequently, Members of the Committee raised several issues related to the subject 
like the facilities available to entrepreneurs for installing CBG plant, the availability of 
feedstock and their quality, review of LoI issued, the viability of CBG plants in the 
backdrop of wide swings in the price of CNG, the market for organic manure and 
slurry, the rate of return on the investment, feed-stock based pricing, carbon credit 
scheme etc,. The stakeholders from CBG plants provided inputs on hurdles based by 
the scheme and also highlighted the various issues hampering the progress of CBG 
plants. 
 Thereafter, the representatives of Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas and 
IOCL, GAIL, HPCL & BPCL were called in to give clarification on the various 
issues raised in the first half of the meeting. 
4. The officials clarified on the various aspects such as establishing an ecosystem 
for production of CBG from various waste/biomass sources in the country and 
envisaged developing 5000 CBG plants with total CBG production capacity of 15 Million 
Metric Tonne Per Annum (MMTPA) i.e. equivalent to 54 MMSCMD of gas by 2023-24, 
promoting use of Compressed bio gas (bio-CNG) in the CNG (transport) and PNG 
(Domestic) sector of City Gas Distribution (CGD). 
5.  Further, the need for de-centralized approach for setting up for CBG plants, tie-
up with local municipal bodies/panchayats, synchronizing State and Centre efforts 
bringing economy of scale, technological intervention for mixed fuel feeding, bringing 
uniformity in taxation for CBG, introducing interest subvention scheme for CBG plants, 
encouraging farmers to participate in agricultural waste management through CBG plant 
also came up for discussion. 
6. The representatives of the Ministry furnished clarifications to the queries raised 
by the Members. On some of the points on which the information was not readily 
available with the representatives, the Chairperson asked them to furnish written replies 
on the same within seven days to the Lok Sabha Secretariat. The Chairperson then 
thanked the representative of the MoPNG/PSUs for providing valuable information on 
the subject before the Committee.                                                                                                                                 
7. The witnesses then withdrew. 
8. A copy of the verbatim proceedings is kept in the Branch for record. 
  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 

ANNEXURE-IV 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2021-22) 
 
TWENTIETH SITTING 
(04.08.2022) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, 4th August, 2022 at 1500 hrs. in Main 
Committee Room, PHA New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Ramesh Bidhuri - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11.  Shri Ramesh Chand Bind 
12.  Shri Girish Chandra 
13.  Shri Topon Kumar Gogoi 
14.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya 
15.  Shri Santosh Kumar 
16.  Shri Rodmal Nagar 
17.  Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
18.  Shri M. K. Raghavan 
19.  Shri Chandra Sekhar Sahu 
20.  Shri Dilip Saikia 
21.  Dr. Bharatiben Dhirubhai Shiyal 
22.  Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
23.  Shri Vinod Sonkar 
24.  Shri Ajay Tamta 
25.  Dr. Kalanidhi Veeraswamy 
                      RAJYA SABHA 
17. Smt. Kanta Kardam 
18. Shri Rambhai Mokariya 
19. Shri Subhas Chandra Bose Pilli 
20. Dr. V. Sivadasan 

SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Y. M. Kandpal - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri H. Ram Prakash - Director 
3. Shri Brajesh Kumar Singh - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Mohan Arumala - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
 
1 Shri Pankaj Jain - Secretary 
 
2 Dr. Navneet Mohan Kothari - JS (Marketing & Gas Pricing) 
 
 
Representatives of the Department of Financial Services & M/o Finance 
 
1 Shri Suchindra Misra - Addl. Secy 
2.  Shri Bhushan Kumar Sinha - JS 
 
Representatives of the Department of Revenue & M/o Finance 
 
1 Shri G.D. Lohani, - JS (TRU) CBIC 
2. Shri Raman Chopra - JS(TPL-II) CBDT 
 
Representative of the DAC&FW  M/o Agriculture 
 
1 Shri Priya Ranjan,  - JS 
 
Representative of the MNRE 
 
1 Shri Dinesh Dayanand jagdale - JS 
 
Representatives of the Department of Fertilizers & M/o C&F 
 
1. Ms. Neeraja Adidam - JS 
 
Representatives of GAIL & IOCL  
 
 
1 Shri Manoj Jain - CMD, GAIL 
2 Shri M.V. Iyer - Director (BD), GAIL 
3 Shri Sujoy Choudhary - Director (P&BD), IOCL 
4 Shri Shantanu Gupta - ED, IOCL 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Action Taken 
Report on the recommendations contained in the Tenth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on 

‘Demands for Grants (2022-23) of MoP&NG’ and adopted the same without any 
modifications.  
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration Draft Action Taken Report 
on the recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the 
subject ‘National Gas Grid including PNG and CNG’ and adopted the same without any 
modifications.  
 
 The Committee then authorised the Chairperson to present/lay the reports in 
both the Houses of Parliament.  
 
(The witnesses were then called in) 
 
4. Subsequently, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed Members of the Committee 
and apprised them about the agenda of the sitting i.e. "Review of Implementation of 
CBG (SATAT)”. Thereafter, the representatives of the MoPNG, M/o Finance, M/o 
Chemicals & Fertilizers, MNRE, M/o Agriculture & Farmer’s Welfare were called in to 
give oral evidence to the Committee. After customary introduction, the Committee 
sought clarification on various issues such as stoppage of Central Financial Assistance, 
lack of clarity on income tax exemption, increase in GST rates on machinery and lack of 
clarity on definition of machinery, differential prices being paid for CBG by OMCs and 
GAIL, lack of infrastructure for CBG offtake, payment of uniform price for different raw 
material based CBG, marketing of organic manure produced as by-product, availability 
of finance, land  and raw materials and the various steps taken to establish an 
ecosystem for production of CBG. Further, transportation on CBG establishment of 
credit guarantee fund, need for revision of Letters of Intents (LoIs), pricing of agricultural 
residue/crop stubble, integrating Common Service Centre (CSC), Village Level of 
Entrepreneur (VLE), Co-operative societies and Farmers Producers Organizations 
(FPOs), Subsidy for CBG plants, licensing and offtake of fermented/liquid bio-manure, 
steps taken for establishing single window clearance system, financial assistance, CBG 
plants were also taken up by the Committee.  
 
5. The representatives of the Ministry furnished clarifications to the queries raised 
by the Members. On some of the points on which the information was not readily 
available with the representatives, the Chairperson asked them to furnish written replies 
on the same within seven days to the Lok Sabha Secretariat.                                                                                                   

The Chairperson then thanked the representatives of the various ministries for providing 
valuable information on the subject before the Committee.  
 
The witnesses then withdrew.  
 
6. A copy of the verbatim proceedings is kept in the Branch for record. 
  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
***** 

ANNEXURE-V 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2022-23) 
 
SIXTH SITTING 
(19.12.2022) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 19 December, 2022 from 1530 hrs. to 1600 hrs. 
in Committee Room D, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Ramesh Bidhuri - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Dr. Ramesh Chand Bind 
3.  Shri Girish Chandra 
4.  Smt. Chinta Anuradha  
5.  Shri Dilip Saikia  
6.  Shri Topon Kumar Gogoi 
7.  Shri Naranbhai Bhikhabhai Kachhadiya 
8.  Dr. Kalanidhi Veeraswamy 
9.  Shri Santosh Kumar  
10.  Shri Rodmal Nagar 
11.  Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel  
12.  Shri M.K. Raghavan  
13.  Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal  
14.  Shri Lallu Singh  
15.  Shri Ajay Tamta 
  
                      RAJYA SABHA 
16.  Shri Mithlesh Kumar 
17. Shri Rambhai Harjibhai Mokariya 
18.  Dr. Sasmit Patra  
19. Shri Ravichandra Vaddiraju 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Y. M. Kandpal - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri H. Ram Prakash - Director  
3. Shri Brajesh Kumar Singh - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Report on the subject 
“Review of Implementation of CBG (SATAT)”.  
3. The Committee adopted the draft Report without any modifications and authorised the 
Chairperson to present/lay the reports in both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned 

          Appendix-I  
 
List of CBG Plants commissioned/ initiated supply of CBG under SATAT initiative: 
Sr 
LOI 
issuin
g 
OGMC 
Name of the 
project District State Feed Stock 
Designed 
CBG 
Productio
n Capacity 
(TPD) 
Final 
Product 
1 IOCL 
Noble 
Exchange 
Environment 
Solutions 
Pune LLP 
Pune Maharas
htra Food Waste 14 CBG 
2 IOCL 
Spectrum 
Renewable 
Energy Pvt. 
Ltd. 
Kolhapur Maharas
htra Press mud 6 CBG 
3 IOCL IOT Biogas 
Pvt. Ltd. Namakkal Tamil 
Nadu 
Pressmud/P
oultry Litter 15 CBG 
4 IOCL 
Green Earth 
Biogas Pvt. 
Ltd. 
Surendran
agar Gujarat 
Cattle 
Dung/Potato 
waste 
 
 
5 CBG 
5 IOCL Bleach 
Energy Anand Gujarat Animal 
Waste 2 CBG 
 
6 IOCL Glow Green 
Biotech Surat Gujarat MSW/Cattle 
Dung 2.1 CBG 
7 IOCL 
Spectrum 
Renewable 
Energy Pvt. 
Ltd. 
Rohtak Haryana Pressmud/C
attle Dung 6 CBG 
8 IOCL 
Sri Lakshmi 
Venkateshw
ara Green 
Crops Power 
Projects Pvt. 
Ltd. 
Y.S.R 
Kadapa 
Andhra 
Pradesh Press mud 3 CBG 
9 IOCL 
Clarus 
Bioenergy 
Pvt. Ltd. 
Sangli Maharas
htra Press mud 4 CBG 
10 IOCL 
Akshar 
Biotech 
Private 
Limited 
Surat Gujarat Vegetable 
Waste 2.2 CBG 
11 IOCL 
T R Mega 
Foods and 
Beverages 
LLP 
Ludhiana Punjab Animal 
Waste 5 CBG 
12 IOCL Solika Hyderaba Telangan Animal 2 CBG 

Sr 
LOI 
issuin
g 
OGMC 
Name of the 
project District State Feed Stock 
Designed 
CBG 
Productio
n Capacity 
(TPD) 
Final 
Product 
Energy Pvt. 
Ltd. 
d a Waste 
13 IOCL 
Indian 
Potash 
Limited 
Muzaffarn
agar 
Uttar 
Pradesh Press mud 9 CBG 
14 IOCL 
Vyzag Bio-
Energy Fuel 
Pvt. Ltd. 
Visakhapa
tnam 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
Municipal 
Solid Waste 
(MSW) 
2 CBG 
15 IOCL 
Leafiniti 
Bioenergy 
Private 
Limited 
Bagalkot Karnatak
a Press mud 10.2 CBG 
16 IOCL 
Energim 
Sustainable 
Solutions 
CuddalorePv
t. Ltd. 
Cuddalore Tamil 
Nadu Press mud 10.6 CBG 
17 IOCL Verbio India 
Pvt. Ltd. Sangrur Punjab Agri Residue 30 CBG 
18 IOCL 
Sobti 
Engineering 
Works Pvt. 
Ltd. 
Ghaziaba
d 
Uttar 
Pradesh Cattle Dung 2.4 CBG 
19 GAIL 
Shri 
Govardhann
athji 
Energies 
LLP 
Kheda Gujarat Agriculture 
waste 8 CBG 
20 GAIL 
Gobardhan 
Varanasi 
Foundation 
SPV 
Varanasi Uttar 
Praesdh 
Cattle dung 
and other 
waste 
2 CBG 
21 GAIL 
Hyderabad 
Integrated 
MSW 
Limited 
Hyderaba
d 
Telangan
a 
MSW and 
others 2 CBG 
22 GAIL 
IL&FS 
Environment
al 
Infrastructur
e & Services 
Limited 
Indore Madhya 
Pradesh 
Bio 
degradable 
waste 
19.7 CBG 
23 GAIL 
Mahindra 
Waste to 
Energy 
Indore Madhya 
Pradesh MSW  0.7 CBG 

Sr 
LOI 
issuin
g 
OGMC 
Name of the 
project District State Feed Stock 
Designed 
CBG 
Productio
n Capacity 
(TPD) 
Final 
Product 
Solutions 
Limited 
24 GAIL 
Anarobic 
Energy 
Private 
Limited 
Haridwar Uttarakh
and 
Sewage 
Sludge, 
Press mud 
etc. 
2.8 CBG 
25 BPCL 
JPS 
Agrotechs& 
Farms, 
Rohtak 
Rohtak Haryana Cattle Dung 2 Biogas 
26 BPCL 
Sama 
chemo 
pvt.Ltd. 
,Sangli 
Sangali Maharas
htra Press Mud  8 Biogas 
27 BPCL 
Siddapur 
Distilleries 
Ltd., 
Bagalkot 
Bagalkot Karnatak
a Press Mud  8 Biogas 
28 BPCL 
Apex Green 
Energy 
Corporation, 
Bharuch 
Bharuch Gujarat Press Mud 5.6 Biogas 
29 BPCL 
Aryan 
Associate 
and 
Company , 
Ujjain 
Ujjain Madhya 
Pradesh Cattle Dung 2 CBG 
30 BPCL Jakraya 
Sugar Ltd. Solapur Maharas
htra Spent –wash 7 CBG 
31 BPCL 
Aryan 
Associate 
and 
Company, 
Vadodara 
Vadodara Gujarat Vegetable 
waste 2 CBG 
32 HPCL SLR Energy  Cuddalore Tamil 
Nadu 
Multiple 
feedstock  2.8 CBG 
33 HPCL 
Phoenix 
India R & D 
Group 
Birbhum West 
Bengal Cattle Dung 6 CBG 
34 HPCL Mahasankh 
Energy LLP. Vellore Tamil 
Nadu 
Press mud / 
Vegetable 
Waste 
2.8 CBG 
35 IGL PS 
Greengas 
Muzaffarn
agar 
Uttar 
Pradesh 
180-200 
TPD of 
Press Mud 
5 CBG 

Sr 
LOI 
issuin
g 
OGMC 
Name of the 
project District State Feed Stock 
Designed 
CBG 
Productio
n Capacity 
(TPD) 
Final 
Product 
and 
Cowdung 
 
 