 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2022-23) 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
  
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
[SAFETY AND SECURITY OF OIL INSTALLATIONS OF PUBLIC 
 SECTOR OIL COMPANIES-WITH SPECIFIC REFERENCE 
 TO BAGHJAN BLOW-OUT INCIDENT] 
 
 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
16 March, 2023 /25  Phalguna, 1944 (Saka) 


CP&NG NO.     
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2022-23) 
 
 (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
[SAFETY AND SECURITY OF OIL INSTALLATIONS  
OF PUBLIC  SECTOR OIL COMPANIES-WITH SPECIFIC 
REFERENCE TO BAGHJAN BLOW-OUT INCIDENT] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 23.03.2023 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 23.03.2023  
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
16 March, 2023 /25 Phalguna, 1944 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 


 
 CONTENTS 
 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-23) ……………... (iii) 
 
 INTRODUCTION ......…………………………………………… (iv) 
 
 
REPORT 
 
 
 PART - I  
I INTRODUCTION 1 
II AGENCIES REGULATING PETROLEUM SECTOR  1 
III OIL INDUSTRY SAFETY DIRECTORATE (OISD)  1 
IV HEALTH, SAFETY, SECURITY AND ENVIRONMENTAL (HSSE) 
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM IN OIL INDIA LIMITED (OIL) 
2 
V BAGHJAN OIL FIELD  2 
VI BAGHJAN WELL BLOWOUT: (BACKGROUND NOTE PAGE 1 
(JULY 20, 2022) 
3 
VII LAPSES COMMITTED BY OPERATOR AND CONTRACTOR 7 
VIII ROLE OF INSTALLATION MANAGER  9 
IX DELAY IN AWARD OF CONTRACT  11 
X TRAINING OF PERSONNEL  11 
XI ENQUIRIES INTO THE INCIDENT  15 
XII DISCIPLINARY ACTION AGAINST OFFICIALS OF OIL  16 
XIII NEAR MISS REPORTING  17 
XIV ANALYSIS/INVESTIGATION OF ACCIDENT/DANGEROUS 
OCCURRENCE  
18 
XV HSE PERFORMANCE  18 
XVI RELIEF AND REHABILITATION  20 
XVII MONETARY COMPENSATION TO AFFECTED FAMILIES  20 
XVIII NGT DIRECTIONS ABOUT VIOLATIONS AND NON-COMPLIANCE 
BY OIL 
23 
XIX ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT  24 
XX TERI (THE ENERGY AND RESOURCES INSTITUTE) REPORT  25 
XXI DIRECTIONS OF NATIONAL GREEN TRIBUNAL (NGT)  26 
XXII RESTORATION OF ENVIRONMENT NEAR BLOWOUT SITE  28 
XXIII SECURITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM  29 
XXIV UPGRADATION OF INFRASTRUCTURE 30 
XXV UPGRADATION OF AIRPORTS  32 
XXVI POST BLOWOUT TRAINING MEASURES  33 
XXVII SAFETY TRAINING  TO LOCAL COMMUNITY  35 
XXVIII SHIFTING OF OIL CORPORATE OFFICE  36 
XXIX INSURANCE FOR OIL FIELDS  37 
  
PART – II 
 
 
 
Observations / Recommendations of the Committee ............. 
 
39 
 
 
ANNEXURES  
ANNEXURE I Minutes of the second sitting of the Committee (2020-21) 
held on 20.10.2020 
 

ANNEXURE II Minutes of the Twentieth sitting of the Committee (2020-21) 
held on 06.08.2021 
 
ANNEXURE III Minutes of the eighteenth sitting of the Committee (2021-
22) held on 20.07.2022 
 
ANNEXURE IV Minutes of the Tenth sitting of the Committee (2022-23) 
held on 16.03.2023 
 

(iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM  
& NATURAL GAS (2022-23) 
 
Sl. No. Name of Members 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
Shri Ramesh Bidhuri - Chairperson 
 
2 Dr. Ramesh Chand Bind 
3 Shri Pradyut Bordoloi 
4 Shri Girish Chandra 
5 Smt. Chinta Anuradha 
6 Shri Dilip Saikia 
7 Shri Topon Kumar Gogoi  
8 Shri Naranbhai Bhikhabhai Kachhadiya 
9 Dr. Kalanidhi Veeraswamy 
10 Shri Santosh Kumar 
11 Shri Rodmal Nagar 
12 Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
13 Shri Unmesh Bhaiyyasaheb Patil  
14 Shri M.K. Raghavan 
15 Shri Chandra Sekhar Sahu 
16 Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar 
17 Dr. Bharatiben Dhirubhai Shiyal 
18 Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
19 Shri Lallu Singh 
20 Shri Vinod Kumar Sonkar 
21 Shri Ajay Tamta 
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
23 Smt. Kanta Kardam 
24 Shri Mithlesh Kumar 
25 Shri Pabitra Margherita 
26 Shri Rambhai Harjibhai Mokariya 
27 Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
28 Dr. Sasmit Patra 
29 Shri Subhas Chandra Bose Pilli 
30 Dr. V. Sivadasan 
31 Shri Ravichandra Vaddiraju 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1 Shri Y.M. Kandpal Joint Secretary 
2 Shri H. Ram Prakash Director 
3 Shri Brajesh Kumar Singh Deputy Secretary 
 
 

(iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas having 
been authorised by the Committee, to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Nineteenth Report on the subject ‘Safety and Security of Oil Installations of Public 
Sector Oil Companies with specific reference to Baghjan Blow-Out incident’. 
 
2. The Committee took briefings of the representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum 
& Natural Gas/Oil PSUs in connection with examination of the subject at their sittings 
held on  20.10.2020, 06.08.2021 & 20.07.2022.   
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas on 16.03.2023.  
 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas/PSUs and Oil PSUs for placing their views before them 
and furnishing the information desired in connection with examination of the subject.     
 
5. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to 
the Committee. 
  
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
_16_ March, 2023 
25, Phalguna 1944 (Saka)     
RAMESH BIDHURI, 
                          Chairperson,  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                        
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 
 

REPORT 
 
PART I 
Introduction 
 
1.1 The Oil & Natural Gas Industry handles highly inflammable hydro-carbons in all 
physical forms – solid, liquid & gas – and operates processes under high temperature 
and pressure with presence of Oxygen (air) and many a times active sources of ignition. 
Therefore, the safety in Petroleum and Natural Gas Industry is of paramount 
importance. It is not only critical for the operators’ manpower and assets but also, by the 
very nature of possible adverse outcomes of safety system failure, for society at large - 
as such adverse outcomes, may spill over the boundary of the industry establishments. 
The Industry establishments, at their levels are aware of the risks involved and have 
safety system in place to obviate such accidents. 
 
1.2 A major Well blowout had occurred on 27th May, 2020 at Baghjan oil well- 5 in 
Tinsukia district of Assam causing release of high pressure natural gas creating panic to 
the nearby residents.  Accordingly, the Committee decided to examine “Safety and 
Security of Oil installations of Public Sector Oil Companies with specific reference to 
Baghjan Blowout incident to identify gaps in the safety and security frame work of the 
OIL India Ltd. and its HSSE policies. 
AGENCIES REGULATING PETROLEUM SECTOR 
Directorate General of Mines Safety (DGMS) 
 
1.3 Safety in onshore is being regulated by Directorate General of Mines Safety 
(under Ministry of Labour) through the Oil Mines Regulations, 2017 framed under the 
provisions of the Mines Act, 1952. These regulations cover entire gamut of operations in 
oil mines right from drilling to oil / gas production including their storage and 
transportation by pipelines with chapters on protection against fires and on General 
Safety Provisions. The focus of the Mines Act, 1952 is on regulating mining operations 
with due emphasis on health and safety of workmen. The Act extends up to territorial 
waters (up to 12 nautical miles). In the Mines Act, 1952, definition of minerals includes 
mineral oils (which in turn include natural gas and petroleum).  Thus, oil & gas industry 
also comes under the ambit of this Act. 
 
Oil Industry Safety Directorate (OISD)  
 
1.4 OISD (Oil Industry Safety Directorate) is a technical Directorate under the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas.  It was established in 1986. It formulates and 
coordinates the implementation of a series of self-regulatory measures aimed at 
enhancing the safety in the Oil & Gas industry in India. The major activities of OISD 
include development of standards and codes that would be suitable for the conditions 
prevailing in India, conducting  External Safety Audits (ESA) regularly to check 
compliance w.r.t. implementation of safety standards, acting  as a competent authority 
to exercise powers and functions as stipulated in Petroleum and Natural Gas (Safety in 
Offshore operations) Rules, 2008 to enhance safety in offshore regulations, conferment 
of safety awards, organizing  Training Programmes / Workshops, dissemination of 
information on safety enhancement etc.  Till date, OISD has developed 124 standards.    

Health, Safety, Security and Environmental (HSSE) Management System in OIL 
India Limited (OIL)  
 
1.5 OIL India Limited (OIL) carries out its operations by adopting a Health, Safety, 
Security and Environmental (HSSE) Management System, which continually evolves 
and responds to the changing needs and emerging operational requirements. OIL 
accords top priority to HSSE aspects in its operational areas and “Safety First” is 
practiced as a culture in OIL.  OIL is   proactive to achieve the goal of ‘zero accident and 
no harm to Man, Machine and Material’. Continual enhancement of HSSE standards in 
all the activities is one of the prime corporate objectives of the organization, which is 
aptly reflected in OIL’s one of the vision statements “OIL is fully committed to Health, 
Safety & Environment”.    
 
Baghjan Oil Field  
 
1.6 The Baghjan field is located in Doomdooma Revenue Circle of the district of 
Tinsukia in Upper Assam, about 61 Km from OIL Head office at Duliajan via Rajgarh 
Road and NH-15 and/or via Makum Bypass, which is about 76 kms.  
 
1.7 OIL discovered this field in 2003 after drilling its first exploratory Well Baghjan-1. 
So far 10 exploratory wells have been drilled, and target depth of wells are around 3800 
to 4300 Mtr. The area of the Baghjan field is about 20 Sq. Km. The estimated Oil 2P 
Reserve is about 13.59 MM3 and estimated Recoverable Reserve is about 2.785 MM3. 
Non-associated estimated 2P Gas Reserve in place is 13.84 BCM and Recoverable 
Gas estimated as 25.60 BCM. Associated 2P gas Reserve in place estimated is 13.84 
BCM and Recoverable Gas estimated as 5.99 BCM. Reservoir Pressure varies from 
402 Kg/ Sq. Cm to 429.5 Kg/Sq. Cm i.e. almost Hydrostatic Pressure. There are mainly 
three major Hydrocarbon bearing i.e. Oil & Gas horizons found in the Baghjan Field 
namely;   
 
(i) LANGPAR, 3870 Mtr, Original Formation Pressure 422kg/cm2  
 
(ii) LK+Th, SG III+IV and SG I+II, 3781 to 3729 Mtr, Original Reservoir 
Pressure Hydrostatic +10%.  
 
(iii)  NARPUH, 3673 Mtr, Original estimated Reservoir Pressure Hydrostatic 
+10%.  
 
All three Zones lie in the depth range of 3630 to 3900 Mtr TVD. The age of 
multiple sand reserves discovered are of Palaeocene – Lower Eocene Age.  
 
1.8 The Baghjan Field development started from December 2005 after successful 
completion of Well Baghjan-2. Total 16 Development wells were successfully drilled and 
completed. Total wells in this field are 26 Nos (10 Exploratory and 16 Development). 
Type of wells are (1) Vertical -1No (Baghjan -1), (2) J bend 8 Nos, (3) S profile - 17 Nos. 
No Horizontal or ERD wells have been drilled till date. But there is a plan to drill ERD 
wells to target the prospective sand lying below the DSNP, which is about 1 Km away 
from the main Baghjan field.  
 
1.9 Commercial Oil production started in December, 2005 after successful 
completion of Well Baghjan-2 in Bottom most sand i.e. LANGPAR sand. The Production 

of the field gradually increased and reached a peak production of about 910 M3/Day in 
March 2012. Thereafter, the Oil production showed a declining trend and reached a 
level of 630 m3/Day in September 2016 with increased water cut. However, after drilling 
of few more development wells, production of Oil increased to level of 1000 M3/Day in 
November 2017.  The initial Reservoir Pressure was 422 Kg/Cm2 at a depth of 3647 
Mtr which was 58 Kg/cm2 above Hydrostatic pressure as recorded in Baghjan Well-1 in 
April 2003. The current Reservoir pressure is around 411.2 Kg/Cm2 at a depth of 3977 
Mtr recorded in May 2020.Present Production of the Baghjan field is Oil + Condensate 
950 M3/Day, Water 284 M3/day and 1.3 MMSCMD Gas. Estimated Loss of Production 
due to blow out at Well Baghjan-5 is 90 to 95000 M3 of Gas and 10 to 15 M3 of 
Condensate per Day.  
 
1.10  Well Baghjan-5 was spudded on 20.11.2006 and successful drilling to target 
depth of 3904 completed on 12.03.2007. This is a ‘S’ profile deviated well and 4 stage 
casing Policy adopted in this well.  
 
1.11 The well was actually put on production from September 2015 and cumulative 
production up to March 2020 was 191.83 MMSCM of Gas and 44180 M3 of 
Condensate. Recently, it was observed that the well was producing Gas from Gas Cap 
of BGN001 block which may lead to faster reservoir pressure drop resulting in lesser 
recovery. So, it was decided to permanently plug back this Zone i.e. LANGPAR SAND 
and to recomplete the well in next upper sand called LK+Th sand at depth of 3760 Mt. 
 
Baghjan Well Blowout:  
 
1.12 A major blowout occurred at OIL’s high pressure well no. Baghjan-5 at Baghjan 
in Tinsukia District, Assam on 27th May, 2020 while working on the work over well head. 
Blowout is an inherent hazard of oil exploration jobs while carrying out a well 
intervention job in the well. Various safety measures are placed while doing the critical 
well intervention jobs, which makes blowout very rare across the industry. In OIL also, 
there already existed foolproof safety measures to prevent such hazards or mishaps at 
oil & gas wells. It is very complex to identify the exact reason of occurrence of a 
blowout. Entire operation at the well was carried out as per approved work program 
following the standard operating procedure (SoP). However, the cement plug that was 
placed as a secondary barrier as per the approved program, failed leading to the gas 
leakage, which ultimately turned to be full-fledged blowout. The blowout that occurred 
on 27th May 2020 didn’t catch fire initially and steps were taken on war-footing to cap 
the well with the help of Crisis Management team of ONGC & OIL.  
 
1.13 Foreign experts were also mobilized from M/s Alert Disaster Control Inc.  
Singapore who arrived on 07-06-2020 despite COVID restrictions. A blowout is 
susceptible to catch fire even with a small spark. The well was therefore being 
continuously water blanketed 24x7 with the help of fire tenders. However, the well 
unfortunately caught fire on 9th June 2020 while activities were in progress to make way 
for placing the Blowout Preventer (BOP) on the wellhead. The source of spark could not 
be ascertained. OIL lost two brave Fire fighters in the fire. Later, an electrical engineer 
lost his life while on duty at site. There were no casualties of local villagers in the 
blowout fire. 
 
1.14 The initial attempt to cap the well using specially designed in-house hydraulically 
driven mechanical transporter had to be abandoned after the well caught fire. The whole 

plan changed thereafter with requirement of massive infrastructure to be created at 
ground zero, viz. debris removal of burnt rig structure, deployment of heavy well killing 
equipment, creating water reservoirs, and laying pipelines for pumping huge quantity of 
water from nearby Dangori river etc. Debris removal took much longer time than 
expected due to very loose soil condition where movement of heavy vehicles was a big 
challenge. Two attempts of capping operation failed, once due to toppling of the Athey 
wagon along with BOP-stack due to loose soil condition and once due to snapping of 
bull line connections.  Subsequently, one attempt of killing operation also failed due to 
failure of annulus valve. 
 
1.15 Thereafter as per advice of M/s Alert Disaster Control, the foreign expert team  
who was engaged for the well control operation at Baghjan, the Snubbing Unit was 
mobilized from Canada for killing the well downhole due to the complications arising in 
the well. Formalities to bring the unit from Canada and non-availability of infrastructure 
to land the aircraft in Assam delayed the process further. The well was eventually 
capped successfully on 15.11.2020 and was subsequently abandoned permanently due 
to technical complexities.   
 
1.16 The Baghjan Gas well blowout temporarily impacted OIL’s daily production from 
the well. Subsequent to successful capping of the blow-out well, field development 
activities for production of oil & gas from Baghjan field is being continued and wells are 
being drilled in the vicinity of Baghjan-5 well. There is no indicative impact of blowout on 
the reservoir. 
 
1.17 When asked by the Committee about the events leading to the Blowout at the 
Baghjan Well, Ministry in its written replies submitted the following  
 
“OIL India Limited (OIL) was carrying out workover operations in its Baghjan well 
No.5, Tinsukia District, Assam from 19.04.2020. The responsibility of carrying out 
the workover job was allocated to one of the Chartered Hired service providers 
as per terms and conditions of contract and under supervision and monitoring of 
Company. Representative (Installation Manager - IM) appointed by OIL. After 
initial well completion activities, the well was once again subdued to repair the 
pressure build up in the annulus. As per procedure, a cement plug was also 
placed as secondary barrier before repairing the pressure build-up. On 
27.05.2020, at around 9AM, it was informed from the well site that as the Blowout 
Preventer [BOP] was nippled-down to address the pressure build-up issue, the 
well started displacing fluid, which clearly indicated a failure of both the barriers. 
The IM provided necessary instructions to shut the well immediately to avoid well 
kick and rushed to the site immediately. However, by the time the site personnel 
could arrange and shut the well, the well went into blowout condition rapidly at 
around 10:30 am. 
 
District authorities were immediately informed about the incident and were also 
requested for support including assistance for law-and-order issues.  Immediately 
the signs of ensuing disaster could be assessed by OIL’s  team.  OIL fire service 
team along with the mutual aid partners were deployed immediately to avoid any 
possible fire. The head of OIL’s Field Head Quarters (FHQ) activated Emergency 
immediately w.e.f 10.45 AM of 27.05.2020 as per the DMP (Disaster 
Management Plan) protocol.  Efforts were also made by the technical team to 
close the well without further delay. Crisis Management Team from ONGC was 

called to work jointly with OIL’s expert team. International Blow-out control 
expert, M/s Alert Disaster Control (Asia) Pte Ltd, Singapore was also called to 
guide the working team. On 09.06.2020, when the joint team of OIL, ONGC and 
Alert was almost ready with the well control plan, the well unfortunately caught 
fire at around 1.15 PM, despite Fire Service personnel (along with mutual aid 
partners) spraying water on wellhead area uninterruptedly since 27.05.2020 to 
avoid any ignition.” 
 
Explaining about the crisis management made by the OIL India Limited, the officials of 
OIL during the oral evidence made the following submission:- 
 
“…. the blowouts are taking place all over the world and here also. In OIL India, 
last blowout took place in 2005. That was the first major blowout for Oil India. 
Immediately a crisis management team was made and certain facilities were 
created. However, as this was a massive blowout one and those facilities were 
not sufficient to tackle this. Therefore, we called all the equipment from ONGC. 
ONGC team was also called from Rajahmundry, Ahmedabad, Baroda etc. even 
during this pandemic. That also was found to be insufficient to control this fire. 
That is why we had to resort to import one snubbing unit from Canada as the 
blowout intensity was really very high. Now we have decided and we have 
already created more facilities to take care of such situation particularly in North 
East in consultation with ONGC. Both of us are creating facilities in North 
East….”  
             
1.18 The Committee enquired as to whether any technical assistance was sought 
from global fire extinguishing companies to extinguish/douse the fire at Baghjan oil field, 
to which the Ministry furnished the following reply:  
 
“Technical assistance from Global Blowout & Fire Control Company, M/s Alert 
Disaster Control (Asia) Pte Ltd, Singapore was taken. The intensity of blowout 
and well pressure was very high and the joint efforts from OIL and ONGC-CMT 
could not gain control over the blowing well till 30.05.2020. The well was in the 
vicinity of environmentally sensitive and significantly inhabited area. Viewing the 
various unfavorable outcome and imminent risk to environment and 
stakeholders, simultaneous effort to engage internationally reputed Blowout Well 
Control and Fire Fighting companies was initiated. By sharing the available 
information of the blowing well, techno-commercial proposal was sought from 
M/s Alert Disaster Control (Asia) Pte Ltd, Singapore, M/s Wild Well Control, USA 
and M/s Halliburton Offshore Services (Boots & Coots Services), USA by 
31.05.2020. After techno-commercial evaluation of the proposals, the contract 
was awarded to M/s Alert Disaster Control (Asia) Pte Ltd, Singapore on 
01.06.2020.” 
 
Explaining about the capacity to handle such blowout incident by the OIL, 
officials of the Ministry made the following observation during the oral evidence:- 
 
"सर, जो ᳯरलीफ मेजसᭅ और लोगᲂ को इवै᭍युएट ᳰकया गया, वह िडि᭭ᮝ᭍ट 
एडिमिन᭭ᮝेशन और ᳯरसोसᱷज ऑयल क ं पनीज कᳱ क ं बाइंड एफटᭅ से ᱟआ। जैसा माननीय 

सद᭭य ने कहा ᳰक िडि᭭ᮝ᭍ट एडिमिन᭭ᮝेशन क े  पास नहᱭ होता है, वह सब क ं पनी कᳱ 
सपोटᭅ से हो रहा था। 
दूसरा, जो मेजर चीज ऑ᭣जवᭅ कᳱ गई है, हमने भी कᳱ है और लोगᲂ ने भी कᳱ है। 
᭣लोआउट इतना बड़ा था ᳰक वहां उसको क ंᮝोल करने कᳱ क ै पेिसटी नहᱭ थी। उस समय 
मई-जून का महीना था। उस समय कोिवड का इ᭫यू था। सारे ᭢लाइ᭗स बंद थे। आपने 
ᳲसगापुर के बारे मᱶ पूछा, ये क ं पनी ᳲसगापुर मᱶ ही बे᭭ड है। ᳲसगापुर मᱶ कॉ᭠टै᭍ट ᳰकया 
गया। उसका एक आदमी ऑ᭭ᮝेिलया मᱶ और दूसरा आदमी कनाडा मᱶ था। चाटᱷड ᭡लेन 
हॉयर करक े  उनको इकᲶे लाना एक मेजर इ᭫यू था। हमारा िमिन᭭ᮝी ऑफ ए᭍सटनᭅल 
अफ े यसᭅ से फ ु ल इनवॉलमᱶट होना, कोिवड ᮧोटोकॉल कᳱ परिमशन लेना, उन सभी चीजᲂ 
को ᮧबंिधत ᳰकया जाना था। मंᮢालय भी उᲬ ᭭तर पर, इसमᱶ पूरी तरह से शािमल था। 
एक मह᭜वपूणᭅ अवलोकन जो हमने देखा है ᳰक हमᱶ ᭃमता बनाने कᳱ आव᭫यकता है। 
ओएनजीसी का िस᭭टम राजमुंदरी और वड़ोदरा से लेकर गए थे, लेᳰकन वे भी उतने 
सᳰफिशएंट नहᱭ थे। यह एक मह᭜वपूणᭅ बात है िजसे हमने देखा है और हमने िनणᭅय 
िलया है ᳰक हमारे पास पूरी ᭃमता क े  साथ उᱫर पूवᭅ मᱶ एक समᳶपत संकट ᮧबंधन कᱶ ᮤ 
होना चािहए। आपने मु᭎य कारण क े  बारे मᱶ पूछा है।" 
  
1.19 When asked as to whether there is any human error or violation of SoP's leading 
to the outbreak of fire in Baghjan oil field, the Ministry in its written reply submitted the 
following:  
 
“As per report on Baghjan blowout incident, the root cause of incident was due to 
percolation of unset cement which lightened the hydrostatic head and caused the 
blow out. Lapses in observing some of the SOPs were noticed. 
 
OIL initiated disciplinary proceedings against 18 executives. Major penalty has 
been imposed on 2 Executives, 2 Executives have been issued administrative 
warning and rest have been exonerated with the advice to be more careful and 
vigilant in future.” 
 
1.20 The Committee sought to know why the process of extinguishing the oil well 
blowout had taken more than 100 days, to which the Ministry furnished the following 
written reply:   
 
“Baghjan-5 blowout was a major gas well blowout with very high intensity and 
high well pressure. Across the industry, incident of such high-pressure blowout 
in onshore operations is extremely rare. The execution of well control plan had 
to be carried out overcoming various hurdles. The various delays in operational 
sequence is explained as below:- 
 
a.The operational condition was inconducive as the work-over outfit was 
working with more than 200 nos of tubular double on it. The related supporting 
infrastructure on the well plinth also resulted in a limited accessibility to the 
blowing well mouth and plinth area. 

 
b.Subsequent to the initial well control operations till 09.06.2020, the high 
intensity fire ravaged the work-over outfit, related ancillaries and most of the 
firefighting equipment. Cleaning the well plinth area from all fire damaged debris 
under intense well fire, dumping these safely at a safe distance were all slow 
and time-consuming processes because of serious safety hazards. 
c. Many of the fire control equipment were burnt-off by the well fire. The same 
had to be sourced and mobilized from various industry partners across the 
country. 
d. All approach roads including the blowout site was inundated by flood waters 
from nearby Dangari river restricting access to the site for many consecutive 
days. The major bridge on the road breached during the flood, thereby 
restricting movement of man and material to the site. The soil condition was 
loose due to repeated wave of flood and some big equipment got stuck/ toppled 
creating a serious safety risk in operations.  All these have caused inordinate 
delays in operations.  
e. Site specific improvisation required for equipment to protect from intense heat 
of well fire at all times during capping operation. 
f. After successful capping of the well, the surface intervention effort had to be 
aborted, due to failure of the well head integrity (due to damage caused by the 
intense heat generated due to the well fire). 
g. Finally, after trying all possible measures to control the blowout and subdue 
the well, specialized unit called the Snubbing unit was mobilized from Canada. 
Due to limited facility of the nearby airports, the snubbing unit was transported 
on road from Kolkata to Blow out site. 
h. The first wave of Covid 19 Pandemic and associated lockdown was also a 
challenge in movement of machineries from various parts of the country and 
abroad. 
i. Over and above the operational issues there were geo-political, environmental 
and social issues resulting in protests and bandhs that delayed the blowout 
control considerably. Local youth associations protested and road/access to site 
was blocked on several occasions.” 
 
Lapses Committed by Operator and Contractor  
1.21 When the Committee sought to know the exact lapses or violation of SoPs that 
resulted in the blowout at Baghjan oil well No. 5, the Ministry in its written reply 
furnished the following:-  
 
“The violation of SOP’s that resulted in the blowout are illustrated below:- 
 The Waiting on Cement (WOC) which is 48 Hrs as per SOP, was compromised 
and M/s John Energy Ltd (JEL) crew started to pull out the pipes after 12 hours 
only in violation of the plan. 
 The position and strength of cement plug was not tested before nipple down of 
Blow out Preventer (BOP). 

 Started pulling out 27/8” drill pipe and nippled down BOP before complete setting 
of the cement sample kept at surface.  
 Once pullout of pipe was completed, JEL crew removed the BOP to change the 
well head without any instruction from OIL 
 In BGN-05, indication of the kick (flow of influx from the well) was detected at 
around 09:00AM by the Well site crew of JEL.  After detecting the kick by the 
driller, the response of crew members of JEL was neither as per well control 
procedure nor as per Bridging document agreed by OIL and JEL. Since there 
was a delay in response in taking well control measures, the blowout occurred at 
10:30 am.” 
1.22 When the Committee enquired as to why Blowout Preventer (BOP) was removed 
in violation of procedural requirements regarding change of work programme, the 
Ministry in its written reply submitted  the following:-  
 
"JEL had removed the BOP without the knowledge of OIL’s Installation 
Manager(IM).  There was lack of knowledge and deficiency in understanding the 
gravity of a critical operation on the part of the JEL. JEL nipple down the BOP 
before completion of WOC period of 48 hours without the permission/intimation 
of Installation Manager (OIL) which is violation of procedural requirements 
regarding change of work program." 
 
1.23 When asked by the Committee about any lack of communication between 
Installation Manager of OIL India and the service provider John Energy Ltd. and  If so, 
any penalty has been imposed on the service provider, the Ministry MoPNG submitted 
the following in its reply:- 
 
“Yes, there was lack of communication between Installation Manager of OIL India 
and the service provider John Energy Ltd. The contractor personnel failed to 
inform the Installation Manager and violated procedural requirements regarding 
change of work program (Nipple down of BOP) prior to completion of WOC 
period of 48 hours which can be issued only by the Installation Manager. 
 
The following penalty was imposed to the Service Provider (M/s John Energy Limited) 
 
a. Contract was terminated immediately after Baghjan Blowout incident  
b. Performance Bank Guarantee deposited against the contract was revoked  
c. M/s John Energy Limited was put into Holiday list from 10.10.2020 to 30.04.2021   
1.24 When the Committee wanted to know whether M/s John Energy. Ltd. has been 
suspended from further operations post the Baghjan incident, the Ministry in its reply 
stated the following:  
a. "Post Baghjan Blow-out incident, M/s JEL was advised vide letter dated 16.06.2020  
of OIL to suspend the mobilization of their 2nd Rig against the contract. Further an 
internal Committee was formed as per Banning Policy of OIL to examine on non-
performance of M/s JEL. The Committee examined the matter in detail and 

recommended to terminate the contract immediately and put M/s JEL on Holiday for 
a period of 2 years. 
b.  However, as per direction of Guwahati High Court vide Order dated 11.02.2021, M/s 
JEL was advised to appear before CGM (C&P) for personal hearing and accordingly, 
they appeared for personal hearing on 01.03.2021. Based on outcome of the same, 
the order for Holiday/Debarment was reviewed and the Holiday Period was reduced 
to 30.04.2021 vide Review Order dated 28.04.2021." 
1.25 Asked as to whether OIL India has been continuing with the services of M/s John 
Energy Ltd. even after the blowout incident, the Ministry in its written reply stated the 
following: 
 
“After the blowout incident the contract was terminated and Contractor, M/s JEL, 
was put into Holiday list from 10.10.2020 to 30.04.2021 for providing the service 
to OIL India Limited. OIL hasn’t availed any Workover service from JEL, since 
then. However, a drilling Rig contract has been awarded to the service provider 
M/s. JEL, (Rig DR CH-7, for LOC NOAA in Basin Mine) against open tender after 
the Holiday period.” 
 
Explaining the role of OISD to the Committee during the oral evidence, the 
officials of OISD made the following submission:- 
 
"वेल क ंᮝोल मᱶ ᭣लोआउट पर मेन फोकस है। ऑिडट मᱶ हम देखते हᱹ ᳰक इनक े  बीओपी कᳱ क ं िडशन कैसी 
है, उसक े  ᮧेशर टे᭭ट कैसे हो रहे हᱹ, फ ं᭍शन टे᭭ट कैसे हो रहे हᱹ, लोग कᳱ ᮝेᳲनग वेल- क ंᮝोल मᱶ क ै सी है, 
बीओपी का िᮟल कैसे कर रहे हᱹ। बीओपी क े  ᮧीपेयडᭅनेस के तहत, जब ये पुल- आउट करते हᱹ, तो ᳯᮝप-
शीट भरते हᱹ या नहᱭ, इस ᮧकार से इसके  अ᭠दर काफᳱ ᭃेᮢ होते हᱹ, जो हमारे ऑिडटसᭅ देखते हᱹ। गैप 
िमलने से वे रेकमᱶडेशंस बनाकर आते हᱹ। इन रेकमᱶडेशंस को बाद मᱶ क᭥पनीज क᭥᭡लाय करती है, 
िजनको हम मॉिनटर करते हᱹ।" 
 
Role of Installation Manager 
 
1.26 When the Committee asked as  to   whether there was any lapse on the part of 
the Installation Manager in the blow out incident, the Ministry in its written reply stated 
the following:- 
 
“There is no lapse on the part of the above-mentioned Installation Manager. M/s 
John Energy Limited (JEL) failed to inform the Installation Manager and violated 
procedural requirements regarding change of work program (Nipple down of 
BOP) prior to completion of WOC period of 48 hours which can be issued only by 
the Installation Manager.” 
1.27 When  the Committee asked as to why the crew of M/s JEL did not act swiftly to 
control the well after detecting the kick and wasted precious time in taking instructions 
from officials over the blow out, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in its written 
reply submitted as under: 
 
“Even though there were series of non-conformities of SOP carried out by M/s 
John Energy Ltd (JEL) without the knowledge of OIL, JEL continues to deny 

any negligence on their part for delay in taking action to control the kick in the 
well.” 
 
1.28 When asked whether OIL executives who were supposed to supervise this 
work were coordinating with M/s John Energy Ltd. or not during this period, the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in its written reply submitted as under:  
 
“All Major works were carried out under the supervision of OIL officials as per 
Contract. After the cementing job, well was under “Waiting on Cementation 
(WOC)” period and supervision was not required from OIL officials during 
WOC. After end of WOC, further job was supposed to be carried out under 
direct supervision of OIL personnel, however M/s John Energy Ltd. started the 
job without intimating to OIL with violation of procedural requirement.” 
 
1.29 When asked whether HSE officials from both OIL and M/s John Energy Ltd. 
were to be present at the site during such major work over operations, the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas in its written reply submitted as under: 
 
“During major workover operations, HSE officials from M/s John Energy Ltd and 
competent officials from OIL remain present at site.” 
 
1.30 When asked as to why the Installation Manager, OGPS personnel of OIL and 
Tool pusher of M/s JEL were not present at the rig site during critical operation like 
removal of BOP and the action taken by OIL against these officials, the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas in its written reply submitted as under: 
  
“After completion of the cementing job at 04:00 pm on 26th May 2020, well was 
under Waiting on Cementation (WoC)” period for 48 hours and hence, 
supervision was not required from OIL officials during WOC period as it was not 
a critical operation. However, considering the job after WOC, the IM and OGPS 
personnel could be contacted during that period by official of M/s John energy 
Ltd for any supervision or clarification or job preparation like arrangement of 
tools/equipment.”  
 
 During the waiting period, the Tool pusher went for collection of equipment 
drilling bit for carrying out cement cleaning job. During the absence of Tool 
pusher, Driller was the Shift-in-Charge at the well site.  
 
 After the end of WOC, further job was supposed to be carried out under direct 
supervision of OIL i.e. OGPS personnel, however M/s John Energy Ltd. started 
the job without intimation to OIL with violation of procedural requirement. 
 
 Pending inquiry, both the Installation Manager and OGPS official were 
immediately suspended after the Baghjan Blowout incident. Subsequently, 
based on the outcome of the disciplinary committee, the grades of both the 
Installation Manager and OGPS official were reduced to a lower stage in the 
time scale of pay (one stage) for period of one year with cumulative effect.  
 
1.31 Further Elaborating the views of Ministry regarding the Baghjan Blowout 
incident, the representatives of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas made the 
following submission during the oral evidence before the Committee:- 

 
“After Baghjan incident, which involved a blowout in a well of OIL India in 
Assam, MoPNG has constituted a three-member high level committee which 
was headed by Shri SCL Das, DG, DGH and it comprised of Shri B.C. Bora, 
former Chairman of ONGC and Shri D.K. Sengupta, former Director of ONGC 
to enquire into the causes of the incident. The Committee recommended 
various measures to be taken to avoid such incident in future. It took several 
months to control the fire in the well. The long time taken to control the fire was 
viewed seriously by the Ministry and the Ministry conveyed its displeasure with 
the direction to be more careful, proactive in maintaining all precautionary 
measures and safety standards to prevent such incidents in future…..”  
                                                          
Delay in Award of Contract 
 
1.32 As per the OISD Inquiry Report submitted on 26.08.2020, one of the major 
lapses committed was the starting of well operations without a formal contract in 
place.  In fact, this rig had already completed workover of one well without contract in 
place. 
1.33 When the Committee asked who was the official and which unit was 
responsible for finalizing the contract from OIL and at whose behest did the contractor 
commence the work and what action had been taken in this regard against the 
person(s) concerned, the Ministry in its written reply mentioned the following:-  
 
"The award of Contract was handled by the Contracts Department at Field 
Head Quarter, Duliajan. It was processed under Contracts Global Section of 
OIL.  The Letter of Award (LOA) for the Workover Rigs was issued to M/s John 
Energy Ltd. (JEL) on 23.08.2019 and M/s John Energy Limited confirmed their 
acceptance to the LOA vide their letter dated 23.08.2019. As per the Provision 
of the Contract under Clause 4.0, the  ‘Contract Timeline’ is effective from date 
of issuance of LOA  and we quote the clause as below : 
 
  
“Effective date of contract: The contract shall become effective as on date 
COMPANY notifies the CONTRACTOR in writing that is has been awarded the 
contract. This date of issuance of Letter of Award (LOA) by the COMPANY will 
be the Effective Date of Contract. All terms and Conditions of the contract shall 
come into force with the date of issuance of LOA” 
  
So, the contract was effective from 23.08.2019 with M/s JEL." 
 
Training of personnel 
 
1.34 Asked by the Committee as to whether any internal review on required 
procedures in qualifying personnel has been made and what changes have been 
incorporated to ensure that the qualified personnel are able to discharge their work 
and respond to situations appropriately, the Ministry in its written reply submitted the 
following:-  
 
 "Qualifying personnel are thoroughly reviewed before placement of contract. 
Regular training and awareness program are carried out apart from regular 
statutory training for all personnel working under Workover Mine.  From June 

2022, every week on Friday, training is provided to around 20-21 Nos of 
Contractual Employees on HSE Awareness and Job role based training. More 
than 160 persons have been trained so far. 
 
Qualified personnel like Driller /Toolpusher have been given additional training 
on Well Control by the In-house faculty in spite of having valid IWCF/IADC 
certificate to ensure that they are able to discharge their work and respond to 
situations appropriately after learning from Baghjan incident. More than 100 
contractual Drillers, Assistant Drillers, Mud Attendant etc of Workover Rigs 
were trained in total four batches starting from 20th July 2021."  
 
1.35 When the Committee enquired  about the level of oil production at the site of the 
incident, the Ministry submitted the following reply:  
 
 "Well – BGN-05 
 Total Natural Gas – 88,000 SCMD 
 Total Crude Oil / Condensate – 29 Kilo litre per Day 
 
 (This was a gas well however, with gas production, there is an associated flow of 
 condensate. The well was flowing gas @ 88,000 SCMD along with condensate of  
 29 kl per day)" 
 
1.36 Asked about the estimated financial loss to OIL on account of this blowout 
incident including the collateral loss to surroundings and loss of production, etc., the 
Ministry furnished the following in its written reply:  
 
"OIL India Ltd has incurred expenditure of Rs 449.03 crores related blowout of 
Well No 5 at Baghjan. Out of Rs 449.03 crore, Rs. 301.11 crore was incurred on 
arresting the blowout and Rs. 147.92 crore incurred on relief & rehabilitation 
and compensation to the affected public.  
 
Based on the average daily production of natural gas and condensate from 
Baghjan well - 5 before the incident of blowout, the loss of production is 
estimated at about Rs.20 crore in total from the date of the incident till horizontal 
diversion of natural gas production." 
 
During the oral evidence about the review of Baghjan incident by Safety 
Council, the representatives of Ministry/OIL submitted as under: 
"अंत मᱶ, एनुअल मोिनटᳳरग से᭢टी काउि᭠सल, िजसके चेयरमैन, सेᮓे टरी, पेᮝोिलयम एंड 
नेचुरल गैस के ᳇ारा कᳱ जाती है। इसका इ᭥पलीमᱶटेशन ᭭टे᭗स है, हम लोगᲂ के पास जैसे 
ही ᳯरपोटᭅ आई, उसक े  तुरंत बाद 12 अᮧैल, 2022 को एक टा᭭क फोसᭅ बना दी थी और 
सेᮓे टरी, पेᮝोिलयम एंड नेचुरल गैस िमिन᭭ᮝी ने 6 मई, 2022 को ᳯर᳞ ू ᳰकया। ᳰफर 
ए᭍सटनᭅल से᭢टी ऑिडट ओआईएसडी कᳱ तरफ से 9 मई, 2022 और 13 मई, 2022 क े  
बीच ᱟआ। ओआईएसडी ने दोबारा से इसको 24 मई, 2022 को ᳯर᳞ ू ᳰकया, फाइनली 

ऑयल एचएससी कमेटी िजसमᱶ इंिडपे᭠डᱶट डायरे᭍टर रहते हᱹ, उसने इसको ᳯर᳞ ू ᳰकया 
था, उसने 16 जून, 2022 को ᳯरसᱶटली ᳯर᳞ ू ᳰकया था।"                                              
 
1.37 Asked as to whether  there are  any clause for compensation/levy of penalties for 
poor performance or loss of production, the Ministry furnished the following reply:  
 
"Regarding compensation/levy of penalties, applicable clauses are available in 
the contract for poor performance/loss of production in addition to HSE aspects." 
 
1.38 On being asked by the Committee as to why OIL did not take corrective actions 
on observations made by OISD and the formats used by OIL were not in accordance 
with OISD guidelines and who were responsible for such omissions, the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas in its written reply submitted as under:  
 Post blowout, all Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) (1044 Nos.) have been 
revised through a Multi-Disciplinary Committee. In addition, Workover Mine under 
Drilling Services have been transferred to OGPS department for better 
monitoring and supervision.  
 All formats used at OIL were prepared as per OISD guidelines. 
 The daily diary was not filled-in as per statute by the IM. Presently, the same is 
now complied by all IMs. ” 
1.39 When asked to furnish reasons in detail for lapses pointed out by High Level 
Committee on the part of operator i.e. OIL and contractor i.e. M/s JEL, the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas in its written reply submitted as under:  
i. Evaluation of the viability of the cement barrier was considered in the well 
program. Planning group always re-addresses well control issues each time a 
barrier is removed or replaced. It was clearly mentioned in the well program to 
carry out well head repair only after WOC period of 48 hours. OIL has a policy of 
tagging and testing of cement plug in temporary/permanent abandonment 
ii. Though tagging and testing were not included in the well program but WOC of 48 
hrs starting from 04:00 pm of 26th May 2020 was clearly mentioned in well 
program as well as cementing report and there was no instruction to reduce the 
WOC period of 48 hrs. 
iii. Time period of Waiting on Cementation (WOC) was 48 hrs. However, M/s. John 
Energy limited (JEL) pulled out the drill pipe before 48 hours without any 
instruction from OIL and also failed to inform the Installation Manager. 
iv. Lack of knowledge and deficiency in understanding the gravity of a critical 
operation on the part of the JEL, which is evident from the fact that JEL without 
the instruction of the IM and before completion of planned WOC for 48 hours, 
and in absence of Production Engineer of OIL and Tool pusher of JEL had 
removed the BOP without the knowledge of IM. 

v.  When JEL personnel observed flow from the well, they should have had 
immediately nipple up BOP and shut the well for initial control of the well as per 
contract clause 19.1 under SCC (Section-III) and Bridging Document (clause no 
3.11.1.3) instead of wasting precious time over decision/instruction from OIL. 
Whereas as per Clause no 7.17 L (iii) under SCC (Section III) both Tool Pusher/ 
Tour Pusher and Driller must posses valid well control certificate (IWCF)/IADC 
and should be conversant with well control methods to take independent in case 
of well emergencies. 
1.40 When asked by the Committee as to what measures have been initiated to 
prevent recurrence of such blowouts given the presence of 21 active wells in and 
around Baghjan region, the Ministry submitted the following written reply: 
 
"SoP and set emergency procedure followed by OIL in case of blowout like 
situations were available. However, after the massive blowout (which was a 
difficult one to control), all the SoPs and Emergency Procedures were reviewed 
and re-assessed; and following stringent measures were taken after the 
Baghjan Blowout: 
 
a. Standard Operating Procedures: OIL India has been following Good 
Petroleum Industry Practices and has Standard Operating Procedures for its 
activities with respect to all operations directly or indirectly related to Drilling, 
Workover, Production of oil & gas including maintenance, Logging or any other 
related services. The Blowout incident at Baghjan well no. 5 had necessitated a 
review of the existing SOPs and also add relevant ones for further improvement 
and operational excellence. The Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for 
various activities in the oil & gas installations as well as for other service 
departments (1044 SoPs in total)in OIL India Limited were reviewed. From now 
on all SOPs will be reviewed after every 2 years. However, in case of change or 
upgradation in equipment/ system or adoption of any new system, the relevant 
SOP will be reviewed / added as and when required. 
 
b.Increased site visits of various levels of senior officials to different work 
centres with proper checklists.Such records of visits are to be maintained for 
periodic review by the Head of Departments, Group Heads, Head of Fields and 
concerned Directors. 
c. Structural change: OIL had earlier shifted to an asset-based structure for 
the Main Producing Area (MPA)under Fields Headquarter with an objective of 
increasing production through focused attention to the matured acreages 
covered by the Mining Leases in Assam and Arunachal Pradesh. The Asset 
based structure had proved to be effective and the Geology & Reservoir (G&R) 
teams had been reorganized in alignment with the Assets to provide focused 
support. However, post Baghjan Well N0-05 incident, it was perceived that there 
was scope for improvement in the structure especially in areas of drilling and 
workover operations.  
With the above in view certain structural changes were brought in, in the 
following areas: 
i. Workflow for custody transfer of well in different phases of its lifecycle. 

ii. Restructuring of Organogram for Workover activities. 
Under the above initiative, Workover Section, which was earlier a part of Drilling 
Services and reporting to Director (E&D) was brought under Director (Operations) 
along with the rig resources, allied services and personnel on ‘as is where is’ basis. 
This would ensure operational synergy, more job focus and single point responsibility 
in work-over operations.  
 d. Mines Structure: The above also necessitated restructuring of the “Mines 
Structure”. Accordingly, actions were taken to reassign Mines Owner, Mines Agent, 
Deemed Agent, Mines Manager etc., in line with the new operational structure at 
Fields Headquarter. 
 
e. CMT (Crisis Management Team) Department: The process of strengthening the 
existing CMT department was undertaken with adequate numbers of manpower and 
machinery.  The CMT personnel along with the other related to well control operations 
are undergoing Certified training programmes. Frequency of mock drills is being 
increased to keep the members in full readiness at all times. Last Level-III off-site 
Mock Drill at the Secondary Tank Farm(STF) Duliajan was conducted by OIL on 
21.01.2022.Process for procuring few equipment was also initiated. While some of 
the equipment have already arrived, the remaining are expected within a few months.  
f. Safety Audits: Presently OIL has a robust system of safety audits with following 
audits carried out in every Drilling / Workover location: 
 Pre- Spud in audits in Drilling Rigs before starting the operation. 
 Pre-Workover audits in Workover Rigs before starting the operation. 
 Surprise Safety audit during Drilling & Workover operations 
 Multidisciplinary Audit in all operating drilling rigs and workover rigs annually 
during Internal Safety Week observance 
 Multidisciplinary Audit was carried out during internal safety week from 17th 
November to 27th November 2021." 
 
Enquiries into the incident 
 
1.41 The enormity and severity of the blowout incident caught the attention of the 
Government and the judicial bodies which resulted in constitution of several internal and 
external Committees for enquiring the incident and making recommendations thereon.  
Three of such Committees require mention in this Report.   
 One Committee was constituted by Oil Industry Safety Directorate (OISD) 
consisting of Shri Zafar Ali, Additional Director (E&P), OISD, Shri Ajoy Kumar Das, 
GM(D), ONGC and Shri Dibyajyoti Dutta, DGM(D), ONGC to investigate the incident of 
blowout, to identify the root cause of the accident and to suggest remedial measures to 
prevent recurrence of such events.  
 
1.42 After the submission of the Report of the Committee appointed by OISD, Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas constituted a three Member High Level Committee 
consisting of Shri S.C.L. Das, IAS, DG, DGH, Shri B.C. Bora, Former CMD, ONGC and 
Shri T.K. Sengupta, Former Director (Offshore) ONGC.  The Committee was headed by 
DG, DGH.  The terms of  the reference of the Committee were to identify the lapses in 

following laid down protocols and procedures which led to the incident and to 
recommend short and long-term measures to prevent the recurrence of such incidents 
including identifying any gaps in laid down standard operating procedures. 
 
1.43 A Committee was also constituted by the Hon’ble National Green Tribunal 
consisting of Hon’ble Mr. Justice B.P. Katakey, former Judge of the Gauhati High Court, 
Chairperson, Member Secretary, Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), Member, a 
senior expert from Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), Member, Dr. 
Sarbeswar Kalita, Professor and Head of the Department of Environment Science, 
Guwahati University, Member, Shri Abhay Kumar Johari, IFS (Retired), Former 
Member, Biodiversity Board, Member, Shri Ajit Hazarika, Ex-Chairman, ONGCL, 
Member, Member Secretary/Senior Scientist, Assam State Pollution Control Board 
Member (PCB, Assam), Member, District Magistrate, Tinsukia District, Assam (DC, 
Tinsukia), Member  
 
Disciplinary action against officials of OIL  
 
1.44 The enquiry of the high level Committee appointed by Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas and Justice B.P. Katakey Committee Report appointed by NGT had found 
out lapses in the planning of the workover and execution of the same.   
 
1.45 When the Committee enquired about the lapse on the part of the Installation 
Manager overseeing the workover at Baghjan well-5, the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas in its written reply submitted as under: 
 
“There is no lapse on the part of the above-mentioned Installation Manager. M/s 
John Energy Limited (JEL) failed to inform the Installation Manager and violated 
procedural requirements regarding change of work program (Nipple down of 
BOP) prior to completion of WOC period of 48 hours which can be issued only by 
the Installation Manager.” 
 
Explaining the view of the accountability of officials present in site, the officials of the 
Ministry  made the following submission during the oral evidence:- 
 
“इसमᱶ कहᱭ डाउट नहᱭ है ᳰक कहᱭ न कहᱭ चूक थी। हमारे सारे एसओपीज हᱹ, लेᳰकन 
ᳰफर भी यह घटना ᱟई। इसमᱶ ᳰकसी को दो राय नहᱭ है ᳰक ᳰकसी कᳱ कहᱭ न कहᱭ चूक 
थी। 
 सर, आपने ᮧ᳤ पूछा था ᳰक जो काम हो रहा था, वह अपनी ᳯरग थी या हायडᭅ 
ᳯरग थी। यह ᳰकसी क᭥पनी, कॉ᭠ᮝै᭍टर कᳱ एक हायडᭅ ᳯरग थी। वह काम कर रहा 
था, लेᳰकन वहां िज᭥मेदारी काफᳱ लोगᲂ कᳱ थी ᳰक ᳰकसको वहां पर ᭍या करना चािहए 
था। उसमᱶ नोᳯटस ᳰकया गया ᳰक िजस-िजस कᳱ िज᭥मेवारी बननी चािहए थी, उसमᱶ 
कहᱭ न कहᱭ चूक ᱟई है। सर, ᳰकसी न ᳰकसी कᳱ िज᭥मेवारी होती है और उसमᱶ भी 
लै᭡सेज हᱹ। उसमᱶ क ु छ लोगᲂ क े  िखलाफ ऐ᭍शन िलया गया है, उस पर अᱧण जी ᮧकाश 
डालᱶगे।" 

 
1.46 When enquired about the disciplinary action against the officials of OIL the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in its written reply submitted as under: 
 
“OIL initiated disciplinary proceedings against 18 executives. Based on the outcome 
of the disciplinary committee, Major penalty has been imposed on 2 Executives, 2 
Executives have been issued administrative warning and rest were exonerated as 
no charges as per Memorandum of Article of Charges as per OIL’s “Oil Indian 
Executive Conduct and Appeal Rules” could be established. 
 
Near Miss Reporting 
 
1.47 OIL strictly implemented the system of reporting of near miss incidents. To this 
effect, in order to encourage reporting of Near Miss incident, a reward system is in 
place. In the event of any near miss incidents, investigations are carried out and 
corrective measures are circulated for knowledge sharing either as a report or as a 
safety alert through oilmail (OIL’s intranet facility). The near miss incidents are also 
discussed in the safety meetings at all levels including Board level through 
presentations. Similar system is also followed for occurrence of any accidents, fire or 
dangerous occurrence. Glimpse of near miss reporting of OIL for last 5 years is as 
under.  
 
*The above data includes any unsafe act and unsafe conditions. 
 
1.48 When the Committee asked as to why the number of these incidents is 
increasing despite the strict adherence to SoP's, the Ministry in its written reply stated 
the following:-  
 
“A near miss, is an unplanned event that has the potential to cause, but does not 
actually result in human injury, environmental or equipment damage, or an 
interruption to normal operation. In short, Near miss reporting is a proactive 
measure of identifying early warning signs of an incident. 
 
An increasing trend of near misses reporting aids in taking proactive step to 
improve the workplace and move towards rectifying potential hazards and risk 
which can cause harm to human, environment, or equipment. 
 
The reporting has increased due to increase in awareness and rewarding program 
is in place to motivate the reporting of near miss. These reports are analyzed to 
identify the root cause of incident and implement the control measures throughout 
the company to prevent reoccurrence of such incidents. Reporting of increased 

near miss causes reduction in no. of accidents. Hence increase in near miss is 
desired for safety of the operation.” 
 
Analysis/Investigation of accident/dangerous occurrence 
 
1.49 All accidents and high potential near misses are investigated by a 
multidisciplinary team. Annual accident and near miss analysis are carried out and 
circulated.  
  
Year Fatal Serious Minor Reportable Total Loss Time Injury 
Frequency Rate(LTIF) 
2017-18 0 9 1 10 0.392 
2018-19 0 6 0 6 0.236 
2019-20 0 2 2 4 0.156 
2020-21 5 3 1 9 0.357 
2021-22 1 1 1 3 0.107 
 
 
 
 
 
HSE Performance 
 
1.50 Apart from number of audits, compliance of HSE recommendations, safety 
training, near miss reporting, OIL also tracks the Loss Time Injury Frequency Rate 
(LTIF) on regular basis and maintains annual record.  

 
 
IT-enabled system for core functions:  Introduction of IT-enabled system for 
Drilling, Workover and Production operations to ensure availability of real-time 
information on critical well operations to Installation Manager. 
Review of Disaster Management Plans(DMP): The Off-Site DMP was reviewed 
and submitted to District Administration of Dibrugarh &Tinsukia. Moreover, mock 
drills being conducted including District Administration, State Disaster 
Management Authorities, Neighbouring Industries etc.  
Training: Well control training being imparted to Drilling Rig personnel and it will 
be also extended to workover rig key personnel and production engineers. Till 
now around 128 Personnel has been trained. 
 
A specialised training on “Basic Life Safety and First Responder” has been 
introduced for executive as well as employees for personnel safety at their 
workplaces and emergencies. Till now around 114 Personnel has been trained. 
2-Day Training Programme on HSE Management System has been organised for 
key officials working in operational areas for enhancing the awareness on HSE on 
27th to 28th July 2021. 
Explaining the training being given to employees of OIL during the oral evidence, 
the representatives of OIL made the following submission:- 
“ ……इसक े  अलावा हम लोगᲂ ने ᮝेᳲनग और आिडट वगैरह मᱶ से᭢टी इिनिशएᳯट᭪स 
िलए हᱹ। से᭢टी आिडट, जैसा पहले आप देख सकते हᱹ 641 ᱟए थे 2020-21 मᱶ और 
बागजान इंसीडᱶट क े  बाद, हम लोगᲂ ने उसे बढ़ाकर करीब 731 कर ᳰदया है। ये वैᳯरयस 
आिडट जैसे ᳰक, वकᭅ ओवर िᮟᳲलग आिडट, फायर आिडट, ए᭠वायनᭅमᱶट आिडट, सरᮧाइज 
आिडट आᳰद। ए᭍सटनᭅल एजᱶसीज़ हᱹ, जैसे ओआईएसडी, डीजीएमएस हम लोगᲂ क े िलए 
आिडट करती हᱹ। …..”  
 
 
 

Relief and Rehabilitation 
1.51 When the Committee enquired about how many families had to be relocated from 
the Baghjan oil blowout site for safety reasons and whether they have been resettled in 
their original habitats,the Ministry in its written reply submitted the following: 
 
"Around 3000 families were shifted to 12 Relief Camps for 3 to 4 months as a 
precautionary measure.  The camps were closed when the well was brought 
under control.  The persons staying in the camps went back to their homes.” 
 
Monetary Compensation to affected Families  
1.52 The National Green Tribunal (NGT) in its preliminary order dated 06.08.2020 had 
directed for payment of compensation to the families affected by the fire and blowout 
incident at Baghjan-5.   
 1.53 When asked by the Committee about the families identified for monetary 
compensation affected by the fire and blowout incident, the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas in its written reply submitted as under: 
“As per preliminary order dated 06-08-2020, NGT had directed for payment of 
interim compensation in 3 categories to local residents nearby to OIL’s well 
Baghjan -5 as under: 
 
a. Category 
(i) 
Rs. 25.00 Lakhs (whose houses have been completely 
gutted by fire) 
b. Category 
(ii) 
Rs. 10.00 Lakhs (whose houses have been severely 
damaged) 
c. Category 
(iii)            
Rs. 2.5 Lakhs (whose house has been moderately 
/partially damaged or        whose standing crops and 
horticulture have been partially damaged 
 
Accordingly, OIL released the payment to the Deputy Commissioner, Tinsukia, as 
per the list submitted by the District Administration. 
 
 NGT Order No. of 
families Amount (Rs) Total 
A Category (i) 12 ₹ 25,00,000.00  ₹ 3,00,00,000.00 
B Category (ii) 57 ₹ 10,00,000.00 ₹ 5,70,00,000.00 
C Category (iii)           561 ₹ 2,50,000.00  ₹ 14,02,50,000.00 
 ₹ 22,72,50,000.00 
 
Subsequently, as per advise of District Administration, Compensation for 
Category (ii) and Category (iii) was revised to Rs 15 Lakhs and 10 Lakhs 
respectively. 
 
Accordingly, for Category (ii) @15 Lakhs for 173 families and @ 10 Lakhs for 439 
families, a total amount of ₹ 69.85 Cr, was paid as compensation.  Rs 22.725 Cr 

was already paid as detailed in above table and balance Rs 47.125 Cr was later 
deposited with DC, Tinsukia. 
 
 
Revised Order 
as per tripartite 
agreement 
No. of 
families Amount (Rs) Total 
B Category (ii) 173 ₹ 15,00,000.00  ₹ 25,95,00,000.00 
C Category (iii)           439 ₹ 10,00,000.00  ₹ 43,90,00,000.00 
 A ₹ 69,85,00,000.00  
 
  
B (already paid 
as per NGT 
order) ₹ 22,72,50,000.00  
 
  
Remaining 
(A-B) 
₹ 
47,12,50,000.00 
 
Additionally, as per the advice of Deputy Commissioner, Tinsukia one time 
compensation based on District Administration survey was given to the affected families 
as detailed below :- 
 
 Order of DC No. of 
families 
Amount 
(Rs) Total 
A One time compensation  1285 ₹ 50,000.00 ₹ 6,42,50,000.00 
b One time compensation  3887 ₹ 30,000.00 ₹ 11,66,10,000.00 
c One time compensation  8321 ₹ 15,000.00 ₹ 12,48,15,000.00 
d One time compensation  1993 ₹ 10,000.00 ₹ 1,99,30,000.00 
    ₹ 
32,56,05,000.00 
 
Furthermore, as per the advice of Deputy Commissioner, Tinsukia certain other 
compensation were disbursed as detailed below :- 
 
 Order of DC Total 
a Compensation to three families of deceased (not 
due to fire/accident)  near Baghjan blowout site  
₹ 18,00,000.00 
b Reimbursement to DC for various meeting held 
by DC amongst various authorities in connection 
with Baghjan 
₹ 15,00,000.00 
  Total ₹ 33,00,000.00 
           
Overall, OIL paid Rs.102.74 Cr as compensation to affected families.” 
1.54 On being asked by the Committee about the criteria/procedure adopted by OIL 
for identifying households for compensation, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
in its written reply submitted as under: 
 
“Based on the assessment, the District Administration intimated OIL about the 
total number of beneficiaries against various categories of affected families, 

which were also recommended by the Committee constituted by the NGT. 
Accordingly, OIL released the amount to Deputy Commissioner, Tinsukia for 
payment to the beneficiaries, as identified by the District Administration.” 
 
1.55 The Committee enquired about the number of households that were gutted due 
to the impact of the Baghjan blowout and details of relief and rehabilitation measures 
extended, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in its written reply submitted as 
under: 
“A total of 12 Nos. of houses were gutted due to blowout at Baghjan Well No.5. 
Post Blowout, 1610 families (6700 nos. people) were accommodated at 12 relief 
camps established by OIL. All the Relief Camps were provided with food, shelter, 
lighting, hygiene, toilet, drinking water medical requirements and other basic 
amenities.  The District Administration extended extensive support in running the 
relief camps.” 
 
1.56 When asked about the compensation paid  to the next kin of the firefighters, the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in its written reply submitted as under: 
“Compensation paid including the Personal Accident Insurance Coverage, 
 Contributory Term Life insurance, Compensation under The Employee’s 
Compensation Act, 1923, EDLI etc. are as hereunder: 
 
Name GPA  Workmen 
Compensation SSS EDLI Total 
Compensation 
X ₹ 
40,49,830.00 ₹ 10,43,475.00 ₹ 30 
Lakhs 
₹7,02,000 ₹ 87,95,305.00 
Y ₹ 5,03,488.00 ₹ 14,59,800.00 ₹ 30 
Lakhs 
₹7,02,000 ₹ 56,65,288.00 
 
Terminal benefits such as PF, Gratuity paid to the dependents of the 
Employees are as hereunder: 
 
Name PF  Gratuity  Total Amount 
Paid 
X ₹ 88,71,100.79 ₹ 20,00,000.00 ₹ 1,08,71,100.79 
Y ₹ 11,55,581.86 ₹ 5,48,691.00 ₹ 17,04,272.86 
 
1.57 When the Committee asked about the financial assistance for education of the 
children of deceased firefighters, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in its written 
reply submitted as under:  
 
“Compassionate employment has been provided as per Company Policy to the 
son of Late Tikheswar Gohain and wife of Late Durlov Gogoi .After employment 
their children are eligible for educational facilities as per OIL’s Children Education 
policy.” 

NGT Directions about violations and non-compliance by OIL  
1.58 The Committee perused the recommendations of the Committee appointed by 
NGT.  The following are some of the important observations:- 
“(i) Based on the information gathered thus far, the Committee has been able 
to arrive at key findings with conclusive evidence inter-alia of violations and                   
non-compliance by OIL of key environmental safeguards and safety oversight 
that appears to render the environmental protections, particularly under the Air 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981, Water (Prevention and Control of 
Pollution) Act, 1974, Hazardous Waste (Management and Handing) Rules, 1989 
and more recently the Hazardous and other Wastes (Management & 
Transboundary Movement) Rules, 2016 ineffective. 
 
(ii) OIL never had the CTE/NOC and/or the CTO both under the Water Act 
and/or under the Air Act, when it first started its drilling operations in Well 
Baghjan-5 in 2006.  What is alarming is that the records furnished by OIL and 
PCB, Assam consistently indicate a clear infraction of environment safeguards as 
prescribed under the aforesaid laws by OIL, even for the subsequent years.  As 
evident from the reply to the Show Cause Notice dated 19.06.2020 and the 
records submitted by PCB, Assam, the mandatory consent under the Water Act 
and Air Act was approved by PCB, Assam only for the years 2008-09, 2012-13, 
2018-19. 
 
(iii) OIL had no CTE/NOC and/or CTO either under the Water Act and/or the 
Air Act and/or authorization under the Hazardous Waste (Management, Handling 
and Transboundary Movement) Rules, 2016.   
 
(iv) On the day of the blowout of Well Baghjan-5 on 27.05.2020 and explosion 
on 09.06.2020, OIL did not have the mandatory consents including the CTE/NOC 
and/or the CTO under the Water Act, Air Act and/or the Hazardous Waste 
(Management, Handling and Transboundary Movement) Rules, 2016.  The 
omissions on the part of OIL amounts to a clear violation not merely of the 
statutory mandate but also the conditions that have been stipulated under Clause 
10 (iii) and (vi) of the Environment Clearance dated 11.05.2020 with respect to 
the Extension Drilling & Testing of Hydrocarbons at 7 locations under the DSNP 
Area, where the blowout and subsequent fire occurred with respect to Well 
Baghjan-5. 
 
(v) Having reviewed the documents placed before the Committee by both OIL 
and the Assam State Biodiversity Board, there appears to be a clear 
noncompliance vis-à-vis of conducting the Biodiversity Impact Assessment study 
as was mandated vide Clause 1 of the Order dated 04.12.2006 passed by the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Goa Foundation vs. Union of India 
[W.P.(C) No. 460/2004].” 
 
 
 

Environmental impact assessment  
1.59 Justice B. P. Katakey report sought legal action against OIL India for violating air, 
water and environmental protection acts for extraction of hydro-carbons in the 
ecologically fragile Baghjan region. 
 
1.60  When asked by the Committee as to whether OIL India obtained mandatory 
approvals/clearances for extraction of hydrocarbons in and around Baghjan region, the 
Ministry of PNG has stated the following:- 
 
“OIL had obtained all the mandatory statutory clearances as per the requisite 
applicable laws as detailed below : - 
 
OIL had obtained Consent to Establish (“CTE”) and Consent to Operate (“CTO”) 
under :- 
(i)         Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 (“Water Act”), 
(ii)        Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 (“Air Act”); and  
 
Also, Hazardous waste authorization was obtained under :- 
 
(iii)   Hazardous Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules, 1989 
(“Hazardous Waste Management Rules”);  
For Environment Clearance of Baghjan Well No.5, the Environment Impact 
Assessment (EIA) Notification was published by MoEF&CC in Sept., 2006., 
however, the preparatory work had started prior to the notification and the drilling 
operations started in the month of November 2006.  
Subsequently, OIL applied for EC on 19.11.2007 against drilling of development 
and exploratory wells at North-Hapjan-Tinsukia-Dhola area in Tinsukia District 
Assam and was granted EC on 01.11.2011. 
 
1.61 According to Justice Katakey Report, the Supreme Court granted a conditional 
approval to Oil India stated that the Company must carry out a bio-diversity impact 
assessment before commencing extraction of hydro-carbons.  However, Oil India did 
not carry out the required assessment for the same.  
 
1.62 When asked by the Committee to furnish reasons for not carrying out bio-
diversity impact assessment before commencing extraction of hydro-carbons, The 
Ministry in its written reply submitted the following:-  
 
“All statutory clearances were in place during the operation at Baghjan Well no. 
5. The condition for carrying out Biodiversity study was recommended against a 
completely different proposal of OIL namely on Extension Drilling and Testing of 
hydrocarbons at 7 (seven) locations under Dibru-Saikhowa National Park Area, 
Assam.   
 
As the said proposal required to carry out drilling more than 4000 mtrs below a 
Protected Area using latest technology of Extended reach Drilling (ERD), while 
granting Wildlife Clearance the Standing Committee of NBWL in its meeting held 
on 29th July, 2017 and Hon’ble Supreme Court in its order dated 7th September, 

2017, recommended to carry out Bio-diversity study and implementing  the 
mitigation plan among other allied conditions.  
 
It is pertinent to mention that the biodiversity is in progress and OIL has not 
started any drilling under the above-mentioned proposal.” 
 
 
TERI (The Energy and Resources Institute) Report 
 
 
1.63 After the blowout incident, since news reports had suggested extensive damage 
to the environment of the surrounding areas due to spill over of oil condensate, noise, 
burning of crops, vegetation, tea bushes etc.  Accordingly, OIL appointed TERI (The 
Energy and Resource Institute) for assessment of environmental quality – water, soil 
and vegetation in and around Baghjan-5.  A biodiversity impact assessment was also 
carried out by Assam State Biodiversity Board.   
1.64 Oil India engaged M/s TERI (The Energy and Resources Institute) for 
assessment of environmental quality-water, soil and vegetation in and around Baghjan 
Well 5.  When the Committee sought to know whether TERI has submitted its report to 
Oil India, and if so, what are its findings, the Ministry in its written reply stated the 
following:  
 
“Yes. The final assessment report was submitted by TERI on 28.02.2022 and the 
findings are illustrated below :- 
Sample Findings 
Soil The sample analysis showed no occurrence of pollutants like heavy metals, 
Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAH) and Benzene, Toluene, Ethylbenzene and 
Xylene (BTEX). Other physico-chemical properties analysis results showed that the 
soil is comparable with normal soil type. 
Plant/ 
Vegetation 
Blowout associated pollutants like Total Petroleum Hydrocarbon (TPH), BTEX and 
PAH was found below the detection limit.  
Surface Water Surface water was found to be free from oil and grease, PAH and heavy metal 
contamination.  
Ground Water The metallic salts and heavy metals such as Zn, Ni, Cr, Cr (6+), Pb and Cr were 
found to be below detection limits as per IS 10500:2012 drinking water standards.  
Fish The sample analysis results showed no accumulation of PAH, BTEX and tested no 
heavy metals like cadmium, lead, mercury, nickel and hexavalent chromium.  
 
 
1.65 When asked by the Committee as to whether Assam State Bio-Diversity Board 
had submitted its report to assess the impact on biodiversity in the aftermath of the 
Baghjan blowout, the Ministry has stated the following:  
 
“A tripartite MoU between Assam State Biodiversity Board, International Union 
for Conservation and Nature and OIL was signed on 04.05.2021 to carry out a 
Biodiversity Impact Assessment Study in Dibru Saikhowa National Park and 
Develop Comprehensive Management Plan & also, to support in implementation 
of the Management Plan Developed. The study would be carried out in phases 
as illustrated below :- 
 

Phase Date Status 
field survey 3 rd to 8th Aug, 2021 Completed 
impact assessment 27th Nov to 9th Dec, 
2021 
Completed 
Ecosystem services 
review   
25th Apr to 6 th May, 
2022 
Completed 
biodiversity 
management plan 
  Interim Report for 2 seasons submitted 
in Jan, 2022. and First Draft Report on 
Ecosystem was submitted in July, 2022. 
Final Report awaited 
Mitigation Plan   Yet to be started 
 
Directions of National Green Tribunal (NGT)  
 
1.66 NGT had also mentioned in their report that there were impacts on crops and 
ecology of the nearby areas. OIL in this regard, had been undertaking all possible 
efforts by engaging its own resources and engaging hired services from organizations of 
national repute to minimize the impacts on the environment and to recuperate from the 
damage caused to the crops and ecology in the vicinity of the affected area. Apart from 
the District Administration, the following organizations/Agencies were engaged for the 
purpose for accessing the impact on environment and find suitable mitigation measures: 
 
(i)   M/s ERM India Pvt. Limited, an NABET/QCI accredited Environmental    Impact 
Assessment (EIA) Consultant. 
(ii)  The Energy Research Institute (TERI) 
(iii)  Assam Agricultural University (AAU). 
(iv)  CSIR- Northeast Institute of Science and Technology. 
(iv)  IIT, Guwahati 
(V) Assam State Biodiversity Board  
 
As per reports submitted by these organizations, there has been no adverse 
permanent effect on the surrounding areas including the Blowout site. The summary of 
various studies are as under:  
 
Report of Assam Agriculture University  
 The soil sample collected from the North, South, East and West direction within 
500 m radius of the Baghjan (BGN -5.)  
 Porosity, alkalinity, pH and electrical conductivity (EC) were in the safe limit. 
 Soil pH ranged between minimum 5.33 (acidic) and maximum 7.64 (slightly 
saline). 
 The soil carbon (WBC) data ranged from 0.97 to 2.27%. 
 Soil available nitrogen was found to be in the lower range.  
Conclusion of The Energy Research Institute (TERI) 

 Noise level at the distance of 500m from well head were in the range of 75- 80 
db. 
 The monitoring results for Parameter are within the NAAQS limits.  
CSIR- North East Institute of Science and Technology (NEIST): 
 Occurrence of local earthquake tremors of smaller magnitude.  
 The magnetic field declination was observed at the blowout site (Latitude 
27.597150 N and Longitude 95.3798940 E).  
 High frequency disturbances (noise) levels were observed as recorded by the 
seismographs, originated from the blowout site during Jet fire Stage. 
Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati  
 Sound Intensity Measurement Inference: No detrimental effect to the structural 
integrity. 
 Spectral Energy Inference:  No detrimental effect to the structural integrity. 
 Frequency Inference: No significant influence to the structural integrity. 
 Thermal Measurement Inference: No significant effect of fire in blowout well in 
Baghjan well 5 to the structural integrity. 
M/s ERM India Pvt. Limited, an NABET/QCI accredited Environmental Impact 
Assessment (EIA) Consultant. 
 Post blowout period ambient quality monitoring results revealed that all the 
pollutants were as per NAAQ standards. 
 Sample were collected within the 5 Km radius of BGN-5  to monitor the Physico-
Chemical Parameters including  TPH, PAH and BTEX. 
 No abnormality was observed in Physico-Chemical Parameters  
 No visible sign of condensate deposition observed at DSNP soils at the 
monitored locations. 
Central Pollution Control Board  
 Sample collected from 05 water body within the range from 100 to 500 Mtr from 
Well Head. 
 All Parameters are within limits for surface water quality. 
 Ambient Air Quality all parameters are within limits. 
Bioremediation 
 Effective restoration of the oil spill affected area. 
 Restoration in shortest possible duration. 

 Plantation of native species Vigna mungo (Urad bean) part of Eco restoration of 
contaminated site. 
Biodiversity Study by Assam State Biodiversity Board in collaboration 
International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) 
 The Biodiversity study is being carried out in and around  Dibru-Saikhowa- 
National Park including MaguriMotapungbeel by Assam State Biodiversity Board. 
However, NGT in its order had directed to constitute three committees under 
MoEF&CC, MoPNG and Govt. of Assam to study the aspects of regulatory compliance, 
safety in the operations and ecological impact in the area on account of the blow out 
respectively. MoPNG has constituted committee as per direction. The committee formed 
under MoEF&CC was reconstituted by Supreme Court dated 09.02.2021 due to matter 
concerning conflict of interest by appointment of a committee member.  
 
Restoration of Environment near Blowout Site 
 
 1.67 When asked by the Committee as to what action plan was finalized by Oil India 
with regard to restoration of flora and fauna and undo the environmental damage that 
occurred in nearby areas of the well site in Baghjan, the Ministry in its written reply 
stated to following:  
 
“No environmental damage has occurred in nearby areas of well site Baghjan. 
Post Baghjan Blowout, OIL took up immediate bioremediation work for affected 
area in association with M/s TERI. Additionally, OIL carried out Environment 
impact assessment study by NABL accredited M/s ERM India Pvt. Ltd and  M/s 
TERI. The study reports don’t show any deviation from prescribed environmental 
parameters. 
 
 OIL has signed an MoU with Pollution Control Board, Assam on 21.07.2022 for 
carrying out mass plantation in Baghjan well No.5 plinth in Tinsukia District, 
Assam. Additionally, OIL is carrying out a Biodiversity Impact Assessment study in 
Dibru Saikhowa National Park in association with Assam State Biodiversity Board 
and International Union for Conservation of Nature. As per the recommendation of 
the study report, OIL will develop and implement an ecosystem conservation 
management plan.” 
 

Elucidating about the steps taken to restore the environment in the incident site at 
Baghjan, the representatives of the MoPNG/OIL India Limited submitted the following 
during the oral evidence:-  
"….हम लोगᲂ ने इनवारमᱶट कᳱ तरफ भी क ुछ इिनिशएᳯटव िलए हᱹ, जैसे आप देख सकते हᱹ ᳰक ये हम 
लोगᲂ ने ᳰद इनजᱮ ᳯरसोसᭅ इं᭭टीᲷ ूट के  ᳇ारा बायो रे᭥यूडेशन बागजान साइट का कराया था। पहली 
फᳱगर मᱶ आप देख सकते हᱹ, जब बागजान चल रहा था तब ऐसा फᳱगर था और आज क े  टाइम मᱶ 
रे᭭टोर होने क े  बाद ऐसा फᳱगर हो गया है। इसके अलावा, हम लोगᲂ ने कुछ इनवायरमᱶटल ᭭टडीज भी 
क ु छ एजᱶसी से करायी थी जैसे ᳰक थमᭅल मैᳲपग एंड साउंड कैरे᭍टᳯर᭭ट᭍स सेि᭭मक एड ᭔योᮕाᳰफकल 
᭭टडीज इनवायरमेट इ᭥पै᭍ट असेसमᱶट एयर Ფािलटी नॉयस लेवल सभी ᭭टडीज ने बोला है ᳰक वहां पर 
कोई मेजर इफ ै᭍ट बागजान ए᭍सीडᱶट क े  बाद नहᱭ आया है। 
हम लोग बागजान के  आसपास क े  ᭃेᮢᲂ मᱶ एक बायो-डायवᳶसटीज मैनेजमᱶट ᭡लॉन भी लागू 
कर रहे हᱹ िजसक े  िलए असम ᭭टेट बायोडायवᳶसटी बोडᭅ को इंगेज ᳰकया गया है। इंटरनेशनल यूिनयन 
फॉर क᭠जरवेशन ऑफ नेचर क े  सहयोग से ᳰकया है। इसका फᳱ᭨ड सवᱷ 3 से 8 अग᭭त, 2021 के बीच 
िडᮩूगढ़ से सैखोवा नेशनल पाकᭅ, मागुरी मोतापुंग बील मᱶ ᱟआ था। उसका इ᭥पै᭍ट असेसमᱶट ᳯरपोटᭅ 27 
नव᭥बर, 2021  से 9 ᳰदसंबर क े  बीच ᱟआ । 25 अᮧैल से 6 मई, 2020 क े  बीच इको िस᭭टम ᳯर᳞ ु 
ᱟआ, फायर ऑिडट, ए᭠यायनᭅमᱶट ऑिडट, सरᮧाइज ऑिडट आᳰद ए᭍सटनᭅल एजᱶसीज है, जैसे 
ओआईएसडी. डीजीएमएस हम लोगᲂ क े िलए ऑिडट करती हᱹ।” 
 
Security Management System 
 
1.68 Security of its people and installation is of prime importance to OIL. Accordingly, 
a security policy has been approved by the top management and a SOP for Security 
activities has been made and reviewed from time to time. All OIL installations and field 
locations are deployed with security personnel as per the degree of security 
requirement. The Security Force comprises of Central Industrial Security Force (CISF), 
Assam Industrial Security Force (AISF), Assam Home Guard (AHG), OIL Security, Work 
Contract Labourer (WCL) & Village Defence Protection (VDP). Satellite patrolling camps 
are established in field locations to provide   immediate security assistance. Mock drills 
are carried out regularly with District Administration, Neighbouring companies, CISF, 
NDRF and community to sensitise and bring awareness on Dos & Don’ts during an 
emergency situation. OIL has divided its installations in three categories on the basis of 
Production Impact, Threat and Local Demography, viz. (i) Vital Installations, (ii) Less 
Vital Installations and (iii) Non-Vital Installations. 
 
Based on above categories, all OIL installations and field locations are deployed with 
security personnel as per following: (i) All vital installations are guarded either by CISF, 
AISF and Armed Home Guards under command of Police Neighborhood Coordination 
Officers (NCOs)/Special Police Officers (SPOs) or a security team without arms under 
command and control of SPOs. (ii) All less vital installations are guarded by team of 
(8/10) unarmed security personnel stationed inside the location. (iii) All non-vital 
installations are guarded by Home Guards/ Hired security personnel or VDP members 
round the clock in shift. (iv) Round the clock armed patrolling for all installations are also 
in place. For the Crude Oil Trunk Pipeline of OIL, Line walking, Arial Patrolling and Joint 
Patrolling of Pipeline RoW by OIL’s personnel are done in a structured manner.  

 
Apart from above, following security measures are adopted: (i) Satellite patrolling camps 
(11 Nos.) are established in field locations to provide immediate security assistance. (ii) 
Round the clock security control room is working for any help. (iii)  Enhancement in 
armed security personnel. (iv) Regular liaison with District police & Civil District 
Administration, CRPF, IB & Army. (v) Attending Quarterly Onshore Security 
Coordination Committee (OSCC) meeting presided by DGP Assam Police as per 
schedule. (vi)  Attending Monthly District Level Coordination Committee (DLCC) 
meeting presided by DCs. (vii) Conducting security threat drills by CISF. (viii) Security 
personnel Participation in mock drills at Installations. (ix) Vulnerable bridges are 
protected by the Home guard personnel under Assam Police Department. 
 
OIL, in order to upgrade its Security System, is taking up following measures, which are 
in progress: (i) CCTVs has been recommended for all vital installation and are under 
various phases of implementation. (ii) Drones surveillance project for few operational 
area and pipeline is in process. (iii) Modernization of CISF with modern gadgets such 
Baggage scanner, tyre killers, smart card ID, Door Frame Metal Detector (DFMD), 
Handheld Metal Detector (HHMD), Night Vision Devices (NVDs) etc. 
 
Elaborating on the Security Measures followed by Oil India, the Following 
submission were made during the oral evidence: 
 
“ िस᭍योᳯरटी एि᭍टिवटीज ऑयल इं᭭टालेशन सीआईएसएफ, एआईएसएफ और ऑयल 
िस᭍योᳯरटी फोसᭅ से गाडᱷड हᱹ। हम ऑयल ऑᮧेशन एᳯरयाज़ मᱶ ᮟोन सवᱷ भी करते हᱹ। ऑयल 
फᳱ᭨ड पेᮝोᳲलग आᯯड फोसᭅ पसᭅनल ᳇ारा कᳱ जाती है। हमारी िडि᭭ᮝ᭍ट लॅबल कमेटी मीᳳट᭏स 
भी िडि᭭ᮝ᭍ट और ᭭टेट अथाᳯरटीज़ के साथ होती है। 
   हमने िवलेज िडफᱶस पाटᱮज भी रखी है, जो पाइपलाइन कᳱ पेᮝोᳲलग मᱶ सपोटᭅ करती है। 
बागजान ᭭टेट क े  क ु छ फोटोज भी हᱹ, ᳯरसᱶटली 7 माचᭅ, 2022 क े  िचᮢ हᱹ। इसक े अलावा अबेडेट 
वे᭨स हᱹ, जहां हमᱶ तेल और गैस िमलने कᳱ कोई आशा नहᱭ है, इसे हम पूरा ᳯर᭭टोर कर देते हᱹ। 
आप देख सकते हᱹ पहले कभी यहां िᮟᳲलग ᱟई थी और अब पता नहᱭ चलेगा ᳰक यहां िᮟᳲलग 
ᱟई थी।“  
Upgradation of Infrastructure 
 
1.69 The Committee observed that the Fire Control Operations at Baghjan-5 were 
delayed due to non-availability of infrastructure to land the aircraft carrying the Snubbing 
Unit mobilize from Canada.  The High Level Committee had also recommended that 
OIL should develop a strong Crises Management Team well equipped and trained to 
handle blowouts.  Accordingly, the Committee made queries to the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas about capacity building at OIL and strengthening of 
infrastructure in Assam.   
 
1.70 When asked about the status of procurement of new equipment by OIL, the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in its written reply submitted as under: 
 
 “The status of procurement estimated to cost Rs. 51 crore is as under: 

 
Sl. Item Description Status 
1 Breathing Apparatus with extra 
cylinder  
Order Completed. Material received on 11-08-2021. 
2 Fire Proximity Suit Order Completed. Material received on 24-08-2021. 
3 2000 GPM Foam Monitor (4 nos.) Order completed. Materials received on 
15.09.2021.  
4 1000 GPM Foam Monitor (2 nos.) Order completed. Materials received on 
15.09.2021. Installation & Commissioning 
completed. 
5 Hydraulic Fork Lift  (Dual Drive) Order completed. Material received on 20.09.2021. 
Installation & Commissioning completed. 
6 1000 GPM Foam Monitor (2 nos.) Order completed. Materials received on 
24.09.2021. Installation & Commissioning 
completed. 
7 Trailer mounted Fire Pump  Order Completed. Material received on 16-11-2021. 
8 50 Tonne Hydraulic Jack Order Completed. Material received on 24-11-2021. 
9 Crawler Bulldozer Order Completed. Material received on 28/07/2022  
10 Air Compressors Order Completed. Material received on 28-12-2021. 
11 Electrification Job at CMT Yard & 
BOP Hanger 
Job in progress. EDC 31.08.2022 
12 Complete Athey Wagon with 
mast & undercarriage with 
accessories 
In process. EDC 30/11/2022.  
13 Fire Water Pump Unit (4000 ±  
5% GPM / 15140 ±  5% LPM 
Diesel Engine Driven )  
Delivery as per schedule. EDC : 15th February, 
2023 
14 250 KVA Generating Set  Material received on 30.03.2022. Installation & 
Commissioning completed. 
15 Drilling Spool & Adapter Spools Order Completed. Material received on 24-09-2021 
& 11-10-2021 
16 4" & 6" Fire Hoses with Storz 
Couplings 
Order completed. Material Received on 11-10-
2021. 
17 Stainless Steel Flexible and 
Chicksen hose assemblies  
Order completed. Material Received on 08-11-2021 
& 13-12-2021. 
18 Accessories for Double Ram 
BOP, 7.1/16" x 10M ( 7 1/16 '' 
HCR valve Assy)  
Order completed. Material Received on 02-12-
2021. 
19 Accessories for Double Ram 
BOP, 7.1/16" x 10M (Hammer 
Lug and companion Flange) 
Order completed. Material Received on 06-01-
2022. 
20 Accessories for Single Ram Blow 
Out Preventer, 13.5/8" x 10M  
Order completed. Material Received on 26-11-
2021. 
21 Accessories for Single Ram Blow 
Out Preventer, 13.5/8" x 10M 
Order Completed. Material received on 26.05.2022 

(Blind Flange) 
22 Pneumatically Operated Casing 
Cutter 
Order completed. Material Received on 17-01-
2022. 
23 Ultra Slim Hydraulic Torque 
Wrench 
Order completed. Material Received on 11-03-
2022. 
24 Single RAM BOP (13.5/8" x 10M) 
&  
Double RAM BOP (7.1/16" x 
10M) 
Purchase order placed. Expected delivery date: 
22/09/2022 
25 BLOWOUT CONTROL 
SOFTWARE 
Order completed. Material Received on 04-11-
2021.  
26 Trailer mounted Well Killing 
pumper unit 
Purchase Order placed Delivery due on 24/06/ 
2023 
27 Drilling Simulator Tender is in process 
28 Flexible Steel Hoses for Choke 
Manifold 
Order Completed. Material received at CMT Office 
on 10.06.2022 & 14.06.2022.  
 
Upgradation of Airports  
 
1.71 When asked whether the Government had any plans to expand/modernize 
Guwahati and Dibrugarh airports for accommodating heavy-lift aircrafts transporting fire 
fighting equipment for any kind of oil and gas disasters in future, The Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas in its written reply submitted as under:-  
 
“As per Ministry of Civil Aviation, Guwahati Airport is equipped to receive Code-C 
and D aircraft (A 320 and B737/757). The runway is capable of receiving Code E 
aircraft with prior intimation of 24 hours. To expand/modernize Guwahati Airport 
for accommodating heavy-lift aircraft transporting fire-fighting equipment has not 
yet been planned. As regards Dibrugarh Airport, runway has been extended by 
461 m from 1829 m to 2290 m for A321 type of aircraft operations. At present, 
there is no plan to upgrade Dibrugarh Airport for Handling Massive Air-cargo 
carrier.” 
 
1.72 When asked about whether the existing roads/airports had been strengthened 
and expanded to bring Snubbing Unit and other such machinery for disaster 
management work to oil wells/fields located in the North East, the Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas in its written reply submitted as under: 
 
“The runway of Dibrugarh Airport  has been extended by 461 m from 1829 m to 
2290 m for A321 type of aircraft operations.” 
 
1.73 When asked about whether the Ministry had ordered any study to review the 
road and other infrastructure to move the disaster control/ mitigation infrastructure 
swiftly to remote oil fields/units the country, The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
in its written reply submitted as under:- 
 
   “The Ministry has not ordered any such study.” 
 
 

Post Blowout Training Measures 
 
1.74 The enquiry of the High Level Committee had found out that many of the key 
personnel of OIL associated with the workover operation were either not having well 
control certification (like OGPS official) or having well control certification on “Rotary 
drilling well control” from IWCF only (as well control school of OIL does not have 
accreditation for well intervention). The Committee had also recommended that safety 
trainings should be imparted not only at the entry and supervisory levels but also at the 
middle and senior management levels, as refresher courses. 
 
Accordingly, on being asked whether OIL had sent any batch of officials for the 
advance training, the Ministry in its written reply submitted as under:-  
 
“Since January, 2021-till date OIL has sponsored 130 employees for various 
advanced well control trainings in association with reputed institutes to its 
employees as detailed below”:- 
 
Training Institute Number of 
Participants 
IWCF-WELL 
INTERVENTION 
PRESSURE CONTROL 
INSTITUTE OF DILLING 
TECHNOLOGY 
34 
IWCF DRILLING WELL 
CONTROL COURSE 
PETRODRILL WELL CONTROL 
SCHOOL, GUWAHATI 
18 
IWCF ROTARY DRILLING 
WELL CONTROL 
(SURFACE) 
PETROLEUM TRAINING & 
CONSULTANCY SERVICS, 
MUMBAI 
1 
IWCF PRACTICAL 
ASSESSOR 
CERTIFICATE 
PETROLEUM TRAINING & 
CONSULTANCY SERVICS, 
MUMBAI 
1 
IWCF(SURFACE) WELL 
CONTROL 
PETROLEUM TRAINING & 
CONSULTANCY SERVICS, 
MUMBAI 
67 
IWCF LEVEL 3: DRILLER 
WELL CONTROL 
(SURFACE) 
PETROLEUM TRAINING & 
CONSULTANCY SERVICS, 
MUMBAI 
  
4 
IWCF LEVEL 4: 
SUPERVISOR WELL 
CONTROL (SURFACE) 
PETROLEUM TRAINING & 
CONSULTANCY SERVICS, 
MUMBAI 
2 
IWCF Combined Surface 
and Subsea Well Control 
Programme 
PETROLEUM TRAINING & 
CONSULTANCY SERVICS, 
MUMBAI 
1 
BALANCE 2 SURFACE 
(LEVEL-4) PRACTICAL 
ASSESSMENT 
PETROLEUM TRAINING & 
CONSULTANCY SERVICS, 
MUMBAI 
1 
IWCF ROTARY DRILLING 
WELL CONTROL (LEVEL 
4: SUPERVISOR) 
(SURFACE) 
WELL CONTROL SCHOOL, IDT, 
ONGC, DEHRADUN 
1 
  Total 130  * International Well Control Forum (IWCF) 

 
1.75 The Committee sought to know whether any specific MoU had been signed with 
any globally well known oil company to prevent re-occurrence of Baghjan like blowouts 
in future to which the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in its written reply 
submitted as under:  
 
“OIL floated an EOI amongst the well known global companies. Against the said 
EOI, interest was received from 3 parties. After evaluation of the interest 
received, OIL is in the process of finalizing an MoU.” 
 
Elaborating about the steps taken to train the employees in handling blowout like 
incidents, the representatives of Ministry/OIL made the following submission 
during the oral evidence: 
“ ………..सर,एक मह᭜वपूणᭅ चीज हम लोगᲂ ने ये ᳰकया है, डीएनबी एक व᭨डᭅ ᭍लास 
से᭢टी सᳶवस ᮧोवाइडर है, जो हम लोगᲂ को िᮟᳲलग एंड वकᭅ ओवर साइट क े  िलए 
इ᭠टीᮕेटेड एचएससी सᳶवसेज देगा। हम लोगᲂ ने उसे क ंᮝै᭍ट ᳰदया है ताᳰक सारी से᭢टी 
एचएससी से᭢टी मैनेजमᱶट िस᭭᭗म क े  इ᭥ᮧूवमᱶट क े  िलए सजेशन दे। हम लोगᲂ क े क ु छ 
मह᭜वपूणᭅ ᮝेᳲनग हᱹ, जो 2020-21 मᱶ करीब 4 हजार 295 थी जो अब 2021-22 मᱶ 6 
हजार 740 लोगᲂ को ᮝᱶन कर चुक े  हᱹ। इसमᱶ जो मह᭜वपूणᭅ ᮝेᳲनग हᱹ, आईड᭣᭨यूसीएफ 
और आईएडीसी वेल क ंᮝोल ᮝेᳲनग है, जो ᭭᭗पेशली ᭡लेआउट को क ंᮝोल करने क े  िलए दी 
जाती है।”  
“ ….हमने एक मह᭜वपूणᭅ कदम और उठाया है। हमने आगᭅनाइजेशन कᳱ री᭭᭗चᳳरग कᳱ 
है। वेल क ं᭡लीट करने क े िलए दो मह᭜वपूणᭅ काम होते हᱹ, एक वकᭅ ओवर माइन और वेल 
किमशᳲनग। जो ऑपरेशंस थे, वे अलग-अलग डॉयरे᭍टसᭅ के अंडर आते थे, डायरे᭍टर 
ए᭍स᭡लोरेशन एंड डेवलपमᱶट क े  अंडर और डायरे᭍टर ऑपरेशंस क े अंडर। बागजान 
इंसीडᱶट क े बाद एक अ᭒छा सा ᭢लो बनाने क े  िलए एक ही डायरे᭍टर क े  अंडर, 
डायरे᭍टर आपरेशंस क े  अंडर आ गए हᱹ, िजससे वेल कं᭡लीशन एि᭍टिवटीज़ पर ᮧॉपर 
क ंᮝोल ᳰकया जा सक े । 
 तीसरा मु᭎य इंᮧूवमᱶट हमने जो ᳰकया है, वह ᮓाइिसस मैनेजमᱶट ᮕुप को लेकर है। 
हम लोगᲂ ने ᮓाइिसस मैनेजमᱶट ᮕुप के अंदर मैनपॉवर बढ़ाई है। कुछ मु᭎य इᳰᲤपमᱶ᭗स 
हम लोगᲂ ने खरीदे हᱹ, िजसकᳱ कᳱमत करीब 50 करोड़ के आसपास है। मु᭎य इᳰᲤपमᱶ᭗स 
जैसे फायर वाटर प᭥᭡स, फोम मॉनीटसᭅ, कॉलर बुलडोजर, हाइᮟोिलक फोकᭅ िल᭢᭗स 
आᳰद इसमᱶ ᮧमुख हᱹ। इसक े  बाद हम लोगᲂ ने क ुछ िडिजटल इनीिशएᳯट᭪स भी िलये हᱹ। 
िजतने भी ए᭍सीडᱶ᭗स होते हᱹ, आजकल हम लोग उसकᳱ ऑनलाइन ᳯरपो᳻टग कर रहे हᱹ, 
ताᳰक उसका ᭢लो सब लोगᲂ को ज᭨दी से ज᭨दी पता चल जाए। वकᭅ ओवर ᭡लाᳲनग जो 

होती है, वह भी हम लोगᲂ ने ऑनलाइन कर दी है। जॉब से᭢टी एनािलिसस, पीपी 
ᳯर᭡लेसमᱶट, डॉ᭍युमᱶट आᳰद सब ऑनलाइन लेकर आ गए हᱹ।….”   
 
Safety training  to Local Community 
 
1.76 On being asked whether there was any plan on the part of the Ministry/OIL 
PSUs to impart necessary firefighting training to local communities living in vicinity of 
OIL and gas installations, The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in its written 
reply submitted as under:- 
 
“There is no plan to impart fire-fighting training to local communities living in 
vicinity of oil and gas installations.   However, PSUs impart fire-fighting training to 
its employees and contractual workforce in accordance with statutes and OISD 
standards. Moreover, safety awareness programmes/ campaigns are being 
conducted for local communities living in the vicinity of oil and gas installations 
and along the Right of Way (ROW) of pipeline through distribution of safety 
pamphlets, meetings, nukkad natak, radio jingles, screening safety films etc. 
 
As part of Tier III mock drills carried out with Mutual Aid Partners like District 
Administration, National Disaster Response Force, CISF, Neighboring Industries 
etc. OIL sensitizes the local communities on action to be taken during disaster. 
Pamphlets on Do’s & Don’ts during emergency drills in vernacular language is 
also distributed among the locals.  
 
Additionally, OIL also imparts firefighting trainings to students & staff of schools 
and colleges around its operational areas.” 
 
1.77 When asked whether there was any mechanism through which the nearby 
villages of oil fields/units in the country were provided with firefighting equipment and 
other related infrastructure, The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in its written 
reply submitted as under:- 
 
“Firefighting in petroleum installation is specialized activity and performed by 
specially trained personnel considering the nature of product which is highly 
inflammable and the specialized equipment used for firefighting. Petroleum 
Installations are required to develop an elaborate Emergency Response & 
Disaster Management Plan (ERDMP) as per applicable statutes. ERDMP is also 
submitted to District Authority. Off-site mock drills are also conducted in 
association with mutual aid members, local fire brigade, police, hospitals, district 
administration including local community. 
 
All OIL installations have been equipped with adequate fire-fighting equipment 
with corresponding fire water requirement as per statutory provisions/guidelines. 
Additionally, strategically located fire stations of OIL which are equipped with 
sophisticated fire equipment and trained firefighting staff provide aid during 
emergency in the installations and nearby communities at large.”  
 
 

Shifting of OIL Corporate Office 
 
1.78 OIL had been asked to relocate Headquarter/Corporate office to Guwahati to 
increase its operational and execution capability and to have close supervision & 
oversight of its operation in North East. This may also help in active interaction with 
State Government and local community. OIL had also been asked to set up a Crisis 
Management Centre in collaboration with ONGC. 
  
1.79 When The Committee enquired about the current status of shifting/relocation of 
the corporate office of Oil India to Guwahati, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
in its written reply submitted as under:-  
 
“Government of Assam has allotted a plot of land in Guwahati to Oil India to set 
up its office. OIL has taken possession of the land in Guwahati for construction of 
office. The design and architectural consultancy, project management and 
construction supervision services have been completed. The foundation stone 
laying ceremony was held on 22.06.2022 in the august presence of Honourable 
Chief Minister of Govt. of Assam and Minister of State for Petroleum & Natural 
Gas & Labour and Employment, Government of India.”  
 
1.80 When the Committee enquired as to whether ONGC and OIL had any plan to set 
up dedicated crisis management centre in North-East, the Ministry/OIL in its written 
replies submitted the following:-  
 
“Both OIL & ONGC have their set ups in NE as crisis Management Teams and 
committed to work together for any such crisis.  Regular coordination meetings 
are being held in this regard.  ONGC has its own “Regional Crisis Management 
Team” set-up at Sivasagar, Assam Asset to cater the crisis mitigation 
requirement of its operation in North-East region. Apart from ONGC’s 
requirement, this facility also provides services to other E&P companies on call 
basis. The Facility is operational since year 2003 and having all Blowout Control 
equipment and dedicated trained manpower to deal with any oil and gas well 
crisis. Time to time, up gradation of equipment and training of team is also being 
done. This facility is also having well control equipment repair and overhauling 
facility.”  
 
1.81 Explaining the steps taken by the Ministry in response to the Baghjan incident, 
the representatives of the Ministry of MoPNG made the following comments during the 
oral evidence: 
 
“….Keeping in view the necessity to increase the operational and execution 
capacity, OIL had been asked to relocate corporate office to Guwahati so that it 
can have better supervision over the activities in the North-East and interact with 
the State Government and local community. The MoPNG also directed ONGC 
and OIL to set up a crisis management centre in the North-East. Post Baghjan 
incident, OIL has taken several measures….”  
 
Insurance for OIL fields 
 
1.82 When asked by the Committee whether any insurance for oil fields against fire 
incidents has been taken by Oil India, the Ministry furnished the following written reply:   

 
OIL India Ltd has the following major insurance policies to cover its assets from fire 
and corresponding third party liability (drilling / workover rigs, production facilities, well 
logging tools & equipment etc.: 
 
 Sl. 
No. 
Policy Sum Insured  
(Rs. in crore) 
1 Industrial All Risk Policy (IAR) 13,451.55 
2 Drilling & workover Rigs Package Policy 621.09 
3 Oil & gas well drilling tools All Risk 
Policy  
185.23 
4 Public Liability Insurance (PLI) Act, 1991  *AOA 5 crore/ **AOY 15 
crore 
5 Public Liability Insurance (PLI) Beyond 
Act 
AOA 11.67 crore/ AOY 35.01 
crore 
 *AOA= Any one Accident, ** AOY = Any one Year 
 
The IAR policy covers fire insurance for all the assets in the fields.  However, no 
specific insurance policy is taken for fire incidents in the wells. For blocks under 
NELP, insurance policies are taken for drilling wells as per the requirements of 
production Sharing Contract. 
 
 Explaining the details of insurance coverage in oil wells, the representatives of 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural gas and OIL submitted the following during the oral 
evidence: 
 
“ …….. इं᭫योरᱶस क े  बारे मᱶ माननीय सद᭭यᲂ ने जो ᮧ᳤ पूछा था, उसके संबंध मᱶ मᱹ बताना चाᱠंगा 
ᳰक हमारा िजतना भी इ᭠ᮨा᭭ᮝ᭍चर है, जैसे ᳰक पाइप लाइ᭠स, ᭡लां᭗स वगैरह पूरी तरह से ई᭠᭫योड हᱹ। 
इस हेतु करीब 13 करोड़ ᱧपये का इं᭫योरᱶस है। उसके  िलए सारा ᮧीिमयम जाता है, लेᳰकन जो ऑयल 
वे᭨स हᱹ, उनका इं᭫योरᱶस नहᱭ होता है, ᭍यᲂᳰक उनसे संबंिधत दुघᭅटनाएं बᱟत कम होती हᱹ और 
ᮧीिमयम बᱟत ᭔यादा है। अगर हम हर साल ᮧीिमयम देते चले जाएं, तो ᮧीिमयम कᳱ कॉ᭭ट बᱟत 
᭔यादा आएगी। यᳰद 15-20 सालᲂ मᱶ दुभाᭅ᭏यवश इस तरह कᳱ दुघᭅटनाएं हो जाए, तो उसके िलए हम 
से᭨फ इं᭫योरᱶस करक े  रखते हᱹ, ताᳰक यᳰद कभी ऐसी दुघᭅटनाएं हो, तो खचाᭅ हम िबयर करᱶगे।….”    
 क ु एं कᳱ हमारी ᮧॉपटी का जो नुकसान हो रहा है, उसका इं᭫योरᱶस नहᱭ है। िजसे हम अबव 
सरफ े स और िबलो सरफ े स कहते हᱹ, अबव सरफ े स पर तो हमारा इᳰᲤपमᱶट है, उसका तो इं᭫योरᱶस हो 
जाता है, लेᳰकन क ु एं मᱶ जो तेल था, मान लीिजए वह न᳥ हो गया तो उसका कोई इं᭫योरᱶस नहᱭ है।  

PART – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
Need for periodic review of Safety Measures in Petroleum Sector 
The Committee note that the Indian Petroleum Sector has presence in 
upstream, midstream and downstream sector including onshore and offshore 
fields, refineries, several Gas processing plants, Liqufied Natural Gas (LNG) 
terminals and more than 45,000 kms of crude oil and petroleum product pipelines 
spread across the length and breadth of the country.  The Committee also note 
that several Acts and Rules govern the safety of oil and gas units and the same 
are being enforced by agencies under different Ministries of Central and State 
Governments. 
The Committee note that the Oil and Natural Gas Industry process highly 
inflammable hydro-carbons under high temperature and pressure. Therefore, any 
accident in the Petroleum and Natural Gas Industry can cause serious outcomes 
like loss of lives, disruption of activities in the surroundings, huge economic loss 
and also irreparable damage to the local environment. Hence, the Committee 
observe that Safety in petroleum sector is of utmost importance and there should 
be zero tolerance to accidents.   
 The Committee further recall that many accidents happened in the Oil and 
Gas sector in the country during the last few years.  The Baghjan oil Well blowout 
in Assam in May-June, 2020, sinking of Barge P-305 in Bombay High region in the 
wake of cyclone Tautkae in May 2021, the blast in the pipeline of GAIL in Nagaram 
in Andhra Pradesh in 2014 and accident at IOCL facility in Jaipur in 2009 etc., are 
some of the serious incidents in the last decade for the petroleum industry in the 
country.   
 The Committee further note that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
has constituted a Working Group comprising of industry professionals, legal 
experts, academics, etc. to look into the whole gamut of safety framework and 
suggest necessary changes for petroleum sector in the country in response to 
the recommendations made in this regard by this Committee in their 13th Report 
(17th Lok Sabha).       

The Committee had examined the circumstances and events leading to 
leakage of gas and oil condensate from Well No. 5 of Baghjan oil field situated in 
Tinsukia district of Assam from 27 May, 2020 which was followed by fire and 
blowout of oil Well on 9 June, 2020 and handling of the incident subsequently by  
OIL.  The Committee note with concern that the disaster had happened not 
because of any equipment failure but due to the cumulative effect of human 
errors during different stages of the workover operations at Baghjan-5.  The 
Committee further note that the disaster had happened due to gross disregard of 
safety regulations and practices and lack of effective monitoring of workover 
operations.  The serious incidents which happen in the petroleum sector is a 
cause of concern and that lessons learnt by Oil/PSUS from one incident should 
prevent of other accidents and should be taken seriously by PSUs.  Hence, a 
comprehensive review of the safety requirements for the entire oil and gas 
industry has become all the more desirable.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should expedite the submission of the Report by the 
Working Group so that review/updation of safety framework of the petroleum 
sector of the country may be taken up. 
   
Recommendation No. 2 
Need for promoting safety culture in OIL 
 
The Committee note that in the Baghjan incident, the waiting on cement 
(WOC) which was 48 hours was compromised by OIL and its officials instructed 
the crew of M/s John Energy Limited (JEL) to start pull out of the same after 12 
hours only in violation of the plans.  Moreover, after completion of pull out, the 
crew of M/s JEL started removal of Blow out preventer (BOP) to change the well 
head, even though the cement had not set in and there was no written 
instructions from OIL which severely compromised the safety of the well, and 
therefore, appears to be major immediate cause of the incident.  The Committee 
further note that there were serious lapses on the part of contractor M/s JEL in 
the form of failure to communicate the change of plan to Installation manager, 
failure to take prompt action after detecting initial flow of fluid from Well, failure 
of key persons of the company to remain present at the rig site, poor record-

keeping by rig crew, improper BOP testing and drills, inadequate response due to 
lack of skilled manpower, etc.   
The Committee further note that the High Level Committee which 
investigated the causes of the incident had observed a number of lapses on the 
part of OIL also at the planning, execution, organizational and training and 
accreditation levels.  The Committee also note that though M/s JEL was the 
Contractor in the contract, it was actually acting under close supervision and 
control of OIL.  The representatives of OIL had under the contract the right to 
observe, test, check and control implementation of workover, testing 
programmes, equipment and stock, inspect works performed by contractor or 
examine records kept at Well site by the Contractor.  The representatives also 
had the right to give instructions to the Contractor regarding the workover 
programme and the Contractor was bound to comply with the same under the 
provisions of the contract.  These lapses on the part of officials of OIL in planning 
and execution of workover programme at Baghjan-5 have led this Committee to 
conclude that  the safety agencies like Directorate General of Mines Security 
(DGMS)/ Oil Industry Safety Directorate (OISD) should lay emphasis on strict 
compliance with laid down procedures for carrying out various operations.  
Accordingly, the Committee recommend Ministry/OIL/ Safety Agencies to put up 
frame work and protocol of accountability to  foster and promote a strong safety 
culture among their officials and employees and of their contractors followed by 
strict enforcement and encourage them in adhering to the same.   
 
Recommendation No. 3 
Need for review of Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) 
The Committee note that the High Level Committee had recommended OIL 
to develop comprehensive manuals for workover, drilling, production etc. as 
developed by E&P majors covering all operations in detail, which will be guiding 
document covering all operations.  The Committee further note that the OIL had 
revised the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) of more than 1000 activities in 
the oil and gas installations.  The Committee, however, note that the 
recommendations of the High Level Committee regarding development of 
comprehensive manuals for workover, drilling, production etc. have not been 

complied yet.  Accordingly, this Committee exhort OIL to review its Standard 
Operating Procedures in the light of practices of international exploration and 
production majors and case studies of different accidents, faults, problems etc. 
and develop comprehensive manuals for different operations in a time bound 
manner which should be periodically reviewed in the light of needs and changing 
scenario of the industry.  The Committee further recommend the Ministry to 
develop a review system pertaining to safety audit observations and their 
compliance by all the PSUs concerned in the Safety Council meeting annually. 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
Need for strict action against the Contractor 
 
The Committee note that the lapses and disregard of contractual 
obligations by the Contractor M/s JEL were major proximate reasons for the 
Baghjan-5 incident. The main Contractor M/s JEL was put on holiday for a period 
of two years.  However, the contractor went to Guwahati High Court and as per its 
advise appeared before CGM (C&P) for personal hearing on 01.03.2021.  Based on 
the outcome, the order for holiday/debarment was reviewed and vide Review 
Order dated 28.04.2021 the holiday period was reduced to 30.04.2021. The 
Committee further note that OIL imposed certain penalties on the contractor and 
revoked performance bank guarantee deposited against the contractor.  The 
Committee observed that a drilling rig contract has been awarded to M/s JEL 
against open tender after the holiday period.  The Committee note that the OIL 
has not utilized the terms of the contract whereby the contractor is liable to bear 
the entire cost and expenses of killing the Well or otherwise bringing the Well 
under control and also for indemnifying the company and treated the Contractor 
with leniency.  The Committee, therefore, recommend OIL to take appropriate 
action against the Contractor under the provisions of the contract to make it 
liable for the expenses incurred by OIL in the entire incident.   
 
 
 
 
 

Recommendation No. 5 
 
Need for enquiry by the Ministry  
 The Committee note that three Committees constituted to enquire about 
Baghjan incident had found a series of  lapses on the part of officials of OIL 
concerned with the planning and execution of workover at Baghjan-5.  The 
Committee further note that the lapses caused great damage to the people and 
the environment of surrounding areas besides causing huge financial loss. The 
Committee further note that the crisis management of the incident could have 
been better.  while initially 18 officials were suspended in the wake of disciplinary 
proceedings, two were found guilty.   The Committee observe that fixing of 
responsibilities in this regard is grossly inadequate to the proportion of damages 
caused and lapses committed at procedural levels by the personnel of OIL. 
 The responsibility of ensuring a safe work procedure vests with Oil PSUs 
and  they need to be accountable.  The role of senior officers is more of 
supervisory nature but the same was missing in this case. Accordingly, this 
Committee recommend Ministry to institute an enquiry into lack of proper 
supervision and monitoring in workover programme at Baghjan-5  and fix 
appropriate responsibility and accountability to bring out any erring and 
incompetent officials of OIL.  
Recommendation No. 6 
Need for observance of Environmental Laws 
 
 The Committee note that the Justice B.P. Katakey Committee Report had 
found that, OIL did not have the mandatory clearances under several Acts to 
operate in the particular well.  The Committee further note that the replies of the 
Ministry and OIL inform that it had mandatory consent to establish or operate 
under abovementioned laws on the day of the blow out of Baghjan-5 and 
subsequent fire on 09.06.2020.  However, the Ministry have stated that OIL had 
obtained all mandatory statutory clearances as per the requisite applicable laws.    
 The Committee note that a number of licenses and approvals are required 
under various laws pertaining to the mining and protection of environment for 
exploration and extraction of oil and gas.  The Committee  further note that these 

licenses are for a specific period and they are required to be renewed after the 
lapse of the same.  If these were to be reviewed by Directorate General of 
Hydrocarbons (DGH)/Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas from time to time, 
such lapses could have been noticed.  There is need to institutionalise such a 
mechanism.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas to take up the issue with all the PSUs and review the compliance 
of all applicable laws in the oil and gas fields that are currently in operation.    
Action taken in this regard may be intimated within three months. 
 
Recommendation No.7 
 
Self Reliance to Tackle Emergency in oil and gas Installations 
 
The Committee note that the safety related incidents in oil Installations can 
cause severe damage to the installation itself, surrounding areas etc. and with 
hydro carbon substances, the risk of fire is very high.  Many incidents in the past 
have caused death of human beings, damage to property and also to 
environment.  The Committee also observe that some of the issues faced by the 
petroleum sector are very unique like oil well blow out, oil spill in coastal areas, 
etc.  These events need specialized response and many a times it is seen that 
international experts are engaged and  certain equipment are also brought from 
abroad to mitigate and handle such incidents.    The Committee note that in 
Baghjan incident, the safety equipment were mobilized from ONGC/OIL in Assam, 
Vadodara, Ahmedabad, etc.  Finally as these were inadequate, foreign expertise 
from Singapore were roped in and Snubbing Unit was mobilized from Canada 
which indicates that the country lacks requisite equipment/technology and skilled 
expertise in handling such incidents.  
 While the upstream oil companies in the country may have crisis 
management teams to handle safety incidents, it is desired that the country 
should develop capabilities in handling well blow out control and also 
manufacture associated equipment in the country.  The Committee desire that the 
Ministry and the PSUs should review the response in putting out the blow out in 
the oil well in Baghjan thoroughly and identify the gaps and try to address all 
those gaps within the country and collaborate with international agencies to 

attain self reliance in these areas.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry should review the deficiencies and gaps in the safety systems required 
to fight safety related incidents and take necessary action to create infrastructure 
and skill sets to deal with them in future.  The Committee may be apprised about 
the action taken within three months. 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
 
Need for Single Safety Agency for Petroleum Sector 
 
 The Committee note that the Oil and Gas sector is being regulated by many 
agencies like Directorate General of Mines Safety (DGMS), Petroleum and 
Explosives Safety Organisation (PESO), Oil Industry Safety Directorate (OISD), 
Petroleum & Natural Gas Regulatory Board (PNGRB), Directorate General of 
Shipping (DGS), Fire Departments and Lifts Departments from State 
Governments, etc., for different activities in the petroleum sector. One of the 
safety enforcement agencies in the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas is OISD, 
but it has no statutory powers as it is only a technical directorate and all its 
officials are on deputation. Since many agencies are performing focused and 
limited role in enforcing the rules and regulations under the laws mandated to 
them, a holistic approach is missing for the sector.   Many a time the gaps in 
legislation is also not noticed as many regulators are busy enforcing their 
mandate alone. 
 The Committee further note that they had vide their recommendation No. 3, 
in their Report No. 12 (15th Lok Sabha) and recommendation No. 10, in their 
Report No. 24 (16th Lok Sabha) and recommendation No. 5 in their Report No. 13 
(17th Lok Sabha) recommended for formation of single agency to enforce safety 
related rules and regulations in the petroleum sector.  The Committee also note 
that the High Level Committee (HLC) constituted by the Government of India to 
enquire into the sequence of events leading to stranding of vessels and accident 
after the Cyclone Tauktae had also concluded that the Government consider 
setting up a single statutory regulator for exercising effective oversight on safety 
aspects of all onshore and offshore oil fields.  
This Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation for a single safety 
agency for oil and gas sector and expect the Ministry to implement the same for 

ensuring the safety culture in Oil PSUs and regulating agencies.  A weak safety 
frame work is detrimental to not only general public but also to the oil companies.  
The accidents besides derailing their normal activities, lower confidence of the 
public and investors.  Therefore, formation of a single regulatory authority for the 
oil and gas sector is a requirement of the time in the interest of the industry.  
Accordingly, this Committee again recommend to the Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas to undertake serious deliberations and take effective steps towards 
formation of single regulatory body for oil and gas industry.   
 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
Needs for advance Training of employees of OIL 
 
 The Committee note that the High Level Committee constituted to enquire 
into Baghjan incident mentioned above recommended for mandatory training in 
Well control for all the key personnel of OIL associated with workover operations 
and production engineers working in Well Services section like OGPS as many of 
the key personnel of OIL associated with the workover operation of Baghjan-5 
had not been trained in Well intervention.    
 
The Committee further note that the Well control school of OIL had no 
accreditation for Well control and neither it had dedicated faculty nor it was 
properly equipped. The Committee also note that OIL has sponsored 130 
employees for various advanced Well control trainings in association with 
reputed institutes since then and desire that officials of ONGC and private sector 
should be mandated to train their personnel.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend OIL to upgrade its Well training schools by equipping them well with 
dedicated faculty and infrastructure and to undertake the advance training in Well 
intervention for its remaining key employees associated with workover 
operations/production engineers.  The Committee may also be apprised by OIL 
about the action taken in this regard.  
 
 

Recommendation No. 10 
 
Restructuring  HSE Management System by Oil PSU’s 
 
 The Committee note that a series of lapses at the planning and execution 
level caused the Baghjan-5 incident.  The Committee further note that the justice 
Katake Committee had observed that OIL did not have the mandatory consent to 
establish or operate under various environmental laws on the day of Blow out 
incident at of Baghjan-5 i.e. 9th June, 2020.  These lapses and disregard of 
environmental laws have led this Committee to conclude that the monitoring from 
higher level functionaries of OIL was weak.  The Committee desire OIL to 
introduce an IT-enabled system to Drilling, Workover and Production operations 
to ensure availability of real-time information on critical Well operations to key 
personnel and senior management for strengthening of Oil Well Services. 
Accordingly, the Committee recommend OIL to increase the frequency of 
meetings of Health Safety Environment (HSE) sub Committee and also strengthen 
its HSE management system in the light of lessons drawn from Baghjan-5 
incident and other incidents in the upstream sector.   
 The Committee further feel that the current safety structure may need 
review as the HSE Officials in PSU  organizations report to their top management 
and hence could be under pressure to allow violations / be indifferent to complete 
the work on time.  Therefore, the Committee recommend  that the Ministry/DGH 
and the safety agencies like OISD/DGMS to review the existing structure and 
implement a mechanism by which the safety functions are headed by officials 
from other PSUs to ensure reasonable autonomy to the safety functionaries and 
help in developing a strong safety culture in the organization. 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
Strengthening of Infrastructure near Oil Installations 
 
The Committee note that there are many oil and gas Installations in the 
North East and several new projects are being undertaken.  The Committee 
observe  that North East region including Assam and Tripura has got oil and gas 
fields, refinery in Assam, LPG bottling plants and city gas distribution pipelines.  
Indradhanush Gas Grid Ltd. (IGGL) is also laying pipelines under North-Eastern 
Natural Gas Grid project to connect major cities across North-Eastern Region 

with a gas grid  to provide sufficient supply of natural gas.  In this scenario, it is 
essential that along with energy infrastructure the associated safety, security and 
environment related response system should also be augmented and kept in 
readiness to meet any emergency.  The Committee observe that during the blow 
out incident in 2020 in Baghjan, the snubbing units from Canada could not be 
landed at  Guwahati Airport and had to be unloaded at Kolkata Airport which had 
the required infrastructure and then moved by road which caused avoidable 
delay.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should do 
comprehensive area survey of the North-Eastern Region and map all the oil and 
gas fields/installations /units etc. and also the nearest road/ rail/ airport 
infrastructure available for handling disaster management 
equipment/machineries required in case of emergency and take coordinated 
action in association with the Ministries concerned to strengthen the aviation/rail 
and road infrastructure in the region.  
 
Recommendation No. 12 
 
Emergency Response Centres 
 
The Committee note that the country has many industrial clusters and also 
in many cities like Mumbai, Vadodara, Vizag, Chennai, Kochi , Guwahati etc. oil 
and gas installations/Units are found to be concentrated.  In addition to these 
installations and Units, there are several industries operating in their vicinity in 
these cities.  The Committee observe that there was a proposal to establish 
Emergency Response Centres in some of these cities so as to respond to the 
safety incidents at short notice in and around these industrial clusters.  The 
Committee also note that the work related to  setting up of five ERCs at IOCL-
Jaipur, HPCL-Vizag, BPCL-Manmad, ONGC-Hazira, and GAIL-Guna have been 
progressing.  
The Committee observed that a similar facility is required to be set up in 
Guwahati too.  There are several oil and gas related plants/units in and around 
Guwahati and therefore, the ERC can provide effective crisis management 
alongwith bolstering the safety infrastructure in North East region.  The 

Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry should take necessary action for 
setting up a Emergency Response Centre in Guwahati at the earliest. 
 
Recommendation No.13 
 
Training for Local Communities 
The Committee note that the local communities near to the oil and gas 
fields/units/installations play an important role in the safe and secure functioning 
of these installations.  These are the people who are likely to be affected due to 
the unforeseen incident/accidents that may happen in these units.  So it is very 
important that local communities and population are made aware of the possible 
safety related incidents and also the response required in those situations.  The 
Committee also observe that the local communities also step in to help the 
organizations to respond to the situation and support the operations.  
 In this regard, the Committee desire that a proper structured and formal 
training module particularly in fire fighting as well as rescue, first-aid and other 
such basic safety requirements to the local population could be of immense value 
and help whenever such emergencies arise.  Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry should persuade all the PSUs to educate and train 
the local communities in basic safety training requirements and also equip them 
with basic facilities like fire fighters and fire tenders which can be useful for both 
the communities and nearby towns as well in meeting the emergency 
requirements of the organization.    
 
Recommendation no. 14 
 
 
Bio remediation measures in BAGHJAN site 
 
The Committee note that there were extensive damages  to the local 
environment due to the Baghjan Well blow out incident . Damages to crops, tea 
estates and vegetation due to spillover of oil condensate  were reported. The OIL 
took up bio remediation  work immediately and appointed TERI for assessment of 
environmental quality namely water, soil and vegetation in and around Baghjan. 
The Committee note that TERI has submitted its final assesment on 28.02.2022 . A 

bio    diversity    impact    assessment    was    also    carried    out   by   Assam 
Bio diversity board.  Additionally OIL carried out environmental assessment 
study by NABL accredited M/s ERM India Pvt Ltd and M/s TERI. The study reports 
don’t show any deviation from prescribed environmental parameters.  Further 
,the Committee note that OIL is carrying out many studies for conservation 
management and has also signed an MOU with CPCB for green plantation,  etc. 
The Committee desire that OIL should complete all their assessments and 
carryout the necessary action without dilution of their commitments towards the 
environment. The Committee recommend that the Ministry should regularly 
review and monitor the progress made by OIL in this regard. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
16 March, 2023 
25 Phalguna, 1944 (Saka)     
 
RAMESH BIDHURI, 
                          Chairperson,  
Standing Committee on                                      
Petroleum & Natural Gas 

Annexure-I  
 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2020-21) 
 
SECOND SITTING 
(20.10.2020) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 20th October, 2020 from 1100 hrs. to 1245 
hrs. in Main Committee Room, PHA, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Ramesh Bidhuri - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Smt. Chinta Anuradha  
3.  Shri Pradyut Bordoloi  
4.  Shri Girish Chandra 
5.  Shri Topon Kumar Gogoi  
6.  Shri Unmesh Bhaiyyasaheb Patil 
7.  Dr. Kalanidhi Veeraswamy 
8.  Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
9.  Shri Lallu Singh 
10.  Shri Ajay Tamta  
  
                      RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
12. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
13. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
14. Shri A. Vijayakumar 
15. Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri H. Ram Prakash - Director 
3. Shri Tirthankar Das - Director 
4. Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Mohan Arumala - Under Secretary 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
 
 

 
1. Shri Tarun Kapoor - Secretary 
2. Shri Sunil Kumar - Joint Secretary (Refinery) 
3. Dr. Navneet Mohan Kothari - Joint Secretary (Mkt.) 
4. Shri Ranjan Mehrotra  - Director (Mo-LPG), OISD 
5. Shri Arun Mittal  - ED, Oil Industry Safety Directorate (OISD)  
 
  
Representatives of Public Sector Undertakings   
 
 
1. Shri Shashi  Shanker - CMD, ONGC 
2. Dr. Alka Mittal  - Director (HR), ONGC 
3. Shri  Anurag Sharma - Director (Onshore) , ONGC 
4. Shri Rajesh Kakkar - Director (Offshore), ONGC 
5. Dr. Baljeet Singh - Chief Security Officer, ONGC 
6. Shri S.C. Mishra  - CMD, OIL 
7. Shri P.K. Goswami - Director (Operation), OIL 
 
8. Shri Manoj Jain  - CMD, GAIL 
9. Shri P.K. Gupta - Director (HR) 
10. Shri S.M. Vaidya   - Chairman, IOCL 
11. Shri Gurmeet Singh  - Director (Marketing) 
12. Shri Ranjan Kumar Mohapatra - Director (HR) 
13. Shri Mukesh Kumar Surana  - CMD, HPCL 
14. Shri Rakesh Misri - Director (Marketing) 
15. Shri K. Padmakar  - CMD, BPCL 
16. Shri Arun Kumar Singh   - Director (Marketing) 
 
 
2.   At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed Members of the Committee 
and representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas/PSUs to the sitting of 
the Committee to have briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of P&NG/PSUs on 
the subject "Safety and Security of Oil Installations of Public Sector Oil 
Companies".  Thereafter, the Secretary, Ministry of P&NG introduced his colleagues to 
the Committee.  Then the representatives of OISD made an oral presentation on the 
subject. 
 
3.   Subsequently, Members of the Committee raised several issues related to the 
subject such as Safety and emergency preparedness in oil and gas industry, causes of 
accidents/fire incidents at oil and gas installations, actions taken against the officials 
responsible for such accidents, compensation policy for victims of such incidents, 
establishment of Emergency Response Centre, status of implementation of 
recommendations made by  the committees set up for safety and security of gas and oil 

installations including M.B. Lal Committee and Apurvachand Committee, the role of 
Directorate of Industry Safety and Health with regard to safety audit and inspection at oil 
and gas installations, number of safety audits conducted by the authorities particularly 
at Baghjan installations, PESO monitoring system, lack of permanent staff in OISD, 
single safety monitoring regulatory framework to ensure safety and security of oil and 
gas installations, formation of a unified safety board, creation of buffer zone around oil 
and gas installation, response of States with respect to environmental aspect of 
accidents, guidelines issued in respect of application of Geo-physical mapping/imaging, 
data regarding machineries and equipments being utilized at such installations, critical 
equipment maintenance and replacement policy, number of obsolete machineries and 
equipments being used, expenditure incurred on repairing of industrial 
equipments/machineries, real time monitoring/surveillance system to enhance safety 
and security of oil and gas installations, new legislations to ensure safety of 
installations, training and orientation programme for local community on disaster 
preparedness, statistics regarding  number of installations where accidents occurred 
and its impact in terms of lives lost and commercial losses during last five years, 
application of artificial intelligence techniques  in oil and gas industry. 
 
4. Further, other issues like cyber security vulnerabilities in oil and gas industry, 
issues raised by CAG report regarding ONGC 2008 Rules, action taken by the Ministry 
to prevent such incidents, global position of India with respect to safety and security of 
oil and gas industry, special insurance scheme for the victims of accidents, mechanism 
followed to fix the responsibilities for disasters, new safety code 2020, oil spill 
prevention and responses, air, water, and soil contamination due to hydraulic fracking 
process, safety procedure in door to door delivery of diesel, detailed report regarding 
Baghjan and Bhubaneshwar accidents, seminars conducted by PSUs on safety and 
security of these installations, powers of OISD, pipeline safety mechanism  came up for 
discussion during the sitting. Thereafter, representatives of the Ministry/PSUs clarified 
on several issues raised by the Members and assured the Committee that the required 
details would be intimated to the Secretariat in writing. 
 5. Thereafter, the Chairperson thanked the representatives of the Ministry/PSUs for 
expressing their views and answering queries raised by the Members of the Committee.  
Further, to the queries where replies were not readily available, the Ministry was 
instructed to furnish the same to the Secretariat within ten days. 

6. A copy of the verbatim proceedings is kept in the Branch for record. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
**** 
 

Annexure--II 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2020-21) 
 
TWENTIETH SITTING 
(06.08.2021) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 06th August, 2021 from 1500 hrs. to 1730 
hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, PHA, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Ramesh Bidhuri - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Smt. Chinta Anuradha 
3.  Shri Rodmal Nagar 
4.  Shri Unmesh Bhaiyyasaheb Patil 
5.  Dr. Kalanidhi Veeraswamy 
6.  Shri Dilip Saikia 
7.  Dr. Bharatiben Dhirubhai Shiyal  
8.  Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
9.  Shri Lallu Singh 
10.  Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
                      RAJYA SABHA 
11. Shri Ripun Bora 
12. Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
13. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
14. Dr. V. Sivadasan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri H. Ram Prakash - Director  
3. Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Mohan Arumala - Under Secretary 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of P&NG 
Representatives of OISD  
 
1. Shri Arun Mittal - Executive Director,   
2. Shri Vikas Kumar Sharma - Director (E&P) 
1. Shri Amar Nath - Additional Secretary (Exploration) 

Representatives of OIL   
 
1. Shri Sushil Chandra Mishra - CMD 
2. Shri Harish Madhav - Director (Finance) 
3. Shri P.K. Goswami - Director (Operations) 
4. Shri Sanjay Chaudhary - Executive Director (Corporate Affairs) 
5. Shri Ashok Das  - Executive Director (HR) 
6. Shri A. Roy Chaudhary - Executive Director (Production Services) 
 
2.   At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed Members of the Committee 
and representatives of the Ministry of P&NG/OIL/OISD and informed that the sitting was 
convened to take oral evidence on the subject "Safety and Security of Oil 
Installations of Public Sector Oil Companies including the recent Baghjan Oil Well 
Blowout".     
 
3.   Subsequently, Members of the Committee deliberated on various issues related 
to the subject such as exact causes for the blowout of Baghjan oilfield, total number of 
deaths, shifting of affected population to safer places and subsequent  rehabilitation, 
reasons for 100 days delay in containment of the blowout, production level at the site of 
incident, violation of safety and standard operating protocols, measures initiated to 
prevent recurrence of such blowouts, safety audits conducted in Baghjan and 
irregularities found, in-house expertise available with Oil India Ltd to deal with such oil 
and natural gas blowouts, environmental impact assessment carried out to study the 
damage to the local ecology by this blowout. 
4. In addition, report of the High Level Committee on the incident, internal inquiry by 
OISD and DGMS, the court cases and NGT directions in the case, compensation to 
victims, bogus beneficiaries and setting up of a mechanism to oversee the relief 
package, shifting of regional headquarters to Guwahati were also discussed. 
                                                                                                                                                                  
5. Thereafter, the Chairperson thanked the representatives of the Ministry of 
P&NG/OIL/OISD for expressing their views and answering queries raised by the 
Members of the Committee. Further, to the queries where replies were not readily 
available, the Ministry of P&NG were instructed to furnish the same to the Secretariat 
within ten days. 
6. A copy of the verbatim proceedings is kept in the Branch for record. 
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 

Annexure-III 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2021-22) 
 
EIGHTEENTH SITTING 
(20.07.2022) 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 20th July, 2022 from 1600 hrs. to 1730 
hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, PHA, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Ramesh Bidhuri - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Smt. Chinta Anuradha 
3.  Dr. Ramesh Chand Bind 
4.  Shri Girish Chandra 
5.  Shri Topon Kumar Gogoi 
6.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya 
7.  Shri Santosh Kumar 
8.  Shri Rodmal Nagar 
9.  Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
10.  Shri Unmesh Bhaiyyasaheb Patil 
11.  Shri M.K. Raghavan 
12.  Shri Chandra Sekhar Sahu 
13.  Shri Dilip Saikia 
14.  Dr. Bharatiben Dhirubhai Shiyal 
15.  Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
16.  Shri Lallu Singh 
17.  Shri Vinod Sonkar 
18.  Shri Ajay Tamta 
19.  Dr. Kalanidhi Veeraswamy 
                      RAJYA SABHA 
20. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
21. Smt. Kanta Kardam 
22. Shri Rambhai Mokariya 
23. Shri Subhas Chandra Bose Pilli 
24. Dr. V. Sivadasan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Y. M. Kandpal - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri H. Ram Prakash - Director 
3. Shri Brajesh Kumar Singh - Deputy Secretary 

4. Shri Mohan Arumala - Under Secretary 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
 
1 Shri Pankaj Jain - Secretary 
2 Shri Sunil Kumar - Joint Secretary (Refinery) 
 
Representative of DGH 
 
1 Shri S.C.L. Das - DG 
 
Representatives of OISD 
 
1 Shri Vikas Kumar Sharma - Director (E&P) 
2 Shri Arun Mittal - ED 
 
Representatives of OIL 
 
1 Shri Harish Madhav - Director (Finance) & CMD (AC) 
2 Shri P.K. Goswami - Director (Operations) 
3 Shri Sanjay Kumar Rai - ED (HSE) 
 
 
2.  At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed Members of the Committee 
and apprised them about the agenda of the sitting i.e. "Safety and Security of Oil 
Installations of Public Sector Oil Companies with specific reference to Baghjan 
Oilwell Blowout Incident”. 
 
3.   Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of petroleum & Natural Gas, DGH, 
OISD and OIL were called in. After customary introduction, a representative of Oil India 
made a power point presentation on the subject.  
 
4. Thereafter, Members of the Committee raised several issues related to the 
subject such as violation of SOPs leading to the Baghjan blowout, impact of the blowout 
over local bio-diversity, tool box talk by the installation manager of OIL, internal and 
external safety audit system, the amount of monetary compensation to the affected 
population, criteria for disbursal of the same, the amount of insurance paid by OIL to 
insurance companies, the service provider of Baghjan well i.e. John Energy Ltd 
commencing its operations at the well site without the formal work order from OIL, 
import of the snubbing unit from Canada and transport of the same from Kolkata airport 
by road to blowout site to extinguish the fire, space constraint at Guwahati and 
Dibrugarh airports to handle massive air cargo like snubbing unit in times of oil and gas 

disasters, disciplinary proceedings/penal action against erring officials of Oil India w.r.t 
the blow out incident etc. 
 
5. Further, issues like imparting training to local communities w.r.t. fire fighting skills 
under guidance of district administrations in the country, strengthening crisis 
management teams to deal with oil and gas disasters and setting up of crisis 
management centre in the north eastern region, increasing number of near miss 
incidents despite adherence to SoPs, creation of better physical infrastructure in and 
around the Baghjan region for transportation of critical fire-fighting equipment and 
setting up of green hydrogen plants also came up for discussion during the sitting. 
 
6. The representatives of the Ministry/OIL furnished clarifications to the queries 
raised by the Members. On some of the points where the information was not readily 
available, the Chairperson asked the representatives to furnish written replies on the 
same within seven days to the Lok Sabha Secretariat.                                                                                                                            
 
7.  The Chairperson then thanked the representatives of the MoPNG / OIL / DGH / 
OISD for providing information on the subject before the Committee.  
 
8. The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
9. A copy of the verbatim proceedings is kept in the Branch for record. 
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
 

Annexure-IV 
 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2022-23) 
 
 
TENTH SITTING 
(16.03.2023) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 16th March, 2023 from 1500 hrs. to 
1530 hrs. in Committee Room ‘1’, EPHA, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Ramesh Bidhuri - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri Ramesh Chand Bind 
3 Shri Pradyut Bordoloi 
4 Shri Girish Chandra 
5 Smt. Chinta Anuradha 
6 Shri Dilip Saikia 
7 Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya 
8 Dr. Kalanidhi Veeraswamy 
9 Shri Santosh Kumar 
10 Shri Rodmal Nagar 
11 Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
12 Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar 
13 Dr. Bharatiben Dhirubhai Shiyal 
14 Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
15 Shri Lallu Singh 
16 Shri Ajay Tamta 
 
                      RAJYA SABHA 
 
17 Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
18 Smt. Kanta Kardam 
19 Shri Mithlesh Kumar 
20 Shri Pabitra Margherita 
21 Shri Rambhai Mokariya  
22 Shri Sasmit Patra 
23 Shri Subhas Chandra Bose Pilli 
24 Dr. V. Sivadasan 
25 Shri Ravichandra Vaddiraju 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Y.M. Kandpal - Joint Secretary 

2. Shri H. Ram Prakash - Director 
3. Shri Brajesh Kumar Singh  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  XXX     XXX      XXX     XXX       XXX      XXX    XXX     XXX    XXX      
  
3. The Committee then took up for consideration draft report on ‘Safety and 
Security of Oil Installations of Public Sector oil companies-with specific reference to 
Baghjan Blow-Out Incident’ and adopted the same with slight modifications in 
recommendations. 
 
4. The Committee then authorised the Chairperson to finalize the Reports and 
present/lay the Reports in both the Houses of Parliament.  
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________________________ 
XXX:   Matter not related to the subject. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 