 
20 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2022-23) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)  
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Seventeenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2022-23) on the subject 
‘'Review of Implementation of CBG (SATAT)'] 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August 2023/Shravana, 1945 (Saka) 


2 
 
 
 
CP&NG NO.     
TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2022-23) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Seventeenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2022-23) on the subject 'Review of Implementation of 
CBG (SATAT)'] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 01.08.2023 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 01.08.2023 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August 2023/ Shravana 1945 (Saka)  
  


3 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-23)………………………                     (iii) 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………               (iv) 
CHAPTER I 
   
 
Report ………………………………………………….                  
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ……………………………                      
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies …………………………………     
                   
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted                                             
by the Committee ……………………………………    
                   
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited 
……….                     
 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the fifteenth sitting of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2022-23) 
held on 27.07.2023. 
 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations contained in the Seventeenth  
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2022-23) on 
the subject 'Review of Implementation of CBG 
(SATAT)'. 
 

4 
 
 
 
(iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM &  
NATURAL GAS (2022-23) 
Sl. No.                                           Names of Members 
                                                      LOK SABHA 
Shri Ramesh Bidhuri – Chairperson 
2 Dr. Ramesh Chand Bind 
3 Shri Pradyut Bordoloi 
4 Shri Girish Chandra 
5 Smt. Chinta Anuradha 
6 Shri Dilip Saikia 
7 Shri Topon Kumar Gogoi  
8 Shri Naranbhai Bhikhabhai Kachhadiya 
9 Dr. Kalanidhi Veeraswamy 
10 Shri Santosh Kumar 
11 Shri Rodmal Nagar 
12 Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
13 Shri Unmesh Bhaiyyasaheb Patil  
14 Shri M.K. Raghavan 
15 Shri Chandra Sekhar Sahu 
16 Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar 
17 Dr. Bharatiben Dhirubhai Shiyal 
18 Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
19 Shri Lallu Singh 
20 Shri Vinod Kumar Sonkar 
21 Shri Ajay Tamta 
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
23 Smt. Kanta Kardam 
24 Shri Mithlesh Kumar 
25 Shri Pabitra Margherita 
26 Shri Rambhai Harjibhai Mokariya 
27 Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
28 Dr. Sasmit Patra 
29 Shri Subhas Chandra Bose Pilli 
30 Dr. V. Sivadasan 
31 Shri Ravichandra Vaddiraju 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1 Shri Y.M. Kandpal Joint Secretary 
2 
3 
Shri H. Ram Prakash 
Shri Gurpreet Singh 
Director 
Committee Officer  
 
 
 
  

5 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twentieth 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Seventeenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the subject 'Review of 
Implementation of CBG (SATAT)'. 
2. The Seventeenth Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas 
was presented to Lok Sabha/ laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on 21.12.2022. The Action 
Taken Replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained in the 
Seventeenth Report were received on 20.04.2023. 
3. The Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas (2022-23) considered and 
adopted the Report at their sitting held on 27.07.2023.  
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Seventeenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Petroleum & Natural Gas is given in Annexure-II. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officers of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
 27 July, 2023 
5 Shravana, 1945 (Saka)     
                           RAMESH BIDHURI,                                             
Chairperson,  
Standing Committee on                          
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 

6 
 
 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Seventeenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum 
and Natural Gas (2022-23) on the subject 'Review of Implementation of CBG (SATAT)' of 
the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 21.12.2022.  
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry on 20.04.2023 in respect 
of all the 20 Recommendations/Observations contained in the Report.  These have been 
categorized as per the following: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the Government:- 
Reco. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 10,11,12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19 and 20 (Total -16) 
(Chapter- II) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies:- Nil 
(Chapter- III) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee:- Reco. Nos. 6 and 9 (Total - 02) 
(Chapter- IV) 
                                      
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government 
are still awaited:- Reco. Nos. 8 and 17 (Total-02) 
                                                                                                         (Chapter- V)   
 3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of this Report and Final 
Replies in respect of the recommendations for which interim replies have been 
furnished by the Government (included in Chapter-V), should be furnished 
expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.  

7 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
Implementation of SATAT 
5. The Committee in its original Report (Reco. No. 1) had recommended as under:  
“The Committee note that India is one of the fast-growing economies in the world 
and energy availability is a major component for any growing economy. Considering 
that the country is dependent to a large extent on import of crude oil for its 
hydrocarbon needs, it is vulnerable to the volatility of crude oil prices in the 
international market and this necessitates the nation to develop a strategy to 
insulate the economy by developing domestically produced alternative fuels. The 
Government of India has planned to promote usage of natural gas and to increase 
the share in energy mix from the current level of around 6.7 percent to 15 percent 
by 2030. 
The Committee further note that the National Policy of Bio fuels 2018 aims to 
increase the role of Bio fuels in the energy and transport sector of the country and 
that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has launched the Sustainable 
Alternative Towards Affordable Transportation (SATAT) initiative in October 2018 
which envisages developing 5000 CBG plants with total production capacity 
equivalent to 54 MMSCMD of gas by 2023-24. SATAT offers an investment 
potential of Rs. 1.75 lakh crore and generate about 75,000 direct employments. 
The initiative promotes use of Compressed Bio Gas (CBG) in the CNG (transport) 
and PNG (Piped Natural Gas) sector of City Gas Distribution (CGD) supplies and is 
produced from agriculture residues, animal dung, food waste, municipal Solid waste 
(MSW) and sewage water. This initiative also integrates the other objectives of the 
government namely doubling of farmer’s income, import reduction, employment 
generation, waste to wealth creation, etc., and which can help the country in 
meeting the commitments. 
The Committee however note with regret that out of an ambitious target of 
developing 5000 CBG plants by 2023-24, only about 40 CBG plants have been set 
up so far which indicates that lots of ground need to be covered under SATAT 
scheme which is burdened by lack of clarity, procedural hurdles and has not 
enthused the investors/entrepreneurs to come forward to establish CBG plants so 
far. The Committee while observing that MoPNG is approaching this scheme as a 
waste to energy or waste Management initiative for agricultural residue, desire that 
the Ministry should change its vision of SATAT as an initiative to produce natural 
gas domestically in a green and clean form. 
The Committee, appreciate SATAT as a path breaking and transformational 
initiative of the Ministry and hope that if successfully implemented, SATAT would 
strengthen self-reliance to meet the energy demands of the country. The Committee 
would, however, caution the Ministry not to rest on its laurels on the success in 
Ethanol Blended Petrol (EBP) program but take proactive steps and be responsive 
to make the SATAT initiative successful too and recommend that it should ensure 
successful implementation by reviewing the progress at regular intervals and 
address various impediments that pulls back achieving of targets set under this 
initiative”. 
6. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
“CBG sector is in developing stage in the country. Due to various constraints CBG 
projects are not being established at a desired rate. Since the inception of SATAT 

8 
 
 
 
initiative this Ministry has coordinated with other Ministries, State Governments and 
other stake holders. Some of the key initiative taken by Government for expediting 
the progress of CBG projects are as under:   
(i) Revision in CBG procurement price and indexing the same with CBG 
Retail Selling Price (RSP) which will be at par with CNG RSP.  
(ii) MoPNG has issued policy guidelines for co-mingling of CBG with 
Natural Gas in CGD network.  
(iii) Under synchronization scheme procurement price of biogas is Rs. 
1470/MMBTU excluding GST w.e.f. 1.12.2022. In addition, Rs. 8/kg of 
compression charge for supply of CBG on retail outlet and for CBG supply in 
pipeline Rs. 2/kg of pipeline injection charge would be paid extra. 
(iv) MNRE is providing “Central Financial Assistance” of Rs. 4.0/- Cr. per 
4800 kg/day of installed capacity of CBG plants (Maximum CFA up to Rs. 
10/-Cr./project) under “Waste to Energy Programme”. 
(v) State Bank of India, Bank of Baroda, Canara Bank and some other 
banks have developed exclusive loan product for financing of CBG projects. 
Canara Bank has been nominated as Nodal Banker under SATAT. 
(vi) Department of Fertilizers have issued letter to Fertilizer companies for 
mandatory offtake of FOM with chemical fertilizers as a “Basket approach”.  
(vii) To avoid cascading of taxes on blended compressed natural gas, 
excise duty on amount of GST-paid on compressed bio gas contained in the 
blended CNG has been exempted. 
This Ministry is reviewing the progress of SATAT initiative on regular basis. CBG 
projects are also being reviewed and monitored by Inter Ministerial Task Force for 
GOBARdhan formed under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Department of Drinking 
Water and sanitation. This Ministry is coordinating with other Ministries, 
Departments, State Governments and stakeholders for expeditious development of 
CBG projects”. 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
No. L-16023/7/2020-GP-I(E: 38363) dated 20.04.2023 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
7. The Committee in its original Report had recommended that the Ministry 
should ensure successful implementation of SATAT initiative by reviewing the 
progress at regular intervals and address various impediments that pulls back 
achieving of targets set under this initiative. 
The Ministry in its action taken reply have submitted that due to various 
constraints CBG projects are not being established at a desired rate.  Further, the  
Ministry are reviewing the progress of SATAT initiative on regular basis and  
coordinating with other Ministries, Departments, State Governments and 

9 
 
 
 
Stakeholders for expeditious development of CBG projects that are also being 
reviewed and monitored by Inter Ministerial Task Force for GOBARdhan formed 
under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation.   
The Committee while noting the initiatives being taken to implement the 
SATAT initiative expect that the Ministry being the nodal agency for implementing 
the scheme have a paramount responsibility to closely monitor that the targets for 
the projects are achieved and to ensure that the obstacles/difficulties being faced 
by the investors/entrepreneurs are addressed without any delay by necessary 
action.  If the CBG projects are not being established at a desired rate, it becomes 
all the more important that Ministry should have a relook in its approach and 
explore some out of the box solutions to help grow CBG sector and achieve its full 
potential.  
Recommendation No. 2 
Review of Letter of Intents 
8. The Committee in its original Report (Reco. No. 2) had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that under the SATAT initiative, the production of CBG 
would have multiple benefits vis-a-vis reduction of natural gas import, reduction of 
Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions, reduction in burning of agriculture residues, 
effective waste management, etc. The Committee further note that Oil and Gas 
Marketing Companies (OGMCs) invite Expression of Interest (EOI) from potential 
investors/entrepreneurs to procure CBG for further selling to automotive and 
commercial customers. Indian Oil Corporation is the nodal company for SATAT 
coordination. 
The Committee have been informed by the Ministry that as on 1stJune 2022, a total 
of 3263 Letter of Intents (LOIs) have been issued by the Oil PSU's. Number of 
cases where land has been finalized is 328 and 97 LOIs have achieved financial 
closure. The Committee observe that 35 CBG plants have been commissioned so 
far and around 40 plants are expected to be commissioned by March 2023. 
The Committee observe that the same entrepreneur/investor has been issued a 
large number of Letters of Intents (LOIs) and the reason given for issue of such 
multiple LOIs is that the project involves getting clearances, approvals and many 
other supply chain issues and the plant can be set up as and when the necessary 
approvals are available in a given location. However, the Committee have been 
informed by the entrepreneurs that the banks are not extending loans for more than 
one project to the entrepreneur who is holding multiple Letters of Intents (LOIs). The 
Department of Financial Services state that PSU Banks would like to see the 
execution of a few CBG plants to which they have already extended the loan. 

10 
 
 
 
However, the Committee suspect that the PSUs had issued multiple Letters of 
Intents (LOIs) just to show that the targets under SATAT are on course of being 
achieved as it is evident that the same entrepreneur will not get finance for different 
projects from banks without providing adequate security and guarantees. The fact 
that out of 3263 Letters of Intents (LOIs), hardly 40 plants have been commissioned 
with less than 24 months to go speak volumes of the progress made. Therefore, the 
Committee desire that there should be proper guidelines for issuance of Letters of 
Intents (LOIs) to entrepreneurs including at multiple locations 
The Committee deplore MoP&NG / PSU's for such deceptive methods to mislead 
about the targets and show that the progress under SATAT is good. The Committee 
while acknowledging the impact of COVID, would like the Ministry to review the 
letters of Intents (LOIs) issued so far in terms of progress made and take all 
corrective actions and aggressively attract new investors / entrepreneurs. The 
Committee, therefore recommend that the Ministry should set up a committee to 
review the Letters of Intents (LOIs) issued and also to frame guidelines for issue or 
fresh Letters of Intents (LOIs)”. 
9. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
“LOIs have been issued to interested and eligible entities who have submitted the 
relevant documents for setting up of CBG plants under the SATAT initiative, after 
evaluation as per extant guidelines.  
Getting a LOI issued has been the very basic and initial step towards implementing 
the CBG project for such entrepreneurs as the LOI is being reproduced by these 
parties to various banks and statutory bodies, basis which they receive NOC and 
sanction of loan.  
This Ministry has advised OGMCs to review the selection criteria for LoI issuance 
so that only serious applicants are selected and also to withdraw the LoIs issued to 
non performing entrepreneurs.  Accordingly, OGMCs are reviewing the LoI issued 
and giving notices for cancellation of LoIs of non-serious LoI holders. LoIs of 87 
non-serious candidates have been cancelled so far”. 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
No. L-16023/7/2020-GP-I(E: 38363) dated 20.04.2023 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
10.  The Committee while expressing their apprehension regarding the method for 
issuing Letters of Intents (LOIs) to entrepreneurs/investors, had recommended in 
their original report that the Ministry should set up a committee to review the LOIs 
issued and also to frame guidelines for issue of fresh LOIs by Oil and Gas PSUs 
(OGMCs).  

11 
 
 
 
The Ministry in their action taken reply have submitted that  they have 
advised OGMCs to review the selection criteria for LoI issuance so that only serious 
applicants are selected and also to withdraw the LoIs issued to non performing 
entrepreneurs.  Accordingly, OGMCs are reviewing the LoIs issued and giving 
notices for cancellation of LoIs issued to non-serious LoI holders.  Eighty seven 
non-serious candidates/LOIs have been cancelled so far. 
The Committee appreciate the efforts made by the Ministry/OGMCs to review 
the selection criteria for LoI issuance and cancellation of LoIs issued to eighty 
seven non-serious candidates.  However, the reply is silent about steps being taken 
towards review of guidelines regarding issuing of LoIs.    
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation to set up a 
committee to review the LoIs issued so far from time to time and to tweak the 
guidelines so as to overhaul the selection criteria for issuing of LoIs by Oil and Gas 
PSUs to only serious candidates.  The Ministry may also apprise the Committee 
about the action taken in the matter within three months of presentation of this 
report. 
Recommendation No. 3 
NBCC Coordination Mechanism 
11. The Committee in its original Report (Reco. No. 3) had recommended as under:  
“The Committee note that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas is 
implementing the National Policy of Bio Fuels 2018 which aims to increase use of 
bio fuel in the country. The Committee also note that the success of CBG (SATAT) 
scheme is very much contingent on the well-coordinated efforts among various 
Ministries/Stakeholders/Organizations by resolving the challenges and bottlenecks 
in a time bound manner. This can be achieved by establishing a two-way 
communication between stakeholders and Govt. and within govt. bodies. There are 
roles for several Ministries for successful implementation of the CBG project and 
coordination amongst different Ministries is essential. 
The Committee observe that the National Bio Fuel Coordination Committee (NBCC) 
is already in place as a coordination mechanism which has representatives from 
various Ministries and headed by the Hon'ble Minister of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas to provide overall coordination, effective end-to- end implementation and 
monitoring of bio fuels. The Committee, however, find it surprising to note that since 
its inception, NBCC has held only one meeting till date which reflects the lack of 
seriousness by the Ministry to this mechanism for SATAT initiative. The Committee 
would, therefore, recommend that the MoPNG should convene meetings of NBCC 
at regular intervals to sort out issues in implementation of the programme and may 
also form sub committees involving the concerned Ministries to sort out specific and 
pointed issues”. 

12 
 
 
 
12. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply:  
“During the budget speech it has been announced that a 5 per cent CBG mandate 
will be introduced for all organizations marketing natural and bio gas.  MoPNG has 
initiated process to convene the meeting of NBCC to discuss the issues related to 
implementation of SATAT as well as introduction of CBG blending mandate. 
Under National Policy of Bio fuels, a “Working Group on Biofuels” comprising of 
eminent experts in the field of bio fuels, technical experts from research and 
academic institutions in the field of bio fuels, representatives from relevant 
Ministries/Departments, OMCs, PCRA, representatives/ experts from the Industry, 
CSIR Lab, National Sugar Institute & Bio fuel Associations etc. has been formed. 
Issues related to CBG projects are also discussed in the Working Group of Bio 
fuels. 
In addition, CBG projects are also being reviewed and monitored by Inter Ministerial 
Task Force formed under GOBARdhan scheme.  Further, MoPNG is part of 
committee formed by Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare regarding the 
supply of raw material for CBG plants and the use of bio manure produced by CBG 
plants”.  
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
No. L-16023/7/2020-GP-I(E: 38363) dated 20.04.2023 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
13. The Committee in their original report had recommended that the MoPNG 
should convene meetings of NBCC at regular intervals to sort out issues in 
implementation of the programme and also to form Sub-Committees involving the 
concerned Ministries to sort out specific and pointed issues.  
The Ministry in their action taken reply have submitted that they have initiated 
process to convene the meeting of NBCC to discuss the issues related to 
implementation of SATAT as well as introduction of 5 per cent CBG mandate.  
Further, under National Policy on Bio fuels, a Working Group comprising of eminent 
experts in the field of bio fuels, technical experts from research and academic 
institutions, representatives from relevant Ministries/Departments, OMCs, PCRA, 
representatives/experts from the Industry, CSIR Lab, National Sugar Institute & Bio 
fuel Associations etc. has been formed to discuss issues related to CBG projects.  
They are also being reviewed and monitored by Inter Ministerial Task Force formed 
under GOBARdhan scheme.  Further, the Ministry have been made part of 
Committee formed by Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare regarding the 
supply of raw material to CBG plants and the use of bio manure produced by CBG 
plants. 

13 
 
 
 
The Committee are satisfied to note that a Working Group on Biofuels has 
been formed and the Ministry have made an initiative to convene the meeting of 
NBCC to discuss the issues related to CBG projects.  However, details regarding 
date of notification for constituting Working Group and its achievement so far in 
facilitating entrepreneurs/investors has not been mentioned in the reply.  The 
Committee would exhort the Ministry not to be complacent about these initiatives 
and rather it should actively strive towards holding the meetings at regular intervals 
so that issues plaguing successful implementation of CBG SATAT initiative are 
sorted out.  Besides, the Committee would expect the Ministry to apprise them 
about the action taken in the matter within three months of presentation of this 
report. 
Recommendation No. 5 
Central Financial Assistance (CFA) 
14. The Committee in its original Report (Reco. No. 5) had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that Ministry of New & Renewable Energy (MNRE) was 
implementing a scheme called Central Financial Assistance (CFA) for extending 
support to new and renewable energy projects. The Committee note that since April 
2021, the Central Financial Assistance program for biogas/CBG projects has been 
discontinued and this has served as a major setback to the industry. The 
Committee have learnt that the CBG plants fall under new and renewable energy 
category and hence these plants are entitled for CFA. However, as the scheme is 
not in place, this facility is denied to entrepreneurs who come forward to set up 
CBG plants.  The Committee strongly feel that to mainstream the industry, which is 
still in its introductory/nascent stage, the continuation of CFA scheme is important. 
The Committee recommend that MOPNG should take up with MNRE and Ministry 
of Finance for reintroduction of this Central Financial Assistance Scheme to 
incentivize and enthuse entrepreneur to set-up of CBG plants in the country. 
The Committee also desire that MoPNG may consider to move towards Generation 
Based Incentive (GBI) instead of Capex-based subsidy for CBG plants which will 
provide incentives for producing gas and keep the plants running and functional 
rather than just setting up the plant. The Committee would like determination of 
appropriate GBI (price/per Kg of CBG) under different feedstocks to be estimated 
by the Ministry in this regard”. 
15. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
 
“Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) has accorded administrative 
approval for implementation of “Waste to Energy Programme” on 2.11.2022  for the 
duration 2021-22 to 2025-26 under the Umbrella Scheme of National Bio energy 
Progarmme. Under Waste to Energy Programme MNRE inter-alia provides “Central 
Financial Assistance” of Rs. 4.0/- Cr. per 4800 kg/day (for Bio CNG generation from 
new biogas plant) and Rs 3.0 Cr per 4800 kg/day (for Bio CNG generation from 
existing Biogas plant) with a maximum CFA of Rs. 10.0 Cr/project for both cases. 

14 
 
 
 
Further, for development of CBG projects enablers like introduction of 5 per cent 
CBG mandate for all organizations marketing natural gas, fiscal support for 
collection of bio-mass and distribution of bio-manure has been announced in budget 
speech.  
Besides, MoPNG is also exploring possibilities for providing fiscal support for 
development of pipeline infrastructure for connecting CBG projects with CGD 
network.  
With the implementation of above enablers, a market driven ecosystem will be 
developed to support CBG sector on long term basis.  
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
No. L-16023/7/2020-GP-I(E: 38363) dated 20.04.2023 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
16. The Committee in their original Report had recommended to the Ministry to 
take up the issue for reintroduction of Central Financial Assistance Scheme and 
also to consider moving towards Generation Based Incentive (GBI) instead of 
Capex-based subsidy for CBG plants. 
The Ministry in their action taken reply have submitted that under Waste to 
Energy Programme, the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) inter-alia 
provides Central Financial Assistance of Rs. 4.0 Cr. per 4800 kg/day (for Bio CNG 
generation from new biogas plant) and Rs. 3.0 Cr per 4800 kg/day (for Bio CNG 
generation from existing Biogas plant) with a maximum CFA of Rs. 10.0 Cr/project 
for both cases. Further, for development of CBG projects enablers like introduction 
of 5 per cent CBG mandate for all organizations marketing natural gas, fiscal 
support for collection of bio-mass and distribution of bio-manure has been 
announced in budget speech.  The Committee note that the MoPNG is also 
exploring possibilities for providing fiscal support for development of pipeline 
infrastructure for connecting CBG projects with CGD network.  
The Committee appreciate the various steps being taken by the Ministry to 
facilitate the CBG sector entrepreneurs/investors.  However, the Committee would 
expect the Ministry to  make all out efforts to implement the announcements made 
regarding introduction of 5 per cent CBG mandate, fiscal support for collection of 
bio-mass and distribution of bio-manure and providing fiscal support for 
development of pipeline infrastructure for connecting CBG projects with CGD 
network. The Committee feel that a little hand holding by the Ministry will go a long 
way in creating suitable eco system for supporting CBG sector, which is currently  

15 
 
 
 
at nascent stage.  The Committee would also recommend that a robust mechanism 
for coordination with other Ministries and concerned agencies as well as to address 
the difficulties/obstacles being faced by the stakeholders may also be developed at 
the Ministry level.  The Committee may also be apprised about the action taken in 
the matter within three months of presentation of this report. 
Recommendation No. 6 
Financial Institution for Petroleum Sector 
17. The Committee in its original Report (Reco. No. 6) had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that there are many projects which are being implemented by 
the MOPNG to enhance the energy security of the country· in the hydro carbon 
area including bio fuel projects for blending with petrol, diesel and gas. The 
Committee feel that with the plethora of initiatives being taken up by the Ministry, 
there is a need for financing these activities particularly at the initial stage by 
understanding the risks and reward associated with the project for which the 
expertise is available in the Oil PSUs who are operating for a long time in this 
sector. The Committee, therefore desire that the Oil PSUs which have strong cash 
flows and healthy balance sheets and consistently profit making should come 
forward to setup a financial institution for financing all bio-fuel and clean energy 
projects that are launched or likely to be launched in the future by the Ministry. 
There are institutions like Power Finance Corporation (PFC), Rural Electrification 
Corporation (REC), Housing & Urban Development. Corporation (HUDCO), Indian 
Renewable Energy Development Agency (IREDA) etc. in different Ministries of the 
Government for financing and monitoring specific sector projects. The Committee 
would desire the MoPNG should nudge the petroleum sector oil PSUs to establish a 
financial institution owned and managed by them as shareholders which will focus 
on clean, green and renewable energy bio fuel projects taken up by Ministry of PNG 
like Ethanol production for Ethanol Blended Petrol (EBP), Bio-diesel Projects, CBG 
projects, etc. The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry should set up a 
PSU financial institution for funding oil and gas sector project under its 
administrative control”.  
18. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
“This Ministry is coordinating with Banks and existing financial institutions viz Power 
Finance Corporation (PFC), Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency 
(IREDA), Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) etc. to provide easy 
finance for CBG sector. This Ministry is also working with World Bank and SIDBI for 
development of mechanism for financing of CBG projects.  
Department of Food and Public Distribution (DFPD), Government of India has 
notified the "Scheme for extending financial assistance to project proponents for 
enhancement of their ethanol distillation capacity or to set up distilleries for 
producing 1st Generation (1G) ethanol from feed stocks such as cereals (rice, 
wheat, barley, corn & sorghum), sugarcane, sugar beet, etc.” vide Gazette 
Notification No.128 dated 14 January 2021. National Bank for Agriculture and Rural 
Development (NABARD) has been appointed as the Nodal Bank for interacting with 
DFPD and managing interest subvention under the scheme. 

16 
 
 
 
At this juncture, existing banks and financial institutions may be used to finance 
CBG and other Bio fuel projects. Once this sector attains a level of maturity and 
requires support for further scaling, this ministry will examine the need for 
establishment of financial institutions for specific sector”.   
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
No. L-16023/7/2020-GP-I(E: 38363) dated 20.04.2023 
Comments of the Committee 
 
19. The Committee in their original Report had recommended that the Ministry of 
MoPNG should nudge the petroleum sector oil PSUs to establish a financial 
institution owned and managed by them as shareholders which will focus on clean, 
green and renewable energy bio fuel projects like Ethanol production for Ethanol 
Blended Petrol (EBP), Bio-diesel Projects, CBG projects, etc.  The Ministry while 
replying to the recommendation have stated that they are coordinating with banks 
and other financial institutions like Power Finance Corporation, Indian Renewable 
Energy Development Agency, Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI), 
World Bank,  National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) etc. 
for development of mechanism for financing of CBG projects.  Further, the Ministry 
have also stated ‘once this sector attains a level of maturity and requires support 
for further scaling’, this Ministry will examine the need for establishment of financial 
institutions for specific sector.   
The Committee are dissatisfied with the reply of the Ministry and reiterate 
their earlier recommendation for setting up a PSU financial institution for funding oil 
and gas sector projects particularly the new initiatives under bio-fuel and Climate 
Change concerned mitigation projects.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the Ministry should prepare a detailed road map at the earliest in consultation with 
Oil and Gas PSUs to setup a financial institution for financing all bio-fuel and clean 
energy projects. 
Recommendation No. 7 
Bio Fuel  Infrastructure Fund 
20. The Committee in its original Report (Reco. No. 7) had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that the SATAT scheme is a laudable and ambitious initiative 
of the Government which can help the country to meet its energy requirements and 
strengthen the energy security. However, the action taken by the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas to implement the scheme have been very lukewarm and 
indifferent The Committee would still give the benefit for doubt to the Ministry as the 
country was fighting the Covid pandemic during the last two years. However, as the 

17 
 
 
 
situation has improved to a considerable extent and economic activities have picked 
up, the Ministry should now focus on taking necessary steps to see that the SATAT 
initiative is implemented and all objectives and targets are met. 
The Committee note that a scheme that may be replicated in this regard is the AIF 
(Agriculture Infrastructure Fund) facilitated by NABARD and the Ministry of 
Agriculture. In this regard, the Committee are of the view that a fund in the name of 
Bio Fuel Infrastructure fund in the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas may be 
created in a suitable way either from Oil Industry Development Board (OIDB) funds 
or budgetary allocations for development of this sector quickly and without waiting 
for other government agencies to finance them. Ministry may furnish the action 
taken in this regard”. 
21. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
“For ethanol projects DFPD is already providing financial assistance through 
NABARD. In line with the budget announcement this ministry is preparing a 
proposal for providing fiscal support for biomass collection of biomasses for CBG 
projects. In addition, this Ministry is also exploring possibilities for providing fiscal 
support for development of pipeline infrastructure for connecting CBG projects with 
CGD network. MoPNG is also coordinating with banks and other multilateral 
financial institutions to provide financing for CBG projects.  
Aforesaid steps will help in expeditious development of CBG sector. This Ministry 
will assess the need for setting up Bio Fuel Infrastructure Fund in due course”. 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
No. L-16023/7/2020-GP-I(E: 38363) dated 20.04.2023 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
22. The Committee in their original Report had recommended that the Ministry 
should explore the possibility of creating  Bio Fuel Infrastructure fund taking cue 
from the Agriculture Infrastructure Fund facilitated by NABARD and the Ministry of 
Agriculture, in a suitable way either from Oil Industry Development Board (OIDB) 
funds or budgetary allocations for development of this sector quickly and without 
waiting for other government agencies to finance them. 
The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated that they will assess the 
need for setting up Bio Fuel Infrastructure Fund in due course alongwith exploring 
possibilities for providing fiscal support for development of pipeline infrastructure 
for connecting CBG projects with CGD network.  Besides, the Ministry have also 
stated to be coordinating with banks and other multilateral financial institutions to 
provide financing for CBG projects. 
While appreciating the efforts being made by the Ministry to coordinate with 
banks and other multilateral financial institutions to provide financing for CBG 

18 
 
 
 
projects, the Committee feel that when a National Bio Fuel Fund/PM - Jivan Yojana  
fund has been established by the Ministry, it should be properly funded and utilized 
for the objectives set out.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to 
make all out efforts  for seeking adequate funds for bio fuel projects under National 
Bio Fuel Fund/PM - Jivan Yojana and to expedite the development of CBG sector. 
Recommendation No. 9 
 Investment in CBG Projects by Oil PSUs 
23. The Committee in its original Report (Reco. No. 9) had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that CBG projects are being implemented with the expectation 
that private entrepreneurs and investors will come forward and the role of oil PSUs 
shall be to provide support to these projects in the form of assured off take of CBG 
produced from these plants. The Committee observe that IOC has invested in 5 
CBG projects and GAIL and HPCL in one each whereas the upstream PSUs like 
ONGC and OIL which have specific mandate relating to production of natural gas 
and marketing of natural gas respectively have not invested in any project so far. 
The Committee find it surprising to note that PSUs are not interested in setting up of 
CBG projects on their own despite domestic natural gas production being a 
mandate of the upstream oil PSUs. The Committee, therefore, would like Oil PSUs 
to aggressively enter into CBG sector through company owned company operated 
(COCO) model or joint ventures with other OMCs/entrepreneurs. 
Further, the OMCs also have a responsibility to meet the LPG demand in the 
country both in domestic and commercial sector and a large part of their LPG 
requirement is imported to meet the demand. These companies have restricted 
themselves to buy the Bio- gas from the CBG projects. The Committee feel this is 
unacceptable and want all the PSUs to invest and promote CBG projects seriously 
with their own investment. The Committee also expect that the Ministry should 
persuade the oil PSUs particularly upstream oil PSU's like ONGC, OIL and GAIL in 
particular to set up a good number or CBG projects in the country as this fall within 
their mandate of producing natural gas. The PSUs with their professional and 
project management competence should set aside sizeable fund for investment in 
these projects and able to execute the projects in time bound and efficient manner. 
This will also demonstrate the viability of these projects and will give confidence to 
investors. This will also allow the PSUs and the Ministry to gain valuable experience 
to sort out various issues and put in place required policy measures to ensure that 
the CBG initiative is successfully implemented and enhance the energy security of 
the nation. Therefore, the Committee recommend that all the OIL PSUs should 
seriously look into SATAT initiative and invest in CBG plants with their own funds”. 
24. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
“OGMCs have been investing in creating and maintaining infrastructure for 
promotion of CBG projects which include development of Retail Outlet, laying of 
pipeline, purchase of equipment, etc. Further, they are also investing in 
establishment of CBG plants. The list of CBG projects with OGMC’s investment are 
as under:  
 

19 
 
 
 
S No.OGMC Location Status of project 
1 IOCL Namakkal, Tamil Nadu Sale of CBG initiated in May 2020 
2 IOCL Hingonia, Jaipur, Rajasthan Mechanical Completion 
3 IOCL Gorakhpur, Uttar Pradesh Work in progress 
4 IOCL Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh Work in progress 
5 HPCL Budaun, Uttar Pradesh Work in Progress 
6 HPCL Jalore, Rajasthan Work in Progress 
7 GAIL Ranchi, Jharkhand Work in Progress 
 
In addition, IOCL has also commissioned cattle dung to Biogas Plants in Betul & 
Hoshangabad in Madhya Pradesh and Gorapkhpur in Uttar Pradesh. 
Other Oil PSUs and CGD entities are also being encouraged invest in 
establishment of CBG plants”. 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
No. L-16023/7/2020-GP-I(E: 38363) dated 20.04.2023 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
25. The Committee while observing that PSUs were not setting up CBG projects 
on their own despite domestic natural gas production being a mandate of some of 
the upstream oil PSUs, had recommended in their original Report that the  Ministry 
should prevail upon Oil PSUs to aggressively enter into CBG sector either on their 
own or through joint ventures so as to demonstrate the viability of the CBG projects 
and instil confidence among the investors/entrepreneurs.   
The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry as it does not 
mention any new measure taken by Oil PSUs in this regard and has rather resorted 
to mislead the Committee by furnishing the details of the CBG projects that are 
already being undertaken by IOCL, HPCL and GAIL.  The Committee are not happy 
with this lack of seriousness being exhibited by the Ministry and Oil and Gas PSUs.   
Besides, the Committee are  concerned to note that the Ministry have not shown 
any interest to issue orders to Oil and Gas PSUs for investing in creating and 
maintaining infrastructure for promotion of CBG projects which create a doubt that 
the Ministry itself is skeptical about the viability and success of the CBG projects.  
The Committee feel that unless Oil and Gas PSUs shed their reluctance and come 
forward in investing in a few CBG projects, which can come out as effective model, 
it will be difficult to persuade private entrepreneurs and investors to come forward 

20 
 
 
 
and invest in the CBG Sector.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and want the Ministry to persuade the Oil and Gas PSUs to 
consider and make investments in new CBG projects with their own funds and 
seriously pursue their implementation.  The Ministry may also apprise the 
Committee about the action taken in the matter within three months of presentation 
of this report.  
Recommendation No. 10 
Establishing a Credit Guarantee Fund (CGF) 
26. The Committee in its original Report (Reco. No. 10) had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note the Entrepreneurs are facing huge problems in getting 
financial assistance for CBG plants. The Committee feel that lack of credit is one of 
the major factors due to which not many CBG plants have come up and therefore 
there is an urgent need to address access to credit by evolving innovative financial 
mechanisms/products. The Committee suggest that there should be a Credit 
Guarantee Fund (CGF) established for CBG project financing, like the one launched 
under Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE) by 
Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) and Government of India for 
stimulating collateral-free lending to Micro Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) 
borrowers and the same can be thought for CBG projects as well. This shall enable 
risk reduction of and instill confidence in the Financial Institutions for undertaking 
credit exposure in the CBG industry. 
The Committee also recommend that there can be refinancing of loans by Indian 
Renewable Energy Development Agency Limited (IREDA) under MNRE that can 
directly enter into MoU with Public Sector Banks wherein every CBG project that 
meets certain basic needs (for being qualified as a potent project) would be 
provided the benefit of concessional rate lending by IREDA via the bank/NBFC for 
onward lending”. 
27. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
“MoPNG is working with World Bank and SIDBI to explore the possibilities for 
concessional credit for CBG projects. World Bank has submitted a proposal to 
MoEFCC for seeking US$15 million funds through the non-grant instrument under 
the current Global Environment Facility (GEF) 8th cycle for implementing RSF 
facility for CBG projects under SATAT initiative and the same has been endorsed 
by the MoEFCC. Further, MoPNG is also coordinating with IREDA to provide 
concessional loans for CBG projects”. 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
No. L-16023/7/2020-GP-I(E: 38363) dated 20.04.2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

21 
 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
28. The Committee while noting the difficulties being faced by the entrepreneurs 
in getting financial assistance for CBG plants, had in their original Report 
recommended for establishing Credit Guarantee Fund (CGF) for CBG project 
financing, like the one Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises 
by Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) and Government of India for 
stimulating collateral-free lending to Micro Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) 
borrowers.  Besides, the Ministry were also asked to explore the possibility of 
refinancing of loans by Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency Limited 
(IREDA) under MNRE to facilitate setting up CBG plants.  
The Committee are satisfied to note that the MoPNG is working with World 
Bank and SIDBI to explore the possibilities for concessional credit for CBG projects 
and are also coordinating with IREDA to provide concessional loans for CBG 
projects.  However, there seem to be no reference in the reply about specific steps 
taken towards establishing Credit Guarantee Fund exclusively for CBG projects.  
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and exhort the 
Ministry to make all out efforts towards establishing Credit Guarantee Fund so as to 
improve accessibility of credit to CBG projects. 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

22 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation No. 1 
Implementation of SATAT 
The Committee notes that India is one of the fast-growing economies in the world and 
energy availability is a major component for any growing economy. Considering that the 
country is dependent to a large extent on import of crude oil for its hydrocarbon needs, it is 
vulnerable to the volatility of crude oil prices in the international market and this 
necessitates the nation to develop a strategy to insulate the economy by developing 
domestically produced alternative fuels. The Government of India has planned to promote 
usage of natural gas and to increase the share in energy mix from the current level of 
around 6.7 percent to 15 percent by 2030. 
The Committee further note that the National Policy of Bio fuels 2018 aims to increase the 
role of Bio fuels in the energy and transport sector of the country and that the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas has launched the Sustainable Alternative Towards Affordable 
Transportation (SATAT) initiative in October 2018 which envisages developing 5000 CBG 
plants with total production capacity equivalent to 54 MMSCMD of gas by 2023-24. SATAT 
offers an investment potential of Rs. 1.75 lakh crores and generate about 75,000 direct 
employments. 
The initiative promotes use of Compressed Bio Gas (CBG) in the CNG (transport) and 
PNG (Piped Natural Gas) sector of City Gas Distribution (CGD) supplies and is produced 
from agriculture residues, animal dung, food waste, municipal Solid waste (MSW) and 
sewage water. This initiative also integrates the other objectives of the government namely 
doubling of farmer’s income, import reduction, employment generation, waste to wealth 
creation, etc., and which can help the country in meeting the commitments. 
The Committee however note with regret that out of an ambitious target of developing 
5000 CBG plants by 2023-24, only about 40 CBG plants have been set up so far which 
indicates that lots of ground need to be covered under SATAT scheme which is burdened 
by lack of clarity, procedural hurdles and has not enthused the investors/entrepreneurs to 
come forward to establish CBG plants so far. The Committee while observing that MoPNG 
is approaching this scheme as a waste to energy or waste Management initiative for 
agricultural residue, desire that the Ministry should change its vision of SATAT as an 
initiative to produce natural gas domestically in a green and clean form. 
The Committee, appreciate SATAT as a path breaking and transformational initiative of the 
Ministry and hope that if successfully implemented, SATAT would strengthen self-reliance 
to meet the energy demands of the country. The Committee would, however, caution the 
Ministry not to rest on its laurels on the success in Ethanol Blended Petrol (EBP) program 
but take proactive steps and be responsive to make the SATAT initiative successful too 
and recommend that it should ensure successful implementation by reviewing the 
progress at regular intervals and address various impediments that pulls back achieving of 
targets set under this initiative. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 CBG sector is in developing stage in the country. Due to various constraints CBG projects 
are not being established at a desired rate. Since the inception of SATAT initiative this 
Ministry has coordinated with other Ministries, State Governments and other stake holders.  

23 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation No. 1 
Implementation of SATAT 
The Committee notes that India is one of the fast-growing economies in the world and 
energy availability is a major component for any growing economy. Considering that the 
country is dependent to a large extent on import of crude oil for its hydrocarbon needs, it is 
vulnerable to the volatility of crude oil prices in the international market and this 
necessitates the nation to develop a strategy to insulate the economy by developing 
domestically produced alternative fuels. The Government of India has planned to promote 
usage of natural gas and to increase the share in energy mix from the current level of 
around 6.7 percent to 15 percent by 2030. 
The Committee further note that the National Policy of Bio fuels 2018 aims to increase the 
role of Bio fuels in the energy and transport sector of the country and that the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas has launched the Sustainable Alternative Towards Affordable 
Transportation (SATAT) initiative in October 2018 which envisages developing 5000 CBG 
plants with total production capacity equivalent to 54 MMSCMD of gas by 2023-24. SATAT 
offers an investment potential of Rs. 1.75 lakh crores and generate about 75,000 direct 
employments. 
The initiative promotes use of Compressed Bio Gas (CBG) in the CNG (transport) and 
PNG (Piped Natural Gas) sector of City Gas Distribution (CGD) supplies and is produced 
from agriculture residues, animal dung, food waste, municipal Solid waste (MSW) and 
sewage water. This initiative also integrates the other objectives of the government namely 
doubling of farmer’s income, import reduction, employment generation, waste to wealth 
creation, etc., and which can help the country in meeting the commitments. 
The Committee however note with regret that out of an ambitious target of developing 
5000 CBG plants by 2023-24, only about 40 CBG plants have been set up so far which 
indicates that lots of ground need to be covered under SATAT scheme which is burdened 
by lack of clarity, procedural hurdles and has not enthused the investors/entrepreneurs to 
come forward to establish CBG plants so far. The Committee while observing that MoPNG 
is approaching this scheme as a waste to energy or waste Management initiative for 
agricultural residue, desire that the Ministry should change its vision of SATAT as an 
initiative to produce natural gas domestically in a green and clean form. 
The Committee, appreciate SATAT as a path breaking and transformational initiative of the 
Ministry and hope that if successfully implemented, SATAT would strengthen self-reliance 
to meet the energy demands of the country. The Committee would, however, caution the 
Ministry not to rest on its laurels on the success in Ethanol Blended Petrol (EBP) program 
but take proactive steps and be responsive to make the SATAT initiative successful too 
and recommend that it should ensure successful implementation by reviewing the 
progress at regular intervals and address various impediments that pulls back achieving of 
targets set under this initiative. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 CBG sector is in developing stage in the country. Due to various constraints CBG projects 
are not being established at a desired rate. Since the inception of SATAT initiative this 

24 
 
 
 
Ministry has coordinated with other Ministries, State Governments and other stake holders. 
Some of the key initiative taken by Government for expediting the progress of CBG 
projects are as under:   
(viii) Revision in CBG procurement price and indexing the same with CBG Retail Selling 
Price (RSP) which will be at par with CNG RSP.  
(ix) MoPNG has issued policy guidelines for co-mingling of CBG with Natural Gas in 
CGD network.  
(x) Under synchronization scheme procurement price of biogas is Rs. 1470/MMBTU 
excluding GST w.e.f. 1.12.2022. In addition, Rs. 8/kg of compression charge for supply of 
CBG on retail outlet and for CBG supply in pipeline Rs. 2/kg of pipeline injection charge 
would be paid extra. 
(xi) MNRE is providing “Central Financial Assistance” of Rs. 4.0/- Cr. per 4800 kg/day 
of installed capacity of CBG plants (Maximum CFA up to Rs. 10/-Cr./project) under “Waste 
to Energy Programme”. 
(xii) State Bank of India, Bank of Baroda, Canara Bank and some other banks have 
developed exclusive loan product for financing of CBG projects. Canara Bank has been 
nominated as Nodal Banker under SATAT. 
(xiii) Department of Fertilizers have issued letter to Fertilizer companies for mandatory 
offtake of FOM with chemical fertilizers as a “Basket approach”.  
(xiv) To avoid cascading of taxes on blended compressed natural gas, excise duty on 
amount of GST-paid on compressed bio gas contained in the blended CNG has been 
exempted. 
This Ministry is reviewing the progress of SATAT initiative on regular basis. CBG projects 
are also being reviewed and monitored by Inter Ministerial Task Force for GOBARdhan 
formed under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Department of Drinking Water and 
sanitation. This Ministry is coordinating with other Ministries, Departments, State 
Governments and stakeholders for expeditious development of CBG projects.  
 
O.M. No.   L-16023/7/2020-GP-I (E: 38363) 
Dated:    20.04.2023 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see para no. 7 of Chapter 1) 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
Review of Letter of Intents 
The Committee note that under the SATAT initiative, the production of CBG would 
have multiple benefits vis-a-vis reduction of natural gas import, reduction of Greenhouse 
Gas (GHG) emissions, reduction in burning of agriculture residues, effective waste 
management, etc. The Committee further note that Oil and Gas Marketing Companies 
(OGMCs) invite Expression of Interest (EOI) from potential investors/entrepreneurs to 
procure CBG for further selling to automotive and commercial customers. Indian Oil 
Corporation is the nodal company for SATAT coordination.  

25 
 
 
 
The Committee have been informed by the Ministry that as on 1stJune 2022, a total of 
3263 Letter of Intents (LOIs) have been issued by the Oil PSU's. Number of cases where 
land has been finalized is 328 and 97 LOIs have achieved financial closure. The 
Committee observe that 35 CBG plants have been commissioned so far and around 40 
plants are expected to be commissioned by March 2023. 
The Committee observe that the same entrepreneur/investor has been issued a large 
number of Letters of Intents (LOIs) and the reason given for issue of such multiple LOIs is 
that the project involves getting clearances, approvals and many other supply chain issues 
and the plant can be set up as and when the necessary approvals are available in a given 
location. However, the Committee have been informed by the entrepreneurs that the 
banks are not extending loans for more than one project to the entrepreneur who is 
holding multiple Letters of Intents (LOIs). The Department of Financial Services state that 
PSU Banks would like to see the execution of a few CBG plants to which they have 
already extended the loan. 
However, the Committee suspect that the PSUs had issued multiple Letters of Intents 
(LOIs) just to show that the targets under SATAT are on course of being achieved as it is 
evident that the same entrepreneur will not get finance for different projects from banks 
without providing adequate security and guarantees. The fact that out of 3263 Letters of 
Intents (LOIs), Hardly 40 plants have been commissioned with less than 24 months to go 
speak volumes of the progress made. Therefore, the Committee desire that there should 
be proper guidelines for issuance of Letters of Intents (LOIs) to entrepreneurs including at 
multiple locations 
The Committee deplore MoP&NG / PSU's for such deceptive methods to mislead about 
the targets and show that the progress under SATAT is good. The Committee while 
acknowledging the impact of COVID, would like the Ministry to review the letters of Intents 
(LOIs) issued so far in terms of progress made and take all corrective actions and 
aggressively attract new investors / entrepreneurs. The Committee, therefore recommend 
that the Ministry should set up a committee to review the Letters of Intents (LOIs) issued 
and also to frame guidelines for issue or fresh Letters of Intents (LOIs). 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
LOIs have been issued to interested and eligible entities who have submitted the relevant 
documents for setting up of CBG plants under the SATAT initiative, after evaluation as per 
extant guidelines.  
Getting a LOI issued has been the very basic and initial step towards implementing the 
CBG project for such entrepreneurs as the LOI is being reproduced by these parties to 
various banks and statutory bodies, basis which they receive NOC and sanction of loan.  
This Ministry has advised OGMCs to review the selection criteria for LoI issuance so that 
only serious applicants are selected and also to withdraw the LoIs issued to non 
performing entrepreneurs.  Accordingly, OGMCs are reviewing the LoI issued and giving 
notices for cancellation of LoIs of non-serious LoI holders. LoIs of 87 non-serious 
candidates have been cancelled so far.  
 
O.M. No.   L-16023/7/2020-GP-I (E: 38363) 
Dated:    20.04.2023 
 

26 
 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see para no. 10 of Chapter 1) 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
  
NBCC Coordination Mechanism 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas is implementing the 
National Policy of Bio Fuels 2018 which aims to increase use of bio fuel in the country. The 
Committee also note that the success of CBG (SATAT) scheme is very much contingent 
on the well-coordinated efforts among various Ministries/Stakeholders/Organizations by 
resolving the challenges and bottlenecks in a time bound manner. This can be achieved by 
establishing a two-way communication between stakeholders and Govt. and within govt. 
bodies. There are roles for several Ministries for successful implementation of the CBG 
project and coordination amongst different Ministries is essential. 
The Committee observe that the National Bio Fuel Coordination Committee (NBCC) is 
already in place as a coordination mechanism which has representatives from various 
Ministries and headed by the Hon'ble Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas to provide 
overall coordination, effective end-to- end implementation and monitoring of bio fuels. The 
Committee, however, find it surprising to note that since its inception, NBCC has held only 
one meeting till date which reflects the lack of seriousness by the Ministry to this 
mechanism for SATAT initiative. The Committee would, therefore, recommend that the 
MoPNG should convene meetings of NBCC at regular intervals to sort out issues in 
implementation of the programme and may also form sub committees involving the 
concerned Ministries to sort out specific and pointed issues. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
During the budget speech it has been announced that a 5 per cent CBG mandate will be 
introduced for all organizations marketing natural and bio gas.  MoPNG has initiated 
process to convene the meeting of NBCC to discuss the issues related to implementation 
of SATAT as well as introduction of CBG blending mandate. 
Under National Policy of Bio fuels, a “Working Group on Biofuels” comprising of eminent 
experts in the field of bio fuels, technical experts from research and academic institutions 
in the field of bio fuels, representatives from relevant Ministries/Departments, OMCs, 
PCRA, representatives/ experts from the Industry, CSIR Lab, National Sugar Institute & 
Bio fuel Associations etc. has been formed. Issues related to CBG projects are also 
discussed in the Working Group of Bio fuels. 
In addition, CBG projects are also being reviewed and monitored by Inter Ministerial Task 
Force formed under GOBARdhan scheme.  Further, MoPNG is part of committee formed 
by Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare regarding the supply of raw material for 
CBG plants and the use of bio manure produced by CBG plants.  
 
O.M. No.   L-16023/7/2020-GP-I (E: 38363) 
Dated:    20.04.2023  
 
 

27 
 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see para no. 13 of Chapter 1) 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
Single Window Clearance 
The Committee note that the Compressed Bio-Gas (CBG) plants need various approvals 
and clearances from different agencies of Central, State Govt. and local administration. 
The Committee note that the implementation of CBG (SATAT) has been delayed due to 
multiplicity of agencies involved in granting clearances and permissions. Self-certification 
and undertaking may also be studied for feasibility in place of mandatory approvals and 
NOCs etc. as the case may be. 
The Committee exhort the Ministry to consider issuing a blanket approval or with a half-
yearly/yearly reconciliation mechanism and a forum for joint consultative mechanism 
involving elected representatives from local and state/district level should be evolved to 
iron out all the differences arising among various agencies and in this regard, there can be 
an "Infrastructure Approvals Committee" at State/District level which can take up such 
clearances and fast track them. The Committee observe that the Ministry should 
Coordinate with various Government Departments/Agencies including Financial 
Institutions, State Governments and other stake holders to arrange and  implement  
various  enablers  for  development  of  CBG  sector and Expeditious allocation or land to 
CBG producers by the State Government would be helpful in developing CBG Projects. 
CBG (SATAT) is of national importance and therefore, there is a need to bring uniformity in 
permissions and clearances from various central / state / local bodies / departments to lay 
pipeline network. In order to streamline the process of approvals, the Committee desire 
that deemed approval mechanism should be put into place so that the necessary 
clearances and NOCs may be obtained in a defined time period. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should strive for a single-window mechanism for a 
fast-track system or obtaining approvals and clearances which will help in reducing the 
time to process such permissions. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
For single window clearance there is requirement to form State level SATAT Committees 
on state level enablers and approvals.  
State level SATAT Committees have been formed by the State Governments of Haryana, 
Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Andhra Pradesh, Tripura & West Bengal through 
which various state specific enablers have been sought. Govt. of Uttar Pradesh have 
created Bio-Energy policy to facilitate CBG Plants in the State. 
This Ministry is coordinating with other State Governments to form State Level committee 
for implementation and monitoring of SATAT initiative.  
For expeditious implementation of SATAT initiative existing and upcoming CBG projects 
are being mapped on National Master Plan portal.    
O.M. No.   L-16023/7/2020-GP-I (E: 38363) 
Dated:    20.04.2023 
  

28 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
Central Financial Assistance (CFA) 
The Committee note that Ministry of New & Renewable Energy (MNRE) was implementing 
a scheme called Central Financial Assistance (CFA) for extending support to new and 
renewable energy projects. The Committee note that since April 2021, the Central 
Financial Assistance program for biogas/CBG projects has been discontinued and this has 
served as a major setback to the industry. The Committee have learnt that the CBG plants 
fall under new and renewable energy category and hence these plants are entitled for 
CFA. However, as the scheme is not in place, this facility is denied to entrepreneurs who 
come forward to set up CBG plants.  The Committee strongly feel that to mainstream the 
industry, which is still in its introductory/nascent stage, the continuation of CFA scheme is 
important. The Committee recommend that MOPNG should take up with MNRE and 
Ministry of Finance for reintroduction of this Central Financial Assistance Scheme to 
incentivize and enthuse entrepreneur to set-up of CBG plants in the country. 
The Committee also desire that MoPNG may consider to move towards Generation Based 
Incentive (GBI) instead of Capex-based subsidy for CBG plants which will provide 
incentives for producing gas and keep the plants running and functional rather than just 
setting up the plant. The Committee would like determination of appropriate GBI (price/per 
Kg of CBG) under different feedstocks to be estimated by the Ministry in this regard. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE)has accorded administrative approval for 
implementation of “Waste to Energy Programme” on 2.11.2022  for the duration 2021-22 
to 2025-26 under the Umbrella Scheme of National Bio energy Progarmme. Under Waste 
to Energy Programme MNRE inter-alia provides “Central Financial Assistance” of Rs. 4.0/- 
Cr. per 4800 kg/day (for Bio CNG generation from new biogas plant) and Rs 3.0 Cr per 
4800 kg/day (for Bio CNG generation from existing Biogas plant) with a maximum CFA of 
Rs. 10.0 Cr/project for both cases. 
Further, for development of CBG projects enablers like introduction of 5 per cent CBG 
mandate for all organizations marketing natural gas, fiscal support for collection of bio-
mass and distribution of bio-manure has been announced in budget speech.  
Besides, MoPNG is also exploring possibilities for providing fiscal support for development 
of pipeline infrastructure for connecting CBG projects with CGD network.  
With the implementation of above enablers, a market driven ecosystem will be developed 
to support CBG sector on long term basis. 
O.M. No.   L-16023/7/2020-GP-I (E: 38363) 
Dated:    20.04.2023 
  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see para no. 16 of Chapter 1) 
 
 
 
 

29 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
Bio-Fuel  Infrastructure  Fund 
The Committee note that the SATAT scheme is a laudable and ambitious initiative of the 
Government which can help the country to meet its energy requirements and strengthen 
the energy security. However, the action taken by the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
to implement the scheme have been very lukewarm and indifferent The Committee would 
still give the benefit for doubt to the Ministry as the country was fighting the Covid 
pandemic during the last two years. However, as the situation has improved to a 
considerable extent and economic activities have picked up, the Ministry should now focus 
on taking necessary steps to see that the SATAT initiative is implemented and all 
objectives and targets are met. 
The Committee note that a scheme that may be replicated in this regard is the AIF 
(Agriculture Infrastructure Fund) facilitated by NABARD and the Ministry of Agriculture. In 
this regard, the Committee are of the view that a fund in the name of Bio Fuel 
Infrastructure fund in the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas may be created in a 
suitable way either from Oil Industry Development Board (OIDB) funds or budgetary 
allocations for development of this sector quickly and without waiting for other government 
agencies to finance them. Ministry may furnish the action taken in this regard. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
For ethanol projects DFPD is already providing financial assistance through NABARD. In 
line with the budget announcement this ministry is preparing a proposal for providing fiscal 
support for biomass collection of biomasses for CBG projects. In addition, this Ministry is 
also exploring possibilities for providing fiscal support for development of pipeline 
infrastructure for connecting CBG projects with CGD network. MoPNG is also coordinating 
with banks and other multilateral financial institutions to provide financing for CBG 
projects.  
Aforesaid steps will help in expeditious development of CBG sector. This Ministry will 
assess the need for setting up Bio Fuel Infrastructure Fund in due course. 
O.M. No.   L-16023/7/2020-GP-I (E: 38363) 
Dated:    20.04.2023 
  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see para no. 19 of Chapter 1) 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
Establishing a Credit Guarantee Fund (CGF) 
The Committee note the Entrepreneurs are facing huge problems in getting financial 
assistance for CBG plants. The Committee feel that lack of credit is one of the major 
factors due to which not many CBG plants have come up and therefore there is an urgent 
need to address access to credit by evolving innovative financial mechanisms/products. 
The Committee suggest that there should be a Credit Guarantee Fund (CGF) established 
for CBG project financing, like the one launched under Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for 
Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE) by Small Industries Development Bank of India 
(SIDBI) and Government of India for stimulating collateral-free lending to Micro Small and 

30 
 
 
 
Medium Enterprises (MSME) borrowers and the same can be thought for CBG projects as 
well. This shall enable risk reduction of and instill confidence in the Financial Institutions 
for undertaking credit exposure in the CBG industry. 
The Committee also recommend that there can be refinancing of loans by Indian 
Renewable Energy Development Agency Limited (IREDA) under MNRE that can directly 
enter into MoU with Public Sector Banks wherein every CBG project that meets certain 
basic needs (for being qualified as a potent project) would be provided the benefit of 
concessional rate lending by IREDA via the bank/NBFC for onward lending. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
MoPNG is working with World Bank and SIDBI to explore the possibilities for concessional 
credit for CBG projects. World Bank has submitted a proposal to MoEFCC for seeking 
US$15 million funds through the non-grant instrument under the current Global 
Environment Facility (GEF) 8th cycle for implementing RSF facility for CBG projects under 
SATAT initiative and the same has been endorsed by the MoEFCC. Further, MoPNG is 
also coordinating with IREDA to provide concessional loans for CBG projects. 
O.M. No.   L-16023/7/2020-GP-I (E: 38363) 
Dated:    20.04.2023 
  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see para no. 28 of Chapter 1) 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
Assured Bio-Manure Offtake 
The Committee note that one of the major by-products of the CBG plants is the Bio-
manure and there is no assurance for off take of bio manure or any other long term supply 
agreements at a reasonable and marketable price. The CBG plants cannot sustain 
themselves solely through production and marketing of Bio-gas and hence sale of bio 
manure will enhance the financial viability of CBG plants. The Committee also note that 
this bio- manure can solve the problems of nutrients of soil and also improve the soil 
health bringing innumerable benefits to the agriculture sector also. The Committee feel 
that a holistic view must be taken off the CBG plants and Bio-manure must be seen as 
revenue stream of CBG projects. The Committee further desire that in order to promote 
and popularize use of organic manure there should be clear earmarking 'Production date' 
and 'Best used before date, safety measures and means to prevent nutrient loss during 
transportation and similar other measures to educate and create awareness in the public 
domain so that there is no apprehension regarding their use. 
MOPNG in coordination with Ministry of Agriculture through its agricultural extension 
machinery including Krishi Vikas Kendras (KVK),FPO, etc. must make special efforts to 
propagate utilization of 'Organic Ferment Manure' on farmland. The Committee therefore 
recommend that MoPNG should devise a mechanism in consultation with Dept of 
Agriculture and Dept of Fertilizers to ensure assured off-take of bio-manure of entire 
quantity of CBG with long term agreement including the price and agencies assigned for 
purchase of bio manure to attract investment in this sector. 
  

31 
 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Bio manure produced from CBG projects has been included as Fermented Organic Manure 
(FOM) and Liquid Fermented Organic Manure (LFOM) under Fertilizer Control Order 1985 to 
regularize its marketing. Department of Fertilizers (DoF) have issued letter on 27.05.2022 to 
fertilizer companies for mandatory off take of FOM with chemical fertilizers as a “Basket 
approach”.   
Further, following announcements made during the budget speech on 1.2.2023 will inter-
alia promote the offtake of FOM: 
 For distribution of bio-manure, appropriate fiscal support will be provided. 
 Over the next 3 years, 1 crore farmers shall be facilitated to adopt natural farming. 
 “PM Programme for Restoration, Awareness, Nourishment and Amelioration of 
Mother Earth” will be launched to incentivize States and Union Territories to promote 
alternative fertilizers and balanced use of chemical fertilizers. 
This Ministry has requested Department of Fertilizers to develop modalities for assured off 
take of FOM and to provide Market Development Assistance for FOM marketing. Creation 
of market ecosystem for FOM / LFOM. 
Besides above, DAFW has also been requested to advise their Research Institutions/ 
Centers/ Central Agricultures Universities, State Agriculture Universities and Krishi Vigyan 
Kendras to conduct research and extension activities for promotion of FOM/LFOM. 
Recently, ICAR has initiated a study on utilization of bio manure produced from CBG 
projects. 
O.M. No.   L-16023/7/2020-GP-I (E: 38363) 
Dated:    20.04.2023 
  
Recommendation No. 12 
Quota for Biomethane Injection in Natural Gas Grid 
The Committee feel that Ministry should reorient its approach and the various facets of the 
scheme must be fully addressed and utilized. As the sources of CBG are diverse and 
scattered, the CBG plants must be seen as decentralized gas fields. The Committee feel 
that this will enhance the domestic gas production as the targets under CBG (SATAT) are 
equal to the current domestic natural gas production. The success of SATAT for sure will 
reduce dependence on import of natural gas and simultaneously generating new sources 
of income and employment within the country. 
The Committee desire that the CBG plants with varying capacities must be channelized / 
synchronized with National Gas Grid. The Committee has learnt that Gas Utility major, 
GAIL (India) limited is already in the process of finalizing the operational modalities for the 
supply of CBG co-mingled with domestic gas. The Committee suggest that while the 
process for the same may be expedited, there should be a uniform price of City gas/ PNG 
across all CGD entities (private PSUs). One such mechanism to arrive at a uniform gas 
price may be through a gas pool pricing mechanism, as is presently applicable for Natural 
Gas supply to Fertilizer plants. 
The Committee also recommend that there should be phase-wise (short term and long 
term) blending quota/mix of co-mingled CBG in the total domestic gas supply to the CGD 

32 
 
 
 
sector. The success of ethanol blended petrol and diesel has already laid the precedent 
and the same may be adopted in this case as well. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
MoPNG has issued guidelines for comingling of CBG generated under SATAT initiative 
with the natural gas in CGD network. GAIL has operationalized CBG-CGD synchronization 
scheme. 
The Union Budget speech of 2023 has included that in due course, a 5 per cent CBG 
mandate will be introduced for all organizations marketing natural and bio gas.   MoPNG 
has initiated the process for implementation of budget announcement. 
O.M. No.   L-16023/7/2020-GP-I (E: 38363) 
Dated:    20.04.2023 
 
Recommendation No. 13 
CBG Off-Take Price 
The Committee note that the CBG plants have very low internal rate of return (IRR) and 
the CBG pricing needs to be remunerative to the marketing companies. The Committee 
appreciate the efforts made by the Ministry in raising the CBG prices to Rs. 54/kg plus 
GST and also pegging CBG prices with that of CNG this is expected to provide a cushion 
to marketing companies. The Committee however, are concerned to observe that this 
pricing does not take into account the feedstock by which CBG is produced. The 
Committee have learnt that this uniform pricing incentivizes certain feedstocks while 
discouraging others. The present benchmarking of CBG prices under SATAT to the CNG 
prices is a much-appreciated initiative towards achieving fair pricing of CBG. However, the 
pricing needs to be more robust and flexible upon factoring in the cost economics of a 
CBG plant for different feed stocks as well. 
The Committee desire that a guideline needs to be issued by MoPNG in coordination with 
various agencies w.r.t. appropriate Market price for CBG that ensures the viability of a 
CBG plant, creating transparency in rational price discovery and promoting long-term 
investment plans of investors/promoters. The Committee further recommend that the 
Ministry should establish the pricing mechanism of CBG produced from different types of 
feed stocks and cues can be taken from the differential pricing (FRP) mechanism for bio 
ethanol from different grades of molasses and a similar approach can be replicated in the 
case of CBG sector as well. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Under SATAT initiative CBG projects are being commissioned across the country. CBG 
Plants may use single or multiple feed stocks depending on their plant design and 
availability. The ratio of different feed stock may vary from plant to plant and within the 
plant due to seasonal availability of feeds stocks, cost and other factors which cannot be 
monitored. Therefore, feed stock based CBG procurement price would not be suitable for 
most of the CBG plants.  

33 
 
 
 
CBG is an alternate of CNG, thus its retail selling price must be aligned with CNG selling 
price. Therefore, OGMCs have indexed procurement pricing of CBG with retail selling 
price of CNG. 
 
O.M. No.   L-16023/7/2020-GP-I (E: 38363) 
Dated:    20.04.2023 
  
Recommendation No. 14 
Market Development Assistance for Bio Manure 
The Committee note that in the CBG plants, one of the revenue streams is selling of Bio-
manure which is a by product in the production of CBG. The Committee further note that 
the OGMCs under the MoPNG have already announced the price for purchase of CBG. 
The Ministry of Chemical and Fertilizers has also issued notification under Fertilizer 
Control Order (FCO) to treat the Bio-slurry as organic Bio-manure. The Committee note 
that the market development assistance was provided by the Department of Fertilizers for 
promotion and consumption of city compost has been discontinued after30th September 
2021. Therefore, the MoPNG should take the matter with Department of 
Fertilizers/Department of Expenditure for continuation of market development assistance 
for off take of fermented Bio-manure to ensure balance and integrated nutrient 
management for the crops. The Committee therefore recommend that the MoPNG to 
persuade Ministry of Finance for MDA for incentivizing CBG entrepreneurs. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
MoPNG has requested Department of Fertilizers to provide Market Development 
Assistance (MDA) for FOM marketing and to develop modalities for assured off take of 
FOM. 
This year’s budget announcements inter-alia has mentioned that appropriate fiscal support 
will be provided for distribution of bio-manure. Accordingly, Department of Fertilizers has 
moved an EFC Note which inter-alia provides MDA for FOM. MoPNG has supported the 
proposal. 
O.M. No.   L-16023/7/2020-GP-I (E: 38363) 
Dated:    20.04.2023 
  
Recommendation No. 15 
Feedstocks Issues for CBG Production 
The Committee note that the Biomass sources like municipal solid waste, sewage 
treatment plant waste, cattle dung, sugarcane press mud, agricultural residue etc. are 
some of the feedstocks to produce Biogas through the process of aerobic decomposition. 
The availability  of these feedstocks is varied in nature as the municipal solid waste and 
sugarcane press mud are available for most of the year, whereas, agriculture residue 
would be available only for couple of months in a year. This necessitates that CBG plants 
which use agricultural residue as feedstock may also need huge land parcel to store the 
agriculture residue for the remaining part of the year as the residue is available only during 
harvest period. 

34 
 
 
 
Entrepreneurs who appeared before the Committee stated that there is huge uncertainty 
over the supply and price of agriculture residue as the farmers demand a higher price to 
supply to the CBG plant. The entrepreneur has limited choice as the feedstock has to be 
sourced from neighboring region and transportation from longer distances will add the cost 
of feedstock. The entrepreneurs demand support from State Governments in the form or 
assured raw material supply and also land availability at concessional price for long term 
to store the feedstocks. However, the Committee note in the case of municipal solid waste 
there are no such problems as most of the cities and towns have huge landfills with the 
municipal wastes. Similarly, the sugar factories also has sugar press mud. 
Therefore, the Ministry should focus on municipal solid waste and sugar press mud as the 
preferred feedstock for setting-up of CBG plant all over the country which the Committee 
feel is a low hanging fruit. The MoPNG should hold consultation/discussions with Ministry 
of Urban Development for nudging urban local bodies to setup CBG plant with the support 
of Oil PSU's / State Governments and use Municipal Solid Waste as feedstock. The CBG 
from these plants can be used for urban transport and City Gas Distribution (CGD) 
network in these cities. Similarly, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas should 
discuss with concerned Ministry/Indian Sugar Mills Association (ISMA)/ Sugar mills to 
encourage them to invest in CBG plants as well, and sell them to OMCs with whom they 
already have good relationship due to ethanol blending programme, The Committee, 
therefore recommend that MoPNG should prioritize its focus on municipal solid waste and 
sugarcane press mud as feed stocks to promote the CBG projects and make it a reality 
and successful rather than focus on agriculture residue which is saddled with problems. 
The Ministry may also rope in urban municipal bodies, agriculture mandis, cooperative 
sector, fertilizer companies, Farmers' Producer Organizations (FPOs), Krishi Vigyan 
Kendra (KVK), NAFED etc. to promote CBG projects in their area of operations. 
The Committee recommend the MOPNG to hold consultations with State Governments 
and endeavor to constitute State level coordination Committee in all states and to try to 
impress upon them to fix price for different types of bio mass so that there shall be no 
uncertainty about pricing and availability of biomass for the CBG plants. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
MoPNG is working in line with the recommendation of Standing Committee.  
During the Budget speech it has been mentioned “500 new ‘waste to wealth’ plants under 
GOBARdhan (Galvanizing Organic Bio-Agro Resources Dhan) scheme will be established 
for promoting circular economy. These will include 200 compressed biogas (CBG) plants, 
including 75 plants in urban areas, and 300 community or cluster-based plants at total 
investment of ` 10,000 crore.”  The 75 plants in urban areas mentioned in budget speech 
are MSW based CBG plants. This Ministry is coordinating with Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs to facilitate setting up MSW based CBG projects.  
OGMCs participating in SATAT are in contact with Indian Sugar Mills Association (ISMA)  
and National Federation of Cooperative Sugar Factories Limited (NFCSF) and also with 
individual sugar mills to persuade them for utilization of press mud for production of CBG. 
Budget speech also mentions that for collection of bio-mass appropriate fiscal support will 
be provided. MoPNG has initiated stakeholder consultation to explore possibilities for 
providing fiscal support for collection of biomass for CBG projects.  
Further, MoPNG has also requested States to constitute State Level State level 
coordination Committee for implementation of SATAT initiative. State Level Committees 

35 
 
 
 
for implementation and monitoring of SATAT initiative have been constituted in Assam, 
Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, Tripura and West 
Bengal). Issue of biomass supply chain has been raised in State Level Committee 
meetings. Recently, Uttar Pradesh has announced “Uttar Pradesh Rajya Jaiv Urja Niti-
2022” wherein enablers like in addition to the 50%  subsidy on biomass aggregation 
equipment under SMAM scheme 30 % subsidy on purchase of baler raker and trolly etc. 
have been provided by UPNEDA. Policy also mentions about constitution of district level 
committee to make paddy straw available for entrepreneurs at market price.  
O.M. No.   L-16023/7/2020-GP-I (E: 38363) 
Dated:    20.04.2023 
  
Recommendation No. 16 
GST Issues in CBG 
The Committee note that the Compressed Bio Gas under SATAT is basically used for bio 
CNG in transport sector and PNG in the domestic sector. The Ministry has also permitted 
the CBG produced from the CBG plants to be injected into the CGD network under the 
CBG-CGD Synchronization Scheme and the responsibility of connecting the CBG plant to 
the CGD network within a distance of 10 kms would lie with bio gas producers. 
The Committee note that at present various petroleum products are coming under different 
tax regimes. Bio gas is under GST and CNG is under excise duty and when CBG is mixed 
with CNG which is permitted, then it attracts double taxation as VAT is also levied in 
addition to excise duty. This cascading tax structure create confusions and the same gas 
attracts different tax application which may create complications and litigations and 
increase the burden and end price. The Committee desire that there is a need to have 
uniformity in the tax structure on the products likely CBG, CNG, PNG and when CBG is 
mixed with as a CNG or PNG. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas should hold consultations with Department of Revenue for 
clarity, rationalizing the tax structure and determination of applicable tax and if required, 
approach GST Council where required. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Union Budget speech of 2023 has included the following:-  
“To avoid cascading of taxes on blended compressed natural gas, it has been proposed to 
exempt excise duty on GST-paid compressed bio gas contained in it. Central excise duty 
exemption is being provided to blended Compressed Natural Gas from so much of the 
amount as is equal to the GST paid on Bio Gas/Compressed Bio Gas contained in the 
blended CNG.” 
Ministry of Finance vide Notification No. 05/2023 -Central Excise dated 01.02.2023 has 
notified the following:- 
“the Central Government, on being satisfied that it is necessary in the public interest so to 
do, hereby exempts Compressed Natural Gas (hereinafter referred to as ‘CNG’), falling 
under tariff item 2711 21 00 of the Fourth Schedule to the Excise Act, when blended with 
Biogas or Compressed Biogas (hereinafter referred to as ‘CBG’), from so much of the duty 
of excise leviable thereon the amount of central tax, State tax, Union territory tax or 
integrated tax, as the case may be, paid on the Biogas or CBG contained in such blended 
CNG, subject to fulfilment of certain conditions specified in the order. 

36 
 
 
 
Further, this Ministry is also pressing upon the need for bringing Natural Gas under the 
ambit of GST as long-term solution.   
O.M. No.   L-16023/7/2020-GP-I (E: 38363) 
Dated:    20.04.2023 
   
Recommendation No. 18 
Awareness and Trained Manpower 
The Committee note that the CBG sector is still in its infancy and there are many risks 
involved in the business leading to a lot of hardships being faced by entrepreneurs and 
promoters. There is a lack of credit supply to the CBG sector and it is also plagued by 
structural constraints and not yet in a position to come up with a definite revenue stream. 
The Committee therefore feel that there is an urgent need to create awareness among 
financial institutions regarding the viability and potentialities of CBG sector in generating 
employment and income opportunities, however, the gestation period is not fully 
developed or understood. The Committee also desire that all the bottlenecks and 
challenges facing the industry must be identified and modalities and solutions to them be 
properly identified and disseminated to the various stakeholders in a coordinated and time 
bound manner. The Committee therefore recommend that a proper plan has to be 
formulated to train the Financial Institution Officials (across the hierarchy) to dispel the 
notion of the undue inherent risk associated with CBG industry. 
The Committee further note that the sector is still evolving and there is a lack of sufficient 
trained manpower and recommend that MoPNG in consultation with Ministry of Skill 
Development should prepare a curriculum/training module to impart skills in the sector to 
take care of the future manpower needs. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
In order to create awareness among financial institutions and to “Training Program on 
Fundamentals of Compressed Biogas Plants and their Techno-commercial Assessment” 
was organised for bank officials in coordination with World Bank on 11th and 12th 
November, 2022. The programme covers fundamental understanding of a compressed 
biogas plant, technical aspects of a CBG plant, the policy and regulatory aspects of the 
sale of the key products and by-products of a CBG plant along with field visit of CBG plant. 
More such training programme will be conducted in future. 
In addition to that OGMCs participating in SATAT have also conducted training sessions 
for banks, financial institutions, global financial intuitions, entrepreneurs, etc. on 
technological and commercial aspects of CBG Plants.  
A dedicated portal on SATAT scheme (https://satat.co.in) has been prepared. The portal 
has details on SATAT initiative documents, financing of CBG Plants, technology providers, 
enablers on CBG, Government Policies, Frequently Asked Questions, details on manure 
marketing. The portal has detailed learning modules on CBG technology and financing. 
Entrepreneurs can pose questions on the portal for clarification on SATAT initiative. 
CBG projects are also being reviewed and monitored by Inter Ministerial Task Force 
formed under GOBARdhan scheme. Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship is 
a member of the task force is assessing the training need for biogas and CBG sector to 
impart skills in the sector to take care of the future manpower needs.  
O.M. No.   L-16023/7/2020-GP-I (E: 38363) 
Dated:    20.04.2023 

37 
 
 
 
  
Recommendation No. 19 
Carbon Trading 
The Committee note that CBG (SATAT) scheme has immense potential in waste 
management in the country. CBG plants have a potential for an efficient management of 
stubble burning which causes immense environmental damage and consequently 
damaging the image of the country as a whole. An important feature of the CBG plants is 
that it converts bio-gas out of multiple feedstocks including waste material and therefore 
can contribute immensely towards Swachch Bharat Mission as well. 
The Committee recommend that MoPNG in coordination with the MNRE should evolve a 
mechanism whereby they assess the carbon footprint that would be generated had CBG 
plants not managed the waste material. This will help the nation in achieving India's 
commitments of carbon net zero by 2070 made at COP-26 Glasgow. The carbon credits 
so generated by CBG plants can be monetized and improve its financial viability and 
revenue stream accordingly which provides a win-win situation for all the stakeholders. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
During this year’s budget speech has given thrust on ‘Green Credit Programme’ and 
announced that  
“For encouraging behavioural change, a Green Credit Programme will be notified under 
the Environment (Protection) Act. This will incentivize environmentally sustainable and 
responsive actions by companies, individuals and local bodies, and help mobilize 
additional resources for such activities.” 
 
The Parliament has passed the Energy Conservation (Amendment) Bill, 2022 and the 
same has come into effect from 1st January 2023. This includes provisions to “Specify the 
carbon credit trading scheme”.  Design of carbon trading scheme is to be prescribed 
through Rules after consideration of all relevant aspects, including transition of existing 
schemes of tradable certificates to single national framework.  Any registered entity, in 
accordance with these Rules, shall be entitled to purchase or sell the carbon credit 
certificate" 
MoPNG will coordinate with stakeholder Ministeries viz. MoP, MoEFCC and MNRE to 
facilitate the CBG producers in availing the benefits of carbon credit trading scheme. 
O.M. No.   L-16023/7/2020-GP-I (E: 38363) 
Dated:    20.04.2023 
  
Recommendation No. 20  
Global Cooperation on Bio-fuels 
The Committee note that India is the third-largest consumer and importer of oil in the 
world. The Committee note that the Government has announced National Policy on· 
Biofuels 2018 to promote and include biofuels in the country's energy basket to target 
climate change concerns and also to reduce dependence on import of crude oil. The NPB-
2018 envisages production and blending of ethanol, biodiesel and CBG as alternative fuels 
with traditional fuels like Petrol, Diesel and Natural Gas. 

38 
 
 
 
The Committee appreciate the efforts in achieving the 10 per cent ethanol blended petrol 
and hope that with a slew of measures being undertaken the target of 20 per cent blending 
can be achieved by 2024-25. This is expected to give a general boost to Biofuels which 
will also help achieve carbon reduction goals and commitments made at CoP26, Glasgow. 
The Committee note that many of the countries like Brazil, US, Indonesia, China and 
Germany produce biofuels. It is hoped an alliance among such countries would create an 
ecosystem for fuel standards and engines as well as cooperation for a quicker adoption of 
latest state of the art technologies. This will pave way for global cooperation, funding and 
technology development which will help other countries also to fight carbon emission and 
climate change concerns. The Committee, therefore, recommend that India should pitch 
for a global cooperation on Biofuels on the lines of The International Solar Alliance (ISA). 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
India is already engaged with various global agencies viz. International Energy Agency 
(IEA)  Bioenergy, IEA Advanced Motor Fuels (AMF), Bio future Platform under Clean 
Energy Ministerial (CEM) etc. 
Further, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, is working to develop a Global Biofuels 
Alliance of India and  other interested countries along with leading biofuel producers and 
consumers i.e. Brazil and the United States. This Alliance will be aimed at facilitating 
cooperation and intensifying the use of sustainable biofuels, including in the transportation 
sector. It will place emphasis on strengthening markets, facilitating global biofuels trade, 
development of concrete policy lesson-sharing and provision of technical support for 
national bio fuels programs worldwide.  
The contours or the scope of the Global Biofuel Alliance will be made keeping in view 
various considerations such areas inadequately covered by existing platform and which 
require new impetus for achieving true potential of Biofuels such as collaborative R&D, 
equitable access to technology and financing; ease of access / acquiring membership; etc. 
O.M. No.   L-16023/7/2020-GP-I (E: 38363) 
Dated:    20.04.2023 
  
 
  

39 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE GOVERNMENT DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- Nil - 
 
 
  

40 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
Financial Institution for Petroleum Sector 
The Committee note that there are many projects which are being implemented by the 
MOPNG to enhance the energy security of the country· in the hydro carbon area including 
bio fuel projects for blending with petrol, diesel and gas. The Committee feel that with the 
plethora of initiatives being taken up by the Ministry, there is a need for financing these 
activities particularly at the initial stage by understanding the risks and reward associated 
with the project for which the expertise is available in the Oil PSUs who are operating for a 
long time in this sector. The Committee, therefore desire that the Oil PSUs which have 
strong cash flows and healthy balance sheets and consistently profit making should come 
forward to setup a financial institution for financing all bio-fuel and clean energy projects 
that are launched or likely to be launched in the future by the Ministry. 
There are institutions like Power Finance Corporation (PFC), Rural Electrification 
Corporation (REC), Housing & Urban Development. Corporation (HUDCO), Indian 
Renewable Energy Development Agency (IREDA) etc. in different Ministries of the 
Government for financing and monitoring specific sector projects. The Committee would 
desire the MoPNG should nudge the petroleum sector oil PSUs to  establish a financial 
institution owned and managed by them as shareholders which will focus on clean, green 
and renewable energy bio fuel projects taken up by Ministry of PNG like Ethanol 
production for Ethanol Blended Petrol (EBP), Bio-diesel Projects, CBG projects, etc. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry should set up a PSU financial institution 
for funding oil and gas sector project under its administrative control.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
This Ministry is coordinating with Banks and existing financial institutions viz Power 
Finance Corporation (PFC), Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency (IREDA), 
Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) etc. to provide easy finance for CBG 
sector. This Ministry is also working with World Bank and SIDBI for development of 
mechanism for financing of CBG projects.  
Department of Food and Public Distribution (DFPD), Government of India has notified the 
"Scheme for extending financial assistance to project proponents for enhancement of their 
ethanol distillation capacity or to set up distilleries for producing 1st Generation (1G) 
ethanol from feed stocks such as cereals (rice, wheat, barley, corn & sorghum), 
sugarcane, sugar beet, etc.” vide Gazette Notification No.128 dated 14 January 2021. 
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) has been appointed as 
the Nodal Bank for interacting with DFPD and managing interest subvention under the 
scheme. 
At this juncture, existing banks and financial institutions may be used to finance CBG and 
other Bio fuel projects. Once this sector attains a level of maturity and requires support for 
further scaling, this ministry will examine the need for establishment of financial institutions 
for specific sector.   

41 
 
 
 
O.M. No.   L-16023/7/2020-GP-I (E: 38363) 
Dated:    20.04.2023 
 
 COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see para no. 19 of Chapter 1) 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
Investment in CBG Projects by Oil PSUS 
 
The Committee note that CBG projects are being implemented with the expectation that 
private entrepreneurs and investors will come forward and the role of oil PSUs shall be to 
provide support to these projects in the form of assured off take of CBG produced from 
these plants. The Committee observe that IOC has invested in 5 CBG projects and GAIL 
and HPCL in one each whereas the upstream PSUs like ONGC and OIL which have 
specific mandate relating to production of natural gas and marketing of natural gas 
respectively have not invested in any project so far. The Committee find it surprising to 
note that PSUs are not interested in setting up of CBG projects on their own despite 
domestic natural gas production being a mandate of the upstream oil PSUs. The 
Committee, therefore, would like Oil PSUs to aggressively enter into CBG sector through 
company owned company operated (COCO) model or joint ventures with other 
OMCs/entrepreneurs. 
Further, the OMCs also have a responsibility to meet the LPG demand in the country both 
in domestic and commercial sector and a large part of their LPG requirement is imported 
to meet the demand. These companies have restricted themselves to buy the Bio- gas 
from the CBG projects. The Committee feel this is unacceptable and want all the PSUs to 
invest and promote CBG projects seriously with their own investment. The Committee also 
expect that the Ministry should persuade the oil PSUs particularly upstream oil PSU's like 
ONGC, OIL and GAIL in particular to set up a good number or CBG projects in the country 
as this fall within their mandate of producing natural gas. The PSUs with their professional 
and project management competence should set aside sizeable fund for investment in 
these projects and able to execute the projects in time bound and efficient manner. This 
will also demonstrate the viability of these projects and will give confidence to investors. 
This will also allow the PSUs and the Ministry to gain valuable experience to sort out 
various issues and put in place required policy measures to ensure that the CBG initiative 
is successfully implemented and enhance the energy security of the nation. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that all the OIL PSUs should seriously look into SATAT initiative 
and invest in CBG plants with their own funds. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
OGMCs have been investing in creating and maintaining infrastructure for promotion of 
CBG projects which include development of Retail Outlet, laying of pipeline, purchase of 
equipment, etc. Further, they are also investing in establishment of CBG plants. The list of 
CBG projects with OGMC’s investment are as under:  
 
 

42 
 
 
 
S 
No. OGMC Location Status of project 
1 IOCL Namakkal, Tamil Nadu Sale of CBG initiated in May 2020 
2 IOCL Hingonia, Jaipur, 
Rajasthan Mechanical Completion 
3 IOCL Gorakhpur, Uttar Pradesh Work in progress 
4 IOCL Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh Work in progress 
5 HPCL Budaun, Uttar Pradesh Work in Progress 
6 HPCL Jalore, Rajasthan Work in Progress 
7 GAIL Ranchi, Jharkhand Work in Progress 
 
In addition, IOCL has also commissioned cattle dung to Biogas Plants in Betul & 
Hoshangabad in Madhya Pradesh and Gorapkhpur in Uttar Pradesh. 
Other Oil PSUs and CGD entities are also being encouraged invest in establishment of 
CBG plants. 
O.M. No.   L-16023/7/2020-GP-I (E: 38363) 
Dated:    20.04.2023 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see para no. 25 of Chapter 1) 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  

43 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation No. 8 
Collateral Security for CBG Projects 
The Committee note that Reserve Bank of India has included CBG projects under Priority 
Sector Lending and public sector banks are extending loans to CBG plants.  Canara Bank 
has been nominated as Nodal Banker under S ATAT. State Bank of India, Bank of Baroda, 
Canara Bank and some other banks have developed exclusive loan product for financing 
of CBG projects. World Bank, ADB and JICA are working for Detailed Project Report for 
multilateral cheaper credit to CBG plants. 
However, the Committee note that the banks are not extending loans for more than one 
project to the same entrepreneur who is holding multiple LOI issued by Oil and Gas 
Marketing (OGMCs) companies. The Department of Financial Services state that they 
would like to see the execution of these plants to which they have already extended the 
loan. One of the hurdles faced by entrepreneurs is that the banks seek collateral security 
for financing the projects. The Committee have been informed by the entrepreneurs that 
the gas purchase agreement between the Oil and Gas Marketing Companies (OGMCs) 
and CBG plant operators for taking up the entire off-take of the gas at pre- determined 
price should also be taken into consideration by the Banks as a means of security and if 
required an escrow account between the three parties namely, CBG Plants Management, 
OGMCs and banks can be entered into where the banks may get their loan service from 
this account. The Committee are of the view that there is merit in this suggestion and 
recommend that MOPNG should hold consultation with Ministry of Finance on this issue 
and ease the collateral security burden on the entrepreneurs as in done under Ethanol 
Blended Petrol (EBP) Programme. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
MoPNG has taken up the matter of easing of collateral security burden with Department of 
Financial Services at various occasions. Recently the issues have also been raised in the 
meeting held on 23.3.2023. 
CBG has been included under priority sector lending by Reserve Bank of India. Escrow 
account provisions have been made in the commercial agreements. In addition, there are 
clauses on Substitution rights, intimation to lenders, etc. in the commercial agreement 
between CBG Plant and OGMCs to facilitate the lending process.  
Canara Bank has been nominated as Nodal Banker under SATAT. State Bank of India, 
Punjab National Bank, Canara Bank, Union Bank and Bank of Baroda, etc. have launched 
products on financing of CBG Plants under SATAT scheme. A coordination committee on 
CBG Projects Finance has been constituted under the leadership of Canara Bank. Various 
issues related to financing of CBG Projects including collateral issue has been discussed 
during the meetings of the committee. 
O.M. No.   L-16023/7/2020-GP-I (E: 38363) 
Dated:    20.04.2023 
  
  

44 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 17 
Tax Issues for CBG Plants 
The Committee note that Section 80JJA or the lncome-tax Act, 1961 provides for 
deduction of 100% from the profits and gains derived from the business of collecting and 
processing or treating of biodegradable waste for generating power or producing bio-
fertilizers, bio-pesticides or other biological agents or for producing bio-gas or making 
pellets or briquettes for fuel or organic manure for a period of five consecutive assessment 
years beginning with the assessment year in which such business commences. 
The Committee feel that CBG plants must be seen as a sunrise industry and recommend 
that special concessions must be provided at nascent stage and unambiguous 
continuation of the 80JJA scheme under the new sections in the IT amendment shall be 
provided for the ten years which will serve as the much-needed impetus, particularly to the 
entrepreneurs/ Start-Ups foraying into the industry. 
The Committee observe that the GST Council recently notified of escalation of GST slab 
from 5% to 12% for biogas plant-related equipment and their parts. This is expected to 
provide incentive to the domestic industry to avail the input tax credit under GST regime. 
However, the Committee note that, due to these ambiguities, clarifications are sought by 
Indirect Tax Officials from CBG plants. 
The Committee note that clarity in tax issues goes a long way in attracting investments in a 
sector. The disparity in tax structure for CBG Plants needs to be bridged with uniformity in 
the taxation of Goods and Services for all procurements in CBG projects. The Committee 
therefore recommend that these issues should be addressed by MoPNG in consultation 
with Department of Revenue. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Providing of tax benefits like income tax waiver and accelerated depreciation shall assist in 
propagation of CBG Plants. MoPNG is considering the issue for taking up the same with 
Department of Revenue.  
O.M. No.   L-16023/7/2020-GP-I (E: 38363) 
Dated:    20.04.2023 
  
 
  
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
27 July, 2023 
 05 Shravana, 1945 (Saka)     
                           RAMESH BIDHURI, 
                                             Chairperson,  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                        
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
  

45 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2022-23) 
 
FIFTEENTH SITTING 
(27.07.2023) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 27 July, 2023 from 1530 hrs. to 1600 hrs. 
in Committee Room '1', Extension to Parliament House Annexe (EPHA), New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Ramesh Bidhuri - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Dr. Ramesh Chand Bind 
3.  Shri Dilip Saikia 
4.  Shri Topon Kumar Gogoi 
5.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya 
6.  Dr. Kalanidhi Veeraswamy 
7.  Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
8.  Dr. Bharatiben Dhirubhai Shiyal 
9.  Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
10.  Shri Vinod Sonkar 
11.  Shri Ajay Tamta 
                      RAJYA SABHA 
12. Smt. Kanta Kardam 
13. Shri Mithlesh Kumar 
14. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
15. Shri Sasmit Patra 
16. Shri Ravichandra Vaddiraju 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Y. M. Kandpal - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri H. Ram Prakash - Director  
3. Shri Brajesh Kumar Singh - Deputy Secretary 
 

46 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Action Taken Report 
on the recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on 
'Review of implementation of CBG (SATAT)' of MoP&NG’ and adopted the same without 
any modifications.  
 The Committee then authorised the Chairperson to present/lay the reports in both 
the Houses of Parliament.  
 
The Committee then adjourned 
  

47 
 
 
 
Annexure II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTEENTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2022-23) ON 'REVIEW OF IMPLEMENTATION OF CBG (SATAT)'. 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 20 
 
II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government  
(Vide Recommendations Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 10,11,12, 13, 
14, 15, 16, 18, 19 and 20)  
16 
 Percentage to Total 80.00% 
III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s 
(Vide Recommendations No. Nil) 
 
00 
 Percentage of Total 00 
 
IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee  
(Vide Recommendations Nos. 6 and 9) 
 
02 
 Percentage of Total 
 
10.00% 
V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendation No. 8 and 17)  
 
02 
 Percentage of Total 
 
10.00% 
 
 
 