22 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2022-23) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Nineteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2022-23) on the subject ‘Safety 
and Security of Oil Installations of Public Sector Oil Companies with 
Specific Reference to Baghjan Blow-out incident’] 
 
 
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  August, 2023/Shravana, 1945 (Saka) 
 


CP&NG NO.     
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2022 - 23) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Nineteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2022-23) on the subject ‘Safety and Security 
of Oil Installations of Public Sector Oil Companies with Specific Reference 
to Baghjan Blow-out incident’] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 08.08.2023 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 08.08.2023 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  August, 2023/Shravana, 1945 (Saka) 


 
CONTENTS 
          Page 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-23)……………………………..                     (iii) 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………..                     (iv) 
CHAPTER I 
   
 
Report ………………………………………………….                       
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ……………………………      
                   
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies …………………………………     
                    
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted  
by the Committee ……………………………………         
                    
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited ……    
                     
 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Sixteenth sitting of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2022-23) 
held on 04.08.2023. 
 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2022-23) on  
the subject ‘Safety and Security of Oil Installations of 
Public Sector Oil Companies with Specific Reference 
to Baghjan Blow-out incident’. 
 

(iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL 
GAS (2022-23) 
Sl. No.                                           Names of Members 
                                                      LOK SABHA 
Shri Ramesh Bidhuri – Chairperson 
 
2 Dr. Ramesh Chand Bind 
3 Shri Pradyut Bordoloi 
4 Shri Girish Chandra 
5 Smt. Chinta Anuradha 
6 Shri Dilip Saikia 
7 Shri Topon Kumar Gogoi  
8 Shri Naranbhai Bhikhabhai Kachhadiya 
9 Dr. Kalanidhi Veeraswamy 
10 Shri Santosh Kumar 
11 Shri Rodmal Nagar 
12 Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
13 Shri Unmesh Bhaiyyasaheb Patil  
14 Shri M.K. Raghavan 
15 Shri Chandra Sekhar Sahu 
16 Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar 
17 Dr. Bharatiben Dhirubhai Shiyal 
18 Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
19 Shri Lallu Singh 
20 Shri Vinod Kumar Sonkar 
21 Shri Ajay Tamta 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22 Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
23 Smt. Kanta Kardam 
24 Shri Mithlesh Kumar 
25 Shri Pabitra Margherita 
26 Shri Rambhai Harjibhai Mokariya 
27 Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
28 Dr. Sasmit Patra 
29 Shri Subhas Chandra Bose Pilli 
30 Dr. V. Sivadasan 
31 Shri Ravichandra Vaddiraju 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1 Shri Y.M. Kandpal Joint Secretary 
2 
3 
 
Shri H. Ram Prakash 
Shri Brajesh Kumar Singh 
 
Director 
Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas 
having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present this Twenty-Second Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
of the Committee on the subject ‘Safety and Security of Oil Installations of Public 
Sector Oil Companies with Specific Reference to Baghjan Blow-out incident’. 
2. The Nineteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural 
Gas was presented to Lok Sabha/ laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on 
23.03.2023. The Action Taken Replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report were received on 
03.07.2023. 
3. The Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas (2022-23) 
considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 04.08.2023.  
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas is given in Annexure-II. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report. 
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered to them by the officers of the Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee. 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
 04  August, 2023 
 13 Shravana, 1945 (Saka)     
                           RAMESH BIDHURI,                                             
Chairperson,  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                        
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 

REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Nineteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2022-23) on the subject ‘Safety and 
Security of Oil Installations of Public Sector Oil Companies with Specific 
Reference to Baghjan Blow-out incident’, which was presented to Lok Sabha and 
laid in Rajya Sabha on 23.03.2023.  
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry on 03.07.2023 
in respect of all the 14 recommendations/observations contained in the report. 
These have been categorized as per the following: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government:- Reco. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 12 and 14 (Total - 9)  
          (Chapter- II) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies:- Nil 
(Chapter- III) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:- Reco. Nos. 6, 
10, 11 and 13 (Total - 04) 
 (Chapter- IV) 
                                                                                                       
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:- Reco. No. 8 (Total - 01)   
                                                                                                             
(Chapter- V)   
3. The Committee are satisfied to note that the Ministry has accepted 09 
recommendations out of 14 recommendations of this Committee and 
further expect the Ministry to monitor the implementation of the same.  The 
Committee also desire that the Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of this Report and 
Final Replies in respect of the recommendations for which interim replies 
have been furnished by the Government (included in Chapter-V), should be 
furnished expeditiously.  

4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations.  
Recommendation No. 5 
Need for enquiry by the Ministry  
5. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that three Committees constituted to enquire 
about Baghjan incident had found a series of lapses on the part of 
officials of OIL concerned with the planning and execution of 
workover at Baghjan-5. The Committee further note that the lapses 
caused great damage to the people and the environment of 
surrounding areas besides causing huge financial loss. The 
Committee further note that the crisis management of the incident 
could have been better. While initially 18 officials were suspended in 
the wake of disciplinary proceedings, two were found guilty. The 
Committee observe that fixing of responsibilities in this regard is 
grossly inadequate to the proportion of damages caused and lapses 
committed at procedural levels by the personnel of OIL.  
 
The responsibility of ensuring a safe work procedure vest with 
Oil PSUs and they need to be accountable. The role of senior officers 
is more of supervisory nature but the same was missing in this case. 
Accordingly, this Committee recommend Ministry to institute an 
enquiry into lack of proper supervision and monitoring in workover 
programme at Baghjan-5 and fix appropriate responsibility and 
accountability to bring out any erring and incompetent officials of 
OIL”. 
 
6. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
“A three member High Level Committee was constituted vide this 
Ministry’s order dated 11.06.2020 to enquire into the incident of blow 
out and fire at Baghjan oilfield. The report of the High Level 
Committee has been accepted by the Government and OIL was asked 
to take action on the recommendations of report and also against the 
officers responsible for lapses. Action has been taken up by OIL to 
ensure proper safety and security system to avoid repetition of 
similar incidents in future and majority of the HLC recommendations 

have been implemented by OIL. 
The Government of India had also constituted a five-member 
committee in compliance of order dated 19.02.2021 passed by the 
Principal Bench of National Green Tribunal. New Delhi (NGT) in 
Bonani Kakkar Vis Oil India Limited & Others, Original Application 
No. 43/2020 (EZ). The recommendations of committee were accepted 
and forwarded to upstream companies for implementation. OISD 
monitors the status of implementation of the recommendations of the 
Committee on quarterly basis and a review meeting is taken by 
Ministry once in six months with Heads/senior representatives from 
DGMS, DGH and other major E&P companies (both PSU & private). 
Safety Council reviews status of implementation of the 
recommendations of the Committee once every year. 
After the incident at Baghjan well No. 5 of M/s Oil India Limited, 
an inquiry was conducted by the officer of DGMS to ascertain the 
causes and circumstances that led to the incident. Based on the 
findings of the inquiry, action has been taken against the persons 
responsible for the incident.  
Prosecution has been initiated against the (i) Nominated Owner 
of the company (ii) Agent, (iii) Mine Manager, (iv) Deputy Mine 
Manager, (v) Installation manager, (vi) Chief Engineer – Oil & Gas 
services M/s OIL (Agent), for the contravention of the provisions of 
the Mines Act 1952 and Oil Mines Regulation 2017”. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.Expl-12023(11)/1/2021-EXPL-II-PNG dated 3rd July, 2023 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
7. The Committee in their original Report had recommended the 
Ministry to institute an enquiry into lack of proper supervision and 
monitoring in workover programme at Baghjan-5 and fix appropriate 
responsibility and accountability to bring out any erring and incompetent 
officials of OIL. 
 The Ministry in its written reply has stated that OIL has initiated 
Prosecution has been initiated by OIL against the (i) Nominated Owner of 
the company (ii) Agent, (iii) Mine Manager, (iv) Deputy Mine Manager, (v) 
Installation manager, (vi) Chief Engineer – Oil & Gas services M/s OIL 

(Agent), for the contravention of the provisions of the Mines Act 1952 and 
Oil Mines Regulation 2017. 
 The Committee while being satisfied with the action taken by OIL on 
this issue, would like to wait for the outcome of the prosecution against the 
officials. 
Recommendation No. 6 
Need for observance of Environmental Laws  
8. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that the Justice B.P. Katakey Committee Report 
had found that, OIL did not have the mandatory clearances under 
several Acts to operate in the particular well. The Committee further 
note that the replies of the Ministry and OIL inform that it had 
mandatory consent to establish or operate under abovementioned 
laws on the day of the blow out of Baghjan-5 and subsequent fire on 
09.06.2020. However, the Ministry have stated that OIL had obtained 
all mandatory statutory clearances as per the requisite applicable 
laws. 
The Committee note that a number of licenses and approvals 
are required under various laws pertaining to the mining and 
protection of environment for exploration and extraction of oil and 
gas. The Committee further note that these licenses are for a specific 
period, and they are required to be renewed after the lapse of the 
same. If these were to be reviewed by Directorate General of 
Hydrocarbons (DGH)/Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas from 
time to time, such lapses could have been noticed. There is need to 
institutionalise such a mechanism. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to take up the 
issue with all the PSUs and review the compliance of all applicable 
laws in the oil and gas fields that are currently in operation. Action 
taken in this regard may be intimated within three months”. 
 
9. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
“The checklist for carrying out OISD external safety audit also 
includes compliance of environmental requirements. Checklist shall 
be further reviewed to make it more inclusive of the requirements. 

OISD is also revising standard OISD-RP-201 on ‘Environment 
Management in E&P sector’ with extended scope to cover entire oil & 
gas industry.  
As far as OIL is concerned, it routinely obtains, monitors and 
renews regulatory clearances (e.g., forest clearance, environment 
clearances, CTO, CTE, etc.) for all of its operations and installations. 
All essential conditions stipulated in such clearances are also 
followed. 
  
In addition to the above measures, it may be pertinent to 
mention that recently on the environmental front, OIL has included 
ESG activities under project “KAVACH”, with objectives of meeting 
following targets. 
• OIL to be net zero by 2040. 
• Emission reduction of 45% from 2005 level by 2030. 
• Develop Strategy & Policy to fulfil National & Global Standards. 
• Adoption of Alternative Cleaner Fuels in its Operations. 
• Focus on Energy Efficiency. 
• Focus on CCUS, Flare reduction. 
• Offset Mechanism & Green Energy (Biofuel, Green Hydrogen, 
Renewables), carbon credits etc. 
 
ONGC complies with applicable laws, rules/ regulations and 
guidelines in the oil and gas fields. Compliance of these is regularly 
checked by the Regulatory/Competent authorities during regular 
External Safety Audits/ Inspections. Compliance is also checked 
during the Internal Safety Audits, carried by Multi- Disciplinary Teams 
of ONGC officials. It is ensured that action is taken on the audit 
observations at earliest. Compliance status of observations is 
monitored at Highest Level of Management. Action taken on the 
observations is also submitted to the concerned 
Regulatory/Competent authorities”. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.Expl-12023(11)/1/2021-EXPL-II-PNG dated 3rd July, 2023 

 
Comments of the Committee  
 
10. The Committee in their original Report had noted that as per Justice 
B.P. Katakey Report, OIL did not have mandatory clearances under several 
environmental acts to operate in the particular well.  Thereafter, this 
Committee had recommended the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to 
take up with all Oil PSUs and review compliance of all environmental laws 
which were applicable to oil and gas fields.  The reply of Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas mentions extant practices being followed by 
OISD.  It does not mention about any review done or being done for all 
necessary clearances in position of Oil PSUs.  Therefore, the Committee 
are disappointed to note neither the Ministry nor the OISD has undertaken 
such review of compliance of all applicable laws by Oil PSUs and 
accordingly, they reiterate their earlier recommendation to the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas and OISD to take up the issue with all Oil PSUs 
and review compliance of all environmental laws which were applicable to 
oil and gas fields. 
Recommendation No. 8 
Need for Single Safety Agency for Petroleum Sector  
11. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that the Oil and Gas sector is being regulated 
by many agencies like Directorate General of Mines Safety (DGMS), 
Petroleum and Explosives Safety Organisation (PESO), Oil Industry 
Safety Directorate (OISD), Petroleum & Natural Gas Regulatory Board 
(PNGRB), Directorate General of Shipping (DGS), Fire Departments 
and Lifts Departments from State Governments, etc., for different 
activities in the petroleum sector. One of the safety enforcement 
agencies in the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas is OISD, but it 
has no statutory powers as it is only a technical directorate, and all 
its officials are on deputation. Since many agencies are performing 
focused and limited role in enforcing the rules and regulations under 
the laws mandated to them, a holistic approach is missing for the 
sector. Many a time the gaps in legislation is also not noticed as 
many regulators are busy enforcing their mandate alone.  

 
The Committee further note that they had vide their 
recommendation No. 3, in their Report No. 12 (15th Lok Sabha) and 
recommendation No. 10, in their Report No. 24 (16th Lok Sabha) and 
recommendation No. 5 in their Report No. 13 (17th Lok Sabha) 
recommended for formation of single agency to enforce safety 
related rules and regulations in the petroleum sector. The Committee 
also note that the High-Level Committee (HLC) constituted by the 
Government of India to enquire into the sequence of events leading 
to stranding of vessels and accident after the Cyclone Tauktae had 
also concluded that the Government consider setting up a single 
statutory regulator for exercising effective oversight on safety 
aspects of all onshore and offshore oil fields.  
 
This Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation for a 
single safety agency for oil and gas sector and expect the Ministry to 
implement the same for ensuring the safety culture in Oil PSUs and 
regulating agencies. A weak safety framework is detrimental to not 
only general public but also to the oil companies. The accidents 
besides derailing their normal activities, lower confidence of the 
public and investors. Therefore, formation of a single regulatory 
authority for the oil and gas sector is a requirement of the time in the 
interest of the industry. Accordingly, this Committee again 
recommend to the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas to undertake 
serious deliberations and take effective steps towards formation of 
single regulatory body for oil and gas industry”. 
 
12. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
“A working group has been constituted by Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas, comprising of members drawn from the Oil and Gas 
Industry (Upstream, Midstream and Downstream), PNGRB, OISD, 
Academia, Shipping and Fire Services with the scope to review the 
whole gamut of safety system and suggest necessary changes for 
Petroleum Sector in India, identify gaps in extant laws and 
recommend way forward to establish single safety regulator for 
petroleum sector.  The Working Group is expected to submit its 
report by August 2023”. 

 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.Expl-12023(11)/1/2021-EXPL-II-PNG dated 3rd July, 2023 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
13. The Committee in their original Report had recommended that the 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas to undertake serious deliberations and 
take effective steps towards formation of single regulatory body for oil and 
gas industry.   
 The Ministry in its written reply has stated that it has constituted a 
Working Group comprising of members drawn from the Oil and Gas 
Industry (Upstream, Midstream and Downstream), PNGRB, OISD, 
Academia, Shipping and Fire Services with the scope to review the whole 
gamut of safety system and suggest necessary changes for Petroleum 
Sector in India, identify gaps in extant laws and recommend way forward to 
establish single safety regulator for petroleum sector.  The Working Group 
is expected to submit its report by August 2023.   
 The Committee note that the Ministry has constituted the above 
Working Group and the Report of the group is expected by August, 2023.  
The Committee would like to await for submission of the Report and its 
recommendation/conclusions.   
Recommendation No. 10 
Restructuring HSE Management System by Oil PSU's  
14. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that a series of lapses at the planning and 
execution level caused the Baghjan-5 incident. The Committee further 
note that the justice Katake Committee had observed that OIL did not 
have the mandatory consent to establish or operate under various 
environmental laws on the day of Blow out incident at of Baghjan-5 
i.e. 9" June, 2020. These lapses and disregard of environmental laws 
have led this Committee to conclude that the monitoring from higher 
level functionaries of OIL was weak. The Committee desire OIL to 
introduce an IT-enabled system to Drilling, Workover and Production 
operations to ensure availability of real-time information on critical 

Well operations to key personnel and senior management for 
strengthening of Oil Well Services. 
 
Accordingly, the Committee recommend OIL to increase the 
frequency of meetings of Health Safety Environment (HSE) sub 
Committee and also strengthen its HSE management system in the 
light of lessons drawn from Baghjan-5 incident and other incidents in 
the upstream sector. 
 
The Committee further feel that the current safety structure 
may need review as the HSE Officials in PSU organizations report to 
their top management and hence could be under pressure to allow 
violations/ be indifferent to complete the work on time. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry/DGH and the safety agencies 
like OISD/DGMS to review the existing structure and implement a 
mechanism by which the safety functions are headed by officials 
from other PSUs to ensure reasonable autonomy to the safety 
functionaries and help in developing a strong safety culture in the 
organization”. 
 
15. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
“HSE management system of OIL has been reviewed and approved 
by the respective Head of Fields. The OIL HSE Management System 
(HSE-MS) is to provide the framework and structure for the delivery of 
the highest level of HSE Performance in accordance with the best 
exploration, production, and transportation practice. 
It is a dynamic system, and the HSE-MS will continually evolve 
to respond to changing needs and emerging operational 
requirements as the Mines/ Departments is going through a period of 
transition. 
Amongst the various documents in the HSE management 
system, the HSE-MS manual is the most important and essential 
document. The specific purpose of the Manual is to document the 
core elements of the HSE management system, their relationship and 
interaction. 
The OIL HSE Management System is integrated into the overall 

management system. HSE Management System cuts across the 
functional boundaries of different departments and 
installations/facilities and is managed in an integrated and 
coordinated way. 
  Project KAVACH envisages to further reinforce 
transformational standardization of HSE Organization and 
Management System through Establishment of Integrated HSE 
Organization, conducting perception survey and gap analysis. 
  High Level Committee in Baghjan Accident, had advised for 
strengthening of HSE functioning by recommending for direct 
reporting of Chief HSE to CMD. In compliance to the 
recommendation, ONGC has changed the reporting structure of Chief 
HSE, from Director-I/c to Chairman & CEO”. 
 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.Expl-12023(11)/1/2021-EXPL-II-PNG dated 3rd July, 2023 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
16. The Committee in their original Report had recommended that the 
Ministry/DGH and the safety agencies like OISD/DGMS to review the 
existing structure and implement a mechanism by which the safety 
functions are headed by officials from other PSUs to ensure reasonable 
autonomy to the safety functionaries and help in developing a strong 
safety culture in the organization.  
The Ministry in its written reply has stated that HSE management 
system of OIL has been reviewed and approved by the respective Head of 
Fields.  The Ministry has further stated that OIL is implementing project 
KAVACH which envisages to further reinforce transformational 
standardization of HSE Organization and Management System through 
Establishment of Integrated HSE Organization, conducting perception 
survey and gap analysis.  The Ministry has also stated that High Level 
Committee in Baghjan Accident, had advised for strengthening of HSE 
functioning by recommending for direct reporting of Chief HSE to CMD and 
in compliance to the recommendation, ONGC has changed the reporting 

structure of Chief HSE, from Director-I/c to Chairman & CEO. 
The Committee note that the original recommendation of the 
Committee regarding increasing the frequency of meetings of HSE Sub-
Committee of OIL and heading of safety functions in Oil PSUs by officials 
from other PSUs have not been addressed by the Ministry.  The Committee 
reiterate their earlier recommendation to increase the frequency of 
meetings of HSE Sub-Committee of Oil PSUs.  The action taken reply of the 
Ministry is also silent about review of safety function and hierarchy and 
manning by officials from other PSUs at senior level.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation to Ministry/DGH/DGMS to 
review the existing safety structures in Oil PSUs and implement a 
mechanism by which the safety functions are headed by officials from 
other PSUs to ensure reasonable autonomy to the safety functionaries and 
develop a strong safety culture in the organization.   
Recommendation No. 11 
Strengthening of Infrastructure near Oil Installations   
17. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee observed that a similar facility is required to be set up in 
Guwahati too. There are several oil and gas related plants/units in and around 
Guwahati and therefore, the ERC can provide effective crisis management 
alongwith bolstering the safety infrastruce in North East region. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that Ministry should take necessary action for setting up a 
Emergency Response centre in Guwahati at the earliest. 
The Committee note that there are many oil and gas Installations in 
the North East and several new projects are being undertaken. The 
Committee observe that North East region including Assam and 
Tripura has got oil and gas fields, refinery in Assam, LPG bottling 
plants and city gas distribution pipelines. Indradhanush Gas Grid Ltd. 
(IGGL) is also laying pipelines under North-Eastern Natural Gas Grid 
project to connect major cities across North-Eastern Region with a 
gas grid to provide sufficient supply of natural gas. In this scenario, it 
is essential that along with energy infrastructure the associated 
safety, security and environment related response system should 
also be augmented and kept in readiness to meet any emergency. 

The Committee observe that during the blow out incident in 2020 in 
Baghjan, the snubbing units from Canada could not be landed at 
Guwahati Airport and had to be unloaded at Kolkata Airport which 
had the required infrastructure and then moved by road which 
caused avoidable delay. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the Ministry should do comprehensive area survey of the North-
Eastern Region and map all the oil and gas fields/installations /units 
etc. and also the nearest road/ rail/ airport infrastructure available for 
handling disaster management equipment/machineries required in 
case of emergency and take coordinated action in association with 
the Ministries concerned to strengthen the aviation/rail and road 
infrastructure in the region”. 
 
18. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
 
“OIL’s Crisis Management Team (CMT) has been strengthened with 
fire-fighting appliances & equipment which will ensure availability of 
fire-fighting resources & PPEs like SCBA sets & proximity suits on 
the central level which will be deployed in the shortest possible time 
during any major fire or blowout emergencies. 
  
Field Communication Department is developing a system for Quick 
deployment of communication facilities to the site of crisis/disaster 
and manage the requirement of the situation in case of any 
emergency. Every service department is expanding its capability to 
improve the infrastructure to meet the emergency needs. 
An Emergency Response Centre (ERC) is being set up under the 
aegis of OIL / NRL at a central location (Jorhat town), so as to 
respond to emergencies at all nearby oil producing installations / 
Refineries. 
  
Improvement in infrastructure is continuous process. Guwahati 
Airport is equipped to receive Code-C and D aircraft (A 320 and 
B737/757). The runway is capable of receiving Code E aircraft with 
prior intimation of 24 hours. The runway of Dibrugarh Airport has 
been extended by 461 m from 1829 m to 2290 m for A321 type of 

aircraft operations”. 
 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.Expl-12023(11)/1/2021-EXPL-II-PNG dated 3rd July, 2023 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
19. The Committee in their earlier original Report had recommended that 
the Ministry should do comprehensive area survey of the North-Eastern 
Region and map all the oil and gas fields/installations /units etc. and also 
the nearest road/ rail/ airport infrastructure available for handling disaster 
management equipment/machineries required in case of emergency and 
take coordinated action in association with the Ministries concerned to 
strengthen the aviation/rail and road infrastructure in the region.   
 The Ministry in its written reply has stated that Improvement in 
infrastructure is a continuous process. Guwahati Airport is equipped to 
receive Code-C and D aircraft (A 320 and B737/757). The runway is capable 
of receiving Code E aircraft with prior intimation of 24 hours. The runway of 
Dibrugarh Airport has been extended by 461 m from 1829 m to 2290 m for 
A321 type of aircraft operations. 
 The Committee note that the reply of the Ministry talks about aviation 
infrastructure alone and is silent on needed improvement in road/rail 
infrastructure and action taken thereon.  The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Ministry should do 
comprehensive area survey of the North-Eastern Region and map all the oil 
and gas fields/installations /units etc. and also the nearest road/ rail/ airport 
infrastructure available for handling disaster management 
equipment/machineries required in case of emergency and take 
coordinated action in association with the Ministries concerned to 
strengthen the aviation/rail and road infrastructure in the region.  
Recommendation No. 13 
[Training for Local Communities  
20. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that the local communities near to the. oil and gas 

fields/units/installations play an important role in the safe and secure 
functioning of these installations. These are the people who are likely to 
be affected due to the unforeseen incident/accidents that may happen in 
these units. So it is very important that local communities and population 
are made aware of the possible safety related incidents and also the 
response required in those situations. The Committee also observe that 
the local communities also step in to help the organizations to respond to 
the situation and support the operations. In this regard, the Committee 
desire that a proper structured and formal training module particularly in 
fire-fighting as well as rescue, first-aid and other such basic safety 
requirements to the local population could be of immense value and help 
whenever such emergencies arise.  
Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should 
persuade all the PSUs to educate and train the local communities in basic 
safety training requirements and also equip them with basic facilities like 
fire fighters and fire tenders which can be useful for both the communities 
and nearby towns as well in meeting the emergency requirements of the 
organization”. 
 
21. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
“As far as OIL is concerned, Safety awareness programs/campaigns are 
being conducted for local communities living in the vicinity of oil and gas 
installations and along the Right of Way (ROW) of pipeline through 
distribution of safety pamphlets, meetings and screening safety films etc. 
  
As part of Tier-III mock drills carried out with Mutual Aid Partners 
like District Administration, National Disaster Response Force, CISF, 
Neighboring industries etc., OIL sensitizes the local communities on action 
to be taken during disaster. Pamphlets on Do’s & Don’ts during 
emergency drills in vernacular language is also distributed among the 
locals. 
  
OIL also maintains a well-equipped firefighting facility at Duliajan 
and Moran, which apart from its internal emergencies, also comes to the 
aid of nearby communities as part of its community assistance program. 
Moreover, basic fire-fighting training is imparted to local communities from 
time to time. 
  

ONGC keeps adequate firefighting infrastructure, equipment and 
manpower in its operational areas. Assistance is provided to local 
administration, local population and other industries whenever required in 
control and mitigating of fire emergencies. Awareness and training 
programs are being conducted for local communities, schools and 
colleges. These programs include basic fire safety awareness, practical 
demonstration of firefighting equipment, first aid trainings, emergency 
drills, etc”. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
O.M. No.Expl-12023(11)/1/2021-EXPL-II-PNG dated 3rd July, 2023 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
22. The Committee in their original Report had recommended to equip 
local communities with basic facilities like fire fighters and fire tenders 
which can be useful for both the communities and nearby towns as well in 
meeting the emergency requirements of the organization. 
 The Reply of the Ministry gives details about training programs and 
emergency drills conducted for local communities but is silent on the 
facilities made available to local communities.   
 
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation to 
equip local communities with basic facilities like fire fighters, fire tenders 
etc. which could be useful in emergency situations and act as first line of 
defence and apprise them of contemplated action in this regard.  
 
  

 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation No. 1 
  
Need for periodic review of Safety Measures in Petroleum Sector  
The Committee note that the Indian Petroleum Sector has presence in upstream, 
midstream and downstream sector including onshore and offshore fields, 
refineries, several Gas processing plants, Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) terminals 
and more than 45,000 kms of crude oil and petroleum product pipelines spread 
across the length and breadth of the country. The Committee also note that 
several Acts and Rules govern the safety of oil and gas units and the same are 
being enforced by agencies under different Ministries of Central and State 
Governments.  
 
The Committee note that the Oil and Natural Gas Industry process highly 
inflammable hydrocarbons under high temperature and pressure. Therefore, any 
accident in the Petroleum and Natural Gas Industry can cause serious outcomes 
like loss of lives, disruption of activities in the surroundings, huge economic loss 
and also irreparable damage to the local environment. Hence, the Committee 
observe that Safety in petroleum sector is of utmost importance and there should 
be zero tolerance to accidents.  
 
The Committee further recall that many accidents happened in the Oil and Gas 
sector in the country during the last few years. The Baghjan oil Well blowout in 
Assam in May-June 2020, sinking of Barge P-305 in Bombay High region in the 
wake of cyclone Tautkae in May 2021, the blast in the pipeline of GAIL in 
Nagaram in Andhra Pradesh in 2014 and accident at IOCL facility in Jaipur in 
2009 etc., are some of the serious incidents in the last decade for the petroleum 
industry in the country.  
 
The Committee further note that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has 
constituted a Working Group comprising of industry professionals, legal experts, 
academics, etc. to look into the whole gamut of safety framework and suggest 
necessary changes for petroleum sector in the country in response to the 
recommendations made in this regard by this Committee in their 13" Report (17th 

Lok Sabha). 
 
The Committee had examined the circumstances and events leading to leakage 
of gas and oil condensate from Well No. 5 of Baghjan oil field situated in Tinsukia 
district of Assam from 27 May 2020 which was followed by fire and blowout of oil 
Well on 9 June 2020 and handling of the incident subsequently by OIL. The 
Committee note with concern that the disaster had happened not because of any 
equipment failure but due to the cumulative effect of human errors during 
different stages of the workover operations at Baghjan-5. The Committee further 
note that the disaster had happened due to gross disregard of safety regulations 
and practices and lack of effective monitoring of workover operations. The 
serious incidents which happen in the petroleum sector is a cause of concern 
and that lessons learnt by Oil/PSUS from one incident should prevent of other 
accidents and should be taken seriously by PSUs. Hence, a comprehensive 
review of the safety requirements for the entire oil and gas industry has become 
all the more desirable. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry 
should expedite the submission of the Report by the Working Group so that 
review/updation of safety framework of the petroleum sector of the country may 
be taken up. 
Reply of the Government 
 
A working group constituted by Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, comprising 
of members drawn from the Oil and Gas Industry (Upstream, Midstream and 
Downstream), PNGRB, OISD, Academia, Shipping and Fire Services with the 
scope to review the whole gamut of safety system and suggest necessary 
changes for Petroleum Sector in India, identify gaps in extant laws and 
recommend way forward to establish a single safety regulator for petroleum 
sector. The Working Group is expected to submit its report by August 2023. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No.Expl-12023(11)/1/2021-EXPL-II-PNG dated 03.07.2023 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
Need for promoting safety culture in OIL  
The Committee note that in the Baghjan incident, the waiting on cement (WOC) 
which was 48 hours was compromised by OIL and its officials instructed the crew 
of M/s John Energy Limited (JEL) to start pull out of the same after 12 hours only 
in violation of the plans. Moreover, after completion of pull out, the crew of M/s 

JEL started removal of Blow out preventer (BOP) to change the well head, even 
though the cement had not set in and there were no written instructions from OIL 
which severely compromised the safety of the well, and therefore, appears to be 
major immediate cause of the incident. The Committee further note that there 
were serious lapses on the part of contractor M/s JEL in the form of failure to 
communicate the change of plan to Installation manager, failure-to take prompt 
action after detecting initial flow of fluid from Well, failure of key persons of the 
company to remain present at the rig site, poor record- keeping by rig crew, 
improper BOP testing and drills, inadequate response due to lack of skilled 
manpower, etc.  
 
The Committee further note that the High-Level Committee which investigated 
the causes of the incident had observed a number of lapses on the part of OIL 
also at the planning, execution, organizational and training and accreditation 
levels. The Committee also note that though MIs JEL was the Contractor in the 
contract, it was actually acting under close supervision and control of OIL. The 
representatives of OIL had under the contract the right to observe, test, check 
and control implementation of workover, testing programmes, equipment and 
stock, inspect works performed by contractor or examine records kept at Well 
site by the Contractor. The representatives also had the right to give instructions 
to the Contractor regarding the workover programme and the Contractor was 
bound to comply with the same under the provisions of the contract. These 
lapses on the part of officials of OIL in planning and execution of workover 
programme at Baghjan-5 have led this Committee to conclude that the safety 
agencies like Directorate General of Mines Security (DGMS)/ Oil Industry Safety 
Directorate (OISD) should lay emphasis on strict compliance with laid down 
procedures for carrying out various operations.  Accordingly, the Committee 
recommend Ministry/OIL/Safety Agencies to put up framework and protocol of 
accountability to foster and promote a strong safety culture among their officials 
and employees and of their contractors followed by strict enforcement and 
encourage them in adhering to the same.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
OISD lays emphasis on following procedures and OISD standard requirements. 
This is re-iterated in industry meetings and during audits. Violation of procedures, 
unsafe acts and unsafe conditions, if any, are observed during audits and 
through random checking of CCTV footage. From the year 2022-23, OISD has 

started organisational audit and safety culture is one of the important elements 
focused during organisation audit. 
OIL has taken steps to address the lapses pointed out by the High-level 
Committee. Every fortnightly review meeting at corporate office, as well as every 
weekly review meeting at Field Headquarters (Duliajan) starts with a review of 
safety activities and initiatives. 
OIL has launched Project “KAVACH” which envisions transformational 
standardisation in Health, Safety & Environment and ESG. The objectives under 
project KAVACH will be achieved through 10 identified GOALs. Under the said 
project, Goals pertaining to promoting Safety Culture in OIL are as under:  
 Strengthening HSE Management Commitment. 
 Establishment of Integrated HSE Organization, conduct perception survey, gap 
analysis, audit universe, asset integrity management etc. 
 Benchmarking HSE Parameters with International best practices, 
implementation of ISO 9001/14001/45001 etc 
 Integration of Technology, AI/IOT for improving safety performance and 
production. 
 
Additionally, some of the safety measures carried out at field level to foster and 
promote a strong safety culture amongst OIL employees are: 
 Safety Briefing and Discussion prior to all operational meetings and also at 
entry points at every installation 
 Safety Video circulated on weekly basis across the organization, the same 
are shown during every safety meeting at pit level, installation level, mine 
level. 
 Job Safety Analysis: It has been ensured for every critical activity to 
ensure the elimination of hazards and mitigation measures. 
 Management of Change has been implemented in line with OISD 
Guidelines. 
 Toolbox Talks: This helps to plan the work in a team, eliminates 
miscommunication and remove any shortcoming in person or equipment 
for a specific job and resolve the confusions/ misunderstandings. 
 Mock Drills: There is schedule for conducting mock drills with participation 
of all key personnel and associated employees, including contractor 
employees. 
 Safety Meetings: A platform to raise issues via direct communication. 
 Bridging document preparation to define role and responsibility of 
Contractor and Owners is being followed. 

 Guidelines for Stop Work Authority has been introduced. 
 Loss Control Tours by Sr. Management have been introduced, as a 
measure to enhance accountability. 
All disciplinary actions and penalty procedure are being taken care through the 
Company’s standing orders, Rules and terms of Contract. To strengthen the 
same, a Zero Tolerance Policy has been prepared and is under review for 
implementation for strict adherence to the Operational and safety procedures. 
  
Provisions and safety protocol have already been made in the Oil Mines 
Regulations 2017, (under the Mines Act 1952) for different operations in Oil 
Mines. The onus lies on the respective oil companies for the compliance of the 
statute. Directorate General of Mines Safety (DGMS) will enhance efforts for 
strict compliance of the statutory provisions. 
 
 Mini stry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No.Expl-12023(11)/1/2021-EXPL-II-PNG dated 03.07.2023 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
Need for review of Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) 
The Committee note that the High-Level Committee had recommended OIL to 
develop comprehensive manuals for workover, drilling, production etc. as 
developed by E&P majors covering all operations in detail, which will be guiding 
document covering all operations. The Committee further note that the OIL had 
revised the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) of more than 1000 activities 
in the oil and gas installations. The Committee, however, note that the 
recommendations of the High-Level Committee regarding development of 
comprehensive manuals for workover, drilling, production etc. have not been 
complied yet. Accordingly, this Committee exhort OIL to review its Standard 
Operating Procedures in the light of practices of international exploration and 
production majors and case studies of different accidents, faults, problems etc. 
and develop comprehensive manuals for different operations in a time bound 
manner which should be periodically reviewed in the light of needs and changing 
scenario of the industry. The Committee further recommend the Ministry to 
develop a review system pertaining to safety audit observations and their 
compliance by all the PSUs concerned in the Safety Council meeting annually.  

Reply of the Government 
 
OIL has a sizeable list of Standard Operating Procedures (SoPs). Following the 
observations of the Hon’ble Committee, all the SOPs of more than 1200 activities 
in the oil & gas installations have been reviewed, revised and additional relevant 
clauses have been added for further improvement and operational excellence. 
 Work/Operational Manuals are being prepared / updated by the respective 
functional authorities. 
  
OISD has issued guidelines on “System of SOPs” and action has been initiated 
to implement it across the organisation. The guidelines specify review of SoPs 
every three years. Company wise long pending observations are deliberated and 
discussed in Safety Council. In addition, issues observed during audits and 
accident investigation are also deliberated in Safety Council. Based on the 
recommendation, OISD shall further enhance review system pertaining to safety 
audit observation & compliance in the Safety Council. 
 
 Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No.Expl-12023(11)/1/2021-EXPL-II-PNG dated 03.07.2023 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
Need for strict action against the Contractor  
The Committee note that the lapses and disregard of contractual obligations by 
the Contractor M/s JEL were major proximate reasons for the Baghjan-5 incident. 
The main Contractor MIs JEL was put on holiday for a period of two years. 
However, the contractor went to Guwahati High Court and as per its advice 
appeared before CGM (C&P) for personal hearing on 01.03.2021. Based on the 
outcome, the order for holiday/debarment was reviewed and vide Review Order 
dated 28.04.2021 the holiday period was reduced to 30.04.2021. The Committee 
further note that OIL imposed certain penalties on the contractor and revoked 
performance bank guarantee deposited against the contractor. The Committee 
observed that a drilling rig contract has been awarded to M/s JEL against open 
tender after the holiday period. The Committee note that the OIL has not utilized 
the terms of the contract whereby the contractor is liable to bear the entire cost 
and expenses of killing the Well or otherwise bringing the Well under control and 
also for indemnifying the company and treated the Contractor with leniency. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend OIL to take appropriate action against the 

Contractor under the provisions of the contract to make it liable for the expenses 
incurred by OIL in the entire incident. 
Reply of the Government 
Contractors are penalized for their lapses on the basis of the penalty clauses of 
the contract.  
As far as OIL is concerned, Contract safety management is in place. All the 
recommendations as per 10th, 11th and 12th Conference on Safety in Mines 
pertaining to safety of contractor workers have been incorporated as HSE points 
in the tender document. Bridging documents is in place wherever applicable. 
Competency criteria for workers are identified and specified in the contract 
document. 
As recommended by the Hon’ble Committee, and after due deliberations 
internally within OIL, a Legal Notice dated 11.04.2023 demanding compensation 
of Rs 462 crores (the expenditure incurred by OIL towards controlling of Blowout 
and its consequential effects along with interest@12% from the date of blowout) 
within 30 days from the receipt of the Notice has been sent to the contractor, 
John Energy Limited. However, OIL has reserved its right to seek additional 
compensation in the future depending upon the outcome of the aforesaid civil 
appeal pending before the Court/ Tribunal. Additionally, OIL has also reserved its 
right to claim manpower costs which are under the process of calculation for 
controlling Baghjan blowout. This is without prejudice to OIL’s other rights in the 
matter. 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No.Expl-12023(11)/1/2021-EXPL-II-PNG dated 03.07.2023 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
Need for enquiry by the Ministry  
 
The Committee note that three Committees constituted to enquire about Baghjan 
incident had found a series of lapses on the part of officials of OIL concerned 
with the planning and execution of workover at Baghjan-5. The Committee further 
note that the lapses caused great damage to the people and the environment of 
surrounding areas besides causing huge financial loss. The Committee further 
note that the crisis management of the incident could have been better. While 
initially 18 officials were suspended in the wake of disciplinary proceedings, two 
were found guilty. The Committee observe that fixing of responsibilities in this 
regard is grossly inadequate to the proportion of damages caused and lapses 

committed at procedural levels by the personnel of OIL.  
The responsibility of ensuring a safe work procedure vest with Oil PSUs and they 
need to be accountable. The role of senior officers is more of supervisory nature 
but the same was missing in this case. Accordingly, this Committee recommend 
Ministry to institute an enquiry into lack of proper supervision and monitoring in 
workover programme at Baghjan-5 and fix appropriate responsibility and 
accountability to bring out any erring and incompetent officials of OIL. 
Reply of the Government 
A three member High Level Committee was constituted vide this Ministry’s order 
dated 11.06.2020 to enquire into the incident of blow out and fire at Baghjan 
oilfield. The report of the High Level Committee has been accepted by the 
Government and OIL was asked to take action on the recommendations of report 
and also against the officers responsible for lapses. Action has been taken up by 
OIL to ensure proper safety and security system to avoid repetition of similar 
incidents in future and majority of the HLC recommendations have been 
implemented by OIL. 
The Government of India had also constituted a five-member committee in 
compliance of order dated 19.02.2021 passed by the Principal Bench of National 
Green Tribunal. New Delhi (NGT) in Bonani Kakkar Vis Oil India Limited & 
Others, Original Application No. 43/2020 (EZ). The recommendations of 
committee were accepted and forwarded to upstream companies for 
implementation. OISD monitors the status of implementation of the 
recommendations of the Committee on quarterly basis and a review meeting is 
taken by Ministry once in six months with Heads/senior representatives from 
DGMS, DGH and other major E&P companies (both PSU & private). Safety 
Council reviews status of implementation of the recommendations of the 
Committee once every year. 
After the incident at Baghjan well No. 5 of M/s Oil India Limited, an inquiry was 
conducted by the officer of DGMS to ascertain the causes and circumstances 
that led to the incident. Based on the findings of the inquiry, action has been 
taken against the persons responsible for the incident.  
Prosecution has been intiated against the (i) Nominated Owner of the company 
(ii) Agent, (iii) Mine Manager, (iv) Deputy Mine Manager, (v) Installation manager, 
(vi) Chief Engineer – Oil & Gas services M/s OIL (Agent), for the contravention of 
the provisions of the Mines Act 1952 and Oil Mines Regulation 2017.  
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No.Expl-12023(11)/1/2021-EXPL-II-PNG dated 03.07.2023 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I) 

 
Recommendation No. 7 
Self Reliance to Tackle Emergency in oil and gas Installations  
The Committee note that the safety related incidents in oil Installations can cause 
severe damage to the installation itself, surrounding areas etc. and with 
hydrocarbon substances, the risk of fire is very high. Many incidents in the past 
have caused death of human beings, damage to property and also to 
environment. The Committee also observe that some of the issues faced by the 
petroleum sector are very unique like oil well blow out, oil spill in coastal areas, 
etc. These events need specialized response and many a times it is seen that 
international experts are engaged, and certain equipment are also brought from 
abroad to mitigate and handle such incidents. The Committee note that in 
Baghjan incident, the safety equipment were mobilized from ONGC/OIL in 
Assam, Vadodara, Ahmedabad, etc. Finally, as these were inadequate, foreign 
expertise from Singapore were roped in and Snubbing Unit was mobilized from 
Canada which indicates that the country lacks requisite equipment/technology 
and skilled expertise in handling such incidents.  
 
While the upstream oil companies in the country may have crisis management 
teams to handle safety incidents, it is desired that the country should develop 
capabilities in handling well blow out control and also manufacture associated 
equipment in the country. The Committee desire that the Ministry and the PSUs 
should review the response in putting out the blow out in the oil well in Baghjan 
thoroughly and identify the gaps and try to address all those gaps within the 
country and collaborate with international agencies to attain self-reliance in these 
areas. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should review the 
deficiencies and gaps in the safety systems required to fight safety related 
incidents and take necessary action to create infrastructure and skill sets to deal 
with them in future. The Committee may be apprised about the action taken 
within three months. 
Reply of the Government 
The deficiencies and gaps in the safety system required to fight safety related 
incidents are being reviewed and necessary actions are being taken. OIL is in the 
process of developing a full-fledged ‘Crisis Management Centre’. E&P operators 
have been advised to have MOU with the service providers for crisis 
management. 
  
OISD organizes DMP (Disaster Management Plan) meet with the private oil and 

gas companies every year to discuss issues pertaining to DMP of the companies. 
OISD conducts mock drill during safety audits to check preparedness of crew 
and emergency system. Deficiencies are observed and brought out in audit 
report. OISD has taken up relevant standards for revision like OISD-GDN-
227(Emergency Response and Preparedness in E&P Industry);OISD-STD-189 
(Fire Fighting)& OISD-RP-174 (Well control) with inclusion of offshore operations. 
  
OIL’s Crisis Management Team (CMT) has identified critical equipment and 
skills to be enhanced to increase its efficacy. The CMT is being strengthened 
with adequate manpower and equipment to tackle any emergency. Moreover, 
various Equipment procurement, Infrastructure enhancement and technological 
upgradation has already been carried out. Training of personnel in well control is 
planned to be carried out in cooperation with IDT, ONGC. 
  
OIL entered into an MoU with M/s Cudd Well Control for assistance during critical 
well control / blowout control event in the oilfields of Oil India Limited. Hiring of 
one number Snubbing Unit Services for workover operation in Assam & 
Arunachal Pradesh for a period of three years is under process. Procurement 
process for OIL’s own Snubbing Unit has also been initiated. The unit will 
generally be used for work over operations; however, it can also be used to 
control critical well situations. 
 
Following measures are in place in ONGC for handing oil well blow outs/fire 
accidents /oils spill: 
1) ONGC is self-reliant and having adequate equipment and expertise to 
deal with any blow-outs emergencies in onshore and offshore locations. 
Depending upon the level of emergency in offshore blow-out situations, 
specialized equipment may be required to be deployed, with assistance 
from outside agencies. 
2) ONGC is also in process of upgrading its current Blow-Out Control 
equipment at its Regional Centres. 
3) ONGC is having dedicated Crisis Management Teams to control 
emergency scenarios related to blowout/uncontrolled flow from oil & gas 
wells and tackle related emergency situations, the teams are based at all 
work centers with guidance and support from Central Crisis Management 
Team (CMT) at Vadodara and four Regional CMTs (at Rajahmundry, 
Vadodara, Mumbai and Sivasagar).  
4) There is a state of the art training institute at Narsapur, Rajahmundry 
which caters to the requirement of capacity building in crisis management 
in blowout scenarios.  

5) As per the directives of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, ONGC has 
planned to set up a state of the art ERC (Emergency Response Centre) at 
Hazira which will cater to Fire Emergencies and other related incidents 
which are beyond the control of the installation and district administration. 
Each ERC shall cater to facilities within the range of about 300 Kms 
(radius). 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No.Expl-12023(11)/1/2021-EXPL-II-PNG dated 03.07.2023 
Recommendation No.  9 
  
Needs for advance Training of employees of OIL  
The Committee note that the High-Level Committee constituted to enquire into 
Baghjan incident mentioned above recommended for mandatory training in Well 
control for all the key personnel of OIL associated with workover operations and 
production engineers working in Well Services section like OGPS as many of the 
key personnel of OIL associated with the workover operation of Baghjan-5 had 
not been trained in Well intervention.  
 
The Committee further note that the Well control school of OIL had no 
accreditation for Well control and neither it had dedicated faculty, nor it was 
properly equipped. The Committee also note that OIL has sponsored 130 
employees for various advanced Well control trainings in association with 
reputed institutes since then and desire that officials of ONGC and private sector 
should be mandated to train their personnel. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend OIL to upgrade its Well training schools by equipping them well with 
dedicated faculty and infrastructure and to undertake the advance training in Well 
intervention for its remaining key employees associated with workover 
operations/production engineers. The Committee may also be apprised by OIL 
about the action taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
OIL has taken extensive measures to ramp up its training curriculum and 
coverage. 
During the year 2022-2023 OIL has already conducted advanced Safety related 
training and trained 549 personnel as per OISD Standard 176. The Target for the 
year 2023-2024 is training of 1,626 personnel as per OISD Std 176.  
 In addition, OIL has conducted training in (MVT, Firefighting prevention, First 
Aid, Gas Testing etc.) to Permanent Employees (Executives &Work persons), 
Contractual employees, apprentices etc. Total number of persons trained 
(including advanced Safety related training) is 8849 in 2022-23 which is 31.3% 

more than 2021-22. With respect to training mandays, the corresponding 
increase is almost 34%. 
 Well control training being imparted to Drilling Rig personnel and it will be also 
extended to workover rig key personnel and production engineers in coordination 
with IDT ONGC, Dehradun. 
 In addition, a specialised training on “Basic Life Safety and First Responder” has 
been introduced for executive as well as employees for personnel safety at their 
workplaces and emergencies. 2-Day Training Programme on HSE Management 
System has been organised for key officials working in operational areas for 
enhancing the awareness on HSE. Advanced firefighting training with live 
demonstration has been implemented for executives and employees. 
 Further under Project “KAVACH”, OIL intends to conduct Safety related 
workshops targeting 10% of the workforce spread across all spheres.  
 In line with the recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee, efforts to upgrade its 
well training schools through development of internal faculties as per the IWCF 
norms is in progress. 
 ONGC’s Institute of Drilling Technology (IDT) is involved in training and 
Research and Development activities related to drilling operations. The ‘Well 
Control School’ (WCS), a part of the IDT, is a premier training establishment to 
provide skills to drilling crew for handling of critical well control situations. WCS is 
accredited to the IWCF (International Well Control Forum) Rotary Drilling well 
control certification program, IWCF Well Intervention Pressure Control 
certification program and IADC (International Association of Drilling Contractors) 
certification program at different levels. The institutes provides training to ONGC 
personnel as well as external candidates. 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No.Expl-12023(11)/1/2021-EXPL-II-PNG dated 03.07.2023 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
 Emergency Response Centres  
The Committee note that the country has many industrial clusters and also in 
many cities like Mumbai, Vadodara, Vizag, Chennai, Kochi , Guwahati etc. oil 
and gas installations/Units are found to be concentrated. In. addition to these 
installations and Units, there are several industries operating in their vicinity in 
these cities. The Committee observe that there was a proposal to establish 
Emergency Response Centres in some of these cities so as to respond to the 
safety incidents at short notice in and around these industrial clusters. The 
Committee also note that the work related to setting up of five ERCs at IOCL 

Jaipur, HPCL-Vizag, BPCL-Manmad, ONGC-Hazira, and GAIL-Guna have been 
progressing. 
The Committee observed that a similar facility is required to be set up in 
Guwahati too. There are several oil and gas related plants/units in and around 
Guwahati and therefore, the ERC can provide effective crisis management 
alongwith bolstering the safety infrastructure in North East region. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry should take necessary action for 
setting up a Emergency Response Centre in Guwahati at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
An Emergency Response Centre (ERC) is being set up under the aegis of OIL / 
NRL at a central location (Jorhat town), so as to respond to emergencies at all 
nearby oil producing installations / Refineries. Further, Crisis Management Team 
(CMT) is being strengthened with adequate manpower and equipment to tackle 
any emergency. This will act as an Emergency Response Centre for its Field 
Headquarters / Upper Assam. OIL has also entered into an MoU with M/s Cudd 
Well Control for assistance during critical well control / blowout control event in 
the oilfields of Oil India Limited. 
  
For catering to the blowout exigencies and emergencies in North Eastern region, 
ONGC is already having Regional Crisis Management Team setup at Sivasagr, 
Assam. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No.Expl-12023(11)/1/2021-EXPL-II-PNG dated 03.07.2023 
 
Recommendation No. 14 
Bio-remediation measures in BAGHJAN site  
The Committee note that there were extensive damages to the local environment 
due to the Baghjan Well blow out incident. Damages to crops, tea estates and 
vegetation due to spillover of oil condensate were reported. The OIL took up bio-
remediation work immediately and appointed TERI for assessment of 
environmental quality namely water, soil and vegetation in and around Baghjan. 
The Committee note that TERI has submitted its final assessment on 28.02.2022 
. A  bio-diversity impact assessment was also carried out by Assam Bio diversity 
board. Additionally, OIL carried out environmental assessment study by NABL 
accredited M/s ERM India Pvt Ltd and M/s TERI. The study reports don't show 
any· deviation from prescribed environmental parameters. Further, the 
Committee note that OIL is carrying out many studies for conservation 

management and has also signed an MOU with CPCB for green plantation, etc. 
The Committee desire that OIL should complete all their assessments and 
carryout the necessary action without dilution of their commitments towards the 
environment.  
The Committee recommend that the Ministry should regularly review and monitor 
the progress made by OIL in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the committee is noted for bio-remediation of the 
Baghjan site. Extensive bio-remediation has already been carried out at site, 
resulting in vast improvement in the entire are surrounding the site. 
  
The bio-remediation was carried out by assessing the affected area through 
physical survey, Aerial Survey and sampling and testing procedures.  
All the contaminated area in and around Baghjan Plinth #5 was bio remediated 
by M/s TERI engaged by OIL, who carried out the work in two phases:   
 Phase No. I (Pre-Capping of Well) for a total area of 1,60,000 square 
meters. 
 Phase No. II (Post Capping of Well) for a total area of 69,833 square 
meters.  
  
The further study was also carried out by engaging M/s TERI to assess 
Environmental Quality of Soil and Vegetation for 2 Km radius from Baghjan 
Plinth. Based upon the sampling and analysis of soil, water and vegetation 
sample in surrounding environment including bio-reserve, the said study reveals 
the absence of significant pollutants in Blowout site area.  
  
The Baghjan-5 plinth has been restored by plantation of 35000 sapling of 55 
native’s species for creating a dense forest on the plinth in accordance with the 
MOU signed between OIL and Pollution Control Board, Assam. At present area 
in and around the Baghjan site is fully restored through natural vegetation. 
  

 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE GOVERNMENT DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES  
 
 
 
 
 
- Nil - 
  

 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation No. 6 
Need for observance of Environmental Laws  
The Committee note that the Justice B.P. Katakey Committee Report had found 
that, OIL did not have the mandatory clearances under several Acts to operate in 
the particular well. The Committee further note that the replies of the Ministry and 
OIL inform that it had mandatory consent to establish or operate under 
abovementioned laws on the day of the blow out of Baghjan-5 and subsequent 
fire on 09.06.2020. However, the Ministry have stated that OIL had obtained all 
mandatory statutory clearances as per the requisite applicable laws. 
The Committee note that a number of licenses and approvals are required under 
various laws pertaining to the mining and protection of environment for 
exploration and extraction of oil and gas. The Committee further note that these 
licenses are for a specific period, and they are required to be renewed after the 
lapse of the same. If these were to be reviewed by Directorate General of 
Hydrocarbons (DGH)/Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas from time to time, 
such lapses could have been noticed. There is need to institutionalise such a 
mechanism. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas to take up the issue with all the PSUs and review the 
compliance of all applicable laws in the oil and gas fields that are currently in 
operation. Action taken in this regard may be intimated within three months.  
Reply of the Government 
 
The checklist for carrying out OISD external safety audit also includes 
compliance of environmental requirements. Checklist shall be further reviewed to 
make it more inclusive of the requirements. OISD is also revising standard OISD-
RP-201 on ‘Environment Management in E&P sector’ with extended scope to 
cover entire oil & gas industry.  
As far as OIL is concerned, it routinely obtains, monitors and renews regulatory 
clearances (e.g., forest clearance, environment clearances, CTO, CTE, etc.) for 
all of its operations and installations. All essential conditions stipulated in such 
clearances are also followed. 
  

In addition to the above measures, it may be pertinent to mention that recently on 
the environmental front, OIL has included ESG activities under project 
“KAVACH”, with objectives of meeting following targets. 
 
 OIL to be net zero by 2040. 
 Emission reduction of 45% from 2005 level by 2030. 
 Develop Strategy & Policy to fulfil National & Global Standards. 
 Adoption of Alternative Cleaner Fuels in its Operations. 
 Focus on Energy Efficiency. 
 Focus on CCUS, Flare reduction. 
 Offset Mechanism & Green Energy (Biofuel, Green Hydrogen, 
Renewables), carbon credits etc. 
 
ONGC complies with applicable laws, rules/ regulations and guidelines in the oil 
and gas fields. Compliance of these is regularly checked by the 
Regulatory/Competent authorities during regular External Safety Audits/ 
Inspections. Compliance is also checked during the Internal Safety Audits, 
carried by Multi- Disciplinary Teams of ONGC officials. It is ensured that action is 
taken on the audit observations at earliest. Compliance status of observations is 
monitored at Highest Level of Management. Action taken on the observations is 
also submitted to the concerned Regulatory/Competent authorities. 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No.Expl-12023(11)/1/2021-EXPL-II-PNG dated 03.07.2023 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
Restructuring HSE Management System by Oil PSU's  
The Committee note that a series of lapses at the planning and execution level 
caused the Baghjan-5 incident. The Committee further note that the justice 
Katake Committee had observed that OIL did not have the mandatory consent to 
establish or operate under various environmental laws on the day of Blow out 
incident at of Baghjan-5 i.e. 9" June, 2020. These lapses and disregard of 
environmental laws have led this Committee to conclude that the monitoring from 
higher level functionaries of OIL was weak. The Committee desire OIL to 
introduce an IT-enabled system to Drilling, Workover and Production operations 
to ensure availability of real-time information on critical Well operations to key 

personnel and senior management for strengthening of Oil Well Services. 
Accordingly, the Committee recommend OIL to increase the frequency of 
meetings of Health Safety Environment (HSE) sub Committee and also 
strengthen its HSE management system in the light of lessons drawn from 
Baghjan-5 incident and other incidents in the upstream sector. 
The Committee further feel that the current safety structure may need review as 
the HSE Officials in PSU organizations report to their top management and 
hence could be under pressure to allow violations/ be indifferent to complete the 
work on time. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Ministry/DGH and 
the safety agencies like OISD/DGMS to review the existing structure and 
implement a mechanism by which the safety functions are headed by officials 
from other PSUs to ensure reasonable autonomy to the safety functionaries and 
help in developing a strong safety culture in the organization. 
 
Reply of the Government 
HSE management system of OIL has been reviewed and approved by the 
respective Head of Fields. The OIL HSE Management System (HSE-MS) is to 
provide the framework and structure for the delivery of the highest level of HSE 
Performance in accordance with the best exploration, production, and 
transportation practice. 
  
It is a dynamic system, and the HSE-MS will continually evolve to respond to 
changing needs and emerging operational requirements as the Mines/ 
Departments is going through a period of transition. 
  
Amongst the various documents in the HSE management system, the HSE-MS 
manual is the most important and essential document. The specific purpose of 
the Manual is to document the core elements of the HSE management system, 
their relationship and interaction. 
  
The OIL HSE Management System is integrated into the overall management 
system. HSE Management System cuts across the functional boundaries of 
different departments and installations/facilities and is managed in an integrated 
and coordinated way. 
  
Project KAVACH envisages to further reinforce transformational standardization 
of HSE Organization and Management System through Establishment of 
Integrated HSE Organization, conducting perception survey and gap analysis. 

  
High Level Committee in Baghjan Accident, had advised for strengthening of 
HSE functioning by recommending for direct reporting of Chief HSE to CMD. In 
compliance to the recommendation, ONGC has changed the reporting structure 
of Chief HSE, from Director-I/c to Chairman & CEO. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No.Expl-12023(11)/1/2021-EXPL-II-PNG dated 03.07.2023 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
Strengthening of Infrastructure near Oil Installations  
The Committee note that there are many oil and gas Installations in the North 
East and several new projects are being undertaken. The Committee observe 
that North East region including Assam and Tripura has got oil and gas fields, 
refinery in Assam, LPG bottling plants and city gas distribution pipelines. 
Indradhanush Gas Grid Ltd. (IGGL) is also laying pipelines under North-Eastern 
Natural Gas Grid project to connect major cities across North-Eastern Region 
with a gas grid to provide sufficient supply of natural gas. In this scenario, it is 
essential that along with energy infrastructure the associated safety, security and 
environment related response system should also be augmented and kept in 
readiness to meet any emergency. The Committee observe that during the blow 
out incident in 2020 in Baghjan, the snubbing units from Canada could not be 
landed at Guwahati Airport and had to be unloaded at Kolkata Airport which had 
the required infrastructure and then moved by road which caused avoidable 
delay. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should do 
comprehensive area survey of the North-Eastern Region and map all the oil and 
gas fields/installations /units etc. and also the nearest road/ rail/ airport 
infrastructure available for handling disaster management 
equipment/machineries required in case of emergency and take coordinated 
action in association with the Ministries concerned to strengthen the aviation/rail 
and road infrastructure in the region. 
Reply of the Government 
OIL’s Crisis Management Team (CMT) has been strengthened with fire-fighting 
appliances & equipment which will ensure availability of fire-fighting resources & 
PPEs like SCBA sets & proximity suits on the central level which will be deployed 
in the shortest possible time during any major fire or blowout emergencies. 
  

Field Communication Department is developing a system for Quick deployment 
of communication facilities to the site of crisis/disaster and manage the 
requirement of the situation in case of any emergency. Every service department 
is expanding its capability to improve the infrastructure to meet the emergency 
needs. 
An Emergency Response Centre (ERC) is being set up under the aegis of OIL / 
NRL at a central location (Jorhat town), so as to respond to emergencies at all 
nearby oil producing installations / Refineries. 
  
Improvement in infrastructure is continuous process. Guwahati Airport is 
equipped to receive Code-C and D aircraft (A 320 and B737/757). The runway is 
capable of receiving Code E aircraft with prior intimation of 24 hours. The runway 
of Dibrugarh Airport has been extended by 461 m from 1829 m to 2290 m for 
A321 type of aircraft operations. 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No.Expl-12023(11)/1/2021-EXPL-II-PNG dated 03.07.2023 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter-I) 
 
 Recommendation No. 13 
Training for Local Communities  
The Committee note that the local communities near to the. oil and gas 
fields/units/installations play an important role in the safe and secure functioning 
of these installations. These are the people who are likely to be affected due to 
the unforeseen incident/accidents that may happen in these units. So it is very 
important that local communities and population are made aware of the possible 
safety related incidents and also the response required in those situations. The 
Committee also observe that the local communities also step in to help the 
organizations to respond to the situation and support the operations. In this 
regard, the Committee desire that a proper structured and formal training module 
particularly in fire-fighting as well as rescue, first-aid and other such basic safety 
requirements to the local population could be of immense value and help 
whenever such emergencies arise.  
Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should persuade all the 
PSUs to educate and train the local communities in basic safety training 
requirements and also equip them with basic facilities like fire fighters and fire 
tenders which can be useful for both the communities and nearby towns as well 
in meeting the emergency requirements of the organization. 
 

Reply of the Government 
As far as OIL is concerned, Safety awareness programs/campaigns are being 
conducted for local communities living in the vicinity of oil and gas installations 
and along the Right of Way (ROW) of pipeline through distribution of safety 
pamphlets, meetings and screening safety films etc. 
  
As part of Tier-III mock drills carried out with Mutual Aid Partners like District 
Administration, National Disaster Response Force, CISF, Neighboring industries 
etc., OIL sensitizes the local communities on action to be taken during disaster. 
Pamphlets on Do’s & Don’ts during emergency drills in vernacular language is 
also distributed among the locals. 
  
OIL also maintains a well-equipped firefighting facility at Duliajan and Moran, 
which apart from its internal emergencies, also comes to the aid of nearby 
communities as part of its community assistance program. Moreover, basic fire-
fighting training is imparted to local communities from time to time. 
  
ONGC keeps adequate firefighting infrastructure, equipment and manpower in its 
operational areas. Assistance is provided to local administration, local population 
and other industries whenever required in control and mitigating of fire 
emergencies. Awareness and training programs are being conducted for local 
communities, schools and colleges. These programs include basic fire safety 
awareness, practical demonstration of firefighting equipment, first aid trainings, 
emergency drills, etc. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No.Expl-12023(11)/1/2021-EXPL-II-PNG dated 03.07.2023  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter-I) 
 

 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation No. 8 
Need for Single Safety Agency for Petroleum Sector  
The Committee note that the Oil and Gas sector is being regulated by many 
agencies like Directorate General of Mines Safety (DGMS), Petroleum and 
Explosives Safety Organisation (PESO), Oil Industry Safety Directorate (OISD), 
Petroleum & Natural Gas Regulatory Board (PNGRB), Directorate General of 
Shipping (DGS), Fire Departments and Lifts Departments from State 
Governments, etc., for different activities in the petroleum sector. One of the 
safety enforcement agencies in the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas is OISD, 
but it has no statutory powers as it is only a technical directorate, and all its 
officials are on deputation. Since many agencies are performing focused and 
limited role in enforcing the rules and regulations under the laws mandated to 
them, a holistic approach is missing for the sector. Many a time the gaps in 
legislation is also not noticed as many regulators are busy enforcing their 
mandate alone.  
 
The Committee further note that they had vide their recommendation No. 3, in 
their Report No. 12 (15th Lok Sabha) and recommendation No. 10, in their Report 
No. 24 (16th Lok Sabha) and recommendation No. 5 in their Report No. 13 (17th 
Lok Sabha) recommended for formation of single agency to enforce safety 
related rules and regulations in the petroleum sector. The Committee also note 
that the High-Level Committee (HLC) constituted by the Government of India to 
enquire into the sequence of events leading to stranding of vessels and accident 
after the Cyclone Tauktae had also concluded that the Government consider 
setting up a single statutory regulator for exercising effective oversight on safety 
aspects of all onshore and offshore oil fields.  
 
This Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation for a single safety agency 
for oil and gas sector and expect the Ministry to implement the same for ensuring 
the safety culture in Oil PSUs and regulating agencies. A weak safety framework 
is detrimental to not only general public but also to the oil companies. The 
accidents besides derailing their normal activities, lower confidence of the public 
and investors. Therefore, formation of a single regulatory authority for the oil and 
gas sector is a requirement of the time in the interest of the industry. Accordingly, 

this Committee again recommend to the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas to 
undertake serious deliberations and take effective steps towards formation of 
single regulatory body for oil and gas industry. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
A working group has been constituted by Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, 
comprising of members drawn from the Oil and Gas Industry (Upstream, 
Midstream and Downstream), PNGRB, OISD, Academia, Shipping and Fire 
Services with the scope to review the whole gamut of safety system and suggest 
necessary changes for Petroleum Sector in India, identify gaps in extant laws 
and recommend way forward to establish single safety regulator for petroleum 
sector.  The Working Group is expected to submit its report by August 2023. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No.Expl-12023(11)/1/2021-EXPL-II-PNG dated 03.07.2023  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
04 August, 2023 
 13 Shravana,1945 (Saka)     
                           RAMESH BIDHURI, 
                                           
Chairperson,  
Standing Committee on                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 

ANNEXURE-I 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2022-23) 
 
SIXTEENTH SITTING 
(04.08.2023) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 04th August, 2023 from 1500 hrs. to 
1640 hrs. in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Ramesh Bidhuri - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
Shri Ramesh Bidhuri- Chairperson 
2 Shri Ramesh Chand Bind  
3 Shri Pradyut Bordoloi 
4 Smt. Chinta Anuradha 
5 Shri Dilip Saikia 
6 Dr. Kalanidhi Veeraswamy 
7 Shri Chandra Sekhar Sahu 
8 Dr. Bharatiben Dhirubhai Shiyal 
9 Shri Lallu Singh 
10 Shri Vinod Kumar Sonkar 
11 Shri Ajay Tamta 
 RAJYA SABHA 
12 Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
13 Smt. Kanta Kardam 
14 Shri Mithlesh Kumar 
15 Shri Rambhai Harjibhai Mokariya 
16 Dr. Sasmit Patra 
17 Dr. V. Sivadasan 
18 Shri Ravichandra Vaddiraju 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Y. M. Kandpal - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri H. Ram Prakash - Director  
3. Shri Brajesh Kumar Singh - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. XXXX              XXXX                    XXXX                    XXXX                   
XXXX 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Action Taken 
Report on the recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report (17th Lok 

Sabha) on the subject ‘Safety and Security of Oil Installations of Public 
Sector Oil Companies with Specific Reference to Baghjan Blow-out 
incident’ of MoP&NG’ and adopted the same without any modifications.  
 The Committee then authorised the Chairperson to present/lay the reports 
in both the Houses of Parliament.  
 
The Committee then adjourned 
*** 

Annexure II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE NINETEENTH REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS (2022-23) ON THE SUBJECT ‘SAFETY AND 
SECURITY OF OIL INSTALLATIONS OF PUBLIC SECTOR OIL COMPANIES 
WITH SPECIFIC REFERENCE TO BAGHJAN BLOW-OUT INCIDENT’. 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 14 
 
II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government  
(Vide Recommendations Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 12, and 14)  
9 
 Percentage to Total 64.30% 
III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s 
(Vide Recommendations No. Nil) 
 
00 
 Percentage of Total 00 
 
IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee  
(Vide Recommendations Nos. 6, 10, 11 and 13) 
 
04 
 Percentage of Total 
 
28.60% 
V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendation No. 8)  
 
01 
 Percentage of Total 
 
7.10% 
 
 
 