 
3 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2024-25) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
  MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the First 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and 
Natural Gas (2024-25) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas’] 
  THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 NEW DELHI 
 August, 2025/Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 


CP&NG NO.    131 
THIRD REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2024 - 25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the First 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and 
Natural Gas (2024-25) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas’] 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12.08.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12.08.2025 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 August, 2025/Shravan, 1947 (Saka)  


CONTENTS 
         PAGE 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2024-25)                                                       (iii) 
INTRODUCTION                                                                                                          (iv) 
CHAPTER I 
   
 
Report                      1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government………………………………    
                   
25 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies………………………………………..    
                    
37 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted                                             
by the Committee……………………………………………   
                    
38 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited………  
                     
41 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Fourteenth sitting of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2024-25) 
held on 07.08.2025. 
43 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations contained in the First Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (2024-25) on the subject 
‘Demand for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas’. 
45 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM &  
NATURAL GAS (2024-25) 
Shri Sunil Dattatrey Tatkare  –  Chairperson 
Sl. No.                                           Members 
                                                      LOK SABHA 
2 Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla 
3 Shri Benny Behanan 
4 Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
5 Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
6 Shri Putta Mahesh Kumar 
7 Shri Vinod Lakhamshi Chavda  
8 Smt. Joba Majhi 
9 Smt. Pratima Mondal 
10 Shri Laxmikant Pappu Nishad 
11 Shri Jai Prakash 
12 Shri Dilip Saikia  
13 Smt. Kamaljeet Sehrawat  
14 Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal  
15 Dr. Amar Singh 
16 Shri Vivek Thakur 
17 Shri Ve Vaithilingam 
18 Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
19 Shri Parbhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
20  Dr. Kalanidhi Veeraswamy  
21 Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22 Shri Chunnilal Garasiya  
23 Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
24 Shri Chandrakant Handore 
25 Shri Manoj Kumar Jha 
26 Shri Mithlesh Kumar   
27 Shri Dorjee Tshering Lepcha 
28 Shri Mayankbhai Jaydevbhai Nayak 
29 Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar 
30 Dr. V. Sivadasan 
31 Shri Ravi Chandra Vaddiraju 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1 Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar Joint Secretary 
2 
3 
 
Shri Sujay Kumar  
Shri Gurpreet Singh 
 
Deputy Secretary 
Committee Officer 
(ii) 

INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Third 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
First Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on ‘Demands for Grants       
(2024-25) of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas’. 
2. The First Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas was 
presented to Lok Sabha/ laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on 12.12.2024 and 
13.12.2024 respectively. The Action Taken Replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the First Report were received on 10.03.2025. 
3. The Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas (2024-25) considered and 
adopted the Report at their sitting held on 07.08.2025.  
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the First Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Petroleum & Natural Gas is given in Annexure-II. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the 
Report. 
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officers of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
New Delhi; 
07 August, 2025 
16 Shravan,1947 (Saka)     
                      Sunil Dattatrey Tatkare, 
                                        Chairperson,  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                        
Petroleum & Natural Gas 
 
(iii) 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the First 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural 
Gas (2024-25) on "Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas'', which was presented to Lok Sabha on 12.12.2024 and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 13.12.2024. 
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry on 10.03.2025 in 
respect of all the 18 recommendations/observations contained in the report.  These 
have been categorized as per the following: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the Government: - 
Reco. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15 and 18 (Total – 14) 
(Chapter- II) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies: - Nil 
 
(Chapter- III) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: - Recos. No.  5 and 16 (Total - 2) 
 
(Chapter- IV)                                                                                                 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: - Recos. No. 14 and 17 (Total - 2) 
                                                                                                         (Chapter- V)   
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of this Report and Final 
Replies in respect of the recommendations for which interim replies have been 
furnished by the Government should be furnished expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations.  
  

2 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
Need to streamline budget making process 
 
5.  The Committee note that the total allocation of the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas in BE 2024-25 is Rs 15930.26 cr. as against Rs 41007.72 cr. in BE 2023-
24. Out of the budgeted amount, Rs 14801.29 cr. has been allocated towards revenue 
expenditure and Rs 1128.97 cr. has been allocated towards capital expenditure. In FY 
2021-22, the BE of the Ministry was Rs 15943.78 crore which was reduced to Rs 
8846.13 crore at the RE Stage. The Actual Expenditure in that year was only Rs 
5753.63 crore. In FY 2022-23, the BE of the Ministry was Rs 8939.86 crore which was 
increased to Rs 33883.55 crore at the RE Stage. The Actual Expenditure in the year 
was Rs 30912.71 crore. In FY 2023-24, the BE of the Ministry was Rs 41007.72 crore 
which was reduced to Rs 14757.01 crore at the stage of RE. The Actual Expenditure in 
the year was Rs 14330.21 crore. The Committee note that there have been wide 
variations in Budget Estimates (BE), Revised Estimates (RE) and Actual Expenditure of 
the last three financial years of the Ministry. The Committee, however, understand that 
the financial estimates of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas are closely linked 
with changes taking place in international market prices of crude oil and gas. It may, 
therefore, not always be possible for the Government to accurately anticipate the 
international price movements of petroleum products as price movement is dependent 
on external or international factors. Hence such wide variations in BE, RE and Actual 
Expenditure of the Ministry. The Committee, however, underline that such wide 
variation2 in BE and RE and actuals hinders the cause of prudent planning and 
management of financial resources of the Government. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommend that every effort must be made by the Ministry to ensure that such huge 
variations in estimates are avoided by way of effective financial and economic planning.

6. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply:  
 
“Reasons for variations in BE/RE vis-à-vis actual expenditure for the FY 2022-23, 2023-24 and 2024-25 
 
(figures in Crores of rupees) 
BE 2022-
23 
RE 2022-
23 
Variance 
in RE 
from BE 
2022-23 
Major reasons for Variance RE 2022-
23 
Actuals 
2022-23 
Variance 
in Actuals 
2022-23 
from RE 
2022-23 
Major reasons for variance  
8939.86 33883.55 24943.69 (i) Rs. 22,000 Crores were 
additionally allocated in a New 
Scheme viz. One time grant to 
PSU OMCs for under recoveries 
in Domestic LPG in pursuance to 
the Cabinet Meeting dated 
12.10.2022. 
 
(ii) Rs. 7210 Crores additional 
funds were allocated viz. PMUY 
due to Rs. 200 subsidy to PMUY 
consumers.    
 
(iii) Rs. 245.00 Crores were 
additionally allocated in a New 
Scheme viz. Numaligarh 
Refinery Expansion Project. 
 
 
(iv) Rs. 215.62 Crores  were 
additionally allocated in a New 
Scheme viz. Flagging of 
merchantship  
33883.55 30912.71 -2970.84 (i)  Rs. 2346.63 Crores 
surrendered in Scheme viz. PMUY 
due to Oil Marketing Companies 
bills are lower than projections and 
bills of March, 2023 were not 
received before the end of FY 
2023-24. 
 
(ii) Rs. 269.74 Crores surrendered 
in Scheme viz. Indradhanush Gas 
Grid Litd. (IGGL), due to lower 
CAPEX during FY 2022-23 for the 
reasons such as delay in land 
acquisition in Assam/Tripura, delay 
in receipt of environment and 
statutory clearances. 
 
(iii)  Rs. 131.58 Crores 
surrendered in Scheme viz  
Flagging of merchantship due to 
lesser bills expected from OMCs.  
BE 2023-
24 
RE 2023-
24 
Variance 
in RE 
from BE 
2023-24 
Major reasons for Variance RE 2023-
24 
Actuals 
2023-24 
Variance 
in Actuals 
2023-24 
from RE 
2023-24 
Major reasons for variance  

4 
 
 
 
41007.72 14757.01 -26250.71 (i) Rs. 29,999.99 Crores were 
surrendered due to reduction of 
funds  by Ministry of Finance in 
the Scheme viz. Capital Support 
to OMCs. 
 
(ii)  Rs. 4,999.99 Crores were 
surrendered in the Scheme viz. 
Payment to ISPRL for Crude Oil 
Reserves due to deferment of the 
proposal by DoE, MoF on 
14.11.2023. 
 
(iii) Additional funds of Rs. 
8499.99 Crores were allocated 
viz. PMUY due to Rs. 100 per 
connection increase in subsidy 
and due to 25 lakh new 
connections.   
 
(iv) Additional fund of Rs. 1280 
Crores is required in DBTL 
Schemes, due to the previous 
pending payments of Rs. 342 
Crore upto March, 2023.  
Further, quantity of LPG for 
2023-24 and 2024-25 has been 
estimated at a growth of 1.73% 
over previous year volume.  A bill 
of Rs. 443.86 Crore upto July, 
2023 was pending with the 
Ministry.  
 
(v) Rs. 468 Crores were 
surrendered due to non-
finalization of land purchase in 
ISPRL Phase-II 
 
(vi) Rs. 500 Crores were 
surrendered in IGGL Scheme 
14757.01 14330.21 -426.80 (i) Rs. 256.62 Crores surrendered 
in Scheme viz. Indradhanush Gas 
Grid Litd. (IGGL), due to lower 
CAPEX during FY 2023-24. 
 
(ii) Rs. 76.24 Crores surrendered 
in Scheme viz. PM JI-VAN Yojana, 
due to less bills received from 
HPCL and IOCL due to non-
achievement of 2nd and 3rd 
Milestones of disbursement 
conditions. 
 
(iii)  Rs. 42.25 Crores surrendered 
in Scheme viz. Scheme for 
flagging of Merchant  Ships due to 
receipt of less bills from the Oil 
Marketing Companies concerned. 
 
  

5 
 
 
 
due to RoU issues and monsoon, 
construction activities have been 
slowed down. 
 
 
BE 2024-
25 
RE 2024-
25 
Variance 
in RE 
from BE 
2024-25 
Major reasons for 
Variance 
RE 2024-
25 
Actuals 
2024-25 
Variance 
in Actuals 
2024-25 
from RE 
2024-25 
Major reasons for 
variance  
15930.26 17367.70 1437.44 (i) Additional funds of Rs. 
437.44 Crores were 
provided as additional cash 
in PMUY scheme to meet 
the additionality of Rs 3606 
Crores in the scheme. 
 
(ii) Rs 1000 Crore provided 
in OID Fund in the month of 
January, 2025. The funds 
are parked funds for 
utilization in FY 2025-26. 
17367.70 7247.63 
(as on 
07.02.2025) 
10120.07 Actual variance will be 
ascertained once the 
financial year has ended. 
 
In view of the table above it may be seen that major variation in the BE RE AE due to Demands of Funds in the new schemes as well 
as due to fresh decision in the flagship schemes of the Ministry. 
 The suggestion of the Standing Committee has been noted & will be taken care in future”.  
 

6 
 
6 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
7. The Committee in their original Report had recommended the Ministry to 
streamline its budget making process to ensure that huge variations in budget 
estimates are avoided by way of effective financial and economic planning. The 
Ministry in their action taken reply have furnished reasons for variance in budget 
utilisation viz 2346.63 crores w.r.t PMUY due to lower projections of OMCs;        
Rs. 269.74 crores w.r.t IGGL due to delay in land acquisition and obtaining 
statutory clearances; Rs. 256 crores surrendered in financial year 2023-24 due to 
low capital expenditure w.r.t IGGL, Rs. 76.24 crores surrendered w.r.t PM-JI-VAN 
Yojana Scheme, etc. 
 While accepting the reply of the Ministry the Committee express their 
concern over the reduction in capital expenditure by the Ministry/Oil PSUs which 
resulted into surrender of considerable amount of allocated budgetary funds 
during the financial year 2024-25 w.r.t implementation of various major schemes. 
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their previous recommendation and urge the 
Ministry to undertake prudent planning and management of financial resources of 
the Government so that the allocations are made in accordance with actual 
requirements. The Committee also urge the Government to make all out efforts to 
remove hinderances coming in the way of implementation of its major schemes 
by Oil PSUs.  
Recommendation No. 3 
 
Transfer of Petrochemicals division from the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilisers 
to the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  
 
8. The Committee note that petrochemical industry is a fast growing industrial 
sector in the country. The demand of petrochemical products in the country has been 
increasing at a CAGR of about 8 per cent in the last few years. The Committee also 
note that Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) of the country have become large, 
diversified and integrated. They have also large presence in the petrochemicals sector 
and actively engaged in increasing their Petrochemicals intensity index. IOCL has plans 
to increase its petrochemicals intensity index from current 5 per cent to 15 per cent by 
2030. 

7 
 
7 
 
 
In view of the growing importance of the petrochemicals in the Petroleum sector, 
the Committee recall their recommendation included in their 18th Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2023-24) in which they had suggested the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas to examine the expediency of transfer of petrochemicals 
division from the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers to the Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas and to take up the issue with the Cabinet Secretariat for amendment of 
Allocation of Business Rules of the Government of India, if needed. In this regard, the 
representative of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas deposed before the 
Committee during evidence that the decision would not be taken by the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas alone. There were multiple stake holders in this and all of 
them had their own views.  
 
The Committee are of the opinion that the petroleum and petrochemicals 
industries are inter- related. The feedstock for petrochemicals industry is provided by 
petroleum industry. Therefore, better synergy between them will help both the industries 
and contribute to their mutual faster growth. The Committee also view that the transfer 
of Petrochemicals division from the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilisers to the Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas will help in better policy formulation for both the sectors 
and facilitate ease of doing business. Accordingly, the Committee recommend the 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas to take up the matter with the Cabinet Secretariat 
for initiating a dialogue process involving all the stake holders for transfer of 
Petrochemicals division from the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilisers to the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas. 
 
9. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply:  
 
“The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG) has taken note of the 
committee's recommendation. The significance of collaboration between the 
petrochemical and petroleum industries is recognized by MoPNG.  
 
The decision regarding the transfer of the petrochemicals division from the 
Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers to the MoPNG requires detailed consultations among 
all stakeholders. Since multiple Ministries/ Departments and entities are involved, 
discussions with relevant stakeholders are necessary before sending proposal to the 
Cabinet Secretariat for taking further action regarding amendment of the Allocation of 
Business Rules, 1962”. 
Comments of the Committee 
 
10. The Committee in their original Report had recommended the Ministry to 
take up the issue of transfer of Petrochemicals Division from the Ministry of 

8 
 
8 
 
Chemicals and Fertilisers to the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to ensure 
better synergy and policy formulation for both the sectors and also to facilitate 
ease of doing business. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have submitted 
that for decision regarding the transfer of the petrochemicals division from the 
Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers to the MoPNG, discussions with relevant 
stakeholders are necessary before sending proposal to the Cabinet Secretariat 
for taking further action regarding amendment of the Allocation of Business 
Rules, 1962. The Committee, desire that the Ministry may take up the issue at the 
highest level for initiating process of involving all the stake holders for transfer of 
Petrochemicals division from the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers to the 
MoPNG. 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
Need to achieve universal coverage of Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana (PMUY) 
 
11. The Committee note that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has 
successfully provided 10.33 crore connections as on August, 2024 under PMUY. The 
Committee acknowledge the achievement of the Ministry and opine that the scheme 
has certainly helped in empowering women from poor and unprivileged sections of the 
society and improving their living standards by helping them in getting rid of the smoky 
and hazardous chullhas. However, based on the findings of Comprehensive Annual 
Modular (CAM) Survey 2022-23 conducted by the National Sample Survey Office 
(NSSO) under the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI) and 
replies of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, the Committee are of the view that 
the country has achieved substantial progress in achieving universal coverage of LPG 
connections which is the core objective of PMUY. The Committee therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry may further intensify its public awareness campaign for the 
PMUY and work out new and innovative ways of encouraging people to avail the 
benefits under PMUY. 
 
12. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
 
“As of 01.01.2025, there are 32.87 Cr active LPG consumers in the country including 
10.33 Cr PMUY consumers. This reflects in near saturation LPG coverage in the 
country. To further build on the success of PMUY, OMCs are carrying out various public 
awareness campaigns through a multi-pronged approach, including the following: 
1. Targeted Outreach Campaigns: OMCs are conducting Pradhan Mantri LPG 
Panchayat (PMLP) to educate people about advantages of using LPG over other 

9 
 
9 
 
conventional fuels as well as safe usage of LPG. As on closing of Nov’24, OMCs 
have conducted 3.17 lakh LPG Panchayats since Apr’18. 
2. Innovative Engagement methods: Partnering with local influencers, women’s 
self-help groups, and community leaders to encourage adoption and safe usage 
of LPG. 
3. Digital and Traditional Media Integration: Leveraging social media platforms, 
Hoardings at prominent places, Theatres etc. to enhance the reach and impact of 
awareness initiatives. 
4. Community Involvement: Creating Interactive platform through conducting 
cooking competition in various districts to promote safe LPG usage and 
showcase cost-saving practices”. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
13. The Committee had recommended the Ministry to intensify its public 
awareness campaign for the PMUY and work out new and innovative ways of 
encouraging people to avail the benefits under PMUY. The Ministry in their action 
taken reply have submitted that as of 01.01.2025, there are 32.87 Cr active LPG 
consumers in the country including 10.33 Cr PMUY consumers which reflects 
near saturation of LPG coverage in the country. Besides, to further build on the 
success of PMUY, OMCs are stated to be carrying out various public awareness 
campaigns through a multi-pronged approach. The Committee are concerned to 
note that the Ministry has not provided the details regarding specific efforts made 
towards identification of new beneficiaries belonging to poor households living in 
urban areas under PMUY. The Committee, therefore, reiterate its recommendation 
and urge the Ministry to ensure universal coverage of the scheme for the targeted 
beneficiaries. Further, the Committee also desire the Ministry to put in place a 
mechanism to provide LPG connections under PMUY as and when applied for by 
all the eligible persons.  
Recommendation No. 5 
     
Need to increase subsidy on LPG gas cylinders issued under PMUY 
 
14.  The Committee note that the current refill rate of LPG cylinders issued under 
PMUY is 3.95 per year. This is much less than the refill rate of non-PMUY LPG cylinder 
which is about 6.5. The Committee further note that the provision of subsidy on refilling 
of LPG cylinders issued under PMUY, currently being Rs. 300 per cylinder, has 

10 
 
10 
 
contributed towards increase in refill rate of LPG cylinders issued under the Yojana from 
3.01 in 2019-20 to 3.95 in 2023-24. Thus, there is direct causal relationship between 
increase in amount of subsidy on LPG cylinders issued under the PMUY and increase 
in refill rate of such cylinders over the years. The Committee further note that the 
current refill rate of LPG cylinders issued under PMUY is much below the stated policy 
of Government of India to issue 12 subsidized LPG cylinders per year to the 
beneficiaries of PMUY. 
 
The Committee appreciate that the PMUY has brought positive changes in the 
living standards and life style of all women specially rural women. However, the 
Committee feel that the low refill rate of LPG cylinders issued under PMUY is indicative 
of the fact that the target consumers are not able to take full benefit of the scheme. The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to find out the reasons there for and work out 
suitable remedies. Increasing the subsidy amount on refilling of LPG cylinders may be a 
solution. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry may increase the 
subsidy to such an extent that makes the price of LPG refill cylinders affordable to the 
poor beneficiaries. This will not only increase the refill rate of cylinders but also help in 
widening the coverage of beneficiaries. 
 
15. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
 
“Per capita consumption of LPG amongst PMUY families has increased from 
3.01 in 2019-20 to 3.95 in 2023-24 which has further increased to 4.4 in the current FY 
2024-25 (Prorated based on the consumption during Apr-Dec’24). This gradual increase 
is a testament to the fact that LPG refills are becoming affordable to PMUY 
beneficiaries. 
 
After getting connections, sustained usage of LPG by Ujjwala beneficiaries needs 
a behavioural change to happen. Creating behavioural change in a predominantly rural 
and traditional society takes significant time and continuous efforts. Traditional cooking 
methods, preferences around taste and flavours, absolutely free and unlimited 
availability of firewood in hilly, rural and forest areas and orthodox beliefs connected to 
existing ways of cooking are issues beyond affordability and sometimes more important 
decision-making factors. Therefore, while price plays an important role in refill purchase 
decision by poor families, it is not the only factor. Further, an increase in subsidy 
beyond current levels may also escalate the financial burden on the government 
finances. 
 
Careful calibration of approach is hence required to balance affordability for consumers, 
financial sustainability for OMCs, and the government's fiscal responsibilities while 
ensuring sustained growth in LPG adoption”. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
16. The Committee had emphasized upon the Ministry to increase the subsidy 
on LPG gas cylinders issued under PMUY so that LPG refills become affordable 

11 
 
11 
 
for the poor beneficiaries under PMUY. The Ministry in its reply have submitted 
that per capita consumption of LPG amongst PMUY families has increased from 
3.01 in 2019-20 to 3.95 in 2023-24 which has further increased to 4.4 in the current 
FY 2024-25 (Prorated based on the consumption during Apr-Dec’24). Further, the 
Ministry have stated in their reply that after getting connections, sustained usage 
of LPG by Ujjwala beneficiaries needs a behavioral change to happen and that 
increase in subsidy beyond current levels may also escalate the financial burden 
on the government finances.  
 
 The Committee feel that reasons put forth by the Ministry for not 
considering to increase the subsidy on LPG gas cylinder under PMUY are not 
very convincing. While managing financial burden on Government finances is 
very important, at the same time, increasing coverage of PMUY with goal of 
achieving universal coverage is essential for achieving the objective of PMUY. 
Moreover, sizeable financial gains from within the scheme are possible by 
plugging loopholes like identification and blocking of ghost LPG connections 
under PMUY. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation for 
achieving universal coverage of PMUY by all possible means on the part of the 
Government. 
Recommendation No. 8 
 
Indian Strategic Petroleum Reserves- Need to expedite Construction of Phase - II   
 
17. The Committee note that an amount of Rs. 408 crore has been allocated in the 
BE 2024-25 of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas for construction of 
underground caverns in Phase–II of Indian Strategic Petroleum Reserves. The 
Committee further note from the reply of the Ministry that the construction of phase – II 
of Indian Strategic Petroleum Reserves has not started yet.  It was informed that even 
the land for the project has not been acquired so far.  In view of the strategic importance 
of the project, the Committee recommend the Ministry to vigorously pursue the 
authorities concerned including the respective State Governments, expedite the whole 
process and ensure full utilization of the budget earmarked for the project in the current 
financial year so as to accelerate the pace of the work of Phase-II of the project and to 
ensure that the intended purpose is served.   
 
18. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 

12 
 
12 
 
 
“In July 2021, Government approved the establishment of two additional 
commercial-cum-strategic petroleum reserve facilities with total storage capacity of 6.5 
MMT at Chandikhol (4 MMT) in Odisha and Padur (2.5 MMT) in Karnataka, on a Public 
Private Partnership mode. 
  
The process and discussions with the respective State Government for 
expeditious completion of land acquisition at Chandikhol is going on. For Padur-II, the 
request for proposal (RFP) has been floated, and the land acquisition process is in 
advance stage”. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
19. The Committee had recommended the Ministry to ensure full utilization of 
the budget earmarked for the project in the current financial year and also to 
vigorously pursue with the concerned authorities including State Governments to 
expedite the process of completing construction of Phase II project of ISPRL.  
The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have submitted that the process and 
discussions with the respective State Governments for expeditious completion of 
land acquisition w.r.t Chandikhol and Padur-II is under way. The Committee urge 
the Ministry to closely monitor the progress of the project and make all out efforts 
to resolve land acquisition related issues in consultation with all the 
stakeholders. 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
Need to expedite implementation of PM-Jivan Yojana 
 
20. The Committee note that during the last 5 years of the operation of the PM Jivan 
Yojana only an amount of Rs. 265 crore has been spent against total financial outlay of 
Rs. 1969.50 crore and approved financial assistance of Rs. 908.25 crore. Further, out of 
6 commercial and 4 demonstration projects selected by the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas for providing financial assistance under the scheme, only 1 commercial 
plant located at Panipat, Haryana has been commissioned. The Committee has been 
informed that in BE 2022-23, a budget of Rs. 314.36 crore had been allocated by the 
Ministry against which the actual expenditure stood at merely Rs. 37.875 crore. 
 
Similarly, in the year 2023-24, against budget estimate of Rs. 227.26 crore, the 
actual expenditure was recorded to be as low as Rs. 75.75 crore. The Committee find 
the expenditure pattern unsatisfactory. Now, in the current Financial Year of 2024-25, 
the budget estimates for the project has been reduced to Rs. 117.41 crore. 

13 
 
13 
 
 
As regards, underutilization of budget for the yojana, the Ministry informed the 
Committee that the allocated budget for 2023-24 could not be fully utilized as Project 
Developers faced challenges in achieving the milestones under the PM JI-VAN Yojana. 
These challenges included the complexity of new technologies, limited vendors for 2G 
equipment, delays in statutory clearances, issues with biomass supply chain logistics, 
COVID-related delays, slow finalization of deliverables due to first-time 
commercialization of technology, and disruptions in material/equipment delivery caused 
by geo-political situations. The Committee observe that the Ministry had furnished the 
same explanation to the Committee during examination of Demands for Grants-2023-
24. The Committee view that when a new industry is developed by any country, 
challenges are bound to be encountered. The Committee also view that 2G ethanol 
plants are vital for securing energy security for the country as India is deficient in 
hydrocarbon resources especially crude oil and natural gas. Accordingly, the Committee 
recommend to the Ministry to make more concrete and vigorous efforts to overcome the 
obstacles being faced by 2G ethanol plants selected for the yojana. 
 
 
21. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
 
“The PM JI-VAN Yojana was amended in August 2024 to expand its scope. The key 
amendments inter-alia include: 
 Replacement of “2G ethanol” with the broader category of advanced biofuels. 
 Inclusion of bolt-on and brownfield projects under the eligibility criteria. 
 Extension of the scheme’s timeline up to FY 2028-29. 
To attract investments in the biofuel sector, a stakeholders’ meeting was held in 
October 2024. This meeting served to inform stakeholders about the revised provisions 
of the scheme and to gather valuable feedback and suggestions for its successful 
implementation. 
Based on the amendments, CHT, the implementing agency, has prepared the 
Request for Selection (RFS-V) document for selecting project developers for 
commercial-scale advanced biofuel projects. The document will be released shortly. 
 
The scheme is being monitored at the highest level in the Ministry, which has 
facilitated the steady operation of the 2G ethanol plant at Panipat. The expertise gained 
from this plant is being utilized in the commissioning of new 2G plants at Bathinda 
(HPCL) and Bargarh (BPCL), as all three plants are based on the same technology. 
 
The 2G plant at Numaligarh (ABRPL), based on bamboo feedstock, has reached 
a significant milestone with the successful production of diluted ethanol from its 
fermentation section. The plant is expected to be commissioned shortly. 
 
The stable operation of these plants and advancements in 2G technology will 
encourage private project developers to adopt 2G technology for biofuel production”. 
 
 
 

14 
 
14 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
22. The Committee, while noting the sluggish utilisation of earmarked budget 
outlays, had recommended that the Ministry need to expedite the implementation 
of PM-Jivan Yojana by making concrete and vigorous efforts to overcome the 
obstacles being faced by project developers. The Ministry in their action taken 
reply have inter-alia submitted that to attract investments in the biofuel sector, a 
stakeholders’ meeting was held in October 2024 to inform stakeholders about the 
revised provisions of the scheme and to gather valuable feedback and 
suggestions for its successful implementation. Further, it has been stated in the 
reply that based on the amendments, CHT, the implementing agency, has 
prepared the Request for Selection (RFS-V) document for selecting project 
developers for commercial-scale advanced biofuel projects which is expected to 
be released shortly. Besides, the Committee have been informed that the 
expertise gained from commissioning of 2G ethanol plant at Panipat plant is 
being utilized in the commissioning of new 2G plants at Bathinda (HPCL) and 
Bargarh (BPCL), as all three plants are based on the same technology. Similarly, 
2G plant at Numaligarh (ABRPL), based on bamboo feedstock is expected to be 
commissioned shortly.  
 The Committee welcome the Ministry/Oil PSUs for extending the schemes’ 
timeline by five years i.e. FY 2028-29 and revising some of its provisions. 
However, they are concerned to point out considerable delay in achieving 
milestones under the PM-JI-VAN Yojana as only one commercial plant at Panipat 
has been commissioned as on date. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry 
to make all out efforts to remove challenges faced by the project developers and 
ensure timebound commissioning of ongoing projects by undertaking regular 
monitoring of the scheme. The Ministry may apprise the Committee about the 
action taken in the matter. 
 
 
  

15 
 
15 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
 
Need to expedite Numaligarh Refinery Expansion Project Work 
 
23. The Committee note that Numaligarh Refinery is implementing a major refinery 
expansion project to treble its crude oil refining capacity from 3 MMTPA to 9 MMTPA at 
an estimated capital expenditure of about Rs. 28000 crore. Out of this amount, the 
Central Government committee Rs. 1020 crore as Viability Gas Funding (VGF). The 
project was to be completed by 2024. The Committee find that an amount of Rs. 500 
crore was earmarked in BE 2023-24 which was reduced at RE stage to Rs. 475.50 
crore. This year an amount of Rs. 275 crore has been earmarked as grant-in-aid to NRL 
for implementing its expansion. However, the Committee have been informed that as on 
31.08.2024, the physical and financial progress of the project were 67.6 percent and 
59.2 percent respectively. The completion date of the project has been revised upto 
December, 2025. The Committee are concerned about the apparent delay in completion 
of the expansion project and recommend the Ministry to closely monitor the project the 
highest level so as to avoid any further time overrun and consequent cost escalation.  
The Committee may be appraised to the progress made in the expansion project in due 
course.  
  
24. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
 
“As on 31 December, 2024, physical and financial progress of the project is 
72.78% and 68.82% respectively. Out of Rs 1020 Crore towards Viability Gap Funding 
(VGF) for the project, Rs. 803.00 Crore has been released till 31.12.2024. NRL Board 
has approved the revised completion schedule with Commercial Operation Date (COD) 
date for the 6 million Metric Tons Per Annum (MMTPA) Refinery in December 2025 and 
for Paradip-Numaligarh crude oil pipeline in October 2025. The project cost of the 
project is being pending for approval from Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
(CCEA). All Project is being monitored at the highest level in the Ministry and all efforts 
are being made to expedite the project”. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
25. The Committee while noting the apparent delay in completion of the 
Numaligarh Refinery expansion project, had in their original Report 
recommended the Ministry to closely monitor the project the highest level so as 
to avoid any further time overrun and consequent cost escalation. The Ministry in 
their action taken reply have submitted that as on 31 December, 2024, physical 
and financial progress of the project is 72.78% and 68.82% respectively. Out of Rs 
1020 Crore towards Viability Gap Funding (VGF) for the project, Rs. 803.00 Crore 
has been released till 31.12.2024. NRL Board has approved the 

16 
 
16 
 
revised completion schedule with Commercial Operation Date (COD) for the 6 
million Metric Tons Per Annum (MMTPA) Refinery in December 2025 and for 
Paradip-Numaligarh crude oil pipeline in October 2025. The project cost of the 
project is being pending for approval from Cabinet Committee on Economic 
Affairs (CCEA). All Project is being monitored at the highest level in the Ministry 
and all efforts are being made to expedite the project. 
 
 The Committee believe that the Ministry and other concerned implementing 
agencies need to proactively monitor the progress of the project so as to ensure 
that the revised timelines for completing the project are achieved. The Committee 
expressed their apprehension as to whether the revised completion scheduled of 
the project, which is December 2025, for NRL expansion project and October 2025 
for Paradip-Numaligarh crude oil pipeline project would be achieved keeping in 
view the current pace of implementation of the project. The Committee therefore 
reiterate their earlier recommendation to monitor the project and highest level 
and remove the bottlenecks affecting its timely completion. The Committee 
further desire the Ministry to take up the issue of pending project approval from 
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) at the earliest so that revised 
completion schedule for the project does not require further time extension.  
 
Recommendation No. 13 
 
Oil  Industries Development Cess (OID Cess) 
 
26.  The Committee note that the levy of OID Cess on domestic production of crude 
oil mostly impacts public sector upstream oil and gas companies viz. ONGC and OIL. 
The Committee further note that OID Cess paid by ONGC during last three financial 
year are Rs.14126, 15951 and 13921 crore respectively. The OID Cess paid by OIL 
during the last three years are Rs.2011,2513 and 2440 crore respectively. 
      
The Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas in a note stated that OID Cess has the 
effect of reducing the resources available with the NOCs (ONGC/OIL) for exploratory 
efforts to bring larger area of the country under exploratory coverage. Given 85% 
import dependent in case of crude oil, it is essential that more resources are made 
available to NOCs to enhance exploration coverage in the country for energy security 
reasons.  The Ministry further emphasized that the Government may consider 
allocating a portion of OID Cess collection to NOCs and thereby supplement the 

17 
 
17 
 
internal accruals of NOCs for the exploration activities. The Committee was further 
informed by the Ministry that they had taken up the matter of creation of an OID Fund 
and credit of cess to the Fund with the Ministry of Finance. The 
Committee acknowledged the efforts made by the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
and expect that they will vigorously pursue the matter with the Ministry of Finance so 
that the sum provided through OID Fund may be utilized by the upstream oil and gas 
sector towards enhancement of exploration coverage in the larger interest of energy 
security of the country. 
 
27. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
 
 “As per section 16 of Oil Industry (Development) Act 1974, the proceeds of the 
duties of excise levied are first credited to the Consolidated Fund of India. The Central 
Government may, if Parliament by appropriation made by law in this behalf, so 
provides, pay to the Board from time to time, from out of such proceeds, after 
deducting the expenses of collection, such sums of money as it may think it for being 
utilized exclusively for the purposes of this Act. 
  
The cess allocated to OIDB together with internal generation are being utilized 
as per the mandate defined in the Oil Industry 
(Development) Act, 1974. 
  
As regards, the recommendation regarding vigorously pursuing the matter with 
the Ministry of Finance so that the fund is provided through OID Fund for utilization by 
the upstream Oil and Gas sector towards enhancement of exploration coverage in the 
larger interest of energy security of the country, it is stated that OIDB has requested 
the Ministry to provide fund from OID Cess for the development of oil and gas sector. 
  
Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs has initiated action for 
constitution of the Oil Industry Development Fund (OID Fund) with Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas being the Nodal Ministry to take up the matter of accounting procedure 
for constitution of the OID Fund with the office of Controller General of Accounts in 
consultation with the Budget Division”. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
28. The Committee had recommended the Ministry to vigorously pursue the 
issue of constitution of Oil Industry Development Fund with the Ministry of 
Finance so that the sum provided through OID Fund might be utilized for the 
development of oil and gas sector in the country. The Ministry in their action 
taken reply have inter-alia submitted that the cess allocated to OIDB together with 
internal generation are being utilized as per the mandate defined in the Oil 
Industry (Development) Act, 1974. The Committee have also apprised that the 

18 
 
18 
 
Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs has initiated action for 
constitution of the Oil Industry Development Fund (OID Fund) with the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas being made the nodal Ministry. 
The Committee express their satisfaction regarding the efforts made towards 
constitution of OIDB Fund with MoPNG. However, the Committee desire the 
Ministry to ensure proactive engagement with the Ministry of Finance to ensure 
that the sums are released timely from the OID Fund for the development and 
growth of the oil industry in the larger interest of energy security of the country.  
Recommendation No. 14 
       
 
Need for higher allocation for R&D projects in Petroleum Sector and better 
synchronization between stakeholders. 
 
29. The Committee note that research and development activities in petroleum 
sector is of paramount importance especially as the sector is of crucial importance for 
the national economy. Moreover, petroleum sector is already undergoing rapid 
changes in view of higher emphases on energy transition nationally as well as 
globally. R&D will have an important role in this. The Committee also note that OIDB 
has committee Rs.2 crore in last three years for R&D Projects. This amount appears 
to be inadequate, oil and gas sector being a technology intensive sector. The 
Committee, however, also understand that bulk of expenditure in R&D projects in the 
sector is being undertaken in the OMCs. 
  
Accordingly, the Committee recommend that the Ministry may look into the issue 
of greater budgetary support for R&D projects of national importance. Moreover, the 
Committee also recommend that the Ministry may take steps to ensure better 
synchronization in R&D activities between OMCs and other public sector institutions 
having R&D activities in the sector to achieve better outcomes. 
 
30. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
 
 
“During the last three years, OIDB had released R&D grant of Rs.55.37 crore to 
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. (R&D) and Rs.60 lakh to Indian Institute of Technology, 
Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad.  
  
In addition to the above, Centre for High Technology (CHT) fully funded by OIDB 
grant had also released R&D grants amounting to Rs.1.93 crore during the 
last three years.  
  
In terms of OID Board's approval, Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH), 
being the expert body for Upstream Sector, the funding of the Upstream Sector R&D 

19 
 
19 
 
Projects are being done by DGH and the Downstream R&D Projects are being executed 
and funded by CHT. Both the Organisations are the grantee institutions of OIDB. DGH 
and CHT are also monitoring the progress and utility of the Upstream Sector and 
Downstream related R&D Projects respectively”. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
31. The Committee in their original Report had recommended the Ministry to 
look into the issue of greater budgetary support for R&D projects of national 
importance and take steps to ensure better synchronization in R&D activities 
between OMCs and other public sector institutions having R&D activities in the 
sector to achieve better outcomes. The Ministry in their action taken reply have 
inter-alia submitted that during the last three years, OIDB had released R&D grant 
of Rs.55.37 crore to Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. (R&D) and Rs.60 lakh to Indian 
Institute of Technology, Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad. DGH and CHT are also 
monitoring the progress and utility of the Upstream Sector and Downstream 
related R&D Projects respectively.  
 The Committee are not fully satisfied with the reply of the Ministry as the 
aspect related to greater budgetary support for R&D projects in petroleum sector 
and also for better synergy between OMCs and other public sector R&D institutes 
have not been touched upon in the reply. The Committee, therefore, reiterate its 
recommendation and urge the Ministry to augment fund allocation for R&D 
projects and put in place a mechanism for better synchronization among 
stakeholders in R&D sector. The Committee call upon the Ministry to furnish 
information relating to the abovementioned recommendation along with OMC 
wise details of expenditure made on R&D activities and details of fund allocation 
by the Ministry for R&D. 
Recommendation No. 15 
Need to expedite completion of North-East Gas Grid (NEGG) Project  
 
32. The Committee note that the current physical progress of the North-East Gas 
Grid (NEGG) Project is 83.24 percent and the project is expected to be completed by 
31.03.2025.  In this regard, the Committee recall that the Ministry had informed the 
Committee during examination of Demands for Grants (2023-24) that project would be 
operational by 2024.  However, considering the current physical progress of the project, 
there is an apparent delay in completion of the project.  Accordingly, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to make vigorous efforts to complete the project by revised 
deadline and ensure that no further delay takes place.   
 
33. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 

20 
 
20 
 
 
“The North East Gas Grid (NEGG) project, a 1670 Km and 4.75 MMSCMD 
capacity natural gas pipeline network, is being implemented by Indradhanush Gas Grid 
Limited (IGGL) to connect the eight North eastern states and the regional gas sources 
to the National Gas Grid.  
 
Present Status: Construction activities of the NEGG project are in progress with the 
achievement of a physical progress of 84.06%.  
 
Original Timeline: March 2024 
 
 Revised Timeline: July 2025. 
 
 Cost Outlay: Rs 9265 Crore with Viability Gap Funding of Rs 5559 Crore. 
 
 VGF released as on 12.02.2024: Rs 3601.91 Crore. (VGF request of Rs. 400 crore by 
IGGLis being processing for the FY 2024-25.) 
 
 The progress of the project has been affected due to various hindrances. The 
Phase-II sections are delayed due to various hindrances viz. slow progress in ROU 
compensation disbursement by the Competent Authorities on account of non-availability 
of land documents with affected landowners in Cachar & Karimganj districts in Assam 
and several districts in the state of Tripura, delay in allotment of permanent land by the 
respective State Governments in Meghalaya and Mizoram for establishing stations/ 
terminals. 
 
Further, Phase-III sections are delayed due to the non-availability of working 
permissions from NHIDCL in the states of Nagaland, Manipur, West Bengal, and 
Sikkim, owing to ongoing national highway widening works. Besides this, a lot of 
difficulties are being faced in getting administrative clearance from State Government of 
Nagaland and there is also delay in allotment of permanent lands in Nagaland and 
Manipur.   
  
Regular review of the project status is taken by Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas, Cabinet Secretariat, PMO etc on the progress status along with status of the 
mitigating measure taken for removal of the hindrances”.    
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
34. The Committee had recommended the Ministry to make vigorous efforts to 
complete the North-East Gas Grid (NEGG) project by revised deadline and ensure 
that no further delay takes place. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have 
inter-alia stated that Phase-II sections are delayed due to various hindrances viz, 
slow progress in ROU compensation disbursement by the competent authorities 
on account of non-availability of land documents with affected landowners in 

21 
 
21 
 
Cachar & Karimganj districts in Assam and several districts in the state of Tripura 
and delay in allotment of permanent land by the respective State Governments in 
Meghalaya and Mizoram for establishing stations/ terminals. Further, Phase-III 
sections are delayed due to the non-availability of working permissions from 
NHIDCL in the states of Nagaland, Manipur, West Bengal, and Sikkim, owing to 
ongoing national highway widening works. Besides this, a lot of difficulties are 
being faced in getting administrative clearance from State Government of 
Nagaland and there is also delay in allotment of permanent lands in Nagaland and 
Manipur. 
 The Committee, in view of the reasons put forward by the Ministry, feel that 
intensive efforts and engagement with all stakeholders are required in order to 
ensure that revised timeline of completing the project by July 2025 is achieved. 
The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to take proactive steps for 
addressing the challenges being faced in obtaining statutory clearances from 
various Center and State level authorities and try earnestly to complete the 
project as per revised schedule. The Committee may be apprised about the action 
taken in the matter. 
Recommendation Serial No.16 
 
Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology (RGIPT) 
 
35. The Committee note that the RGIPT is an Institute of National Importance 
mandated to conduct high quality R&D work and award Bachelors, Masters, Doctoral 
and PG Diploma Degrees in different streams related to Petroleum Science and 
Technology including Management.  The Committee further note that The Institute has 
two Centres i.e. Assam Energy Institute (AEI) Sivasagar & Energy Institute Bengaluru 
(EIB) in addition to the main campus at Jais, Amethi, Uttar Pradesh.   
 
 The Committee have been informed that RGIPT, Jais, Amethi is currently offering 
14 B.Tech., 2 M.Tech, 2 MBA and Phd in Engineering, Sciences, Management Studies 
and Humanity Subjects.  Thereis a sanctioned strength of 706 seats for B.Tech., 20 for 
M. Tech. and 60 seats for MBA.  Moreover, 234 nos, of Phd Scholars are enrolled at 
RGIPT Jais Campus. 
 
 As regards, Assam Energy Institute (AEI), Sivasagar, the Committee was 
informed that the Institute is offering Diploma courses in various streams.  It has 
increased the number of Diploma seats from 260 to 400 in 2023-24.  After the 
recommendation of the Committee on P&NG, it has also started offering 6-year 
Integrated Dual Degree (IDD) programme from Academic Session 2024-25 with a 
provision to award Diploma after completion of 3-year course and B.Tech. degree after 
completion of 6-year course. 
 

22 
 
22 
 
 The Committee are of the opinion that the prime objective behind setting up of 
RGIPT is to provide high quality education, training and research to generate efficient 
human resources to meet growing human resources requirement in Petroleum and 
Energy Sector. 
 
 The Committee desire that Ministry may look into the feasibility of opening new 
centres in different parts of the country covering wide rang of undergraduate and post 
graduate courses so that the requirement of skilled professionals for the rapidly growing 
Petroleum Industries is fulfilled.  
 
36. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
 
   “ Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology, Jais, Amethi, was established 
as an Institution of National Importance through an act of Parliament in 2007 under the 
aegis of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, Government of India. Further, the 
Institute has established two centers in Assam and Karnataka, namely Assam Energy 
Institute (AEI), Sivasagar, and Energy Institute, Bengaluru (EIB). Requirement of human 
resources depends on the dynamics of the market. New courses are started in these 
Institutes considering the demand supply gap and newer developments in rapidly 
changing energy domain.     
Another domain specific institute namely Indian Institute of Petroleum and Energy 
(IIPE), Visakhapatnam has also been setup by this Ministry. Apart from these domain 
specific institutes, many other educational institutes also run various courses including 
degree in Petroleum Engineering, Geophysics etc which are required in petroleum 
sector”.   
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
37. The Committee in their original Report had desired the Ministry to look into 
the feasibility of opening new centers on the lines of RGIPT in different parts of 
the country offer wide range of undergraduate and post graduate courses so that 
the requirement of skilled professionals for the rapidly growing Petroleum 
Industries is met and to ensure that people living in different parts of the country 
get an opportunity to receive professional education in the sectors. The 
Committee feel that the Ministry have not mentioned any specific steps taken 
towards establishing new centers on the lines of RGIPT. While appreciating the 
establishment of Centers such as Assam Energy Institute (AEI), Sibasagar, 
Assam and Energy Institute, Bengaluru (EIB), Karnataka and Indian Institute of 
Petroleum and Energy (IIPE), Visakhapatnam, the Committee feel that more such 
Centers need to be located in all parts of the country in order to benefit people 
living in different parts of the country. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
recommendation and urge the Ministry to augment the infrastructure at existing 

23 
 
23 
 
centers of petroleum energy as well as set up new centers of excellence in 
different parts of the country. 
Recommendation No.17 
 
Indian Institute of Petroleum and Energy (IIPE)- Progress in construction work 
 
38. The committee was informed that the land for construction of the permanent 
campus of IIPE was handed over in March, 2023 and the institute entrusted the 
construction work to the CPWD. The Committee have also been informed that the 
physical progress of the construction work is 37 percent and financial progress is merely 
30 percent. Moreover, the scrutiny of the budget figures submitted by the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural gas reveals that the actual expenditure during the last three years 
were as low as 25 percent, 19.5 percent and 53.5 percent to the BE in 2021-22, 2022-
23 and 2023-24 respectively. During 2023-24, Only Rs. 90 crore could be utilized 
against the BE of Rs. 168 crore even after handing over of the land in March, 2023. This 
shows the slow progress of work for constructing permanent campus of the institute. 
The Committee recommend the Ministry of Petroleum& Natural Gas to monitor and get 
the pace of work expedited so that the institute may start operating from their own 
permanent campus as early as possible.  
 
39. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
 
 
  “ IIPE entrusted the construction work for permanent campus of IIPE to CPWD. 
The CPWD awarded the contract on 03.10.2023 for construction of the buildings. As on 
31.12.2024, the physical and financial progress of the construction of the permanent 
campus of the Institute is 44% and 34% respectively.  The CPWD conveyed that the 
essential buildings required for the commencement of academic activities at the 
permanent campus will be handed over by May, 2025 and the remaining buildings of 
the project by October, 2025 except that of Central Administrative Building which is 
likely to be completed by July, 2026.  
The construction of the compound wall around the alienated land is already completed 
by the Andhra Pradesh Industrial Infrastructure Corporation Ltd (APIIC). 
The Institute is continuously coordinating with the authorities of the CPWD and regularly 
monitoring the work progress”. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
40. The Committee had recommended the Ministry to monitor the ongoing 
construction work at Indian Institute of Petroleum and Energy (IIPE) at 
Visakhapatnam and get the pace of work expedited so that the institute might 
start operating from its own permanent campus as early as possible. The 
Ministry, in their action taken reply have inter-alia stated as on 31.12.2024, the 

24 
 
24 
 
physical and financial progress of the construction of the permanent campus of 
the Institute is 44% and 34% respectively. The CPWD conveyed that the essential 
buildings required for the commencement of academic activities at the permanent 
campus will be handed over by May, 2025 and the remaining buildings of the 
project by October, 2025 except that of Central Administrative Building which is 
likely to be completed by July, 2026.  
  The Committee while acknowledging the progress of construction 
work at IIPE at Visakhapatnam, feel that at present rate of progress, it is unlikely 
that the timeline for completion of the project will be met. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation to expedite the construction 
work by undertaking proper coordination with CPWD which is the implementing 
agency. The Committee also desire to know whether essential buildings required 
for commencement of academic activities at permanent campus which were 
scheduled to be completed by May 2025 have been handed over to the institute.  
The Committee may be apprised about the action taken in the matter. 
  

25 
 
25 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
Need to streamline budget making process 
 
  The Committee note that the total allocation of the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas in BE 2024-25 is Rs 15930.26 cr. as against Rs 41007.72 cr. in BE 2023-
24. Out of the budgeted amount, Rs 14801.29 cr. has been allocated towards revenue 
expenditure and Rs 1128.97 cr. has been allocated towards capital expenditure. In FY 
2021-22, the BE of the Ministry was Rs 15943.78 crore which was reduced to Rs 
8846.13 crore at the RE Stage. The Actual Expenditure in that year was only Rs 
5753.63 crore. In FY 2022-23, the BE of the Ministry was Rs 8939.86 crore which was 
increased to Rs 33883.55 crore at the RE Stage. The Actual Expenditure in the year 
was Rs 30912.71 crore. In FY 2023-24, the BE of the Ministry was Rs 41007.72 crore 
which was reduced to Rs 14757.01 crore at the stage of RE. The Actual Expenditure in 
the year was Rs 14330.21 crore. The Committee note that there have been wide 
variations in Budget Estimates (BE), Revised Estimates (RE) and Actual Expenditure of 
the last three financial years of the Ministry. The Committee, however, understand that 
the financial estimates of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas are closely linked 
with changes taking place in international market prices of crude oil and g25as. It may, 
therefore, not always be possible for the Government to accurately anticipate the 
international price movements of petroleum products as price movement is dependent 
on external or international factors. Hence such wide variations in BE, RE and Actual 
Expenditure of the Ministry. The Committee, however, underline that such wide 
variation25 in BE and RE and actuals hinders the cause of prudent planning and 
management of financial resources of the Government. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommend that every effort must be made by the Ministry to ensure that such huge 
variations in estimates are avoided by way of effective financial and economic planning.

Reply of the Government 
 
Reasons for variations in BE/RE vis-à-vis actual expenditure for the FY 2022-23, 2023-24 and 2024-25 
 
(figures in Crores of rupees) 
BE 2022-
23 
RE 2022-
23 
Variance 
in RE 
from BE 
2022-23 
Major reasons for Variance RE 2022-
23 
Actuals 
2022-23 
Variance 
in Actuals 
2022-23 
from RE 
2022-23 
Major reasons for variance  
8939.86 33883.55 24943.69 (i) Rs. 22,000 Crores were 
additionally allocated in a New 
Scheme viz. One time grant to 
PSU OMCs for under recoveries 
in Domestic LPG in pursuance to 
the Cabinet Meeting dated 
12.10.2022. 
 
(ii) Rs. 7210 Crores additional 
funds were allocated viz. PMUY 
due to Rs. 200 subsidy to PMUY 
consumers.    
 
(iii) Rs. 245.00 Crores were 
additionally allocated in a New 
Scheme viz. Numaligarh 
Refinery Expansion Project. 
 
 
(iv) Rs. 215.62 Crores  were 
additionally allocated in a New 
Scheme viz. Flagging of 
merchantship  
33883.55 30912.71 -2970.84 (i)  Rs. 2346.63 Crores 
surrendered in Scheme viz. PMUY 
due to Oil Marketing Companies 
bills are lower than projections and 
bills of March, 2023 were not 
received before the end of FY 
2023-24. 
 
(ii) Rs. 269.74 Crores surrendered 
in Scheme viz. Indradhanush Gas 
Grid Litd. (IGGL), due to lower 
CAPEX during FY 2022-23 for the 
reasons such as delay in land 
acquisition in Assam/Tripura, delay 
in receipt of environment and 
statutory clearances. 
 
(iii)  Rs. 131.58 Crores 
surrendered in Scheme viz  
Flagging of merchantship due to 
lesser bills expected from OMCs.  
BE 2023-
24 
RE 2023-
24 
Variance 
in RE 
from BE 
2023-24 
Major reasons for Variance RE 2023-
24 
Actuals 
2023-24 
Variance 
in Actuals 
2023-24 
from RE 
2023-24 
Major reasons for variance  

27 
 
 
 
41007.72 14757.01 -26250.71 (i) Rs. 29,999.99 Crores were 
surrendered due to reduction of 
funds  by Ministry of Finance in 
the Scheme viz. Capital Support 
to OMCs. 
 
(ii)  Rs. 4,999.99 Crores were 
surrendered in the Scheme viz. 
Payment to ISPRL for Crude Oil 
Reserves due to deferment of the 
proposal by DoE, MoF on 
14.11.2023. 
 
(iii) Additional funds of Rs. 
8499.99 Crores were allocated 
viz. PMUY due to Rs. 100 per 
connection increase in subsidy 
and due to 25 lakh new 
connections.   
 
(iv) Additional fund of Rs. 1280 
Crores is required in DBTL 
Schems, due to the previous 
pending payments of Rs. 342 
Crore upto March, 2023.  
Further,  quanity of LPG for 
2023-24 and 2024-25 has been 
estimated at a growth of 1.73% 
over previous year volume.  A bill 
of Rs. 443.86 Crore upto July, 
2023 was pending with the 
Ministry.  
 
(v) Rs. 468 Crores were 
surrendered  due to non-
finalization of land purchase in 
ISPRL Phase-II 
 
(vi) Rs. 500 Crores were 
surrendered in IGGL Scheme  
14757.01 14330.21 -426.80 (i) Rs. 256.62 Crores surrendered 
in Scheme viz. Indradhanush Gas 
Grid Litd. (IGGL), due to lower 
CAPEX during FY 2023-24. 
 
(ii) Rs. 76.24 Crores surrendered 
in Scheme viz. PM JI-VAN Yojana, 
due to less bills received from 
HPCL and IOCL due to non-
achievement of 2nd and 3rd 
Milestones of disbursement 
conditions. 
 
(iii)  Rs. 42.25 Crores surrendered 
in Scheme viz. Scheme for 
flagging of Merchant  Ships due to 
receipt of less bills from the Oil 
Marketing Companies concerned. 
 
  

28 
 
 
 
due to RoU issues and monsoon, 
construction activities have been 
slowed down. 
 
 
BE 2024-
25 
RE 2024-
25 
Variance 
in RE 
from BE 
2024-25 
Major reasons for 
Variance 
RE 2024-
25 
Actuals 
2024-25 
Variance 
in Actuals 
2024-25 
from RE 
2024-25 
Major reasons for 
variance  
15930.26 17367.70 1437.44 (i) Additional funds of Rs. 
437.44 Crores were 
provided as additional cash 
in PMUY scheme to meet 
the additionality of Rs 3606 
Crores in the scheme. 
 
(ii) Rs 1000 Crore provided 
in OID Fund in the month of 
January, 2025. The funds 
are parked funds for 
utilization in FY 2025-26. 
17367.70 7247.63 
(as on 
07.02.2025) 
10120.07 Actual variance will be 
ascertained once the 
financial year has ended. 
 
In view of the table above it may be seen that major variation in the BE RE AE due to Demands of Funds in the new schemes as well 
as due to fresh decision in the flagship schemes of the Ministry. 
 The suggestion of the Standing Committee has been noted & will be taken care in future.  
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/09/2024-Fin.I (E-50569) dated 10th March, 2025 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
Refer Para 7 of the Chapter I of this Report 
 
 
 

Recommendation No. 2 
Need to increase Capital Expenditure 
 The Committee note that an amount of Rs 1128.97 cr. has been allocated towards 
capital expenditure in the Budget Estimates (BE) of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas for the financial year 2024-25 as against Rs 35508.98 crore in BE 2023-24, which is 
only 3.17 per cent of the B.E. in 2023-24. 
 
 The Committee note that Oil and Gas Sector is an important industrial sector in the 
country. It contributes about 15 per cent to the GDP of the country and 25 per cent of the 
revenue receipts of the central and state governments. This sector is also a large 
employment generator.  The Committee further note that the import dependency of the 
crude oil and natural gas of the country is very high and the same is a big concern for the 
energy security of the country.  In this backdrop, the Committee opine that in order to 
achieve long term goal of securing energy security, the country needs to make large 
capital investments. 
 
 The Committee are aware that oil PSUs of the government of India make large 
capital expenditure. The IEBR allocation towards capital expenditure of Oil PSUs in current 
fiscal year is estimated to be Rs. 1,18,499 crore.  The budget data provided by the Ministry 
shows that there is a reduction of Rs. 18,322 crore in estimated allocation towards capital 
expenditure of Oil PSUs in the current financial year from the actual capital expenditure of 
Rs. 1,36,821 crores in FY 2023-24.  The estimated IEBR budget towards capital 
expenditure of Oil PSUs in FY 2024-25 is of the same level as the actual capital 
expenditure of Rs. 1,19,027 crore in FY 2022-23. 
 
 The Committee further observe that the capital expenditure of the Ministry and Oil 
PSUs is not sufficient to meet and manage the surge in demand of petroleum products in 
the country and achieve net-zero targets.  The committee find the capital expenditure of 
the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and Oil PSUs in current financial year 
inadequate to achieve the basic long term goal of energy security.  Accordingly, the 
Committee recommend the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to endeavor for 
increase in the allocation towards capital expenditure in the next possible opportunity.   
Reply of the Government 
 
The details of IEBR for Oil and Gas PSUs from year 2023-34 is tabled below  
(Rs crores) 
  2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 
S.NO CPSE BE Actual BE Actual BE Actual* BE 

30 
 
 
 
1. ONGC 29950 30208 30125 37494 30800 36976.16 34900.00 
2. OVL 8180 2704 3229 3259 5580 2709.84 5590.00 
3. OIL 4302 5534 4896 5907 6880 3724 7860.00 
4. GAIL  7500 9099 7750 11426 8044 4691.08 8480.00 
5. IOCL 28549 37287 30395 42236 30909 25240.44 35293.85 
6. BPCL  10000 12120 10000 11702 13000 9554.88 18500.00 
7. HPCL 14500 14084 10210 14412 12500 8039.62 11500.00 
8. MRPL 815 625 820 1600 820 518.50 827.00 
9. CPCL 584 654 548 611 501 466.18 303.00 
10. NRL 6774 6596 8290 7984 9375 5704.65 9133.35 
11. BL 40 52 40 59 40 21.03 40.00 
12. EIL 160 62 98 132 50 20.18 50.00 
 
Total 
11135
4 
11902
7 
10640
1 
13682
1 
11849
9 
97666.56 
132477.2 
*as on November 2024 
Oil and Gas PSUs have been consistently over achieving their budgetary Targets, on year 
on year basis, further the actual achievement of IEBR has been consistently on a rising 
trend and as on Nov 24, already Oil and Gas PSUs have achieved 82% of their annual 
target for year 2024-25. Further, there is an increase of ~ 12% in Budgetary allocation for 
year 2025-26 over 2024-25.  
Hon’ble Prime Minister has outlined his vision on Energy Transition in COP-26 at Glasgow 
in 2021, known as “Panchamrut“, which stated: 
• To raise the non-fossil fuel based energy capacity of the country to 500 GW by 2030. 
• To meet 50% of the country’s energy requirements using renewable energy sources by 
2030. 
• To reduce the total projected carbon emission by one billion tonnes between now and the 
year 2030. 
• To reduce the carbon intensity of the economy to less than 45% by 2030 
• To become carbon neutral and achieve net zero emissions by the year 2070. 
 

31 
 
 
 
Through a meticulously designed strategy, major Oil and gas CPSEs plans to achieve net 
zero operations by 2046, which aligns with India's net zero pledge for 2070. In Oil Sector, 
PSU wise targets to achieve operational net zero are as under: 
Oil Sector PSUs NetZero Target Year 
IOCL 2046 
HPCL 2040 
BPCL 2040 
CPCL 2046 
MRPL 2038 
NRL 2038 
GAIL 2035 
EIL 2035 
ONGC 2038 
OIL 2040 
 
The expenditure towards achieving the same will be done periodically over a period of 
time. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/09/2024-Fin.I (E-50569) dated 10th March, 2025 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
Transfer of Petrochemicals division from the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilisers 
to the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  
 
 The Committee note that petrochemical industry is a fast growing industrial sector in 
the country. The demand of petrochemical products in the country has been increasing at 
a CAGR of about 8 per cent in the last few years. The Committee also note that Oil 
Marketing Companies (OMCs) of the country have become large, diversified and 
integrated. They have also large presence in the petrochemicals sector and actively 
engaged in increasing their Petrochemicals intensity index. IOCL has plans to increase its 
petrochemicals intensity index from current 5 per cent to 15 per cent by 2030. 
 
In view of the growing importance of the petrochemicals in the Petroleum sector, 
the Committee recall their recommendation included in their 18th Report (17th Lok Sabha) 
on Demands for Grants (2023-24) in which they had suggested the Ministry of Petroleum 
& Natural Gas to examine the expediency of transfer of petrochemicals division from the 
Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers to the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas and to take 
up the issue with the Cabinet Secretariat for amendment of Allocation of Business Rules of 
the Government of India, if needed. In this regard, the representative of the Ministry of 

32 
 
 
 
Petroleum and Natural Gas deposed before the Committee during evidence that the 
decision would not be taken by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas alone. There 
were multiple stake holders in this and all of them had their own views.  
 
The Committee are of the opinion that the petroleum and petrochemicals industries 
are inter- related. The feedstock for petrochemicals industry is provided by petroleum 
industry. Therefore, better synergy between them will help both the industries and 
contribute to their mutual faster growth. The Committee also view that the transfer of 
Petrochemicals division from the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilisers to the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas will help in better policy formulation for both the sectors and 
facilitate ease of doing business. Accordingly, the Committee recommend the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas to take up the matter with the Cabinet Secretariat for initiating a 
dialogue process involving all the stake holders for transfer of Petrochemicals division from 
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilisers to the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG)has taken note of the 
committee's recommendation. The significance of collaboration between the petrochemical 
and petroleum industries is recognized by MoPNG.  
 
The decision regarding the transfer of the petrochemicals division from the Ministry 
of Chemicals & Fertilizers to the MoPNG requires detailed consultations among all 
stakeholders. Since multiple Ministries/ Departments and entities are involved, discussions 
with relevant stakeholders are necessary before sending proposal to the Cabinet 
Secretariat for taking further action regarding amendment of the Allocation of Business 
Rules, 1962. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/09/2024-Fin.I (E-50569) dated 10th March, 2025 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
Refer Para 10 of the Chapter I of this Report 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
Need to achieve universal coverage of Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana (PMUY) 
 
 The Committee note that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has 
successfully provided 10.33 crore connections as on August, 2024 under PMUY. The 
Committee acknowledge the achievement of the Ministry and opine that the scheme has 
certainly helped in empowering women from poor and unprivileged sections of the society 
and improving their living standards by helping them in getting rid of the smoky and 
hazardous chullhas. However, based on the findings of Comprehensive Annual Modular 
(CAM) Survey 2022-23 conducted by the National Sample Survey Office (NSSO) under 
the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI) and replies of the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, the Committee are of the view that the country has 
achieved substantial progress in achieving universal coverage of LPG connections which 
is the core objective of PMUY. The Committee therefore, recommend that the Ministry may 
further intensify its public awareness campaign for the PMUY and work out new and 
innovative ways of encouraging people to avail the benefits under PMUY. 
 
  

33 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As of 01.01.2025, there are 32.87 Cr active LPG consumers in the country including 
10.33 Cr PMUY consumers. This reflects in near saturation LPG coverage in the country. 
To further build on the success of PMUY, OMCs are carrying out various public awareness 
campaigns through a multi-pronged approach, including the following: 
5. Targeted Outreach Campaigns: OMCs are conducting Pradhan Mantri LPG 
Panchayat (PMLP) to educate people about advantages of using LPG over other 
conventional fuels as well as safe usage of LPG. As on closing of Nov’24, OMCs 
have conducted 3.17 lakh LPG Panchayats since Apr’18. 
6. Innovative Engagement methods: Partnering with local influencers, women’s self-
help groups, and community leaders to encourage adoption and safe usage of LPG. 
7. Digital and Traditional Media Integration: Leveraging social media platforms, 
Hoardings at prominent places, Theatres etc. to enhance the reach and impact of 
awareness initiatives. 
8. Community Involvement: Creating Interactive platform through conducting 
cooking competition in various districts to promote safe LPG usage and showcase 
cost-saving practices. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/09/2024-Fin.I (E-50569) dated 10th March, 2025 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
  
Need to effectively target subsidies on LPG Cylinders 
 
 The Committee note that one lakh PMUY connections were blocked in FY 2023-24. 
Thus, considering 3.95 per year refill rate of LPG cylinders issued under PMUY and Rs. 
300 per cylinder of subsidy on them, the Ministry would have saved around Rs. 11.85 
crore subsidy on LPG cylinders issued under PMUY. Further, 7 lakh non-PMUY 
connections were blocked in 2023-24. The same must have also contributed in additional 
savings. The quantity of blocked connections points towards the large number of instances 
of misuse of government subsidy and the same need to be curbed. The Committee 
appreciate the efforts of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas/Oil PSUs and 
recommend them to intensify identification and blocking of ghost LPG connections keeping 
in mind that the bonafide beneficiaries should not be affected. The subsidy should be 
effectively targeted towards the benefit of the poor and needy persons. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Government is conscious of the possible misuse of subsidised LPG by 
unscrupulous elements and has been taking various actions to eliminate the possibility of 
such activities, which include, putting a cap on refills booked by PMUY consumers, 
monitoring high consumption consumers and distributors, Standard Operating Procedure 
to handle inactive PMUY consumers, necessitating Biometric Aadhaar Authentication of all 
PMUY consumers etc.  

34 
 
 
 
Further, to ensure, subsidy is targeted effectively to the genuine customers, OMCs 
are periodically carrying out offline de-duplication exercise on various deterministic 
parameters to weed out duplicate connections. 
 
In the recent dedupe exercise carried out during Nov’24, 1.71 lakh PMUY 
customers & 2.53 lakh Non-PMUY customers has been blocked. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/09/2024-Fin.I (E-50569) dated 10th March, 2025  
Recommendation No. 7 
 
Indian Strategic Petroleum Reserves – Filling up crude reserves  
 
  The Committee note that a budget of Rs. 5000 crore had been allocated in BE 
2023-24 for filling up crude oil reserves.  However, no expenditure on this account was 
incurred in FY 2023-24.  For the year 2024-25 the Ministry has not allocated any amount 
for filling up of strategic crude reserves as the expenditure on this account was deferred 
during the previous year.  The Ministry has stated that provision on this account will be 
made during the next financial year, i.e. 2025-26. 
 
 The Committee further note that the basic objective of setting up of Indian Strategic 
Petroleum Reserves was securing energy security for the country in the event of oil 
shocks.  However, the Committee note from reply of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas that out of total capacity of 5.33 MMT of crude oil of Indian Strategic Petroleum 
Reserves, the Current crude stock in all three caverns is 3.6059 MMT.  This is 67 percent 
of the rated capacity of caverns.  The Committee feel that under the given geo-political 
scenario of the world, especially that of the regions which are major suppliers of crude oil, 
a cautions approach is required for maintenance of sufficient buffer stock of crude oil to 
meet any emergent situation to protect the energy security of the country. Accordingly, the 
Committee recommend the Ministry to maintain the optimum level of Indian Strategic 
Petroleum Reserves and take up the matter of allocation of adequate budget with the 
Ministry of Finance.     
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 In the Union Budget of 2023-24 presented on 01.02.2023 under MoPNG Demand 
no 76, an amount of INR 5000 Crore had been allocated for purchase of crude oil by 
ISPRL. However, the Department of Expenditure, MoF recommended that the proposal for 
filling of crude oil be deferred keeping in mind the emerging trends in oil markets and no 
expenditure was incurred in F.Y. 2023-24. 
 
ISPRL shall be purchasing the crude oil through OMCs in the international market 
to fill these strategic reserves. 
  
Further, an amount of INR 5597 Crore has been allocated for purchase of crude oil 
by ISPRL in F.Y. 2025-26 and necessary approvals for utilizing this grant will be taken in 
due course. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/09/2024-Fin.I (E-50569) dated 10th March, 2025  

35 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
 
Indian Strategic Petroleum Reserves- Need to expedite Construction of Phase - II   
 
 The Committee note that an amount of Rs. 408 crore has been allocated in the BE 
2024-25 of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas for construction of underground 
caverns in Phase – II of Indian Strategic Petroleum Reserves.  The Committee further note 
from the reply of the Ministry that the construction of phase – II of Indian Strategic 
Petroleum Reserves has not started yet.  It was informed that even the land for the project 
has not been acquired so far.  In view of the strategic importance of the project, the 
Committee recommend the Ministry to vigorously pursue the authorities concerned 
including the respective State Governments, expedite the whole process and ensure full 
utilization of the budget earmarked for the project in the current financial year so as to 
accelerate the pace of the work of Phase-II of the project and to ensure that the intended 
purpose is served.   
 
 Reply of the Government 
 
In July 2021, Government approved the establishment of two additional 
commercial-cum-strategic petroleum reserve facilities with total storage capacity of 6.5 
MMT at Chandikhol (4 MMT) in Odisha and Padur (2.5 MMT) in Karnataka, on a Public 
Private Partnership mode. 
  
The process and discussions with the respective State Government for expeditious 
completion of land acquisition at Chandikhol is going on. For Padur-II, the request for 
proposal (RFP) has been floated, and the land acquisition process is in advance stage. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/09/2024-Fin.I (E-50569) dated 10th March, 2025 
 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
Need to expedite implementation of PM-Jivan Yojana 
 
 The Committee note that during the last 5 years of the operation of the PM Jivan 
Yojana only an amount of Rs. 265 crore has been spent against total financial outlay of 
Rs. 1969.50 crore and approved financial assistance of Rs. 908.25 crore. Further, out of 6 
commercial and 4 demonstration projects selected by the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas for providing financial assistance under the scheme, only 1 commercial plant 
located at Panipat, Haryana has been commissioned. The Committee has been informed 
that in BE 2022-23, a budget of Rs. 314.36 crore had been allocated by the Ministry 
against which the actual expenditure stood at merely Rs. 37.875 crore. 
 
Similarly, in the year 2023-24, against budget estimate of Rs. 227.26 crore, the 
actual expenditure was recorded to be as low as Rs. 75.75 crore. The Committee find the 
expenditure pattern unsatisfactory. Now, in the current Financial Year of 2024-25, the 
budget estimates for the project has been reduced to Rs. 117.41 crore. 
 
As regards, under utilization of budget for the yojana, the Ministry informed the 
Committee that the allocated budget for 2023-24 could not be fully utilized as Project 

36 
 
 
 
Developers faced challenges in achieving the milestones under the PM JI-VAN Yojana. 
These challenges included the complexity of new technologies, limited vendors for 2G 
equipment, delays in statutory clearances, issues with biomass supply chain logistics, 
COVID-related delays, slow finalization of deliverables due to first-time commercialization 
of technology, and disruptions in material/equipment delivery caused by geo-political 
situations. The Committee observe that the Ministry had furnished the same explanation to 
the Committee during examination of Demands for Grants-2023-24. The Committee view 
that when a new industry is developed by any country, challenges are bound to be 
encountered. The Committee also view that 2G ethanol plants are vital for securing energy 
security for the country as India is deficient in hydrocarbon resources especially crude oil 
and natural gas. Accordingly, the Committee recommend to the Ministry to make more 
concrete and vigorous efforts to overcome the obstacles being faced by 2G ethanol plants 
selected for the yojana. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The PM JI-VAN Yojana was amended in August 2024 to expand its scope. The key 
amendments inter-alia include: 
 Replacement of “2G ethanol” with the broader category of advanced biofuels. 
 Inclusion of bolt-on and brownfield projects under the eligibility criteria. 
 Extension of the scheme’s timeline up to FY 2028-29. 
To attract investments in the biofuel sector, a stakeholders’ meeting was held in 
October 2024. This meeting served to inform stakeholders about the revised provisions of 
the scheme and to gather valuable feedback and suggestions for its successful 
implementation. 
Based on the amendments, CHT, the implementing agency, has prepared the 
Request for Selection (RFS-V) document for selecting project developers for commercial-
scale advanced biofuel projects. The document will be released shortly. 
 
The scheme is being monitored at the highest level in the Ministry, which has 
facilitated the steady operation of the 2G ethanol plant at Panipat. The expertise gained 
from this plant is being utilized in the commissioning of new 2G plants at Bathinda (HPCL) 
and Bargarh (BPCL), as all three plants are based on the same technology. 
 
The 2G plant at Numaligarh (ABRPL), based on bamboo feedstock, has reached a 
significant milestone with the successful production of diluted ethanol from its fermentation 
section. The plant is expected to be commissioned shortly. 
 
The stable operation of these plants and advancements in 2G technology will 
encourage private project developers to adopt 2G technology for biofuel production. 
 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/09/2024-Fin.I (E-50569) dated 10th March, 2025 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
Scheme for Appraisal of Area in India’s Extended Continental Shelf – Need to 
expedite the implementation  
 
 The Committee note that Government of Indian has launched a new Central Sector 
scheme for Appraisal of Areas in India’s Extended Continental Shelf and a provision of Rs. 

37 
 
 
 
388 crore has been made in BE 2024-25 under the Capital Section in the Union Budget.  
The scheme is a welcome initiative of the Government of India for appraisal of 
hydrocarbon resources in India’s Extended Continental Shelf. The successful 
implementation of the scheme may make additions to precious crude oil and natural gas 
resources of the country.  However, the Committee has been informed that the project has 
not started yet and it is likely to commence by the end of December, 2024.  Accordingly, 
the Committee recommend the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to monitor the 
implementation of the project and ensure that the budget earmarked for the scheme in the 
current year is utilized fully.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
This project is conceived in coordination with MoES for a good quality high 
resolution 2D Seismic Data Acquisition, Processing and Interpretation (API) of 30,000 LKM 
in the extended Continental shelf area in Western and Eastern offshore beyond EEZ 
boundary. The ECS survey will provide valuable inputs regarding the presence of 
sediments and help to ascertain hydrocarbons potential in the Continental Shelf area. This 
generated data will help in supporting the claim of extended continental shelf boundary 
beyond the EEZ boundary in East and West coast by Government of India.  API of 30,000 
LKM of good quality 2D Broad Band Seismic data shall be completed by two National Oil 
Companies namely ONGC (15,500 LKM in western offshore) and OIL (14,500 LKM in 
eastern offshore). Seismic data acquisition in Western sector started on 25.11.2024 and till 
31.12.2024 acquisition of approximately 5600 LKM of seismic data has been completed. It 
is expected that out of allocated INR 492 crores (Enhanced budget from INR 410 Crore) 
approximately INR 200 Crores will be utilised in FY 2024-2025 and remaining amount INR 
292 Crores will be utilized in FY 2025 – 2026 for successful completion of the scheme.     
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/09/2024-Fin.I (E-50569) dated 10th March, 2025 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
Mission Anveshan – Monitoring the implementation 
 
 The Committee note that Government of Indian launched another new Central 
Sector scheme i.e. Mission Anveshan in the Union Budget 2024-25 for intensive appraisal 
of India’s on-shore sedimentary basins building upon the leads provided in data acquired 
under National Seismic Programme.  A provision of Rs. 332 crore has been made in BE 
2024-25 for the schemes.  The Committee have been given to understand that the 
welcome initiative of the Government of India Mission Anveshan has been launched in 
continuity with the National Seismic Programme aiming at the appraisal of hydrocarbon 
resources in India’s on-shore sedimentary basins.  The Committee are of the opinion that 
success of such ambitious schemes depends on its effective implementation.  The 
Committee therefore, suggest the Ministry to come out with a roadmap for time bound 
implementation of the scheme and utilization of the budget earmarked for the same in the 
current financial year.  The Committee also recommend the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas to monitor the implementation of the project and utilization of the budget 
earmarked for the same also as to ensure that the Mission may successfully fulfil the 
intended objectives.  
  
 

38 
 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 Mission Anveshan has been launched in continuity with the National Seismic 
Program (NSP) aiming at the hydrocarbon resources in India’s onshore Basin. Mission 
Anveshan is a scheme of 2D Seismic Data Acquisition, Processing and Interpretation 
(API) of 20275 LKM spread over seven onland Indian sedimentary basins namely 
Rajasthan, Ganga-Punjab, Chhattisgarh, Cuddapah, Krishna-Godavari, Deccan Syneclise 
and Saurashtra. The objective of Mission Anveshan is comprehensive appraisal of the 
Identified sedimentary basins on the basis of leads generated during the Interpretation of 
National Seismic Program (NSP) data. Two National Oil companies, namely ONGC and 
OIL has been entrusted with the task of execution of the project. Seismic data acquisition 
has been started from 29th November 2024 (Rajasthan and Ganga-Punjab Basin) and till 
31.12.2024 a total of approx. 430.0 Line Kilo Meter (LKM) has been acquired. It is 
expected that out of allocated INR 792 crores approximately INR 150 Crores will be 
utilized in FY 2024-2025. Remaining amount INR 642 Crores will be utilized in FY 2025 – 
2026 for successful completion of the scheme.   
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/09/2024-Fin.I (E-50569) dated 10th March, 2025 
Recommendation No. 12 
 
Need to expedite Numaligarh Refinery Expansion Project Work 
 
 The Committee note that Numaligarh Refinery is implementing a major refinery 
expansion project to treble its crude oil refining capacity from 3 MMTPA to 9 MMTPA at an 
estimated capital expenditure of about Rs. 28000 crore.  Out of this amount, the Central 
Government committee Rs. 1020 crore as Viability Gas Funding (VGF).  The project was 
to be completed by 2024.  The Committee find that an amount of Rs. 500 crore was 
earmarked in BE 2023-24 which was reduced at RE stage to Rs. 475.50 crore.  This year 
an amount of Rs. 275 crore has been earmarked as grant-in-aid to NRL for implementing 
its expansion.  However, the Committee have been informed that as on 31.08.2024, the 
physical and financial progress of the project were 67.6 percent and 59.2 percent 
respectively.  The completion date of the project has been revised upto December, 2025.  
The Committee are concerned about the apparent delay in completion of the expansion 
project and recommend the Ministry to closely monitor the project the highest level so as 
to avoid any further time overrun and consequent cost escalation.  The Committee may be 
appraised to the progress made in the expansion project in due course.  
  
Reply of the Government 
 
As on 31 December, 2024, physical and financial progress of the project is 72.78% 
and 68.82% respectively. Out of Rs 1020 Crore towards Viability Gap Funding (VGF) for 
the project, Rs. 803.00 Crore has been released till 31.12.2024. NRL Board has approved 
the revised completion schedule with Commercial Operation Date (COD) date for the 6 
million Metric Tons Per Annum (MMTPA) Refinery in December 2025 and for Paradip-
Numaligarh crude oil pipeline in October 2025. The project cost of the project is being 
pending for approval from Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA). All Project is 
being monitored at the highest level in the Ministry and all efforts are being made to 
expedite the project. 
 

39 
 
 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/09/2024-Fin.I (E-50569) dated 10th March, 2025 
 
Recommendation No. 13 
 
Oil  Industries Development Cess (OID Cess) 
 
 The Committee note that the levy of OID Cess on domestic production of crude oil 
mostly impacts public sector upstream oil and gas companies viz. ONGC and OIL. The 
Committee further note that OID Cess paid by ONGC during last three financial year are 
Rs.14126, 15951 and 13921 crore respectively. The OID Cess paid by OIL during the 
last three years are Rs.2011,2513 and 2440 crore respectively. 
      
The Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas in a note stated that OID Cess has the 
effect of reducing the resources available with the NOCs (ONGC/OIL) for exploratory 
efforts to bring larger area of the country under exploratory coverage. Given 85% import 
dependent in case of crude oil, it is essential that more resources are made available to 
NOCs to enhance exploration coverage in the country for energy security reasons.  The 
Ministry further emphasized that the Government may consider allocating a portion of 
OID Cess collection to NOCs and thereby supplement the internal accruals of NOCs for 
the exploration activities. The Committee was further informed by the Ministry that they 
had taken up the matter of creation of an OID Fund and credit of cess to the Fund with 
the Ministry of Finance. The Committee acknowledged the efforts made by the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas and expect that they will vigorously pursue the matter with the 
Ministry of Finance so that the sum provided through OID Fund may be utilized by the 
upstream oil and gas sector towards enhancement of exploration coverage in the larger 
interest of energy security of the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As per section 16 of Oil Industry (Development) Act 1974, the proceeds of the 
duties of excise levied are first credited to the Consolidated Fund of India. The Central 
Government may, if Parliament by appropriation made by law in this behalf, so provides, 
pay to the Board from time to time, from out of such proceeds, after deducting the 
expenses of collection, such sums of money as it may think it for being utilized 
exclusively for the purposes of this Act. 
  
The cess allocated to OIDB together with internal generation are being utilized as 
per the mandate defined in the Oil Industry 
(Development) Act, 1974. 
  
As regards, the recommendation regarding vigorously pursuing the matter with the 
Ministry of Finance so that the fund is provided through OID Fund for utilization by the 
upstream Oil and Gas sector towards enhancement of exploration coverage in the larger 
interest of energy security of the country, it is stated that OIDB has requested the 
Ministry to provide fund from OID Cess for the development of oil and gas sector. 
  
Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs has initiated action for 
constitution of the Oil Industry Development Fund (OID Fund) with Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas being the Nodal Ministry to take up the matter of accounting procedure 

40 
 
 
 
for constitution of the OID Fund with the office of Controller General of Accounts in 
consultation with the Budget Division. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/09/2024-Fin.I (E-50569) dated 10th March, 2025 
 
Recommendation No. 15 
 
Need to expedite completion of North-East Gas Grid (NEGG) Project  
 
 The Committee note that the current physical progress of the North-East Gas Grid 
(NEGG) Project is 83.24 percent and the project is expected to be completed by 
31.03.2025.  In this regard, the Committee recall that the Ministry had informed the 
Committee during examination of Demands for Grants (2023-24) that project would be 
operational by 2024.  However, considering the current physical progress of the project, 
there is an apparent delay in completion of the project.  Accordingly, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to make vigorous efforts to complete the project by revised 
deadline and ensure that no further delay takes place.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The North East Gas Grid (NEGG) project, a 1670 Km and 4.75 MMSCMD capacity 
natural gas pipeline network, is being implemented by Indradhanush Gas Grid Limited 
(IGGL) to connect the eight North eastern states and the regional gas sources to the 
National Gas Grid.  
 
Present Status: Construction activities of the NEGG project are in progress with the 
achievement of a physical progress of 84.06%.  
 
Original Timeline: March 2024 
 
 Revised Timeline: July 2025. 
 
 Cost Outlay: Rs 9265 Crore with Viability Gap Funding of Rs 5559 Crore. 
 
 VGF released as on 12.02.2024: Rs 3601.91 Crore. (VGF request of Rs. 400 crore by 
IGGLis being processing for the FY 2024-25.) 
 
 The progress of the project has been affected due to various hindrances. The 
Phase-II sections are delayed due to various hindrances viz. slow progress in ROU 
compensation disbursement by the Competent Authorities on account of non-availability of 
land documents with affected landowners in Cachar & Karimganj districts in Assam and 
several districts in the state of Tripura, delay in allotment of permanent land by the 
respective State Governments in Meghalaya and Mizoram for establishing stations/ 
terminals. 
 
Further, Phase-III sections are delayed due to the non-availability of working 
permissions from NHIDCL in the states of Nagaland, Manipur, West Bengal, and Sikkim, 
owing to ongoing national highway widening works. Besides this, a lot of difficulties are 
being faced in getting administrative clearance from State Government of Nagaland and 
there is also delay in allotment of permanent lands in Nagaland and Manipur.   

41 
 
 
 
  
Regular review of the project status is taken by Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas, Cabinet Secretariat, PMO etc on the progress status along with status of the 
mitigating measure taken for removal of the hindrances.    
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/09/2024-Fin.I (E-50569) dated 10th March, 2025 
 
Recommendation No.18 
 
Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR) of Oil PSUs 
 
 The committee note that the IEBR of Oil PSUs for BE 2024-25 has been targeted at Rs. 
1,18,499 crore as compared to Rs. 1,06,401 crore of the BE 2023-24. The Committee also note that 
the actual utilisation of the IEBR funds were recorded to be Rs. 1,19,027 crore in 2022-23 and Rs. 
1,36,821 crore in 2023-24. During the current FY 2024-25, the BE of Rs. 1,18,499 crore has been 
targeted, which is less than the actual expenditure of the previous two years. The Committee also 
observe that the actual expenditure of individual PSUs during the current financial year upto 31st 
August 2024 is only Rs. 49,381 crore against the BE of Rs. 1,18,499 crore. 
 In view of the fact that the demand for petroleum products has been increasing continuously 
during the last 10 years, the Committee feel that the country needs to find more crude oil and gas 
resources and create additional refining capacity and distribution infrastructure to meet growing 
demand. Further, Oil PSUs need to invest more in energy transition projects to meet net-zero 
commitments. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the IEBR exercise of the Oil PSUs may 
be prepared more prudently keeping the need of the sector in mind and the actual utilisation of the 
funds are monitored properly by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The details of IEBR for Oil and Gas PSUs from year 2023-34 is tabled below  
(Rs crores) 
  2022—23 2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 
S.NO CPSE BE Actual BE Actual BE Actual* BE 
1. ONGC 29950 30208 30125 37494 30800 36976.16 34900.00 
2. OVL 8180 2704 3229 3259 5580 2709.84 5590.00 
3. OIL 4302 5534 4896 5907 6880 3724 7860.00 
4. GAIL  7500 9099 7750 11426 8044 4691.08 8480.00 
5. IOCL 28549 37287 30395 42236 30909 25240.44 35293.85 
6. BPCL  10000 12120 10000 11702 13000 9554.88 18500.00 
7. HPCL 14500 14084 10210 14412 12500 8039.62 11500.00 
8. MRPL 815 625 820 1600 820 518.50 827.00 
9. CPCL 584 654 548 611 501 466.18 303.00 
10.NRL 6774 6596 8290 7984 9375 5704.65 9133.35 
11.BL 40 52 40 59 40 21.03 40.00 
12.EIL 160 62 98 132 50 20.18 50.00 
 Total 111354 119027 106401 136821 118499 97666.56 132477.2 
*as on November 2024 
 
Oil and Gas PSUs have been consistently over achieving their budgetary Targets, on year on 
year basis, further the actual achievement of IEBR has been consistently on a rising trend and as on 

42 
 
 
 
Nov 24, already Oil and Gas PSUs have achieved 82% of their annual target for year 2024-25. 
Further, there is an increase of ~ 12% in Budgetary allocation for year 2025-26 over 2024-25.  
The Energy Transition will happen a period of time and till then possibly all energy systems 
will co-exist. The phase-out will happen over different time frames for two reasons, first energy 
systems are not only capital intensive but take time to develop and mature, and second, the phase 
out of old systems takes time till incremental benefits can justify investment in all new additional 
capital-intensive energy systems. Energy transition also hints toward the transformation of the 
global energy sector from fossil-based to zero-carbon by the second half of this century, known as 
the “Net Zero Mission”. 
 
Through a meticulously designed strategy, major Oil and gas CPSEs plans to achieve net 
zero operations by 2046, which aligns with India's net zero pledge for 2070. In Oil Sector, PSU 
wise targets to achieve operational net zero are as under: 
 
Oil Sector PSUs NetZero Target Year 
IOCL 2046 
HPCL 2040 
BPCL 2040 
CPCL 2046 
MRPL 2038 
NRL 2038 
GAIL 2035 
EIL 2035 
ONGC 2038 
OIL 2040 
 
The expenditure towards achieving the same will be done periodically over a period of time.  
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/09/2024-Fin.I (E-50569) dated 10th March, 2025 
  

43 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF 
THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
  

44 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
     
Need to increase subsidy on LPG gas cylinders issued under PMUY 
 
  The Committee note that the current refill rate of LPG cylinders issued under 
PMUY is 3.95 per year. This is much less than the refill rate of non-PMUY LPG cylinder 
which is about 6.5. The Committee further note that the provision of subsidy on refilling of 
LPG cylinders issued under PMUY, currently being Rs. 300 per cylinder, has contributed 
towards increase in refill rate of LPG cylinders issued under the Yojana from 3.01 in 2019-
20 to 3.95 in 2023-24. Thus, there is direct causal relationship between increase in amount 
of subsidy on LPG cylinders issued under the PMUY and increase in refill rate of such 
cylinders over the years. The Committee further note that the current refill rate of LPG 
cylinders issued under PMUY is much below the stated policy of Government of India to 
issue 12 subsidized LPG cylinders per year to the beneficiaries of PMUY. 
 
The Committee appreciate that the PMUY has brought positive changes in the living 
standards and life style of women specially rural women. However, the Committee feel that 
the low refill rate of LPG cylinders issued under PMUY is indicative of the fact that the 
target consumers are not able to take full benefit of the scheme. The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Ministry to find out the reasons there for and work out suitable 
remedies. Increasing the subsidy amount on refilling of LPG cylinders may be a solution. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry may increase the subsidy to such 
an extent that makes the price of LPG refill cylinders affordable to the poor beneficiaries. 
This will not only increase the refill rate of cylinders but also help in widening the coverage 
of beneficiaries. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Per capita consumption of LPG amongst PMUY families has increased from 3.01 in 
2019-20 to 3.95 in 2023-24 which has further increased to 4.4 in the current FY 2024-25 
(Prorated based on the consumption during Apr-Dec’24). This gradual increase is a 
testament to the fact that LPG refills are becoming affordable to PMUY beneficiaries. 
 
After getting connections, sustained usage of LPG by Ujjwala beneficiaries needs a 
behavioural change to happen. Creating behavioural change in a predominantly rural and 
traditional society takes significant time and continuous efforts. Traditional cooking 
methods, preferences around taste and flavours, absolutely free and unlimited availability 
of firewood in hilly, rural and forest areas and orthodox beliefs connected to existing ways 
of cooking are issues beyond affordability and sometimes more important decision-making 
factors. Therefore, while price plays an important role in refill purchase decision by poor 
families, it is not the only factor. Further, an increase in subsidy beyond current levels may 
also escalate the financial burden on the government finances. 
 

45 
 
 
 
Careful calibration of approach is hence required to balance affordability for consumers, 
financial sustainability for OMCs, and the government's fiscal responsibilities while 
ensuring sustained growth in LPG adoption. 
 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/09/2024-Fin.I (E-50569) dated 10th March, 2025 
 
Recommendation Serial No.16 
 
Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology (RGIPT) 
 
 The Committee note that the RGIPT is an Institute of National Importance 
mandated to conduct high quality R&D work and award Bachelors, Masters, Doctoral and 
PG Diploma Degrees in different streams related to Petroleum Science and Technology 
including Management.  The Committee further note that The Institute has two Centres i.e. 
Assam Energy Institute (AEI) Sivasagar & Energy Institute Bengaluru (EIB) in addition to 
the main campus at Jais, Amethi, Uttar Pradesh.   
 
 The Committee have been informed that RGIPT, Jais, Amethi is currently offering 
14 B.Tech., 2 M.Tech, 2 MBA and Phd in Engineering, Sciences, Management Studies 
and Humanity Subjects.  Thereis a sanctioned strength of 706 seats for B.Tech., 20 for M. 
Tech. and 60 seats for MBA.  Moreover, 234 nos, of Phd Scholars are enrolled at RGIPT 
Jais Campus. 
 
 As regards, Assam Energy Institute (AEI), Sivasagar, the Committee was informed 
that the Institute is offering Diploma courses in various streams.  It has increased the 
number of Diploma seats from 260 to 400 in 2023-24.  After the recommendation of the 
Committee on P&NG, it has also started offering 6-year Integrated Dual Degree (IDD) 
programme from Academic Session 2024-25 with a provision to award Diploma after 
completion of 3-year course and B.Tech. degree after completion of 6-year course. 
 
 The Committee are of the opinion that the prime objective behind setting up of 
RGIPT is to provide high quality education, training and research to generate efficient 
human resources to meet growing human resources requirement in Petroleum and Energy 
Sector. 
 
 The Committee desire that Ministry may look into the feasibility of opening new 
centres in different parts of the country covering wide rang of undergraduate and post 
graduate courses so that the requirement of skilled professionals for the rapidly growing 
Petroleum Industries is fulfilled.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
   Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology, Jais, Amethi, was established as 
an Institution of National Importance through an act of Parliament in 2007 under the aegis 
of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, Government of India. Further, the Institute has 
established two centers in Assam and Karnataka, namely Assam Energy Institute (AEI), 
Sivasagar, and Energy Institute, Bengaluru (EIB). Requirement of human resources 
depends on the dynamics of the market. New courses are started in these Institutes 

46 
 
 
 
considering the demand supply gap and newer developments in rapidly changing energy 
domain.     
Another domain specific institute namely Indian Institute of Petroleum and Energy (IIPE), 
Visakhapatnam has also been setup by this Ministry. Apart from these domain specific 
institutes, many other educational institutes also run various courses including degree in 
Petroleum Engineering, Geophysics etc which are required in petroleum sector.   
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/09/2024-Fin.I (E-50569) dated 10th March, 2025 
  

47 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation No. 14 
       
 
Need for higher allocation for R&D projects in Petroleum Sector and better 
synchronization between stakeholders. 
 
 The Committee note that research and development activities in petroleum sector 
is of paramount importance especially as the sector is of crucial importance for the 
national economy. Moreover, petroleum sector is already undergoing rapid changes in 
view of higher emphases on energy transition nationally as well as globally. R&D will 
have an important role in this. The Committee also note that OIDB has committee Rs.2 
crore in last three years for R&D Projects. This amount appears to be inadequate, oil and 
gas sector being a technology intensive sector. The Committee, however, also 
understand that bulk of expenditure in R&D projects in the sector is being undertaken in 
the OMCs. 
  
Accordingly, the Committee recommend that the Ministry may look into the issue of 
greater budgetary support for R&D projects of national importance. Moreover, the 
Committee also recommend that the Ministry may take steps to ensure better 
synchronization in R&D activities between OMCs and other public sector institutions 
having R&D activities in the sector to achieve better outcomes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
During the last three years, OIDB had released R&D grant of Rs.55.37 crore to 
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. (R&D) and Rs.60 lakh to Indian Institute of Technology, Indian 
School of Mines, Dhanbad.  
  
In addition to the above, Centre for High Technology (CHT) fully funded by OIDB 
grant had also released R&D grants amounting to Rs.1.93 crore during the 
last three years.  
  
In terms of OID Board's approval, Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH), 
being the expert body for Upstream Sector, the funding of the Upstream Sector R&D 
Projects are being done by DGH and the Downstream R&D Projects are being executed 
and funded by CHT. Both the Organisations are the grantee institutions of OIDB. DGH and 
CHT are also monitoring the progress and utility of the Upstream Sector and Downstream 
related R&D Projects respectively. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/09/2024-Fin.I (E-50569) dated 10th March, 2025 
  

48 
 
 
 
Recommendation No.17 
 
Indian Institute of Petroleum and Energy (IIPE)- Progress in construction work 
 
 The committee was informed that the land for construction of the permanent 
campus of IIPE was handed over in March, 2023 and the institute entrusted the 
construction work to the CPWD. The Committee have also been informed that the physical 
progress of the construction work is 37 percent and financial progress is merely 30 
percent. Moreover, the scrutiny of the budget figures submitted by the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural gas reveals that the actual expenditure during the last three years 
were as low as 25 percent, 19.5 percent and 53.5 percent to the BE in 2021-22, 2022-23 
and 2023-24 respectively. During 2023-24, Only Rs. 90 crore could be utilized against the 
BE of Rs. 168 crore even after handing over of the land in March, 2023. This shows the 
slow progress of work for constructing permanent campus of the institute. The Committee 
recommend the Ministry of Petroleum& Natural Gas to monitor and get the pace of work 
expedited so that the institute may start operating from their own permanent campus as 
early as possible.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
  IIPE entrusted the construction work for permanent campus of IIPE to CPWD. The 
CPWD awarded the contract on 03.10.2023 for construction of the buildings. As on 
31.12.2024, the physical and financial progress of the construction of the permanent 
campus of the Institute is 44% and 34% respectively.  The CPWD conveyed that the 
essential buildings required for the commencement of academic activities at the 
permanent campus will be handed over by May, 2025 and the remaining buildings of the 
project by October, 2025 except that of Central Administrative Building which is likely to be 
completed by July, 2026.  
The construction of the compound wall around the alienated land is already completed by 
the Andhra Pradesh Industrial Infrastructure Corporation Ltd (APIIC). 
The Institute is continuously coordinating with the authorities of the CPWD and regularly 
monitoring the work progress. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/09/2024-Fin.I (E-50569) dated 10th March, 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
07 August, 2025_________ 
 16  Shravan,1947 (Saka)     
                           Sunil Dattatrey Tatkare, 
                                           Chairperson,  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                        
Petroleum & Natural Gas 
 

49 
 
 
 
Confidential 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2024-25) 
Minutes of the Fourteenth Sitting of the Committee 
….. 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 07th August, 2025 from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in 
Committee Room Samanvay-2, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi-110001. 
PRESENT 
Shri Sunil Dattatrey Tatkare - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2 Shri Benny Behanan 
3 Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
4 Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
5 
6 
Smt. Pratima Mondal  
Shri Laxmikant Pappu Nishad  
7 Smt. Kamaljeet Sehrawat  
8 Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal  
9 Dr. Amar Singh 
10 Shri Ve Vaithilingam 
11 Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
12 Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
13 Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
14 
15 
16 
Shri Chunnilal Garasiya 
Shri Mithlesh Kumar    
Shri Mayankbhai Jaydevbhai Nayak     
17 Dr. V. Sivadasan 
18 Shri Ravi Chandra Vaddiraju  
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. 
2. 
Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar 
Shri Sujay Kumar 
- 
- 
Joint Secretary 
Deputy Secretary  
 
  

50 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
convened to consider and adopt the following 03 draft Action Taken Reports: 
 
(i) Draft Report on the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the First Report (18th LS) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas 
on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas’.  
 
(ii) XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
 
(iii)  XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Reports at 2 (i) and xxxxxx above without any 
modifications;  xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
 4. The Committee then authorised the Chairperson to finalize the Reports and present/lay the 
Reports in both the Houses of Parliament.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
__________________________________________________________________ 
XXXX- Matter not related to this Report.  
 
 
  

51 
 
 
 
Annexure II 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRD REPORT (EIGHTEENTH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2024-25) ON THE SUBJECT ‘DEMAND FOR GRANTS (2024-25)’ OF THE MINISTRY OF 
PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS’. 
I Total No. of Recommendations  18 
II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government  
(Vide Recommendations Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 
12, 13, 15 and 18)  
14 
 Percentage to Total 78.00% 
III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s 
(Vide Recommendations No. Nil) 
 
0.00 
 Percentage of Total Nil 
 
IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee  
(Vide Recommendations Nos. Nos. 5 and 16) 
 
02 
 Percentage of Total  11.00% 
V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendation No. 14 and 17)   
02 
 Percentage of Total  11.00% 
   
 