21 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2022-23) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Eighteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2022-23) on Demands for 
Grants (2023-24)] 
 
 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  August, 2023/Shravana, 1945 (Saka) 
 


CP&NG NO.     
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2022 - 23) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Eighteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2022-23) on Demands for Grants (2023-24)] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 08.08.2023 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 08.08.2023 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  August, 2023/Shravana, 1945 (Saka) 
 


CONTENTS 
          Page 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-23)……………………………..                     (iii) 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………..                     (iv) 
CHAPTER I 
   
 
Report ………………………………………………….                       
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ……………………………      
                   
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies …………………………………     
                    
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted                                             
by the Committee ……………………………………         
                    
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited ……    
                     
 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Sixteenth sitting of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2022-23) 
held on 04.08.2023. 
 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations contained in the Eighteenth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2022-23) on 
'Demands for Grants (2023-24)'. 
 

(iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM & NATURAL 
GAS (2022-23) 
Sl. No.                                           Names of Members 
                                                      LOK SABHA 
Shri Ramesh Bidhuri – Chairperson 
 
2 Dr. Ramesh Chand Bind 
3 Shri Pradyut Bordoloi 
4 Shri Girish Chandra 
5 Smt. Chinta Anuradha 
6 Shri Dilip Saikia 
7 Shri Topon Kumar Gogoi  
8 Shri Naranbhai Bhikhabhai Kachhadiya 
9 Dr. Kalanidhi Veeraswamy 
10 Shri Santosh Kumar 
11 Shri Rodmal Nagar 
12 Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
13 Shri Unmesh Bhaiyyasaheb Patil  
14 Shri M.K. Raghavan 
15 Shri Chandra Sekhar Sahu 
16 Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar 
17 Dr. Bharatiben Dhirubhai Shiyal 
18 Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
19 Shri Lallu Singh 
20 Shri Vinod Kumar Sonkar 
21 Shri Ajay Tamta 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22 Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
23 Smt. Kanta Kardam 
24 Shri Mithlesh Kumar 
25 Shri Pabitra Margherita 
26 Shri Rambhai Harjibhai Mokariya 
27 Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
28 Dr. Sasmit Patra 
29 Shri Subhas Chandra Bose Pilli 
30 Dr. V. Sivadasan 
31 Shri Ravichandra Vaddiraju 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1 Shri Y.M. Kandpal Joint Secretary 
2 
3 
4 
Shri H. Ram Prakash 
Shri Brajesh Kumar Singh 
Shri Gurpreet Singh 
Director 
Deputy Secretary 
Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 

(iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas 
having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present this Twenty-First Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
of the Committee on 'Demands for Grants (2023-24)'. 
2. The Eighteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural 
Gas was presented to Lok Sabha/ laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on 
23.03.2023. The Action Taken Replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report were received on 
22.06.2023. 
3. The Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas (2022-23) 
considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 04.08.2023.  
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas is given in Annexure-II. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report. 
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered to them by the officers of the Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee. 
 
 
New Delhi; 
 04  August, 2023 
13 Shravana, 1945 (Saka)     
                           RAMESH BIDHURI,                                             
Chairperson,  
Standing Committee on                                                                                   
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
 
 

REPORT 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Eighteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2022-23) on "Demands for Grants 
(2023-24) of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas'', which was presented to 
Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 23.03.2023.  
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry on 22.06.2023 
in respect of all the 20 recommendations/observations contained in the report. 
These have been categorized as per the following: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government:- Reco. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 16, 17, 18, 19 
and 20 (Total - 16) 
          (Chapter- II) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies:- Nil 
(Chapter- III) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:- Reco. Nos. 4, 5 
and 15 (Total - 3) 
 (Chapter- IV) 
                                                                                                      
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:- Reco. No. 13 (Total - 1) 
                                                                                                    (Chapter- V)   
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of this Report and 
Final Replies in respect of the recommendations for which interim replies 
have been furnished by the Government (included in Chapter-V), should be 
furnished expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations.  

Recommendation No. 4 
 
Construction of ISPRL Phase-II Projects 
 
5. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note that an allocation of Rs 508 Cr has been made in the BE 
2023-24 for construction of ISPRL Phase-II projects at Chandikhol (Odisha) and 
Padur (Karnataka) with storage capacity of 4.0 MMT and 2.5 MMT respectively 
using underground unlined rock caverns storage technology in PPP mode. 
Besides, provision of rs 202.81 Cr has been made for payment to ISPRL 
regarding O&M Expenditure for Mangalore (Padur) and Vishakhapatnam 
Projects. The Committee are also given to understand that the additional caverns 
in phase II, envisaged to be constructed shall be close to existing refineries 
respectively and the increase in capacity will add to increase in 12 days of crude 
oil requirement. In addition, 1.5-2 MMT capacity is proposed to be constructed 
adjacent to existing caverns at Mangalore. Feasibility of constructing above 
ground storage at Mangalore and Padur on the existing land is also being looked 
into. ISPRL is also examining storages in other locations in the country. It is also 
noted that since land allotment at both the locations is pending with respective 
State Governments in Odisha and Karnataka, the projects could not be started 
and consequently allocation of the outlays of Rs 600 Cr in BE 2022-23 could not 
be utilized. The Committee find that there has been inordinate delays in land 
acquisitions in respect of both the projects in the two states and the progress 
seems to be minimal. Taking note of the fact that the strategic petroleum 
reserves are projects of national importance to enhance energy security of the 
country, the Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to take up the issue of land 
acquisition at the highest level in coordination with the two State Governments 
keeping in view interests of all stake holders. and also desire that the Ministry 
should explore possibility of building more strategic petroleum reserves across 
the country particularly mini or small caverns wherever geological conditions are 
favourable for constructing such caverns. The Committee further desire that the 
Ministry should also explore the option of giving responsibility to OMCs/refineries 
to operate and maintain strategic petroleum reserves caverns while the Ministry 
bears the capital cost for construction”.  
 
6. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply:  
 

“Cabinet had approved development of Commercial cum Strategic reserves 
under Phase II at Chandikhol (4MMT) and Padur (2.5 MMT) on Public-Private 
Partnership (PPP) mode along with dedicated Single Point Mooring (SPM) and 
associated pipelines during cabinet meeting held on 08th July 2021.  
Land Acquisition is under process and discussions with the respective State 
Governments for expeditious completion of land acquisition are going on”.  
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/14/2022-Fin.I dated 19th July, 2022 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
7. The Committee in their original report while pointing out the 
inordinate delay being experienced in land acquisition in respect of both 
the ISPRL projects at Chandikhol (Odisha) and Padur (Karnataka) had 
desired the Ministry to take up the issue of land acquisition at the highest 
level in coordination with the two State Governments. The Committee had 
recommended that these projects should be taken to their logical 
conclusion and also to explore possibility of building more strategic 
petroleum reserves particularly mini or small caverns. Moreover, the 
Committee had also desired that the Ministry should explore the option of 
giving responsibility to OMCs/refineries to operate and maintain strategic 
petroleum reserves caverns while the Ministry bears the capital cost for 
construction.   
 In this regard, the Committee note that the Ministry have stated that 
land acquisition is under process and discussions with the respective 
State Governments for expeditious completion of land acquisition are 
going on and that the Cabinet had approved development of Commercial 
cum Strategic reserves under Phase II at Chandikhol (4MMT) and Padur (2.5 
MMT) on Public-Private Partnership (PPP) along with dedicated single point 
mooring and associated pipelines.  The Ministry has neither furnished 
details of steps taken towards solving vexatious issue of land acquisition 
nor it has furnished any road map or plan to construct strategic storage 
facilities for crude oil in association with Oil Marketing Companies 
(OMCs)/Refineries.  The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the 
Ministry and reiterate their earlier recommendation for expediting the 
process for completion of land acquisition in respect of both the projects. 
The Committee further desire the Ministry to explore feasibility of building 

mini or small caverns by engaging OMCs/Refineries to operate and 
maintain strategic petroleum reserves caverns while the Ministry bears the 
capital cost for construction.   
Recommendation No. 5 
 
LPG Connections to Poor Households (Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana) 
 
8. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note that in BE 2023-24, only a token amount of Rs. 1 Lakh has 
been made in respect of PMUY scheme for providing LPG connections to poor 
households as against Rs. 800 cr provided in BE 2022-23 which was increased 
to Rs. 8010 Cr at RE stage in 2022-23. The Committee also note that the target 
of release of additional 60 lakh connections in addition to 9 crore already issued 
under PMUY was achieved by December, 2022. The Committee are also given 
to understand that as on closing of January 2023, OMCs have received 7.8 lakh 
cleared applications under Ujjwala 2.0 scheme which are pending for release of 
the connection. The Committee have been apprised that a proposal to provide 
PMUY connections to remaining applicants is under progress for due approvals. 
Besides, on perusal of the state-wise details regarding release of 60 Lakh 
connections under Ujjwala 2.0, the Committee observe that more efforts are 
needed to enhance LPG coverage. The Committee have been assured that 
funds would not come in the way of releasing pending applications under PMUY 
and that OMCs are fully capable of undertaking expenditure from their own 
sources for implementing the scheme and claim reimbursement later on. In this 
regard, the Committee while being satisfied with the achievement of the scheme, 
sincerely appreciate the efforts of the Ministry and OIVICs for the successful 
implementation of the scheme and also their readiness to further enhance 
coverage of the scheme keeping in view emergence of new households seeking 
connections under PMUY. The Committee recommend the Ministry/OMCs to 
strive for clearing pending 7.8 lakh applications under Ujjawala 2.0 and devise 
the required modalities at the earliest so that the scheme will be implemented for 
the new beneficiaries within the stipulated deadline. Further, the Committee also 
desire the Ministry to provide LPG connections on demand and include 
beneficiaries of poor households living in urban/rurban areas so as to make the 
PMUY benefit all stratums of the society and help build gas based economy 
across the country”.  
 

9. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply:  
 
“Hon’ble Finance Minister during her Budget Speech for FY 2021-22 on 
01.02.2021 had announced that Ujjwala Scheme which has benefited 8 crores 
households will be extended to cover 1 crore more beneficiaries. Accordingly, 
Ujjwala 2.0 was launched in the esteemed presence of the Hon’ble Prime 
Minister from Mahoba District of Uttar Pradesh on 10th August, 2021 on pan 
India basis to provide additional one crore LPG connections along with free first 
refill and stove to cover the left-out poor households. Subsequently, the 
Government decided to release 60 lakh more LPG connections under Ujjwala 2.0 
and as on 01.01.2023, the target of 1.60 crore Ujjwala 2.0 connections has 
already been achieved. OMCs have received 8.4 lakh cleared applications under 
Ujjwala 2.0 scheme which are pending for release the connection. A proposal to 
provide PMUY connections to remaining applicants is under progress. Once the 
proposal is approved by competent authorities, necessary action to seek 
additional budget for the additional PMUY connections will be initiated”.  
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/14/2022-Fin.I dated 19th July, 2022 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
10. The Committee in their original Report had recommended the 
Ministry/OMCs to strive for clearing pending 7.8 lakh applications under 
Ujjawala 2.0 within the stipulated deadline. Further, the Committee had also 
desired the Ministry to provide LPG connections on demand and include 
beneficiaries of poor households living in urban/rurban areas so as to 
ensure that the PMUY benefit all stratums of the society.  The Ministry in 
their action taken reply have stated that OMCs have received 8.4 lakh 
applications under Ujjwala 2.0 scheme which are pending for release the 
connections and a proposal to provide PMUY connections to remaining 
applicants is under progress. Once the proposal is approved by competent 
authorities, necessary action to seek additional budget for the additional 
PMUY connections will be initiated.  
The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry as the aspect 
related to identification of new beneficiaries belonging to poor households 
living in urban/rurban areas under PMUY scheme has not been touched 
upon in the reply.  Moreover, no mention about the likely time frame by 

which the pending applications will be cleared for release of connection 
points towards a non-serious attitude of the Ministry as well as OMCs 
towards clearing pending applications.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate 
their earlier recommendation and exhort the Ministry for expediting the 
approval process for clearing the pending 8.4 lakhs applications under 
Ujjawala 2.0 and also desire that OMCs should make proactive efforts in 
getting in additional budget once the requisite approvals are obtained.  
  
Recommendation No. 6 
 
Indian Institute of Petroleum Energy (IIPE), Visakhapatnam  
 
11. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note that the Government has made a provision of Rs 168 Cr in 
respect of IIPE during the financial year 2023-24. The Committee further note 
that while Rs 150 Cr allocation was made in BE 2022-23 which was reduced to 
Rs 100 Cr during RE 2022-23, the actual expenditure upto 1.1.2023 has been 
shown as ‘nil’. The Committee have been informed that since its inception, the 
Institute is operating from temporary campus situated at Andhra University 
College of Engineering, Visakhapatnam as the land allocated for the construction 
of a permanent campus of IIPE was under litigation. Further, it has been learnt 
that consequent upon the order passed by Hon’ble High Court of Andhra 
Pradesh on 15.12.2022 preventing any sort of interference, hindrance or 
obstruction in the construction activities by IIPE, APIIC has now resumed the 
construction activities of the boundary wall in the alienated land and the 
conceptual drawings for the buildings have been facing time and cost overrun as 
the original outlay for construction of permanent campus and infrastructure 
development was pegged at Rs 655.47 Crore and was to be completed in two 
phases by financial year 2020-21 has now been revised to be estimated to Rs 
928.66 Crore due to GST and inflation and is now proposed to be completed by 
financial year 2026-27. 
In this regard, the Committee while welcoming the adjudication by the Hon’ble 
High Court, recommend the Ministry to fast track the construction activities on the 
allocated land for IIPE by undertaking proper coordination with implementing 
agencies like APIIC and CPWD to avoid any further cost and time over run. The 
Committee may be kept abreast of the progress”. 
 

12. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
 
“The MoP&NG has released the amount of Rs. 29,24,90,810/- on 31.03.2023 for 
the financial year 2022-23.  The expenditure incurred by the Institute during the 
financial year 2022-23 towards construction of permanent campus and 
infrastructure development was Rs. 17.781 crore.  
The original outlay for setting up of IIPE was pegged at Rs. 655.47crore which 
includes for construction of buildings, infrastructure, purchase, of machinery, 
equipment, software/Hardware, Furniture & Fixtures etc.  However, due to 
pending Court cases litigated by the farmers and as land could not be handed 
over to the Institute till mid of March, 2023, the Institute could not start the 
construction activities within the time frame.  Further, as per the Detailed Project 
Report (DPR) which was prepared by M/s KPMG, the construction estimates per 
unit rates were bases on CPWD plinth area rates (PAR) 2012 and Cost Index 
2014.  The estimated rates as provided in the DPA are of 10 years old which will 
not match with the latest construction cost due to time lag, inflation, introduction 
of GST regime, etc. and hence it has been revised to be estimated to Rs. 928.66 
crore for construction activities, excluding land cost.   
However, in this regard, based on the recommendations of the Finance 
Committee of the Institute, the Board of Governors, IIPE during the 16th meeting 
held on 17.03.20023 approved for entrusting M/s Education Consultant of India 
Ltd. {EdCIL), a Central PSU, under Ministry of Education, for carrying out the 
study and preparing a Revised DPR to enable the Nodal Ministry to revise the 
total project cost and timeline of completion of project.  The same is under 
process at the Institute level. On submission of the revised DPR by the proposed 
firm, the final estimates for setting of the permanent campus of IIPE will be 
confirmed. 
Consequent, upon the order passed by the Hon’ble High Court of Andhra 
Pradesh on 15.12.2022, the Andhra Pradesh Industrial Infrastructure Corporation 
(APIIC) has resumed the construction activities of the boundary wall. 
Based on the finalized drawings of buildings of the permanent campus, CPWD 
has submitted the Preliminary Estimates for Rs. 383 crore of Phase-1 
construction on 13.03.2023 and the same was approved by the Board of 
Governors, IIPE during its meeting held on 17.03.2023.  The Institute has 
accorded the AA & ES for the preliminary estimates and communicated the same 
to the CPWD on 22.03.2023.  The Institute has released a total amount of Rs. 
38.3 crore being advance 10% of AA&ES (Rs. 25.7 crore released in FY 2021-22 
& Rs. 12.6 crore released in FY 2022-23 on 29.03.2023), to the CPWD, as per 

agreement terms and conditions.  
The CPWD is in process of hiring the Consultant for development of Bulk 
Services which consists of design and schematic drawings for road network, 
water supply, sewerage system, capacity calculations for WTP, STP etc/ in the 
permanent campus of the Institute.  The report is expected to be submitted by 
the CPWD by end May, 2023.  Subsequently, the CPWD will initiate the 
tendering process for construction activities”. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/14/2022-Fin.I dated 19th July, 2022 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
13. The Committee in their original report had recommended the Ministry 
to fast track the construction activities on the allocated land for IIPE by 
undertaking proper coordination with implementing agencies like APIIC 
and CPWD to avoid any further cost and time over run.  
The Ministry in their action taken reply have interalia submitted that the 
amount of Rs. 29,24,90,810/- has been released  as on 31.03.2023 for the 
financial year 2022-23.  The expenditure incurred by the Institute during the 
financial year 2022-23 towards construction of permanent campus and 
infrastructure development was Rs. 17.781 crore. Further, it has been 
stated in the reply that based on the recommendations of the Finance 
Committee of the Institute, the Board of Governors, IIPE during the 16th 
meeting held on 17.03.20023 approved for entrusting M/s Education 
Consultant of India Ltd. (EdCIL), a Central PSU, under Ministry of 
Education, for carrying out the study and preparing a Revised DPR to 
enable the Nodal Ministry to revise the total project cost and timeline of 
completion of project.  The same is under process at the Institute level. On 
submission of the revised DPR by the proposed firm, the final estimates for 
setting of the permanent campus of IIPE will be confirmed. The Ministry 
have further stated in their reply that CPWD is in process of hiring the 
Consultant for development of Bulk Services in the permanent campus of 
the Institute.  The report is expected to be submitted by the CPWD by end 
May, 2023.  Subsequently, the CPWD will initiate the tendering process for 
construction activities. 
The Committee while accepting the reply of the Ministry opine that there 
has been considerable delay in operationalisation of the Institute which has 

resulted in both time and cost overrun. The Committee, therefore, reiterate 
their earlier recommendation to fast track the construction activities by 
undertaking proper coordination with implementing agencies like APIIC 
and CPWD and also with M/s Education Consultant of India Ltd. (EdCIL) 
which has been entrusted with preparing a revised Detailed Project Report 
(DPR) to enable the Nodal Ministry to revise the total project cost and 
timeline of completion of project. The Ministry may also apprise the 
Committee about the action taken in the matter within six months of 
presentation of this report. 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
Numaligarh Refinery Expansion Project 
 
14. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that outlays of Rs 245 Cr and Rs 500 Cr have been made 
in RE 2022-23 and BE 2023-24 respectively for Numaligarh Refinery Expansion 
Project. The Committee further note that the Numaligarh Refinery Limited (NRL) 
was established in 1993 in accordance with historic Assam accord signed on 
15th August, 1985 as an economic package which led to setting up of 
Numaligarh Refinery. The NRL was dedicated to the nation by the former Prime 
Minister late Atal Bihari Vajpayee on the 9th of July, 1999 and the 3 MMTPA 
capacity refinery was commissioned on the 1st October, 2000. The Committee 
further note that the refinery has embarked on a major integrated expansion 
project to treble its capacity from 3 MMTPA to 9 MMTPA at an estimated 
investment of more than Rs 28000 Cr. Out of this amount, the Central 
Government has committed Rs 1020 Cr as Viability Gap Funding (VGF). The 
remaining cost of the project is being funded through addition equity from 
Promoters (Rs 3165 Cr), internal accruals (Rs 4937 Cr) and commercial 
borrowings (Rs 18904 Cr). The Committee also observe that the target date of 
completion of the project is January, 2025. However, as on 31st January, 2023 
the physical and financial progress of the project is only 28.8% and 28.3% 
respectively. The Committee, therefore, recommend to Ministry of petroleum & 
Natural Gas and Numaligarh Refinery Limited to take all necessary steps to 
complete the project as per schedule and obviate any possibility of cost 
escalation due to time overrun". 
 
15. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
 

 
"As on 31st May, 2023, physical and financial progress of the project is 39.43% 
and 39.05% respectively. All efforts are being made to expedite the project". 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/14/2022-Fin.I dated 19th July, 2022 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
16. The Committee in their original report while observing  that the target 
date of completion of the Integrated expansion project of Numaligarh 
Refinery Limited (NRL) is January, 2025, had  recommended  the  Ministry 
and NRL to take all necessary steps to complete the project as per 
schedule and obviate any possibility of cost escalation due to time 
overrun.  
The Ministry in their action taken reply have submitted that as on 31st May, 
2023, physical and financial progress of the project is 39.43% and 39.05% 
respectively and that all efforts are being made to expedite the project.  
The Committee while accepting the reply of the Ministry are concerned to 
note that there is no clarity in the reply as to whether the target date of 
completion of the project i.e. January 2025 will be achieved or not. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and exhort the 
Ministry to closely monitor the progress of the project and to make all out 
efforts to complete the project as per schedule without any time and cost 
overrun.  
Recommendation No. 15 
 
Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum and Technology (RGIPT) Centre  
 
17. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that in respect of RGIPT, Sivasagar, Assam, no budgetary 
allocation has been made in BE 2022-23 and BE 2023-24 whereas expenses of 
the Institute are metthrough budgetary support from Government, OIDB and 
funding from Oil PSUs. The Committee have been apprised that the 
sanctionedstrength of Teaching Staff is 36 whereas the actual strength is 23. In 
respect of Non-Teaching Staff the strength is 40 and the actual strength is 11. 
Presently, RGIPT Sivasagar offers Diploma courses and PhD whereas in RGIPT, 
Amethi offers courses in B.Tech, M.Tech, PhD and MBA in the domain of 

Petroleum and Energy. 
  The Committee observe that the prime objective behind setting up 
of RGIPT at Amethi and at Sivasagar is to provide excellent education, training 
and research to generate efficient human resources to meet growing requirement 
in petroleum and energy sector. In this regard, the Committee are of the view that 
both the centres of RGIPT should have similarity in offered courses as the 
institution has been accorded the status of being an institution of National 
Importance. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to ensure 
offering of B.Tech and M.Tech courses apart from undertaking revision of 
sanctioned strength and filling vacant posts in RGIPT, Sivasagar in view of the 
fact that Assam is a oil and gas hub where extensive oil field activities are being 
carried out in its vicinity. The Committee also desire that the Ministry should 
facilitate the Institute to emerge as premier Skill Development Centre for 
hydrocarbon industry with introduction of courses like high-tech welder, x-ray 
technicians, Robotics, Artificial Intelligence, etc". 
 
18. In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
 
"Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology, Shiv Sagar Assam is being 
developed with the help of funds made available by Oil PSUs & OIDB and a 
grant of Rs. 100.00 crore received by Government of India in 2021-22.    
The Centre (AEI) is at present offering five 3-year Diploma Courses and after its 
campus becomes fully functional, B.Tech. and other programmes may also start 
in subsequent years to fulfil human resource needs of hydrocarbon and energy 
sectors.    
The Assam Energy Institute (AEI), Sivasagar has been established with the 
objective to cater to the skilled and trained human resource need of oil and gas 
industries. To cater this need, AEI commenced its academic programmes from 
Academic Session 2017-18 by offering 3-year Diploma Courses.  
 
Institute is currently offering 5 Nos. of Diploma level courses and Ph.D 
programmes in relevant discipline from AEI, Sivasagar and there is a plan to offer 
undergraduate programmes also considering the manpower requirements of 
energy industries.  
 
The AEI has an Endowment Fund of Rs. 249.50 crore. These funds have been 
contributed by Oil PSUs. The Assam centre meet out its recurring expenses from 
the interest earned on the investment of Endowment Fund.  

 
The courses offered at Assam Energy Institute (AEI), Sivasagar are not same 
and are complementary nature to that of courses offered at RGIPT, Jais, Amethi. 
Currently, AEI offers 3-years Diploma programmes in the domain areas of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas. Whereas at RGIPT, Jais B. Tech., M. Tech. and 
MBA courses are offered in the domain of Petroleum and Energy. Further to that 
there is a lateral entry scheme for the Diploma pass out students of AEI to 
acquire B. Tech. degree at Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology 
(RGIPT), Jais, Amethi". 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/14/2022-Fin.I dated 19th July, 2022 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
19. The Committee in their original report had recommended the Ministry 
to ensure offering of B.Tech and M.Tech courses on the lines of  RGIPT, 
Amethi which offers courses in B.Tech, M.Tech, PhD and MBA in the 
domain of Petroleum and Energy  and also to undertake revision of 
sanctioned strength and filling vacant posts in RGIPT, Sivasagar.  Besides, 
the Committee had also desired  the Ministry to facilitate the Institute to 
emerge as premier Skill Development Centre for hydrocarbon industry in 
the North-East with the introduction of courses like        high-tech welder, 
X-ray technicians, Robotics, Artificial Intelligence, etc.  
 The Ministry in their action taken reply have inter-alia stated that the 
Institute is currently offering 5 nos. of Diploma level courses and Ph.D 
programmes in relevant disciplines and there is a plan to offer 
undergraduate programmes also considering the manpower requirements 
of energy industries.  Further, the reply states that the courses offered at 
Assam Energy Institute (AEI), Sivasagar are not same and are 
complementary in nature to that of courses offered at RGIPT, Jais, Amethi.  
 In this regard, the Committee observe that the reply of the Ministry is 
vague as there is no commitment for developing the RGIPT (AEI) Sivasagar 
as premier Skill Development Centre in North-East for petroleum and 
energy studies within a stipulated time period.  Moreover, it can not be 
discerned from the reply as to whether presently there is lack of demand 
for undergraduate courses at RGIPT, Sivasagar or it is the lack of will 
power on the part of the RGIPT to offer similar courses.  The Committee, 

therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that the 
Ministry should help the Institute in emerging as premier Skill Development 
Centre for hydrocarbon industry with introduction of new courses B.Tech 
courses and also by provide sufficient grants of money under the union 
budget for the purpose.   
Recommendation No. 19 
 
City Gas Distribution Network  
 
20. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note from the information provided by the Ministry that the target 
dates of completion of Piped Natural Gas (PNG) connections in 31 geographical 
areas of the country were upto 30 September 2022. In this regard, the 
Committee observe that the implementation of City Gas Distribution Network 
Programme is behind the schedule. The Committee further note that PNGRB has 
so far authorized 297 Geographical Areas (Gas) for development of CGD 
network which cover 98% of the country’s population and 88% of its geographical 
area. The last concluded 11th and 11 A CGD Bidding rounds, wherein 
authorization for 67 Gas has been awarded for the development of CGD network, 
which covers 28.47% of the country’s population and 34.66% of its geographical 
area. The projects need to be completed as per schedule same is part of the 
vision of the Hon’ble Prime Minister of India to make the country a gas based 
economy by 2030 by increasing the share of natural gas in India’s Energy Mix 
from present 6.3% to 15%. In view of the above, the Committee recommend the 
Ministry of petroleum and Natural Gas to review the progress of CGD network 
projects with CGD entities and so as to ensure the progress of the programme as 
per schedule”. 
21. In this regard the Ministry, have submitted the following reply: 
 “Upto 28.2.2023, a total 107.56 lakh PNG domestic connections and a 
total 5283 CNG Stations have been commissioned across the country by the 
various entities, authorized by the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board 
(PNGRB). The work of laying and expanding CGD networks in all the 
Geographical Areas (GAs) is being carried out by the entities, authorized by 
Petroleum & Natural Gas Regulatory Board (PNGRB). PNGRB carries out 
monitoring and progress review of the Minimum Work Programme on periodic 
basis. In line with the regulations, the entities failing to meet the target have been 
issued notices and remedial time period has been given to achieve their targets. 
The cases of entities who have failed to meet their target will be dealt in 

accordance with the provisions of the PNGRB Act and the extant regulations. 
Moreover, MoP&NG also takes periodic review on the progress made by CGD 
entities from time to time”. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/14/2022-Fin.I dated 19th July, 2022 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
22. The Committee in their original report had observed  that the 
implementation of City Gas Distribution Network in the country is behind  
the schedule and  that PNGRB has so far authorized 297 Geographical 
Areas (Gas) for development of CGD network which cover 98% of the 
country’s population and 88% of its geographical area. The Committee had 
recommended the Ministry of petroleum and Natural Gas to review the 
progress of CGD network projects with CGD entities so as to ensure the 
progress of the programme as per schedule. 
The Ministry in their action taken reply have submitted that upto 28.2.2023, 
a total 107.56 lakh PNG domestic connections and a total 5283 CNG 
Stations have been commissioned across the country by the various 
entities, authorized by the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board 
(PNGRB). The work of laying and expanding CGD networks in all the 
Geographical Areas (GAs) is being carried out by the entities, authorized 
by Petroleum & Natural Gas Regulatory Board (PNGRB). PNGRB carries 
out monitoring and progress review of the Minimum Work Programme on 
periodic basis. In line with the regulations, the entities failing to meet the 
target have been issued notices and remedial time period has been given 
to achieve their targets. The reply also states that the cases of entities who 
have failed to meet their target will be dealt in accordance with the 
provisions of the PNGRB Act and the extant regulations and Ministry also 
takes periodic review on the progress made by CGD entities from time to 
time. 
The Committee while accepting the reply expect the Ministry to closely 
monitor the progress of the CGD projects and also take proactive steps for 
addressing the challenges/difficulties being faced by the CGD entities in 
obtaining various statutory clearances from various State and district level 
authorities and complete the projects as per schedule.  
----- 

CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation No. 1 
Budgetary Allocations 
The Committee note that the total allocation of the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas for BE 2023-24 has been Rs 41007.72 Cr as against Rs 8939.86 Cr 
of the BE 2022-23 and of Rs 33883.55 Cr of the RE 2022-23. The Committee 
also note that provision of Rs 35000 Cr has been made in the BE 2023-24 which 
comprises Rs 30000 Cr as capital support to Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) 
towards energy transition and net zero objectives and Rs 5000 Cr towards 
payment to Indian Strategic Petroleum Reserve Limited. Besides, one time grant 
of Rs 22000 Crore to OMCs has been made as compensation for under 
recoveries in their domestic LPG operations in the RE 2022-23. For Numaligarh 
Refinery expansion project, an outlay of rs 245 Cr in RE 2022-23 and Rs 500 Cr 
in BE 2023-24 has been proposed towards Viability Gap Funding. Further, the 
Committee note that under DBT for LPG scheme an allocation of Rs 180 Cr has 
been made whereas for LPG connection to Poor Households (PMUY), only a 
token amount Rs 1 Lakh has been provided in the BE 2023-24. For 
Indradhanush Gas Grid Limited (IGGL) and Other subsidy payable including NE 
Region (Domestic Natural Gas), an allocation of Rs 1800 Cr and Rs 1633.02 Cr 
respectively has been made in BE 2023-24. Similarly, under the Capital Heads, 
the Committee finds that Rs 508 Cr has been allocated to ISPRL under Phase-II 
of construction of strategic crude storage caverns. In respect of IIPE, 
Visakhapatnam, a provision of rs 168 Cr has been made whereas under PM-
JIVAN Yojana Rs 227.26 Cr has been allocated in the BE 2023-24. Similarly, Rs 
290.44 Cr has been allocated under Scheme for Flagging of Merchant Ships 
(Shipping Subsidy). However, the Committee are dismayed to note that the 
Centre for Excellence for Energy, Bangalore, Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum 
Technology, Assam, Phulpur-Dharma-Haldia Pipeline Project and National 
Seismic Programme have not been allocated any funds during the BE 2023-24. 
Similarly, funds have not been allocated under the Head “Payment of Differential 
royalty to State Governments” in BE 2023-24. 
The Committee also observe that the budgetary allocations of the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas during the last three financial years have been Rs 
15943 Cr for BE 2021-22, Rs 8939.86 Cr for BE 2022-23 and Rs 41007.72 Cr for 
BE 2023-24 thereby showing stark variations which reflects poor planning in 

making budgetary projections. 
The Committee also note that the Government has also made some new 
announcements in the budget such as support to OMCs for priority capital 
investments towards energy transition and net zero objectives and establishing 
500 new ‘waste to wealth’ plants under GOBARDhan (Galvanizing Organic Bio-
Agro Resources Dhan) for promoting circular economy. 
The Committee while welcoming the new budgetary announcements of the 
Government for the BE 2023-24, desire that the Ministry must ensure full 
utilization of the allocations made for existing schemes and new 
programmes/schemes in a timely manner and without escalation of cost. A road 
map for utilization of Rs 30000 Cr allocated to OMCs for the said purpose may 
be prepared by the ministry under intimation to the Committee. 
The Committee recommend that the Ministry should fully utilize the funds 
allocated for the different programmes and schemes and if need for additional 
funds arise, they may approach the Government during Revised Budget Estimate 
exercise. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Allocation of funds are done keeping in mind full utilization of funds in different 
programmes and schemes.  
2. Reasons for non-allocation of funds in BE 2023-24 in some of the 
schemes as pointed out by the Committee are as follows: 
 
i) Centre for Excellence for Energy, Bangalore : The Committee on 
Establishment Expenditure during their meeting dated 13.8.2021 had 
decided one time Govt. Budgetary Support of Rs 100 Crore would be 
provided. 
ii) Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology, Assam:  
iii) Phulpur-Dhamra-Haldia Pipeline Project:The sunset date for the scheme 
was 2019-20 as per the CCEA approval. However, it was extended upto 
2021-22. Funding for the scheme was completed by GoI in 2021-22 thus 
no funds were allocated in 2022-23 and 2023-24. 
iv) National Seismic Programme: 2-D survey under the scheme has been 
completed. The next advanced leg of 3-D survey is being incorporated in 
Mission Anveshan which is under process. 
v) Payment of Differential Royalty to State Government: Rs 27.12 Cr were 
sought in BE 2023-24, however no funds were allocated after RE-BE 
discussions by Ministry of Finance  
3. Further, with regard to the variations in Budgetary Allocations of MoPNG 
in past three years, it is submitted that the decrease in BE 2022-23 is due to 

projections made by OMCs in view of the pending bills for under recovery in 
DBTL schemes which are duly vetted by PPAC. As for the increase in BE 2023-
24, it is mainly due to Capital Expenditure of Rs 30000 Cr allocated as Capital 
Support to OMC and Rs 5000 Cr allocated for purchase of crude oil for filling the 
caverns.  
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/02/2023-Fin.I dated 22.06.2023 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
Transfer of Petrochemicals division from the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers to the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
 
The Committee note that the Petrochemicals Industry is one of the fastest 
growing industries in India with demand increasing at a CAGR of more than 8% 
in the last five years. The Committee further note that the Petrochemicals market 
in India is dominated by basic petrochemicals (about 45%) in which upstream 
and downstream petroleum companies of the country has a large presence. 
Recently, ONGC commissioned largest Petrochemical plant of the country i.e 
ONGC Petro increases ltd. Plant at Bharuch, Gujarat. IOCL is also executing 
several Petrochemical projects to increase its present Petrochemical Industry 
Index (PTI) of about 5% to 15% by 2030. The Oil PSU Refineries under Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas has considerable budget in their IEBR every year 
under the head ‘Petrochemicals’. The Committee also note that the department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals was transferred from the Ministry of Petroleum 
and Chemicals to the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers on 5 June, 1991. In 
this regard, the Committee observe that the Petrochemicals industry of the 
country has tremendously expanded since then and presently on the course of 
becoming a major Petrochemicals hub of the world. The OMCs of the country 
have also become large, diversified and integrated. Here, the Committee feel that 
transfer of Petrochemicals division from the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers to 
the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas will benefit both the petroleum & 
petrochemicals sectors through better policy formulation and implementation and 
also utilizing the synergies between two sectors. As the Refineries need various 
sanctions, approvals, clearances, etc, it will be better if the departments are 
under the same Ministry. The Committee recommend to the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas to examine the expediency of transfer of 
petrochemicals divisions from the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers to Ministry 

of Petroleum & Natural Gas and in case the same is found beneficial to take up 
the issue with the Cabinet Secretariat for amendment of Allocation of Business 
Rules of the Government of India. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The recommendation of the committee is noted. Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas acknowledges the importance of synergy between Petroleum & 
Petrochemicals sectors. However, on the issue of transfer of Petrochemicals 
division from the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers to Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas, detailed deliberations amongst all the stakeholders are need.” 
 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/02/2023-Fin.I dated 22.06.2023 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
INDIA STRATEGIC PETROLEUM RESERVES LIMITED (ISPRL) 
 
The Committee note that an allocation of Rs 5000 Cr has been made in the BE 
2023-24 to ISPRL for meeting the cost of filling up of crude oil caverns. The 
Committee have also been apprised that crude oil stored in some of the SPRs 
was released to be sold in open market in 2021 keeping in view then prevailing 
high global prices thereby making substantial saving to the Govt. of India. The 
Committee while appreciating this financially prudent decision of the 
Government, recommend that the Ministry must take proactive steps to ensure 
full utilization of earmarked funds during the net financial year for filling up 
caverns and explore the possibilities of arranging cheaper crude oil for strategic 
storage in the country in the light of current geopolitical situation. In this regard, 
the Ministry should not hesitate in seeking enhanced budgetary allocations from 
the Government and it should also rope in OMCs/refineries for filling these 
strategic reserves keeping in view overall energy security of the country. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
In the Union Budget of 2023-24 presented on 01.02.2023 under MoPNG 
Demand no 76, an amount of INR 5000 Crore has been allocated for purchase of 
crude oil by ISPRL.  

ISPRL shall be purchasing the crude oil through OMCs in the international 
market to fill these strategic reserves. MoPNG is in process of taking the 
necessary approvals for utilizing this grant. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/02/2023-Fin.I dated 22.06.2023 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 Indian Institute of Petroleum Energy (IIPE), Visakhapatnam 
 
The Committee note that the Government has made a provision of Rs 168 Cr in 
respect of IIPE during the financial year 2023-24. The Committee further note 
that while Rs 150 Cr allocation was made in BE 2022-23 which was reduced to 
Rs 100 Cr during RE 2022-23, the actual expenditure upto 1.1.2023 has been 
shown as ‘nil’. The Committee have been informed that since its inception, the 
Institute is operating from temporary campus situated at Andhra University 
College of Engineering, Visakhapatnam as the land allocated for the construction 
of a permanent campus of IIPE was under litigation. Further, it has been learnt 
that consequent upon the order passed by Hon’ble High Court of Andhra 
Pradhesh on 15.12.2022 preventing any sort of interference, hindrance or 
obstruction in the construction activities by IIPE, APIIC has now resumed the 
construction activities of the boundary wall in the alienated land and the 
conceptual drawings for the buildings have been facing time and cost overrun as 
the original outlay for construction of permanent campus and infrastructure 
development was pegged at Rs 655.47 Crore and was to be completed in two 
phases by financial year 2020-21 has now been revised to be estimated to Rs 
928.66 Crore due to GST and inflation and is now proposed to be completed by 
financial year 2026-27. 
In this regard, the Committee while welcoming the adjudication by the Hon’ble 
High Court, recommend the Ministry to fast track the construction activities on the 
allocated land for IIPE by undertaking proper coordination with implementing 
agencies like APIIC and CPWD to avoid any further cost and time over run. The 
Committee may be kept abreast of the progress. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The MoP&NG has released the amount of Rs. 29,24,90,810/- on 31.03.2023 for 
the financial year 2022-23.  The expenditure incurred by the Institute during the 

financial year 2022-23 towards construction of permanent campus and 
infrastructure development was Rs. 17.781 crores.  
 
The original outlay for setting up of IIPE was pegged at Rs. 655.47crores which 
includes for construction of buildings, infrastructure, purchase, of machinery, 
equipment, software/Hardware, Furniture & Fixtures etc.  However, due to 
pending Court cases litigated by the farmers and as land could not be handed 
over to the Institute till mid of March, 2023, the Institute could not start the 
construction activities within the time frame.  Further, as per the Detailed Project 
Report (DPR) which was prepared by M/s KPMG, the construction estimates per 
unit rates were bases on CPWD plinth area rates (PAR) 2012 and Cost Index 
2014.  The estimated rates as provided in the DPA are of 10 years old which will 
not match with the latest construction cost due to time lag, inflation, introduction 
of GST regime, etc. and hence it has been revised to be estimated to Rs. 928.66 
crores for construction activities, excluding land cost.   
 
However, in this regard, based on the recommendations of the Finance 
Committee of the Institute, the Board of Governors, IIPE during the 16th meeting 
held on 17.03.20023 approved for entrusting M/s Education Consultant of India 
Ltd. {EdCIL), a Central PSU, under Ministry of Education, for carrying out the 
study and preparing a Revised DPR to enable the Nodal Ministry to revise the 
total project cost and timeline of completion of project.  The same is under 
process at the Institute level. On submission of the revised DPR by the proposed 
firm, the final estimates for setting of the permanent campus of IIPE will be 
confirmed. 
 
Consequent, upon the order passed by the Hon’ble High Court of Andhra 
Pradesh on 15.12.2022, the Andhra Pradesh Industrial Infrastructure Corporation 
(APIIC) has resumed the construction activities of the boundary wall. 
 
Based on the finalized drawings of buildings of the permanent campus, CPWD 
has submitted the Preliminary Estimates for Rs. 383 crores of Phase-1 
construction on 13.03.2023 and the same was approved by the Board of 
Governors, IIPE during its meeting held on 17.03.2023.  The Institute has 
accorded the AA & ES for the preliminary estimates and communicated the same 
to the CPWD on 22.03.2023.  The Institute has released a total amount of Rs. 
38.3 crores being advance 10% of AA&ES (Rs. 25.7 crores released in FY 2021-
22 & Rs. 12.6 crores released in FY 2022-23 on 29.03.2023), to the CPWD, as 
per agreement terms and conditions.  
 
The CPWD is in process of hiring the Consultant for development of Bulk 
Services which consists of design and schematic drawings for road network, 
water supply, sewerage system, capacity calculations for WTP, STP etc/ in the 
permanent campus of the Institute.  The report is expected to be submitted by 
the CPWD by end May, 2023.  Subsequently, the CPWD will initiate the 
tendering process for construction activities. 
 

Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/02/2023-Fin.I dated 22.06.2023 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.13 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
  
 Centre for Excellence of Energy, Bangalore 
 
The Committee note that no budgetary provision has been made for the 
establishment of Centre for Excellence of Energy, Bangalore during in BE     
2022-23 and 2023-24. The Committee have been apprised that the issue related 
to land acquisition for the Institute has been resolved now and the Government of 
Karnataka through M/s Nirmithi Kendra has completed the construction of 
boundary wall and land is now in possession of the Institute. Further, the 
Committee have learnt that the construction of Academic Block and Students’ 
Hostel are underway from the fund received from the Government of India, and it 
will be completed by 2024. With regard to non-availability of budgetary support to 
the Institute for the last two financial years, the Committee have been informed 
that as per the decision of the Committee on Establishment Expenditure (CEE) 
which was held under the Chairmanship of Finance Secretary and Secretary 
(Expenditure) on 13.8.2021, there would be no Government Budgetary support 
for recurring operational expenditure of the Institute after providing support of Rs 
100 Cr in financial year 2021-22. In this regard, while appreciating the Ministry for 
successfully resolving the land dispute, the Committee wonder as to how the 
Centre of Excellence will undertake construction activities related to permanent 
campus without allocation of budgetary support from the Government. The 
Committee, therefore recommend the Ministry to look into this matter and 
approach the Ministry of Finance with fresh proposal for ensuring budgetary 
support to the institute or it may arrange funds from OIDB on loan basis till 
Government funds become available so that infrastructural development of the 
Institute is not hampered due to lack of funding. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The centre has been named as “Energy Institute, Bengaluru (EIB)” on the 
recommendation of Board of Governors and General Council of RGIPT. 
 
The construction of Academic Block and Students’ Hostel are underway from the 
fund of Rs. 100.00 crore being received from the Ministry, and it will be 

completed by 2024. There is a plan to shift the academic activities to permanent 
campus in late 2024.  
 
Funding requirement to set up Bangalore Energy Institute was deliberated in a 
meeting of Committee on Establishment Expenditure (CEE) held on 13.08.2021 
under the Chairmanship of Finance Secretary and Secretary (Expenditure) 
wherein it was recommended to grant one time Government Budgetary Support 
(GBS) of Rs. 100 crore to   Bangalore Energy Institute to develop infrastructure.  
There would be no GBS for recurring operational expenditure.    
 
OIDB has released an advance of Rs. 50 crore to meet out the immediate 
requirement for setting up a Energy Institute Bengaluru 
 
With regard to the budgetary support to the Energy Institute Bengaluru the matter 
is under consideration of this Ministry whether to arrange the funds from OIDB or 
from other PSUs or GBS. 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/02/2023-Fin.I dated 22.06.2023 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
  
 National Bio-Fuel Fund 
 
The Committee note that the National Bio-fuel Fund (NBF} was envisaged under 
National Policy on Biofuels-2018 for extending financial incentives including 
Viability Gap Funding, subsidies and grants for biofuels. In this regard, the 
Committee, further, note that while Rs. l Cr allocation was made during BE 2022-
23 which was reduced to Rs. 1 Lakh at RE 2022-23 stage and the actual 
expenditure as on O 1.01.2023 has been shown as 'nil'. The BE 2023-24 under 
the Head is also 'nil'. In this regard, while furnishing reasons for lack of budgetary 
support to NBF in BE 2023-24, the Committee have been informed by the 
MoPNG that the Ministry of Finance has not agreed to the proposal for setting up 
National Biofuel Fund. In view of this, the Committee recommend the Ministry to 
explore possibility of synchronizing the objectives of NBF with PM-JI-VAN Yojana 
or other such schemes which are being implemented by the MoPNG for bio fuel 
sector. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The objective of the National Biofuel Fund (NBF) was to consider extending 
financial incentives including viability gap funding, subsidies and grant for 
biofuels including "Advanced Biofuels". However, the Ministry of Finance has not 
agreed to the proposal for setting up of NBF. 

In the National Policy on Bio fuels - 2018 amended in June, 2022, the scope of 
"Advanced Biofuels" has been widened. The Ministry is also proposing 
amendment in Pradhan Mantri JI¬VAN Yojana including changing the objective 
of the existing scheme from "establish commercially viable projects for 2G 
Ethanol production" to "enhance commercial viability of projects for Advanced 
biofuels production" thereby synchronising the objectives of NBF with PM JI-VAN 
Yojana. 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/02/2023-Fin.I dated 22.06.2023 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
  Payment of Compensation to OMCs for under recoveries 
 
The Committee note that a fresh allocation of Rs. 22000 Cr has been made in 
RE 2022-23 as one time grant to PSU OMCs for under recoveries on sale of 
domestic LPG. In this regard, the Committee were informed that the purpose of 
the grant is to partially compensate PSU OMCs for losses incurred by them on 
sale of domestic LPG since April, 2020. The Committee were further informed 
that the global prices of LPG rose from $236 per metric tonne in April, 2020 to a 
peak of $950 per metric tonne and was still near $790 per metric tonne in 
February, 2023. There is also likelihood of its increase during the months of 
March-April this year. Since a significant chunk of LPG is imported in the country, 
the steep rise in international prices of LPG severaly impacted the financial 
position of the PSU OMCs. However, PSU OMCs passed on only a part of the 
increased cost of LPG to consumers. During the period i.e. April, 2020 to 
January, 2023, the price of LPG in domestic market has increased by about 72 
per cent. Due to such forbearance from passing on the full cost to consumers, 
the PSU OMCs sustained losses on account of under recoveries on domestic 
sale of LPG and their total under recoveries amounted to Rs. 28000 to 29000 Cr 
during the period. The Committee were also informed that the remaining losses 
will be either recovered from consumers slowly in future or compensated by other 
ways. The Committee appreciate the wise decision of the PSU OMCs to protect 
the domestic LPG consumers of the country from sudden impact of steep rise in 
prices of LPG cylinder and contributing to rein in the inflation in the country. The 
Committee also appreciate the decision of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas to fund under recoveries from general exchequer. The Committee further 
recommend the Ministry and PSU OMCs to demonstrate such good gesture in 
future too to protect/safeguard the people of the country from financial hardships 
caused by steep price increase of LPG cylinder and fund the under- recoveries of 
OMC's from general budget of the Government. 

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The recommendations of the committee have been noted. 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/02/2023-Fin.I dated 22.06.2023 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
 Feed stock subsidy to BCPL/Assam Gas Cracker Complex 
 
The Committee note that an outlay of Rs. 137.50 Cr was made in BE 2022-23 as 
Feed stock subsidy to BCPL/Assam Gas Cracker Complex. The outlay has 
remained unchanged in RE 2022-23. However, the same has been increased 
steeply to Rs. 392.06 Cr in BE 2023-24. The Committee further note that the 
feedstock subsidy to BCPL is a central sector scheme to provide subsidy to the 
complex for a period of 15 years from the date of commission of the complex i.e. 
02.01.2016 due to sub-optimal capacity of petrochemical complex. The yearly 
subsidy is a function of polymer price, gas price and naptha price while 
maintaining minimum post tax IRR of 10%. The Committee further note that the 
amount of yearly subsidy is decided by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas in accordance with the approved methodology of the Cabinet Committee on 
Economic Affairs (CCEA). The Committee also note that the Feedstock subsidy 
has provided this sub-optional capacity plant a level playing platform for 
competing in domestic market and thereby improved its viability which is 
reflected in its improving physical and nancial performance. However, the 
Committee observed that the capacity utilization of this plant is continuously 
falling from the peak of 108% achieved in 2019-20. The targeted production for 
2023- 24 as per boards’s approved plan is 94%. The Committee further 
apprehend that the falling capacity utilization may deteriorate its financial 
performance and impact its economic viability. Accordingly, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry of Petroleum and natural Gas and BCPL to look into the 
causes of falling capacity utilization of the complex and take appropriate steps to 
increase the same with a view to strengthen the viability of this ambitious project 
and making it capable of competing in an era when subsidy scheme will no 
longer be available to lend its protective arms.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The feedstock subsidy is computed on yearly basis to maintain post tax IRR of 
10%. The feedstock subsidy is a function of polymer, gas and naphtha prices to 

maintain 10% IRR. As per the approved methodology, the subsidy for a year is 
linked to actual production or 94% of installed capacity. Since the commissioning 
of BCPL in 2016, the production had gradually increased achieving 108% 
capacity utilization in 2019-2020. From a peak of 108% capacity, though the 
capacity utilization had fallen in subsequent years, the capacity utilization was 
maintained at more than 100% in FY 2020-21 & FY 2021-22. The plant requires 
a major planned shutdown for proper repair & maintenance/overhauling so that 
the unit functions without interruptions. The annual maintenance shutdown of the 
BCPL complex was planned in March-April 2021 which could not be materialized 
due to Covid-19 situation. The shutdown was postponed to April 2022. However, 
due to non-availability of vendors/ OEM representatives of some of the critical 
equipment due to prevailing COVID 19 situation whose presence were required 
during the maintenance shutdown period, the major plant shutdown had to be 
deferred. Instead, a short shut down of the plant for maintenance activities of a 
few equipment were executed in April 2022 with in-house resources. After 
completion of this planned shutdown, some technical problems were observed 
during start-up & stabilization of the plant leading to extended shutdown of the 
plant and subsequent production loss. This affected the production performance 
in the FY 2022-23. The impendingmajor annual shutdown of the plant is planned 
in May 2023 for carrying out the maintenance activities. It is expected that the 
overhauling of major equipment during this shutdown will enhance the plant 
performance. This year i.e. FY 2023-24 the production target is 103 % which may 
further increase from 2024-25 onwards. Further, to strengthen the viability of the 
plant and making it capable of competing in an era when subsidy will no longer 
be available, BCPL has already initiated actions to increase the plant capacity by 
40% through de-bottle necking & expansion of the plant by next 4-5 years. 
Feasibility study towards the same is in progress. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/02/2023-Fin.I dated 22.06.2023 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
 Numaligarh Refinery Expansion Project 
 
The Committee note that outlays of Rs 245 Cr and Rs 500 Cr have been made in 
RE 2022-23 and BE 2023-24 respectively for Numaligarh Refinery Expansion 
Project. The Committee further note that the Numaligarh Refinery Limited (NRL) 

was established in 1993 in accordance with historic Assam accord signed on 15th 
August, 1985 as an economic package which led to setting up of Numaligarh 
Refinery. The NRL was dedicated to the nation by the former Prime Minister late 
Atal Bihari Vajpayee on the 9th of July, 1999 and the 3 MMTPA capacity refinery 
was commissioned on the 1st October, 2000. The Committee further note that the 
refinery has embarked on a major integrated expansion project to treble its 
capacity from 3 MMTPA to 9 MMTPA at an estimated investment of more than 
Rs 28000 Cr. Out of this amount, the Central Government has committed Rs 
1020 Cr as Viability Gap Funding (VGF). The remaining cost of the project is 
being funded through addition equity from Promoters (Rs 3165 Cr), internal 
accruals (Rs 4937 Cr) and commercial borrowings (Rs 18904 Cr). The 
Committee also observe that the target date of completion of the project is 
January, 2025. However, as on 31st January, 2023 the physical and financial 
progress of the project is only 28.8% and 28.3% respectively. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend to Ministry of petroleum & Natural Gas and Numaligarh 
Refinery Limited to take all necessary steps to complete the project as per 
schedule and obviate any possibility of cost escalation due to time overrun. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
As on 31st May, 2023, physical and financial progress of the project is 39.43% 
and 39.05% respectively. All efforts are being made to expedite the project. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/02/2023-Fin.I dated 22.06.2023 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.16 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
 PM-JIVAN YOJANA 
The Committee note that the allocation for Pradhan Mantri Ji-van Yojana has 
been reduced from Rs. 314.36 Cr in BE 2022-23 to Rs. 83.34 Cr in RE 2022-23. 
The actual expenditure as on 01.01.2023 was 'nil'. However, the outlay has been 
increased to Rs. 227 .26 Cr in BE 2023- 24. The Committee further note that 
Government of India launched "Pradhan Mantri JI-VAN (Jaiv lndhan- Vatavaran 
Anukool fasal awashesh Nivaran) Yojana" for providing financial assistance with 
total financial outlay of Rs. 1969.50 crore for the period 2018-19 to 2023-24 to 
provide initial thrust to create 2G Ethanol capacity in the country and attract 
investments in this sector. Under the PM JI-VAN Yojana, financial assistance of 

Rs. 1 ~O crore each to commercial projects of IOCL at Panipat (Haryana), HPCL 
at Bhatinda (Punjab), BPCL at Bargarh (Odisha), NRL at Numaligarh (Assam), 
Shell India Markets Pvt Ltd. in Maharashtra/Karnataka, Rs. 100 crore to MRPL at 
Davangere (Karnataka) and Rs. 15 crore each to demonstration projects at 
Haryana (IOCL), Bihar (HPCL) and Punjab (Chempolis) amounting to Rs. 895 
crore has been approved. Out of the above projects, the project located at 
Panipat has been commissioned. The projects located at Numaligarh and 
Bargarh are expected to be commissioned during 2023. Further, the projects 
located at Bhatinda and Davangere are expected to be commissioned in 2024 
and 2025 respectively. As regards reduction in outlay for the scheme in RE, the 
Committee were informed by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas that 
since the project developers could not achieve the milestones due to various 
reasons including COVID pandemic effect; delay in receipt of statutory 
clearances; low vendor participation in few equipment/packages; delayed 
delivery and abnormal fluctuations of various materials/equipment, international 
crisis between Ukraine and Russia, the amount under BE 2022-23 has been 
revised to f 83.31 crore. 
In view of the above, the Committee recommend the Ministry to set up a 
coordination mechanism to deal with various state Governments 
/PSUs/Companies and other stakeholders with a view to identify the problems 
affecting the smooth implementation of the project and take appropriate steps 
through policy decisions or otherwise to expedite the implementation of the 
projects. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Under the PM JI-VAN Yojana, Centre for High Technology (CHT) has been 
made the nodal agency for effective implementation of the scheme. In order to 
provide overall coordination, effective end-to-end implementation and monitoring 
of biofuel programmes, a National Biofuel Coordination Committee headed by 
the Minister, Petroleum and Natural Gas and representatives of concerned 
Ministries has been constituted Further, in order to monitor the implementation of 
biofuel programme, Working Group has been formed. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/02/2023-Fin.I dated 22.06.2023 
 
Recommendation No. 14 
Domestic Production of Crude Oil and Natural Gas 
 
The Committee note that the domestic production of crude oil in the country has 
been continuously falling since 2013-14 and it has plummeted from about 38 

Million Metric Tonnes (MMT) to 29.69 MMT in 2021-22. The domestic production 
of natural gas has also fallen marginally during the period from 35.40 BCM to 
34.02 BCM in 2021-22. The Committee further note that the Government has 
taken major policy decisions, like gas pricing reforms, OALP, discovered small 
field (DSF) policy, Hydrocarbon Exploration and Licensing Policy (HELP), 
National Data Repository, National Seismic Programme for un-appraised areas, 
policy framework to incentivize enhanced recovery methods for oil and gas, etc. 
The Committee have been informed that recently large area lying in deep sea 
waters of the country has been offered for exploration under open area licensing 
Policy. The Committee also note that exploration and production of hydrocarbons 
is a capital and technology intensive activity and the gestation period of projects 
in the sector is usually long. The committee further observe that large oil and gas 
companies of the world are shy off Indian oil and gas sector. The Committee feel 
that these large companies possess large capital and state of the art technology 
and their involvement in the domestic oil and gas exploration and production will 
substantially boost up production of crude oil and gas in the country. Therefore, 
the Committee recommend the Ministry to formulate appropriate packages for 
the oil and gas exploration and production in the country with a view to attract 
large companies of the world working in oil and gas exploration and production 
and also consider providing financial/tax benefits to ONGC and Oil India Ltd. 
(OIL) for their CAPEX projects as they contribute about 71% and 81% of the 
domestic production of crude oil and natural gas respectively. The Committee 
also recommend ONGC and OIL to take steps to bring state-of-the-art 
technology and expertise in the field, including in the deep sea exploration and 
extraction, in India so that the exploration and extraction efforts of the country 
may be taken to a substantially higher level. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Blocks awarded under OALP regime are under exploration stage and majority 
of exploratory wells are yet to be drilled. As on date, five hydrocarbon discoveries 
have already made and much more discoveries are expected. Further, the Policy 
reforms were promulgated by the Government in Feb 2019 with a view to 
encourage Exploration and Production activities in sedimentary basins. The 
Government is committed to encourage exploration and production activities in 
Indian sedimentary basins and continuously working on resolving the concerns 
and feedbacks of prospective and existing investors. The Government is working 
upon following initiatives to make a complete globally competitive package for the 

existing and prospective investors in E&P sector of India: 
i. Existing maximum limits for acreage bidding has been doubled to 
encourage play based exploration. 
ii. Modification in modalities for carving out open acreage blocks with partial 
1’x1’ unit. 
iii. Clarifications on Target Depth of exploratory well to avoid any dispute in 
future. 
iv. Modifications in Operatorship Experience for Deep/ Ultra-deep blocks 
bidding to maximize the participation. 
v. Modifications in Bidding Parameters, Evaluation Criteria ,Exploration 
timelines and Work Programme Flexibility in Category-II and III Basins. 
vi. Modifications in ‘Excusable Delay’ provisions for imposing LD, Penalty etc. 
vii. Removal of Dual Liquidated Damage for commencement of Development 
and Production Operations 
viii. Modifications in ‘Effective date’ and introduction of ‘Commencement date’ 
for Exploration Timelines. 
ix. Modified provisions for deduction of taxes and Reference rate of 
conversion for Statutory and Contractual payments. 
x. Enhanced Stabilization Period for incentivizing early monetization of 
Discoveries. 
xi. Addition of Retention Period for submission of Field Development Plan 
(FDP) in specific cases. 
xii. Modified definition of Arm’s Length Sale as per GOI notifications dated 
25.10.2020. 
xiii. Modified provisions for change in Consortium during EOI and bidding 
stage. 
xiv. Enhanced Scope of Force Majeure 
xv. Modifications in provisions to streamline EoI and Bidding processes- 
Change in Net Worth definition, Basic Data Package cost and rationalized 
Tender/ application Fee and Bid/ Participation Bond. 
 

Recently, Government of India has released around 99% of the ‘No-Go’ Areas in 
the Indian Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) for E&P operations covering an area 
of 1 million Sq. Km offshore areas in West Coast, East Coast & Andaman & 
Nicobar Island areas to provide major boost to the oil & gas exploration. Oil India 
Limited (OIL) is currently evaluating to submit offers under “Mega Offshore OALP 
Bid Round-IX”, where-in about 26 blocks covering an area of approximately 2.23 
lakh Sq. Km are under offer.   
OIL has already reached out to select International Oil Companies for 
collaboration in the upstream segment of the hydrocarbon value chain in India. 
Discussions are underway for farm-in opportunities and submission of joint offer 
in OALP IX bidding round primarily for offshore blocks so as to ensure synergy 
gains through adoption of advance technological interventions and joint 
exploration campaigns. Concurrently, OIL is also in the process of securing 
exploratory drilling service providers to undertake offshore drilling activities.   
ONGC, being the major national E&P player in India, is making all efforts and 
taking new initiatives towards augmenting crude oil and natural gas production. 
ONGC is giving major thrust to develop discoveries made in the Krishna 
Godavari basin in Eastern offshore. Field development project of Cluster-II fields 
of NELP Block KG-DWN-98/2 is under implementation in Eastern Offshore and 
Gas production has commenced on 5th March 2020 from U field. Other 
discoveries in KG offshore which will contribute natural gas production 
enhancement is under various stages of appraisal/ development. 
Coal Bed Methane (CBM) gas was discovered by ONGC in its four active blocks 
viz., Jharia, Bokaro, North Karanpura blocks in the State of Jharkhand and 
Raniganj block in the State of West Bengal. Development plan of CBM, Bokaro & 
Jharia blocks are under implementation.  
Action has been initiated for enhancement of recovery factor of matured fields by 
inducting IOR and EOR Technologies. ONGC has aggressively planned and 
implemented number of EOR schemes to enhance recovery and production from 
its mature fields 
In ONGC induction/ adoption / absorption of new technologies is being done 
regularly. Based on the technical requirements, new technology is continuously 
inducted to minimize cost of new wells, better placement of wells, improve 
productivity and monitoring of existing and new wells, revive old/closed wells etc.; 
so that production possibilities from the fields are maximized. 
Few of the major steps to bring state of the art technology and the efforts made 
towards deep sea exploration are as follows: 
a) Induction of State-of-art Technology: 

 In order to address geological/geographical challenges like imaging issues, 
logistic issues, subsurface risk mitigation, obtaining outputs on fast track 
basis and enhancing geoscientific understanding of subsurface to facilitate 
hydrocarbon exploration, ONGC, in the recent past, has introduced state-of-
art exploration techniques like Low Frequency Passive Seismic Method 
(LFPS), Air-borne Hydrocarbon Sensing Survey (AHSS), Passive Seismic 
Tomography (PST), AI based simulation, XRD studies and well activation 
through fish bone technology etc. 
 In addition to induction of above techniques, AI/ML based approach and 
IOR/EOR techniques for enhanced oil recovery from brown fields, are being 
implemented in the operation area/Fields of ONGC. 
 Continuing its efforts towards induction of state of the art technology, ONGC 
is always scouting the market to tap the opportunity of inducting Industry 
Ready Technology within the permissible way of New Technology induction 
b) Deep sea exploration and extraction in India:  
To chase deep sea Hydrocarbon potential and to take exploration and extraction 
efforts of the country to a substantially higher level, ONGC is actively pursuing 
collaboration with global oil majors. The participation of global oil majors shall not 
only infuse state of art technologies but also contribute towards knowledge 
sharing, skill enhancement (expertise) of the workforce of ONGC. In this regard, 
ONGC has already inked MoU with the Exxon Mobil, Total Energies and 
Chevron. 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/02/2023-Fin.I dated 22.06.2023 
 
Recommendation No. 16 
 Central Sales Tax (CST) applicable to standalone refineries 
 
The Committee note that the issue of levy of Central Sales Tax (CST) on 
standalone refineries like CPCL, MRPL and NRL for inter-state sale of MS, HSD 
and ATF is plaguing the standalone refineries for quite a long time. The CST paid 
by the standalone refineries, in respect of products transferred to OMCs, in other 
states, are not reimbursed by them, as this element of cost is not included in the 
Retail Sales Price of fuel products. Thus, these levy of CST, inherently 
disincentivizes the investment and Capacity creation by the Standalone Refining 
Industry. It may be noted that the Levy of CST affects Gross Refining margin by 
(GRM) around 0.8$/bbls, impacting profitability. However, before dismantling of 
administered pricing mechanism on 1 April 2002, irrecoverable taxes like CST on 

inter-state sales were reimbursed from the Oil pool account of the Government of 
India, to the OMCs. In this regard, the Committee were informed by the Ministry 
that when State value Added tax Act was implemented in 2006-2007, the 
empowered committee of State Finance ministers had recommended that CST 
be phased out. Thereafter, the CST was gradually reduced from 4% on 31 March 
2007 to 2% on 1 April 2008. The Ministry has also informed the Committee that 
phasing out of CST would largely benefit standalone refineries and the industrial 
and economic growth besides bringing about significant efficiencies in the 
product supply chain. The Committee also note that the three companies have 
paid an amount of Rs 609 Cr during Financial Year 2021-22 and Rs 607 Cr 
during first 9 months of Financial Year 2022-23 towards CST. The Committee 
also feel that the financial gain accruing to the three standalone refineries after 
phasing out of CST will substantially boost their capacity to fund CAPEX 
requirement. Accordingly, the Committee recommend to Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas to take up the issue of consideration of phasing out of CST by 
GST council with Ministry of Finance. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The matter of phasing out Central Sales Tax (CST) is being persued by MoPNG 
with concerned authorities. 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/02/2023-Fin.I dated 22.06.2023 
 
Recommendation No. 17 
Indradhanush Gas Grid Limited (IGGL) 
 
The Committee observe that a provision of Rs 1800 Crore has been made in 
respect of Indradhanush Gas Grid Limited (IGGL) scheme as a part of North East 
Natural Gas Pipeline Grid in the BE 2023-24 which is critical for extending natural 
gas pipeline coverage in far flung areas of North-East. The Committee have been 
informed that the project execution for the scheme is on track and is expected to 
be operational by 2024. While appreciating that there has been no time and cost 
over run so far in implementing the scheme, the Committee desire that any 
extraneous factors which hamper the completion process should be taken up 
with appropriate authorities so that the project is completed as per the schedule 
without any time and cost overruns. The Committee recommend the Ministry to 
ensure the availability of sufficient budgetary allocation for the scheme and they 

should not hesitate in seeking enhanced allocations if required at any stage. 
The Committee also desire that the proposed expansion of Natural Gas Pipeline 
Grid to Gurdaspur-Jammu-Srinagar should be formalized at the earliest by the 
Ministry/concerned PSUs so that execution work commences without any delay. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
NEGG has achieved a physical progress of 70.01% out of scheduled 70.16% as 
of 31st March 2023. Construction activities of all the sections of all three phases 
are in progress with total 723 Km welding and 591 Km lowering as of 31st March 
2023. The project is on schedule without any time or cost overrun. PNGRB has 
invited expression of Interest for laying Gurdaspur-Jammu gas pipeline in 
January, 2023. The last date for submission of bid is 8.5.2023. Jammu Srinagar 
pipeline would be taken thereafter. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/02/2023-Fin.I dated 22.06.2023 
 
Recommendation No. 18 
New Auction Policy to Sell Domestic Crude Oil Production 
The Committee note that Government has notified new auction policy on 
11.07.2022 for allocation of domestically produced crude oil which inter-alia 
states that the condition in Production sharing Contracts (PSCs) to sell crude oil 
to Government or Government Nominee or Government Companies, shall be 
waived off, if such a condition is mentioned in any PSC and the contract shall 
stand amended accordingly.  The Committee are also given to understand that 
the broad objectives of this new auction policy are to creating a level playing 
field, promoting competition and incentivizing investment in entire Oil and Gas 
value chain with a focus on ease of doing business and more freedom to 
operators/industry.  The Committee further note that in pursuance of these 
guidelines, ONGC has adopted competitive & transparent bidding through e-
auction platform of independent service provider for crude oil produced from 
fields of ONGC in Mumbai Offshore, where infrastructure is available to supply 
crude oil to number of refineries through coastal or pipeline mode. Till now, six-
auctions have been completed for sale of crude oil during the period from 
November 2022 to February 2023. Besides, the Committee have also been 
apprised that to ensure the stability in supply-chain and pricing, term contracts at 
negotiated pricing are also being considered by ONGC.  In this regard, while 

appreciating the efforts of the Government for ushering in reforms in the sector, 
the Committee feel that interests of standalone refineries also need to be 
protected while implementing this policy as they will be in disadvantageous 
position to get requisite type of crude to cater to downstream industries.  The 
Committee expect the factual information from the Ministry regarding allocation of 
domestic crude to standalone refineries.  The committee, therefore, recommend 
the Ministry to impress upon the ONGC/OIL to incorporate term contracts in new 
policy of crude oil allocation for standalone refineries and also take up the matter 
at the highest level for necessary course correction in the new policy keeping not 
of the fact that bulk of global trade of crude oil happens through term contracts 
finalized through one to one negotiations for stability of supply chain. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs approved ‘Deregulation of Sale of 
Domestically Produced Crude Oil’ on 29 June, 2022. Through this policy 
decision, Government shall cease to allocate crude oil and condensate with 
effect from 01.10.2022. The condition in the Production Sharing Contracts 
(PSCs) to sell crude oil to the government, or its nominee, or government 
companies shall be waived off and all exploration and production operators will 
be free to sell crude oil produced from their fields in domestic market. However, 
as earlier, export of crude oil will not be permissible. The government revenues 
like Royalty, Cess, and Contractual Payments, etc. shall be calculated based on 
the sales price or the price of Indian Basket of Crude Oil, as calculated by 
Government nominated Agency, whichever is higher. 
As far as OIL is concerned, OIL’s major production is from North East Region. 
OIL supplies crude oil to 4 refineries in the region and has in placed long term 
Crude Oil Sale Agreements (COSA). Since North East Region is land locked 
area and transportation to other area is a challenge, OIL has not yet resorted to 
auction for sale of crude oil. 
ONGC has already commenced discussions/negotiations with PSU refineries 
(including standalone refineries like CPCL/NRL/MRPL) for sale of crude oil from 
fields in Mumbai Offshore, on Term Contract basis for the period March 2023 to 
March 2024. All the PSU refineries including standalone refineries have agreed 
for Term Contract. Supply has also commenced w.e.f. 01/03/2023. Further 
discussions/negotiations are on for finalizing pricing and other terms. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/02/2023-Fin.I dated 22.06.2023 
  

Recommendation No. 19 
 City Gas Distribution Network 
 
The Committee note from the information provided by the Ministry that the target 
dates of completion of Piped Natural Gas (PNG) connections in 31 geographical 
areas of the country were upto 30 September 2022. In this regard, the 
Committee observe that the implementation of City Gas Distribution Network 
Programme is behind the schedule. The Committee further note that PNGRB has 
so far authorized 297 Geographical Areas (Gas) for development of CGD 
network which cover 98% of the country’s population and 88% of its geographical 
area. The last concluded 11th and 11 A CGD Bidding rounds, wherein 
authorization for 67 Gas has been awarded for the development of CGD network, 
which covers 28.47% of the country’s population and 34.66% of its geographical 
area. The projects need to be completed as per schedule same is part of the 
vision of the Hon’ble Prime Minister of India to make the country a gas based 
economy by 2030 by increasing the share of natural gas in India’s Energy Mix 
from present 6.3% to 15%. In view of the above, the Committee recommend the 
Ministry of petroleum and Natural Gas to review the progress of CGD network 
projects with CGD entities and so as to ensure the progress of the programme as 
per schedule. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Upto 28.2.2023, a total 107.56 lakh PNG domestic connections and a total 5283 
CNG Stations have been commissioned across the country by the various 
entities, authorized by the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board 
(PNGRB). The work of laying and expanding CGD networks in all the 
Geographical Areas (GAs) is being carried out by the entities, authorized by 
Petroleum & Natural Gas Regulatory Board (PNGRB). PNGRB carries out 
monitoring and progress review of the Minimum Work Programme on periodic 
basis. In line with the regulations, the entities failing to meet the target have been 
issued notices and remedial time period has been given to achieve their targets. 
The cases of entities who have failed to meet their target will be dealt in 
accordance with the provisions of the PNGRB Act and the extant regulations. 
Moreover, MoP&NG also takes periodic review on the progress made by CGD 
entities from time to time. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/02/2023-Fin.I dated 22.06.2023 

Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No. 20 
 
 Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR) of oil PSUs 
 
The Committee note that the IEBR of oil PSUs for BE 2023-24 has been targeted 
at Rs 108190.72 Cr as compared to Rs 111354 Cr of the BE 2022-23. In the 
exploration and production (E&P) sector the allocation in BE 2023-24 is Rs 
60491.03 Cr as against Rs 50536 Cr in the BE 2022-23. However, the actual 
expenditure for the E&P sector was Rs 31612.34 Cr as on 31st December, 2022. 
Further, in respect of the refinery and marketing sector, a provision of Rs 
14183.10 Cr has been made in BE 2022-23 as against Rs 53876.35 Cr in the 
previous years’s BE and the actuals in this sector upto 31st December, 2022 is 
shown as Rs 39737.46 Cr. With regard to the petrochemicals sector, an amount 
of Rs 10772.66 Cr has been provided in BE 2023-24 as against Rs 6741.68 Cr in 
the previous financial year. The actuals for the same by the end of the year 2022 
is shown as Rs 6211.46 Cr. In addition, the Engineering sector has been 
provided with an allocation of Rs 22743.92 Cr in BE 2023-24 as against Rs 200 
Cr in the FY 2022-23 and the actuals for the same is shown as Rs 70.12 Cr only. 
The Committee also observe several variations in BE, RE and actual expenditure 
of individual oil PSUs of the Ministry. For instance, the actual expenditure of 
ONGC upto December, 2022 was shown as Rs 19,153 Cr as against Rs 29,950 
Cr. In case of OVL also, Rs 1970 Cr was shown as actuals when compared to Rs 
8,180 Cr of the BE 2022-23. In respect of HPCL there is a variation against its 
actual shown as Rs 8,849 Cr upto December, 2022 as against Rs 14,500 Cr in 
the BE 2022-23. The downstream company MRPL has also registered a low 
actual at Rs 339 Cr as against Rs 815 Cr in the BE 2022-23. The actual 
expenditure of NRL upto December, 2022 was shown as Rs 4,273 Cr as against 
Rs 6,774 Cr. 
While analyzing the utilization of IEBR funds, the Committee are dismayed to 
observe that oil PSUs including upstream majors ONGC/OVL, GAIL and OIL 
have not fully utilized the allocations of the current financial year as only three 
months are left and good amount of funds are lying with PSU’s. Further, OMCs 
like HPCL, IOCL, BPCL and MRPL and PSUs like EIL have also made lesser 
utilization of their BE allocations as seen from their actuals. The RE of 2022-23 is 
pegged at Rs 83766 Cr which shows stark reduction in the IEBR expenditure. 

Taking note of the fact that one of the factors in the economic growth of the 
country is IEBR by PSUs, the Committee wonder as to why the companies which 
are having paramount responsibilities in ensuring energy security and transition 
to green energy initiatives are not able to utilize the earmarked funds. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the IEBR exercise of the CPSEs may be 
prepared in a more realistic manner to avoid large gaps between the estimates 
and the expenditure so that the allocated funds are gainfully utilized. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
During FY 2022-23, against BE of ₹ 1,11,354 crore and RE of ₹ 83766 crore,  ₹ 
1,13,853 crore was utilised for implementation of ongoing and new projects 
which is 102% of BE and 136% of RE for the respective year. BE for FY 2023-24 
has been targeted at ₹1,06,401 crore. CPSE-wise Internal and Extra Budgetary 
Resources (I&EBR)-BE, RE & Actual for FY 2022-23 and BE 2023-24 is given 
below: 
                                                                                                                       
      (In ₹ Crore) 
CPSE FY: 2022-23 Actual % 
Achievement over  
FY: 2023-
24 
BE RE Actual * BE RE BE  
ONGC 29950  29950 29209 98 98 30125 
OVL 8180  2907 2723 33 94 3229 
OIL 4302  4389 5057 118 115 4896 
GAIL  7500  7918 8313 111 105 7750 
IOCL 28549  17130 35205 123 206 30395 
BPCL  10000  6000 11527 115 192 10000 
HPCL 14500  7163 13847 95 193 10210 
MRPL 815  815 641 79 79 820 
CPCL 584  584 609 104 104 548 
NRL 6774  6800 6615 98 97 8290 
Balmer& 
Lawrie 40 40 46 116 116 40 
EIL 160  70 60 38 86 98 
Total 111354  83766 113853 102 136 106401 
 *: Provisional  

 
Sector-wise expenditure incurred by oil and gas CPSEs is as follows: -          
                                                                                                                                     
(In ₹ Crore) 
Sector  FY: 2022-23 
Actual % 
Achievement 
over 
FY: 
2023-24 
BE RE Actual* BE RE BE  
Exploration & Production 
Sector 50536 46140 46092 91 100 46757 
Refining & Marketing 
Sector 53876 33224 57967 108 174 52749 
Petro-Chemicals Sector 6742 4292 9688 144 226 6756 
Engineering Sector 200 110 106 53 97 138 
Total 111354 83766 113853 102 136 106401 
*: Provisional 
 
The explorations activities generally remain slow during first half of the financial 
year (FY) mainly due to monsoon and pick up only from November onwards. 
Therefore, the actual capex generally remains low during first half of the financial 
year.  However, actual expenditure achievement for FY 2022-23 has been higher 
than BE/RE target. 
 
ONGC has almost achieved its Capex target for FY 2022-23 with no significant 
under achievement. CPSE-wise major reasons for less achievement are as 
below: 
 
1. OVL: In the BE of ₹ 8180 crore, two major projects, allocated about 53% of the 
total budget were:  
(i). 32% (₹ 2614 cr.): Area-1, Mozambique and  
(ii) 21% (₹ 1729 cr.): Sakhalin-1, Russia 
 
However, both the projects suffered Force Majeure due to Geopolitical and 
security reasons. 
 
a) Sakhalin-1, Russia: Force Majeure declared with effect from 21st April 
2022 owing to US/ UK/EU sanctions post Russia-Ukraine conflict. Consequently, 
all drilling & further activities in Development Drilling/Facility works /RFE LNG 
suspended by the then Operator ExxonMobil. Subsequently, under a Russian 
Govt. Decree on 7th October, 2022, the project operations were handed over to a 

Rosneft subsidiary, SMNG-Shelf. Accordingly, actual capex is ₹ 125 crore 
against BE of ₹ 1729 crore.  
b) Area-1, Mozambique: Project continues to be under Force Majeure (FM) 
since 11th May 2021. Operator suspended all major Onshore and Offshore 
contracts in order to reduce the capital expenditure until the security situation is 
fully restored. The actual capex is ₹ 281 crore against BE of ₹ 2614 crore. 
c) Other Russian Assets, Vankorneft and Imperial: ₹ 616 crore reduced 
because of deferment of capex due to deferment of drilling plans and delay in 
capital construction. Also, there has been some reduction in capex in Myanmar 
exploratory projects because of security situation and delay in approvals 
subsequent to regime change (₹ 530 crore) 
d) Capex reduction (₹ 214 cr) done in two Bangladesh blocks SS-04 & 09 as 
drilling tender for Titli-1X & Maitri-1X wells could not be awarded due to lack of 
competition, rate reasonability and mobilization period risks etc. 
2. HPCL: Reason for under achievement was mainly due to financial and other 
complexities faced by many of the contracts involved in high CAPEX projects like 
HRRL, VRMP, 2G Ethanol plant at Bathinda etc. during COVID which made 
them very weak and hence they were not able to normalise and deliver the 
expected progress. In addition to above, current level of unprecedented 
borrowings together with continued under-recoveries on sale of petroleum 
products and long term repayments has severely constrained finances of HPCL.    
3. MRPL: MRPL had deposited value of land (for Phase-4 expansion) with 
Karnataka Industrial Area Development Board (KIADB).  In addition to this land 
payment, there is delay in finalizing the R&R package by state government and 
compensation amount to be paid towards malkies, building, horticulture etc. An 
amount of ₹ 100 crore was budgeted towards horticulture, structure and  malki 
payment.  However, during review with KIADB, it was seen that the payment 
towards horticulture, structure and malki was not being released as survey was 
yet to be completed.   
MRPL had kept budget of ₹ 40 crore towards payment to consultant (for one of 
our projects) which is presently under litigation.  This payment was not realized in 
the FY 2022-23. 
 
4. NRL: IEBR was lower mainly due to shifting of current year's capex to the 
previous year to front load capex related line pipe procurement for the Paradip-
Numaligarh Crude Oil Pipeline Project”. 
 
5. EIL:The IEBR of the EIL primarily pertains to their routine Capex/IEBR items 
such as buildings, office equipment, Furniture & Fixtures and IT assets etc. and 

includes equity participation in Subsidiary/ Joint Venture.  
One of the major Capex expenditure is renovation of Building at head office of 
EIL situated in New Delhi. EIL had kept budget of ₹ 50 crore during 2022-23 for 
the  renovation of Building. The tender for execution of renovation work is being 
finalized based on the report of Architect/ consultant appointed in this regard and 
the work is expected to commence from April- May 2023.  
 Another major component of Capex for FY 2022-23 was Expenditure on 
Implementation of ERP in the Company. The Final report from consultant 
appointed in this regard has been received and the tender for appointment of 
agency for ERP software application & implementation is floated. 

 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE GOVERNMENT DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES  
 
 
 
 
 
- Nil - 
  

 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
  
Recommendation No. 4 
 
Construction of ISPRL Phase-II Projects 
 
The Committee note that an allocation of Rs 508 Cr has been made in the BE 
2023-24 for construction of ISPRL Phase-II projects at Chandikhol (Orissa) and 
Padur (Karnataka) with storage capacity of 4.0 MMT and 2.5 MMT respectively 
using underground unlined rock caverns storage technology in PPP mode. 
Besides, provision of rs 202.81 Cr has been made for payment to ISPRL 
regarding O&M Expenditure for Mangalore (Padur) and Vishakhapatnam 
Projects. The Committee are also given to understand that the additional caverns 
in phase II, envisaged to be constructed shall be close to existing refineries 
respectively and the increase in capacity will add to increase in 12 days of crude 
oil requirement. In addition, 1.5-2 MMT capacity is proposed to be constructed 
adjacent to existing caverns at Mangalore. Feasibility of constructing above 
ground storage at Mangalore and Padur on the existing land is also being looked 
into. ISPRL is also examining storages in other locations in the country. It is also 
noted that since land allotment at both the locations is pending with respective 
State Governments in Odisha and Karnataka, the projects could not be started 
and consequently allocation of the outlays of Rs 600 Cr in BE 2022-23 could not 
be utilized. The Committee find that there has been inordinate delays in land 
acquisitions in respect of both the projects in the two states and the progress 
seems to be minimal. Taking note of the fact that the strategic petroleum 
reserves are projects of national importance to enhance energy security of the 
country, the Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to take up the issue of land 
acquisition at the highest level in coordination with the two State Governments 
keeping in view interests of all stake holders. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that these projects should be taken to their logical conclusion in a 
time bound manner and also desire that the Ministry should explore possibility of 
building more strategic petroleum reserves across the country particularly mini or 
small caverns wherever geological conditions are favourable for constructing 
such caverns. The Committee further desire that the Ministry should also explore 

the option of giving responsibility to OMCs/refineries to operate and maintain 
strategic petroleum reserves caverns while the Ministry bears the capital cost for 
construction. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Cabinet had approved development of Commercial cum Strategic reserves under 
Phase II at Chandikhol (4MMT) and Padur (2.5 MMT) on Public-Private 
Partnership (PPP) mode along with dedicated Single Point Mooring (SPM) and 
associated pipelines during cabinet meeting held on 08th July 2021.  
Land Acquisition is under process and discussions with the respective State 
Governments for expeditious completion of land acquisition are going on. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/02/2023-Fin.I dated 22.06.2023 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
LPG Connections to Poor Households (Pradhan Mantri Ujjwla Yojana) 
 
The Committee note that in BE 2023-24, only a token amount of Rs. 1 Lakh has 
been made in respect of PMUY scheme for providing LPG connections to poor 
households as against Rs. 800 cr provided in BE 2022-23 which was increased 
to Rs. 8010 Cr at RE stage in 2022-23. The Committee also note that the target 
of release of additional 60 lakh connections in addition to 9 crore already issued 
under PMUY was achieved by December, 2022. The Committee are also given 
to understand that as on closing of January 2023, OMCs have received 7.8 lakh 
cleared applications under Ujjwala 2.0 scheme which are pending for release of 
the connection. The Committee have been apprised that a proposal to provide 
PMUY connections to remaining applicants is under progress for due approvals. 
Besides, on perusal of the state-wise details regarding release of 60 Lakh 
connections under Ujjwala 2.0, the Committee observe that more efforts are 
needed to enhance LPG coverage. The Committee have been assured that 
funds would not come in the way of releasing pending applications under PMUY 
and that OMCs are fully capable of undertaking expenditure from their own 
sources for implementing the scheme and claim reimbursement later on. In this 
regard, the Committee while being satisfied with the achievement of the scheme, 

sincerely appreciate the efforts of the Ministry and OIVICs for the successful 
implementation of the scheme and also their readiness to further enhance 
coverage of the scheme keeping in view emergence of new households seeking 
connections under PMUY. The Committee recommend the Ministry/OMCs to 
strive for clearing pending 7.8 lakh applications under Ujjawala 2.0 and devise 
the required modalities at the earliest so that the scheme will be implemented for 
the new beneficiaries within the stipulated deadline. Further, the Committee also 
desire the Ministry to provide LPG connections on demand and include 
beneficiaries of poor households living in urban/rurban areas so as to make the 
PMUY benefit all stratums of the society and help build gas based economy 
across the country. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Hon’ble Finance Minister during her Budget Speech for FY 2021-22 on 
01.02.2021 had announced that Ujjwala Scheme which has benefited 8 crores 
households will be extended to cover 1 crores more beneficiaries. Accordingly, 
Ujjwala 2.0 was launched in the esteemed presence of the Hon’ble Prime 
Minister from Mahoba District of Uttar Pradesh on 10th August, 2021 on pan 
India basis to provide additional one crore LPG connections along with free first 
refill and stove to cover the left-out poor households. Subsequently, the 
Government decided to release 60 lakh more LPG connections under Ujjwala 2.0 
and as on 01.01.2023, the target of 1.60 crore Ujjwala 2.0 connections has 
already been achieved. OMCs have received 8.4 lakh cleared applications under 
Ujjwala 2.0 scheme which are pending for release the connection. A proposal to 
provide PMUY connections to remaining applicants is under progress. Once the 
proposal is approved by competent authorities, necessary action to seek 
additional budget for the additional PMUY connections will be initiated. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/02/2023-Fin.I dated 22.06.2023 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation No. 15 
 
Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum and Technology (RGIPT) Centre 
The Committee note that in respect of RGIPT, Sivasagar, Assam, no budgetary 
allocation has been made in BE 2022-23 and BE 2023-24 whereas expenses of 
the Institute are metthrough budgetary support from Government, OIDB and 

funding from Oil PSUs. The Committee have been apprised that the 
sanctionedstrength of Teaching Staff is 36 whereas the actual strength is 23. In 
respect of Non-Teaching Staff the strength is 40 and the actual strength is 11. 
Presently, RGIPT Sivasagar offers Diploma courses and PhD whereas in RGIPT, 
Amethi offers courses in B.Tech, M.Tech, PhD and MBA in the domain of 
Petroleum and Energy. 
The Committee observe that the prime objective behind setting up of RGIPT at 
Amethi and at Sivasagar is to provide excellent education, training and research 
to generate efficient human resources to meet growing requirement in petroleum 
and energy sector. In this regard, the Committee are of the view that both the 
centres of RGIPT should have similarity in offered courses as the institution has 
been accorded the status of being an institution of National Importance. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to ensure offering of B.Tech and 
M.Tech courses apart from undertaking revision of sanctioned strength and filling 
vacant posts in RGIPT, Sivasagar in view of the fact that Assam is a oil and gas 
hub where extensive oil field activities are being carried out in its vicinity. The 
Committee also desire that the Ministry should facilitate the Institute to emerge 
as premier Skill Development Centre for hydrocarbon industry with introduction of 
courses like high-tech welder, x-ray technicians, Robotics, Artificial Intelligence, 
etc. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology, Shiv Sagar Assam is being 
developed with the help of funds made available by Oil PSUs & OIDB and a 
grant of Rs. 100.00 crore received by Government of India in 2021-22.    
The Centre (AEI) is at present offering five 3-year Diploma Courses and after its 
campus becomes fully functional, B.Tech. and other programmes may also start 
in subsequent years to fulfil human resource needs of hydrocarbon and energy 
sectors.    
The Assam Energy Institute (AEI), Sivasagar has been established with the 
objective to cater to the skilled and trained human resource need of oil and gas 
industries. To cater this need, AEI commenced its academic programmes from 
Academic Session 2017-18 by offering 3-year Diploma Courses.  
 
Institute is currently offering 5 Nos of Diploma level courses and Ph.D 
programmes in relevant discipline from AEI, Sivasagar and there is a plan to offer 
undergraduate programmes also considering the manpower requirements of 
energy industries.  
 
The AEI has an Endowment Fund of Rs. 249.50 crore. These funds have been 

contributed by Oil PSUs. The Assam centre meet out its recurring expenses from 
the interest earned on the investment of Endowment Fund.  
 
The courses offered at Assam Energy Institute (AEI), Sivasagar are not same 
and are complementary nature to that of courses offered at RGIPT, Jais, Amethi. 
Currently, AEI offers 3-years Diploma programmes in the domain areas of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas. Whereas at RGIPT, Jais B. Tech., M. Tech. and 
MBA courses are offered in the domain of Petroleum and Energy. Further to that 
there is a lateral entry scheme for the Diploma pass out students of AEI to 
acquire B. Tech. degree at Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology 
(RGIPT), Jais, Amethi. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/02/2023-Fin.I dated 22.06.2023 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter-I) 
 

CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation No. 13 
Capital Support to OMCs 
The Committee note that an outlay of Rs 30000 Cr has been made in BE 2023-
24 as capital support to Oil Marketing Companies. The Committee further note 
that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas would support the Capital 
expenditure of three Public Sector Oil Marketing Companies viz IOCL, HPCL and 
BPCL, to the tune of rs 30,000 Crore as available in the budget 2023-24, in their 
endeavor for energy transition, meeting net zero objectives and the energy 
security of the country. The OMC wise allocation would be made depending on 
the requirement, availability of IEBR, financial position, etc, of these OMCs for 
the various Capex projects. In this regard, the Committee observe that the details 
of the CAPEX projects of the OMCs and methodology of distribution of funds to 
them are yet to be finalized. Accordingly, the Committee recommend the OMCs 
and the Ministry to finalise details of the CAPEX projects and methodology of 
distribution of fund at the earliest so that the fund earmarked in BE 2023-24 for 
above purpose may be fully utilized. The Committee also recommend the 
Ministry to constantly monitor the proper utilization of the same. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The outlay of Rs 30000 Crore has been made in the BE 2023-24 for capital 
support to the PSU OMCs for capital investment towards net zero objectives, 
energy transition and energy security. The details of the allocation for capital 
support to the OMCs is being worked out. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
No.G-38011/02/2023-Fin.I dated 22.06.2023 
 
 
 
  
New Delhi; 
04 August, 2023 
 13 Shravana,1945 (Saka)     
                           RAMESH BIDHURI, 
                                             
Chairperson,  
Standing Committee on                                                                                                                
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 

Annexure I 
 
MINUTES 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2022-23) 
 
SIXTEENTH SITTING 
(04.08.2023) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 04th August, 2023 from 1500 hrs. to 
1640 hrs. in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Ramesh Bidhuri - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
Shri Ramesh Bidhuri- Chairperson 
2 Shri Ramesh Chand Bind  
3 Shri Pradyut Bordoloi 
4 Smt. Chinta Anuradha 
5 Shri Dilip Saikia 
6 Dr. Kalanidhi Veeraswamy 
7 Shri Chandra Sekhar Sahu 
8 Dr. Bharatiben Dhirubhai Shiyal 
9 Shri Lallu Singh 
10 Shri Vinod Kumar Sonkar 
11 Shri Ajay Tamta 
 RAJYA SABHA 
12 Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
13 Smt. Kanta Kardam 
14 Shri Mithlesh Kumar 
15 Shri Rambhai Harjibhai Mokariya 
16 Dr. Sasmit Patra 
17 Dr. V. Sivadasan 
18 Shri Ravichandra Vaddiraju 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Y. M. Kandpal - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri H. Ram Prakash - Director  
3. Shri Brajesh Kumar Singh - Deputy Secretary 
 

2. At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the 
sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft 
Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in the Eighteenth 
Report (17th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands For Grants 2023-24’. The Committee 
adopted the Report without any modification. 
3. XXXX              XXXX                    XXXX                    XXXX                   
XXXX 
 The Committee then authorised the Chairperson to present/lay the reports 
in both the Houses of Parliament.  
The Committee then adjourned 
*** 

Annexure II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS (2022-23) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2023-24). 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 20 
 
II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government  
(Vide Recommendations Nos. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,11,12, 
14, 16, 17, 18, 19 and 20)  
16 
 Percentage to Total 80.00% 
III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s 
(Vide Recommendations No. Nil) 
 
00 
 Percentage of Total 00 
 
IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee  
(Vide Recommendations Nos. 4, 5 and 15) 
 
03 
 Percentage of Total 
 
15.00% 
V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendation No. 13)  
 
01 
 Percentage of Total 
 
5.00% 
 
 
 