4 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2024-25) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Twenty-Fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2023-24) on the subject 
‘‘Litigations involving Oil PSUs’’] 
 
 
FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 ……. August, 2025/…….Shravan, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 


CP&NG NO.     
FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
(2024 - 25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Twenty-Fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2023-24) on the subject 
‘‘Litigations involving Oil PSUs’’] 
  
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12.08.2025 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12.08.2025 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  August, 2025/Shravan, 1947 (Saka)  
 


CONTENTS 
          Page 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2024-25)……………………………..                     (iii) 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………..                     (iv) 
CHAPTER I 
   
 
Report ………………………………………………….                      1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ……………………………      
                   
13 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies …………………………………     
                    
25 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted                                             
by the Committee ……………………………………         
                    
26 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited ……    
                     
28 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the fourteenth sitting of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2024-25) 
held on 07.08.2025. 
29 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Fourth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas (2023-24) on  
the subject ‘Litigations involving Oil PSUs’. 
31 

(iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM &  
NATURAL GAS (2024-25) 
Sl. No.                                           Names of Members 
                                                      LOK SABHA 
Shri Sunil Dattatrey Tatkare - Chairperson 
2 Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla 
3 Shri Benny Behanan 
4 Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
5 Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
6 Shri Putta Mahesh Kumar 
7 Shri Chavda Vinod Lakhamshi  
8 Smt. Joba Majhi 
9 Smt. Pratima Mondal 
10 Shri Laxmikant Pappu Nishad 
11 Shri Jai Prakash 
12 Shri Dilip Saikia  
13 Smt. Kamaljeet Sehrawat  
14 Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal  
15 Dr. Amar Singh 
16 Shri Vivek Thakur 
17 Shri Ve Vaithilingam 
18 Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
19 Shri Parbhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
20  Dr. Kalanidhi Veeraswamy  
21 Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri Chunnilal Garasiya  
23 Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
24 Shri Chandrakant Handore 
25 Shri Manoj Kumar Jha 
26 Shri Mithlesh Kumar   
27 Shri Dorjee Tshering Lepcha 
28 Shri Mayankbhai Jaydevbhai Nayak 
29 Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar 
30 Dr. V. Sivadasan 
31 Shri Ravi Chandra Vaddiraju 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1 Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar Joint Secretary 
2 Shri Sujay Kumar Deputy Secretary 
3 
 
Shri Gurpreet Singh Committee Officer 
 

(iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas 
having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present this Fourth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty-Fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee on the subject ‘Litigations involving Oil PSUs’. 
2. The Twenty-Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & 
Natural Gas was presented to Lok Sabha/ laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on 
08.02.2024. The Action Taken Replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty-Fourth Report were received on 
14.10.2024. 
3. The Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas (2024-25) 
considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 07.08.2025.  
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty-Fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas is given in 
Annexure-II. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report. 
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered to them by the officers of the Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee. 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
07_August, 2025 
16__Shravan,1947 (Saka)     
Sunil Dattatrey Tatkare,                                          
Chairperson, Standing Committee 
              on Petroleum & Natural Gas                                                     
 
  

REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the                          
Twenty-Fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum 
and Natural Gas (2023-24) on the subject ‘Litigations involving Oil PSUs’, which was 
presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 08.02.2024.  
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry on 14.10.2024 in respect 
of all the 11 recommendations/observations contained in the report. These have been 
categorized as per the following: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government:-Reco. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10 and 11 (Total -10) 
(Chapter- II) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies:- Nil 
(Chapter- III) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:- Reco. No. 8 (Total-01)  
(Chapter- IV) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:-Nil 
                                                                                                         (Chapter- V) 
3. The Committee appreciate that the Ministry have accepted 10 
recommendations out of 11 recommendations of this Committee.  The Committee 
also desire that the Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in Chapter-I of this Report should be furnished within three months of the 
presentation of this Report to the Parliament.  
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations. 
 
 
 
  
 
 

2 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
NEED TO REVIEW LITIGATION SCENARIO IN OIL & GAS PSU’S 
 
5. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that one of the important mandates of the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas is to strengthen energy security of the country. The oil 
and gas PSUs have an important role to establish the required infrastructure for this 
which necessitates the need to frame and enforce laws, rules, 
regulations/guidelines, legal provisions etc, for Petroleum sector. It is a fact that 
Litigations are a part of any business and industry and Petroleum sector is no 
exception. Though some disputes are resolved amicably, while others end up in 
court and legal forums. The Committee recognize that every party has a right to 
protect their interest. 
The Committee note that there are approximately 24,000 cases relating to oil 
PSUs pending at various legal forums and out of these, many of them are pending 
for more than 10 years. The Committee also observe that majority of the cases are 
pending at High court level in respect of almost all oil PSUs which is a pointer 
towards some serious deficiency in their litigation handling mechanism. The 
Committee would expect the MoPNG/Oil PSU’s to have a relook at their litigation 
scenario. The Ministry and Oil PSUs also need not be mechanical in going for 
appeals and not to shy away from taking prudent decision towards appeal. They 
need to rejig their legal policy/litigation handling mechanism so that wasteful 
litigative appeals and expenditure thereon may be avoided which also free 
manpower and funds that can be gainfully utilized on productive 
outcomes/activities. 
The Committee feel that periodical review of the pending litigation cases in 
oil PSUs by the Ministry would reduce the scope for emergence of litigations by 
addressing the hurdles that are coming in their way for amicable solution. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry should develop a monitoring 
mechanism to reduce the scope for litigation in Oil PSUs including developing an 
online monitoring system”.  
6. In this regard, the Ministry have submitted the following reply: 
 
“As observed, maximum numbers of cases are pending before the High Courts. 
However, it is noteworthy that most of these cases are filed against CPSEs as 
CPSEs being ‘State’ under Article 12 of the Indian Constitution and amenable to 
Article 226 under which any person aggrieved can directly approach the High 
Courts. Likewise, High Courts are also the forum for all appeals emanating from 
orders of lower courts.  
  

3 
 
 
 
Further, to get the cases disposed of at the earliest, steps such as filing early 
hearing applications, mentioning of the cases before the court for early disposal etc. 
are being undertaken. Regular follow-ups/conferences are also being held with the 
counsels for getting cases listed regularly and to facilitate early disposal. 
  
As far as filing of appeals is concerned, as and when any adverse order is 
passed, the said order is evaluated on merits before taking any decision regarding 
such case. The opinion of the advocate handling the case is obtained on pros and 
cons of the said order. Cost-benefit analysis is being done while taking decisions. In 
matters having high-stake and/or policy implications, the opinion of senior 
advocates or senior government counsels is also taken. Approval of competent 
authority is obtained before filing an appeal.  
  
In view of the above, adequate checks and balances are being adopted to 
ensure that appeals are not filed mechanically, and a concerted decision is taken 
after assessing merits, policy and financial considerations relating to each such 
underlying matter.  
  
Further, regular legal review of all pending cases in the presence of senior 
officials to conduct a comprehensive assessment for exploring potential solutions to 
identify possibilities of resolving pending matters through out-of-court settlement 
and thereby reducing the overall litigation profile. This process plays a key role in 
identifying the underlying causes of disputes and implementing effective strategies 
to prevent or mitigate them in the future. 
  
Some of the CPSEs like IOCL have also been leveraging technological 
solutions for monitoring, reviewing, and handling all pending matters before various 
forums across the country from the year 2008 itself by utilizing an in-house on-the-
premise portal called ‘Litigation and Arbitration MIS Package’”. 
Comments of the Committee  
7. The Committee had recommended that the Ministry develop a monitoring 
mechanism to reduce the scope for litigation in Oil PSUs including developing an 
online monitoring system. 
The Ministry in their action taken reply have submitted that regular legal 
review of all pending cases in the presence of senior officials to conduct a 
comprehensive assessment for exploring potential solutions to identify possibilities 
of resolving pending matters through out-of-court settlement and thereby reducing 
the overall litigation profile. This process plays a key role in identifying the 
underlying causes of disputes and implementing effective strategies to prevent or 
mitigate them in the future.  It was also informed that IOCL is leveraging 
technological solutions for monitoring, reviewing, and handling all pending matters 
before various forums across the Country from the year 2008 itself by utilizing an    
in-house on-the-premise portal called ‘Litigation and Arbitration MIS Package’. 

4 
 
 
 
The Committee appreciate that some of the Oil and Gas PSUs, particularly, 
IOCL has employed technological solutions and put in place online portal for 
monitoring, reviewing and handling all pending matters before various judicial fora 
across the Country.  The Committee feel that it should be replicated across the 
PSUs. The Committee urge the Ministry to make all out efforts to ensure that other 
Oil PSUs also develop an online monitoring system for monitoring, reviewing, and 
handling all pending litigations matters.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the 
Oil PSUs employ innovative solutions including online monitoring system to reduce 
their overall litigation profile within a given time frame.   
Recommendation No. 3 
LITIGATIONS IN OIL MARKETING COMPANIES (OMCs)  
8. The Committee in their original Report had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) being engaged in the 
business of marketing of petroleum fuels and products face number of disputes 
resulting in filing of cases by the aggrieved parties, such as applicants for 
dealerships/ distributorships etc. and also the dealers/distributors affected by the 
imposition of penalties under Marketing Discipline Guidelines (MDG). As per the 
information furnished, the Committee note that as far as MDG violation by 
dealers/distributors are concerned, HPCL has 336 pending cases, IOCL has 275 
cases and BPCL has 118 pending cases before various courts. As regards eviction 
proceedings in relation to land taken on lease in respect of retail outlet dealers and 
LPG distributors, BPCL has 261 pending cases, HPCL has 423 cases, IOCL has 
322 cases at various legal forums with many cases pending for more than 10 years. 
The Committee note that OMC’s have laid down norms/guidelines for 
procedures relating to selection of dealership/ distributorships, as also the operating 
guidelines applicable for them (termed as Marketing Discipline Guidelines) to 
ensure uniformity of procedures and transparency in the decision making 
processes. These guidelines are amended from time to time depending on the 
experience of the OMCs with the stakeholders and statutory requirements. The 
Committee feel that piling up of litigation cases over the years does not bode well 
for the reputation of the OMCs as these are Government entities. The core issues 
responsible for emergence of litigations should be identified and sorted out for 
framing of future contracts, guidelines, etc,. The Committee also desire that OMCs 
should launch special drive for reviewing the old cases pending at various legal 
forums and work towards out of court settlement within stipulated time frame 
wherever possible. 
The Committee would also impress upon the Ministry/OMCs to explore the 
feasibility of hiring some renowned outside agencies to study and suggest 

5 
 
 
 
measures for reducing pendency of litigation/cases. The Committee, therefore, 
desire the OMCs to recalibrate their approach to deal with complaints of RO and 
LPG distributorship applicants and to the extent possible engage the stakeholders 
in the process of formulating/reviewing/amending MDG. The Committee 
recommend the Ministry to play a proactive role in helping out OMCs to dispose off 
the pending litigations by simplifying policies/guidelines issues prone to litigations”.  
9. In this regard, the Ministry have submitted the following reply: 
 
“OMCs have standardised its transaction documents for project purposes in order to 
ensure uniformity in practice and avoidance of unnecessary litigation. These 
standard formats are reviewed on a continuous basis and modified as per the 
evolving jurisprudential principles to avoid challenges and also reduce the chances 
of adverse legal consequences and bring more clarity in such contracts. In this 
connection, documents such as confidentiality agreements, memorandum of 
undertaking, expense sharing agreements, heads of agreement, joint venture 
agreements, shareholders’ agreements, share purchase agreements, gas supply 
term sheets etc. have already been standardised. 
   OMCs also undertake regular reviews of all pending cases in the presence of 
senior officials to conduct a comprehensive assessment for exploring potential 
solutions. This process plays a key role in identifying the underlying causes of 
disputes and implementing effective strategies to prevent or mitigate them in the 
future. In fact, reviews of pending litigation and arbitration matters are already being 
undertaken to identify possibilities of resolving pending matters through out-of-court 
settlement and thereby reduce the overall litigation profile.  
  
Outside agencies such as senior counsels, sitting and retired judges of 
various courts are regularly invited for delivering talks on bottlenecks which are 
being faced in relation to ongoing legal matters before various forums. Likewise, 
regular workshops are also conducted for sensitisation of non-legal officers to assist 
them understand the nuances relating to legal procedures which are to be followed 
in respect of ongoing matters. Workshops cum awareness sessions on new laws 
enacted by the Government of India are conducted, the implementation of which 
may have an impact on the overall business interest. By way of the aforesaid 
exercise, the Functional Department is made aware of the course of action which 
needs to be undertaken in consonance with law of the land and governing 
administrative principles, to significantly reduce the frequency of legal challenges in 
future due to administrative decision making. 
  
The user department like Retail/LPG etc. are constantly discussing the 
issues in the matter of selection/re-constitution etc. and are seeking regular 
guidance from Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, Government of India.   
  
As a regular exercise, OMCs conduct a holistic review of its standard terms 
and conditions governing contracts and tenders as well as policies to keep these in 
line with the evolving jurisprudence. In furtherance thereof, the exercise of 
reviewing the provisions of the General Conditional of Contract, General 
Procurement Conditions, Special Terms and Conditions which are applicable to 
vendors who have been awarded contracts, is under progress. Further, the 

6 
 
 
 
Integrated Works Procedure Manual and Integrated Materials Manuals have also 
been updated in consonance with the current judicial trends and industry practices. 
Likewise, in order to streamline the procedures on a corporation-wide basis, 
regularly prepares and issues standard operating procedures (SOPs) on various 
aspects relating to contract handling and management. Some of OMCS like IOCL 
have also issued SOPs on various aspects relating to project/procurement such as 
interest prohibition, price discount, risk and cost, Notified Claims and limitation of 
liability, identification of assets for effective enforcement of arbitral awards and court 
orders etc. in order to avoid infructuous litigation”. 
Comments of the Committee  
10. The Committee had noted that Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs), being 
engaged in the business of marketing of petroleum fuels and products, face number 
of disputes and had desired the OMCs to launch a special drive for reviewing the 
old cases pending at various legal forums and work towards out of court settlement 
within stipulated time frame wherever possible and to explore the feasibility of 
hiring renowned outside agencies to study and suggest measures for reducing 
pendency of litigation/cases.  
 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated that OMCs have 
standardised its transaction documents for project purposes in order to ensure 
uniformity in practice and avoidance of unnecessary litigation. These standard 
formats are reviewed on a continuous basis and modified as per the evolving 
jurisprudential principles to avoid challenges and also reduce the chances of 
adverse legal consequences and bring more clarity in such contracts.  OMCs also 
undertake regular reviews of all pending cases in the presence of senior officials to 
conduct a comprehensive assessment for exploring potential solutions.  Besides,  
some OMCs like IOCL have also issued Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) on 
various aspects relating to project/procurement such as interest prohibition, price 
discount, risk and cost, Notified Claims and limitation of liability, identification of 
assets for effective enforcement of arbitral awards and court orders etc. in order to 
avoid infructuous litigation.  
While appreciating efforts being made by the OMCs like IOCL in formulating 
Standard Operating Procedures to avoid infructuous litigation in their operations, 
the Committee feel that these efforts are designed to prevent future litigations and 
as regards existing litigations, concerted efforts need to be made for reducing the 
existing pending litigations particularly litigations relating to selection of dealership/ 

7 
 
 
 
distributorships, to ensure uniformity of procedures and transparency in the 
decision making processes.  The Committee note that there is similarity in 
operations of the OMCs in so far as the marketing of petroleum products is 
concerned and feel that the best practices must be shared among themselves in 
order to bring even more transparency and simplicity in their procedures.  There 
should be timely review of procedures so as to conduct a comprehensive 
assessment for exploring potential solutions to pending litigations and also to do 
away with archaic regulations. Besides, the Committee desire that PSUs may 
undertake time bound exercise of reviewing the provisions of General Conditions of 
Contract, General Procurement Conditions, Special Terms and Conditions which are 
applicable to vendors and all Oil PSUs may consider incorporating the same in their 
operations.  The Committee may be apprised about the action taken in this regard. 
Recommendation No. 4 
LITIGATIONS IN GAIL 
11. The Committee in their original report had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that GAIL is operating more than 15000 Km Natural Gas 
Pipeline network and currently executing more than 5000 Km Natural Gas Pipeline 
projects. The Committee also note that the major factor responsible for 83 percent 
of litigation cases in GAIL pertain to Right of Use (RoU) and land acquisition 
compensation. The Committee have been given to understand that ROU (Right of 
use) is acquired in line with P&MP (Petroleum & Minerals Pipeline) Act, 1962 by 
following the prescribed process and the major factor responsible for 
delay/pendency of litigation related to said RoU acquisition are reluctance by land 
owners to give RoU to lay the pipeline in anticipation of reduction in market value of 
their land, restriction of construction of permanent structure in future, dispute in 
disbursement of Compensation due to non-availability of updated land 
records/ownership details from Revenue Department of respective State 
Government. As per the project requirement for pipeline works, GAIL also 
undertakes negotiation in presence of State revenue officials with the land owners 
for deriving market rates for adequate RoU compensation disbursement. 
The Committee note that the GAIL has suggested amendments in P&MP Act 
1962 to MOP&G for increase in land compensation from time to time as it is one of 
the major factors for litigation. The Committee desire that GAIL should make 
optimum use of PM Gati Shakti Programme for laying upcoming gas pipelines 
which would not only reduce the scope for emergence of litigations but will also 
save funds. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to take up the issue 
of revision of P&MP Act, 1962 and also review its land acquisition policy for its 
projects”. 

8 
 
 
 
12. In this regard, the Ministry have submitted the following reply: 
 
“Ministry is in the process of amending the Petroleum Act, PNGRB Act and PMP 
Act. On the second issue of land acquisition policy, it is to mention that the Ministry 
does not have its own land acquisition policy. The land acquisitions for PSUs are 
governed by the Right to Fair compensation and transparency in Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013”. 
Comments of the Committee  
13. The Committee had noted that GAIL is suggesting amendments in P&MP Act 
1962 to the Ministry for increase in land compensation from time to time as it is one 
of the major factors for litigation. The Committee had recommended that the 
Ministry take up the issue of amending the P&MP Act, 1962 and also review land 
acquisition policy for its projects. 
The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated that they are in the 
process of amending the Petroleum Act, the PNGRB Act and the P&MP Act.  On the 
second issue of land acquisition policy, they have replied that the Ministry does not 
have its own land acquisition policy and it is governed by the Right to Fair 
compensation and transparency in Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement 
Act, 2013. 
The Committee appreciate that the Ministry has taken up the process of 
amending the relevant Acts to address the issue of litigation arising due to land 
acquisition/utilisation for gas pipeline projects of GAIL. However, the Committee 
urge the Ministry to take initiative for enabling suitable amendments to the 
existing Acts/Rules/Guidelines etc. related to land acquisition as early as possible 
in order to provide just, fair and acceptable compensation to pipeline project 
affected persons so that land acquisition/RoU for pipeline projects become a 
smooth process. The Committee would also like to draw the attention of the 
Ministry towards recommendation no. 10 contained in its second report relating to 
the Demand for Grants (2025-26) presented to the Parliament in March 2025, 
which, inter alia, dealt with the issue of the local people whose lands have been 
affected by the pipeline projects. The Committee, in the recommendation, had 
stated that local project affected people may be given preference in employment 
by the Oil PSUs. The Committee urge the Ministry to take pro active steps for 
finding a solution to the issue acceptable to all the stakeholders.  

9 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
ROLE OF INDEPENDENT EXTERNAL MONITORS (IEM) 
14. The Committee in their original report had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that as part of implementing Integrity Pact Programme, 
Oil PSUs maintain a panel of former officials of Govt. of India who act as 
Independent External Monitors (IEM) nominated by the CVC, and are required to 
ensure desired integrity, transparency and objectivity in tendering/contracting 
process. Though the advice of IEMs is not legally binding and restricted to resolving 
issues raised by a Bidder regarding any aspect of Tender which is allegedly 
restrictive, non-competitive and biased towards some other Bidder, yet IEMs have 
been stated to be playing an important role in avoidance of potential litigation 
related to tendering process and contract execution. The Committee note that 
around 340 cases with total value of approx. Rs.1,50,000 crores have been handled 
by IEMs in ONGC since 2006, while in IOCL 197 references have been deliberated 
by IEMs involving a total amount of around Rs. 2000 crore. In BPCL, 18 complaints 
were handled, in CPCL 2 cases, while in HPCL 13 references were handled by 
IEMs during the last three years. Similarly, in EIL three cases, whereas in OIL 15 
cases were referred to IEMs during the last three years. 
  
The Committee have been given to understand that most of the cases 
referred to IEMs by the Oil PSUs were settled amicably and in very few cases 
recommendations were challenged in Court of Law. The Committee observe that 
the implementation of Integrity Pact Programme and role of IEMs has avoided 
escalation of disputes to courts of law. The Committee recommend that Ministry/Oil 
PSUs should explore the possibility of expanding the role of IEMs in disposing off 
various pending litigation cases related to Marketing Discipline Guidelines and 
eviction proceedings in respect of retail outlet dealers and LPG distributors at 
various legal forums. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this 
regard within three months of presentation of this Report”. 
 
15. In this regard, the Ministry have submitted the following reply: 
  
“Integrity Pact (IP) was adopted by CPSEs for ensuring fairness and 
transparency in respect of public procurement through the tendering process.  IP is 
required to be implemented through independent external monitors (IEMs). The 
recommendations of IEMs are not binding on the organisations and are limited to 
the aspects covered in the IP. In case any change is required to be made in the 
scope/ambit of operations which are vested with the IEMs, it would require 
directions from the competent authority in the Government.  
  
To ensure that retail outlets (ROs) / LPG distributors follow operating 
policies, procedures and practices, as well as to maintain discipline in their 
operations, Marketing Disciplinary Guidelines (MDGs) were formulated by oil 
marketing PSUs. The MDGs are formulated to ensure high customer service 
standards and prevent malpractices while broadly covering various aspects of 
operations of ROs/LPG distributorships such as storage, handling of products, 
sampling, testing, accounting, irregularities and penalties therefore MDG already 
contains a mechanism of appeal, challenging actions taken by oil marketing PSUs 

10 
 
 
 
against the dealers/distributors. Accordingly, for MDG related disputes, there is 
adequate mechanism in MDGs itself, and such disputes may not fall within the 
current ambit of IEMs. Likewise, eviction matters are governed as per provisions of 
the underlying lease deed entered into between the parties and is subject to local 
land laws. In regard to such disputes, specific courts such as courts of small causes 
have exclusive jurisdiction to try suits and resolve disputes of eviction. In view of the 
aforesaid, IEMs may not have any such jurisdiction to deal with the above referred 
disputes”. 
 
 
Comments of the Committee  
16. The Committee while noting the implementation of Integrity Pact Programme 
and role of IEMs in avoiding escalation of disputes to courts of law, had 
recommended the Ministry/Oil PSUs to explore the possibility of expanding the role 
of IEMs in disposing off various pending litigation cases related to Marketing 
Discipline Guidelines (MDGs) and eviction proceedings in respect of retail outlet 
dealers and LPG distributors at various legal forums. 
 The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated that Integrity Pact (IP) 
was adopted by CPSEs for ensuring fairness and transparency in respect of public 
procurement through the tendering process and it is required to be implemented 
through independent external monitors (IEMs).  Further, it has been stated in the 
reply that for MDG related disputes, there is adequate mechanism in MDGs itself, 
and such disputes may not fall within the current ambit of IEMs. Likewise, eviction 
matters are governed as per provisions of the underlying lease deed entered into 
between the parties and is subject to local land laws. In regard to such disputes, 
specific courts such as courts of small causes have exclusive jurisdiction to try 
suits and resolve disputes of eviction. In view of the aforesaid, IEMs may not have 
any such jurisdiction to deal with the above referred disputes”. 
The Committee are satisfied with the reply of the Ministry considering the 
fact that there are specific courts that have exclusive jurisdiction to try suits and 
resolve disputes of eviction proceedings in respect of retail dealers and LPG 
distributors.  While the Ministry have provided cogent reasons for not expanding 
the role of IEM in resolving cases of litigation arising out of MDGs, the Committee 
feel that IEMs may have a role in resolving disputes relating to such cases of MDG 
where the dispute is on some minor point without involving outright illegality.  The 
Committee, therefore, opine that it may not be proper to completely rule out 
involving IEMs in this field.  Their possible role, if any, may be examined and a 

11 
 
 
 
considered view needs to be taken to resolve some of the issues under MDG.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate its recommendation that the possibility of 
expanding the role of IEMs, in resolving dispute relating to MDGs, may be 
thoroughly explored.  The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this 
regard.    
  
Recommendation No. 9 
 
HIGH PENDENCY OF LITIGATIONS AT HIGH COURT LEVEL 
17. The Committee in their original report had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that almost all OMCs have huge pendency at High Court level 
apart from pending cases in other courts. In BPCL, 2568 out of total 4482 pending 
cases, in CPCL 59 out of total 78 pending cases, in EIL 29 cases out of total 78 
pending cases, in HPCL 2855 out of total 5808 pending cases, in MRPL 146 out of 
total 216 pending cases, in IOCL 5459 out of 9252 total pending cases in Balmer 
Lawrie 41 out of 42 cases, in GAIL 584 out of 3828 total pending cases are at High 
Court level. While acknowledging the fact that delay in court process and 
procedures is responsible for huge pendency of cases at various legal forums, the 
Committee feel that the Ministry and 82 Oil PSUs have to take some proactive 
action for disposal of long pending disputes that are responsible for prolonged 
litigations especially at High Court Level. OMCs also need to periodically review the 
status of pending litigations and they should also find a way out to settle cases by 
mutual give and take where amount involved is not significant keeping in view 
expenditure being incurred on fighting those cases at various legal forums. The 
Committee therefore recommend the Ministry to specifically monitor the pending 
litigation scenario in Oil PSUs at High Court Level and if needed matter may be 
taken up with Ministry of Law & Justice to set up special courts for disposal of long 
pending cases”. 
18. In this regard, the Ministry have submitted the following reply: 
 
“As observed, maximum number of cases are pending before the High Courts. 
However, it is noteworthy that most of these cases are filed against CPSEs as 
CPSEs being ‘State’ under Article 12 of the Indian Constitution and amenable to 
Article 226 under which any person aggrieved can directly approach the High 
Courts. Likewise, High Courts are also the forum for all appeals emanating from 
orders of lower courts.  
  
Further, to get the cases disposed of at the earliest, steps such as filing early 
hearing applications, mentioning of the cases before the court for early disposal etc. 
are being undertaken. Regular follow-ups/conferences are also being held with the 
counsels for getting cases listed regularly and to facilitate early disposal. 

12 
 
 
 
  
As far as filing of appeals is concerned, as and when any adverse order is 
passed, the said order is evaluated on merits before taking any decision regarding 
such case. The opinion of the advocate handling the case is obtained on the pros 
and cons of the said order. Cost-benefit analysis is being done while taking 
decisions. In matters having high-stake and/or policy implications, the opinion of 
senior advocates or senior government counsels is also taken. Approval of 
competent authority is obtained before filing an appeal”. 
Comments of the Committee  
19. The Committee while noting that almost all OMCs have huge pendency at 
High Court level, had recommended the Ministry to specifically monitor the pending 
litigation scenario in Oil PSUs at High Court Level and, if needed, matter may be 
taken up with Ministry of Law & Justice to set up special courts for disposal of long 
pending cases. 
 The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated that maximum number of 
cases are pending before the High Courts.  However, they have pointed out that 
most of these cases are filed against CPSEs as CPSEs being ‘State’ under Article 12 
of the our Constitution and amenable to Article 226, under which any person 
aggrieved can directly approach the High Courts.  Likewise, High Courts are also 
the forum for all appeals emanating from the orders of lower courts.  Further, to get 
the cases disposed of at the earliest, steps such as filing early hearing applications, 
mentioning of the cases before the court for early disposal etc. are being 
undertaken.  Regular follow-ups/conferences are also being held with the counsels 
for getting cases listed regularly and to facilitate early disposal. 
 The Committee appreciate the steps being taken for early disposal of pending 
litigations at High Court level through regular follow-ups with the counsels and 
other relevant measures. The Committee also urge the Ministry to put sustained 
efforts including employing alternate redressal mechanisms to ensure early 
disposal of long pending cases. 
  

13 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation No. 1 
NEED TO REVIEW LITIGATION SCENARIO IN OIL & GAS PSU’S 
  
The Committee note that one of the important mandates of the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas is to strengthen energy security of the country. The oil and gas 
PSUs have an important role to establish the required infrastructure for this which 
necessitates the need to frame and enforce laws, rules, regulations/guidelines, legal 
provisions etc, for Petroleum sector. It is a fact that Litigations are a part of any business 
and industry and Petroleum sector is no exception. Though some disputes are resolved 
amicably, while others end up in court and legal forums. The Committee recognize that 
every party has a right to protect their interest. 
The Committee note that there are approximately 24,000 cases relating to oil PSUs 
pending at various legal forums and out of these, many of them are pending for more than 
10 years. The Committee also observe that majority of the cases are pending at High court 
level in respect of almost all oil PSUs which is a pointer towards some serious deficiency 
in their litigation handling mechanism. The Committee would expect the MoPNG/Oil PSU’s 
to have a relook at their litigation scenario. The Ministry and Oil PSUs also need not be 
mechanical in going for appeals and not to shy away from taking prudent decision towards 
appeal. They need to rejig their legal policy/litigation handling mechanism so that wasteful 
litigative appeals and expenditure thereon may be avoided which also free manpower and 
funds that can be gainfully utilized on productive outcomes/activities. 
The Committee feel that periodical review of the pending litigation cases in oil PSUs 
by the Ministry would reduce the scope for emergence of litigations by addressing the 
hurdles that are coming in their way for amicable solution. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that Ministry should develop a monitoring mechanism to reduce the scope for 
litigation in Oil PSUs including developing an online monitoring system.  
   
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
As observed, maximum numbers of cases are pending before the High Courts. However, it 
is noteworthy that most of these cases are filed against CPSEs as CPSEs being ‘State’ 
under Article 12 of the Indian Constitution and amenable to Article 226 under which any 
person aggrieved can directly approach the High Courts. Likewise, High Courts are also 
the forum for all appeals emanating from orders of lower courts.  
  
Further, to get the cases disposed of at the earliest, steps such as filing early hearing 
applications, mentioning of the cases before the court for early disposal etc. are being 
undertaken. Regular follow-ups/conferences are also being held with the counsels for 
getting cases listed regularly and to facilitate early disposal. 

14 
 
 
 
  
As far as filing of appeals is concerned, as and when any adverse order is passed, the 
said order is evaluated on merits before taking any decision regarding such case. The 
opinion of the advocate handling the case is obtained on pros and cons of the said order. 
Cost-benefit analysis is being done while taking decisions. In matters having high-stake 
and/or policy implications, the opinion of senior advocates or senior government counsels 
is also taken. Approval of competent authority is obtained before filing an appeal.  
  
In view of the above, adequate checks and balances are being adopted to ensure that 
appeals are not filed mechanically, and a concerted decision is taken after assessing 
merits, policy and financial considerations relating to each such underlying matter.  
  
Further, regular legal review of all pending cases in the presence of senior officials to 
conduct a comprehensive assessment for exploring potential solutions to identify 
possibilities of resolving pending matters through out-of-court settlement and thereby 
reducing the overall litigation profile. This process plays a key role in identifying the 
underlying causes of disputes and implementing effective strategies to prevent or mitigate 
them in the future. 
  
Some of the CPSEs like IOCL have also been leveraging technological solutions for 
monitoring, reviewing, and handling all pending matters before various forums across the 
country from the year 2008 itself by utilizing an in-house on-the-premise portal called 
‘Litigation and Arbitration MIS Package’. 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No.Q-21012/1/2024-ED-PNG dated 14.10.2024 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTE 
  
Refer Para 7 of the Chapter-I of this Report  
 
Recommendation No. 2 
LITIGATIONS IN UPSTREAM SECTOR 
  The Committee note that due to rising demand for energy, the hydrocarbon sector 
shall continue to play a crucial role in the energy security of the country. The Committee 
further note that ONGC, OIL, GAIL, CPCL and BPRL which is a wholly owned subsidiary 
of BPCL are undertaking exploration and production activities and the litigations faced in 
upstream sector are mainly related to commercial/contractual issues, tender related 
disputes, land acquisition, environmental cases, taxation cases etc. The Committee also 
note that the Director General of Hydrocarbons (DGH) is also involved in litigations as it is 
the Regulator for upstream sector and its decisions are challenged by the aggrieved 
parties in various legal forums. 
  
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry/Oil and Gas PSUs engaged in upstream 
sector should undertake review of contentious clauses in NELP/ HELP/OALP policies and 
other irritants responsible for pending litigations and make necessary representation to 
Ministry/DGH for amendments in their rules/guidelines to reduce the scope for litigations. 
The Committee recommend that Ministry in consultation with PSU’s/DGH/other 
stakeholders should strive for a low litigation regime and ensure harmonious interpretation 

15 
 
 
 
of contracts/tender conditions under various policy initiatives so that the scope of litigation 
is reduced. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
There have been certain provisions under PSCs/RSCs relating to timely submission of 
Bank Guarantees, FDPs, etc. fulfillment of committed work programmes, sharing of GoI 
Profit Petroleum, etc., which can’t be said as contentious clauses but it appears that the 
disputes arise between the Contractors between the Government/DGH mainly due to non-
compliance of those provisions under the respective contract by the Contractors. Further, 
there have been issues relating financial health of the contractor companies where many 
of them have undergone into insolvency resolution/ liquidation proceedings etc. Where the 
Government has the least control. There have been efforts towards minimising those 
disputes under recent policies/bid rounds under RSC where disputes have been 
considerably reduced.  
  
 Further, in order to resolve the differences/disputes amicably in time time-bound manner, 
the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas (MoPNG), Govt. of India, vide Notification No. 
Expl-15022(13)/6/2017-ONGD-V dated 16.12.2019 has constituted the Committee of 
External Eminent Persons/Experts (CEEE or DRC) for resolution of disputes arising out of 
contracts relating to exploration blocks/fields. Several disputes between DGH and 
Contractor/JV Consortium in calculation of the Cost of Unfinished Work Program resulting 
in disputes are in the process for resolution/settlement through CEEE. Till date, the 
settlement Agreement executed for 24 cases and Rs. 485 Cr. received by the Government 
as the settlement amount. In line with Committee’s recommendations, it is further 
submitted that efforts are continuing towards minimising the scope of litigation as well as 
litigation expenses by DGH/MoPNG.  
 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No.Q-21012/1/2024-ED-PNG dated 14.10.2024 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
LITIGATIONS IN OIL MARKETING COMPANIES (OMCs) 
The Committee note that Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) being engaged in the business 
of marketing of petroleum fuels and products face number of disputes resulting in filing of 
cases by the aggrieved parties, such as applicants for dealerships/ distributorships etc. 
and also the dealers/distributors affected by the imposition of penalties under Marketing 
Discipline Guidelines (MDG). As per the information furnished, the Committee note that as 
far as MDG violation by dealers/distributors are concerned, HPCL has 336 pending cases, 
IOCL has 275 cases and BPCL has 118 pending cases before various courts. As regards 
eviction proceedings in relation to land taken on lease in respect of retail outlet dealers 
and LPG distributors, BPCL has 261 pending cases, HPCL has 423 cases, IOCL has 322 
cases at various legal forums with many cases pending for more than 10 years. 
  
The Committee note that OMC’s have laid down norms/guidelines for procedures relating 
to selection of dealership/ distributorships, as also the operating guidelines applicable for 
them (termed as Marketing Discipline Guidelines) to ensure uniformity of procedures and 
transparency in the decision-making processes. These guidelines are amended from time 
to time depending on the experience of the OMCs with the stakeholders and statutory 

16 
 
 
 
requirements. The Committee feel that piling up of litigation cases over the years does not 
bode well for the reputation of the OMCs as these are Government entities. The core 
issues responsible for emergence of litigations should be identified and sorted out for 
framing of future contracts, guidelines, etc. The Committee also desire that OMCs should 
launch special drive for reviewing the old cases pending at various legal forums and work 
towards out of court settlement within stipulated time frame wherever possible. 
  
The Committee would also impress upon the Ministry/OMCs to explore the feasibility of 
hiring some renowned outside agencies to study and suggest measures for reducing 
pendency of litigation/cases. The Committee, therefore, desire the OMCs to recalibrate 
their approach to deal with complaints of RO and LPG distributorship applicants and to the 
extent possible engage the stakeholders in the process of formulating/reviewing/amending 
MDG. The Committee recommend the Ministry to play a proactive role in helping out 
OMCs to dispose off the pending litigations by simplifying policies/guidelines issues prone 
to litigations. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
OMCs have standardised its transaction documents for project purposes in order to ensure 
uniformity in practice and avoidance of unnecessary litigation. These standard formats are 
reviewed on a continuous basis and modified as per the evolving jurisprudential principles 
to avoid challenges and also reduce the chances of adverse legal consequences and bring 
more clarity in such contracts. In this connection, documents such as confidentiality 
agreements, memorandum of undertaking, expense sharing agreements, heads of 
agreement, joint venture agreements, shareholders’ agreements, share purchase 
agreements, gas supply term sheets etc. have already been standardised. 
  
OMCs also undertake regular reviews of all pending cases in the presence of senior 
officials to conduct a comprehensive assessment for exploring potential solutions. This 
process plays a key role in identifying the underlying causes of disputes and implementing 
effective strategies to prevent or mitigate them in the future. In fact, reviews of pending 
litigation and arbitration matters are already being undertaken to identify possibilities of 
resolving pending matters through out-of-court settlement and thereby reduce the overall 
litigation profile.  
  
Outside agencies such as senior counsels, sitting and retired judges of various courts are 
regularly invited for delivering talks on bottlenecks which are being faced in relation to 
ongoing legal matters before various forums. Likewise, regular workshops are also 
conducted for sensitisation of non-legal officers to assist them understand the nuances 
relating to legal procedures which are to be followed in respect of ongoing matters. 
Workshops cum awareness sessions on new laws enacted by the Government of India are 
conducted, the implementation of which may have an impact on the overall business 
interest. By way of the aforesaid exercise, the Functional Department is made aware of the 
course of action which needs to be undertaken in consonance with law of the land and 
governing administrative principles, to significantly reduce the frequency of legal 
challenges in future due to administrative decision making. 
  
The user department like Retail/LPG etc. are constantly discussing the issues in the matter 
of selection/re-constitution etc. and are seeking regular guidance from Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas, Government of India.   
  

17 
 
 
 
As a regular exercise, OMCs conduct a holistic review of its standard terms and conditions 
governing contracts and tenders as well as policies to keep these in line with the evolving 
jurisprudence. In furtherance thereof, the exercise of reviewing the provisions of the 
General Conditional of Contract, General Procurement Conditions, Special Terms and 
Conditions which are applicable to vendors who have been awarded contracts, is under 
progress. Further, the Integrated Works Procedure Manual and Integrated Materials 
Manuals have also been updated in consonance with the current judicial trends and 
industry practices. Likewise, in order to streamline the procedures on a corporation-wide 
basis, regularly prepares and issues standard operating procedures (SOPs) on various 
aspects relating to contract handling and management. Some of OMCS like IOCL have 
also issued SOPs on various aspects relating to project/procurement such as interest 
prohibition, price discount, risk and cost, Notified Claims and limitation of liability, 
identification of assets for effective enforcement of arbitral awards and court orders etc. in 
order to avoid infructuous litigation. 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No.Q-21012/1/2024-ED-PNG dated 14.10.2024 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
LITIGATIONS IN GAIL 
The Committee note that GAIL is operating more more than 15000 Km Natural Gas 
Pipeline network and currently executing more than 5000 Km Natural Gas Pipeline 
projects. The Committee also note that the major factor responsible for 83 percent of 
litigation cases in GAIL pertain to Right of Use (RoU) and land acquisition compensation. 
The Committee have been given to understand that ROU (Right of use) is acquired in line 
with P&MP (Petroleum & Minerals Pipeline) Act’1962 by following the prescribed process 
and the major factor responsible for delay/pendency of litigation related to said RoU 
acquisition are reluctance by land owners to give RoU to lay the pipeline in anticipation of 
reduction in market value of their land, restriction of construction of permanent structure in 
future, dispute in disbursement of Compensation due to non-availability ofupdated land 
records/ownership details from Revenue Department of respective State Government. As 
per the project requirement for pipeline works, GAIL also undertakes negotiation in 
presence of State revenue officialswith the landowners for deriving market rates for 
adequate RoU compensation disbursement. 
  
The Committee note that the GAIL has suggested amendments in P&MP Act 1962 to 
MOP&G for increase in land compensation from time to time as it is one of the major 
factors for litigation. The Committee desire that GAIL should make optimum use of PM 
Gati Shakti Programme for laying upcoming gas pipelines which would not only reduce the 
scope for emergence of litigations but will also save funds. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Ministry to take up the issue of revision of P&MP Act, 1962 and also 
review its land acquisition policy for its projects. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
Ministry is in the process of amending the Petroleum Act, PNGRB Act and PMP Act. On 
the second issue of land acquisition policy, it is to mention that the Ministry does not have 
its own land acquisition policy. The land acquisitions for PSUs are governed by the Right 

18 
 
 
 
to Fair compensation and transparency in Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement 
Act, 2013.  
 
     Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No.Q-21012/1/2024-ED-PNG dated 14.10.2024 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
PERFORMANCE OF ALTERNATE DISPUTE REDRESSAL MECHANISM 
 The Committee note that with a view to reduce disputes of PSUs with Central and State 
Government and among other PSUs, the erstwhile Permanent Machinery of Arbitration 
(PMA), has recently been replaced with Administrative Mechanism for Redressal of CPSE 
Disputes (AMRCD) which have two level (tier) structure by Department of Public 
Enterprises (DPE). The Committee further note that at the First level (tier), commercial 
disputes between CPSEs are referred to a Committee comprising Secretaries of the 
Administrative Ministries/Departments to which the disputing CPSEs/Parties belong and 
Secretary- Department of Legal Affairs. The Financial Advisors of the two concerned 
Administrative Ministries/Departments represent the issues related to the dispute in 
question, before the above Committee. In case, the two disputing parties belong to the 
same Ministry/Department, the said Committee will comprise Secretary of the 
Administrative Ministry/Department concerned, Secretary- Department of Legal Affairs and 
Secretary- Department of Public Enterprises. In such a case, the matter will be 
represented before the Committee by the Financial Advisor and one Joint Secretary of that 
Ministry/Department. Appeal against the decision of the Committee shall lie with the 
Cabinet Secretary, whose decision will be final and binding on all concerned. 
  
The Committee further note that at BPCL have one pending case with ONGC and three 
cases with other PSUs/Govt. undertakings before AMRCD, IOCL has five pending cases, 
HPCL has two pending cases, ONGC has three pending cases, EIL has three pending 
cases, GAIL has one pending case and Balmer Lawrie & co. Ltd. has two pending cases 
before AMRCD. On perusal of the information provided by the Oil/PSUs, the Committee 
observe that AMRCD model has led to successful resolution of some of the pending 
litigations where CPSEs were the parties. The Committee express their satisfaction 
regarding the efforts made by Oil PSUs for utilizing the AMRCD mechanism for resolving 
the issues. The Committee would impress upon the Ministry and the Oil PSUs to focus on 
this mechanism more vigorously to dispose of pending litigation cases amongst PSUs and 
various Central and State Government agencies as well as to improve the quality of 
dispute resolution. The Committee recommend that Oil PSUs which are having pending 
cases before AMRCD should work towards their speedy resolution through mutual efforts. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
CPSEs have been able to achieve successful resolution in long pending disputes referred 
to the AMRCD mechanism. Keeping this in view and the effectiveness of the AMRCD 
forum, CPSEs also have adopted dispute resolution clauses involving AMRCD mechanism 
in all contracts with government departments/public sector undertakings. 
  
Further, CPSEs have strategically prioritized the resolution of disputes through AMRCD 
mechanism and thereby, alleviating the burden on the judicial system by diverting disputes 

19 
 
 
 
away from traditional court proceedings. By opting for AMRCD dispute mechanism, 
several objectives like to expedite dispute resolution processes, thereby saving substantial 
time and costs for both the corporation and the parties involved are achieved. Additionally, 
AMRCD mechanisms promote collaborative problem-solving, potentially preserving 
business relationships and fostering mutually beneficial outcomes. 
 
 
     Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No.Q-21012/1/2024-ED-PNG dated 14.10.2024 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
OUT OF COURT SETTLEMENT 
  
Keeping note of the fact that alternative dispute resolution measures play a crucial role in 
prevention and disposing off pending cases, the Committee observe that Oil PSUs have 
undertaken measures towards out of court settlements of such pending cases. The 
Committee further note that in BPCL 7 cases, in NRL 2 cases, in MRPL 7 cases, in OIL 1 
case, in IOCL 26 out of 30 cases, in CPCL 3 out of 5 cases, in ONGC 16 out of 34 cases 
that were taken up for out of court settlement have been settled so far. On perusal of the 
above information, the Committee feel that out of Court settlement can be very helpful in 
sorting out the conflicts between parties and in having resolution to the disputes in a short 
period of time. The Committee, therefore, emphasize upon all Oil PSUs to try out of court 
settlement as disputants may find this mechanism more comfortable in conveying their 
opinions since the procedure for settlement is less formal. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry need to encourage the Oil PSUs to go for the out of Court 
settlements for smaller issues with low financial impact. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
Out-of-court settlements hold significant importance for CPSEs in managing legal disputes 
efficiently and effectively. These settlements are instrumental in saving valuable time by 
avoiding prolonged litigation processes. By negotiating terms outside of court, CPSEs are 
achieving quicker resolutions, and thereby, contributing to substantial cost savings by 
minimizing legal fees, court expenses, and potential damages.  
  
In order to dispose of the cases amicably, CPSEs attempt to mutually settle the disputes 
having less financial implication, disputes involving railway claims, LPG consumer cases 
etc. This approach assists in reducing the burden of the courts, saves financial outgo as 
well as helps reduce man-hours on dispute handling and management. In this connection, 
CPSEs like IOCL have also framed an internal conciliation policy which has been 
applicable since 2014 pursuant to which disputes are settled with a success ratio of more 
than 95%.  
  
In addition to the above, following other initiatives have been taken by CPSEs for 
minimizing disputes:  
  
•           Preventive Dispute Resolution Mechanism (PDRM):  With an aim to prevent 
execution related issues turning into bigger legal disputes (arbitrations / Court cases) at a 

20 
 
 
 
later date, PDRM has been introduced. As per this mechanism, in case Engineer-In-
Charge is not able to address the grievances of contractor/vendor and/or the concerned 
contractor/vendor is not satisfied with the decision of Engineer-In-Charge while dealing 
any issue, they can approach higher level (a SAMADHAN Committee comprising of 
members from Technical, Contracts & Procurement and Finance Groups) for settlement of 
issue. Fixed timelines for settlement of such grievances are prescribed in PDRM. As per 
PDRM, issues can be escalated upto the concerned Functional Director level.  
  
•           Quarterly Health Monitoring of Contracts: Along with PDRM, quarterly Health 
Monitoring of all the Contracts being operated in specific Sites by its Officer-In-Charge has 
also been introduced in 2015. Under this activity, settlement of claims pertaining to extra 
works/deviations / execution of Abnormally High rate Items beyond approved quantities 
etc. are being settled on quarterly basis along with fixing accountability of delays 
encountered if any so that they will not carry forward till Contract Closure stage.     
  
In this manner, CPSEs focus is more on resolving the disputes pre-litigation by adopting 
out-of-court mechanisms such as conciliation and mediation. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No.Q-21012/1/2024-ED-PNG dated 14.10.2024 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
SABKA VISHWAS AND VIVAD SE VISHWAS SCHEMES 
  
The Committee note that the Sabka Vishwas Scheme 2019 was introduced in Union 
Budget 2019 for resolution and settlement of past disputes/appeals of Central Excise and 
Service Tax, providing major relief from payment of tax dues, interest and penalty. The 
scheme was initially effective from 01.09.2019 to 31.12.2019 and was later on extended 
up to 15.01.2020. The Committee note that GAIL had applied all 44 cases eligible for 
settlement under the Scheme and all the cases were settled. Similarly, IOC had settled 
161 cases with a settlement amount of Rs.268.67 crores while BPCL settled 97 cases with 
a total demand of Rs.632 crores whereas Balmer and Lawrie settled 4 cases. 
  
The Committee further note that Government of India had introduced Vivad se Vishwas 
Act in the year 2020 to resolve pending litigation under the Income Tax Act, 1961. As per 
the Act, whole of the amount of penalty and interest on disputed tax was waived off and all 
the pending disputes could be settled by paying only the disputed tax (100% for appeal 
filed by assessee and 50% for appeal filed by Income Tax Department). Under this 
scheme MRPL had referred 32 cases out of which 23 are settled and 9 are pending. IOCL 
had referred 33 appeals and all were settled with a quantum of amount approximating 
Rs.2420 crores. 
  
The Committee also note that Vivad se Vishwas Scheme II was launched in July 2023 to 
effectively settle the pending domestic contractual disputes where one of the parties is 
either the Govt. or any other Government undertaking. Under the scheme, for Court 
Awards passed on or before 30.04.2023, the settlement amount offered to the Contractor 
will be up to 85% of the net amount awarded/ upheld by the court, and for Arbitral Awards 
passed on or before 31.01.2023, the settlement amount offered is up to 65% of the net 

21 
 
 
 
amount awarded. In this regard, the Committee have been apprised that ONGC has taken 
the lead in implementing the Vivad se Vishwas Scheme by taking many initiatives by 
identifying disputes eligible for settlement under the scheme and by issuing public 
notification and communication to the concerned parties. The Committee desire that other 
PSUs may emulate ONGC and utilize the Vivad se Vishwas Scheme-II to solve their 
pending litigations. The Committee recommend the Ministry to monitor the cases under the 
Vivad se Vishwas Scheme-II and reduce the litigation in the oil PSUs. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
Vivad se Vishwas Scheme-II was launched by the Government of India on 15.07.2023 with 
a view to settle or resolve contractual disputes efficiently and promptly, promoting ease of 
doing business with the government and encouraging fresh investments in the country. 
The scheme was applicable until 31.03.2024 for settlement under the scheme. 
  
CPSEs have also implemented the Vivad se Vishwas Scheme-II scheme with right earnest 
and efforts were made to settle cases which fell within the ambit and scope of the said 
scheme. Regular review of the cases filed by the parties was done in order to ensure that 
the matters referred under the scheme are resolved at the earliest. Prompt actions on all 
cases were taken in line with provisions of the scheme for settlement of disputes. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No.Q-21012/1/2024-ED-PNG dated 14.10.2024 
 
Recommendation No.  9 
HIGH PENDENCY OF LITIGATIONS AT HIGH COURT LEVEL 
 The Committee note that almost all OMCs have huge pendency at High Court level apart 
from pending cases in other courts. In BPCL, 2568 out of total 4482 pending cases, in 
CPCL 59 out of total 78 pending cases, in EIL 29 cases out of total 78 pending cases, in 
HPCL 2855 out of total 5808 pending cases, in MRPL 146 out of total 216 pending cases, 
in IOCL 5459 out of 9252 total pending cases in Balmer Lawrie 41 out of 42 cases, in GAIL 
584 out of 3828 total pending cases are at High Court level. While acknowledging the fact 
that delay in court process and procedures is responsible for huge pendency of cases at 
various legal forums, the Committee feel that the Ministry and Oil PSUs have to take some 
proactive action for disposal of long pending disputes that are responsible for prolonged 
litigations especially at High Court Level. OMCs also need to periodically review the status 
of pending litigations and they should also find a way out to settle cases by mutual give 
and take where amount involved is not significant keeping in view expenditure being 
incurred on fighting those cases at various legal forums. The Committee therefore 
recommend the Ministry to specifically monitor the pending litigation scenario in Oil PSUs 
at High Court Level and if needed matter may be taken up with Ministry of Law & Justice to 
set up special courts for disposal of long pending cases. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
As observed, maximum number of cases are pending before the High Courts. However, it 
is noteworthy that most of these cases are filed against CPSEs as CPSEs being ‘State’ 
under Article 12 of the Indian Constitution and amenable to Article 226 under which any 

22 
 
 
 
person aggrieved can directly approach the High Courts. Likewise, High Courts are also 
the forum for all appeals emanating from orders of lower courts.  
  
Further, to get the cases disposed of at the earliest, steps such as filing early hearing 
applications, mentioning of the cases before the court for early disposal etc. are being 
undertaken. Regular follow-ups/conferences are also being held with the counsels for 
getting cases listed regularly and to facilitate early disposal. 
  
As far as filing of appeals is concerned, as and when any adverse order is passed, the 
said order is evaluated on merits before taking any decision regarding such case. The 
opinion of the advocate handling the case is obtained on the pros and cons of the said 
order. Cost-benefit analysis is being done while taking decisions. In matters having high-
stake and/or policy implications, the opinion of senior advocates or senior government 
counsels is also taken. Approval of competent authority is obtained before filing an appeal.  
 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No.Q-21012/1/2024-ED-PNG dated 14.10.2024 
 
Recommendation No.  10 
EMPANELMENT OF LAWYERS 
 The Committee note that in addition to well structured legal departments of Oil PSUs, 
there is a provision for empanelment of lawyers/advocates although there is no uniformity 
in engaging lawyers by the oil PSU’s in various courts/tribunals. The Committee have been 
given to understand that whereas, some PSUs like GAIL/MRPL/EIL/ONGC have put in a 
mechanism and guidelines for empanelment of lawyers while other oil PSUs viz 
IOCL/BPCL/HPCL/CPCL/DGH engage advocates on case to case basis and do not have 
any formal panel of lawyers. However, for conducting Government Litigations at various 
forums, the Ministry of Law and Justice assigns lawyers out of the empanelled lawyers for 
MoPNG, to conduct litigation before various courts and forums. 
  
Further, the Committee note that crores of rupees have been spent towards payment of 
fees to lawyers engaged at various legal forums by oil PSUs. The Committee observe that 
keeping in view the high pendency of litigations being faced by oil PSUs, particularly at 
High Court level, there is a need for reviewing the extant guidelines and mechanism 
adopted for empanelment of lawyers. The Committee also desire the Ministry to play a 
proactive role in framing in revisiting/reviewing guidelines for empanelment of lawyers and 
frame uniform set of rules for engaging lawyers. The Ministry/Oil PSUs should also explore 
the option of engaging senior lawyers who are domain experts and willing to take up 
litigation on pro-bono basis which will not only help in expediting the disposal of pending 
litigations but will also help save public money. The Committee, therefore, recommend and 
impress upon the Ministry / oil PSUs to re-assess the volumeof work being undertaken by 
their lawyers/advocates and put in place a mechanism for empanelment of lawyers and 
monitoring of the performance appraisal of the lawyers on all oil PSUs at regular intervals. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
CPSEs follow an extensive presence across multiple locations throughout India and 
likewise, is involved in a diverse array of legal disputes that span from lower courts to 
Supreme Court of India. These cases relate to a wide range of specialised issues, which 

23 
 
 
 
require legal counsels with domain expertise for effectively defending and pursuing interest 
before judicial forums.  
  
Likewise, on account of emerging needs of each matter, CPSE engages law firms and 
individual lawyers best in the legal field for addressing to peculiar needs. These advocates 
are engaged on case to case basis as per policies framed, which remain uniform across all 
verticals.  
  
Senior advocates usually offer pro bono legal services to persons in need, and may not 
agree to do so for benefitting and pursuing the interest of CPSEs which have a focused 
business vision. 
  
To optimize its legal operations, CPSEs regularly conduct a thorough assessment of the 
workload handled by advocates by organising Advocates Meets/Interactions on a periodic 
basis. This evaluation is aimed to ensure that legal tasks are distributed effectively, 
effective liasioning is built between the Law Department of CPSE and the concerned 
advocate. During these Meets/Interactions, CPSEs also undertakes a performance 
assessment of the advocates and constructive feedbacks are also offered for course 
correction, minimising bottlenecks and ensuring timely and effective handling of legal 
cases.  
  
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No.Q-21012/1/2024-ED-PNG dated 14.10.2024 
 
Recommendation No.  11 
INTERNATIONAL LITIGATIONS 
The Committee note that the upstream Oil PSUs like ONGC, OIL, OVL, etc. have 
undertaken Exploration and Production activities in various countries abroad. Engineers 
India Limited undertakes consulting engagements and implements projects in different 
countries. The Oil marketing companies like IOC/HPCL/BPCL and other refining 
companies also enter into agreements for purchase of crude oil/LPG, etc. GAIL buys LNG 
from the international markets. The Committee also note that the Oil PSUs have many 
international legal disputes. 
  
The Committee further note that ONGC is currently engaged in two international 
disputes/litigations which are of commercial nature. As on date, one case is pending 
before the Hon’ble Delhi High Court and the other case is pending before Regional Trial 
Court, Surigao City, Philippines. Similarly, there are three matters regarding the 
international dispute related to OVL. Two matters are pending in the London Court against 
the Government of Sudan and one matter of OVL is pending in Dubai. There are five 
international litigation pending as on date in respect of BPCL and its subsidiary BPRL. As 
far as IOCL is concerned, there is only one international arbitration being pursued in 
Singapore. The Committee also note that the core issue involved in the international 
litigations relates to non-performance of contractual obligations and cost sharing disputes 
between joint venture partners. 
  
Keeping  in  view  the  fact  that  large  amount  of  money  is  being  paid as fees to 
lawyers and also to arbitral institutions for handling international litigations and arbitration, 
the Committee feel  that some out of  the box solutions  are  needed  to  dispose  of  the  

24 
 
 
 
pending  international  litigations  such as  through  formation  of  Conciliation  
Committees.  The  Committee  desire that  the  Ministry  should  take up the  matter  at  
the  highest  level  including the  Ministry   of  External  Affairs  so  as  to  facilitate Oil 
PSUs in handling international litigations particularly by holding bilateral meetings with the 
concerned countries where litigations are pending. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that Oil PSUs having international disputes should rope in MEA to resolve the litigations 
abroad and also reframe their contracts by making suitable amendments so as to prevent 
similar litigations in future. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
As regards the Committee’s recommendation regarding involving MEA in international 
litigation, it is submitted that regular briefing sessions and meetings occur with Embassy 
officials and MEA, and MEA is fully involved in the issues. Assistance of MEA is regularly 
sought and received in issues pertaining to matters in Sudan. As regards the reframing of 
contracts, necessary amendments are regularly made in Standard Contract to eliminate 
any scope of litigation. The Standard Contract would be further studied to ensure that any 
further scope of litigation may be prevented. 
  
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No.Q-21012/1/2024-ED-PNG dated 14.10.2024 
  
  
 
  
  
 
   

25 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE GOVERNMENT DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES  
 
 
 
 
 
 
- Nil - 
  
  
  

26 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
  
ROLE OF INDEPENDENT EXTERNAL MONITORS (IEM) 
  
The Committee note that as part of implementing Integrity Pact Programme, Oil PSUs 
maintain a panel of former officials of Govt. of India who act as Independent External 
Monitors (IEM) nominated by the CVC, and are required to ensure desired integrity, 
transparency and objectivity in tendering/contracting process. Though the advice of IEMs 
is not legally binding and restricted to resolving issues raised by a Bidder regarding any 
aspect of Tender which is allegedly restrictive, non-competitive and biased towards some 
other Bidder, yet IEMs have been stated to be playing an important role in avoidance of 
potential litigation related to tendering process and contract execution. The Committee 
note that around 340 cases with total value of approx. Rs.1,50,000 crores have been 
handled by IEMs in ONGC since 2006, while in IOCL 197 references have been 
deliberated by IEMs involving a total amount of around Rs. 2000 crore. In BPCL, 18 
complaints were handled, in CPCL 2 cases, while in HPCL 13 references were handled by 
IEMs during the last three years. Similarly, in EIL three cases, whereas in OIL 15 cases 
were referred to IEMs during the last three years. 
  
The Committee have been given to understand that most of the cases referred to IEMs by 
the Oil PSUs were settled amicably and in very few cases recommendations were 
challenged in Court of Law. The Committee observe that the implementation of Integrity 
Pact Programme and role of IEMs has avoided escalation of disputes to courts of law. The 
Committee recommend that Ministry/Oil PSUs should explore the possibility of expanding 
the role of IEMs in disposing off various pending litigation cases related to Marketing 
Discipline Guidelines and eviction proceedings in respect of retail outlet dealers and LPG 
distributors at various legal forums. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in 
this regard within three months of presentation of this Report. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
Integrity Pact (IP) was adopted by CPSEs for ensuring fairness and transparency in 
respect of public procurement through the tendering process.  IP is required to be 
implemented through independent external monitors (IEMs). The recommendations of 
IEMs are not binding on the organisations and are limited to the aspects covered in the IP. 
In case any change is required to be made in the scope/ambit of operations which are 
vested with the IEMs, it would require directions from the competent authority in the 
Government.  
  
To ensure that retail outlets (ROs) / LPG distributors follow operating policies, procedures 
and practices, as well as to maintain discipline in their operations, Marketing Disciplinary 
Guidelines (MDGs) were formulated by oil marketing PSUs. The MDGs are formulated to 
ensure high customer service standards and prevent malpractices while broadly covering 

27 
 
 
 
various aspects of operations of ROs/LPG distributorships such as storage, handling of 
products, sampling, testing, accounting, irregularities and penalties therefore MDG already 
contains a mechanism of appeal, challenging actions taken by oil marketing PSUs against 
the dealers/distributors. Accordingly, for MDG related disputes, there is adequate 
mechanism in MDGs itself, and such disputes may not fall within the current ambit of 
IEMs. Likewise, eviction matters are governed as per provisions of the underlying lease 
deed entered into between the parties and is subject to local land laws. In regard to such 
disputes, specific courts such as courts of small causes have exclusive jurisdiction to try 
suits and resolve disputes of eviction. In view of the aforesaid, IEMs may not have any 
such jurisdiction to deal with the above referred disputes. 
  
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No.Q-21012/1/2024-ED-PNG dated 14.10.2024 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTE 
  
Refer Para 16 of the Chapter-I of this Report  
 
 
  

28 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
  
 
 
- Nil - 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
07_August, 2025 
16_Shravan,1947 (Saka)     
Sunil Dattatrey Tatkare, 
                                           Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on                                                                                                        
Petroleum & Natural Gas. 
  
 
 
 
 
  

29 
 
 
 
Confidential 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(2024-25) 
Minutes of the Fourteenth Sitting of the Committee 
………. 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 07th August, 2025 from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in 
Committee Room Samanvay-2, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi-110001. 
PRESENT 
Shri Sunil Dattatrey Tatkare - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2 Shri Benny Behanan 
3 Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
4 Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
5 
6 
Smt. Pratima Mondal  
Shri Laxmikant Pappu Nishad  
7 Smt. Kamaljeet Sehrawat  
8 Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal  
9 Dr. Amar Singh 
10 Shri Ve Vaithilingam 
11 Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
12 Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
13 Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
14 
15 
16 
Shri Chunnilal Garasiya 
Shri Mithlesh Kumar    
Shri Mayankbhai Jaydevbhai Nayak     
17 Dr. V. Sivadasan 
18 Shri Ravi Chandra Vaddiraju  
 

30 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. 
2. 
Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar 
Shri Sujay Kumar 
- 
- 
Joint Secretary 
Deputy Secretary  
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
convened to consider and adopt 03 Action Taken Reports.  Thereafter, the Committee considered 
and adopted the following draft Action Taken Reports with slight modifications: 
(i)XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
(ii) Draft Report on the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the 24th Report (17th LS) of the Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas 
(2023-24) on the subject ‘Litigations Involving Oil PSUs’. 
(iii)XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Reports at 2 (i) xxxxxxxx 2 (ii) without any 
modifications; 2 (iii)  xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
4. The Committee then authorised the Chairperson to finalize the Reports and present/lay the 
Reports in both the Houses of Parliament.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
___________________________________________________________________ 
XXXX- Matter not related to this Report. 
 

31 
 
 
 
Annexure II 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND 
NATURAL GAS (2023-24) ON THE SUBJECT ‘LITIGATIONS INVOLVING OIL PSUS’. 
I Total No. of Recommendations 11 
 
II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government  
(Vide Recommendations Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10 and 
11)  
10 
 Percentage to Total 91.00% 
III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s 
(Vide Recommendations No. Nil) 
00 
 Percentage of Total 0.00% 
IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee  
(Vide Recommendations No. 8) 
01 
 Percentage of Total 9.00% 
V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendation No. Nil)  
00 
 Percentage of Total  0.00%   
 