            
  
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
November, 2014/ Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) 
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY FIRST REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON  247 TH   REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
ON 
 IMPLEMENTATION OF  INTEREST SUBSIDY 
ELIGIBILITY CERTIFICATE (ISEC) SCHEME  
 
 PERTAINING TO  
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES    
      
 (PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 26TH  NOVEMBER, 2014) 
( LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 27 TH  NOVEMBER, 2014) 
 
261 
 

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
November, 2014/ Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY FIRST REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON  247 TH   REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
ON 
 IMPLEMENTATION OF  INTEREST SUBSIDY 
ELEGIBILITY CERTIFICATE (ISEC) SCHEME  
 
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY FIRST REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON 247 TH    REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON 
 IMPLEMENTATION OF  INTEREST SUBSIDY 
ELIGIBILITY CERTIFICATE (ISEC) SCHEME 
 PERTAINING TO  
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES    
      
 (PRESENTED TO  THE RAJYA SABHA ON 26TH  NOVEMBER, 2014) 
( LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 27 TH  NOVEMBER, 2014) 
 
 

CONTENTS 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …………………………………(i)  
 
2. INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………(ii) 
  
3. REPORT …………………………………………………………………….  1  
 
(i) CHAPTER-I 
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by 
the Ministry…………………………………………………………     2 
(ii) CHAPTER-II 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies………………………   3-4 
(iii) CHAPTER-III 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has 
either not accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry 
to review its replies…………………………………………………    5-6 
 
(iv) CHAPTER-IV 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the  
Ministry have not been received…………………………………       7-11 
 
 3. MINUTES ………………………………………………………………………12-13 
                  
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
DEPARTMENT- RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
(CONSTITUTED  W.E.F.  1 
ST   SEPTEMBER,  2014) 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
1. Shri  K.C. Tyagi  _   Chairman  
2. Shri M. P. Achuthan 
3. Shri Ramdas Athawale 
4. Shri Vivek Gupta  
5. Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya 
6. Shri Praful Patel 
7. Shri T. K. Rangarajan 
8. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
9. Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
10. Shri Pramod Tiwari 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
11. Shri Deepak Adhikari (Dev) 
12. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer 
13. Shri Birendra Kumar Chaudhary 
14. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque 
15. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
16. Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena 
17. Smt. Poonamben Maadam 
18. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
19. Shri S. P. Muddahanumegowda 
20. Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
21. Shri M. Srinivasa Rao 
22. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
23. Shri Konda Veshweshwar Reddy 
24. Shri Y. V. Subba Reddy 
25. Shri Rajkumar Saini 
26. Shri B. Senguttuvan 
27. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
28. Shri Rameshwar Teli 
29. Smt. Savitri Thakur 
30. Smt. Dev Varma (Moon Moon Sen) 
31. Shri Rajan Vichare 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.      Shri A.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
2.      Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
3.      Shri Roshan Lal, Joint Director 
4.      Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
(i) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
  
  
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliame ntary Standing Committee on Industry, 
having been authorized by the Committee, hereby pre sent this Two Hundred Sixty First Report on 
Action Taken Note furnished by the Ministry of Micr o, Small and Medium Enterprises on the 
recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hu ndred Forty Seventh Report on 
implementation of Interest Subsidy Eligibility Certificate (ISEC) Scheme.  
 
2. I thank the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises for furnishing the Action 
Taken Note on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred Forty Seventh 
Report. 
  
3. The Committee in its meeting held on 22 
nd  September, 2014 considered and adopted the 
report. 
 
  
 
  
K.C. Tyagi 
                                               Chairman                                                                                   
                Department -related Parliamentary  
                                                                                                     Standing  Committee   on    Industry  
 
New Delhi 
22 
nd  September, 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
REPORT 
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with  the Action Taken by the Ministry of 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two 
Hundred Forty Seventh Report on implementation of I nterest Subsidy Eligibility Certificate 
(ISEC) Scheme  pertaining to the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. 
 
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises in respect of the recommendations conta ined in the Report. These have been 
categorized as follows:  
 
Chapter –I   The recommendations/observations, which have bee n accepted by the Ministry. 
 
 The Committee is pleased to observe that the Minis try has accepted its recommendations as 
mentioned in the Chapter – I of the Report. 
 
Chapter -II   The recommendations/observations which the Commit tee does not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government's replies. 
 
 In respect of these recommendations the Committee is convinced with the logic and 
explanations advanced by the Ministry and therefore do not want to pursue them for the present. 
 
Chapter -III    The recommendations/observations in respect of w hich the Committee has either 
not accepted replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its reply. 
 
 The Committee expresses its concern over the non-i mplementation of recommendations 
contained in Chapter – III and desires that the Min istry should furnish logical explanations 
therefor. 
 
Chapter -IV    The recommendations/observations in respect of wh ich final replies of the Ministry 
have not been received. 
 
 In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either furnished the 
interim replies or couched its language in vague te rms like noted for compliance/guidance, 
therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in respects 
of recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in det ail and to the point, as per the intention and 
spirit of the recommendations of the Committee. 
 
3. The details of the ATR are being discussed in the succeeding pages. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
-2- 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry  
       
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee observes that the banks have not comp lied with the RBI guidelines in this 
regard which were based on the Kalia Committee's re commendations.  A mechanism must be 
created to monitor the implementation of guidelines .  Any breach of such guidelines must be dealt 
with seriously.   
(Para 9) 
Action Taken  
 
As directed by DRPSCI, KVIC has made all efforts to  familiarize the bankers about the 
scheme and placed the details of the scheme on the KVIC website.  CMDs of all 27 Public Sector 
Banks have also been requested to issue necessary i nstruction to the Bank to ensure that adequate 
finances under ISEC scheme are made available to Khadi Institutions. 
According to Department of Financial Services(DFS),  the recommendations of Kalia 
Committee are very specific to Khadi and Village in dustries whereas Nayak Committee are 
general in nature. Therefore the recommendations of  Kalia Committee and formula suggested by 
them for extension of credit by the banks to SSI/MS ME sector is based on empirical research and 
ground realities of MSME sector. Keeping this in vi ew, the requirements of credit to Khadi 
institutions should be based on the recommendations  of Kalia committee which has already been 
accepted by the RBI.  However, the suggestions of t he banks regarding, associations of the banks 
with khadi institutions at state level and monitori ng of the scheme at state level through SLBC is 
agreed to by this Department.  State offices /Zonal  offices of KVIC should be mandated to have 
periodical and regular interactions with the banks in order to help the khadi societies sufficient 
credit availability from the banks as per their req uirements.  The review of the progress of the 
scheme may be a regular agenda in SLBC meetings and quarterly meeting by KVIC with banks 
 
 
 
 

 
-3- 
 
 
CHAPTER-II  
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do es not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s replies  
 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee feels that such conditions of maintai ning a stock of value higher than the 
sanctioned amount, is too stringent a condition which will only make a khadi unit unviable.   
(Para 12) 
Action Taken  
 
KVIC has already directed the field Directors to ta ke-up the issue of the credit requirement 
of Khadi institution in SLBC/DCC. Further, CMDs of all 27 Public Sector Banks have also been 
requested to include banks credit to Khadi Sector under ISEC Scheme as a standing agenda  for the 
meetings of SLDCs/DLBCs and in such other fora and  issue necessary instruction to the Bank to 
ensure that adequate finances under ISEC scheme are made available to Khadi Institutions. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
  In this regard the Committee takes note of the su bmission made by the  representative 
of the State Bank of India, during its meeting on t he issue on 15 
th  April, 2014. It was stated 
that issue was essentially of difference in interest subsidy approved by the KVIC and amount 
actually claimed. 
 
 “ The issue, apparently, is that of a difference in t he interest subsidy approved by the KVIC and 
the amount which is, actually, physically claimed b y the bank on that interest subsidy.  In my view, 
what really happens is that the loans are sanctione d based on certain projections made by 
borrowers.  And the interest subsidy sanctioned by the KVIC is based on the projections made, for 
example, for the first year of operation.  But, act ually, we have seen in many cases, what really 
happens is that after the first year is completed, the projections do not really take place 100 per 
cent; I mean, the projections may be 50 per cent or  60 per cent or 70 per cent.  So, 
correspondingly, the amount of drawing on the loan is also 50 per cent or 60 per cent or 70 per 
cent, and the interest applied is also that much le ss.  One of the major reasons, to my mind, for the 
difference is that the actual performance, especial ly, in the first year does not match with the 
projections made at the time of sanctioning the loa n.  The second thing which I would like to 
submit  is that  it will,  perhaps, be  a good  idea to have, in the State-level Banker ’s Committee, a  

 
-4- 
 
Sub Working Group or a Sub Group of Bankers, KVIC a nd local State-Government functionaries, 
just like they do for PMEGP, to decide on the appli cations, a joint appraisal of these applications, 
and forward them to the banks concerned in that area for approval.   “ 
 
The representative of Punjab national Bank, too, supplemented : 
 
“The gap between financing, as suggested by the KVI C, and those sanctioned by the bank happens 
from two counts.  One is the Margin Money which is supposedly taken by the KVIC at not more 
than 10 per cent.  Banks, normally, finance between  10 and 25 per cent of the margin, which 
results in lesser financing to that extent because the borrower ’s contribution is expected to be a 
little more than ten per cent in such cases.  Secon dly, we have also mentioned in the Report that 
the bank does not finance full stocks.  So, because  of the drawing power, in case the borrower has 
a 25 per cent margin, he is supposed to maintain a stock of, say, 1,33,000 for drawing a D.P. of 
Rs. 1 crore, and this is only because of Margin Mon ey.  It would result in that gap. And, as rightly 
suggested, we can standardize the forum and we can monitor closely.  One of the bankers would be 
a part of this Joint Appraisal between the KVIC and the banks.” 
 
 In views of submission made by the representatives  of Banks, the Committee 
apprehends that resolution of bottlenecks in implem entation has been left to SLDCs/DLBCs.  
But these bodies work under overall policy guidelin es of RBI and respective Banks.  The 
Committee is of the view that first there should be  consensus over policy level between KVIC 
and Bankers, before delegating the powers of resolu tion to SLBCs/DLBCs. The Committee 
notes that the KVIC is engaging the CMDs of Banks t o address the issue. Also,  the 
Department of Financial Services are  also abreast with the issue. There is a need to evolve 
consensus among the relevant stakeholders.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
-5- 
 
CHAPTER-III  
 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which th e Committee has either not accepted 
the replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its replies  
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
  
 
The Committee notes that the ISEC is a very good scheme.  However, it regrets to note that 
banks are issuing fifty per cent loans to the total  ISEC issued.  The RBI guidelines based on Kalia 
Committee, governing ISEC mandate that if less than  ninety per cent ISEC issued are honoured by 
banks then the tripartite meeting among the bank, b eneficiary and the State level Director must be 
organized.  The Committee notes with concern that hardly any such tripartite meeting is organized.  
It is a very serious matter.  In the absence of suc h tripartite meeting, the ISEC scheme is not being 
implemented  properly and  effectively.  Such  tripartite  meeting would  provide  opportunities  for 
discussing the problems affecting the khadi institutions and for coordinating the implementation of 
the scheme which involves banks, KVIC and the benef iciaries.  The Committee recommends that 
the KVIC must ensure that such tripartite meetings take place in every State.  Besides, the 
Committee recommends that the State level Directors  of KVIC must also take the initiative to 
organize such tripartite meetings.   
(Para 17) 
 
Action Taken  
   
KVIC has already directed the field Directors to ta ke-up the issue of the credit requirement 
of Khadi Institution in SLBC/DCC.  Further, CMDs of  all 27 Public Sector Banks have also been 
requested to issue necessary instruction to the Ban k to ensure that adequate finances under ISEC 
scheme are made available to Khadi Institutions. DFS agreed with the observations of the Ministry 
of MSME. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee recommends that the KVIC must take st eps beyond writing routine 
letters  with  much  avail.  The  Committee  suggests that KVIC too  should  make  innovative  
 

-6- 
 
modifications to address the concerns of the Banks.  KVIC may even also explore new 
avenues of funding this Scheme  and negotiate with  institutions like SIDBI, NABARD and 
other similar institutions to provide finance to Kh adi institutions under ISEC scheme.  The 
KVIC has also not replied as to why the tripartite negotiation mechanism has not been used, 
in case of disputes.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

-7- 
 
CHAPTER-IV  
 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which fi nal replies of the Ministry have not 
been received 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee observes that working capital amount under the ISEC as approved by the KVIC 
and actual availed credit have increased over the y ears, however, the difference between the two, 
in percentage terms too has increased to about 50%.  The Committee finds such a situation where 
Banks lend only half the amount of credit what is a pproved by the KVIC, patently unacceptable. 
There is a need for serious efforts to bridge this gap. While the Government has formulated 
enabling scheme to address the credit needs of khad i and polyvastra institutions, the policies and 
guidelines for financing institutions are either no t in sync with Government's policy or the 
guidelines are not being enforced by the Banks and the RBI.  The Committee was also informed by 
the KVIC officials that even though the beneficiari es got the interest at the rate of four per cent, 
actually some banks are charging more interest than prescribed.  This is a very serious matter.  The 
Committee recommends that those banks which do so m ust be investigated upon and appropriate 
action may be taken so that such gross breach of banking norms do not take place.  The Committee 
recommends that the banks must give credit to the k hadi institution under the ISEC slightly above 
the base rate.  The Committee recommends that the b anks must honour the ISEC and strict 
instructions be issued to the bank Managers to honour it.  
(Para 7) 
Action Taken  
KVIC has already directed the field Directors to ta ke-up the issue of the credit requirement 
of Khadi Institution in SLBC/DCC.  Further, CMDs of  all 27 Public Sector Banks have also been 
requested to issue necessary instruction to the Ban k to ensure that adequate finances under ISEC 
scheme are made available to Khadi Institutions. 
 
A letter has been issued again by KVIC on 07.04.201 4 to all the CMDs of Banks enclosing 
recommendations of the DRPSCI [under intimation to Institutional Finance Division of Ministry of 
Finance] and Dy. Governor (RBI) seeking their inter vention in the implementation of the 
recommendation of DRPSCI. 
 

-8- 
 
Further, a Committee has been formed by KVIC as per  the direction of Ministry to review 
and monitor the implementation of Guidelines under ISEC scheme at Central level. Monitoring at 
State level will be done by SLBCs. 
 
A committee of Officers was formed by KVIC under ch airmanship of Financial Adviser, 
KVIC to discuss the issue with Western Council of t he Chartered Accounts of India. The meeting 
is proposed to be held shortly. 
 
Department of Financial Services(DFS), Ministry of Finance is also of the view that the 
credit requirements of Khadi Sector needs to be taken by the banks on priority and credit should be  
extended to Khadi institutions based on ISEC issued  by KVIC. As regards the suggestions of 
banks regarding some modifications in the guideline s in the scheme and its monitoring, KVIC has 
already formed a committee and the committee may su bmit its report in time bound manner to 
MSME so that modifications in the scheme may be discussed with the banks and representatives of 
DFS and amendments/modifications, if any be carried out accordingly. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Ministry of MSME may inform the committee of th e outcome of the said 
Committee. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee is aware of the nature of khadi busin ess. Unlike any other business, a 
typical khadi institutions runs an integrated busin ess involving spinning, weaving, wet processing, 
fabric conversion, wholesale distribution and retai ling. Therefore routine banking norms should 
not be applied in the khadi sector.  
(Para 10) 
Action Taken  
There are already guidelines issued by RBI on credi t requirement of Khadi institutions, 
wherein, it was specifically mentioned that KVIC’s assessment may be accepted if it does not 
exceed the assessment made by the banks more than 1 0%. In case the KVIC’s assessment of 
working capital exceeds more that 10%, the quantum of working capital may be arrived at by 
mutual dialogue between the institutions/KVIC and f inancing bank. DFS has conveyed its 
agreement with the observations of the Ministry of MSME. 
 

-9- 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee would like to know if the mechanism of Tripartite Negotiations in 
case of disputes, has been resorted to, by the KVIC. In context of presentation made before it 
by the Department of Financial Services and represe ntatives of Banks, the Committee would 
like to review the performance of SLBCs in respect of ISEC disbursals.  
 The Committee takes note of the presentation made by the Secretary, M/o MSME, during its 
meeting on the issue on 15 th  April, 2014. The Secretary summarized the issue and stated : 
 
“the peculiar business cycle of the Khadi instituti on which needs to be recognised by the banks 
and once recognised it will lead to an agreed, adeq uate amount of working capital.  If the working 
capital is inadequate, the Khadi institutions will function in a very sub-optimal way, which is also 
happening at many places. We are not able to access  the loans.  This puts their sustainability into 
question and leads to a very vicious cycle in which  their further capability of raising loans and 
repaying loans is affected.  I think as the Committ ee has highlighted, the peculiar cycle of the 
Khadi institutions needs to be understood.  At the highest level, this agreement had actually taken 
place between the KVIC and the banks as to what wou ld be the requirement of working capital.  
But, in practice, the amount of working capital whi ch is being made available is less.  Over a 
period of time, because the working capital is less  even the margin money which is being provided 
for as per the budgetary exercise has also remained  stagnant.  So I think for breaking this vicious 
cycle we need to once again focus on the peculiarit y of the business cycle of the KVIC and the 
engagement between the KVIC and the RBI and the ban king institutions should be revived in a 
more meaningful way.” 
 
In this regard, the Committee recognizes that the G overnment has replaced the 
Seasonal rebate Scheme with Marketing Development A ssistance (MDA), to facilitate the 
Khadi institutions to sell their products year long  instead of during seasonal rebate period. 
The Committee believes that the MDA scheme should h ave reduced the business cycle to 
make it more compatible with Banking norms.   
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee concurs with the suggestions emerging  from the study.   The Committee 
particularly recommends that there was a need that the banking institutions appreciate the business 
cycle of khadi sector and the constraints faced by it.  There is a need for alignment of 
banking/financial norms with business cycle of khadi sector. 
(Para 14) 
 

-10- 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
There are already guidelines issued by RBI on credi t requirement of Khadi institutions, 
wherein, it was specifically mentioned that KVIC’s assessment may be accepted if it does not 
exceed the assessment made by the banks more than 1 0%. In case the KVIC’s assessment of 
working capital exceeds more that 10%, the quantum of working capital may be arrived at by 
mutual dialogue between the institutions/KVIC and finasncing bank. 
According to DFS, the sales of khadi are discount b ased/ rebate based/season based and 
festivals specific.  Accordingly, the production of  khadi is undertaken by the institutions.  
Moreover, this is a highly decentralized activity a s spinning, weaving, dying, printing, conversion 
into fabrics takes place at different places and th erefore, khadi completes only one business cycle 
in a year. As per recommendations of Standing Commi ttee, banks should not insist on maintaining 
higher stocks by the khadi institutions. DFS has so ught details of non-compliance so that 
consolidated instructions could be issued to all th e banks to agree the present business cycle for 
khadi based on the ISEC issued by KVIC.   
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee may be apprised of the new consolidat ed instructions to be issued by 
Department of Financial Services. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee is inclined to accept the observation s made by the Chief  Advisor ( Cost). 
Still, the Committee hopes that the detailed norms should facilitate the KVI institutions to access 
the institutional finance at affordable rate. The C ommittee also observes that while the 
Government and RBI has put the sector under priority sector category, yet the terms and conditions 
are too stringent and defeat the entire purpose of placing them in the priority sector. The purpose 
of 'priority sector' is not merely to provide great er access to institutional credit, rather to provid e 
greater access to it at affordable terms.  While financing Khadi, the Banks should not look at it as a 
commodity, they should also look at the noble legacy and philosophy which sustain it. Howsoever  
 

-11- 
 
intangible it may be, Khadi remains a proud heritag e of freedom struggle invoking the ideals for 
which Mahatma Gandhi lived and sacrificed his life. 
(Para 16) 
Action Taken 
 
 
The study of Working capital formula under ISEC was earlier done by Chief Advisor, Cost, 
Ministry of Finance as decided by the Commission ba sed on the recommendation of Task Force 
Committee. The report of Chief Advisor, Cost was pl aced in Commission in its meeting 
March,2013, wherein, the Commission has formed a Re view Committee to study the issue for 
taking suitable decision. The observation and recom mendation of Review Committee was 
discussed in the Commission in its meeting held in June’ 2013 and thereby it was directed that 
detailed proposal acceptable to the banks regarding  working capital formula may be evolved with 
the help of Chartered Accountants . 
Accordingly, a committee of Officers was formed by KVIC under chairmanship of 
Financial Adviser, KVIC to discuss the issue with W estern Council of the Chartered Accounts of 
India. The meeting is proposed to be held shortly. DFS agreed with the observations of the 
Ministry of MSME. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee may be apprised of the outcome of the  new Committee set up by the 
KVIC.  The Committee also recognize that the Department of Financial Services to has  been 
 seeking the inputs from Bankers  on  this  Scheme.   Therefore  it  is  advisable  that  the  
Committee set  up  by  KVIC should be in sync with the Department of Financial Services so 
that the outcome should result in consensus.  The C ommittee set up by KVIC may include 
the Indian Bank Association. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

-12- 
 
 
III                                                  
Third Meeting 
 
 
 The Committee met at 2.00 p.m. on Monday, the 22 nd  September, 2014 in Committee 
Room `A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present  
Shri K.C. Tyagi -  Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA  
1. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
2. Shri Vivek Gupta 
3. Shri T.K. Rangarajan 
4. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
5. Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
6. Shri Pramod Tiwari 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
7. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer 
8. Shri Birendra Kumar Chaudhary 
9. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
10. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
11. Shri S.P. Muddahanumegowda 
12. Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
13. Shri M. Srinivasa Rao 
14. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
15. Shri Konda Veshweshwar Reddy 
16. Shri Y.V. Subba Reddy 
17. Shri Rajkumar Saini 
18. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
19. Shri Rameshwar Teli 
20. Smt. Savitri Thakur 
21. Shri Rajan Vichare 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
 3. Shri Roshan Lal, Joint Director 
 4. Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
-13- 
 
At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welcom ed the members of the Committee 
and briefed them that the agenda of the meeting was  to consider and adopt the draft 260 th  and 261 st  
Reports of the Committee on Action Taken on the 251 st  and 247 th  Reports of the Committee on 
Implementation of Prime Minister's Employment Gener ation Programme (PMEGP) and 
Implementation of Interest Subsidy Eligibility Cert ificate (ISEC) Scheme, respectively, pertaining 
to Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. 
2. Thereafter, the Committee took up the reports fo r consideration.  After some discussion the 
Committee adopted the 260 th  draft Report with certain amendments pertaining in volvement of 
Members of Rajya Sabha in District Level Task Force  Committees (DLTFCs) for Prime Minister's 
Employment Generation Programme (PMEGP) as included  in Para 5 Chapter-II of the ATR.  The 
Committee unanimously adopted 261 st  draft Report.   
3. The Committee also decided to undertake a study visit during the second fortnight of 
October and first fortnight of November, 2014 to Hy derabad, Tirupati, Chennai, Kochi and 
Munnar and authorized the Chairman to obtain necessary approvals and make arrangements.. 
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Meet ing was kept. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 2.27 p.m. 
 
New Delhi                                     Rosha n Lal 
22 
nd  September 2014                                                                                                    Joint Director 
 
To 
 The Chairman and Members of the  
 Department related Parliamentary  
 Standing Committee on Industry 
 
 
 
******* 