PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY

SIXTY-EIGHTH REPORT

ON

WORKING AND PERFORMANCE REVIEW OF
MINERALEXPLORATION CORPORATION LTD. ( MECL)

DEPARTMENT OF MINES ( MINISTRY OF MINES AND COAL)

(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 8™ MARCH, 2002)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 8™ MARCH, 2002)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2002/PHALGUNA, 1923 (SAKA)


ae मे पा |

CONTENTS

PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (901)
COMPOSITION OF THE PREVIOUS COMMITTEE (iiti)(iv)
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE -1¥° : (५)
INTRODUCTION (vii)
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 1-11
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND 12-14
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE At A GLANCE
MINUTES 15-25


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Date of Constitution - 1" January, 2002)

Shri Ramdas Agarwal _ Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
Shri Faguni Ram

Shri 7.1. Maheshwari

Ms. Frida Topno

Shri Jibon Roy

Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
Shri 5. Sivasubramanian
Smt. Saroj Dubey

Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha
Prof. M.M. Aggarwal

Shri MJ. Varkey Mattathil

LOK SABHA

Shri A. Narendra

Shri Tarachand Sahu

Shri G. Mallikarjunappa
Shri Basangouda R. Patil
Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
Shri Ramanand Singh
Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
Shri Ananta Nayak

Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
Shri La Chandra Das
Shri Thomas Hansda

Shri Uttamrao Patil

Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
Shri A.C. Jose

Shri P. Rajendran

Shri Sunil Khan

Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
Shri Malyala Rajaiah
Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari
Shri Beni Prasad Verma
Shri Deepak Kumar
Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
Shri Brijlal Khabri

Shri Manjay Lal



3 7
39.

41.

Dr. $. Jagathrakshakan
Dr. K. Malaisamy
Kumari Mamata Banerjee
Shri Ajoy Chakraborty

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary

Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary

Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer

(ii)



PRADA Nv

=

>

wo

COMPOSITION OF THE PREVIOUS COMMITTEE

Shri Ramdas Agarwal —Chairman

RAJYA SABHA
Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi

Dr. Faguni Ram

Shri P.K. Maheshwari

Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma
Shri Jibon Roy

Shri Somappa R. Bommai
Smt. Saroj Dubey

Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhundar
Shri S. Sivasubramanian
Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha
Prof, M.M. Aggarwal

Shri Bangaru Laxman

LOK SABHA

Shri A. Narendra

Shri Ramdas Athawale

Shri Ram Ragnunath Chaudhary
Shri Nepal Chandra Das
Shri K.P, Singh Deo

Shri Anant Mahadeoappa Gudhe
Shri Thomas Hansda

Shri G.J. Javiya

Shri A.C. Jose

Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
Shri Sunil Khan

Shri Deepak Kumar

Shri Manjay Lal

Shri K. Malaisamy

Shri G. Mallikarjunappa
Shri K.H. Muniyappa

Shri Nagmani

Shri Anant Nayak

Shri R. Basanagouda Patil
Shri Uttamarao Deorao Patil
Shri M. Rajaiah

Shri 7. Rajendran

Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
Shri Tarachand Sahu

Shri Ram Sajivan

Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh

(iii)


Shri Ramanand |

Shri Chunnilal Thakur

Shri Rizwan Zaheer.

Smt. Renu Kumari

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer

(iv)



ee ——————— a ७5-

COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-IV

Is Shri A.C. Jose —Convenor
RAJYA SABHA
Smt. Saroj Dubey

Shri Somappa R. Bommai
Dr. Faguni Ram

Pep

LOK SABHA

Shri R. Basangouda Patil
Shri Ramdas Athwale
Shri Thomas Hansda
Shri Nepal Chandra Das
Shri Nagmani

0. Shri K.H. Muniyappa

wie Sar

(v)


INTRODUCTION

1, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Industry, having been authorised by the Committee, hereby present this 68” Report of
Sub-Committee-IV for Ministry of Mines ( of Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Industry) on Working and Performance Review of Mineral Exploration
Corporation Limited ( MECL) which is under the administrative control of Department of Mines
( Ministry of Mines and Coal )

2. The Committee on Industry at its meeting held on 12™ February, .2001 inter-alia
constituted Sub-Committee-IV for Ministry of Mines . The Sub-Committee took up to examine the
issues of Working and Performance Review of Mineral Exploration Corporation Limited (
MECL), The Sub-Committee visited Nagpur interacted with the management of Mineral
Exploration Corporation Limited ( MECL) The Sub-Committee in its meeting held on 7"
December, 2001 heard the Secretary, Ministry of Mines and official concerned to Mineral
Exploration Corporation Limited (MECL The Report has been prepared on the basis of on the
spot study and interaction with the Secretary , Ministry of Mines and officials of | Mineral
Exploration Corporation Limited (MECL) .

3. The Sub-Committee in its meeting held on. 26" December, 2001 considered and adopted
the Report.

4.The Committee at its meeting held on 26" December, 200! considered and adopted the
Report.

NEW DELHI; RAMDAS AGARWAL
December 26, 2001 Chairman,

Department -related Parliamentary

Standing Committee on Industry

oo


— OO —<“i—OOOSOSOSCiw

MINERAL EXPLORATION CORPORATION LIMITED

1. MECL was established on 21.10.1972 to undertake detailed systematic mineral
exploration and allied works in order to establish reserves of various minerals/ores in shortest
possible time, to curtail the large time gap entailed between discovery of a prospect and its
eventual exploitation. The corporation has been carrying out these functions by steadily enlarging
scope of activities during last 29 years. It is the premier exploration agency in the country and
undertakes exploration work on behalf of Government of India, Public Sector Enterprises, State
Governments and private organisations. It has taken up coal sampling and analysis work and it is
also planning to diversify into commercial mining of selected minerals.to increase its revenue

1.2 At present the authorized capital of the Company is Rs. 100 crores and the paid- up
capital is Rs. 67,75 crores.

2.0 OBJECTIVES OF MECL

2.1 During the course of Interaction with the management the Sub-Committee was apprised
of the objectives of MECL which is mentioned below:-

(i) To plan and execute exploration programmes and prepare evaluation reports

(ii) To undertake geological, geo-chemical and geophysical surveys at optimel cost
to the customers to establish exploitable reserves of various minerals.

(iii) To achieve cost effectiveness through improved productivity, optimum utilisation
of human and physical resources ‘and technological up-gradation.

(iv) 10 obtain PL/ML for potential mineral deposits in India for the purpose of
development of the deposit either individually and or jointly with other parties.

(v) To achieve consistently increasing growth through diversification and joint
ventures, strategic partnership and expansion into solid fossil fuels etc. to become
a dividend paying Company.
3.0 ACTIVITIES OF MECL

3.1 MECL is the premier exploration agency in the country and carries out exploration
activities under two major heads, viz. (a) ‘Promotional’ on behalf of Govt. of India, in which
projects are funded by Central Govt. on the basis of detailed exploration schemes formulated by
the Company, in the perspective ‘of the demand vs. availability as well as national priorities (b)
‘Contractual’ on behalf of other agencies including Public Sector, Private Sector and State
Governments as per contract executed by MECL with them.

32 The Committee understands the vital role of MECL in carrying out detailed
systematic mineral exploration and hopes that MECL management would be guided by the
management by objectives ( MBO) and make its eamest efforts for achieving the cherished
goals.

4.0 ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE

4.1 As regards the organisational set up of MECL, the management informed the Sub-
Committee that MECL with its registered office at Nagpur carries out its operations all over
the country through separate division with specific functions. The operational division comprise,
Geology, Drilling and Mining. Support services are provided by Finance, Materials
Management, Personnel & Administration, planning & Business Development Division. It also
has a full fledged information Technology Centre at Nagpur. It manages its functions at projects,


facilitate =] Prompt maintenance of plant and machineries deployed at the projects it has 3
Regional Maintenance Centres at Ranchi, Nagpur and Hyderabad, Technical guidance to
projects, finalisation of geological reports and close liaisoning with the clients is carried out
through the Regional Exploration Centres located at Ranchi, Korba, Nagpur, Hyderabad,
Neyveli and Barmer. To Promote the commercial activities, Commercial Centres are located at
Delhi, Ranchi, Guwahati and Calcutta,

4.2 Regarding Zonal offices, Sub-Committee desired to know as to how MECL justifies the
zonal offices and whether the zonal offices are profit making units. The management stated that

This has also given a boost to the company's business development endeavour, So far, only
Projects were considered as profit making units of the company. However, from this year, it is
Proposed that the zonal offices are also profit making units. The Projects are of purely temporary
in nature and once the allotted work is over, it is closed and the establishment shifts to another
location.

43 The Department of Mines pointed out that five zonal offices have been created at

Supervision. Productivity has improved from 205 meters per drill per month in 1998-99 to 265
mUdrill/month in 1999-2000, to 306 mvdrill/month in 2000-01.

4.4 The Committee is of the view that zonal office should be made a profit
making centre and all Projects assigned to them should be in such 4 way that each
zonal office justifies its existence and each zonal office must contribute in the

administrative expenditure.

5.0 Co-ordination and Co-operation between MECL and GSI/ merger of MECL
with GSI

5.1 The MECL management stated that MECL was carved out of GSI with a specific
mandate of conducting detailed exploration in the identified Prospects of GSI. Over a period of
30 years, these activities have been almost completed and GSI is not able to identify many new
Prospects for MECL to carry out detailed exploration. In this context, it is essential that
funding and efforts of GS! should continue, so that they can search and identify more prospects
for MECL for detailed exploration.

5.2 Further, the major role of MECL has been in Promotional coal exploration which is also
now getting reduced since the majority of area has already been explored during VIlIth and
IXth plan period, The level of revenue now available for next ten years is merely of the order of
1.00 lakh meteres/annum equivalent to Rs.25.00 crores.


$.3 The Department of Mines informed the Sub-Committee that there is a close cooperation
between the GSI and MEC. Objective of MECL and GSI are different. GSI does the
preliminary geological search whereas MEC has been created for detailed exploration of the
promising proposals at indicated mainly by GSI. MEC takes up the detailed exploration
activity on commercial lines, 051 is Government organisation and MEC is a commercial
organisation created in 1972 for above purpose. At. present MEC has diversified its field of
operations and specialised manpower, due to which MEC is able to manage its affairs by
undertaking contracts from various departments/clients.

5.4 The Committee is of the view that GSI should undertake honest effort for searching
and identifying new prospects for MECL for detailed exploration,

$5 The Ministry of Mines may explore the possibility of merger of MECL with
Geological Survey of India (GSI) for better co-ordination and continued prospect for MECL
for detailed exploration. MECL could work as a separate division in GSI structure. The
synergy so achieved due to merger and brand endowment of GSI would open new areas for
MECL as a separate wing of GSI for detailed exploration and promotion and would enable it to
work in domestic market as well as foreign market. Besides, these measures would reduce the
administrative expense .

6.0 BUDGETARY SUPPORT

6.) Replying to the Sub-Committee's query whether the budgetary support given by the
Government is sufficient to carryout the aims and objectives of the Mineral Exploration
Corporation Ltd. MECL management stated that budgetary support to MECL comes from two

aw Sources 1.९. coal and oal sectors. The coal sector as already stated may give Rs.25.00

crores in next 10 vente jowever, in non-coal sector, which was of the order of about Rs. 10
cores per annum for exploration in mineral sector should be allowed to be continued on a
sustained basis so that MECL can continue search for other minerals which are so far not being
done by other agencies.

6.2 The plan-wise bud,
Plan period

support received by MECL from the
Equity ( Rs. in lakhs) | Promotional

Government is as under.
Total ( Rs. in lakhs) |

Vilth
Plan Holiday (2 Years)
शा

IXth

11147
2528
$450
4250

63 MECL may stand on its own, over a period of time when its diversification activities
bear fruit and then it can do exploration/mining of minerals which can give better revenue on
continuous basis.

64 The Department of Mines furnished the details of budgetary support given to MECL
and their appropriation alongwith money raised by MECL , which is stated below:-
(Rs. in lakhs



All the Z| have been fully utilised for the purposes for which were given. »

6.5 MNCs and private parties are doing exploration only for 4 to 5 precious and base
metals and many other minerals of national importance are still required to be explored, which
form a part of 64 minerals as mentioned in National Mineral Inventory of IBM, for which
MECL is the right choice. Government should therefore, continue budget support to MECL.

70 PERFORMANCE OF MECL

7.1 Apprising the performance of MECL to the Sub-Committee since its inception MECL
management stated that within a span of 29 years MECL completed over 900 projects for
detailed mineral exploration & mine development and 106677 million tonnes of reserves for
various minerals have been established. The magnitude of exploration inputs are 6.75 million
metres of drilling, 1.33 million metres of geophysical logging, 3830 sq. km. of detailed geological
mapping & surveying and 0,20 million metres of exploratory and development mining,

72 The mineral- wise reserves established since inception by MECL are given below:-

Reserves (million tonnes

Energy Minerals
Industrial Minerals
Ferrous Minerals
Non-Ferrous Minerals

Precious Minerals
Strategic Minerals

7.3 The Committee appreciates the efforts made by MECL and hopes that MECL would
continue to strive its best in implementing its programme of minerals exploration and
mine development.

8.0 PHYSICO-FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF MECL

8.1 Since inception of MECL, upto 1988-89, there was an upward trend in total productivity
and tumn- over df the Company. The Company had been making profit and generating surplus
from 1976-77 upto 1989-90 except for the period of 1980-81 to 1982-83. But after economic
liberalisation in India it had to face constraints and has been incurring losses from 1990-91. With
the change of policy after liberalisation, the allocation of funds for mineral exploration was
reduced considerably resulting in reduction of direct support to MECL in terms of promotional
projects from a level of around Rs. 20 crores per annum during late eighties to around Rs. 5-8
crores per annum in the recent years, The contractual work which was being awarded by various
public sectors has also reduced considerably on account of financial crunch faced by other
organisations.

82 The Sub-Committee was given the following details regarding the physico financial
performance of MECL:-



PHYSICO-FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF MECL DURING POST REVIVAL PERIOD
(1996-97 - 2000-01

Gross Margin
Rs: in lakhs

83 Replying to the Sub-Committee's query whether the Department of Mines is satisfied
with the performance of MECL, Department of Mines stated that MECL has been maintaining
steady turn over of Rs.60 crores and gross margin of over Rs.5 crores since last three years. It
also started repaying the loan taken from Government of India. MECL has implemented all
recommendations as suggested in the Revival Plan. Diversification of activities in ballast
stone mining, in coal bed methane exploration has been undertaken . MECL has applied for
PL/ML for bauxite and mineral sands. It has been successful in implementing VRS.

84 The Committee is constrained to note that public sector support to MECL through
promotional projects and contractual work has considerably eroded. The Committee feels that , if
our PSUs are to remain, inter- PSU cooperation and synergy are required.

8.5 The Committee, while appreciating the physical performance of MECL, recommends
that MECL management should make efforts to procure work orders from all concerned areas
so that physical performance of the company should have direct positive impact on the
financial performance of MECL. The Committee hopes that once the diversification
programmes are implemented and financial restructuring proposals , which is under the
consideration of Ministry of Finance, is approved and comes into effect, MECL would start
making net profit.

9.0 REVIVAL PLAN OF MECL

9.1 In this scenario, in 1995 Government of India chalked out a revival plan based on
recommendations of expert committee. Accordingly Ministry of Mines constituted a revival
committee for MECL for suggesting measures for bringing the company back to the normal
performance level without appreciable loss. MECL implemented the recommendations of the
Revival Committee, which resulted in improvement in physico-financial performance -


= FINANCIAL RESTRUCTURING

10.1 The Revival Committee had also recommended that Ministry of Mines should initiate
required action for writing off of accumulated losses and waiver of interest on Government loan,
A proposal for financial restructuring has been submitted to Ministry of Mines. Approval for the
following issues have been requested to improve financial performance of MECL.

(i) Waiver of interest of Rs.26.76 crores upto March’2001, on Government of India
loan.

(ii) Transfer of loan of Rs 32.80 crores upto March '2001, into capital reserves.

10.2. The Sub-Committee was informed that out of the loan availed , MECL refunded
Rs.2.00 crore in the last year, including part of the interest on loan. MECL management made
it, explicitly clear that the company is not requesting for providing any fund as aid and is
merely seeking waiver of interest on loan and transfer of the loan amount to capital reserve
so that the company could start paying once it starts earning. MECL management stated that a
clean balance sheet. of the company would enable the company to obtain loan from bank
easily other-wise obtaining loan from banks even for promotional purpose becomes difficult

10.3. The Committee is of the view that implementation of the recommendations of the
Revival Committee would have positive impact on the physical and financial performance of
MECL. The revival Committee had recommended for writing off accumulated losses and
waiver of interest on Government loan to clean the balance sheet of MECL. The Committee
recommends that the request of MECL for waiving of the interest on loan and transfer of
balance loan amount to equity should be considered by the Government so that MECL could
make a tum around. The Ministry of Mines may seriously pursue the matter with the
Ministry of Finance.

11.0. DISINVESTMENT OF MECL

11.1... The MECL management informed the Sub-Committee that Disinvestment Commission
in its 11" report has carried out in depth analysis of MECL in the liberalized scenario and finally
came with the following recommendations.

(i) Allow MECL to continue for a period of 2 years and implement VR scheme,
MECL should obtain PL which would add to its strength.

(ii) To sell 100% equity on as is where is basis.
(iii) Closure, if none of the above options is viable.

11.2. Asa result of recommendation of Disinvestment Commission MECL has continued to
improve in its core areas and also diversified its activities in coal sampling and analysis, Coal Bed
Methane exploration and mining and supply of ballast stone to Railways. It has also downsized its
manpower through VRS to 2758 nos. as on 31-3-01.

11.3. MECL has applied for PL/ML for the following areas also. The status of PL/ML is as
follows:-

PROSPECTING LICENCE
(i) Singhana Copper deposit, Dt. Jhunjhnu, Raj : PL Granted
(ii) Thoothukudi Beach Sand Tamil Nadu - 18005 Ha.
(iii) Tirunelveli Beach Sand Tamil Nadu - 20962 Ha.


(iv) Karlapat Bauxite Deposit, Orrisa - 2710 Ha.
Mining lease
(i) Sattankulam Beach Sand Tamil Nadu - 2771 Ha.
(ii) Naviadi Beach Sand-Tamil Nadu - 3977 Ha.

11.4 The mining lease of Beach Sands is in advance stage of consideration at the level of State
Government and once it is granted MECL can attract good value from private sectors/MNC's for
joint venture project.

11.5 The Department of Mines informed the Sub-Committee that disinvestment would be
attempted in 2002-03 .

11.6 The Committee is happy to note that MECL is making efforts towards obtaining
prospecting licence and mining lease . The Committee recommends that PL and ML may be

granted ,notwithstanding , the Disinvestment proposal. MECL should be allowed to show its
mettle.

12.0 RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES OF MECL

12.1 During the course of interactive the Sub-Committee was apprised that MECL and
undertaken following research and development projects:

(i) Down the hole drilling for mineral explanation;

(ii) Geo-statistical methods for evaluation of exploration dates and
computerisation for optimum evaluation , dates, storage and ret rival.

(iii) Computer ore body modeling

(iv) Development of drilling fluids, coolants and flushing media technology,

(vy) Development of roadiowave - abropti... Techniques and buried electrode
method for base metal sulphides.

(vi) Evaluation of Metal content in base mental sulphide Ores by geophysical
logging ;

(vii) Development of electromagnetic and buried electoral method for geo-
technical study and base metal exploration.

12.2. Replying to the committee's query MECL management stated that MECL at present
does not have any separate R&D section but is having a small unit for in house purpose. The
MECL management further added that MECL gets required feed back on latest technology
from an organisation called BIS, MECL being a member of BIS . BIS conducts periodical
meeting in which the all sort of information with regard to R&D is given. The R&D unit of
MECL interact with exploration projects studies and assesses the outcome and suggests
necessary changes/upgradation of techniques etc. as required.

12.3. The Committee is of the opinion that MECL should prepare technological road maps
exploring its opportunities and understanding technological road blocks for innovative
technological break -through. The Committee is of the view that the MECL should set up
R&D wing for undertaking more R&D projects in order to attain leadership in its spheres of
activities. It may be noted that technological leadership is a product of vision, innovation,
knowledge observation and experiment coming out of research work. MECL may contribute in
developing technology and skill in detailed exploration.


&

13.1

SWOT ANALYSIS OF MECL

MECL management apprised the Sub-Committee of — the strengths , weaknesses
Opportunities and threats of MECL which is stated below:-

feos |

WEAKNESSES

(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)

(vi)
(vii)
(viii)
(ix)
(x)
(xi)

All ground exploration facilities under one roof
Experienced scientific and technical manpower
Core drilling capacity upto 1500 M depth
Hi-tech drills-vacuum suction, reverse circulation
Mining units equipped for exploratory/

commercial ventures

referral agency for coal sampling

state of the art geophysical logging system
1.1. centre with latest hardware & software

Excellent quality of reports

High degree of mobility
Short term project execution

Experience of working in backward areas

(xii)
xiii) _ Exempted from PL

(i Uncertain and reduced work
. availability

(ii) heavily dependent on coal
and lignite sector

(iii) laboratory facilites
(iv) surplus manpower.

(ii)
(iti)

(vy)
(vi)

13.2

in its activities and therefore recommends that

[Opportunities Cd
(i) Mineral exploration services to MNC’s

Joint ventures for work in India & abroad

Deep drilling for CBM

(iv) Modemisation of exploration technology
Large diameter borehole for mine services

Services to mining industry

(i) Gradual reduction of work from
CMPDIL, the largest client.

(ii) Uncertain business trend

(iii) Expanding exploration wings
in other public sectors

(iv) Inadequate prospects —for
detailed exploration outfits

(v) Daily rated contingent
workmen seeking regularisation.

The Committee understands that the strength of MECL is enough to be competitive

MECL management should take every

possible step 10 take advantage of its strength and avail opportunities to improve the



financial and physical performance. The Committee further recommends that MECL
management should make efforts for overcoming its weaknesses and imbibe sufficient
and sustainable resilience to combat threat to its existence. MECL should also try to
shed surplus work force under VRS.

14.0 BUSINESS PLAN OF MECL

14.1. Apprising the Sub-Committee of business opportunities for MECL, the management
stated that the core activities of drilling and mining will continue, however, work availability
from traditional clients is expected to reduce . The management also stated that every effort
would be taken to make up the shortfall and for utilisation of available resources thrust areas
which inter-alia include ; slip holes for CBM exploration; coal sampling and analysis; mining &
supply of ballast stone for railways; obtaining PL//ML for viable deposits; and forming joint
ventures with MNC's and Indian companies.

14.2 The management also apprised the Committee regarding the short term and long term
business plan of MECL which are as under :-

BUSINESS PLAN OF MECL
[SHORTTERM | TERM [LONGTERM Cid TERM
(i) Continue drilling and mine (i) Core activities to continue

development/mine construction activities (ji) Diversification activities to further ex;
(ii) Expansion in coal sampling and analysis, in:
Remote sensing and environmental studies a. exploration for coal bed methane

(iii) Rationalisation of manpower b. mining & supply of ballast stone

(iv) Productivity enhancement ¢. mining of beach sand & bauxite

(४) Competitive in the market (iii) Strategic alliance and joint ventures with

national and international agencies

a

15.0 FUTURE THRUST AREAS OF MECL

15.1. With the economic liberalisation policy of Government of India and frame work of new
mineral policy, the funding for core activity has started showing declining trend. At the same
time, contractual work on behalf of major traditional clients has also drastically reduced. This has
prompted MECL to Identify certain non- traditional areas for its diversification programme.
Some of the important thrust areas for diversification are mentioned below;

15.1.0 EXPLORATION AND DEVELOPMENT OF COAL BED METHANE

15.1.1 Coal Bed Methane (CBM) is emerging as a promising source of clean energy and now is
recognised as a legitimate, low risk and environmental friendly source of energy, associated with

vast known coal and lignite deposits in India. MECL, has emerged as one of the leading agencies
in the field of CBM exploration.


= The Department of Mines stated that the liberalisation of CBM has helped MECL in
procuring orders for slim hole drilling. MECL has already completed first phase of drilling of
Rs.9 crores for ONGC and additional work of Rs.2 crores has been awarded recently, Further
work of Rs.10 crores is expected soon from ONGC. Private parties like ESSAR and Reliance
have been approaching for similar job.

15.1.3 The Committee is happy to observe that MECL is emerging as one of the leading
agencies in the field of CBM exploration. As the Government of India has also liberalized the
CBM policy recently and seven CBM blocks has been auctioned, association of MECL with
prospective Indian/ foreign entrepreneurs will go a long way in developing the CBM resources.
MECL should not leave any stone unturned in getting orders for exploration . Government
also should give priority to MECL. y

15.2.0 COMMERCIAL MINING OF MINOR MINERALS

15.2.1 Besides mine development, commercial mining of certain minor minerals would be
beneficial for the sustainable growth of MECL. Rail ballast stone mining and supply tb Railways
has been the major thrust area identified by MECL recently and efforts are being made to carve
its position in this field. Since the demand of Rail ballast for Railways is expected to increase
manifold in future, Government should evolve a mechanism for awarding supply of Rail ballast
by MEOL to Railways on continuous basis.

15.2.3 The Department of Mines stated that MECL has undertaken mining of blast stone
initially in the State of Jharkhand whereas efforts are being made for obtaining mining lease of
bauxite in Orissa and Chattisgarh and mineral sand in the State of Tamil Nadu.

15.2.4. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Mines should extend its all possible
guidance to MECL for commercial mining of minerals. At the same time MECL management
should approach the Ministry of Railways for receiving work-order for supplying of Rail
blast to Railways.

15.3.0 COAL SAMPLING AND ANALYSIS

15.3.1 MECL has already been identified as third party agency for sampling of coking and non-
coking coals by various clients. Government's help in awarding the work by various
clients/power plants would be very vital for revenue generation in future.

15.3.2 The Committee is pleased to note that that MECL has made its presence felt in the field
of coal sampling and analysis. The Committee recommends that MECL management should
make effects for procuring work order in this field.

15.4.0 MINING & BENEFICIATION. OF BEACH SAND

15.4.1 Beach sand mining and beneficiation for production of Titanium dioxide pigment is
another diversification programme of MECL, for which it has gone ahead With application of
Mining Lease in the state of Tamil Nadu. Once the lease is granted, MECL could attract private
parties for purchase of mineral concentrates for production of pigment. This activity could be a
source of additional revenue for MECL on sustained basis and Government's assistance is needed
in granting mining leases, the Sub-Committee was informed.

15.4.2, The Committee recommends that Government may grant the lease at the earliest.

10



15.5.0 GROUND WATER EXPLORATION

15.5.1 Besides mineral resources, ground water is a vital resource for the development of the
nation. Due to rapid industrialization and population explosion on one hand and depletion of
shallow ground water resources on the other, hamessing the water resources from deep seated
aquifers and its effective utilisation is of paramount importance in the present day scenario. In
view of the above, MECL has now identified ground water exploration and development as the
vital area under diversification programme.

15.5.2 The Sub-Committee was informed that MECL has succéssfully undertaken the ground
water exploration and tube well development in different geological terrain. Having required
infrastructure and capabilities, MECL is geared up to accept the challenging task of deep drilling,
so that assessment and exploitation of ground water resources from deep seated water bearing
strata can be made for water management planning in future.

15.5.3 The Committee understands that harnessing the water resources and its effective
utilization is essential for proper water planning and management, The Committee feels that
MECL , with its rich experience in deep drilling and exploration , should be able to play a
positive role in'exploring ground water which is gradually becoming scarce resource.

W


= AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE

ACTIVITIES OF MECL

The Committee understands the vital role of MECL in carrying out detailed
systematic mineral exploration and hopes that MECL management would be guided by the
management by objectives ( MBO) and make its earnest efforts for achieving the cherished
goals.

(Para 3.2)
ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE

The Committee is of the view that zonal office should be made a profit
making centre and all projects assigned to them should be in such a way that each
zonal office justifies its existence and each zonal office must contribute in the
profitability of MECL. The existence of zonal office should be linked to profitability.
The Committee further recommends that efforts should be made to reduce its
administrative expenditure.

(PARA 4.4)

CO-ORDINATION AND CO-OPERATION BETWEEN MECL AND GSI/
MERGER OF MECL WITH GSI

The Committee is of the view that GSI should undertake honest effort for searching
and identifying new prospects for MECL for detailed exploration.

(Para 5.4)

The Ministry of Mines may explore the possibility of merger of MECL with
Geological! Survey of India (GSI) for better co-ordination and continued prospect for MECL.
for detailed exploration. MECL could work as a separate division in GSI structure, The
synergy so achieved due to merger and brand endowment of GSI would open new areas for
MECL as a separate wing of GSI for detailed exploration and promotion and would enable it to
work in domestic market as well as foreign market. Besides, these measures would reduce the
administrative expense

(Para 5.5)
BUDGETARY SUPPORT.

MNCs and private parties are doing exploration only for 4 to 5 precious and base
metals and many other minerals of national importance are still required to be explored, which
form a part of 64 minerals as mentioned in National Minera! Inventory of IBM, for which
MECL is the right choice. Government should therefore, continue budget support to MECL.

(Para 6.5)

PERFORMANCE OF MECL

The Committee appreciates the efforts made by MECL and hopes that MECL would
continue to strive its best in implementing its programme of minerals exploration and
mine development.

(Para 7.3.)


FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF MECL

= ‘ommittee is constrained to note that public sector support to MECL through
ional projects and contractual work has considerably eroded. The Committee feels that . if
Us. are to remain, inter- PSU cooperation and synergy are required.

(Para 8.4)

The Committee, while appreciating the physical performance of MECL, recommends
ECL management should make efforts to procure work orders from all concerned areas
so that physical performance of the company should have direct. positive impact on the
financial — performance of MECL. The Committee hopes that once the diversification
programmes are implemented and financial restructuring proposals , which is under the
vin 2 of Ministry of Finance, is approved and comes into effect, MECL would start

net profit
(Para 8.5)
~
IVAL PLAN OF MECL o—
ae
F fy ncial restructuring a»

The Committee is of the view that implementation of the recommendations of 3 कु
evival Committee would have positive impact on the physical and financial performance ef
MECL. The revival Committee had recommended for writing off accumulated losses ir
waiver of interest. on Government Joan to clean the balance sheet of MECL. The Committee
recommends that the request of MECL for waiving of the interest on loan and transfer of
balance loan amount to equity should be considered by the Government so that MECL could
make a tum around, The Ministry of Mines may seriously pursue the matter with the
Ministry of Finance.

(Para 10.3)

DISINVESTMENT OF MECL

The Committee is happy to note that MECL is making efforts towards obtaining
prospecting licence and mining lease . The Committee recommends that PL and ML may be
granted \notwithstanding , the Disinvestment proposal. MECL should be allowed to show 15
mettle.

(Para 11.6)
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES OF MECL .

The Committee is of the opinion that MECL should prepare technological road maps
exploring its opportunities and understanding technological road blocks for innovative
technological break -through. The Committee is of the view that the MECL should set up
R&D wing for undertaking more R&D projects in order to attain leadership in its spheres of
activities. It may be noted that technological leadership is @ product of vision, innovation,
knowledge observation and experiment coming out of research work. MECL ‘niay Contribute in
developing technology and skill in detailed exploration.

(Para 12.3.)

13 4


= ANALYSIS OF MECL

The Committee understands that the strength of MECL is enough to be
in its activities and therefore recommends that MECL management should take 6१
possible step to take advantage of its strength and avail opportunities to impro
financial and physical performance. The Committee further recommends that ME¢
management should make efforts for overcoming its weaknesses and imbibe su:
and sustainable resilience to combat threat to its existence. MECL should also try
surplus work force under VRS.

(Para 13.2)
BUSINESS PLAN OF MECL
Future thrust areas of MECL
EXPLORATION AND DEVELOPMENT OF COAL BED METHANE oie

The Committee is happy to observe that MECL is emerging as one of the leading
agencies in the field of CBM exploration, As the Government of India has also liberali
CBM policy recently and seven CBM blocks has been auctioned, association of rie 7
prospective Indian/ foreign entrepreneurs will go a long way in developing the CBM resources,
MECL should not leave any stone unturned in getting orders for exploration . Covert
also should give priority to MECL,

(Para 1.13)
COMMERCIAL MINING OF MINOR MINERALS

The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Mines should extend its all possible
guidance to MECL for commercial mining of minerals. At the same time MECL management
should approach the Ministry of Railways for receiving work-order for supplying of Rail
blast to Railways,

(Para 15.1.4)
COAL SAMPLING AND ANALYSIS

The Committee is pleased to note that that MECL has made its presence felt in the field
of coal sampling and analysis. The Committee recommends that MECL management should
make effects for procuring work order in this field.

(Para 15.3.2)
MINING & BENEFICIATION, OF BEACH SAND
The Committee recommends that Government may grant the lease at the earliest.
(Para 15.4.2)
GROUND WATER EXPLORATION

The Committee understands that harnessing the water resources and its effective
utilization is essential for proper water planning and management. The Committee feels that
MECL , with its rich experience in deep drilling and exploration , should be able to play a
Positive role in exploring ground water which is gradually becoming scarce resource.

(Para 15.5.3.)

14


——————————————S—“‘( eC

m
THIRD MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday the 12 February, 2001 in Room No. 62,
Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Shri Ramdas Agarwal — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
Shri P.K. Maheshwari

Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma
Shri Jibon Roy

Smt. Saroj Dubey

Shri S. Suvasubramanian
Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

Sanvreer

LOK SABHA

9. Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
10. Shri Anant Mahadeoppa Gudhe
EE, Shri G.J. Javiya

12. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan

13. Shri Sunil Khan

14. Shri Deepak Kumar

15, Shri Manjay Lal

16. Shri K. Malaisamy

17. Shri K.H. Muniyappa

18. Shri Nagmani

19. Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah

20. Shri Ram Sajivan

21. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh

22. Shri Ramanand Singh

23. Shri A.C. Jose

24. ‘Shri Ramdas Athawale

SECRETARIAT

Shri P.C. Paikray, Under Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer

2: The Chairman welcomed the Members and announced the formation of four Sub-
Committees of his Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry and also
the names of the Convenors of the Sub-Committees:

Sub-Committee न for Ministry of Stee! -~Convenor -Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi .


‘ नी... for Ministry of Small Scale Industries and Agro and Rural
Industries Convenor - Prof. M.M. Aggarwal

Sub-Committee- III for Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises
Convenor- Dr. 8.8. Ramaiah.

Sub-Committee -IV for Ministry of Mines - Convenor - Shri A.C. Jose

3, Thereafter, the Chairman also announced the subject matter of the study for the Sub-
Committees i.e. Sub-Committee-] for the Ministry of the Stee! and Sub-Committee-IV for the
Ministry of Mines will take up the issues of Modernisation, Restructuring and Expansion
Programmes in the PSUs of the Ministry of Steel and the Ministry of Mines respectively. The
Sub-Committee-III will continue with the subject matter of study ,i.e., Performance review of the
PSUs under the Ministry of Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises and Examination of MoU
system of select Central PSUs. The Sub-Committee-IV will also continue with the study of
Impact of Liberalisation and Globalisation on Small Scale Industries.

4 . . .

5. . . .

6. Thereafter, the Committee adjourned at 4.00 P.M.

*** Relates to other matters,

18



1
FIRST MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 P.M on Monday, the 18™ June , 2001 in Committee Room

*E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

eae a

2S

2.

PRESENT

Shri A.C. Jose — Convenor
RAJYA SABHA

Smt. Saroj Dubey

LOK SABHA

Shri Ramdas Athawale

Shri Thomas Hansda

Shri Nagmani

Shri K.H. Muniyappa.
SECRETARIAT

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
WITNESSES

Representatives of Ministry of Mines

Shri Dipak Chatterjee, Secretary

Shri S.C. Tripathi, Additional Secretary
Smt. Aruna Bagchee, Joint Secretary
Shri 5. P. Gupta, Joint Secretary

At the outset the Convenor welcomed the Members of the Sub-Committee to the

meeting. | Members present discussed the proposed tour programme to Jaipur , Ajmer and
Udaipur from 24" to 30" June, 2001 to make study of Modernisation, Restructuring and
Expansion Programmes in the PSUs of Ministry of Mines. After a brief discussion the Sub-
Committee decided to undertake the said study visit to Khetri, Jaipur and Udaipur from 25% to
28" June, 2001.

3.

The Sub-Committee then heard the oral evidence of the Secretary of the Ministry of

Mines on the overview of the Mining Sector.

4.

A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
The Sub-Committee adjourned at 4.00 PM.

19


रन
SECOND MEETING

The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the * August, 2001 in Room No.63,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT
(मे Shri A.C. Jose -- Convenor

RAJYA SABHA
Nil

LOK SABHA

कै Shri Ramdas Athawale
Shri K.H. Muniyappa

we

SECRETARIAT

Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer

2 At the outset the Convenor welcomed the Members of Sub -Committee - IV and
apprised them of the agenda for the meeting . Members present discussed status of various PSUs
under the administrative control of Ministry of Mines.

a. The Sub -Committee, thereafter, decided to make on the spot study of Modernisation,
Restructuring and Expansion Programmes in mining sector and in this connection decided to visit
Nagpur from 11" to 147 September ,2001 ; Vishakhapatnam, Bhubaneshwar and Ghatshila
(Jharkhand) from 24" to 28* September ,2001 and Kolkata and Sikkim from 8” 13
October ,2001

4. The Sub-Committee adjourned at 5.00 P.M.



mm

THIRD MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 7" December , 2001 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi

PRESENT

1. Shri A.C. Jose — Convenor

RAJYA SABHA
Nil

LOK SABHA
2 Shri Thomas Hansda
SECRETARIAT

Shri P.P.K, Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer

‘WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Mines

Shri Dipak Chaterji, Secretary

Shri S.P. Gupta, Joint Secretary

Smt. Aruna Bagchee, Joint Secretary

Shri Sutanu Behuria, JS&FA

Shri A.K. Bhandari, Director

Shri S.S. Mehra, Director (Fin.)

Smt. Aditi S, Ray, Director

Shri B.K. Menon, CMD, HCL

Shri S.K. Kar, Director, (F), HCL

10... Shri B.N. Mittal, CMD, HZL

11५ Shri M.G. Desmukh, Director (1), MECL
12. Shri K.S. Raju, CG-IBM

13. Shri ५.५. Kutumbarao, Director (INARDDC)

हैक ० 99 [# १९:७७ ७० ३५ [१

2. At the outset the Convenor welcomed the Members of the Sub-Committee and
Secretary, Department of Mines ( Ministry of Coal and Mines) and informed the agenda of the
meeting

3. The Convenor, thereafter, requested the Secretary to give his presentation on various
issues concerned to Hindustan Zinc Ltd ( HZL), Hindustan Copper Ltd. (HCL), Jawaharlal
Nehru Aluminium. Research Development and Design Centre ( JNARDDC), Indian Bureau of
Mines (IBM) and Mineral Exploration Corporation Ltd. ( MECL), in the light of the Sub-
Committee's visit and interaction with the respective management. The Secretary, deliberated

21

*

a


upon mainly on modernisation, restructuring and expansion ॥ of Hindustan Zine Ltd
and Hindustan Copper Ltd. and structural and functional aspects of JNARDDC, IBM and
MECL. After the Secretary's presentation, the Convenor and the Member present asked some
questions which were answered by Secretary and officials of the Department of Mines.

4, The Sub-Committee adjourned at 4.00 P.M

22



IV

FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 2.30 PM. on Wednesday, the 26" December , 2001 in
Committee Room ‘A Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Dethi.
PRESENT
A Shri A.C. Jose — Convenor
RAJYA SABHA

2. Smt. Saroj Dubey
3 Dr. Faguni Ram

LOK SABHA

e
4. Shri Ramdas Athawale
5. Shri Nagmani

SECRETARIAT

Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer

2. At the outset the Convenor welcomed the Members of the Sub-Committee and informed
them the agenda of the meeting.

3. The Sub-Committee, thereafter, took up the following draft reports for consideration:-

(i) Draft. 64" Report on the "Modernisation, Restructuring and Expansion
Programme of Hindustan Zine Ltd. (HZL)",

(ii) Draft 65" Report on the "Modernisation, Restructuring and Expansion
Programme of Hindustan Copper Ltd. (HCL)";

(iii) छशी 66" Report on "Performance Review of Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminium
Research Development and Design Centre (JNARDDC)";

(iv) Draft 67" Report on the "Organisational Structure and Performance Review of
Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM)"; and

(v) Draft 68” Report on the "Working and Performance Review of Mineral
Exploration Corporation Ltd. (MECL)".

After some discussions, the Reports were adopted.
4. The Sub-Committee adjourned at 3.00 P.M. to join the meeting of the Main Committee .

23


|
SIXTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 26" December, 2001 in Committee

Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

eer 9 ४ # ९० ९

PRESENT
Shri Ramdas Agarwal — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
Dr. Faguni Ram

Shri P.K. Maheshwari
Shri Jibon Roy

Smt. Saroj Dubey

Shri S. Sivasubramanian
Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha
Shri Bangaru Laxman

LOK SABHA

Shri A Narendra

Shri Ramdas Athawale
Shri Anant Mahadeoappa Gudhe
Shri GJ. Javiya

Shri A.C. Jose

Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
Shri Manjay Lal

Shri G. Mallikarjunappa
Shri Nagmani

Shri R. Basanagouda Patil
Shri Ram Sajivan

Shri Ramanand Singh
Smt, Renu Kumari

SECRETARIAT

Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer

24



7 Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft reports for consideration :-

(i) Draft 64" Report on the “Modemisation, Restructuring and Expansion
Programme of Hindustan Zinc Ltd, (HZL)";

(ii) Draft 65" Report on the "Modemisation, Restructuring and Expansion
Programme of Hindustan Copper Ltd. (HCL)",

(iii) Draft 66" Report on “Performance Review of Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminium
Research Development and Design Centre (INARDDC)",

(iv) Draft 67" Report on the "Organisational Structure and Performance Review of
Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM)"; and

(v) Draft 68" Report on the "Working and Performance Review of Mineral
Exploration Corporation Ltd. (MECL)".

3.1 After some discussions, the Reports were adopted with certain modifications as
suggested by the Chairman and Members of the Committee.
4, The Committee thereafter, then decided that the Chairman of the Committee may

present the Reports to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha so that government may start
working on the recommendations of the Committee

5. The Committee adjourned at 4.30 PM

i ———

*** Relates to other matters.

MGIP(PLU)MRND—489RS—24.4.2002 25