If 
\ 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYASABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITI'EEONINDUSTRY 
TWENTY-NINTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON MINISTRY 
OF INDUSTRY ON THE 20TH REPORT OF 
THE COMMITTEE 
(PRESENTED ON THE lOTH DECEMBER , 1998) 
_ ... 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 1998/AGRAHAYANA. 1920 (SAKA) 
Ind. 29/98 

, . -
-
.. 
J 
INTRODUCTION 
I. the Chatrman of the Depanment Related Parliamentary Standing Comminee on In­
dustry havmg been authorised by the Commlltee, hereby present this 'T'wenty-Ninth Repon 
on Action Taken by the Ministry of Industry on the recommendations/observations con­
tained in the 20th Repon of the Commiuee on Demands for Grants of Ministry of Indu~try 
for 1996-97. 
2. The 20th Repon of the Commiuee was presemed to the Rajya Sabha and laid o n the 
Table of the Lok Sabha on the ~Grn August, 1996. The Ministry of Industry was requested 
to furnish action taken replies against the recommendations/observations contained in the 
Repon. The replies of the Mimstry in respect of all the recommendations/observations 
were received . 
3. Subsequently. the Commillee atns meeting held on the 28th July, 1997, constituted 
imeraliaSub-Committee-lto examine and report on theAction Taken Report of the Ministry 
oflndustry on its 20th Rcpo n. The Sub -Committ ee considered and adopted its Draft Repo rt 
on the 3rd Nove mber. 1997. The same Report could not be adopted by the full Commmcc 
as it became defunct consequent upon dissolution of the II th Lok Sabha 
4. The newly copstitutcd Commincc met on the 14th August, !998 and adopted the 
Report of the Sub- Comm iuee (Minutes of the meetings are appended as Annexure- 'C · ). 
NEW DELIII; 
14th August. 1998 
(i) 
RAGHAVJl 
Chairman 
Departmmt-relatcd Parliamentary 
Swnding Commillee on Industry 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMilTEE 
1. Shri Raghavji-Chairman 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Shri Govindrno Adik • 3. Shri Maurice Kujur 
4. Shri Karma Topden 
5. Shri Rajubhaa A. Pnnnar • 6. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
7. Dr. Ranbir Singh 
&. Shri C.O. Poulose 
9. Shri P. Pmbhak:ar Reddy 
10. Shri Nagmani 
II. Shri Bhagaban Majhi 
12. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
13. Shri Samosh Bagrodia 
14. Shri Shibu Soren 
15. Shri Gaya Singh 
LOK SABRA 
16. Shri Muni Lall 
17. Shri M. Sr ini va~ 
18. Shri Vi jay Shankar 
19. Shri Gyan Singh 
20. Shri Tarnchand Sahu 
21. Shri Ramanand Singh 
22. Shri Annasahcb M. K. Patil 
23. Shri Jual Omm 
24. Shri Anand Ratna Maurya 
25. Shri Punnulal Mohale 
26. Shri Nadendla Bhaskar Rao 
27. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
28. Shri Duua Meghe 
29. Shri Konijeu Rosaiah 
30. Shn Bijoy Krishna Handique 
31. Dr. Shakeel Ahmad 
32. Shri Sunil Khan 
33. Shri Ananda Pathak 
34. Shri Kini Vardhan Singh 
35. Shri K. Palaniswamy 
36. Shri Surendrn Prasad Yadav (Jahanabad) 
37. Shri Shakuni Choudhury 
38. Shr i Malyala Rajaiah 
39. Shri Prabhat Kumar Samantamy , 
40. Shri A jay Chakrabony 
(ii) 

I ... 
41 Shn Zora Singh 
42 . Shri Ajit Kumar Panja 
4;3. Shri S.S. Palanimanickarn 
44. Prof. Jogendra Kawade 
SECRET ARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta. Director 
Shri P.C. Paikray, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Officer 
(ii•) 

SUB-COMMITTEE-I ON AcnON TAKEN REPORTS OF MlNlSTRY OF INDUSTRY ON 
20TH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Commiuee on Industry at the Meeting held on the 28th 
July. 1997 constituted. inter alia, Sub-Committee-! to elUUlline and report on the Action Taken Reports 
on the 20th Report oft he Commiuee on the Demand fo.r Grants 1996-97 of the Ministry of Industry. The 
composition of Sub.Commiuee is given below:-
1. Shri M.K. ?mil-Convenor 
2. Syed Sibley Razi 
3. Shri Govindrao Adik 
4. Shri Rajubhai A. Parmar 
5. Shrimati Ana ndiben Jethabhai Patel 
6, Shri T.M. Yenkatachalam 
7. Shrimati Jayaprada Nahata 
8. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
9 . Chaudhary Chunni Lal 
l 0. Shrimati Jayawantiben Mehta 
II. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
12. Shri Namdevrao Diwathe 
13. Shri Shya:mlal Bansiwal 
14. Shri Naval Kishore Sharma 
15. Shri Sanat Mehta 
16. Shri Darbara Singh 
2. The 20th Report of the Committee was presented to the Rajya Sabha on the 30th August, 1996 and 
was laid in theLok Sabha the same day. Government have furnished replies indicating the action taken on 
the various recommendation o f the Commiuee. 
3. The Sub-Commiucemet on the lith August, 1997 and considered theATRs furnished by the Ministry 
of Industry on the Vilrious recommendations of the Committee and decided to have certain clarifications. 
It again m~t on the 22ndAugust. 1997 and heard the oral evidence of the Secretaries of various Departments 
of the Ministry of Industry except the Secretary SSI and A & Rl alongwith Member Secretary, Planning 
Commission and Chairman, Disinvestment Commission. It met again on the 16th September, 1997 and 
heard of orru evidence of Secretary, Ministry of Industry (Department of SST and A & Rl) alongwith the 
representatives of K. V.I. C. 
4. The Sub-Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report at its meeting held on the 3rd November, 
1997. Minutes of the sittings of the Sub -Commiuee are appended as Annexure.· 'B' 
5. The Comments/Observations of the Sub-Committee on the various ATRs as received from the 
Ministry of Industry are contain.:<! in the succeeding paragraphs. The supplementary information received 
from the Ministry of Industry on the various recommendations of the Committee is enclosed as 
Annexure -· A'. 
I. RECOMMENDATION 
Foreign Direct Investment 
I. A rate of industrial growth of 12 to 14 per cent is being confidently predicted for the rest of 1990s . 
The influx of forei!,'ll direct investment of a substantial order is one of the postulates on which this 
optimism is based. 
(Para-4) 
·----~- ....... ___,.,...... _______ _ 

2 
Even if the official cl3lm with respect to anflow of FDI an 1995-96 reach the level of two million 
dollars is taken its face value, whether this can be made to climb to th~ level of 10 billion dollars annually 
in the course of next few years remains an open question. (Para 6) 
Action Taken 
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) inflow is one of the parameters taken into consideration for estimating 
industrial growth. The industrial grov.th is directly linked tO availability of infra;tructure like power, 
telecommumcations, roads, railways, oils, pons, etc. To keep pace with the growing need of infrastructural 
facilities, inveslment in these sectors is needed on a l:uge scale. Gov~mment takes measures through 
various fiscal incentives both for domestic and foreign investors. Investment promotion is thus one of the 
imponant steps taken under the economic policies pursued by the Government . Increasing inflow~ of FDI • 
anto the country ha.:. been an 1mponant cornerstone of the economic reforms programme with an objective 
to achieve higher industrial growth and to bridge the gap between domestic savings and total inve~tment 
requirementS. The Government of India encourages foreign mvestment through vmous measures and 
recent policy initiatives include expansion of list or industries for automatic approval, bringing transparency 
by issuing guidelines for APB and simplifying the approval process. 
As regards achieving J 0 billion dollars annually of FDI in the case of next few years, it may be stated 
that there is an increasing trend tn FDI approvals. FDI approvals during 1996 have been signaficantly 
higher (1549) than the year 1995 ( 1355}. The amount of approvals during 1996 t.e. Rs. 361.5 billion is 
about 13% higher than the previous year The acrual inflow in FDI in 1996 amounts to US S 2.41 bilhon 
which is 32% higher over the previous year. Thus the present perfonnance is a positive indicntor of 
increased approvals and inflows of FDI. 
Corn.mentsiObservations 
The Sub-Committee notes the measures being taken by Government for encouraging foreign direct 
investment in the country. It, however, feels that the levels so far reached are still f:u shon of the ten 
billion target. It therefore, suggests that all out cffons be made to accelerate the pace of growth of fore•gn 
direct investment so that the targets envisaged by the Comm.i nee are achieved. 
2. RECOMMENDATION 
Growth Rate 
Problems and difficulties likely to be encountered in the next few years in case the endeavour is to 
sustain the tempo of growth reachw during the past year. (Para 5} 
Action Taken 
At macro economic level it is very difficult to forsee problems and difficulties likely to be encountered 
in the industrial sector in the years to come. In so far as investment promotion is concerned, the Government 
has talcen various steps like putting in place appropriate institutional arrangementS, transparent rules and 
procedures including making to be guideline.~ or consideration of proposals for foreign investment. The 
Government have also recently talcen decision~ to funher liberalize the foreign direct investment regime 
which include expansion of the list of industries. Other promotion effon.~ made by the Government 
including organising conference like Destination India and sector specific investment promotion initiatives. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the steps being taken by Government for promotion of investment in the 
Industrial sector which are instrumental in sustaining the tempo of growth. The Sub -Conunittee hopes 
that Government would take all possible measures for ensuring a fair indu~trial growth. 
---------
_ .. 

3 
3. RECOMMENDATION 
Foreign Direct Investment 
The pattern of movement of foreign direct inve<;tment into the productive sectors of the economy is 
still heavily biased in favour of service industries and for such relatively insignificant, low employment 
creating activities as bottling plants for soft drinks, distilleries for hard drinks. fast food establishment, 
clothiers, cartiers and so on. (Para-7). 
Action Taken 
The sector-wise distribution of approvals of foreign investmentJevcals significant foreign investment 
into such important sectors such as fuel (l'ower and Oil refineries) (about 19%), Telecom (about M%), 
Electronics and Electric Equipments, Chemicals, Food Processing Industries, Transportation. Industrial 
Machinery, etc. Additionally, there have been a numbe r of approvals in such vital sectors as health care, 
setting up of super speciality hospitals and for the manufacture of vital life saving drugs. Since approvals 
are in the priority sectors, actual inflow of FDJ will also logically be in the priority sectors. 
In the Consumer Industry Sector, the proposals are considered on case to case basis and with due 
regard to the fact that such proposal involve at export potential , large scale employment potential specially 
for rural people direct or backward linkage with agro·busine<;s/farm sector and induction of technology of 
infusion of capital. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee feels that the foreign direct investment in the infrastructural sector should be 
much more than the existing 58%. The Sub-Committee hopes that Government would take appropnate 
steps tO attract the foreign direct investment from areas having low employment generating potential and 
promote the same in the infrastructural sector. 
4. RECOMMENDATION 
Distribution of Work among Departments of Ministry 
The di~trlbution of work between these two departments and between them and the newly estab lished 
Department of Industrial Policy appears to be marked by a certain degree of arbitrariness. The other 
Department under the Mioisiry's umbrella, the Department of Public Entefj)rises, has. to all appearances, 
already been divested of operational responsibilities; the national budgetary allocation suggested for tt 
reflects this reality. (Para 8) 
Action Taken 
Distribution of work and allocation of sUbJects between the Ministries and Departments is the matter 
allocated to the Cabinet Secretariat under the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961. 
Accordingly. the Cabinet Secretariat had circu lated the notification dated 8.3.95 issued by the Rashtrapathi 
Bhawan allocating inter-alia subjects between the Departments oflnd ustrial Development and Industrial 
Policy and Promotion. A copy of the Cabinet Secretariat's O.M. No.74/2/295.Cab (i) dated 8.3.95 issned 
in this regard is enclosed. 
in view of the above extract of the para 8 of the Reponofthe Standing Committee on Industry may be 
forwarded to the Cabinet Secretariat for information and necessary action. 
Further, Industry Minister had suggested io the Prime Minister in July'96 that the Departments of 
Industrial Policy and Promotion and Industrial Development should be merged into one Department and 
the merged Department may be designated as the Department of Industrial Development. If the PMO 
agrees to this suggestion, Cabinet Secertariat will issue appropriate orders . 
• 
..._...c., o( 
• .. .:,~...t.._- ~;::J.:.; < • . . ~ 

• 
4 
This will take care of the adverse comment made by the S tandang Committee on lndumy an regard to 
the distribution of work between the Depanmems of Industrial Development and lndu~trial Policy and 
Promotion. 
Comment.s/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that Government have not given any serious consideration to 
the Committee's re.:ommcndation to revie"' the distributaon of work among the various Departments of 
the Mimstry of Industry. It is a matter of regret that the P.M.O. 3S well as the Cabinet Secretariat have not 
responded to the suggestion of the Industry Minister of July. 1995 re.:ommending merger of the Depanrn.:nt 
of ID & the IPP. The Sub-Comminee hopes that Govemmem would review the dastnbuuon of work 
among various Departments under the Ministry of Industry wnhout any 'further delay. 
S. RECOMMENDATION 
Disinvestment 
The objective of a gradual withdrawal of Government from the industrial scene has also mnuenced the 
policy approach toward profit makang public enterprises. Whale the Government will continue to hold on 
to a maJOrity of the equity, a certam number gf share_~ will be offered for sale in the open market; the sale 
proceeds will be merged into the accounts of the general budget. According to the statcmem b) the 
Finance Minb'lerat the time of the presentation of this year·~ budget, re.:eipt.~ from disinvestment operations 
are to be used in the currem year for providing relief to the poor oia a number of welfare acuvities. In 
effect. though, it still boils down to use the resources raised through disinvestment forclosang the n:vcnu..: 
gap in the budget. (Para 9) 
Action Taken Report 
This is an observation rather than a recommendation, and pertains more to the Finance Ministry. 
However, it may be added that to the extent the fund~ are credited to the Consohdated Fund through 
disinvestment it reduces lhe requirement of the Government for raising funds through borrowmgs and 
other sources. The Common Minimum Programme (CMP) of the Government spells out that the funds 
rai~d from disinvestment would be utilised in vital areas of economy particularly health and education 
a:ad ;~ pan of such revenue will be e;~nnarked to create mvestment funds to be u~ed for ~trengthening 
public enterprises. The Plan and non-Plan budgetary suppon ga vcn by Government ench year to PS Us is 
in excess of the proceeds from disinvestment. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes that Plan and non-Plan budgctaC) support given by Government each year 
to PSUs is in excess of the proceeds from disinvestment. 
6. RECOMMENDATION 
Disinvestment Commission 
The Government has this year set up a Disinvestment Commission avowedly to oversee dasinvestment 
operataons. Decisions of this Commission are however slated to be effective only from the third tmnchc 
of the disinvestment programme proposed for 1996-97. A so-called 'core group' of officials, it hn; been 
indicated, will decide upon the details of thedisinvestmentS tO be undertaken dunng the first two tranches. 
The Dismvestment Commission will reportedly have the prerogative of drawing up comprehensive long 
term disinvestment programmes only with respect to such undertakings as are referred to it. 
In the Committee's view, the deferment of the jurisdaction of the Commission ull the third tranche of 
disinvestment proposed for the current year is unwarranted. Moreover, to suggest that the Commission 
will prepare long-term plans of disinvestment only for public sector undertakings that arc referred to 11 
will severely limit its authority . The Committee would urge that the Disinvestment Commission be 
pcnnitted to commence functioning with immediate effect lind be fu lly authorised to decide on ats own 

• 
• 
• 
5 
the undenak ings for which disinvestment progmmmes ure to be. drawn up. In order to remove ambiguity 
and ensure that the disinvestment process follows a rational and transparent course, the so-cal led 'core 
group should be disbanded fonhwith and responsibi lity for the first~wo tr.tnches of dis investment in the 
current year be also delegated to the Commission. The latter should have tlle freedom to decide the umbit 
of its activities; the only direction to it each year should be confined to the approximate order of resources 
to be raised through disinvestments undenaken during the year. (Para 1 0 & II) 
Actio n Taken 
As per the approved schemes, di$investments in the lirst rwo trenches during the financial year 1996-
97 were to be exec uted under the supervision of the Core GrouR- For this purpose the Core Group had 
been reconst ituted under the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary. This Core Group represents the 
Government. It is essential to have some such mechanism at the official level to deal with the large 
number of matters of details connected with disinvestment. 
In the first repon submitted by the Disinvestment Commi~sion, the Commission itself has recommended 
for fonn~ tion of a Standing Empowered Group (SEG) comprising Cabinet Secertary, Secretaries ofMinostry 
of Finance, Depanme m of Public Enterprises, Administrative Ministry of the PSU alongwith the CEO of 
the concemed PSU. At prese nt the Core Group of Secretan~.s is advising and monitoring the execution of 
disinvestments of PSU shares in a professional and tnmsparent manner_ Since the compos•tion of the 
present Core Group is tdenucal to the recommended SEG, there is no need to disband the present Core 
Group . 
The Commission is working within its telllls of reference. Already 50 enterprises have been referred to 
the Commissio n and the Commission in itS 3 reports subnuncc.lto the Government have covered 15 
enterprises. The Commission has recommended for pan tal and total disinvestments in some !'SUs and 
strategic alliance in some PSUs. 
Comments/Observat ions 
The Sub-Committee is not satisfied with the Government's reaction to the Commi ttee's recommendation 
viz. that the Commission should have the full authority to decide on it on the undenakings for which the 
Disinvestment P rogrammes are to be drawn up. The Sub-Committee reitemtes the Commillce's 
rcwrnmendation vi'l- tbatthe authority of the Disinvestment Commission should not be limited to only 
these PSUs which are referred to it. 
7. RECOMMENDATION 
BIFR 
The other side of the p icture is provtded by the long list of sick industrial undertakings routinely 
referred to the Board for Industria l and Fina ncia l Reconstructio n. Going by official data, in the 
overwhel ming majority of cases industrial sickness arises from managenal deficiencies and financial and 
adminis trative malpractices; it is somew hat an irony that it is nontheless the workers who have to suffer 
on account of the collapse of the units.'l11e Ministry representatives, while making their annual appearanc<JS 
before the Committee, ritually narrate the number of cases sent to the BfFR and offer tentative remarks 
on the likely fate awaiting the units. In the opinion of the Committee, sufficient experience, mostly of a 
negative nature, has already been a.cquired with respec t to the BfFR experiment- The fault does not lie 
with the quasi-judicial boc.ly. but with the reluctance on the part of the Government to make up its mind 
on the recom mend ations of the agency.ln several instances. even after the B IFR h a~ forwarded its recom­
mendat ions, a Committee of Ministers as final arbiters, has offered views whi<:h are at variance with 
those of the Bl1<~: a stage of impasse was hereby reached. Meanwhile the Ministry contin ued to dole out 
funds for meeting contractual obligations. The Committee would suggest a change in official thinking in 
this matter; either the BIFR is provided with the final authority to decide issues which fall within its 
juri sdiction, or the Gove rnment proceeds to an alternative modality to meet the challenge of industrial 
sickness. (Para 12) 

6 
Action Taken 
BTFR (hereinafter Board), is ndministrnllvely under theM inistry of Finance and thus these observations 
pertain more to that Ministry. However, it may be added that while formulating revival strategies for the 
sick enterprises, B!FR generally adopts a con<ul!ativc process and arrives at a consensus strategy for 
revival of these unit.<. The Board consult~ the management. employees, financial institutions, State 
Governments, Central Government being the maJor stake holder cannot be excluded from the consultation 
process. llowever. Ill order to expedite the action on the recommendations of the Board, Government 
have already dtspensed with the system of consideration of the recommendauon of the Board by an 
intermediate body. Government at the same tune, are taking steps to revamp and strengthen the BlFR. 
Comments/Observations 
The Ministry tn us Action Taken Note ha.~ stated that observatiOns made by the Committee pertatns 
mon: to the Mmistry of Finance than to the Ministry of Tndustry. The Sub-Committee regrets that 11 
cannot accept the contention of the Ministry. There arc a large number of public sector undenakmgs 
which are administrntively under the control of the Miniw-y of Industry itself nnd a number of units are 
before BIFR A d·~r.ision regarding rev1val of such units is under the sole purview of the !vfinistry of 
Industry . 
The Sub-Committee hopes that Government would complete the revamping and strengthening of 
BIFR on priority and keep the Committee's recommendations m vtew while doing so. The Sub-Committee 
n:iternte' its earhcr view that the B!FR should be prov1ded with final authority to dc:.cribe the issues 
falling within ill> JUrisdiction. 
8. RECOMMENDATlON 
Rehabilitation of PSUs 
The Committee considers 1t essential to dwell oo the desirability of the Ministry not washing its hand• 
from effort.< to rehabilitate the three public sector unit~. the Heavy Engineering Corporntion, the Mining 
and Allied Machinery Corporation and Hindustan Machine Tools. The social stakes in the ca.se of these 
three units are high, and it would be most unWise to allow to go to seed the eap1tal stock once invested m 
these umts. The Committee will make the same observation with respect to the Mim-cement plant at 
Saw•li Madhopur. (Para 13) 
Adion Taken 
HMT was set up m 1953 for the manufacture of machine tools . Over the years, HMT made its mark, 
growing from a sing le-product single-market company to a multi-product, multi-market force. HMT 
which had been progressing at a growth rate of nearly·l3% sufl'ere.l a set back in the beginning of the 
nineue.< and has accumulated losses of Rs. 54.92 crores as on 31 3.96. 
HMT performance had been adversely affected duo to intense competition from domestic and fore1gn 
manuf<ICturers, disproportionate manpower costs obsolete technology, outdated machinery and product. 
excc~1ve interest burden due to a high revel of borrowing and marketing wcakne.~ses. 
The Government in 1991-92 retained the services of JICA(Japan International Cooperation Agency) 
for a detailed study on restructuring and development of HMT. The study brought out inherent weaknesses 
in the organisation and recommended phy~1cal, financial and organisation31 resuucruring. The JICA 
recommended an investment of Rs. 1426 crores during the period 1992-2000. The Strdtegic imperatives 
needed for HMT were to be 10 the areas of technology, access to glohal market, finance and informauon 
technology architecture. One oft he main recommendations of JJCA was that IIMT shou ld concentrate on 
its core businesses like macbine tools. trnetors etc. and divest consumer durable and peripheral businesses 
over a period of time. 
.. .. .... " . 
.:.O..:tollllill>*/.&."""~~ .~ ~-:. :..w. --. ~ "--·~~ 

• 
• 
,-
7 
Proceeding on the recommendations of flCA, in February. 1994, in principle approval of CCF.A was 
obtained to convcn individual bu~iness groups into joint venture companies with international partners 
who may be allowed to have majority equity share 1f it was in HMT's interest The partner was expected 
to bring in tho: investments, technology and the marketing suppon required for restructuring of H'MT 
HMT was also allowed to engage professional agencie~ of national or internauonal repute to 1demuy 
suitable JOint venture partne~. Any specific joint venture proposal that matured wa.~ to be brought before 
Government for approval. 
Accordingly, a number of po~1tivc steps for its re~tructuring ;md turnaround have been unden;tkcn . 
(a) Modernismion/Profession~lisation; 
(b) Step• taken for d1sposal of Non-Performing Assets; 
(c) Improvements in Personnel Management; 
(d) Financial Improvements; 
(e) Effons Made In Marketing/Business Development: 
(f) Productivity and Qualtty Improvements; and 
(g) Jomt Venture Proposals 
Budgetary Support [rom GOl 
Year Plan Non-Plan 
1991-92 
1992-93 
1993-94 
1994-95 
1995-96 
9.17 
10.76 
4.20 
8.65 
5.00 
10.00 
(Rs. tn cmrt's) 
VRS 
7.15 
27.50 
24.10 
12.23 
Heavy Engineering Corporation, the Mining and Allied Machinery Corporation and Hiltdustan 
Machine Tools 
H.E.C. : In ns last hearing held on 26.8.96, BIFR ha~ sanctioned the rehabilitation scheme of IIEC. 
Further action will be taken on receipt ofM1nutes from the BIFR. 
MAMC :MAMC was referred to BIFR m 1992 and wa~ declared sick. BIFR appointed fFCJ a' the 
Operating Agency to colwder the revival of MAMC . A study was cnnied out by IFCI on the 
directions of BIFR. M/s. Raiji & Co. who were entrusted with the study by fFCI. suggested a 
very significant fund infusaon for the rehabil itntion of the company . The study suggested cash 
infusion ofRs. 142.16 crores besides financial restructuring. In addition to these fund~ the SBI 
as well as State Government of West Bengal were also expected to make sacrifices. The SBI 
did not agree to the concessions envisaged m the revival plan. The Government considered the 
various alternatives includmg the revival of MAMC. The Depanment submitted before the 
BJFR that the Government would have no obJection in taking over of the company by a pnvaac 
investor and the financial restructuring would be considered on 111crits of the offers received. 
1l1cre was no offer in response to the advertisement f~ privatisation 
In its heanng held on 3.1.95, BIFR, after bearing all concerned, came to the conclusion that it would 
be difficult to make the net worth of the company positive witbin a reasonable period. It, therefore, 
decided to issue show-cause not1ce for winding up of the company. Futthcr proceedings of the BIFR have 
been Stayed by the Calcutta High Coun. The matter is sub-judice. 

8 
In June. 1996, MAMC proposed a fresh revival plan which wa.~ examined m the DHI but found not 
v.ablc. 
Comme nts/Observations 
The Sub-Commmcc, at the outset. ts unhappy to note thtuthe 'vlinistry's ATR ~~ s1lem about the mml· 
•tcel plant Jt Sawa1 Madhopur The Sub-Commiuee regrets to note that tbe pace of rehabilitation of 
ll'v!T, HEC & MA'v1C is rather very 'low. The sub-ComnuiiL'e hopes that Government expedite the1r 
cff!'ns for finding a solution to nevtve these undertakings Within .1 given time penod. 
<J RECOMMENDATION 
(ndu.~trial Sector 
Be that as 1t may, the country 's indu,trial ~ector, henceforth IS to be constituted of two ~eparate univel'lies; 
on the one hand 1s the likely "mergence of a ~oph1sticated, fast-expanding modem sector teaming on the 
very lateM technology and auempting to maximise effons at auaining internatiOnally competitivene"; 11 
wilt have tL< eye"' much on the demand schedule of the upper cla•scs in Indian society as on the ex.port 
market for survival and growth. Thi" sectnr of industry wilt absorb considerable c:tpttal, but will b<: 
unable to provide much of extra-employment. Thts ts a harsh cold judgement, bull here is not much scope 
for d1sagrccmg w1th th1~ dcpication of the prospective realtty. (P;ml t 4) 
9A At the other end, !hough, there will be a con~ider~ble corpus of capital stock locked up in s1ck and 
closed industrial unll~. some iu tbe puhlic >t>etor and some rn the private hands. The machinerv and 
equipment mstallcd in these units Wilt be obsolete in varjous degrees; the unit cost of production will :~l<o 
render their products unfit for catering to the external market But since they embody cap•tal stock still 
c~puble <1f producing a nm negligible qunnll!y of industrial output of vartous descriptions, apart from 
providing employment to hw1dred of thousands of workers, the <JUCstion of giving them the shon shrift 
•.v11l need to he dealt with >orne care. Should these units be allowed to go to the wall. apart from the 
potential forfcnure of production. tbe work~r> displaced would be unlikely to ftnd employment in the 
sophiMicated modem \Cctor Wen:: they to remain without job~. then: would be the prospect of widespread 
'ociat unrest which IS bound to affect the foundations of the cmue economy. includmg the brightest and 
henlth1cr segments of the mdustrial sector. Ag;unst this background, the const.ramts of a parliamentary 
d~mocracy, "hich i~ both altve ami kick mg. can be easily surrnisrd. (Para I 5) 
Action Taken Report 
While It is cu~tomary to liCparme the m,Jumiaf sector into a modem and a traditional ~ub-sector it j, 
nor appropnate becau~ both these ;ue undergoing dynamic e volutlon and tbat not only both are dependent 
on what is happening outside the mdu.rrial 'ector sucb as in agriculture, construction and transportation 
but they are linked to one another through sub contractmg or supporting activitie~ and ~ervices. 
Any meaningful ~trutegy on industrial sector should provide for a mdustrial produ~t mix that meet~ th~ 
basic needs. accclcr:ttc economic gro"th with distributive justice <tnd provide employment commensurate 
with the resource availnbility to the e~tent compauable w1tb overall economic efficiency. 
In term.s of technology. it would be wrong to look at advance and non advance technology but a.n 
appropriate technology b.:cause labour and capital are not homogenous producuon factors. they arc 
indepe ndent inputs 1n the produclion procc~s and should be considered as such. For a variety of rea.<on' 
industria lisation process in India has encouraged, ofte n unint entiona lly under pricing of capita l and over 
pricing of labour m term~ of their relative opponunity cosr.1"h1s process through thetr direct <md indirect 
effects on factor pnce~ have at least in part been responsible for mcreasing capital intensity in some of the 
industries. The process has also been helped by behavioural bias of engineers, managcn.. scicnti~ts and 
technicians in favour of capital intens1ve techniques. The conunuauon of uneven d1stnbuuon of income 
and relatively lower growths of GDP have remforced these biase~. 

9 
The corresponde nce between sector and technology would be consistent only if it is accepted that 
appropriateness of technology varies across sectors and it can becoce ptualised a~ labour or capital intensive. 
lndustrialtsation would contribute maximum to the social development when it can produce goods at low 
prices for larger strata of population. It, not only should create employment but it should provide inputs 
for e xpansion to other sec tors such as agriculture, construction and other essen tial services. Therefore, it 
would be inappropriat e to segment the industry on a permanent bas is into tmditional and non tradit ional 
sector and to say that while competitiv e ~timulus to growth is acce pted in one, the other sector requires 
some sort of indefinite sheltering allowing for use of inefficient and inappropriate technology sustaining 
on fi:;cal support and subsidies or some kind of entry restriction. Yes. in the interim, this dualistic structure 
has to be accepted and appropriate policy be envisaged for ats im'?gration into a vibrant and competitive 
iudustrial Structure. 
Gov.cmment has adopted a dual approac h in dealing with this situation. On the one hand, on attempt 
has been made to remove the distortionary factor pricing which has in the past encouraged capital intensity . 
On the other hand, Government has continued for the time being with the policy of quantitative restrictions 
by way of reservation of items for small scale sector. While :u the same time creating necessary environment 
for adoption of appropriate techno log y in this sector. Ministry of Industry hns also appointed an Expert 
Group under Prof. Abid Hussain to adv ise on the issu es reluting to SSI sector . 
The Government is quite conc erned with the issue of sickness. This i~ relevant both in the private 
corporate sector as well a~ in PSUs. As of March, 1995 t.here are about 2. 70,000 units in the private 
corporate secto r which were sick or weak. Most of these units are in the small scale sector . Not only the 
magna tude of sickness a matter of concern, but over Rs. 13,000 crores of the bank credit has been locked 
up in these units . A capital scarce country can hard ly afford to have that much of the prod uctive capital 
being locked up without being put to any productive use. 
The issue closely associated with the industrial sickness is the rehabilitation of workers. It is the 
workers who are worst affected segments in the process of restructunng. This naturally requires as 
Committee has rightly poin ted out, Government to be very cautious if restructuring of industries involve> 
displacement of labour. 
However, it is important that the locked in capital in these uni ts is put immedia tely to the productiv~ 
use and the initiative> of the Government in this regard particular ly the amendment of SICA. making 
BIFR a fast uaclc facilitating mechanism are importanL The Ministry wouldconsidercreating an institutional 
mechanism like an Insurance Fund for Employees to deal with the issues of industrial sickness and 
restructuring on a penn anent basis. 
Closed units in urban areas have large tracts or urban land locked up. If these units could be permitted 
to sell this land, the resources so generated could facilitate industrial restructuring without much rc<.:oursc 
to fiscal 5Uppon. Development of land of the closed units in ciues require an integrated and comprehensive 
approach. Unfortunately, the whole problem is viewed today in a compartmentalised manner and is beset 
with regula tions imposed by a host of authorities and agencies of the city, State and National Governme nts. 
Tbus, rejuvenation through rede velopm ent of l;md of closed units , tho ugh econo mically viab le, requires 
an appropriate institutional mechanism. 
The key issues that an ansunnional set-up, estabtished to implement the proposed restructunng of sick 
and closed industrial units tl)rough l<md development, needs to examine are . 
(a) Ensure rightful dues to the displaced workers . The payme nt may anclude compen sation in uddition 
to the outstanding dues. An agreement to this from the concerned workers would be requ ired. 
(b) Introduction of new industries at the same location of a non-polluting nature, to absorb the displaced 
workers. 
(c) Dasposal of assets, particularly land, to pay-off the workers and other creditors . Some priority in 
this disposal could be given to the affected wQrkers. 

10 
(d) To the ex ten! poSSible, I he enttre scheme should be designed to be self-financing. for thi~ purpo\c, 
iniual seed capital to begin the tmplernentation ;tnd payment of due$ to the workers would he 
required from the Nauonal Rcnew:tl Fund or simtiM programme. 
Comment<;/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the contents of the Ministry'~ ATR. 
I 0. R ECOM MENDATION 
Industria l Sickness 
In such a situation. the Govenunent will have little choice but to have a r<':lpprn"al of'" JX>Iicy coocemmg 
the sic!. industnal undenalungs tn the country. Banks ;Uld financtallll>tttullons will haw to be mvolvcd in I his 
exercise. Budgetary support too may need to be augmented, conceivably by drawals hum realisauons from 
disinvcstmem operations. The total pool of funds made available to the s1ck untts,there" no question. ;hould 
be offered at u favourable ra1e "f interest. The infusion of fn;,;h funds, should however be :«:compamcd by a 
thorough O\'Crbaul of the equity >tructure with emphasis on liquidaung as far as poss•blc, of paM liabtl ities to 
the Government; in any event, as matters ~land <II present. such liabi liti~s are not Cibily n.'CoverJblc. New 
capital fund.~ offered to the units should be utilised to finance the purchase ofbalancmg equipment wh1ch may 
ensure a minimum order of modemi<;;ttion. What b equally relevant, managerial per~onnel of the highc>ot 
calibre mu>t be inducted during this phase. (Para I 6) 
Action Taken 
l11e Govcmm~nt proposes to revive and restructure the s1ck units in accordance with the broad polky 
<h spell out in the Common Mimmum Programme. The public :>ectorunils, including financial in~tttutions 
and the banks. an.: expected 10 function ascommerci: d units. Therefore, whilecxtenuing financial :>>>•stance, 
endeavour i~ also to be made to evaluate the v•abtlity of the s1ck units. All poS>tble avenues of revtval 
includ ing chansc of promoters, formation of worker< co-operattvcs etc. are being explored in ca'c of sick 
untt> before the BIFR. Recently Damodar Cement and Slags Ltd . a sub5idiary of Cement Corpor.uion of 
India has bee n divested under BIFR's order to n major ceme nt manufacturer in the private sector. 
Ml< ACC. 
llcsides. fonnution of joint venture C\CO in CIL\C of s1ck unus is being ~xplorc:d. Govcmment has 
alrc;tdy apprO\'L-d m principle the fnnnation of joint venture' mcluding With ma.1onty private cqu1ty 
holdtng 111 some sick PSUs nlreatly referred to BirR like Mls. Instrumentation Limited. Kot.l, 
:0.1/,. \lanclya National Paper :0..1ills Ltd .. 1\-IJ,. C·•ment Corporation of India and M/s. lltmlustan Photo 
Film• Limned. Apart from f'rnanciul restructuring, 1he other opt1ons of revival of 'ick unit> It~.: 
profc"ionali..auun of the manal_;emcnt. handing ovcrto the man.1gement group etc are .Jiso being explored 
hy the Government on continuous hasis. To support the restructunng proposals. a' worked out fo" los' 
makm!! PSlh. an endeavour;, also ll.;tng made to set ur a fund from out of disinvestment proceeds. 
Itt i!dditinn to restructuring of the std. !'SUs. U.\ stated above, effort~ an also n ade to muonahse the 
manpmwr through modtfied VR Scheme. The Naltonal Renewal Fund (NRFI also ~uppon, in rctrnining 
.Uld n•depl<•yment ol' the surpiu• worHorce of s•c~ PSUs. 
Commenl</0bscrva1ions 
The Sub·C.>mminee note' the a..t1on he10g taken by Government for revival of std. lndustri.•l Umh. 
ilh' Sub·C<>mmittcc, however. rc1tcratcs Committee 's recommendation •·i;: •• that the bud~etary support 
ma. he au~mentcu by dmwals from l!albmion from dl'tn\•e>tment 3nd that the funds made ava1lablc to 
'te"- 1111il' 'hould be offered <tt favo11r;tble rates or interest. 
• 
• 

L 
.. . 
I I . RECOMMENDATION 
NRF 
I I 
The Commmcc wi ll here place on record ns v1ew~ on a closely related issue. The Govcrnmem must 
have spt:nt more than Rs. 2.000 crore m the course of the past few years to superannuate workers under 
the Voluntary Rcllrement Scheme by dmwing down rc~ources from the l';a11onal Renewal Fund . h " 
mdeed concc1vable that were thts sum made avaJiablc for capital rccon:>~ruc11on of 1hc unit•, several of 
I hem mighl have already been nursed hack to heahh . The Comminec w1ll recomme nd that from now on 
no hindm ncc shou ld be placed 10 proposals for 1ransfer of NRF resources thrcclly for indus lriul rcviv111, 
such as for purchase of new equipment or for purposes (If working capital. The Commiltee will fun her 
suggc;l that 1hc present arrangement whereby resources of 1he NRF nrc available only for pubhc 
undenakings under 1he aegi~ of lhe Union Govcmmemts indcfenstble. The nalion includes lhc Slales as 
well; therefore resources bclongmg to what i~ descnbed as a National Renewal Fund should be available 
for servicing sick undertakings under 1hc purview of the S1a1e Govemmenls too 
(Para 17\ 
Aclion Token 
A Statemenl showing deta1ls of u1ilisa1ion of NRF funds, since it' mccplion, year-wi~c i' ill 
Annexure- I. 
The Nalional Renewal Fund was <el up by the Government tn February, 1992to provide a ~ocoal safecy 
net for workers affected by industrial reslruCiuring,technological upgrad ation and mode rnisation of Indian 
Industry. 
The guide lines for NRF approved by ohe Cabinel Commiuee on Economic Affairs in October. 1992 do 
not envisage lruns fer ofNRF rcsO\ IfCcs directly for indu>!rial reviva l such:~ purchase of new eqmpmcnl; 
or for purposes of working capilal A copy of the Reooluuon dated 21.12.92 published m the Gazcne of 
India. containing the guideline> for NRF is at Anne1ture-11. 
As regards cxlension of NRF as~t;lance to Stale PSUs, 1h1s Departmenl has already submincd ;I nolc 
on opcr.uiona l modalities for gram of assistance from the Na1ional Renewal Fund 10 the Cabinet Sc\:retttriat. 
Thi• Note, inte""'*- covers assi~tance "-'NRffeti"'VR-S in 8!J4i PS~ ~c?'ttdWever, itV.•as deferred 
in the meeting of <:;c..EA held on 28. 11.1 ~ "' " .. _.,. • ·' 
In view of various faclors, includmg and especially the resource faclor and I he declining budge! for 
NRF. it doc~ nol appear feasible 10 extend the assistance from NRF for additional activities . 
Comments/Observa tions 
The Sub·Commiltee is unhappy 10 note that lhe Mimslry have nol commented on the COJ'llllllllcc .>' 
recomm en<.lnlion viz. that there ~ h Olll tl be no hinderance to proposals fonransfcr o r NRF resources d i rcclly 
for induwial revival such alo purchase of new ec:1uipmen1 or for pu-rpos~ of working capi1al. As regards 
the exlension of NRF assistance 10 S1me PSUs the Sub-Committee feels that Go\'emmenl ac11on 1n lhc 
maner ~~ v.:ry slow as no actton has been taken in the mauer after it Walo deferred in the mcctin~,: of 1he 
Cabinet Commiucc on Economic Affaif\ of 28.11.95 . The Sub-Commiuee hope~ that GO\'Cmmenl would 
take expcdiiLOus ac1ion in this regard and consider af rc~h 1 he Committee's recommendation regardm)! usc 
of NRF rcsuurces. 
12. RECOMMENDATION 
Import Duties 
The Government. it can be suggcsled be persuaded to announce, say, a five year schedule of 11npon 
duty reducuons from now on. and forward this schedule every year. The availabiltty of such a schedule 
will help lhc industrial uniLs 10 dovclail their produc1ion and market plannmg in a far more effcc1ive 
manner I han nt present. 
(Par.1 18) 

• 
12 
UA. II is however foreonsideration whether the rising rupee cost which such devaluation e ntalls does 
not neutrolise the advantages reduction in import duty rates are supposed to confer. Such issue deserve to 
be continuously reviewed; this can be done best by an inleT-ministerial Committee with representati on 
from the Ministries of Industry, Agriculture. Commerce, Finance and the Planning Commission. 
(Para 20) 
128. This inter-ministerial Committee may also oversee the selling up of a mechanism which could 
monitor and report whelhertaking advantage of economic liberalisntion and the gr..1dual demolit ion of the 
tariff structure, foreign parties arc trying to sell some of their wares in our markets by undercutting 
domestic producers. Information systems are available here as well as abroad about such maners, from 
which we can adopt concrete steps to prevent unconscionab le dumping activities on our soil. 
(Para 21) 
,\ction Thkcn 
Proposals for modificati on in import dutie.~ are formulated after examining suggestions received from 
producing units and the user industries from time to time and recommendations are made to the Ministry 
of Finance for changes in import duty rate.~ keeping in vaew the ove.rall deve lopment of the itadustrial 
sector. 
Announcing a five year schedule of import duty reductiOn$ may lead to deferring or postpOnement of 
invcsrrnent decision by the entrepreneurs who may like to take advantage of lower duties in future which 
may be inimical to the growth and development of the economy and reduced ability on the pan of 
Government to correct the flaws and unindented nnomalies which may arise in the system. Further, such 
announcements would become irrelevant once we bring out tax structure in line with duty rates in 
comparable economies toward s which we aim to move. At that level, emphasis would be on stability in 
duty structure rather than on change. A stable duty structure is better than a changing duty rote. 
The proposals fo r changes in import duty rates are made keeping in view the effect of devaluation on 
import prices and existing anomalies if any etc., and these proposed duty rates arc funher discussed with 
Ministry of Finance who takes !he final view on the issue. 
Undercutting may either imply sale of productS by foreign parties at lower prices than the prices 
prevailing in other markets because of their being cost effective or dumping of products by the foreign 
parties. ln the former case, undercutting may actually be good for the economy as this provides products 
at lower prices to the user industry making them cost effective and competitive. This will also induce the 
domestic producers of such products to improve efficiency and bring down !heir cost of production. In 
the later case, that is of dumping, provision already exist according to which the affected party can lodge 
n formal complaint to the Ministry of Commerce which in turn initiates the investigation according to 
existing rules and procedures and recommends imposition of appropriate anti-dumping duties to Ministry 
of Finance in case injury to domestic manufacturers is est:lblished. 
Comments/Observ ati ons 
The Committee is unhappy to note that the Ministry have not responded 10 the Committee's proposal 
to set up an inter-Ministerial Commiuee for the purpose of monitoring the advantages of economic 
liberalisation, gradual demolition of tariff structures. etc . The Sub-Committee is also unhappy over the 
slow/delayed action on behalf of the Government on rationalisation of duties. Such action on the part of 
the Government as re~ulted in various industries like paper steel going sick. The Sub-Committee hopes 
that Government would consider the recommendation of the Committee, seriously and initiate appropriate 
action early. 
13. RECOMMENDATION 
As for the duty changes announced in this year's budget, the Committee would recommend that the 
rates of import duty proposed for paper and newsprint be carefully reviewed. 
(Para 19) 

I 
13 
Aclion Taken 
This Department had reviewed the r.lles of import duty for paper and newsprint. As regards import 
duty on newsprint, this Department had recommended to Ministry of Finance for imposition of 20% 
customs duty. Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) had imposed I 0% customs duty on import 
of newsprint vide notificatton No. 83/96-<:ustoms dated 29.10.96. This Department has again taken up the 
matter for increase of customs duty from I 0% to 20% on import of newsprint which has not been accepted 
in the Budget Proposals of 1997-98. 
Import duty on paper has also been reviewed. The international prices of paper with the existing duty 
structure and the prices of indigenous paper are comparnble. Moreover. the provisions ofWTO/GATf do 
not encourage any increase in the customs duty. Therefore, this Department is of the view that 20% 
customs duty on import of paper may be maintained. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes with satisfaction the action being taken by the Ministry of Industry for 
pursuing the cause of the newspaper industty and recommending increase in the excise duty on newsprint 
by 30%. The Sub-Committee feels that the Government are not very sensuive towards the requirementS 
of the industry while determining the rates of import duty. The Sub-Committee hopes that Government 
would keep in mind more the interest of the domestic industry while fixing import duties. In the opi~on 
of the Sub-Committee, Government should carefully review the duties, otherwise the paper industry is 
already going sick on result of lowering of amport duties. 
14. RECOMMENDATION 
Restructuring or Educational System 
The Committee's auention has been dro~wn to the acute necessity of re-structuring of our educational 
system so that skilled scientific manpower is continuously available to service the fast emerging 
sophisticated segment of our industry. The matter should be examined in depth by the Ministry an association 
with the University Grants Commission and the National Council for Industrial and Technical Education. 
(Para 22) 
Action Taken 
Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Education) who are administratively 
concerned with the subject has been addressed in the mauer to examine the assue of restructuring of our • educational system so that the manpower is avaHablc to the industrial sector on a continuous basis. in 
association with this Department and the industry associations i.e., Confederation of Indian Industry, 
Federation of Indian Chamber of Commerce and Industry and Associated Chamber of Commerce and 
Industry as also University Grants Commission and the National Council for Industrial a.nd Technical 
Education . 
Comments/ObservatiortS 
The Sub-Comminee is unhappy to note that the Ministry of Industry have simply forwarded the 
Comminee's recommendation to the concerned Ministry for necessary action and the mauer has been 
allowed to rest. The Ministry of Industry should have pursued the maner with the concerned Ministries/ 
Departments for ascertaining the action taken by them on the Committee's recommendations. The Sub­
Commiuec now recommends that necessary action may now be initiated in this behalf without any 
further delay. 
15. RECOMMENDATION 
Gr owth Centres and 'lrans port Subsidy Scheme 
The Growth Centres sponsored by the Union Government have been a slow starter and their achievements 
have lagged way behind the assigned targets. Moreover, even when fully implemented, these Centres can 
at best only make a dent on the outsLanding problem of infrastructural deficiency. 
(Para 23) 

t4 
The Trnn~port Subsidy Scheme has helped, but only to a l1mited extenl. 
(Para 23) 
Action Token 
The selling up of Growth Cemres aims at creation of infrastructure to auract industriel> in hack ward 
and remote areas of the country. The main ObJectiVe of the Growth Centre Scheme ha~ not been lost since 
out of the 71 Growth Centres proposed to be set up during the Vlllth Five year Plan. 50 Centres have 
already lx:en approved by 30th November. 1996. Some more are in the p1pehne and are likely to be 
approved during the remaining period of the plan. The mfrastrucrural requirementS of economy. such as 
India wh1ch is a developmg coumry are very demanding. O¢vclopmenrof lnfra~trucrure remams the top 
priority of the Government and looking to the size of the task involved the Growth Centres admutedly 
can have only a supportive role m solving this oursmnding problem. 
The objecuve of the Trnnsport subsidy scheme was to promote industrialisation m backward. remote, 
macccssible and hilly reg1ons. The Trnn>port subs1dy has provided since inception £inancial assistance 
from the Central Government to the rune of Rs. 277 crores approx. It has tllerefore supplemented the 
efforts of the State in amelioratmg the industrial backwardness of the tru-geted areas. The Sch~me ha, 
been extended upto 31st March. 2000 A.D. The Scheme in the overall count!} wide deve lopment of 
backward areas thus could be seen to be limited 10 tru-geted areas. 
Comments/Observa tions 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that out of the 71 Growth Centres proposed to be set up during 
the VriTth Plan Period only 54 could be approved . The number of Growt h Centres actually set up and in 
operation must be even lesser. The Sub-Commmee is further unhappy to note thut the scheme of Growth 
Cen~cs was announced in the year 1988 but the same could take off only in the year 1994-95. 
The Sub-Committee is however, satisfied to note the pace of Implementa tion of the scheme afler it had 
taken off and it hopes that Ministry of Industry would give impetus to the implementation of the scheme 
10 the coming years. 
As regll!':!s the Transport Subsidy Scheme, the Sub-Committee notes the information furnished by the 
f' & ,..... ">' of~. ~ - -" ~- • ..,. -
""- 1"6: ltECOMMENDA110N . ...._ ..,. .~ "" .-. "AI$ •. ~,.....~. .'lola ~,-;..;o • 
• 
Small Scale Sector 
Neither the spasmodi application of conventional in$truments suc h as tax reliefs and subsidies nor a 
narrow compartmental approach will succeed jn unleasrung any ma.~sive development activity in areas 
where it i~ desired that industry should move. This conclusion applies equally for small sc.tle operat ions. 
The infrastructure has to be built ahead of industrial growth. The alternative lines of acuon that can lx: 
sugge>ted are as follows: (a) Public sector outlays on an immense scale, most of which are to be channelled 
to backward areas and small scale industrial operations; (b) foreign as well a~ domesuc in,·c~tors to be 
invited to move in the area.~ of economic retardation on the ass11mnce of mas~lve concessions 1md relief~ 
in taxation. It would, in the view of the Committee. lx: hazardous tO leave the initiative in this maucr 
entirely into private hands because the results may rum out to be di~appointing. New forces have been 
released all overt he polity whlch will increa$ingly demand that the aggregate resources ava1lablc with the 
Government are deployed in such a manner that small-scale activities arc accorded incemiv.: and the 
foundations of industrial infrastructure are spread evenly so as to reach hitheno retarded area>. 
(Para 24) 
Action Taken 
The union Govern ment is committed to the creatic•n of infrastructure conducive for Industrial growth. 
The Finance Ministl} is working on a dispensa tion which includes mvolving foreign and domestic inveMono 
to create infrastructure for inviting industries as well as providing fiscal incentives to the~e areas . 
• 

15 
Comments/Ohscrvations 
The Suh ·Comm ittce is unhappy to note that the work of tdenttfication of backward districts is sttll 
pcndmg with the Mtmstry of Finance. It is funhe runhapp y to note that the infonnauon regarding investment 
made in the mdu,trially backward areas at the regional level1s not maintained centrally. The Mimstry of 
lndu\lry h.t,c alw not stated the latc~l pos1tton with regard 10 the diSpensation bemg worked upon by the 
\111ll,lr) {11 hnance for creation of infraMructure in the had, ward area.~. The Sub-Committee hopes that 
the M1m'!ry of lndu\lry would seriou~ly reconsider the Comm inee's recommendation in this regard. 
17. RECOMMENDATION 
Protection of SSl Sector 
The Go,crnmcnt mu~t resist the pressure to open up area,, currently reserved for the small scale sector. 
for mtrusion by multmational compames. Where the Iauer un11s have made the or entry into the small 
scale ~ector through irregular and surrepttlious means. penal measures should be straigh taway enforced. 
mcludmg their ~ ummary expulsion. 
(Para 25) 
Action Tak en 
It ~~ the pohcy of the Government that once an 11em " reserved for manufacture in the small scale 
'ector. no medJUmflarge scale undenaking s includmg multmationals are allowed to manufacture the item 
except under 75'7r expo n obligation. In Foreign collaboration approva l letters granted for setting up joint 
venture compa nies. a standard cond ition is stipulated that 1tcms reserved for small scale sector shall not 
nc manufactured . Dcsides. violation of the provision under the Reservati on Policy ts puni~habl e under 
Section 24 of lmJustries (Development & Regulatio n) Act, 1951. In case of any vtolation of the provts ion 
uf Reservallon, the concerned admmistrotive Mimstry/Depanmem includng Dtrector General Foretgn 
Trade ha.~ to m1ttate act1on against the vtolaung firm. 
Co mmcnt~Observalions 
The Sub -Committee notes that there are legal provisions for ensuring that no mcdiumflarg() scale 
undcn akings includ ing multinat ionals nre allowed to manufacture an item reserved for the small scale 
sector. 1l1c Sub Committee, however, hopes that Government would enforce these provisions of law 
r1gorou,ly ~o '"to 'trictly check the entry of big compam·~s through irregul.u ..10d surreptitious means in 
to the small 'calc sector The Suh-Commmee further reiterates the Commtttee's recomrnendauon to 
resist the p=sure to open up tO the multmauonals anJ b1g companies the areas reserved for the small 
scale sector The Suh·Committee funher recommends thJt reco mmendations of Abiu Hussain Commmee 
shou ld not he 1m1>lcmemed in t\110 und the protection given t<> S.S .I. should cominuc 
lB. RECCOI\IENDATION 
Exci!.e Rates for SSI 
It" alw necessary to maintdm the rcgtme of fa\·ourablc cxci'e rate> both for the products of ~mall and 
cottage-,calc mduMnal unit> and also for their inputs 
(Paru 26) 
Action Taken 
Every year in Octohcr!November,this Depanmcnt mvitcs 'uggest ion from SSI Associations/Federations 
for modifkation' m Customs/Excise Duttcs:b well as D1rectTaxc~. The~ sugscstions are exarmned and 
di.,.;us>ed wuh the concerned A>~octation . Theneafter, consolidated Pre-Budget proposals are then sent to 
' \1tmstry of Finance. for thetr constlicrotton and 1nclu,lon m the Union Budget. Finance Mmtst~r also 
uiscusses the"· Mel other proposals rcce1ved by Mmt,try of 1-'inance With SSI lnduMry Assocmtions 
before the prc$cntnuon of the Bud pet 

16 
Some of lhe major proposals of SSI Units/ Associations which this department has been taking up with 
Ministry of Finance for lhe last 3-4 years but have not been accepted by lhcm are given below:-
( I) Raising of /?.xcise exemption limit from Rs. 30 lakhs turnover to Rs. 50 lakhs 
This Department has been supporting lhis case on the ground of inflation and also imposition of duties 
on many items during last3-4 year.; which earlier enjoyed "Nil" rate of duty. Ministry of Finance is of the 
opinion !hat full excmptjon of Rs. 30 lakhs covers a substantial portion of SSI units and only very few 
units day, duty for clearance in excess of Rs. 30 lakhs. The SSJ units account for 40% of lhe production 
the manufacturing sector but !heir contribution to excise revenue is negligible . Therefore any enhancement 
in the limit for full exemption will benefit only a handful of units and entails significant revenue 
implications. 
2. RestoraiWn of Brand name concession for the products monufactured by SSI units on behalf of 
large scale units 
The withdraw! of concession has resulted in real loss to the small industry and has adver.;cly affected 
the p!QCess of ancillarisation, somethmg essential for the growth of Indian industry . Therefore, lhis 
Department requsted for its restoration as it would promote marketing of SSI products and provide 
linkage between large and small units. However, Ministry of Finance has not agreed to the proposal. 
3. Restoration of 5% National credit under MOD VAT Scheme 
Under this scheme lhe buyer of goods from small scale manufacturers have been getting a National 
credit under MODVATwhtch was earlier 10% points and subsequently reduced to 5% on the excise duty 
actually paid by lhe later. Ministry of Finance justified the wilhdrawl of concession with lhe argument 
given by CheUiah Committee, i.e., (i) misuse of the scheme; (ii) meant indirect subsidy to SSJ sector; and 
(iii) a loss of revenue to the extent of Rs. 200 crorcs. 
This department, however, strongly feels that national credit should be restored in lhc interest of 
greater bannonisation between large and small units. 
4. Extending the coverage of SSI Exemption Scheme 10 all items monufactured by SSlunits 
A number of items manufactured by small scale units are still outside the purview of SSI Exemption 
Scheme. Though Ministry of Finance have included some of the items in the exemption scheme in the 
budgetl996-97, some important items are still out oflhe purview of excise exemption of Rs. 30 lakh~ . 
Some of these are Wrist Watches, Sandalwood Oil, Travel sets for personal toilet, P. V. Foam , Computer 
components presently not covered, matches, etc. 
Ministry of Finance had earlier stated !hat the existmg scheme already covered most of the items 
excep ting a few for which some economic justification exists. They also added that these concessions are 
largely misused by the large manufacturers. However, !his department is of the opinion that there is a 
~trong case to make this scheme product neutral and thus give the opportunity to SSl units to select on 
item of their choice. 
Representations received from various SSI Associations/Federatioosllndividual Units of the country 
in respect of Excise/Customs duties are examined and where found necessary, are taken up with Ministry 
of Finance. 
Comments/Observations 
TI1e Sub-Committee notes that the views of lhe various SSl Associations/Federations are obtained 
before consolidating lhe pre-budget proposals every year. The Sub-Committee further notes that lhe 
Ministry of lndustry have been supporting lhe cause of the Small Scale sector and recommending the 
rationalisation of the rates ot C)(cise duty on the products of the small scale and the cottage industrial 
units as well as on their inputs. The Sub-Committee hopes !hat Government would be more sensitive 
towards the demands of tbe Small Scale Sector in this regard. 

t9. RI::COMMENDATION 
Export of SSJ products 
t7 
A large rcsponsibiljty therefore devolves on the export effort on behalf of the cottage and small scale 
sector, which already accounts for as much as 35 per cent of our aggregate exports. 
(Para 27) 
Action Taken 
In order to promote exports from small scale sector export worthy SSI units are given opportunity and 
assistnnce in exbibning their selected items in trade exhibitions held abroad. SIDO provides assistance 
towards handling, clearing. insurance, publicity, freight etc. withOU! recovering this expendirure from the 
parucipants . The trade enquiries generated in these exhibitions are widely circulared.nte trade delegations 
and sales-cum-study teams are sponsored from the small scale sector under the MDA Scheme of the 
Ministry which provides reimbursement of 60% of the expendirure from the funds on admissible items of 
expenditure. In addition to participation in external exhibitions, commodity fairs are also held in various 
parts of the country through the field organisations in collaboration with other concerned orgarusatioos to 
help SSI umts to market their products . 
The Import-Export Policy allows various export/import entitlements to exporting units under the various 
schemes covered under the policy. These schemes primarily relate to advance licensing scheme, imports 
under EPCG. scheme of 100% EO Us. setting up or units in FTZs/EPZ.s. The proposals received from SSI 
units are considered and recommended for granting of various licences/entitlements to the importers to 
help them 10 meet their requirements of materials etc. Imports under some or the schemes are allowed 
without payment of customs duty or at concessional rate of customs duty. 
TI1c Import-Export Policy provides for double weightage on exports from small scale units for recognition 
as Exportffradmg Houses. 
TI1e Department had set up a separate sub-group of the Working Group on SSI for the formulation of 
Ninth Five Year Plan. The proposals made by the Working Group for expor;t promotion include the 
following:-
(i) Providing SSI Sector improved access to expon market by earmarking 75% of MDA assistance 
to SSI Sector. 
(ii) Settmg up Trade Points in various cities. 
(iii) Introduction or Electronic Commerce for supply and transmission of data to facilitate timely 
expon. 
(iv) Making availabilny of export finance easier on presentation of Leaers of Credit across the table. 
(v) Evolving Common Brand Names. 
(vi) ·Setting up Common Facility Centres for Design and Development. 
(vii) Setting up Export Processing Zones for SSI Sector. 
(viii) Providing subsidy for preparation of Sales Literature and Catalogue . 
(ix) Extending EPCG Sche:ne for import of capital goods at ze.ro duty to SSI units. 
( x) Passbook Scheme for SSI Exports on the pattern or Star Trading Houses and Large Merchant 
Exporters. 
(xi) Ellcmption from MAT for SSI exports. 
(xii) Strengthening packagmg scheme meant for SSI exporters. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action being taken by the Ministry of Industry for the purpo.se of promotion 
of exports m the cottage and the small scale sector. The Sub-Commiuee hopes that the Ministry of 
Industry shall continue with their efforts for promotion of exports. 

\ 
i 
2\ RECOMMENDATION 
Excise Rates ror SSI 
18 
It is however essential that excise duties leviable on the sector are kept as low as possible and as long 
as possible. (Para 28) 
Actlon Taken 
The Department has requested Min1stry of Finance to take appropriate action on thts recommendation. 
On the recommendations of Public Accounts Committee, t1us department had sponsored a study to 
National Institute of Public Finance & Policy (NIPFP) New Delhi in 1994 on Central Fiscal lncenuves 
and Concessions to Small Scale Industries on Impact of Growth and Structure. NIPFP has smcecompleted 
their study and made recommendations . A copy of the study report has already been made available to 
MiiUSU)' of Fmance in June, 1996. Some of the main recommendations are as under:-
(i) The criteria to define small are different in different Government Departments for extendmg 
concessions to SS!s. Central Excise Department adoptS the production criterion, Income Tax 
Department uses the employment defthition. and STDO uses the investment based definition to 
define small. A unifonn criteria based on labour intensity and capital producttvtty would serve 
the right purpose. However, tbedifflculty m mea.<ruring these for the units every year. and also for 
untts before they commence production , may StJggest that any umt satisfying the two criteria 
mentioned below should he eligible for concessions extended by any agency. (In no case should 
the rumover and investment ceilings he nused, as it would benefit only a very small proportion of 
the powerful SSl). 
Annual turnover Upto Rs. 300 lakhs. 
lnvestmer.t m P&M (original value) Upto Rs. 60 lakhs. 
(ii) An examination of the cut-off points for (a) full exempuon (b) preferential treatment and (c) 
eligibility under the scheme suggestS full exemption may he given for production upto a threshold 
of Rs. 451akhs and normal duty may be imposed thereafter. The eligibility for the unit to avail the 
concessio n should he based on the criterion mentioned in (vi) above. There is no justification for 
increasing the upper ceiling of Rs. 3 crores for units to qualify for these concesstons, a.~ the largec 
SSis are found to he enjoying the economies of scale and also hnve the potential to grow on thetr 
own after a limit. In fiiCt. these ceilings are effectively higher than what the nominal figures 
imply, since SSI unitS also enjoy MODVATcredit. Indeed, there seems to be some justification, 
therefore. not to allow SSI exemption and MODVAT credit at the same ume. This is supported 
also on grounds of tax administration. The duty concessions should therefore, he treated below 
the threshold of tbe MOD VAT scheme. thereby reducing the administr:uive burden of the Excise 
Department. 
(iii) There ts justification for having threshold for full exempt1on for small SS1 units as the~ units 
lack the economies of scale that larger SSI units enjoy. They also face financial crunch at the 
inioal stages. These small unns face higher admintstmtive co>ts as compared to their b1gger 
counterparts . They also have higher employment potential as compared to large SSI units. There 
is justification for giving full exemption to small SS Is also from adrninistrauve point of viev. a~ 
it is virtually impossible to control and supervise lakhs of small factories. It is, therefore, 
recommended thai full exemption may he given to smal l SSI and the limit may be raised from R>. 
30 lakhs to Rs. 45 lakhs as mentioned above. 
This will clea n up the system of excise concessions for SS!s. First. the scope of those recetving 
fuU concessions will be increased from Rs. 30 lakhs to Rs. 45 lakhs turnover; since the smaller 
units are performing better, they would he encouraged further. However, they will nol receive 
MODVAT credit. thereby malcing tax administration easier. If they wish to opt into the MOD VAT 
• 

\ 
19 
system and avail ofMODVATcredit, they would have to pay normal duty, as is possible for them 
to do currently. Second, in line with clean-up of the system, excise concessions will not be 
available for turnover above the first Rs. 45 lakhs of an SSI units. However, they should receive 
MOD VAT credit above this cut off (turnover) point. 
(iv) The CE and IT Departments of the Ministry of Finance are a veritable store house of information 
relati ng to all tax paying individuals or establishments. The records in these Departments are in 
various stages of computerisation. Currently, ·they are not in a position to provide certain essential 
data pertaining to the SSI even though these are available in the various important documents! 
records maintained by them.1Wo working groups (one each forCE and m should be constitu1ed 
including representation from their Departments. Office of'the Development Commissioner (Small 
Scale Industries ) and Ministry of Planning (including CSO and NSSO) to go into the question of 
maintaining a suitable data base of SSI sector. 
(v) Considering the superior performance of units producing unreserved items in ail re!;pects, whether 
labour or capital productivity, or profitability, over the units protected via preservation, the scheme 
has done more harm than goods except for small units having investment in P & M below·Rs. 10 
Jakhs or those with production less than Rs. 30 lakhs. It is, therefore, recommended that this 
instrom cnt of protection is to be used discrimiuately, withdrawing this facility from the pyrview 
of the large si7.e SSI units. In other words. reservation should be allowed for only those product 
categories which require investment of less than Rs. 10 lakhs in P & M for efficient production. 
In this context, policy of reservation needs to be reviewed. 
Comment~ObS4!rvations 
The Sub-Committee notes with satisfaction the concern shown by the Ministry of Industry over the 
Committee's recommendation. It hopes that Governmen t would take prompt action for ensuring a 
favourable regime of duties for the small seale sector in order to strengthen it. 
21. RECOMMENDATION 
K11adi Sector 
. SLrcss sho uld also be laid on the induction of new technological processes again with the help of a 
Government subsidy , contin\lous research and cx!)Criimentation should go on with respect to designs too. 
AU thts should be accompanied by market research covering both home and overseas . Khadi and hand loom 
operations must receive special attention in this connec tion and efforts must concentrate on both protecting 
the equipment and earnings of hundreds and thousand of Klwdi weavers and spinners and at the same 
time, lower the price of Klradi textiles. (Para 2.8) 
Action Taken 
With a view to develop and disseminate information on technologies Sllitable for traditional and small 
scale sector. Small Industries Development Organiation (SfDO) has set up Process and Product 
D<·velopmcnt Centres and other institutions in the specified production areas viz. Fmgrance & Flavour 
Dt:velopmcnt Centre , Kannauj for essential oils, fragranco; a.nd Oavours: Process & Product Development 
Centre. Meenu for sports goods and leisure time equipments Process and Product Development Centre 
( PPDC).Agm (UP) for foundry and forging; Centre for Development of Glass Industry (CDGI). Firozabad 
(UP) for glass industry; IDEMl. Bombay for electrical instruments and ESTC, Ramnagar (UP) for eleclronic 
industn es. 
Th.., Focus of the activities of these Centres is to develop/scale up the processes and technologies, study 
their techno-economic viability and arrange for their transfer to small scale unit~. The Centres also conduct 
regular training programmes both in the production techno logie s as well as in quality control and 
standardi sation for the benefit of existing units as well as the new entrepreneurs. These Centres work in 
close cooperatio n with the other scientific and technological organisations/agencies viz. CSIR laboratories 

20 
in the relevant field and act as interface between R&D Organisations and small scale industries. Besides 
providing infonnation about the technologies available with CSIR laboratories. SIDO through it~ 
headquarters as well as through its field offices also arrange discuss•ons/dialogues of a panicular industry 
group with the concerned CSIR institutions both for general information of the technologies available in 
that anea of activity or in relevance to some specific problems vi:. pollution control waste minimisation, 
etc. Council of Scientific & Industrial Rsearch (CSIR). National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC). 
New Delhi and Asia Pacific Centre for tr.msfer of technology have fonned a consonium for helpmg small 
scale units and they help SSl units in transfer of latest technology. 
SIDBI has also taken initiatives for development and transfer of technology for the benefit of SSI 
through industrial R&D organisation viz. CS!R An MoU has been signed by SIDBI with CSIR in this 
regard to jointly offer viable technology-cum-financial package for industry specific programmes of SSI 
units. SIDBl will also consider assisting SSI units being set up with CSIR technologies with financial 
assistance including ventureeapit.al. SIDBI has also collaborated with Asian and Pacific Centre forTransfer 
ofTechnology (APC'IT) for setting up Technology Bureau for Small Enterprises (TBSE) with the objective 
of technology dissemination, finance, syndication and export promotion for small and med.ium enterpnses . 
SlOB! also gives trnining to various target groups for women w11h the objective that they have adequate 
information, motivation and guidance in setting up their own enterprises. 
Khadi & Village Industries Commission (KVIC) has been constantly making effortS to bnng about 
technological upgradation m Khadi manufacruring equipments to ensure higher earnings of the Khadi 
weavers and spinners. They have so far introduced KVIC new Model Charkha to ensure optimum 
productivity with.minimum load factor. 
They have also developed a Woollen Charkha which is an improvemem of our new Model Charkha. 
1n addition to this they are developing a Coarse count Chark:ha, mcorporatiog the merit~ of KV IC model, 
which will be ready very soon. They have also approved the Modleri Charkha developed by Indian 
Development Service, Oharwar in collaboration with M/s Tool, Holland which have the productivity of 
900 gms. to I Kg. 
As regards the recommendations of the Parliamentary S tanding Committee regarding lowering the 
price of Khadi textiles. it may be stated that KVIC is following a price mechanism under which the price 
of the Khadi is cost plus a nominal margin to compensate establishment of overhead$ of the linked 
institutions alongw•th the sustainable compensation to the spinners and the weavers. 
Comments/Observations 
The importance of KVIC in the country's economy needs no further empha.~is. 1L has been providing 
large scale employment to the weaker sections of the society. The strengthening and development of 
KVIC activities will also help in stopping migration of rural population to lhe uroan area:. The Mm•stry 
in its written submibsion while admitting that marketing Itself is a significant factor butthc Sui>-Cornmntee 
regretably feels that this aspect; has been largely neglected. Not only the ~hop• selhng KVlC products arc 
shabby but also the workers there. by and large, have little interest in selhng the produce that they have 
There does not appear to be any professionalism in their work-culture. Furthem1ore. the packagmg " 
r-,;ther poor and the produce in most of cases also requires upgradation. 
It would be useful if the services of Department of Scientific and lndustnal Rc>earch are obtained Ill 
improving the quality of food products being manufacrured under KVIC umbrella Similarly, packaging 
oftheirproduce needs immediate attention. While Sub-Committee welcomes the decision of the KVIC to 
market its product abroad but feels that the KVIC should first strengthen It> market b;tse withm the 
country itself rather can casting its ne;:t too wide and then in the process not bemg able to do justice neither 
to domestic marltet nor the foreign market. Expon business is a serious business. If the product is 
rejected once by the foreign buyer, it would be difficult to re-enter the market again. Thcrefom, foreign 
forays marketing K VIC products should be taken with great care and planning. 

21 
22. RECOMMENDATION 
Outla y for DeRartment of SSI and A&RI 
AU this implies that. in the course of the next few years. the annual outlay of the Department of cottage 
and Small-Scale Industries must increase several- fold. 
(Para 29) 
Action Taken 
The matter was taken up with Planning Commission. Planning Commi ssion has info rmed that 
recommendations/observations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry wiU be borne in 
mmd while finalising Plan outlay for the Depanment of SSI and A.& Rl. 
Comments/Obse rvations 
The Sub-Committee hopes that Government would substantially enhance the outlay for the Department 
of SSI and A&Rl. 
23. RECOMMENDATION 
Empl oymen t generatio n in SSI sect or 
As already noted, the significance of such meausres for enlarging and mtensifying activities in the 
~mall scale sector are related to the judgement that in the foreseeable penod employment can nse in a 
~pectacular manner only if productive forces are unleashed in the un organi~ed sector. 
(Para 30) 
Action Thken 
To promote small scale industries and increase the employmen t in the small scale sector apart from the 
continuation of the old strategies/measures such as priority sector lending to SSI, fiscal concessions in 
the form of excio;e relief, reservation of items for exclusive manufaclure in the small scale <;eCtor and 
price and purchase preference to projects manufactUred in the SST sector Severa l new measures have 
been taken up which are detailed below:-
(i) To provideadeq uat.ecredit (calculated on normative basis) and improve the quality of its dchwry. 
This is based on Nayak Commiuee recommendation. For improving the Oow of credit to SSl 
sector. a 7-Pomt Action Plan initiated in 1995·96 . 
{iiJ To provide mfrastrucrural ~upport in integ rated manner through Integrated Infrastructure 
Development Scheme . 
(iii) Enhanced lechnology support for modernisation and quality upgradntton. Openmg of five n~w 
1001 ro\1ms with Danish and Indo-German assistl\ncc. Assistance for quality upgradation. 
(iv) Enhancement to entrepreneurship d•~vclopment programme by involving voluntary agencie~ and 
strengthening entreprencurshtp development inMirutes. 
( v ) To Mrengthen spectal employment generation progr.unmes by way of sclf-employmcnl through 
PMRY schemes. 
(vi) Enhance the information and data base of SSI sector. 
Comments/Obser vations 
The Sub-Comrruttee hopes that 1he new mcasu~ proposed 10 be taken by Government for prom<11ing 
~mall scale mdustrics and increa.~ing .:mployment therein would be implemenlcd effectively. 
23·A. Recommendation 
Redefinin g of small scale sector 
It would be equally necessary to re-define and refix legal slipulations concerning small scale act1v11ies 
so as 10 both encourage a larger now of entrepreneurs and minimise avoidable irritations in copi ng with 

22 
organisational and administrative arrangements For mstance, the Ministry may consider whether it is 
po~ible to raise the legal ceiling of investment for the small scale sector from Rs. 60 lakhs to Rs. 2 crore 
or thereabouts, and raise the allowable turnover from Rs. 3 crore tO, say, Rs. 6 crore and exempt the limit 
from duty payment up to a turnover of Rs. 75 lakhs instead of existing limit of Rs. 30 lakhs. 
(Pnra 30} 
Action Taken 
The Government of India. Depanment of SSI & ARJ vide its resolution dated 29.12.95 ha., decided to 
constitute a "Expert Committee on Small Entefllrlses", which under its terms of reference. woll go into 
the issues of review of che definitions, ceiling of investment, legal f~¥T~ework etc. and will make 
recommendations for bringing about change as may be appropriate . 
Regarding raising the limit for exci~e exemption from Rs. 30 lakhs to Rs. 75 lakhs and raising the 
allowable turnover from Rs 3 crores to, say, Rs. 6 crores. Mi11istry of Industry has been recommending 
to the Minbtry of Finance for the last 3-4 years but the same have not been acccpced by Mimstry of 
Finance because:-
• 
(i} Only 2% of the 25 luldt SS!units are registered with Central Excise: 
(ii} 90% of the SSI units have tumover less than Rs. 30 lakhs and all such units are exempted from 
excise duty; 
(iii) Loss of excise revenue of large magnitude cannot be afforded when there is a big budget deficit ; 
and 
(iv) Raising of the turnover wiU only benefit a handful of large small scale units 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes that Government have already raised the investment limit from Rs. 60 lakh 
toRs. 3 crore in the case of SmaU Scale Sector. The Sub-Committe~; hopes that Govemll}enl would be 
sen~itivc towards the needs of SSI in the matter of fixing limits of the tumovcr for the purpose of duty 
exemption. 
24. RECOMMENDATION 
Cred it for Industry and Agriculture 
For agriculture and industry, large as well a.~ bmaU 'cale, the rauonal of cheap credn appears to be 
ObVIOUS. 
(Para31) 
Action Taken 
The intere.'t rates are fixed by RBI keeping in view the credit requirements of all the sectors of the 
economy. Besides rcquorement, RBI also takes into account ocher fact oro like balance of p01ymcnt position, 
inflation rate, money supply etc. while determining the rate of intercsc. As per chc present policy, ontercst 
rates arc now linked to the size of the loan and not to the pUfllOse of the Jo:m. For borrowers upto R •. 
25,000 and becwcen Rs. 25,000 co Rs. 2 lakhs the interest rates are administered by RBI at 12% ant: 
13.5% respectively. For loans above Rs. 2 lakh~. b,onks are now free to cluu-gc incerest from borrowers 
depending upon the or commercial judgement. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the Government's stand in the mutter. It however, feels that Government 
should reconsider lonking of interest rates on credit to the purpose. Government should even otherwise, 
try to bring down the rateS of interest on credit so that cost of the product is contained . 
A 

24-A. RECOMMENDATION 
Pf1RY 
23 
Tne tardy progress of the Prime Minister's Rozgar Yojana, there is no question, is largely on account 
of the lugubious manner and banks have moved in advancing the loans they were expected to distribute 
with speed and imagination. 
(Para31) 
Action Taken 
The Department closely monitors implementation of PMRY in close interacuon with State Governments. 
RBI and commercial banks. A Committee headed by Oy. Governor, RBI al~o monitors sancuon and 
disbursement of loans by the banks under the scheme. All the banks have been advised to process loan 
• applications within the time limit laid down by the RBI. 
Recently, on the suggestion of this department, RBI has issued instructions that in cases where the 
bank performance is specially poor, the district co-ordinators shall look into the perfonnance and submtt 
reports to the District level Commineesffask Force. This department bas also instructed the States that 
they should start training of selected persons wtthin one month of the sanction of loans by banks. The 
Stmes/UTs have also been requested to have regular monitoring and review of the programme at the 
district and State/UT headquarters level. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee feels that there is a need for closer monitoring of the PMRY so that the targets set 
thereunder are achteved. 

ANNEXURE-' A' 
r -

Transfer co NRF 
I. VRS f« Cencral PSUs. 
2. Worl<a c:ompe.nsation 
packages 1n cases of 
closurc:lreh3bilitation 
&: VRS in Scace PSUs. 
3. Wod<er couruelling, 
rellllining and area 
regeneration schemes. 
4. Mi.scJOfficc Expenses 
TOTAL: 
.. 
FINANCIAL DATA REGARDING NATIONAL RENEWAL FUND 
BE 
200 
200 
1992-93 
RE Exp. 
829.66 829.66 
8'29.66 68~.12· 
200 829.66 688.72 
1993-94 
BE RE Exp. 
700 1020.00 7·00.00 
700 831.55 5:39.06" 
140.05 
48,30 0. 12 
0. 10 o.os 
700 1020.00 539.23 
1994-95 
BE RE &p. 
700.00 200.00 I 00.00 
500.00 438.05 250.81 
150.00 
49.90@ 48.29@@ 1.00 
0. 10 0.10 0.09 
700.00 486.44 251.90 
• •• ••• 
lncJIJdca a provUioo ()( RJ 122 crota for rnectina: the lntr:rim Uquidity rcqul.rcment of the nutonD.I.ised tuulc sector. 
!.dudci • PIO"isioa of Rs. 61 aom for ..-ioc tbt illkrim tiqu;dity rcqoin:mcou of the IUIIiotulucd cuttlc sectoc 
locloclcs • provmon of Ro. I.S eroreo for Mlaiouy of lAbour""" O.SO CI'Of< for Dcpa. of SSI.t AR.l • 
lndudu a provision or Rl. 0.39 erore ror Mini$tl)' or l..abow . 
lncludci • l>'OvWOO of Rs. 10 <rom""" O.Jl awe for Mlo Laboar""" Dcpa. of SSI.t AR~ rospectivdy 
lnclu6cs Wllllocaced- of Rs. lS """"' · , 
.. ... 
ln<loclcs 1ft expcndic.,. ofRs, 3.69 & OJ11 .,_. incumcl by M/o. Labow .t SSI.t ARl, ""pe<tively""" Ro. MS<ro<e~c,...rml by Dcpa. of I D . 
Jncl~s an ua.a.l.located amount o( R.I. 8.00 ero~ . 
ANNEXURE-I 
1995-96 
BE R.E &p. 
300.00 140 00 140.00 
239.68 256.68 209.58 
35.32@@@35.32 7.42N 
300.00D 300.00"'217.00 
(Unaudiced Prov.J "' .... 

ANNEXURE-U 
(PUBLIS HED IN THE GAZE'M"E OF INDJA, EXTRA -ORDINARY PART-1, 
SECTION NO. 1) 
Government of India 
Minisuy of lndusuy 
Department of Industrial Development 
RESO LUT ION 
1 
New Delhi, the 2 1st December, 1992. 
The Government of India in the Resolution published in the Gazette of India, Extra-Ordinary Part· I. 
Section· I, dated 03.02.1992. had established the National Renewal Fund (NRF) as a safety net for wor!(ers 
affected by industrial restructuring arising out of the New Industrial Policy announced in Parliament on 
24.07.1991 which aimed at technological upgradation and modernisation of the Ind.an lndusuy. 
The·guide lines for the National Renewal Fund have now been finalised and are as follows : 
' 
I. Obj eclives 
The objectives of the National Renewal Fund are : 
a. to provide assistance to cover the costs of reuainmg and redeployment of employees :trismg as 
a result of modernisation, technology upgradation and industrial restructuring. 
b. to provide funds, where necessary for compensation of employees affected by restructuring or 
closure of industrial units, both in the public and private sectors. 
c. to provide funds for employment generation schemes both in the organised and unorganised 
sectors in order to provide a social safety net for labour needs arising from the consequenc~ of 
industrial restructuring. 
2. Scope 
(i) The fund, to begin wtth, is of a non-statutory nature and may include contributions from inter· 
alia, the Government of India, State Governments, Financial Institutions, lnsuranceCompanies 
and Industrial Undertakings. 
(ii) In all the cases in relation to the organised sector the National Renewal Fund will provid~ 
resource.~ only for the rehabilitation of labour resulting from modernisation, technology 
upgradation, restructuring (including revival) or closure of industrial units as a supplement to 
the funds available from other sources. In the unorganised sector NRr will provide resources 
for employmen t generation schemes. 
3. ConstiJue11ts 
The National Renewal Fund will be constitu ted in two parts. 
A. National Renewal Grant Fund (NRGF) 
The first part of the fund, the Nallonal Renewal Grant Fund (NRGF) will deal w1th the immediate 
requiremepts of labour in sick units arising from revival or closure of such uOII.S. The funds will be 
disbursed in the form of grants for the following purposes: 
(a) to provide funds for assisting employees affected by technology upgradatio n, modernisation, 
restructuring and revival of industrial un dertak i ng~. These funds will be used, inter-alia. for 
approved schemes relating to: 
(i) re-uaining 
(ii) re-deployment 
(iii) counselling and placement services for employment. 
28 
f 
..!.-

r -
29 
(b)' to provide funds for compensation payments to employees affected by rationalisation tn tndustrial 
undertakings and parts thereof. Such payments may be made. intu-a/ia, m the following 
circumstances: 
(i} when industrial undertakings or parts thereof are to be closed as a consequence of sicknes~ 
as recommended by the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) These 
payments may include the payment of legal dues and those under Voluntary Retirement 
Schemes (VRS). The payment of employees' legal dues, if made from the NRF, would 
form a claim on the assets of the closed units as and when they are di~posed off, according 
to the due process of law. 
(ii) When there is a programme for labour rationalisation resulting from rehabilitation schemes 
for sick units as ordered by the BIFR, including VRS. 
(iii) for Voluntary Retirement Schemes m operation in public sector unat~. not necessarily 
requiring BIFR ordefli. 
(iv) payment of compensation to workers affected by closure of units alreatly under liquidation 
as may be sponsored by State Governments in approved schemes. 
(c) to provide resources for interest subsidtes to enable financial institutions to prov1de soft loans for 
funding labour rationalisation. if required, resulring from the industrial restructunng or weak 
units. 
~Employment Generation Fund (EGF) 
The second part of the fund, Employment Generation Fund (EGF) will provide resources for employment 
generation. 
It will provide funds for approved employment generation schemes for both the organised and 
unorganised sectors. This may include schemes such as: 
(a) Special programmes designed to regenerate employment opporrunities in are:t> affected by 
l(ldustrial restrucruring. 
(b) employment generation schemes for the unorganised sector in defined areas. 
The funds will be disbursed in the form of granL~. 
4. The NRGF and EGF will be in operation for a limited period of time upto a maximum period of ten 
years from the date of their inception. 
5. An Industrial undertalcing requiring modernisation, technology upg.mdation, rationalisation, will 
raise funds in the normal way from the capital market and term loans from financial institutions at the 
available rates of interest. The Funds from NRF will be exclusively for the requirements of labour resulting 
from such schemes when approved by these financial institutions. 
6. Financial resources for the NRF 
Funding for the NRF will be provided for the period of time that it will be in operation. The NRF may 
rece1ve funds from budgetary-allocatton. disinvestment of public sector equity and proceeds from 
multilateral or bilateral aid sources. There will be no open ended Government liability for the NRGF and 
EGF which would be in operation only for a limited period of time. 
In addition to the resources mentioned above, financial institutions including the insurance companies, 
State Governments and the Industrial undertakings would be invited to contribute to the NRF on a voluntary 
basis. 

I 
30 
7 Empowered Authority 
The NRF .will be administered by a high-level Empowered Authority in the Depanment of lndustnal 
Development, Ministry of Industry. The authonty shall consist of the foUowmg: 
Secretary (Industrial Development) Ch1um1an 
Secretary (Expenditure) Member 
Secretary (Pubbc Enterprises) 
Secretary (Company Affairs) 
Secretary (Labour) 
Secretnry {Education) 
Economic Adviser, Ministry of Industry 
Labour Representative to be nominated 
by !he Minisuy of Labour 
Employers' Representative to be nominated 
by the Department or Industrial Development 
Two eminent person& from outside Government, 
with professional eKperience or expertise 
m the fields of management, industrial or 
labour relations 
Additional Secretary, Department of I. D. 
Member 
Member 
Member 
Member 
Member 
Member 
Member 
Members 
EKecutive Director 
8. The Empowered Authority would be responsible to the Minister of Industry for its overall functioning. 
It would itself approve proposals for disbursement of funds upto a limn ofRs. I 00 crores. Olher proposals 
would require approval of the Minister for Industry. The Empowered Authority will devise its own rules 
of procedures. 
9. The Empowered Authority or the NRF will be free to make funds available in different forms. The 
disburseme9t wiU be made for the benefit of labour in schemes approved by the Empowered Authority in 
respect of the Central Public sector, and 10 the State Governments for schemes sponsored by them. In 
order to ensure a proper scrutiny the Authority will consider only schemes prepared or underwritten by an 
accountable agency, Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR). State Governments or the 
administrative Minisuy concerned. 
10. NRF will be subject 10 C&AG audit. 
II. The NRF will be maintained in the Public Account·of India. 
• 

ANNEXURE-'ll!' 
ATN RECEIVED FROM M/0 INDUSTRY, OFFICE OF ECONOM:lC ADVISOR VTDE O.M. 
NO. 11019/4/EA/97/EPD, DATED 21.8.'17 
Point as ~ontained in the 20th Report 
Que l . Tite Commiuee expects Foreign Direct Investment to reach a level of 10 billion dollars m the 
, course of next few y~. What is the view of the government in this regard'/ Whdt are the 
projections for FDJ flow during the current year? 
Ans: The C M P of the United Front Government lays stress on the absorption of at least USD 10 
' billion a year as Foreign Direct Jovestment (FDI). There is an increased emphasiS on investment 
in infrastructure to create more capacity tn power, oil, telecom, railways. roads and pons. To 
achieve this target, the Government hus taken various s!l!ps to pur in place appropriate institutional 
mechanisms to provide greater tran~parency and simplification of procedures for approvals of 
proposals for FDI. These include expansion of the list of industries e!tgible for .,utomatic approva l 
and increasing the fumt of FDI to 74% for automatic approval of projects in key mfra.,tructure 
sectors . Government have albO issued guidelines for consideration of FOI proposals by the FIPS. 
' 
Year 
1991 
1992 
1993 
1994 
1995 
1996 
1997 
The entire process of factlitaung inflow of FDI has been revamped m 2 :lr<!..IS; firMly. enlargement 
of tlte list of industries eligible for Automatic approval and increasing the limit of FDl to 74% tor 
Automatic Approval for specific sectors: and ~ondly, by l~yrng down o;pecific ume limits for 
disposal of application s. This has ensured that applications are cons idered by the FIPB and 
Government orders communicated between a period of 4-6 weeks lnwme cases, there rs a 
constraint in the absence of response from the Administrative Ministry which is u valuable input 
for such decision malting. At the same time, the announcement of guulcltnes for considerntion of 
FPI proposals by the FIPB has also facilitated speedy disposal on a conceptual basis rather than 
on a case by ca>c basis. This has resulted in significant increase~ 1n both FDI approvals and 
inflows as would appear from the following figures-
Year-wise FDI approval inOow figures 
Total amount oF FDI !!£(!roved 'iotal amount oi rni inilow 
Rs. billion US$ billion Rs. billion US$ billion 
5.34 0.18 3.51 0.14 
38.88 1.30 6.75 0.26 
88.59 2.95 17.87 0.58 
141.87 4.73 29.82 0.95 
320.71 10.21 63.70 2.03 
361.47 10.32 84.41 2.41 
261.02 7.46 60.13 1.72 
(upto May) 
TOTAL: 1217.88. 37.15 266.19 8.09 
Note: 
Inflow: 
The above includes 48 Euro Issues approvals amounting toRs. 158.32 billion. 
Approval Ratio= 21% 
A comparison of the FDI approvals during the period Jan-May 1997 and that during Jan-May 
1996 (as given below) indicates an increase of approJtimately 125% in the amount ofFDI approved 
while total inflows during this period have recorded an increase of over 75%:-
31 

32 
(Amoum in Rs. Billion) 
Jan-May 1997 Jan-May 1996 
Total amount of FDI approved 116.25 
Total <unount of FDI inflows 60.13 34.24 
The above figures do indicate a sustained mvcstor interest in the country. The total inflow to 
approval ratio i~ 2 1%. One reason for this is the time lag between mflows and approvals on 
account of varymg gestation periods of projects approved. Such delay is greater in the inflows in 
mega projects (while account for almost 50% of approvals). Excluding such mega projects. the 
ratio 1s nearly 50% which is reasonable Inflows have heen partly held up because of issues such 
as d~ l ays in clearnnce of Power Project Agreements (PPAs), credit wonhiness of State Electricity 
Boards, delays m fuel linkages in the power sector, as~ignab1lity oflicences in the telecom sector 
(a common factor also for roads), etc. At the same time, the total amount of inflows is increasing 
significantly on an annual basis. 
ln line with the concerns expressed by the Parliamentary Standing Committee. the matter ha.\ 
heen taken up with the RBlto obtain desegregated inflow data. As a result, the Department ha.~ 
received provisional inflow particulars. This data IS betng reconciled and would provide a valuable 
input to analyse the process of implementation of FDI approved projects. At the same time. the 
Depanm~'tlt has also 1notiated interaction with the State Governments for momtoring the projecl!. 
at the ground level as <1lso to idenufy possible bottlenecks. The need for s1mpWication of procedures 
for greater transparency in approval proceo;ses at the State level are beong reiterated during such 
interaction. Simultaneously, the momtoring of mega projects. especially in areas of special 
significance such as in the infrastrucrure sector, I> also being attempted through a direct interaction 
wtth approval holders. A dewiled study by NCAER on the implementation of the FDI projects 
has also been commissiooed. When complete, this IS likely to provide valuable mput for funhcr 
initiatives both at Central and State level. 
Que 2 What 1s the percentage FDl flow on the infrastrucrure sector and the consumer goods sector'? 
Ans: The amount of FDI approved (August 1991 to May 1997) m the fueb, telecom. transponation 
and metallurgi cal ondustrie~ (wh1ch cover the maJor onfrastructure sector) accounts for 
approltimatcly 58% of total FDI approvals. As ag:unst this, the percentage of FDI inflows on 
the~c sectors (as per provisiOnal figures available from RBI) is as bclow:-
Inflow or FDI ror the period 1181'91 to 3115197 
(Rs. in b111ion) 
Sector Approvals Inflows Percentage 
Inflow/ Approvals 
Fucb 295.5 16.2 5.5 
Telecom 272.5 13.1 4.8 
Transponution 76.2 20.1 26.4 
Metallurgical 67.0 2.6 39 
TOTAL 711.2 52.0 7.3 
The above inflows, highlight not only the long gestation penod in implementation of such projects 
(as compared to other sectors) but also the fact that various policy-mechanisms to facilitate full 
implementation are either in the process of being put in place or have now been finalised/formalised. 
This is illustrated by constramts such as time taken in clearance of Power Purchase Agreements. M 
also in fuel linkages, the viability of State Electricity Boards. assignabihty oflicences and creruion 

I 
33 
of bankable documents acceplable to lending institutions, and creation of a fully integrated policy 
mechanism and delivery system such as for the power sector ~g 110( only coal linkage but 
appropriate linkages with the railways for transportation, with privatelpublic sector companies for 
washing of coal along with consolidated back up to lPP$ to undertake the activity in full. Such 
critical linkages are. therefore, either being finalised or have recently been completed. This fmds 
reflection in inflows of FDI in these sector...1be Government have taken measures to address such 
issues.Jt is expected that this would facilitate greater inflows ofFDI and quicker implementati011 
of these projects: 
The consumer sector, which under the FDI policy consists of 22 specified consumer industries (as 
listed at Sub-Annexure I) and which attract the condition of Dividend Balancing (i.e. repatriation 
of profitsldivdends over 7 years period to be balanced by export earning) accounts for l~s than 
II% of total FDI approved during the period August 1991 to May 1997. While RBI have made 
available sectoral inflow data. the same is not available for the aforesaid 22 specified consumer 
industries. We are, as stated earlier, making efforts to obtain this data, but tbis isl.iUiy to take some 
time. 

SUB-ANNEXURE -1 
LIST OF 22 SPECIFIED INDUSTRIES IN THE CONSUMER GOODS SECTOR IN WffiCH 
DIVIDEND BALANCING IS APPLICABLE 
I. Manufacture of food and food products. 
2. Manufacture of dairy products. 
3. Grain mill products. 
4. Manufacture of bakery products. 
5. Manufacture and refining of sugar (vacuum pan sugar factories). 
6. Production of Common Salt. 
7. Manufacture of hydrogenated oil (Vanaspati). 
8. Tea processing. 
9. Coffee. 
10. Manufacture of beverage; tobacco and tobacco products. 
11. Distilling, rectifying and bending of spirits, wine industries, malt liquors and malL, production of 
country liquors and toddy. 
12. Soft drinks and carbonated water industry. 
13. Manufacture of cigars, cigarettes, cheroof and cigarette tobacco. 
14. Manufacture of wood and wood products, furniture and fixtures. 
I 5. Manufacture of leather and fur/leather products. 
16. Tanning, curing, fmishing, embossing and japanning of leather. 
17. Manufacture of footwear (excluding repair) except vu lcaniud for moulded rubber or plastic footwear. 
18. Manufacture of footwear made primarily of vulcanized or moulded products. 
19. Prophylactics (rubber contraceptive). 
20. Motor cars . 
21. Entertainment Electronics (VCRs, Colour TVS, CD Players, Tape Recorders). 
22. White Goods (domestic Refrigerators, Domestic Dishwashmg M<tchiucs, Programmable Domestic 
Washing Machines, Microwave Ovens, Airconditioners). 
Que. 3. Wbat action has been taken on Ministry's suggestion that l)epanmem of Industrial Policy and 
Promotion and Industrial Development should be merged into one and designated as Department 
oflndustrial Development?Whether the Ministry has some suggc.~tions also for better functional 
coordination of their activities? 
Ans. As far as the suggestion on the merger of Department ofiPPand ID into on~ Department and the 
merged Department to be designated a~ Depanment of lndusu·ial Development as was the case 
prior to March, 1995, a note was sent by Tndustry Minister on 24.7.1996 to the Prime Minister. 
Cabinet Secretariat had issued a Notification dated &.3.1995 allocating inter-alia subjects between 
tbe Department of Industrial Development and Industria l Policy & Promotion. Thus, there is a 
clear cut allocation of subjects between the Department of lD and IPP for functional coord inauon. 
This co-ordination where warranted takes place through discussion s as well as circulation of 
files. 
Que. 4. As per tbe information furnished by Ministry in March, 1995 about 2,70,000 units in private 
corporate sec tor were sick or weak wherein a bank credit of Rs. 13,000 crores have been locked 
up What are the latest correspond ing figures in this regard? 
34 

' 
' 
\ 
35 
Ans. The Reserve Bank of India regularly brings out a review of sick and weak units in both small 
scale and non SSI sector. The total number of sick and weak units are reported to be 2,64, 750 as 
on 3 1st Mare h, 1996. The total amount of bank c.redit blocked in these units is Rs. 13,749 crores 
which is 11.0% of the total ban.k credit to the industry. 
No. or sick/weak units as on 31st March 19?2, 1995 and 1996 & Outstanding Bank Credit 
(Rs. in crore) 
s. Units Category No. of No. of No. or Outstanding Outstanding Outstanding 
No. Units Units Units Credit Credit Credit 
I. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
1992 1995 1996 1992 1995 1996 
SSI Sick Umts 245575 268.815 262.376' 3101 3547 3722 
Non SS! Sick Units 1536 1915 1956 5786 8740 8823 
Non SSI \Veale Units 813 476 418 2646 1452 1203 
Total Sick/weak Units 47.924 271.206 264.750 11533 13739 13748 
Total SSI/Non SSI 21 Lakhs 27 lakhs 28lakhs 65448 102953 124992 
Units (Approx.) 
Sick/weak uniL~ share 11.8% 10.0% 9.45% 17.62% 13.7% 11.0% 
The RBI study indicates that the internal factors comprising short.comings in project appnuscd 
and management deficiencies account for 53.4% of the total facton responsible for industrial 
sickne.~s. Marketing problems is reponed to be oor of the reasons for industrial sickness by 8.5% 
of the units. The infrastructure constraints including the power, transport and non availab ility of 
raw material account for another 8% of the industrial sickne.~s. The change in Government policy, 
increase in import cost and over-head cost -accounts for about 7% of the industrial sickness. 
Que. S. What is the CU!'Tent position on the Ministry's proposal favouring to exteod assistance from NRF 
to State PSUs? 
An:.. The reply would be furnished by Department of Industrial DevelopmenL 
Que. 6 What is the reaction of Government to the Committee's proposal to set up an Inter Ministerial 
Comnu~tce for the purpose of monitoring the advantages of economic liberalisation, gradual 
demotion of tariff structure etc. 
Ans. The Comminee in their Report has stated "This inter ministerial Committee may also oversee the 
setting up of a mechanism whoch could monitor and repon whether taking ~tdvantage of economic 
liberalisauon and the gradual demolition of the tariff structure, foreign patties are trying to sell 
some of their ware m our markets by undercutting domestic producers, information systems are 
available here as well a.~ abroad about such mailers, from wh1ch we can adopt concret step& to 
prevent unconsctonable dumping aclivittes on our soil" 
The consultative process between Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Industry in so far as tanffs 
are concerned has evolved over time. Both the Ministries hold consultations with industry 
accociations on the tariff structure. Ministry of Finance also holds discussions with economists 
and other ex pens on tax and other fiscal mutters. Industry Associauons also submit the or memoranda 
to both these Ministries. Ministry of Industry formulates its views on the tax proposals forcustorns 
and excise duty and forward the same to Ministry of Finance. These proposals are then discussed 
at the Secretary level meetings before fmally given effecrto in the Budget. A Tariff Commissions 
also shortly being set up. 
ln so far the information on international practices for protecting domestic industry is concerned, 
Ministry ofCornmeJ'CC through the missions abroad gets the required information which is shared 
With all economic Ministnes.Anti Dumping mechanism has already been put in place. Government 

• 
36 
bas already cleared the proposal for setting up a Darectorate for Anti Dumping which would 
coUect information about international practice on anti dumping to protect the domestic industry. 
Government of India Ministry of Finance has on 29th July, 1997 announced rules for imposition 
of "Safeguard duty". The rules provide for the appointment of a Director General in the rank of 
Joint Secretary and above to investigate the existence of serious injury or threat there of to 
domestic industry from increased quantities of imports both in absolute terms and relative to 
domestic production and submit provisional/final fmding recommending levy of "safeguattl" 
duty adequate to remove injury. The provisional tudy can be levied up to 200 days. Final Report 
is to be submitted within 8 months from the date of initiation of investigation. If the duty propos..-.d 
to be levied beyond one year, DG is to recommend progressive liberalisation measures. 
Que. 7. Whether Government are considering the demand of the nowsprint industry for increasing the 
import duty on newsprint. What is the present status in the matter? 
Ans. Import of newsprint bas been perrnitte.d due to limitations of indagenous newsprint industry to 
meet the dem:md of newspaper industry both in terms of quantity and qualaty. The Import Policy 
on newsprint has evolved over the years keeping in view the requirements of the newsprint 
industry as well as user industry. Earlier the imports were restricted and were canalised through 
STC. This was relued in March, 1992 and quantitative restrictions were imposed in order to 
ensure use of at least 66% of indigenous newsprint by the newspaper industry. There wa_\ a 
sudden upsurge in the domestic and international prices of newspnnt between September 1994 
and October 1995. The indigenous price of newsprint increased from Rs. 18,000 per tonne to 
Rs. 28,000 per tonne in this period. This was in line with increase in international prices from US 
Dollar 480 (Rs. 15,360) per tonne to$ 1,100 (Rs. 35,200) per tonne. ln the wake of indigenous 
price rise, supply limitations and rise in international prices, Government placed imports of 
newsprint under OGL in May, 1995. The import duty continued to be 0%. 
The situation changed in the later half of 1995-96. Prices started declining. The CIF val~oe of 
import which was Rs. 25,500 a tonne in September, 1995, came down to 21,000 in Apnl, 1996. 
Ministry of Industry, therefore recommended in July & September. 1996 imposiuon of 20% 
costoms duty 011 newsprint I 0% Customs duty was levied with effect from October 1996. However, 
newsprint having more than 8% ash content was allowed to be imponed duty free. It is reponed 
that newsprint in large quantities is being imponed duty free, in the guise of newsprint having 
more than 8% ash contenl. The perception is thatlhe provision which allows duty free impon of 
newsprint having more than 8% ash content is beang misused_ 
Price of amponed newsprint fu!iher came down to Rs. 15.400 in October-No' ember. 1996. Since 
the situation bad furth« deteriorated to the pomt of several units being forced to ~uspend produtaon, 
Secretary, Industrial Policy and Promotion wrote to Ministry of Finance m the month of March 
1997 to impose a uniform duty of 30% on import of newsprint. Holl'blc Industry Minister had 
also written to Union Finance Minister in June 1997 to provide relief to newspnnt industry. So 
far, no response has been received on these recommendations from the M1nistry of Fmance. 
The demand and supply position 
(in lakh ronnts) 
Year Demand Supply- Production lmpon 
(2) {4+5) (4) (5} 
1993-94 5.80 6.72 3.61 3.11 
1994-95 6.00 6.94 4.02 2.92 
1995-96 6.30 7.55 4.10 3.45 
1996-97 6.62 8.47 3.0 5.47 
(SollJC< : OG<:tS-Mili'Ch 1997) 

37 
A 'review of the current demand and supply scenario of newsprint brings out clearly that •mpom 
of newsprint and indigenous supphes together make th: ava!lat.ility of oewspnnt more than tht 
~d by 21ack toones. There lll1: allegallons thai paper which attra,;t20% duty is bemg tmp<.r ·l 
in the guise of newsprint. 
At present customs duty on newsprint continues to be I 0%. Newsprint indusuy had filed an anti­
dumping petition with the Designated Authority constituted by tbe Ministry of Comm~rce for 
imposition of anti-dumping duties. In June 1997 the Authority reconunended to the Ministry of 
Finance imposition of provisional anti-dumping duties against newsprint importli originating 
from USA, Canada and Russia. The Notification is yet to be issed by the Ministry of Finance. 
Answer to Question No. 8 has already been provided earlier. 
Que 9. What percentage of investment both domestic and foreign bas been done in the industrially 
backward areas in the country? Whelher the dispensation being worked out by the Mimstry of 
Finance has been fmalised if so. the 'lalient features thereof 
Ans: Identification of backward dislricts is still pending with Ministry of Finance. The issue rel:uing 
to identification creteria bas been mdica1cd i.n Answer to Question No. 7 of the Action Taken 
Report 17. 
In so far as investment made m the mdustnally backward areas is concemed, information o1tthe 
regional level is not centrally m:untaincd. State· wise capital invested tn the organl'~..t factory 
sector during 1980-81. 1990-91 and 1993-94 is indicated in sub-Annex 2, 3 & 4 of the Not.,. 
The State-wise investment indicated by the entrepreneurs in their Industrial Entrepren~ur 
Memorandum (JEM) for the de licensed industries and for Letters of Intent in respect of licensed 
sector is indicated in Annex 5. 
Information with regard to State-wise FDI approvals is indicated in Annex 6. 

SUB-ANNEXURE-U 
STATE-WISE INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCE 
ASI Fact ory Sector 1980-81 
SL State No. of Invested No. of Per Unit Per Capita* PopulatiOn 
No. Factories Capital Employees Invest. Investment 1981 
(Rs. Lakhs) (Rs.lakh) (Rs.) Nos. 
I Bihar 4250 447580 381926 IOS.31 640.18 69914734 
2 We.~t Bengal 6359 41'7741 952026 65.69 765.36 54580647 
3 Ori~s11 1563 121757 1331.86 77.90 461.72 2S370271 
4 Goa. Daman & Diu 189 22908 15284 12l.21 2107.98 1086730 
5 Mnharashtra 15576 831750 1337718 53.40 1324.78 62784171 
6 Gujarat 11208 439865 699427 39.25 1290.46 34085799 
7 Madhya Pradesh ~488 302494 324708 86.72 579.73 52178844 
8 Kamataka 5381 206402 396236 38.36 555.80 37135714 
9 Kerala 3049 136464 279668 44.76 536.13 25453680 
10 Andhra Pradesh 11155 274599 666150 24.62 512.79 53549673 
II Pondicherry 148 4300 18359 29.05 711.37 604471 
12 Tamil Nadu 10292 381641 794993 37.08 788.38 48408077 
13 Andaman & Nicobar 31 733 4943 23.65 388.36 188741 
14 Jammu & Kashmir 327 13101 27859 40.06 218.81 5937389 
15 Punjab 5688 178694 235141 31.42 1064.36 16788915 
16 Uttar Pr •• desh 7151 431177 770626 6030 388.93 110862013 
17 Haryana 2486 139542 169172 56.13 1079.83 12922618 
IS RajastiJati 2696 173182 191128 64.24 505.47 34261862 
19 Himachal Pradesh 173 22848 22251 132.07 533.73 4280818 
20 l>ellll 3213 69993 129963 21.78 1125.22 6220406 
21 Chandigarh 202 2915 10519 14.43 645.47 451610 
22 A;sam 1583 58808 124421 37.15 295.56 19896843 
23 Mcghalaya 35 8022 5902 229.20 600.53 1335819 
24 Ttipura 222 1369 11444 6.17 66.68 2053058 
25 Manipur 38 220 1629 5.79 1~.48 1420953 
GRAND TOTAL 96503 4688105 7714679 48.58 686.58 682823856 
•Source: ASI IYK0-31 
38 
.-

SUB-ANNEXUR E-Ill 
STATE-WISE INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANC E 
ASl Factory &<tor 1990-91 
Sl. State No. of Invested No. of Per Umt Per Capita Populatoon 
No. Factories Capital Employees Invest. Investment 1991 
(Rs. Cr.) (Rs. lakh) (Rs. lakh) 
Bihar 3409 10227 380362 300.00 1184.03 86374465 
2 West Bengal 5606 12517 740980 223.28 1838.63 68077965 
\ 3 Orissa 1465 6209 153220 423.82 1961.17 31659736 
4 Goa 220 452 17309 205 45 3863.93 1169793 
5 Dadm & N. llaveli 127 242 5680 190.55 17475.83 138477 
6 Mahara~ htra 15595 35399 1239152 226.99 4484.45 789171117 
7 Gujarat 10943 18695 675447 170.84 4525.58 41309582 
8 Madhya Pradesh 3962 13652 417099 344.57 2062.82 6611-1.~0 
9 Daman & Diu 53 42 2642 79.25 4143.43 101586 
10 Kamatak~ 5911 7862 418955 133.01 1748.00 4497720 1 
11 Kerala 3484 3809 271961 109.33 1309.00 29098518 
12 Andhra Pradesh 15205 20361 832120 133.91 306 1.44 66508008 
13 PondicheiT}' 233 367 21661 153.22 4419.49 807785 
14 Tamil Nadu 14617 17700 962589 121.09 3168.70 55858946 
15 Andaman & Nicobar 52 43 55 11 82.69 1532.10 2806(>1 
16 Jmnmu & Kashmir 235 145 13577 61.70 187.86 7718700 
17 Punjab 6255 8132 400960 130.01 4009.47 20281969 
18 Uttar Pradesh 10417 20952 789011 201.13 1506.12 139112287 
19 Haryana 3070 6106 252974 198.89 3708.7l! 1646~648 
20 Raja.•tha:n 3358 6897 41329 205.39 1567.29 44005990 
2 1 Himachal Pradesh 282 1307 53580 463.48 2527.62 5170877 
22 De1ho 3453 1757 144554 50.88 1865 05 9420644 
23 Chandogarh 295 113 12185 40.00 1837.96 642015 
24 A5sam 1548 1523 108953 98.J9 679.48 22414322 
25 Nagaland 50 34 25 13 68.00 28i.IO 1209546 
I 26 Meghalayu 32 263 5636 821.88 1481.88 1774778 
27 Tripura 242 83 11506 34.30 301,03 2757205 
28 Mampur 60 14 10}8 23.33 7621 1837149 
GRANo TOT"L ; 110179 194898 7962504 176.89 2308.42 844290210 
Source: ASJ I 99()·9 t. 
l 
39 

SUB-ANNEXIJRE..lV 
STATE-WISE INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCE 
ASI Factory Sector 1993-94 
Sl. State No. of Invested No. of P~r Unit Per Capita Population 
No. Factories Capital Employees Invest. Investment 1991 
(Rs. Cr) (Rs.lakh) (Rs.) 
I Bihar 3763 16147 340947 429.W 1869.42 86374465 
2 West Bengal 5881 25430 738549 432.41 3735.42 68077965 
3 Orissa 1611 11299 184324 701.37 3568.89 31659736 
4 Goa 256 933 19922 364.45 7975.77 1\69793 
5 Dad.m & N. Haveli 143 385 6300 269.23 27802.45 138477 
6 Maharashua 18710 58653 1315772 313.48 7430.34 78937187 
7 GuJamt 11821 33305 760432 281.74 8062.29 41309582 
8 Madhya Pradesh 4011 21467 451765 535.20 3243.67 66181170 
9 Daman&Oiu 142 301 5945 211.97 29630.07 101586 
10 Karnataka 6094 11829 449862 194.11 2630.00 44977201 
11 Kerala 4035 5578 302215 138.24 1916.94 29098518 
12 Andhra Pradesh 15227 28735 872999 188.71 4320.53 66508008 
13 Pondicbeny 227 847 22727 373.13 10485.46 807785 
14 Tamil Nadu 18522 33449 1107829 18C.59 5988.12 55858946 
15 Andarrtan & Nicobar 34 107 6587 314.71 3812.43 280661 
16 Jammu & Kashmir 265 204 15004 76.98 264.29 7718700 
17 Punjab 6099 13467 437503 220.81 6639.89 20281969 
18 Uttar Pradesh 10335 33460 777177 323.75 2405.25 139ll2287 
19 Haryana 3509 8883 287223 253.15 5395.52 16463648 
20 RaJasthan 4173 8689 251959 208.22 1974.50 44005990 
21 Himachal Pradesh 341 2197 59699 644.28 4248.80 5170877 
22 Delhi 4350 3718 156435 85.47 3946.65 9420644 
23 Chandigam 285 116 7759 40.70 1806.81 642015 
24 Assam 1435 2184 113562 152.20 974.38 22414322 
25 Nagaland 96 46 4320 47.92 380.31 1209546 
26 Meghalaya 29 28 1943 96.55 157.77 1774778 
27 Tripura 168 73 7472 43.45 264.76 2757205 
28 Manipur 32 17 1078 53.13 92.53 1837149 
GRANo 'i'crrAL : 1~1594 ~21347 R'i(l'1909 264.44 3iiil~.41J 84421J021 0 
Source: ASI 1993-94. 
40 
1 

Slllh\NKE XURI:· V ~ 
~ 
3. L'IOUSTRJAL INVESTMENT PROPOSALS (STATE-WISE) 
A 
~ 
~ 
(AUGUST 1991 TO MAY 1997) <;; ... ;; 
TOTAL PROPOSALS INDUSTRIAL t;NTREPRENEURS MEMORANDA (IEMSJ LEITERS OF INTeNT (LOIS) "' 
~~~te~ls UEM+ LOIJ lX-11gc NUOibc:U: (f".at;e Proposed I! age Propo<ed 'kage Nurnbers Ckagc Pr<>posed lk3J;.t Propos.ed 'A age 
Filr.d Jn'c:"1mcnt El'nplo)'IMnl b~ved Jn,esz:mtnt t;JnpJoymem 
<R• Cr) {Sum~l (IU. Cr.) (Num0Ct1) 
M~h-tf;l 5174 17SI 5321 1772 101473 1799 1199627 1708 447 15.37 11315 12.01 Jll622 1611 
Gujar.11 481.2 1459 4442 IJ 78 112Sl6 19.96 7477N 14 20 370 12 72 18148 19 25 l J 969 6 0< 
UHM P'r:ld~h 3273 ~ 9} 2965 9.86 l4371 9.73 Sl0791 9.70 30~ 10.S9 8470 8 99 8921l Ul~1 
TumilN:3do 3247 9.~ $ 2764 9.19 )4124 6.05 4l0002 3.54 J8.l 16 ()() 9484 10.111\ 100668 14 7J 
Andhca Prodesh 2266 6 S7 1951 6.49 4!2 16 8.02 344082 6.53 315 10.83 9078 9.6) 627() I •.1 II< 
lfa.ryn.nll 2134 6.47 1973 6.S6 1978S 3.51 31lll8 5.99 161 l.B 3923 4 16 47929 7 02 
M><fbya I'Dd .. h 1881 5.70 1760 l.8l 47286 838 )92861 7.46 121 J 16 2806 2 98 27261 )99 
Ra.JUtba:a. 1703 510 1623 l40 25607 4.54 )()1493 l.72 110 ~ 15 I ~'\0 I 61 14394 211 
PlroJ.Jb 1629 <94 ll17 lOl 18929 336 389739 7JO tl~ ~ s,.~ 4115 J)l }~981 HI 
West Ben,aJ 1292 3.92 122l 407 17660 } II 211034 .:,OJ 67 2 10 3YIO J 15 16356 239 
Kam.,rab 1241 )76 1064 J.S4 27603 4.90 179351 3.40 177 6.0~ 'bl!6 9 '2! 5847J ~56 
O.ulta & N. Hao,·:la 849 2.$7 834 2.77 1267•1 22l 102264 1.94 15 0.5~ 11 6 :. ll :!233 IJJ) 
O.:lhi 4lS 1.38 439 1.46 6370 I. I 3 46()48 0.87 16 O.Sl 29 (l.IJ,\ ! 30? 0. 19 
Dt!f'lli)ft& DIU 397 120 381 1.27 2669 0.47 289)0 o.ss 16 O.Sl 62 0.07 J;Sl 0 48 I I"' 
Knoat:a 38) I I~ 3)4 I l l sm 0-97 sms 1.04 49 16M 1768 I~~ 9'~9 1.19 
fhm.1Gha.l Pnddh 330 100 301 100 719S 128 74193 1.41 29 1.00 381 040 lO'XI 0.7l 
Urb.1f 298 090 262 010 l8J7 I.G< 4)280 0.82 36 1.24 924 0.98 l.tl.CO 208 
PdnJit't~rry 297 090 281 0.93 )177 0.56 30389 0.58 16 o.ss 12~3 I 33 2863 0.42 
Goa 26l 0.110 23" 0.78 1620 0.64 26620 0.51 31 1.07 Ill 0.12 3165 046 
Or~S3 229 0.69 201 0.67 7108 1.26 74$27 1.42 28 0.96 SJ73 l.70 11~07 164 
A~s.am 76 0.23 65 0.22 lSSb 045 7889 O. IS II 0.38 lJ30 l l~ 4278 0.63 
l1mr.nu & K:a'>hnut 61 0. 19 S8 0.19 273 o.os 24079 0.46 ) 0.10 I I 001 965 0. 14 
Cbarulig-.. h 2) O.o7 22 007 196 0.0) 4466 0 08 I om 0 o.oo 9 000 
MC'gh:days II 0.0] II O.OJ 241 O.OJ 1289 0.02 0 0.00 0 000 0 000 
S•u.im 10 003 9 0.03 lS 0.00 780 0.01 I OOJ s 001 20-l 00~ 
And.lm:an &: NK'Ob:ar 9 OOJ 9 003 332 0.06 2610 OOl 0 000 (I 0.00 0 000 
Arunach.:tl Pt>ktcJoh 6 002 2 001 38 001 172 000 J 0.14 I 000 522 o.os 
N.1gabod s 002 4 001 141 0 03 712 0.01 I 0.03 0 000 0 000 
Trlpu~ 4 00 1 4 001 1040 0.18 1)47 O.oJ 0 000 0 000 0 (/00 
l..akshadwccp I 0.00 I 0.00 J 000 278 O.QJ 0 0.00 0 000 0 1100 
Miu:Jr.tm 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 000 0 000 0 0.00 () 000 0 000 
\.fanipar 0 000 0 000 0 000 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 000 0 000 
\to.-e than I Sutc II 003 0 000 0 o.oo 0 000 II 0.38 323 0 •• 1166 0.26 
TnrAL 32972 10000 .!0063 10000 S63993 100.00 l!6687J 100.00 :909 1000'1 9.1252 I flO Ot'l 6-&li9J 10000 
11: \h. fndu.,tn.all!n•tePft-11011" ~f.emor"r..hm JppiJ~.."'lbon Gk:.J fOf ttcrm 11nder delicensed kelOr_ 
l ( Jlv ~Uef') ,., lnl~nt • .• u~d in 1<~p«t ui th•ms undoer licc=n~d $tctor '= 
I l -~~~ ~~~ 10 M •llum 
I~ I 

SUB-ANNEXURE-VI 
DATA COMPILED AND DISSEMINATED BY INDUSTRY DIVl SION, NIC 
State-wise Break up of Foreign Collaboration & Forei gn Direct Investment Propo sals 
Approved durin g (August, 1991 to May, 1997) 
No. of Approvals Amt. ofFDI %to Total 
State Approved 
Total Tech Fin • (Rs. Crore) 
Andhra Pradesh 457 148 309 2845 .25 2.34 
Assam 10 6 4 1.50 0.00 
Bihar 72 42 30 143.93 0.12 
Gujara t 574 302 272 5046. 11 4. 15 
Haryana 433 153 280 1870.81 1.54 
Himachal Pradesh 74 49 25 342.93 0.28 
Jamm u and Kashmir I 0 8.01 0.01 
Kamalaka 740 266 474 6721.81 5.52 
Kerala 106 38 68 537.97 0.44 
Madhya Pradesh 205 85 120 5615.06 4.61 
Maharashtra 1449 543 906 15262.76 12.54 
Manipur 0 3.19 0.00 
Mcghalaya I 0 I 2.50 0.00 
Nagai and I 0 0.00 0.00 
Orissa 82 29 53 4546.63 3.74 
Punjab 114 41 73 1174.72 0.97 
Rajnsthan 204 68 136 796.38 0.65 
Tamil Nadu 870 275 595 6914.54 5.68 
Tripura 1 0 0.68 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh 417 182 235 2627.16 2.16 
West Bengal 291 97 194 5400.93 4.44 
Andaman & Nicobar 5 0 5 0.98 0.00 
Arunachal Pradesh 2 0 2 11.06 O.ot 
Chandigarh 14 2 12 72.46 0.06 
Dadr-.1 & Nagar Haveli 50 33 17 71.41 0.06 
Delhi 555 60 495 20581.83 16.91 
GOil 71 34 37 285.36 0.23 
Lakshadweep I 0 0.50 0.00 
Pondicherry 53 22 31 254.90 021 
Daman & Diu 16 9 7 5.72 0.00 
Others 4152 2217 1935 40547.07 33.32 
ToTAl: 11022 4702 6320 121694.16 
Que IO.Budgetary allocations for the various depanments of the Ministry of lndu\try is not in line with 
what the Comntiltee has been repeatedly recommending viz. that there should be a manifold 
increase in the budget suppon. 
42 
.. 

lr 
43 
An§. The approved out lay for the Ministry of Industry for the VID Plan was Rs. 5562.50 crores:. 
Against this, the actua l expenditure incurred was Rs. 6219.34 crores. 111e expenditure during the 
VITI Plan period has been as follows:-
(Rs. in crores) 
Approved Expenditure 
(a} Deptt. of IPP 131.00 428.75 
(b) DeptL of ro 1033.00 1978.72 
(c) Depu. of SSI 1627.50 2093.65 
(d) Depn. of Hl 2771.00 1718.22 
TOTAL: 5562.50 6219.34 
For the IX Plan. the Ministry of Industry bad proposed an outlay of Rs. 11907.51 crores. The 
Planning Commi ssion has approved Rs. 8653.04 crores which is broken up as follows:-
(a} Deptt. of IPP 
(b) Deptt. of ID 
(c) Deptt. of SSI 
(d) Deptt . of H1 
TOTAL: 
• Approved at the level of Advisor 
Proposed 
1382.58 
2694.93 
4910.00 
2920.00 
11907.51 
(Rs. in crores) 
Approved 
616.82 
1500.00 
4360.00• 
2176.22 
8653.04 
For the current year which is the first year of the IX Plan. the budgetary allocations, as approved 
by Parliament, are as follows:-
(Rs. in crores) 
Proposed Approved 
(a) Deptt. of IPP 289.53 108.80 
(b) Deptt.ofiD 539.19 513.02 
(c) Deptt. of SSI 1475.50 657.00 
(d) Deptt. of HI 325.05 140.00 
TOTAL: 2629.27 1418.82 
The expe nditure in the Department of Small Scale Industries and Agro & Rural Industries in the 
VUI Plan period has been as follows:-
(Rs. in crons) 
Year Actuals 
1992-'93 292.37 
1993-94 336.22 
1994-95 429.06 
1995-96 544.58 
1996-97 491.42 
TOTAL: 2093.65 

-• 
Tlw AI' fonhe current year is Rs. 65~ 00 crorc' 1 plu' I{, -llh-ro rc' orlthc budg~t of Mim'tQ ol 
llrh;on Development). Expendi ture on the Khudi and Yil!a~c lnJu,!l lc' Sector during the VIII 
Plan period is give n below:-
(H.' m cnnc·' I 
y,.ar l'l:.n Nnn-l'h111 
I 992- 9~ 193 ()() lbl ou 
199.>-94 208.00 32~ (~I 
1994-95 216.00 34 1.00 
1995-96 :m.oo • .\23.00 
I 996-97 308 .20 309. 10 
TorAL: 1262 20 1459.7-1 
GkANtl To rAL : 2721.94 
Th ~ BB for KYIC for the current yea r is Rs. 150.00 cn1re1>. 
Que II The Impact of loberalisation on the dome~tic mdumy. Tl1c Conumllee i> of tho: v1cw tha1 
libcrnlisa tio n i~ not desirable at the expenses of co untry·~ overwhclm111g m~ss cs. 
i\ ns ( i) 
( i i) 
(Ill) 
T he small scale sector which accou nt' for nearly -10% of the industrial output on the 
manufactunng ~ector and over .>5f'!r or total cxpon current!) provide' employment to 
about 16 million JlCr,ons. To protect the small ~ecto r 821 uems continue to be rc,crve d 
for the exc lusive manufacture in thi' '~ctor. Cap;~dty of the exis ting units whtch has 
been operat ing prior to the reservation of item' abo stand frozen. For foreign mv~'to" 
there is an equity cap of24'?1 '" the SS I <,ecttll. 
WitlJ ;t vtcw 10 improving technology level in the Indian industry, acces.~ to tcchno l og~ 
has been libemhsed . Automatic approval is now availabk for forc1gn tcchnolog) 
collaborouons wtth the lump 'um payme nt upto US S 2 m•lhon. and/or roya lty payment~ 
"rc w!lhin the stipulated limits. In the post policy period sinceA ugLL'l 1991 to May. 1997 
a tow I of I I 022 for~•gn collaborat ions have been approved. of which 4 702 are techmcal 
co11abornt1ons The di~tribouon ofte<:hnt<:al collaboration appro,cd acrordmg to the size 
of th~: propMcd Investment mdtcatc that Mllall Jnd medium cnlreprcnc u" have taken 
considerab le adv;mtuge of the technical collabomtion route to ohtain imprnv<.!d technology 
Government ha' also allo\\CU greater :tcces.< of co't effecttw fund' lrom :thro<~d to thl.' 
Indian corpomte ~ector alth<.! 1ntemauonal !"JIC~ The acce~' to mtcmauonal funds of I he 
Indian corporate .<ector in the last t h r~e years i' indicated bclow:-
ECB/GDR Approval\ 
y,,,\r EC'B Appmv~ls (Iuken "" (;()R Appmvab 
nx:onls) (arnounl in US S millilln) 
(Aulounl in liS$ m!lhun) 
------------------ ----1997-9M 
1996-97 
1995-96 
•As ( Ill 15th July. 1'!'17 . 
.. A, on 6th lU11l'. 1•1')7. 
I()()H 
1455 
613 

I. 
45 
Besides, F.CBs. Gove rnment ha~ also effec ted policy changes co augmcnc domcsuc 
availabihcy of crc<ill and soflcning of onceresc races by reducing CRR and SLR. ecc. 
civl During che la<echrce yeas GDP has consiscen tly grown ac over 7% with mOat ion kept 
under control. Inflation as mC<t>ured tn tem1s of Wholesale Price Index has come down 
to a level of 4.05'4 as on 2.8 .97. Tin' sho"' chat the process of liveralisauon has not 
ad' ersely affected the mas<c' 'een in tem1;, of growth and price Mability. 
(vl Ana ly,is of import for che years 199(>·97 indic.lle chat imports have noctaken away the 
nmrkeb from domc,tic manufacturers as would be evident from table below ·-
Import of Commodities (US $ Millions) 
Commodicy Group 1993-94 1994-95 1995-96 1996-97 
Capi tal Goods 5723 7072 10722 9422 
R"" Maccrial & Components 6072 8811 11376 11156 
Chemtcals 1320 2067 2566 2690 
Iron & Sceel 715 1053 1340 1391 
Total Imports 22185 26922 36678 38548 
Que , I! . Whether Mimstry agrees chat the process of rcviv:tl of the sick units is very time consummg? 
What remedial mc•"ur~ ~n: contemplated by Government in th1s regard? 
An, . The reply woulu he fumtshcd by Dcpanment nf lndu,trin l Deve lopment. 

ATNs RECEIVED FROM M/0 INDUSTRY, OFFICE OF ECONOMIC ADVISER 
VIDE O.M. NO. 11019/4/EN97/EPD. DATED 21-08-97. 
POINTS AS CONTAINED IN THE 17TH & 20TH REPORT 
REPLIES IN RESPECT OF QUESTION PERTAINlNG TO DEPARTMENT OF 
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT 
Que. 5 What is the current position on the Ministry's proposal favouring to extend assistance from NRF 
to State PSUs? 
Aos . A Note on Operational Modalities for grant of assistance from National Renewal Fund (NRF) 
was submitted by the Department of Industrial Development to ~abinet Secretariat. This Note, 
inter-alia, covers assistance from NRF for Voluntary Retirement Scheme in State Public Sector 
Undertaltings, etc. It was deferred in the meeting of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
(CCA) held on 28.11.1995. No further development has taken place in the matter till date. 
QJe. 12 Whether Ministry agrees that the process of revival of the sick units is very time consuming . 
What remedial measures are contemplated by Government in this regard? 
Ans. Government bas taken a number of steps to tackle tile problem of industrial sickness which, 
inter-alia, include, guidelines of Reserve Bank of India to banks, amalgamation of sick units 
with healthy units, setting up of Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction under Sick 
Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act. National Renewal Fund, National Equity Fund. 
etc. 
A brief continuing the present status of industrial sickness in the country and a summary of 
remedial measures taken by the Government, is enclosed. 
46 

' 
' 
ANNEXURE 
BRIEF ON INDUSTRIAL S ICKNESS 
l. Data on Industrial sickness in the country is compiled by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and the 
late$! repon is upto the end of March, 1996. In brief, the total industrial sickness may be summed up as 
follows: 
(Rs. in Crores) 
Category N'o. oF On;ts C'5utstanCiing !§ani( l:!reah 
I. Sick non SSI Units 1956 8823.19 
2. Weak non SSI Units 418 1203.12 
3. Sick SSI Units 262376 3721.94 
Total : 264750 13748.25 
2. A number of causes, both internal and external operating in combination, have been responsible 
for industnal sickness. The main cause include deficiencies in management, planning and marketing etc, 
Management deficiency is a major cause of sickness accounting for 53.4% of the cases of industrial 
sickness. 
3. The remedial measures can be categorised into two pans: 
(a) relating to non-SSI units. 
(b) relating to lSI units. 
4. For non-SSI units, legislative enactments, namely, Section 72A of the Income Tax Act, 1961 and 
Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provision) Act, 1985 deal with revival and other measures. 
5. Institutional mechanism for controlling sickness of non-SSI units consists of following agencies:· 
(a) Board of Industrial and Financial Reconstruction; 
(b) Specified Authority; 
(c) Empowered Authority of the National Renewal Fund; 
(d) Administrative Ministries dealing with the industry concerned; 
(e) Reserve Bank of India/banks/financial institutions; and 
(f) State Governments . 
6. Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BlFR) has been set up to secure timely detection 
of sick and potentially sick companies. The Performance Review. 1996' of BlFR indicates registration of 
1853 sick units with the Board upto 31.12.1996. 
7. The region-wise number of sick companies are as follows: 
Western region 563 
Southem region 558 
Northern region 447 
Eastern region 285 
Among the states, substantial number of cases were registered from following: 
Maharashtra 290 
Andhra Pradesh 
Uttar Pradesh 
West Bengal 
250 
191 
177 
47 

• 
48 
8 Total number of workers involved in 1he sock ondu,lnal compa noe> r..:g"oered wnh 1he Bli'R 
(excludong those dismissed as non·mainoainable) •~ 11.82.432. Texlile sector :occoun1' for ohc maxomum 
number of workers affected (3.61,557). 
9. The cumulative losses in lhese companic' hrod amo umed 10 Rs. 23,793 cro res. The 101al net wonh 
(paid- up capioal and free reserves) of 1hese companocs is Rs. 898 1 crores. 
10. Sickness in small scale sector is primarily 1hc rcsponsibilioy of the State Government Gov1. of 
India hnve announced following relief and concessions for reha bilitation. 
(a) Equity assistance schem e 
(b) Selling up of Small lnduwial Development Ban~ of lndla. 
(c) State Level Inter Institutional Com miuee (SUIC) 

·-
NOTES RECEIVED FROM M/0 INDUSTRY, DEPARTMENT OF S.S.I. AND A&RI 
VIDE D.O. NO. 16(5)-ICC, DATED 24-09-97 
NOTE ON ALLOCATION AND UTILISATION OF FUNDS FOR DEVELOPING SMALL 
AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES lN ANDAMAN AND NlCOBAR ISLANDS 
Based on the recommendations of the Prabhat Kumar Committee, the Andaman & Nicobar 
Administration had formulated Schemes for promoting industrial development of Andarnan & Nicobar 
lslands.Alloc.atioo of funds was made in the 8th Plan and Annual Plan1 995-96 of the U.T. Administration. 
The Andari\:ln & Nicobar Administration sought the approval of this Ministry for operating the Schemes, 
with/without modification. Tne expenditure was to be met out of the funds allocated under Plan m the 
Budget Provision of the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
'The formal approval of the Administf11live Ministry of pattern of assistance is necessary under the 
Rule 20 of the Delegation of Fmancial Po\l.er Rules, 1978, Financial assistance could be sanctioned by 
lhe Administrator provided the pattern of assistance 1s prescribed with the previous consent of the 
Government of India. TheA&N Administration has, therefore, been seeking the approval of the Government 
oflndia. (Administrative Ministry) for implementation of the Schemes ofUT. Before the formal approval 
of this Ministry is sought for implementing the Scheme, the necessary budget is allocated sector-wise & 
the funds provided in the Home Ministry's Budget. 
During three years from 1995-96 to 1997-98, the budgeted outlay and actual utilisation under the 
Village & Small Industries Schemes, as reported by AndamllJI & Nicobar Administration, has been as 
under:-
(Rs. in Crores) 
Year <5iii1ay Actual Utilised 
1995-96 10.02 5.57 
1996-97 6.79 , 6.08 
1997-98 9.55 N.A. 
This Ministry does not release fund~ for the trrs including Andaman & Nicobar Islands. It only 
approves Plan schemes and pattern of assistance thereunder in terms of Rule 20 of the Delegation of 
Financial Power Rules, 1978, as and when proposals are received. 
49 

NOTE ON SHARE OF SMALL SCALE SECI'OR IN INDIA'S TOTAL EXPORTS 
Exports from the small ~cale sector over a period of time has acquired a greater significance in India's 
Foreign trade. Th~ SSI Sector today constitutes a very important segment of the Indian economy and it 
accounts for over 40% of the total exports (direct & indirect) from the country Direct exports from the 
SSl Sector accounts for about 34% of the total exports nnd the remaining 6 to 7% are indirect exports 
from the small scale sector. 
I. DIRECT EXPORTS 
Contribution of small scale sector in country's total export.~ duriitg the year .1995-96 was as under: 
(i) Total exports 
(ii) Share of SSI exports 
Rs. I 06464.86 crores 
Rs. 36470.22 crores 
(iii) Percentage share R,s. 34.25 crores 
(a) Manufacturing Sector excluding Handicrafts, Handloom, Silk, Coir items 
The detailed break-up of Product-wise performance of SSI Sector during the year 1995-96 was as 
under. 
(Rs. in Crores) 
Sl. Produ-;t Group Total Share of Percentage 
No. Exports SST Sector Share 
1995-96 1995-96 
I. Enginuring Goods 12595.00 3025.00 24.00 
2. Basic Chemical$, Philllllaceuticals, Cosmetics 7970.30 3002.50 37.67 
3. Chemicals and Allied Products 7458.10 250.04 3.35 . 
4. Plastic Products 1662.40 265.00 16.00 
5. Finished Leather & Leather Products 5762.08 4910.45 85.22 
6. Marine Products 3501.11 624.31 17.83 
7. Processed Food 7932.00 5155.80 65.00 
8. Woollen Garments & Knitwear 1145.72 896.10 78.21 
9. Sports Goods 207.50 207.50 100.00 
1 0. Ready made Garments 14806.49 14806.49 100.00 
11. Rayon & Synthetic Produc~~ 3122.67 1686.24 54.00 
12. Processed Tobacco, Snuff & Bidi 421.04 237.55 56.42 
13. Cashew Kcmal & C~shew Nut Shell Liquid 1230.20 1230.20 100.00 
14. LAC 99.71 98.71 99.00 
I 5. Spices. Spice-Oils, Oleoresins 743.35 74.33 10.00 
Sub Total (a): 68657.67• 36470.22• 53% 
Others (b): 37807.19 Nil Nil 
Total (a) & (b): 106464.86 36470.22 34.25 
• Provisional Figures supplied by EPCs, Commodity Boards etc. 
so 
• 

• 
Sl 
(ll) IND(RECT EXPORTS 
Ex!JC?r:t Stansrics pertaining to performance of small scale sector are collected from the various Export 
Promotion Councils, Com~od it~ Boards etc. It has been experienced that bes;des direct export.~ of about 
34%, SSI Sector also accot nt~ for 6 to 7% as indin.."'t:t exports. There is no specific study about ilie 
estimation of such Share of in6inx:t ex pons. However.ilie sbove estimate is based mainly on the following 
factors: 
(i) A large number of Ancillary units are working m the small scale sector. Such Ancillary units 
supply their products in the form of parts, :assemblies etc. to ilie large scale sector The items 
under reference are ultimately exported by the firms for .lhe large scale sector. 
(ii) A large number of units in ilie small scale sector are supplying many items to theexpon houses, 
t,rading Houses in the large sector. These SSI units due to one rea.~on or the oilier are not in a 
position to di=dy export ilieir merchandise. These supplies of items, manufacrured in ilie small 
scale sector to the Export Houses/Trading houses. etc. are exported in the world market. 
(iii) Export data concerning export performance of small scale sector is compiled on the basis of 
information received from various Export Promotion Councils/Conunodity Boards. These EPCsl 
Commodity Boards in rum collect export figures from their member exporters. But it has been 
observed iliat many small scale units/exponers do not getiliernselves registered with the concerned 
EPCsJCommodity Boards. So the export perform:mce of such unregistered units is not reflected 
in ilie export performance figures compiled by ilie said councils/Commodity Boards. But the fact 
remains that exports from such unregistered umts take place and form a part of performance of 
small scale sector. 
In view of sbove factors, it is estimated that indirect expon from the small scale sector account~ for 
about 6 to 7% of India's tOtal expons. Hence total share of smnll scale industry in ilie country's exports 
comes out to be over 40%. 
(UO A DETAILED NOTE OF EXPORT ON KVIC PRODUCTS, WITH DATA, DJRECfiON ­
WISE, FOR THE LAST 3 YEARS 
Marlceting in itself is a significant factor to accelerate the economic development of the country. KVTC 
as all India organisation with production of about Rs. 4,000 crores of KVI products enjoys immense 
potentiality to enter the global marlcet. 
The present trend of international market. is also most favowable for KVI Products, as most of the 
KVI Products are environmentally friendly. "Near to nature", "Back to basic" and ''Green is IN" are new 
global awareness, and hence KVI products enjoy a preferential market all over the globe. 
High Power Committee headed by Hon'ble Prime Minister of India, in its report of export of KVI 
Products. amongst oilier iliings, have recommended:-
(1) KVIC should be declared as registering auiliority for export of KVI products and it should have 
powers for inspection and certification for KV1 products for which it should be given status of 
Export Promotion CounciJ. 
(II) Yam has a fast growing export market and hence effective measures be taken for its export. 
(ITI) There should not be any Excise Levied on yarn export. 
(IV) To promote export of Village' Industries Products. a beginning may be made by providing 5% 
snbsidy to exporters. 
KVI PRODUCTS HAVING EXPORI' POTENTIAL 
Handllll!de Paper Items: Drawing sheets, gruting cards, writing pads, carry bags, envelopes, 
stationery papers, bond papers, paper machine: handicraft items . 

52 
2. Leather: Gents jackets. gents trouser. ladies jacket, shut, uouser, leather belt. money purse, 
pouch shoes (gents & ladies), chappal. sandles,ltohlapuri,ltatlti chappals, punching gloves, ladies 
bags, purse. 
3. Silk Khadi: Saree, scarf shirt, trouser, jawahar jacket. gandhi cap. kurta, ladies salwar-kurta, tie, 
dupatta. 
4. Cotton Khadi: Jawahar jacket, lalrta, pajama., kurta 'huridar, gandht cap. gents dhoti. gents 
jhabba, baniyan, underwear, handkerchief, kttchen towel, bath towel, bedsheet (embroidered. 
printed and gl~ssworlt). cushion cover, pillow cover, table eover, teacosy, printed curtam<. c<> ton 
sarees, glasswork bag and wall hanging. 
5. Muslin Khadt: Gents dhoti,ladies dhoti, kurta, pajama, shirts,ladie.~ embroidery dress materials, 
dupatta, handkerchief. 
6. Processing of Cereals and Pulses: Papad, spices dal, basmatt rice. 
7. Handictaft Items: Rosewood handicraft items, sandalwood handicraft items, cane and bamboo 
handicraft items wood carving items, wooden toys. 
,New Initiative Taken by KVIC to Boost Export 
I. Rc)!:isteration of KVI Institutions/Societies/Individuals, engaged in manufacturi011; and sale of 
IUJ,tdi and VI Products as Export-oriented units. 
2. lntroduc-•ion of Export Incentive Scheme. 
(i) Fxport variety of all items of Khadi shall be outs1dt the ambit of cost chart. wb1ch 
otherwise is requ1red to be followed as per certifications rules for sale of Khadi. 
(u) To boost export of Khadi, 20 per cem subsidy in the form of grant on the 111put of raw 
material deployed for undertaking the export snail admissible to the lllSUtution (no rebate 
will be paid to them on sales). 
(Ui) Institutions engaged in moUJufacruring V.I. produCts and undertalung e~port shall beelig1ble 
for concess1onal rate of intereM of II per cent on the worldng capital deployed for expon 
production. in lieu of Pre-shipment and post-shipment rate of .:redit finance from 
~mmercial Banks. 
(iv) S per cent Expon subsidy on sale of V.I. products on FREE ON BOARD (FOB) pnce 
exclusive of Freight, lnrurance, Customs etc. shaiJ be extended to societieslinstirutions/ 
individuals registered a.~ eJ~portiilg uoiL~. The mcentive, however, sJ~all not be admissible 
if the agency falls to undertake expon of less than at least I 0 per cent of the total targeted 
V.I. Production. 
(v) Like other normal V.I. Programme, implementing agencies like E.O.Us shall also be 
eligible forassistances like Margin-money, Tenn-loan, Working Capital and other benefits 
for domestic production. 
3. Formation of Expon Consort1um for KVI. 
4. Linkage with liFT. 
5 ?articipation in exhibitions and market surveys abroad. 
6. Tie up with Apparel Export Promotion Council (AEPC). 
7. El<Oports data for last three years. 

I 
(A) 
Sr. No. IndustrieS/Products 1994-95 
I. Handmade Paper 5.99 
2. Palm 1.35 
3. Cereals and Pulses 5.08 
4. Others 
oLlll 12.42 
53 
1995-96 
4.05 
0.46 
7.01 
0.40 
)1.92 
(Rs. in Crorrs) 
1996097 
(Provisional) 
12.00 
(B) Products IUid target couutrie:s: 
51. No. Descnption of Pi'Odllcrs 
I. Cotton and Silk fabrics and woollen carpet 
2. Muslim fabrics 
3. Readymade gannents 
SI.No. Description of Pi'OdllcLS 
4. Rural Handicrafts 
S. Hand made Paper 
6. Leather 
7. Processed Food and Food items 
8. Agarbatti and Matches 
9. Honey 
Targer Countries 
U.K. USA. Fnmce, Germany 
Gulf Countries 
USA, UK 
Target countries 
UK, USA, Germany 
USA 
UK. Russia, Australia 
Gulf Countries 
African Countries 
Gulf and European Countri~ 
(IV) EFFORJ'S BEING MADE TO UPGRADE THE QUALITY & PACKAGING OFPRODUCI'S 
MANUFACTURED BY THE KVIC UNITS 
(a) Development of new model charlcha with merits of 'Ring Spin Technology'. 
(b) KVIC & Khadi Gramodyog Prayog Samity, Ahmedabad have developed 8 spindle ~I c~ 
which can be plied at a spindle speed of 8-10 lhousand RPM and capable of rendering 4.5 to 5 
hanks spindly point 
(c) The Dying & Printing Laboratory of KVlC at Mumba.l has done experiments in process 
developments in lhe field of wet processing and has developed shade canis for cotton & sillt 
using improve class of dies such as Val, reactive, sulphur, metal complex ele., fdr adopcioo in the 
khada sector for better finish and colour. 
(d) KVIC has ente=l into a MoU with National Institute of Fashion Technology (N1Ff) for assi.StaDoe 
in the area of producing & processing high fashion garments suitnble for domestic as well as 
expon market N1FT will also impart one months training to two balcbes of gliiTIIellt fabricators 
lhrough Khadi Bhavan, KVlC, New Delhi to improve tbe quality of Khadi garmen~ suiting 
national & international standards. 
(e) Collaboration walh Indian Instllute of Foreign Trade (I.IFf) for imparting tnunulg to KVI units & 
KVIC officers in the field of export as well as organising seminars with fashion designers exporta'l 
etc., so a.~ to develop & upgrade KVI products suiting international quality standards. 
(fl Seminars and meetings have been conducted with Indian Insti.tuteofPnckagingtodevelop allraetive, 
packaging of KVI productS. Proposal to explore possibility of using pearl pet jars and otbet food 
grade packaging for honey is in process. KVlC bas introduced Eco-friendlypaclcing of handmade 
paper bags for packing high fashion readyma.de garments and same bas beat introdoced on 
experimental basis in selected metropolitan citie:s. 

' 
.... .. 
t ~ 
ANNEXURE-'C' 

ANNEXURE-'C' 
' 
~ .. 
r 

l 
IV. Representatives of Planning Commission 
I. S¥ V.K. Paodit. Special Secretary 
2. Shri K.K. Mishra, Adviser, (Energy) 
3. Shri B.D. Jethra, Au vi~~ ~ (I & M) 
4. Shri B.N. Puri, Addl. Adviser (Transport) 
5. Shri P.N. Shali, Joint Adviser (I & M) 
6. Dr. O.P. Sharma, Joint Adviser (I.E.) 
59 
V. Representative of Disinvestme nt Commission 
Shri G.V. Ramakrishna, Chainnan. 
2. The Sub-Committee heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses on the ATRs on the 
recommendations as contained in the 17th and 20th Reports of the Committee. The Sub-Committee 
directed the witnes ses to furnish the information promised by them during the course of oral evidence at 
the earliest. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
3. The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 2.00 P.M. to meet again on Tuesday, the 16th September, 
1997. 

• 
m 
TKIRD MEETTNG 
The Sub-Commiuee met at 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 16th September, 1997 in Committee Room 'A', 
Ground Floor. Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
I. Shri M.K. Patil - Cunvenor 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Syed Sibtey Razi 
3. Shri Rajubhai A. Parmar 
4. Shri T.M. Vcnkatachalarn 
5. Chandhari Chunni Lal 
LOKSABHA 
6. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
7. Shri Namdevrao Diwathe 
8. Shri Naval Kishore Shanna 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Salish Kumar. Joint Secretary 
Shn Dcepak GJyal, Under Secretary 
Shri Momraj Singh, Committee Officer 
WITNF..SSES 
Representatives of Department of Small Scale Industries and Agro & Rural Industries 
I. Shri Ashok Parthasanhi, Secretary 
2. Shri A.V. Singh, AS & FA 
3. Shri Brahm Outt, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri K.V. lm iraya, AS & DC 
5. Dr. C.S. Prasad, Addj. ~ 
6. Shri R.K. Bh~va, C.E.O. KVIC 
7. Shri S. Bandopadbya, Jt. CEO, KVIC 
8. Shri Rajiv Bhatnagar, Sr. Ex. Director, NS!C 
9 Shri B.L Malhotra. Ex. directo r, NSIC 
I 0. Shri R. Kannan, Secretary, Coir Board 
2. Til e Sub-Committee heard the above noted witnesses on the ATR$ received from the Ministry of 
Industry on the 17th and 20th Repons of the Committee. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
3. The Sub-Committee thereafter considered its future programme and dec1ded to visit Chennai, 
Pondicherry and Pon Blair from September 29, to October 4, 1997 for an on the ~pot study of the 
•rnplementation of the recommendauons of the Committee as contained in its I 7th Repon. 
The Sub-Committee decided that the Chairman, Committee on Industry may be requested to obtain 
the approval of Hon'ble Chairman Rajya Sabha for the said study visit. 
4. The Sub-Committee'then adjourned at 5.40 P.M. 
60 

IV 
FORum MEETING 
The Sub-Comnuttee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday. the 3rd November. 1997 in Committee Room 'A', 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
I. Shri M.K. Patii-Convenor 
RAJ YASA BHA 
2. Syed Sibtey Razi 
3. Shri T.M. Venkata.~alam 
4. Shri Jayan t Kumar Malhoutra 
5. Chaudbari Chunni Lal 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shrimati Jayawantiben Mehta 
7. Shn Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
8. Shri Narndevrao Diwathe 
9. Shri Shyarnlal Bansiwal 
I 0. Shri Nawal Kishon: Sharma 
II Shri Sanat Mehta 
•12.Shri Sunil Khan 
13. Shri Darbara Singh 
SECRETA RIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Deepak Goyal, Under Secretary 
Shri MOmraJ Singh. Committee Officer 
2. lmtiating the discussions, the Convenor menuoned that the Secretariat had not received comments 
from any of the members of the Sub-Committee on the Draft Repon of the Sub-Committee as was 
decided in the last meeting of the full Commiuee held on October, 21, 1997. Thereafter, he explained in 
brief the purpose for calling the meeting of the Sub-Commiuee and invtted views and suggestions of the 
members in the matter. He also informed the members that the Chainnan of the Cornmittee would be 
meeting the Convenors of the three Sub-Committees on November 13, 1997. 
3. Shri Malhoutra, in his intervention, reiterated his earlier position. He expressed his dissatisfaction at 
the manner in which the Ministry had furnished Action Talc.en Repon. He added that no specific answers 
had been given and the Committee was not receiving cooperation from the Ministry oflndustry. 
4. Shri Sanat Mehta mentioned that he had already sent his views in writing and requested that the 
same should be talc.en into account while finalising the Report. Briefly, recapitulating what he bad said in 
his written notes, he mentioned that Foreign Direct lnvestment (FDI) was largely in consumer industries 
and not in the infrastructure. He added that his position had been vindicated from the notes subsequently 
fumishw by the Ministry of Industry giving details of I'Dl in India since 1991 when the process of 
liberalisatio n was stan ed. He added that in the subsequent notes furnished by the Ministry of Industry 
data in most of the cases was still missing. 
61 

r 
62 
4.1 A3 regards disinvestment in PSUs, his idea was that the funds so realised would be utolised for 
rehabilitation of sick industries and for the benefit of employees, and not to meet the budgetary deficit. 
He suggested that the Disinvestment Commission sho\lld be given full autonomy. 
4.2. As regards National Renewal Fund (NRF) Shri Sanae Mehta mentioned that the State Renewal 
Funds should also be given funds from the NRF wherever States had set up State Renewal Funds. He 
expressed his displeasure that in the current year's budget, Ministry of Finance had only made provision 
for NRP and no specific State-wise allocation had been made . 
5. Shri Naval!Gsbore Sharma suggested that the OrJft Report of the Sub-Committ ee may be suitably 
recast so as to clearly indicate wherever no specific replies bad been•fumished by the Ministry. 
6. Shri Patil, Convenor, staled that the Secretariat had already prepared a note pointong out paragraphs 
where the response of the Ministry was either inadequate or not specific. 
7. 1be Sub-Committee adopted the Draft Report subject, however, to the incorporation of the views/ 
suggestions of the Membels therein. 
I 
' 

vm 
EIGHTH MEETING 
The Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry met at 3.00 P.M on Fridny,lhe 
14th August, 1998 in Room No. 63, First Aoor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Raghavji-Chairman 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Shri Govmdrao Adilc 
3. Shri K.anna Topdcn 
4. Shri Rajubhai A. Parmar 
5. Dr Ranbir Singh 
6. Shri NafPlllllli 
7 Shri Bbagaban Majhi 
8. Shri Sanjay N'uupam 
9. Shri Santosh Bagrodia 
WK.SABHA 
IO.Shri M. Srinivas 
li.Shri Vijay Shankar 
12.Shri Gyan Singh 
13.Shri l8raclwld Slhu 
14. Shri Ramanznd Singh 
15.Shri Annasaheb M.K. P&til 
16.Shn A.nand Ratna Maury'\ 
17 .Sbri Punnulal Mohale 
18.Shn Nadendla Bhaskar Rao 
19.Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
20.Shri Dur.a Meghe 
2l.Shri KoniJcti R.osaiah 
22. Shri Sunil J<har, 
23. Shri Anand a Pathak 
24.Shri K Palaniswamy 
25.Shri Shaltunl Choudhury 
'26. Shri Malyala Rajaiah 
27. Shri Prabhat Kumar Samantaray 
28.Shri Zora Singh 
6S 

29.Shri S.S Palmimaniclta:u 
30.Prof. Jogeodra Kaw."ldc 
f"'CRETAiliAT 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director 
Sb.ri P.C. Pa.ilny, Unckt S~ try 
Shri MoiMij Singh, Coromittcc Offictor 
2. • 
3. • 
66 
• • 
• • 
4.1be Conuni~ then took up the Reports of lhn:e ~vious Sub-Co111!lllttees on Action Thken Reports 
of M~ o( Steel. Mines IDd Iodu~ay on its 17til, 18th, 19th IDd 20th Reports for discussion After 
brief deli.benll:ions, all the ~ports wen: adopted. The Committee authon"ld t. .. Cnain:uun to m .... ma!e 
1be Members for the ~of the Repoltll lo the both Houses of Parliamo:m in the Wmter Session. 
s. • • • 
6. The Commialee then adjourned at 4.30 P.M. 
•••Rdate to other ~. 