 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021/ Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
REPORT NO. 
309 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND NINTH REPORT 
ON 
ELECTRIC & HYBRID MOBILITY – PROSPECTS AND CHALLENGES IN 
AUTOMOBILE INDUSTRY 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 6th December, 2021) 
 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 6th December, 2021) 
 

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021/ Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND NINTH REPORT 
ON 
ELECTRIC & HYBRID MOBILITY – PROSPECTS AND CHALLENGES IN 
AUTOMOBILE INDUSTRY 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 6th December, 2021) 
 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 6th December, 2021) 
 
 
 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
                                                                                                                              PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………………………           (i)  
 
2. INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………………           (ii) 
 
3. ACRONYMS…………………………………………………………………….     (iii) -  (v) 
 
 
4. REPORT ………………………………………………………………………….    1 -  37 
 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE – AT A            
    GLANCE…………………………………………………………………………     38  - 49 
 
6. ANNEXURES……………………………………………………………………… 50  - 66 
 
7. MINUTES………………………………………………………………………            -  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                
  To be appended later 
 

 
 
DEPARTMENT- RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
(Constituted  w.e.f.  13th September, 2021) 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 1. Dr. K. Keshava Rao         -       Chairman 
  2.  Shri Hardwar Dubey    
 3. Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
 4. Shri Shwait Malik 
 5. Shrimati Ranee Narah  
 6. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
 7. Shri Sanjay Seth 
 8. Shri Abdul Wahab 
 9.  Dr. Amee Yajnik 
 10.  *Vacant 
     LOK SABHA 
 11.   Shri Hanuman Beniwal 
 12.   Ms. Mimi Chakraborty 
 13.   Shri Bharatsinghji Shankarji Dabhi 
 14.   Shri Hemant Godse  
 15.   Dr. S. T. Hasan 
 16.   Shri Ravi Kishan 
 17.   Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanjibhai Kundariya 
 18.   Shri Ravinder Kushawaha 
 19.   Shrimati Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
 20.   Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
 21.   Shri Ramprit Mandal 
 22.   Shri Vincent H. Pala 
 23.   Shri Chirag Kumar Paswan 
 24.   Shri T. R. V. S. Ramesh 
 25.   Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy  
 26.   Ms. Jothimani S.  
 27.   Shrimati Gomti Sai 
 28.   Shri Sunil Soren 
 29.   Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare 
 30.   Shri Thirunavukkarasar S.U. 
 31.   Shri Vijay Kumar (alias) Vijay Vasanth 
   SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Jagdish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
2.   Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Secretary 
3.   Shri Narendra Kumar, Additional Director 
4.   Smt. Sreeja. V., Deputy Secretary 
5.   Shri Pratap Shenoy, Under Secretary 
6.   Shri AnujVerma, Assistant Research Officer 
__________________________________________________________________________ 
*Vacancy caused due to Resignation of Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar from DRPSC on Industry w.e.f. 
08.11.2021, notified on 12th November, 2021. 
 
(i) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this T hree 
Hundred and Ninth Report on “Electric & Hybrid Mobility – Prospects and 
Challenges in Automobile Industry”, pertaining to the Ministry of Heavy Industries. 
 
2.  The Committee took up the subject for detailed examination. As part of 
examination of the subject, the Committee deliberated in detail in its meeting s held 
on 14th July, 2021, 3rd August and 10th August, 2021 wherein it heard the views of 
Ministry of Heavy Industries ; views/suggestions of Automobile Associations like 
SMEV, SIAM, ACMA etc.; views/suggestions of Electric Vehicle Manufacturers 
namely TATA Motors, Toyota, Maruti Suzuki, Hyundai, Kinetic, Ashok Leyland, 
Piaggio etc.  The Committee also obtained information through its  Questionnaires on 
the subject from the M/o Heavy Industries , Automobile Associations,                            
EV Manufacturers, M/o Power etc.  
 
3.  This Report is based on the submissions  made by the Secretary, Ministry of 
Heavy Industries; Automobile Industry Associations; Electric Vehicle Manufacturers 
and other materials such as the Background Notes, Presentations and replies to the 
questionnaire furnished to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Industry in connection with the e xamination of the subject. 
 
4. The Committee expresses its sincere gratitude to the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries, Automobile Industry  Associations and EV Manufacturers for presenting 
their valuable views/suggestions in connection with the examination of the subject 
before the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry. 
 
5. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at its meeting held on 
1st December, 2021. 
 
 
   Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
 
New Delhi 
1 December, 2021     
Agrahayana 10, 1943 (Saka) 
 
 
(ii) 

 
 
 ACRONYMS 
 
 
 
 
 2W    - Two Wheeler 
 
3W    - Three Wheeler 
 
4W  - Four Wheeler 
 
ACC   - Advanced Chemistry Cell  
 
ACMA  - Automotive Component Manufacturers  
Association of India 
B2C      -  Business-to-Consumer  
BEVs      -   Battery Electric Vehicles  
BPCL     -      Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited 
COVID     -      Corona Virus Disease  
CPSUs      -      Central Public Sector Undertakings  
DISCOMs     -       Distribution Companies 
DHI     -      Department of Heavy Industry 
 
EESL    - Energy Efficiency Services Limited 
EVs     -     Electrical Vehicles 
 
FAME- India     -       Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of  
       (Hybrid & Electric Vehicles in India) 
 
FY             -   Financial Year  
 
GDP     -       Gross Domestic Product 
GHG      -     Greenhouse Gases  
 
GST                                - Goods and Services Tax 
 
 
GW Hours     -     GigaWatt Hour 
 
(iii) 
 

 
 
 HEV - Hybrid Electric Vehicle 
HPCL - Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited 
ICE - Internal Combustion Engine 
IIT - Indian Institute of Technology 
IT - Information Technology 
IOCL -  Indian Oil Corporation Limited 
ITI - Industrial Training Institute 
kWh  - Kilowatt hour  
LCD - Liquid Crystal Display 
LED - Light Emitting Diode  
 
MoHUA -       Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
NBFC - Non Banking Financial Companies 
NTPC -       National Thermal Power Corporation 
OEM -        Original Equipment Manufacturer 
PCB - Printed Circuit Boards 
PGCIL - Power Grid Corporation of India Limited 
PHEV  -   Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicles  
PLI Scheme -       Production-Linked Incentive scheme 
PMP - Phased Manufacturing Programme 
 
PSU - Public Sector Undertaking 
 
R&D - Research & Development 
 
 RoI  - Return on Investment  
RWA  - Resident Welfare Association 
SIAM  - Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers 
(iv) 

 
 
SMEV  - Society of Manufacturers of Electric Vehicles  
USD - US Dollar 
 
UT         -       Union Territory 
 
WHO         -         World Health Organization 
 
xEVs                   -       Electrified Vehicles 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
(v) 

1 
 
 
Report 
 
The Indian automobile market is one of the fastest growing markets globally.  
India’s domestic vehicle sales (2 -wheeler, 3 -wheeler, Passenger Vehicle, 
Commercial vehicle) in the last decade has grown exponentially.  Today, the Indian 
Automobile In dustry is the fifth largest automobile industry of the world.  India is 
world’s largest tractor, 2W, 3W manufacturer and fifth largest passenger vehicle 
manufacturer.  A Glimpse of Indian Automobile Sector is given in Annexure-I.  
India is massively depend ent on crude oil imports from other countries for its fossil 
fuel needs with a n USD 112 billion oil import bill in the Financial Year 2019 
(equivalent to 4% of the country's GDP). The demand of fuel in Transport Sector is 
primarily met through crude oil im port from other countries, which is significantly 
draining the exchequer. 
 
2. India has the second largest road network in the world.  Road transport is the 
preferred mode of transport for passenger s as well as movement of goods compared 
to other modes of transport. The rising transportation has contributed significantly in 
overall Green House Gas ( GHG) emission.  The transport sector in India is the 
largest user of oil and second largest source of CO 2 emissions worldwide. Currently, 
Indian Transportation Sector accounts for one -third of the total crude oil consumed 
in the country, where 80% is being consumed by road transportation alone.  
 
3. Increasing levels of pollution in the environment is currently a global concern 
for most of the Governments across t he globe. Toxic emissions from Internal 
Combustion Engines (ICE) are one of the primary air pollutants of the environment.  
De-carbonizing transportation is the bottom -line to meet climate goals and limiting 
global warming by curtailing the disastrous impact of climate changes.   
 
Global Scenario 
 
4. The world is undergoing an unprecedented energy transition from a system 
based on carbon -intensive fossil fuels to a system based on low carbon, renewable 
energy, driven by the twin imperatives of mitigating cli mate change and generating 
economic prosperity.   
 
 

2 
 
5. Globally, countries such as Norway, Netherlands, Germany, France, UK have 
set targets for migrating to total electric transportation by 2030 -2040. Vehicle 
manufacturers such as Volvo, Daimler, Volkswag en, have already announced their 
plans to go for only electric power -train for future models.  As per forecast by 
International Energy Agency ( IEA) in its Global Outlook 2019 report, electric car 
stock will be ~90 million by 2025.  World Bank announced tha t it will stop financing 
upstream oil and  gas projects after 2019 to raise funds to finance a shift towards 
clean energy.  China accounts for 99% of global m arket for electric buses.  The 
global Battery Electric Vehicle (BEV) sales increased 30% in 2020 (o ver 2.1 million 
BEV sold), driven by European nations on the back of stricter emission norms.  
Around 3.12 million xEVs were sold globally in 2020 of which 68% were BEVs.  
Electric Vehicle comprised 4.6% of overall vehicles sold in 2020 , globally.   
 
Electric & Hybrid Mobility in India 
 
6. India, in 2015, signed the Paris climate agreement along with more than 170 
nations, in combating glo bal warming by cutting down on G reen House G as 
emissions. Further at COP21, India had pledged to reduce its carbon footp rint by    
33-35% by 2030 below 2005 levels. It has also pledged to increase the share of    
non-fossil fuels-based electricity to 40 per cent by 2030. Considering these factors, 
Government of India has decided to switch -over to alternative fuel options to  
minimize air pollution and rising crude oil import bill of the country to fulfill our 
commitments at the global level.  India has also set the national target of achieving 
30% EV sales penetration by the year 2030. 
 
7. Accordingly, the Committee on Industr y took up the subject “Electric & 
Hybrid Mobility – Prospects and Challenges in Automobile Industry ” for detailed 
examination and report thereon. The Committee held three meetings with the 
stakeholders in this regard i.e. on 14.07.2021, 03.08.2021 and 10.08.2021. 
 
8. In the meeting held on 14 th July, 2021, the Secretary, Ministry of Heavy 
Industries and Advisor, NITI Aayog presented their views on the subject and 
explained about the schemes and initiatives rolled out for faster adoption of Electric 
& Hybrid Mobility in India. The Representative of Auto Industry Associations viz. 
Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers ( SIAM), Automotive Component 
Manufacturers Association (ACMA), Society of Manufacturers of Electric Vehicles 
(SMEV) and Representative of T riGreen appeared before the Committee in its 

3 
 
meeting held on 3rd August, 2021 and presented their views on the Challenges and 
Prospects of adoption of Electric Mobility . Similarly, representatives of Automobile 
Manufacturers viz. Tata Motors, Toyota  Kirloskar, Maruti Suzuki, Hyundai, Ashok 
Leyland, Kinetic and Piaggio  also appeared before the Committee and presented 
their views in its meeting held on 10 th August, 2021. Further, the Committee during 
its Study Tour to Ahmedabad also visited the TATA Motors Pl ant, Sanand, 
Ahmedabad on 05.09.2021 and held discussions with their senior representatives on 
their road map for faster adoption of e-mobility.   
 
9. Introduction of Electric & Hybrid Vehicles in India marks the beginning of the 
transition from traditiona l Internal Combustion Engine Vehicles (ICE) to Electric & 
Hybrid Vehicles. EVs are not only environment friendly but also economically more 
viable in the long-run and will also help in reducing fossil fuel imports.   
 
10. As informed by Niti  Aayog, t he fol lowing diagram explains the reasons for 
preferring EVs: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
11. The Committee notes that India being the fifth largest automobile market 
in the world, imports crude oil from outside to cover 80% of its transport fossil 
fuel, thereby dra ining public exc hequer and also increasing pollution from 
traditional I nternal Combustion Engine Vehicles is at alarming levels.  The 
Committee further notes that India’s EV Ecosystem is still at a nascen t stage, as 
compared to several other count ries in the world.  Therefore, the need of the 
hour is to scale up the transition process to electric mobility. The Committee 
welcomes the decision take n by the Gov ernment of India to switch over to 
Hybrid & Electric V ehicles to tackle the GHG (CO2)  emissions from transport 
sector, helping to reduce crude oil import and also be in line with the latest 
global technology. 
 
12. Niti Aayog further informed the Committee that t he Electric Vehicles can be 
classified into Hybrid Electric Vehicle ( HEV), Plug -in Hybrid Electric Vehicle 
(PHEV) and Battery Electric Vehicle (BEV) as explained in the following diagram: 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5 
 
 
Electrified Technologies 
 
13. Battery Vehicle Electrification refers to a family of electrified vehicles 
technologies, which are collectively called xEVs (electrified vehicl es), each having 
an electric powertrain and the core EV parts, i.e., Battery, Motor & Electronics as 
common across all these technologies. xEVs include the following technologies and 
the key difference amongst them being on how the vehicle battery is charg ed and 
these includes :- 
 
 Hybrid Electric Vehicle s (HEVs) which has both Internal Combustion 
Engine (ICE) i.e., Petrol engine as well as an Electric Powertrain.  It does not 
depend on external charging source as the battery is charged onboard  (through 
ICE and also Regenerative braking etc.), also known as self charging electric 
vehicles as well as Strong  Hybrid Electric Vehicles (SHEV).  
 
 Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicles (PHEVs)  which also have both 
powertrains, like HEVs and can also be charged externally from the grid. 
 
 Battery Electric Vehicle s (BEVs) which have only the electric powertrain 
and draw the energy it needs only from the external grid.  
 
 
14. Further, a comparative analysis between the energy -efficiency, CO 2 emissions 
and operational cost of El ectric & Hybrid Vehicles vis-à-vis ICE vehicles , as 
informed by Ministry of Heavy Industries is given below:-  
 
 Electric Vehicle Hybrid Vehicle ICE Vehicle 
Car(Petrol) 
 
Energy Consumption/100 km 
 
14-20 kWh - - 
Avg. Energy Consumption/100 km 
 
151 kWh 4.5 ltr 5.2 ltr 
Energy Cost 7.52 per kWh 105/ltr  105/ltr 
Operating cost for avg. driving 10000 
km/year 
 
  11,250 47,250  54,600 
Avg. CO 2 emissions (CAFE based 
calculations) 
 
36.35 g/km 106.7 g/km 123.3 g/km 
Avg. energy efficiency (Tank to 
Wheel Efficiency) 
~75-77% 
(Grid to power at 
the wheels) 
~25-30% 
(Tank to Wheel 
Efficiency) 
~18-22% 
(Tank to Wheel 
Efficiency) 
 

6 
 
 
 Electric Vehicle Hybrid Vehicle ICE Vehicle 
Bus (Diesel)3 
 
Energy Consumption/km 
 
1.0 - 1.4 kWh/km 3.0 - 4.5 km/ltr 2.5 – 3.5 km/ltr 
Avg. Energy Consumption/100 km 
 
120 kWh 27.77 ltr 34.28 ltr 
Energy Cost 
 
7.52 per kWh  95/ltr 95 
Operating cost for avg. driving 25000 
km/year 
 
 2,25,000  6,59,537 8,14,150 
Avg. CO 2 emissions (CAFE based 
calculations) 
 
290.4 g/km 735.4 g/km 907.8 g/km 
Avg. energy efficiency (Tank to 
Wheel Efficiency) 
~75-77% 
(Grid to power at 
the wheels) 
~18-20% 
(Tank to Wheel 
Efficiency) 
~13-16% 
(Tank to Wheel 
Efficiency) 
 
1Average data considered from different vehicle ranges. 2Electricity cost varies from state to state  and 
operating cost varies accordingly. 3Some references taken from "uses -in-India Technology -Policy-and-
Benefits. 
 
 
15. The maintenance cost is less on Electric vehicles compared to ICE/gasoline 
Vehicles due to lesser number of parts. The specification co mparison between 
Electric and Gasoline Vehicles is given in the following table:  
 
Electric Vs Gasoline 
Parameter ICE/Gasoline Electric 
Power source Gasoline Electricity 
Number of Parts 2000 20 
Vibrations High None 
Noise High None 
Tail Pipe Emission High None 
Operating Cost High Low 
 
 

7 
 
16 (i) The Committee notes that Hybrid Electric Vehicles (HEV s) comple ment 
Battery Electric Vehicles (BEVs) by not only contributing to meet key national 
objectives of reducing fossil fuel consumption and carbon emissio ns by 
replacing Internal Combustion Engine (ICE) vehicles but also in speeding up 
BEV adoption as both these technologies have common EV parts. The 
Committee further notes that since the Hybrid vehicles use dual power train the 
gross weight is higher resul ting in relatively lower efficiency, in comparison to 
EVs. 
(ii) The Committee further notes that BEV enjoys some distinct advantages.  
Firstly, the electricity cost associated with operating a BEV over one mile is 
significantly lower than the gasoline cost  required for operating a comparable 
ICE Vehicle over the same distance.  Secondly, BEV costs less to maintain , 
owing to the relative elegance and simplicity of a battery -electric motor system 
compared with the frequent maintenance required for operation o f an ICE.  
Further, given the high tank -to-wheel efficiency of EVs, overall CO 2 emissions 
per vehicle will remain lower than ICEs.  The trend towards a higher share of 
renewable energy in energy generation will  further make EVs even more CO 2 
efficient. The Committee, therefore, hopes that the EV Sector in India will 
witness growth in the coming years, with more consumers opting to adopt EVs.   
INITIATIVES BY THE GOVERNMENT FOR PROMOTING ELECTRIC 
VEHICLES 
Ministry of Heavy Industries 
FAME (India) - I Scheme 
17. The Ministry of Heavy Industries informed the Committee that FAME India 
(Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid & ) Electric Vehicles in India 
Scheme was launched on 1 st April, 2015 for a period of two years with an outlay of 
795 crores intended to  support the hybrid/electric vehicle market development and 
its manufacturing eco -system to achieve self -sustenance.  The Scheme is one of the 
green initiatives of the Government of India to promote hybrid/electric technology in 
Road Transport so as to red uce dependence on fossil fuels as well as reduction in 
Green House Gas (GHG) emissions. Phase-I of the Scheme was extended from time 
to time upto 31st March, 2019 with an enhanced outlay of 895 crores.   
18. In the First Phase of the Scheme , about 2.8 lakh  hybrid and electric vehicles 
were supported by way of demand incentive amounting to 358 crores  (Approx.) 

8 
 
resulting in saving of about 84 million litres of fuel and reduction of about 210 
million Kg of CO 2 as on 31 st May, 2021. The Scheme further supported  deployment 
of 425 Electric buses in about 9 cities by way of incentives amount to 280 crores 
(Approx).  Through these buses, an additional 80 million litres of fuel and about 180 
million kg of CO 2 is expected to be saved during the lifetime of bus.  Proje cts were 
sanctioned for setting up of 520 charging stations to the tune of 43 c rores (Approx.) 
in cities like Bengaluru, Chandigarh, Jaipur and NCR of Delhi and major highways 
such as Delhi -Chandigarh, Mumbai -Pune, Delhi -Jaipur, Delhi -Agra etc.  Out of 
these 520 Charging stations, 392 charging stations have been installed.  Based on the 
outcome and experience of the phase -I of the Scheme, Phase-II of FAME India was 
approved by the Government and notified on 8 th March, 2019. 
FAME (India) - II Scheme 
19. The 2nd Phase of FAME Scheme commenced from 1 st April, 2019 with an 
outlay of 10,000 crores for a period of 3 years.  Out of total budgetary support, about 
86 percent of fund has been allocated for Demand Incentives so as to create demand 
for EVs in the Countr y.  The 2 nd Phase aims to generate demand by way of 
supporting 7090 e -Buses, 5 lakh e -3 Wheelers, 55000 e -4 Wheeler Passenger Cars 
(Including Strong Hybrid) and 10 lakh e -2 Wheelers. However, depending upon 
offtake of different category of e -Vehicles, these numbers may vary as the provision 
has been made for inter as well as intra segment wise fungibility.  The demand 
incentive is linked to battery capacity i.e., Rs.10,000/KWh for all eligible Vehicles 
except e -Buses (for which the incentive is Rs.20,000/KW h), subject to capping at 
certain percentage of cost of eligible Vehicles [ i.e., 40% for e-Bus and at 20% for all 
other categories of eligible Vehicles].  MHI has sanctioned 6265 electric buses to         
65 cities/STUs/State Government entities which incl udes 600 E -buses for intercity 
operations and 100 e -buses to Delhi Metro Rail Corporations (DMRC) for last mile 
connectivity.  Out of these 6265 electric buses, Supply Order for about 3118 electric 
buses for intra-city, inter-city operations and last mile connectivity have been issued 
as on 31 st May, 2021.  Out of these 3118 buses, 437 electric buses have been 
deployed; 160 buses are deployed in the city of Mumbai, 150 buses in Navi Mumbai, 
30 buses in Goa, 5 each buses in city of Dehradun & Silvasa, 25 in city of Patna,      
12 in city of Surat and 50 in Ahmedabad as on 31 st May, 2021.  A total of               
861 Electric buses have thereby become operational under FAME Scheme including 
425 electric buses as deployed in the cities of Srinagar, Jammu, Luck now, Indore, 
Kolkata, Guwahati and Hyderabad, Mumbai under Phase -I of the Scheme.  2877 
charging stations in 68 cities across 25 States/UTs were sanctioned.  Letters of award 

9 
 
for 1772 charging stations have been issued as on 31 st May, 2021.  MHI had also 
issued an EOI inviting proposals form Public/Private Entities for development of EV 
Charging Infrastructure on major expressways/highways across India.  Over 1550 
Charging Stations are envisaged under the EOI.  Out of these 1550 charging stations, 
300 charging stations for Long Range/Heavy Duty Vehicles i.e., Electric Buses and 
1250 charging stations are for Electric Cars and e2W & e3W as well.  
20. Deployment of Electric Buses in the major cities of the Country u nder FAME 
India Scheme is given below:- 
 
City/State/UT Electric Buses Deployed 
( in Nos.) 
Mumbai 200 
Navi Mumbai 180 
Kolkata 80 
Himachal 75 
Ahmadabad 50 
Indore 40 
Lucknow 40 
J&K(Jammu) 40 
Hyderabad 40 
Goa 30 
Patna 25 
Guwahati 15 
Surat 12 
Dehradun 5 
Silvasa 5 
MMRD 25 
Total 862 
 
21. MHI further informed the Committee that they are proactively assisting OEMs 
in increasing their sales and availing benefits from the Schemes.  As on 17 th June, 
2021, 38 OEMs have registered and revalidated 102 EV models (e2W - 31,             
e3W - 63, & e4W - 8), which are eligible for availing benefits under the 2 nd Phase of 
FAME India Scheme. As on 17 th June, 2021, 76939 Electric Vehicles                    
(e2W - 59354; e3W - 16037 and e4W - 1548) for demand incentive of about         
223 crores have been  supported.  Due to sluggish growth of EV sales, MHI brought 
the following amendments w.e.f 11th June, 2021 in the FAME Scheme for scaling up 
the EV sales:- 

10 
 
 Aggregating will be key method of bringing the upfront cost of 3W EV at an 
affordable level and at par with ICE 3W.  EESL will aggregate demand for      
3 lakh Electric 3W for multiple user segments. 
 
 For Electric Buses, 4 million plus cities (Mumbai, Delhi, Bengaluru, 
Hyderabad, Ahmedabad, Chennai, Kolkata, Surat and P une) will be targeted.  
EESL will go for aggregation of demand in these 9 cities for remaining            
E-buses under the Scheme on OPEX basis.  
 
 For Electric 2W, demand incentive is increased to @ Rs.15000/ - per KWh 
from @ Rs.10000/- per KWh. 
 
 The cap on incentives for Electric 2 Wheele rs is increased to 40% of the cost 
of vehicles from 20% cost of vehicles.  
 
22 (i) The Committee appreciates the amendments made  by Ministry of Heavy 
Industries in Phase -II of the Scheme, in order to accelerate the transition to 
Electric Mob ility. India p rimarily being a Two -Wheeler (2W) driven market 
with a lmost 22 million sales per year, t he Committee welcomes the recent 
decision under FAME -II scheme to increase the subsidy/i ncentive from              
Rs. 10,000/ - per K wh to Rs. 15000/ - per Kwh and increa se in the cap on 
incentive for e2W from 20% to 40% of the cost of vehicles. The Committee 
hopes that the increase in subsidy and the ceiling limit would help in demand 
creation in e2w segment. 
(ii) The Committee further suggests that similar measures to pr omote             
EV adoption also be taken in respect of  other segments such as e3w & e4w  
(private vehicles ). Further, all the S tates should be made aware of the benefits 
of the FAME scheme to encourage consumers to opt for EVs. 
(iii)  The Committee further notes that currently the FAME scheme is limited to 
subsidising xEV purchase & charging infrastructure. The Committee is of the 
view that its scope should be broadened to include funding/grants for xEV 
components development and R&D, Development of compo nents for charging 
infrastructure & capital subsidy/incentive for manufacturing xEV componen ts. 
(iv)  The Committee notes that the 2 nd Phase of FAME Scheme was launched on 
1st April, 2019 with an outlay of 10,000/ - crores for a period of 3 years and the 
scheme tenure has been extended for further two years.  However, the 
expenditure outlay has not been enhanced.  The Committee feels that with the 
extension of the period, there is likelihood for the requirement of more funds 

11 
 
for incentivizing more n umber of vehicles in the new segments like e3W & e4W 
for boosting the EV sale in the immediate future.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that fund assessment may be carried out by the M inistry of Heavy 
Industries to ensure successful implementation of the S cheme and if required , 
outlay may be enhanced and sufficient funds may be demanded in th e coming 
years.  
 
PLI Scheme 
23. India has been heavily reliant on the international market to meet its electric 
vehicle ( EV) component needs, especially battery cells. Pre sently, Lithium-ion 
chemistry based battery is popular in electric vehicles. Since India doesn’t have 
manufacturing facility for Lithium ion battery cells, all battery cells used for battery 
pack in electric vehicles are imported. Localization of cell manu facturing will , 
therefore, help in reducing EV costs, and in achieving self -sufficiency in EV growth.  
A national level strategy to secure critical raw material sources for cell 
manufacturing, and to incentivize local cell manufacturing through capital sub sidy, 
favour trade and FDI Policy, and investment models such as PPP are the  way 
forward to "Make in India". 
24. Accordingly, a Production-Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for manufacture of 
Advanced Chemistry Cell (ACC) in India has been approved by the Union Cabinet 
on 12 th May, 2021 in order to enhance India’s Manufacturing Capabilities and 
Enhancing Exports – for manufacture of Advanced Chemistry Cell (ACC) in India, 
The total outlay of the ACC PLI is Rs.18,1 00 crores for 5 years. The PLI Scheme for 
ACC ba ttery envisages incentivizing large domestic and international players in 
establishing a competitive ACC battery set -up in the country. It represents one of the 
largest economic opportunities of the twenty -first century for several global growth 
sectors, s uch as consumer  electronics, electric vehicles  and renewable energy.  The 
PLI Scheme for ACC batteries describes ACCs as battery cells with new generation, 
advanced storage technologies that can store electric energy as chemical energy and 
convert it back t o electric energy when required. The plan proposes a           
production-linked subsidy based on applicable subsidy per KWh and percentage of 
value addition, achieved on actual sales made for manufacturers who set up 
production units with a capacity of at least 5 GWh.  
25. In this regard, the Committee was informed that MHI had carried out 
extensive stakeholder consultations with potential investors e.g. M/s Tata 
Chemicals; L&T; Suzuki Motor Corporation, Japan; Amar Raja Batteries Ltd, Liv 

12 
 
Guard Energy Tec hnology Private Limited, Nexcharge -Exide Leclanche Energy 
Private Limited, Exicom Tele-systems, Renew Power, Ola etc. 
26. TOSHIBA Corporation, Denso Corporation and Suzuki Motor Corporation 
have jointly invested Rs . 1350 crore to set up India’s first lithi um-ion battery         
giga-factory in Gujarat. It will have an initial production capacity of 2.35 GWh. 
Japanese multinational electronics company TDK Corporation owns Amperex 
Technology Limited, which is planning to invest Rs . 7000 crore in India over th e 
next few years to produce lithium -ion batteries for smart phones and EVs. The 
company has acquired 180 acres of land in the state of Haryana to set up a 
manufacturing plant. 
27. The Committee has been informed that to qualify for the PLI Scheme for 
Advanced Chemistry Cells (ACCs), a high threshold  has been set by the 
Government as manufacturers have to set up production units with a capacity 
of at least 5 GWh.   Similarly, to becom e eligible for the  Automotive Champion 
Scheme, a company should earn revenue  of Rs.  1000 crore from overseas 
operations. Most of the existing Original Equipment Manufacturers ( OEMs) in 
the EV industry are nascent and don’t have such international operations .  The 
Committee, therefore, is of the view  that the specification and crit eria 
prescribed in PLI Scheme should be revisited to enable the Indian OEMs to be 
eligible for the Scheme. 
Ministry of Power  
28. The Ministry of Power in their written reply, apprised the Committee that 
penetration of EVs will lead to overall increase in electric load. However, 
considering the availability of surplus generation capacity at present in the country , 
the increase in demand will be met satisfactorily.  For future, the demand estimation 
exercise is underway and Electric Power Survey will capture  the demands of various 
segments of consumption, including the electric vehicle charging system demand. 
Moreover, the augmentation and expansion of Transmission and Distribution  (T&D) 
network is the desired requisite for catering to the increased demand du e to surge in 
adoption of EVs and that surplus generation during daytime, when the demand in the 
system is low, can be optimally used for charging of EVs.  
29. The Ministry further informed that as per the Charging Infrastructure for 
Electric Vehicles – “Revised Guidelines and Standards” issued by them on 
01.10.2019 (Annexure-II), the Public Charging Station  (PCS) shall have an 

13 
 
exclusive transformer with all related substation equipment including the safety 
appliance, and 33/11 KV lines/cables with associate d equipment including line 
termination etc., if required. These provisions have been included to offset any 
impact on power supply to end consumers and would ensure  that there is no impact 
on frequency of power cuts. 
30. The Ministry of Power further clari fied vide their letter dated 13th April, 2018 
(Annexure-III) that the  charging of batteries of electric vehicles through charging 
station does not require any licence under the provisions of Electricity Act, 2003.  
Regarding Grid Connectivity and Safety of supply for Charging Stations, Central 
Electricity Authority (CEA) has issued amendments to following regulations:- 
 Central Electricity Authority (Technical Standards for connectivity of the 
Distributed Generation Resources) Regulations, 2019. 
 
 Central Elec tricity Authority (measures relating to the Safety and El ectric 
Supply) Regulations, 2019. 
 
31. Ministry of Power brought amendment on 08.06.2020 (Annexure-IV) in the 
revised Guidelines and Standards - Charging Infra structure for Electric Vehicles  
issued on 01.10.2019 regarding capping of Tariff for Supply of Electricity to PCS 
and Definitions of Public Charging Station, Battery Swapping Stations, Battery 
Charging Stations and Electric Vehicle Charging Equipment.   Bureau of Energy 
Efficiency (BEE) has been selected as the Central Nodal Agency (CAN) under the 
provisions of Guidelines issued on 01.10.2019.  
 
32. Ministry of Power had further launched a nationwide “Go Electric” Campaign 
on 19.02.2021 to educate the general public on the benefits of e -mobility, inform the 
potential EV owners about the Government incentives for EV adoption, generate 
curiosity and transform the same into demand, discredit misinformation against 
Electric Vehicles and bring together multiple stakeholders under single platform.  
33. The Committee notes that Ministry of Power had launched a nationwide 
campaign “Go Electric” on 19.02.2021 to educate the general public on the 
benefits of e-mobility and Govt. incentives etc. However, in order to increase the 
awareness about the campaign, th e Committee is of the view that 
advertisements should be given in print as well as electronic media in               
co-ordination with all State Governments. Further , efforts should be made to 
conduct seminars, workshops etc. to increase the awareness about the campaign   

14 
 
 
so that consumers can be encouraged to go for EVs, removing apprehensions in 
their minds about range anxiety, charging infrastructure etc. 
34. Regarding the Tariff for supply of electricity  to EV Public Charging Stations,  
subsequent ame ndments as under  were issued on 08.06.2020 in Para 7 of the 
guidelines and standards for charging infrastructure dated 01.10.2019 :-  
"7.1 The tariff for supply of electricity to EV Public Charging Stations shall be 
determined by the appropriate Commission in accordance with the extant 
tariff Policy issued under Section 3 of the Electricity Act 2003. The tariff shall 
not be more than the average cost of supply plus 15 (fifteen) percent unless 
otherwise specified by the tariff policy. 
7.2 The tariff applicabl e for domestic consumption shall be applicable for 
domestic charging. 
7.3 The separate metering arrangement shall be made for PCS so that 
consumption may be recorded and billed as per applicable tariff for EV 
charging stations." 
 
35. A total of 266 Public Charging Stations have been installed by the CPSUs 
(Energy Efficiency Services Limited, PGCIL and NTPC) under Ministry of Power. 
Further, as per the information available with Central Electricity Authority (CEA) , a 
total of 589 Charging Stations have been installed in the country under the 
jurisdiction of various DISCOMs/distribution licensee. The details of Charging 
Stations for EVs installed in the country are given at (Annexure - V). Regarding the 
targets set to enable smooth transition to EVs, the “Char ging Infrastructure for 
Electric Vehicles – Revised Guidelines and Standards” issued by the Ministry of 
Power on 01.10.2019, envisage a phase -wise installation of Public Charging Stations 
as explained below:- 
 
Phase I (1-3 years):  
All Mega Cities with pop ulation of 4 million plus as per census 2011, all existing 
expressways connected to these Mega Cities & important Highways connected with 
each of these mega Cities may be taken up coverage. A list of these Mega Cities and 
existing connected expressways is attached at Annexure -I (to the guidelines dated 
01.10.2019). 
 

15 
 
Phase II (3-5 years): 
Big Cities like State Capitals, UT headquarter may also be converted for distributed 
and demonstrative effect. Further, important Highways connected with each of these 
Mega Cities may be taken up for coverage. 
The above priorities for phasing of rollout may be kept in mind by all concerned, 
including, different agencies of Central/State Governments while framing of further 
policies/guidelines for public Charging Infrastructu re of EVs, including for 
declaring further incentives/subsides for such infrastructure and for such other 
purposes. 
36. The guidelines also stipulate that at least one charging station should be 
available in a grid of 3 km x 3 km. Further, one charging station be setup at every  
25 km on both sides of highways/roads. For long range EVs and heavy duty EVs , 
there should be at least one charging station at every 100 kms.   Further, the 
guidelines specifies the type of chargers of different standards ( viz., CCS,  
CHAdeMO, Type -2 AC, Bharat AC 001) thus ensuring that the PCS owners have 
the freedom to install the chargers as per the market requirement.  To keep the PCS 
technology agnostic, it has been provided that any other fast/slow/moderate charger 
as per approv ed DST/BIS standards whenever notified can als o be installed at the 
PCS. Thus, the Guidelines provide an  extensive flexibility while ensuring a 
democratic choice to both EV owners and PCS providers to install the type and 
number of chargers.  The Guidelines as issued by MOP mentions that "Charging 
Stations may also be installed by Housing Societies, Malls, Office Complexes, 
Restaurants, Hotels etc., with provision to allow charging of visitors ’ vehicles which 
are permitted to come in its premises.   
37. The Committee notes that the tariff applicable for domestic consumption 
shall be made applicable for domestic charging , whereas for P ublic Charging 
Station (PCS)  provision a separate metering arrangement sh all be made for 
subsidized tariff.  The tariff on dom estic consumption is charged on slab basis 
and the consumption of units over and above the fixed quota used for EV 
charging, are charged at a high rate resulting in high electricity bill which is 
likely to discourage consumers for opting EVs. The Committee , therefore, 
recommends that as in the case of Public Charging Station , a sub -meter or 
separate meter arrangements may be installed for billing the charging point 
used exclusively for EV charging  by domestic consumers  to keep the electricity 
bill affordable to encourage potential buyers to go for EVs . 

16 
 
Ministry of Road, Transport & Highways 
38. The Ministry of Road, Transport & Highways (MoRTH) in their written reply 
to the Committee stated that they have taken the fol lowing measures to promote 
EVs:- 
 Formulated standards, at par with global standards, to enable manufacturing 
and adoption of EV and la id down requirements for Construction and 
Functional Safety, measurement norms of Electrical Energy Consumptio n 
(Wh/km), method of measuring the Range (km), safet y requirements for 
Traction Batteries and Type Approval requireme nts for EVs. It has also 
formulated standards for Type approval of Hybrid Electric Vehicles (HEVs) 
of all categories. 
 
 Issued standards for Retro fitment or Conversion of existing Motor Vehic les 
of various categories to hybrid electric and pure electric vehicles. 
 
 Laid down S afety and Type Approval Requirements for Power Trains of 
Hybrid and Pure Electric Tractors 
 
 Issued advisory to States & UTs to permit sale and registration of EVs without 
batteries, thereby enabling reduction of EV prices, as battery cost accounts for 
30-40% of vehicle cost; this can promote the battery swapping business 
model. 
 
 Issued notification for use of green number plate for electric vehicles.  
 
 Dispensed with the man datory requirement of spare tyres in cars to provide 
extra space for EV batteries in the vehicles. 
 
 Issued draft notification to exempt battery -operated vehicles from paying 
registration fees. 
 
39. In addition to the above initiatives, MoRTH introduced a n ew voluntary 
scrapping policy with the following objectives:- 
 Enable safer vehicle eco-system and reduce road crash fatalities 
 
 Reduce vehicular emission, thereby contributing to lower air pollution  
 
 Reduce the cost of owning vehicles, with lower fuel con sumption and 
maintenance cost of new vehicles 
 
 create a conducive regulatory framework for setting up registered vehicle 

17 
 
scrapping facilities and Automated Fitness Centres 
 
 create new avenues of investments and employment 
 
 create availability of low -cost raw material (scrap) for steel industry and other 
rare-earth metals 
 bring the informal vehicle scrapping industry into the formal sector  
 
 enable transition from a linear to circular economy in the automotive industry  
 
40. The Committee notes that c urrently, Scrapping industry in India is 
unorganized and not environment -friendly. Further, the existing scrapping 
cycle has a l ow recovery percentage in India,  which is about 70 -75%, while  
global benchmarks for recovery from scrapped vehicle are in the range of      
85-95%. This not only leads to inefficient resource management, but also         
non-realization of the full value of high -strength steel alloys and recovery of 
valuable rare -earth metals. Enabling vehicle scrapping in a scientific manner 
by using mode rn technology can enhance  value recovery from scrapped 
vehicles. The Committee, therefore, recommends the following measures:- 
 Setting up of Registered Vehicle Scrapping Centres across the country. 
 
 Incentivising consumers who opt for EVs and scrap their o ld ICE vehicles 
from such registered vehicle scrapping centres.  
 
41. Further, MoRTH vide advisory dated 17 th July, 2019 has requested all the 
States to implement the following measures to promote EVs:- 
 To create preferential policies in respect of waiver o f toll charges, parking 
fees, priority parking slots and  permit exclusive access to EVs to the 
congested zones in the cities. 
 States requested to provide incentives like land allotment for charging 
infrastructure, office complexes and public parking places . 
 States requested to operationalize MoRTH’s notification dated 18 th Oct 2018 
regarding exemption of EVs from the requirement of transport permit . 
 
 States requested to consider waiving of Road Tax to the maximum possible 
extent on the EVs so as to reduce the initial cost of the vehicle to the users. 
 
42. The Committee recommends that the Government should regularly 
monitor and ensure implementation of the measures issued through M /o Road 

18 
 
Transport and Highways advisory dated 17.07.2019 by all State G overnments 
to expedite transition to EVs.  
Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change 
43. The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC)  vide 
Notification S.O.432  (E) dated 15.05.2001 notified the Batteries (Management and 
Handling) Rules,  2001 which cover environmentally sound management of used 
lead acid batteries and detail out responsibilities of various stakeholders involved in 
manufacturing, importing, selling, assembling, re -conditioning and recycling 
activities.  To channelize the w aste batteries (used lithium ion batteries) generated 
from the electric vehicles through refurbishment/recycling, MoEF&CC notified draft 
'Battery Waste Management Rules, 2020' for management of various types of waste 
batteries including lithium -ion batteri es vide Notification S.O.770  (E) dated 
20.02.2020. The new draft rules on Battery Waste Management have the mechanism 
of 'Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR)' which imposes obligation on producers 
of batteries , which include lithium -ion batteries to col lect waste batteries, ensure 
refurbishing/recycling & recovery of metals, and reuse recycled elements.  Further, 
responsibility has been entrusted upon the manufacturers and other stakeholders 
involved in dealing with waste batteries, for safe and environm entally sound 
management of waste batteries to minimize the adverse impacts on environment.   
44. The Committee recommends that the Government should ensur e strict 
adherence of “Battery Waste Management Rules, 2020” by all stakeholders, for 
management of v arious types of waste batteries including lithium -ion batteries. 
The Committee hopes that with the imposition of ‘Extended Producer 
Responsibility’, producers of batteries would collect waste batteries, ensure its 
recycling and recovery of  rare earth -metals and re -use recycled elements 
thereby promoting  circular economy & minimizing the adverse impact  on 
environment. 
Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs 
45. The Ministry of Heavy Industries informed the Committee that the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs  had made the amendments in the following 
guidelines/law to establish charging stations and infrastructure in private and 
commercial building:- 
 Amendments in Model Building Bye -Laws (MBBL-2016) for electric Vehicle 
Charging Infrastructure. 
 

19 
 
 Amendment in Ur ban and Regional Development Plans Formulation and 
Implementation Guidelines (URDPFI -2014) for Electric Vehicle Charging 
Infrastructure. 
 
State EV Policies 
46. The States have a critical role to play  in ensuring the success of the mobility 
transition.  The FAME Scheme has been key in catalyzing state -level policy-making 
and market growth.  Most State EV Policies focus on demand -and supply -side 
incentives to lower the total cost of ownership of vehicles and promote local 
manufacturing. 13 states/UTs have approved/notified dedicated EV Policies whereas 
12 states/UTs are currently in the process of drafting EV Polices. The details , as 
furnished by the Ministry of Heavy Industries, are as given below:- 
 
 
47. The Committee is of the opinion that there is a stron g need to align 
policies across the Center and the State Governments as the difference in the  
structure and quantum of incentives across the Central and State policies, sales 
of Electric Vehicles are not picking up pace across the nation uniformly.  The 
Committee recommends that Government should  align the Central and State 
policies across the nation and calibrate them to create a ‘One India One Policy ’ 
for early adoption of Electric Mobility in India .  Further, this would give EV 
manufacturers a clear direction to invest and create demand and facilitate mass 
adoption to EVs along the length and breadth of the country.  
 

20 
 
48. Electric Mobility in India embarked its journey way back since the year 2015 
with the launch of FAME -(India)-I Scheme.  However, the EV penetration till now 
has been abysmal c ompared to aggregate ICE sale, the number of EVs sold in India 
in the year 2020 -21 was less than 1% as informed by one of the vehicle 
manufacturers as shown in the table below :- 
 
SALES VOLUME (in numbers) 
Vehicle 
Segment 
FY - 2020-21 % of EV sale 
over ICE Electric SHEV & 
PHEV 
ICE 
4W 5,906 564 27,04,987  
2W 1,43,837 - 1,49,75,550 
3W 7,982 - 2,09,215 
Buses 1,850 - 5,472 
Total 1,58,575 564 1,78,95,224 0.8 
SHEV - Strong Hybrid Electric Vehicle, PHEV - Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicle, ICE-Internal Combustion 
Engine Vehicles. 
 
 
49. The Committee is deeply concerned to note the poor uptake in the sales of 
EV i.e., less than 1% sale compared to that of the I nternal Combustion Engine 
(ICE) vehicle since the launch o f FAME -I Scheme in the year 2015 by the 
Ministry of Heavy Industries, which was primarily targeted to promote Electric 
Mobility in India.  For proliferation of a robust EV transition, it is imperative 
to layout a clear and planned strategy for introduction  of new technology or 
investments.  The Committee feels that the Ministry could not anticipate the 
evolution and adoption of the Electric Mobility , which at this point of time 
demands urgent mid-term course correction  to see the desired off -take in mass 
adoption of EVs.  
 
50. As per information provided by Ministry of Heavy Industries , t he trend of 
sales of Electric Vehicles in the last three years in the country is depicted below:- 

21 
 
 
  
51. Although the popularity of Electric Vehicles is increasing day by d ay in India 
but at a dismal pace . As per the Society of Manufacturers of Electric Vehicles 
(SMEV), EV sales in FY20 were 156,000 units, which were up by 20%                
year-on-year. In FY20, 152,000 electric two -wheelers (97.43%), 3,400 cars (2.17%) 
and 600 buses (0.38%) were sold, which is not even 1% of FY20 internal 
combustion engine vehicle sales. 
52. The demand for Electric vehicles in India have surged in the last five 
years, but there is still a long way to go for the industry to reach a parity p oint 
with Internal Combustion Engine (ICE) vehicles. The Committee recommends 
that Government should endeavour to make India a global manufacturing hub 
of electric vehicles through various measures like policy support and creating a 
conducive and comprehensive EV ecosystem to bring a parity with ICE vehicles 
so that consumers are encouraged to buy Electric Vehicles without any concern . 
53. The growing acceptance of EVs is the outcome of several  factors like 
technological advancements, rising storage capacit y of  traction batteries coupled 
with their falling cost, increased public charging facilities and Gov ernment 
incentives. The two EV technologies  currently remain at the top are the battery 
electric vehicles (BEVs) and plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEV).  
54. India is a value conscious and price sensitive market.  Affordability is the 
main consideration for making vehicle purchase decision for mass segment. Electric 

22 
 
Vehicles are more expensive for a similar performing ICE Vehicles. India is 
predominantly 2 wheeler market with  around 80% of Road vehicles being                 
2 wheelers. The annual sale of 2W is almost 20 million. Electrification of 2 wheeler 
segment provides best opportunity considering proportion, simplicity in design, 
intra-city usage r equiring limited driving range. The 2W is not dependent on high 
power charging infrastructure. Offering of incentives in the short and medium term 
is the solution to reduce the upfront cost and total cost of ownership. Under the 
FAME-II scheme, a demand in centive of Rs. 10,000/kwh, subject to a capping of 
20% of the cost was provided to the purchasers of e2W. The MHI in its recent 
revamped FAME -II scheme hiked incentive for e2W to Rs. 15000/kwh along with 
raising the cap to 40% of the ex -showroom price. Thi s has brought down the prices 
of e2W models in the market bridging the gap of price between e2W & ICE 2W. 
The enhanced incentive has encouraged potential consumers to adopt e2W resulting 
in a huge spur in the demand for e2W. 
55. E2W space is anticipated to witness significant disruption after 2024 when the 
battery prices fall below Rs. 7500/kwh. The point of inflection for mass adoption of 
electric 2W is expected to reach by around FY 2023 with Battery prices falling.  
56. Electric three whe elers (e3W) are majorly facilitating  the first and last mile 
connectivity to users of public transport. E3W is providing last mile connectivity to 
and from metro stations, bus station, residential colonies, corporate hubs and 
shopping areas. Further, logistics services and  last mile urban freight service 
provider like Ikea, BigBasket, Grofers and Gate -KWE use electric 3Ws to deliver 
products. On a total cost of Ownership  (TLO) argument, e -autos make sense even 
against CNG 3W vehicles. Along with additional benefit like no p ermit cost will 
drive adoption of electric autos in the near term. 
57. The following table shows the figures of 3 wheeler sales in the last three 
years:- 
Category Financial Years 
 
2018-19 
(in Nos) 
 
2019-20 
(in Nos) 
2020-21 
(in Nos) 
ICE 3W 7,00,442 6,30,572 2,09,215 
e3w 563 5997 6982 
 

23 
 
58. The e3W segment is depressed in demand generation mainly due to 
challenges on affordability. The Committee recommends that the demand 
incentive slab for e3W from Rs.  10,000/KWh to Rs. 15,000/KWh as done in the 
case of e2W, which will generate demand for e3w and help in creating                
self-employment and reduce pollution. 
59. The Committee was informed that the Indian automobile market is very huge 
but entirely different from the world market. More than two thir ds of the auto 
industry comes from passenger cars i.e., Indian Market is very big in numbers not in 
value. Global auto market is three trillion dollars, but India is involved in just about 
two percent of the Global trade. The reason is that the majority of  Indian cars are in 
the low segment.  As the price of e4W is much costlier than the similar ICE model, 
the sale of PV in Ind ia in the year 2019 was mere 0.1%.  The following table shows 
the details of Globa l EV Car sale in the year 2019 as per the informat ion furnished 
by one of the Auto Industry Associations :- 
Country PV Sales ICE 
(2019) EV Sales 
EV 
penetration 
2019 
Total 61,760,003 1,398,422 2.3% 
China 23,980,748 815,345 3.4% 
USA 17,049,080 238,687 1.4% 
Netherlands 446,114 61,564 13.8% 
Germany 3,607,258 61,323 1.7% 
Norway 180,083 60,328 33.5% 
France 2,664,860 47,967 1.8% 
UK 2,676,918 40,154 1.5% 
Korea 1,554,462 29,535 1.9% 
Canada 1,920,547 21,126 1.1% 
Japan 4,904,254 19,617 0.4% 
India 2,775,679 2,776 0.1% 
 
60. With the growing per capita inco me of the country, the purchase of 
Private e4 W was expected to go up rapidly since this category has high scope 
because electric car Models available in India are predominantly low cost  
segment. However , lack of incentives to individuals for purchase of e4W has 
been a big road block in the consumer ’s mind before opting for purchase of 
e4W. The Committee, therefore, urges that the Government shoul d extend 
incentives to purchase e4W by individual s to boost sales in this  category and 

24 
 
Fame-II Scheme should be mo dified to this extent, as it is already providing 
subsidy for commercial e4Ws. 
Views of Auto Associations and Vehicle Manufacturers  
61. In connection with examination of the subject “Electric & Hybrid Mobility – 
Prospects and Challenges in Automobile Indu stry”, t he Committee heard the views 
of Representatives of some Indian Automobile Associations viz., SIAM, ACMA, 
SMEV etc. in its meeting held on 3 rd August, 2021 to know the current status of the 
electric mobility in India, impediments and hurdles faced i n smooth transition to 
electric mobility and suggestions from the Automobile Industry.     
 
62. The Committee heard the views of Representatives of Electric Vehicle 
Manufacturers (OEM) in India in order to have their views on the status of Electric 
& Hybrid Mobility in India, its nuances, prospects , challenges and logistic hurdles 
faced by the EV manufacturers that are slowing down the faster transition to electric 
mobility.  Some prominent Electric Vehicle manufacturers namely Tata Motors, 
Toyota Kirloskar, Maruti Suzuki, Hyundai, Ashok Leyland, Kinetic and Piaggio  
presented their views before the Committee on 10 th August, 2021 in its meeting.  
 
63. OEMs are developing new EV localized models to meet the requirements of 
the Indian consumers for faster adopt ion. The Manufacturers are aligned with the 
Government's Phased Manufacturing Plan  (PMP) and are working towards 
localizing the supply chain and developing strategic supplier base.  They are also 
forming partnerships with global/India n companies to get rel evant technology and 
develop advanced electric vehicles in India.  Since the viability of EV is higher with 
higher running of vehicle, the taxi segment will be able to have higher/faster 
penetration of EVs.  Hence, many companies are partnering/developing business 
models in the shared mobility segments or battery swapping as both models change 
the customer payment from the pay-for-vehicle to pay-by-use. 
MAJOR CHALLENGES IN SMOOTH & FASTER EV ADOPTION 
 
64. The EV adoption challenges differ from country to co untry depending on 
various factors such as Per Capita Income of consumers (Purchasing Power), Price 
Sensitivity of the consumers, Unique Conditions, EV Infrastructure development & 
readiness of local EV parts Manufacturing Ecosystem etc. In the case of Ind ia, EV 
adoption is more difficult as compared to many other countries.   The main 

25 
 
challenges expressed by auto associations and vehicle manu facturers are delineated 
in the succeeding paras:- 
 
Affordability and Demand Generation 
65. The biggest challenge in the EV adoption is the affordability, demand creation 
and high upfront cost. Affordability in Indian conditions is very different from the 
rest of the world as per capita income in India is only about USD 2000, about 5% of 
that in Europe and Japan. This reduces the ability of many people to buy higher 
priced cars. As a result, 77% of cars sold  in India are less than 4 metres in length 
with average Ex -Showroom price is only Rs 6.6  lakhs and only 5% of cars sold  in 
India are priced at  Rs.15 lakhs or  more. Currently, t he cost of an EV is twice the 
price of an Internal Combustion Engine ( ICE) car. Even for a small car, it is 
estimated to be in the range of Rs. 12 -16 lakhs. Therefore, penetration of EVs at this 
price point is likely to be slow. 
66. The Committee notes that the EV industry  is initially facing many 
challenges for take -off due to poor demand from consumers owing to high 
upfront cost of EV s in comparison to I nternal Combustion Engine (ICE)  
vehicles, inadequate charging infrastructure etc. The Committe e urges the 
Government to play an important role as a catalyst for enabling faster adoption 
of Electric Mobility through  subsidies, incentives and long -term sustainable 
policies for demand creation. Further, S tates which have not fully waived off 
road tax/registration fee on EVs should be directed to do so in order to attract 
consumers to go for EVs. Lowering the price of EVs and additional incentives 
on scrapping ICE vehicles for EVs can also fast-track transition to Electric 
Mobility. 
Range Anxiety of Customers & Lack of Charging Infrastructure. 
67. Consumers have high sensitivity towards charging time, travel distance on full 
charge and the availability of charging infrastructure. This is collectively known as 
range anxiety. Robust charging infrastructure  is the basic and predominant 
requirement for Electric Mobility.  Due to rising petrol prices and low running cost 
of Electric Vehicle, middle cla ss families are considering buying electric vehicle. 
However, lack of visibility of public charging infrastruc ture creates dilemma in the 
minds of consumers for making purchase decision of electric vehicles, which has 
been one of the major challenges in the transition to Electric Mobility. 

26 
 
68. Customers are also apprehensive of limited range provided by current EV s as 
it compels the customers to stick to intra -city journeys only and not inter -city trips. 
As per Deloitte survey, 35% consumer think drivi ng range as the major constraint in  
buying EV. 
69. As informed by one of the Vehicle Manufacturers,  the following d iagram 
shows in Percentage the customer concern on all battery powered electric vehicles  :- 
 
70. The Committee was informed that t he FAME India Scheme envisages support 
for setting up of adequate Public Charging infrastructure to instill confidence 
amongst EV users, through active participation and involvement of various 
stakeholders including Government Agencies, Industries, and Public Sector 
Enterprises (PSEs).  The Department has also sanctioned 2 ,877 charging stations in 
68 cities across 25 States/UTs under Phase-II of FAME-India Scheme. Further, plans 
for public charging stations on 16 national highways and 9 expressways is in 
progress. 
71 (i) The Committee observes that the number of existing charging stations is 
very negligible and is  concentrated on ly in Metros and select cities. For a vast 
country like India with huge population of vehicles, the existing charging 
facility is too inadequate. Lack of visible number of charging station s have been 
the major reason for strong hesitancy in consumers to ac cept Electric Mobility. 
Unless and until the issue of inadequate charging facility is addressed, the 
adoption of Electric Mobility is hardly going to take -off. The Committee , 
therefore, recommends that the Government should emphasize on establishing 

27 
 
dense, robust and fast charging infrastructure across the country over and 
above the FAM E (India) -II Scheme and if need be with Public Private 
Partnership (PPP), to allay the fears of range anxiety of customers and instill 
confidence in them for opting to EV. 
 
(ii) The Committee desires that all the EV manufacturers should  make 
provisions for EV Charging facility  in thei r show rooms & service stations , 
which will add up to the charging infrastructure to alleviate consumer’s range 
anxiety. 
 
(iii) The Committee was informed that for a universal and uniform charging 
provisions at charging stations , the Bureau of Indian Standards along with the 
Department of Science and Technology, the Principal Scientific Adviser and 
NITI Aayog are on the role to standardize the adapt ers so that transferability 
and inter-operability is possible. The Committee desires that it be apprised of 
the outcome of such strategies developed by BIS and other stakeholders .  
 
(iv) To improve the mobility services, it is advisable to have a live data base of 
active charging stations installed all over the country and the locations readily 
available for the consumers for their reference enabling them to easily track the 
nearest charging station at times of need while on the move.  The Committee , 
therefore, urges that the MHI in coordination with the Ministries/Agencies 
concerned, may put in place such a facility for enhancing  the e -Mobility 
services.  
 
(v) The Committee desires that for increasing numbers of charging stations, 
the Government may explore installing Smart Meters on electric Poles  at 
dedicated locations and make small charging stations across the 
city/villages/highways and issue smart cards to the EV owners, who can charge 
their batteries anywhere which can be a good booster for faster adopt ion of 
EVs. 
(vi) The Committee further recommends that expenditure incurred on setting 
up of charging stations may be brought under the ambit of CSR  for a limited 
period of 2 -3 years .  Further, renewal energy may be used for powering the 
Public Charging Stations. 

28 
 
Non-availability of EV Components and Lack of Local Supply Chain. 
72. There is  lack of an integrated EV eco -system. An integrated EV Industrial 
cluster ensures a sustainable supply of batteries and other critical component s such 
as semiconductors, powertrain control systems and driving motor. EV has three 
critical components  - Batteries, Motor and power electronics. All these are high 
investment products. In addition, parts such as PCB, LCD/LEDs, Capacitors, 
Resistors, Diodes, Switches, Transistors, Connectors, Relays continue to be imported 
from china, Taiwan and South Korea. 90% of the world’s manufacturing of 
advanced Chemistry Cell  (ACC) is done in China.  USA, Europe and South Korea 
have made good progress in setting up manufacturing plants of AC C. India is 
importing its requirement of ACC. However, battery assembly has started in India.   
73. Lithium batteries deliver good performance; durability is much higher than 
lead acid batteries. They can be charged quickly, the life cycle is long and can be 
disposed off easily at the end of the life cycle. High density, High battery life, low 
battery cost and safety are the underlining factors of EV Battery. Presently ,   
Lithium-ion Chemistry based battery is popular in electric vehicles. India doesn’t 
have manufacturing facility for Lithium ion battery cell. All battery cells used for 
battery pack used in electric vehicles are imported from China, South Korea, Japan 
etc. All manufacturers in India are importing cells and assembling battery packs. 
Major components of Cell cost is the Cathode and Anode. Cathode supply chain is 
highly reliant on key global sources of Lithium, Nickel and deep tie up with the 
mining operations  to ensure a steady supply. Synthetic Graphite development over a 
period can be locali zed in India but would require advancement and investment in 
the development of environment friendly and efficient manufacturing process.  
74. Battery cost constitutes typically 40% cost of electric vehicle. Hence , the 
affordability of EVs will be directly proportionate to the battery cost. The drop in 
battery prices will result in cost reduction of electric vehicles thereby making EVs 
more lucrative. Future trend of reduction of battery price will depend on technology 
evolution.  Massive investment in R&D w orldwide is being made on Electric 
Vehicle Battery (EVB) to achieve increased range. The EVB should have high 
density, be safe, cheaper, with long life and fast charging.  
75. In advance chemistry cells, various chemistries of Lithium are available for 
commercial usage.  
 
 Lithium nickel cobalt aluminum 
 Lithium nickel manganese cobalt  

29 
 
 Lithium manganese spinel 
 Lithium Titanium Oxide 
 Lithium Iron Phosphate 
 
  
76. Nickel Cobalt Aluminium Batteries have high energy and power densities as 
well as good life span. High cost and over-heating, safety issues are the negatives. 
 
77. In the years to come, secured sourcing of lithium could be unquestionably 
pivotal to make EVs a success in any country.  However, India does not have 
enough of lithium reserves for manufactu ring lithium -ion batteries. Many experts 
also consider getting lithium fields in countries, such as, Bolivia or Chile.  Securing 
lithium supply could help to manufacture batteries at a globally competitive price 
with the potential of reducing the price of E Vs. The EV manufacturers informed the 
Committee that O riginal Equipment Manufacturers (OEM)  would require 
Government support to secure long -term supply of lithium and other strategic 
minerals for India. 
 
78. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the G overnment needs to 
forge international partnerships to secure access to key minerals.  The 
Government may form consortium for joint research, investment pooling and 
development of battery technology and battery recycling.  Since India is already 
a global p owerhouse in information technology, communication, digital 
technologies, an excellent foundation may be set up for the development of 
cutting-edge battery management systems.   
 
 
79.  Lithium Batt eries have completely revolution ized the portable electroni cs 
market including E V market. These batteries have high energy density and the 
technology is witnessing significant cost reduction.  As per the information furnished 
by Ministry of Heavy Industries , the following diagram shows the global price  trend 
of Li-ion Battery prices:- 
 

30 
 
 
 
80. The price of lithium batteries have declined by more than 80% in the last 
decade. According to market analysis, lithium -ion cell prices will further fall by 
more than 40%. As per report published by I HS Market, the average cos t of      
lithium-ion batteries will fall to less than Rs. 7500/kwh in 2023. Rapid growth in 
scale, increased application in EVs and growing manufacturing Capacity globally 
shall lead to this price decline. 
81. Home to some of the most polluted cities on t he earth, India is pivoting 
towards new-energy electric vehicles to clean up its toxic air. But with meager 
resources of lithium, the mineral essential to make batteries for electric 
vehicles, it is having to scou t for resources overseas . India’s EV production will 
rely heavily on imports from China of lithium chemicals used to make cathodes 
and battery  cells as China has a thriving lithium chemical, battery cathode, 
battery cell and EV supply chain. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
Government should explore other sources of battery raw material like Lithium 
etc. rather than solely relying on Ch ina for its import needs to ensure 
unhampered supply of raw materials. 
 
 
82. The Committee further recommends that Government should endeavour 
to achieve self -dependency in manufacturing Lithium -ion batteries to reduce 

31 
 
dependency on other countries, especi ally China for unhindered availability of 
raw materials used in batteries.  
 
83. The Committee also recommends that Government should ensure 
strengthening supply chain network, e asy availability and accessibility to raw 
material and components for batteries, to promote EV adoption. 
 
Lack of Financing 
84. The Committee was informed that Fin ance for retail consumers of EVs is still 
difficult and at higher cost. EVs are regularly charged higher interest and insurance 
premium than ICE Vehicles. Moreover, specia lized EV finance options are limited. 
Availability of easy and affordable financing options wo uld encourage EV Purchase.  
85. The Committee notes that c urrently, loans for I nternal Combustion 
Engine (ICE) vehicles are relatively easy to get with lower inte rest rates as the 
vehicle’s value is well -understood, making loans secure for the bank. However, 
this is not the case with EVs, as their residual value is not clear. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that Government should designate EV as a 
priority len ding sector, especially financing for commercial fleets, as they are 
critical to the transition towards cleaner mobility. Availability of easy loans 
with lower interest and longer tenures will make it easier for the consumer to 
go for EVs, which ultimately  lead to faster adoption of electric mobility across 
the country. 
Lack of EV Awareness 
86. The main reason impeding the adoption of EVs is lack of awareness among 
customers in terms of Products, Solutions and the Technology advancement that has 
been done i n the category. EVs being in nascent stage and public experience being 
very limited in this area , has given rise to many doubts and myths thereby making 
customers apprehensive on the choice and hesitate to consider them as an option. 
Hence, a robust public  awareness campaign on the benefits of EVs, economic 
affordability and the latest technology being deployment may help allay such fears 
and improve the customer perception towards the EV segment.  
87. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government and  all other 
stakeholders (especially manufacturers) should make use of every feasible 
promotional and advertising platform to highlight the benefits of Electric 

32 
 
Vehicles and EV technology. Informational campaigns across print and 
electronic media can make a  huge impact. In addition to the obvious benefits 
such as anti -pollution and cost -efficiency, busting myths such as battery 
longevity that surround EV usage may also be highlighted. Return on 
Investment (RoI) and cost of ownership benefits of EVs vis a vis conventional 
Internal Combustion Engines (ICE) can be demonstrated. Customers may also 
be educated about the various benefit s, incentives and subsidies offered by the 
Government such as exemptions of EVs from road tax during vehicle 
registration, discounts offered on purchase of EVs etc. 
Lack of R&D Support  
88. Creating large scale local EV parts manufacturing eco -system is the 
sustainable approach to improve affordability and hasten electrification. The key to 
achieve sustainable affordability is to lowe r manufacturing cost , which is possible 
only through technology improvements  (R&D). The biggest challenge is to develop 
local EV Parts manufacturing eco-system that is at global scale and quality. 
89. The Committee observes that there is no sufficient R&D Support by the 
Ministry for technological advancement. The spending in  India on R&D is 
point less than 1 percent whereas  the major economies spend around 5 to 6 
percent.  Because of poor funding, India is lagging behind in R&D.  Without 
sufficient R&D, tec hnological improvements/advancement is not possible.   The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that R&D facilities should be improved and 
its funding should also be enhanced. The M inistry of Heavy Industries has 
centers/autonomous bodies like Automotive Resear ch Association of India  
(ARAI) and National Automotive Testing and R&D Infrastructure Project 
(NATRIP) for R&D of I nternal Combustion Engine (ICE)  Vehicles. The 
Committee recommends that MHI should set -up R&D Cent ers for supporting 
EVs also for technological advancement. 
90. During the course of discussion it was suggested that Ministry of Heavy 
Industries and EV Manufacturers should jointly work together to undertake 
R&D for furthering the cause of ' Make-In-India' so that in the coming years 
country can become self-reliant in manufacturing EV batteries and components 
indigenously. The Committee , therefore,  recommends that M HI and EV 
manufacturers should make concerted efforts for setting up of a robust R&D 
infrastructure to promote indigenous manufacturing to reduce import s and 

33 
 
achieving self-reliance through technology improvements and advancements 
(R&D). 
 
91. The Committee further recommends that the Government should focus 
on creating local manufacturing ecosystem at global scale in order to lower the 
price of EV  batteries, which will ultimately help  to create EV demand. The 
Government should also focus on global competitiveness of indigenous EV 
industry. However, the most important element is to develop local EV parts 
manufacturing eco-system that is at global scale & quality. 
 
 
92. At p resent, there is no Government S cheme for incentivizing the local 
manufacturing of EV components other than battery cells. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that Government may mull over bringing a scheme 
focused on loca lization of other critical EV components as that would give a 
good boost to Electric Mobility in India. 
Increased Import Duties 
93. One of the major impediments for production of EVs is the absence of EV 
Parts manufacturing eco -system. Because of lack of l arge-scale local manufacturing 
of EV parts, the cost of EVs is also higher, thereby, impacting demand for these 
vehicles. Therefore, currently India is in a situation of vicious cycle in which low 
demand for EVs is ultimately leading to lack of investment viability, due to which 
localization is impacted and hence lowering of production cost of EVs becomes 
difficult. 
 
94. Some of the Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs)  informed the 
Committee that they made a great progress in localizing major components.  
However, few child parts are still imported from other co untries like China. 
The import  duties have been increased from 5% to 15% to encourage local 
manufactures. But due to non -production of some of the                                  
child-parts/components, the cost of Production ha s increased due to hike in 
import duties. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Import duty may 
be raised only i n a phased manner till such components are manufactured 
locally. 
 

34 
 
 
Lack of Skilled Manpower 
95. There is lack  of skilled man -power due to introduction of new & evolving 
technology. Hence, greater focus on skilling initiatives will be required to bridge the 
gap for the newer skill system & competitiveness. 
96. The aggressive push by the Government and EV manufactu rers will 
certainly see a massive EV Industry setup in the coming years , including 
battery production, EV specific assembly lines as well as the charging 
infrastructure.  This would naturally lead to a huge demand of technically 
skilled workforce in the ar ea, as several auto makers have already announced 
their upcoming EV plans in the country.  Meeting this demand will not be 
possible without the cooperation of the training institutes in the country. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that EV -specific trai nings/courses should 
be included into the curriculum of premier institutes like  IITs, Engineering 
Colleges etc. to ensure that there is no scarcity of skilled manpower for India n 
EV Industry. 
 
97. The Committee further recommends that skill and capability building 
measures and skills improvement of manpower in handling fire safety hazards 
in case of EVs should be ensured. Up-skilling of workshop manpower to handle 
servicing and repair of electric powertrain, connected features, vehicle analytics 
etc. should be done expeditiously. 
 
Limited EV Model Compared to ICE 
98. As the EV technology is evolving and that the Market is yet to be established, 
the EV Manufacturers are cautious in mass production in the absence of expected 
demand. The limited number of model s available in the market ha ve been holding 
back the consumer to go for EVs of their preference.  
Uncertainty About Resale Value 
99. As the e-mobility is a new concept , it will be too early to estimate the period 
of road worthiness of  the EV.  Besides, the resale value also depends  upon the 
market forces like  demand etc.  Hence, at this point in time, it is not possible to 
assess the actual resale value, which is stalling the consumers for EV purchase.  

35 
 
GST disparity 
100. The Committee has been informed that at present EV Cars are taxed at 
5%, and big Hybrid Electric Vehicles (HEVs) are taxed at 43% (28% GST plus 
15% Cess). EVs reduce energy consumption by 75% over I nternal Combustion 
Engine (ICE)  while HEVs reduce energy consumption by 30 -45% over ICE 
without any external charger. Hence , HEVs are also entitled for discount on 
GST rate as in the case of EVs. GST sup port of HEV would help the whole       
eco-systems and provide impetus to EVs. The Committee , therefore, 
recommends that the GST rates on HEV may al so be at a lower rate to create a 
lucrative EV ecosystem. 
101. The following diagram  furnished by Ministry of Heavy Industries shows the 
Governmental support globally for promotion of EVs :- 
 
 
102. The Committee observes that the intervention by the Gover nment for 
promoting EV adoption by way of subsidies, financial support, R&D etc. in 
India is very minimal compared to other countries , which is the reason why the 
offtake of EV adoption in India has been very low.  The Committee desires that 
the Government should have focused strategy for enhancing it s involvement for 
supporting the EV transition.  
Prospects of Electric Mobility in India 
Clean Environment 

36 
 
103. Electric Mobility is an important step towards reducing Green House Gases 
that are emitted from tr ansportation.  The EV transition will provide safe, inclusive, 
economic and clean transport options.  Successful mass EV adoption will make 
Earth a better place to live healthily. 
Employment Generation 
104. The EV initiatives of the Government can create a  lot of demand for 
electronics, which could also complement creating a local eco -system.  This could 
be a boon, provided electronics are locally manufactured.  Further, EV offtake can 
create a big demand for cells & batteries and since they are also requir ed for other 
applications, this can lead to another growth opportunity for local manufacturing and 
economic activities, provided indigenous localization takes place.  
105. As the Electric Mobility is a sunrise sector, there is lack of skilled manpower. 
There is a scope for large scale manpower induction. The requirement of trained 
workforce is high in the EV Sector due to new and different technology from ICE.   
106. With increasing charging infrastructure facilities, new business models would 
evolve (includ ing battery swapping for 2 W and 3W) giving rise to new job 
opportunities.  Similarly, as electric mobility is best suited for first and last mile 
connectivity, additional job opportunities in this space would also be created.  
Scope for MSMEs 
107. With e-mobility getting a push through Government schemes and policies, the 
MSMEs have a good scope for manufacturing of new components of EVs and 
charging infrastructure.  The EV Sector will also open up opportunities for Start-ups. 
EV Progressive Policy 
108. Niti Aayog has pegged EV sales penetration in India at 70% for commercial 
cars, 30% for p rivate cars, 40% for buses & 80% for 2Ws & 3Ws by 2030. Since 
India is at a very nascent stage of electrification, Niti Aayog has identified certain 
vehicle segments like 2Ws, 3Ws & 4Ws (Fleet usage) and Buses as the low hanging 
fruits. 
109(i) The objective of the Government for adoption of Electric & Hybrid 
Mobility is to achieve reduction in fossil fuel consumption, pollution and 
Carbon Emission, reducing net imports, rea lizing energy security , enhancing 
local manufacturing, creation of jobs  etc. The Automobile Industry as a whole, 

37 
 
even before the onset of Covid -19 Pandemic was going through slowdown due 
to poor demand because of non -availability of finance to consumers. M oreover, 
the automobile and auto components manufacturer s had made huge 
investments for the transition from BS -IV to BS -VI emission norms w.e.f.        
1st April, 2020. The Covid -19 Pandemic has further stalled the Auto Industry. 
Hence, given the prevailin g precarious situation in the automobile sector, the 
Committee feels that to achieve the end objective, a  technology neutral 
approach to the EV Mobility would be prudent to ensure de -risking from the 
rapid technology transformations. 
(ii) The Committee has  also been informed that technology innovations are 
occurring rapidly and other options i.e. Hydrogen and alternate fuels such as 
Ethanol are also coming up.  Therefore, the committee is of the view that 
widening the technology options would be a better ap proach in the journey 
ahead.  Further, Government policy support may be provided to all electrified 
technologies (BEV, HEV, PHEV & FCEV) , which will ensure a disruption free 
and faster transition from ICE vehicles. 
(iii) The Committee is hopeful that with the trend of fall in battery prices and 
indigenous production of batteries and  EV Components, the gap between the 
price of EV in comparison with similar I nternal Combustion Engine (ICE)  
model/category will be bridged soon and the consumers will shift to e -mobility 
given its low total cost of ownership.   The Committee further hopes that 
measures such as creation of demand for local manufacturing, reduction in 
GST rate for Hybrid EVs, announcements of long -term policy measures for 
Electric and Hybrid Vehicles , provision of subsidy for EVs, revisiting PLI 
Scheme, incentive for scrapping of ICE vehicles while purchasing EVs, 
availability of easy and affordable financing options for EV components, 
inclusion  of EVs in Priority Sector Lending, extension of subsidy  under 
FAME-II scheme to e3Ws and private e4Ws, enhancing awareness among 
people about EV adoption, extension of Government support for Research & 
Development in the field of EV manufacture , robust EV charging  
infrastructure etc. would accelerate the EV pe netration in transport sector, as 
per the targets set by the Government. 
 
******* 

38 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE – AT A GLANCE 
 
1.  The Committee notes that India being the fifth largest automobile 
market in the world, imports crude oil from  outside to cover 80% of its 
transport fossil fuel, thereby dra ining public exchequer and also increasing 
pollution from traditional I nternal Combustion Engine Vehicles is at alarming 
levels. The Committee  further notes that India’s EV Ecosystem is still a t a 
nascent stage, as compared to several other count ries in the world.  Therefore, 
the need of the hour is to scale up the transition process to electric mobility. The 
Committee welcomes the decision take n by the Govt. of India to switch over to 
Hybrid & E lectric Vehicles to tackle the GHG (CO2)  emissions from transport 
sector, helping to reduce crude oil import and also be in line with the latest 
global technology. 
(Para 11) 
 
2. The Committee notes that Hybrid Electric Vehicles (HEV s) comple ment 
Battery Electric Vehicles (BEVs) by not only contributing to meet key national 
objectives of reducing fossil fuel consumption and carbon emissions by 
replacing Internal Combustion Engine (ICE) vehicles but also in speeding up 
BEV adoption as both these technologies have common EV parts. The 
Committee further notes that since the Hybrid vehicles use dual power train the 
gross weight is higher resulting in relatively lower efficiency, in comparison to 
EVs.  
(Para 16 (i)) 
 
3. The Committee further notes that BEV enjoys some distinct advantages.  
Firstly, the electricity cost associated with operating a BEV over one mile is 
significantly lower than the gasoline cost required for operating a comparable 
ICE Vehicle over the same distance.  Secondly, BEV costs less to mainta in, 
owing to the relative elegance and simplicity of a battery -electric motor system 
compared with the frequent maintenance required for operation of an ICE.  
Further, given the high tank -to-wheel efficiency of EVs, overall CO 2 emissions 
per vehicle will r emain lower than ICEs.  The trend towards a higher share of 
renewable energy in energy generation will  further make EVs even more CO 2 
efficient. The Committee , therefore, hopes that the EV Sector in India will 
witness growth in the coming years, with more consumers opting to adopt EVs. 
 
(Para 16 (ii)) 

39 
 
 
4. The Committee appreciates the amendments made by Ministry of Heavy 
Industries in Phase -II of the Scheme, in order to accelerate the transition to 
Electric Mobility. India primarily being a Two -Wheeler (2W)  driven market 
with almost 22 million sales per year, the Committee welcomes the recent 
decision under FAME -II scheme to increase the subsidy/incentive from Rs. 
10,000/- per Kwh to Rs. 15000/ - per Kwh and increase in the cap on incentive 
for e2W from 20% to 40% of the cost of vehicles. The Committee hopes that the 
increase in subsidy and the ceiling limit would help in demand creation in e2w 
segment. 
 
(Para 22 (i)) 
 
5. The Committee further suggests that similar measures to promote EV 
adoption also be taken  in respect of other segments such as e3w & e4w (private 
vehicles). Further all the States should be made aware of the benefits of the 
FAME scheme to encourage consumers to opt for EVs.  
 
(Para 22 (ii)) 
 
6. The Committee further notes that currently the FAM E scheme is limited 
to subsidising xEV purchase & charging infrastructure. The Committee is of 
the view that its scope should be broadened to include funding/grants for xEV 
components development and R&D, Development of components for charging 
infrastructure & capital subsidy/incentive for manufacturing xEV components.  
 
(Para 22 (iii)) 
 
7.  The Committee notes that the 2 nd Phase of FAME Scheme was launched 
on 1st April, 2019 with an outlay of 10,000/ - crores for a period of 3 years and 
the scheme tenure has  been extended for further two years.  However, the 
expenditure outlay has not been enhanced.  The Committee feels that with the 
extension of the period, there is likelihood for the requirement of more funds 
for incentivizing more n umber of vehicles in the new segments like e3W & e4W 
for boosting the EV sale in the immediate future.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that fund assessment may be carried out by the M inistry of Heavy 
Industries to ensure successful implementation of the S cheme and if required, 
outlay may be enhanced and sufficient funds may be demanded in th e coming 
years.  

40 
 
 
(Para 22 (iv)) 
 
8. The Committee has been informed that to qualify for the PLI Scheme for 
Advanced Chemistry Cells (ACCs) , a high threshold  has been set by the 
Government as manufacturers have to set up production units with a capacity 
of at least 5 GWh.   Similarly, to becom e eligible for the  Automotive Champion 
Scheme, a company should earn revenue of Rs.1000 crore from overseas 
operations. Most of the existing Original Equipment Manufacturers ( OEMs) in 
the EV industry are nascent and don’t have such international operations .  The 
Committee, therefore, is of the view  that the specification and criteria 
prescribed in PLI Scheme should be revisited to enable the Indian OEMs  to be 
eligible for the Scheme. 
 
(Para 27) 
 
9. The Committee notes that Ministry of Power had launched a nationwide 
campaign “Go Electric” on 19.02.2021 to educate the general public on the 
benefits of e -mobility and Govt. incentives etc. However, in order  to increase 
the awareness about the campaign, the Committee is of the view that 
advertisements should be given in print as well as electronic media in               
co-ordination with all State Governments. Further, efforts should be made to 
conduct seminars, workshops etc. to increase the awareness about the campaign  
so that consumers can be encouraged to go for EVs, removing apprehensions in 
their minds about range anxiety, charging infrastructure etc. 
(Para 33) 
 
10. The Committee notes that the tariff applicable for domestic consumption 
shall be made applicable for domestic charging , whereas for P ublic Charging 
Station (PCS)  provision a separate metering arrangement shall be made for 
subsidized tariff.  The tariff on domestic consumption is charged on s lab basis 
and the consumption of units over and above the fixed quota used for EV 
charging, are charged at a high rate resulting in high electricity bill which is 
likely to discourage consumers  for opting EVs. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that as i n the case of Public Charging Station , a sub -meter or 
separate meter arrangements may be installed for billing the charging point 
used exclusively for EV charging  by domestic consumers  to keep the electricity 
bill affordable to encourage potential buyers t o go for EVs. 
(Para 37) 
 

41 
 
11. The Committee notes that c urrently, Scrapping industry in India is 
unorganized and not environment -friendly. Further, the existing scrapping 
cycle has a l ow recovery percentage in India,  which is about 70 -75%, while 
global benc hmarks for recovery from scrapped vehicle are in the range of      
85-95%. This not only leads to inefficient resource management, but also         
non-realization of the full value of high -strength steel alloys and recovery of 
valuable rare -earth metals. Enabling vehicle scrapping in a scientific manner 
by using modern technology can enhance value recovery from scrapped 
vehicles. The Committee, therefore, recommends the following measures:- 
 Setting up of Registered Vehicle Scrapping Centres across the country. 
 
 Incentivising consumers who opt for EVs and scrap their old ICE vehicles 
from such registered vehicle scrapping centres.  
(Para 40) 
 
12. The Committee recommends that the Government should regularly 
monitor and ensure implementation of the measures is sued through M/o Road 
Transport and Highways advisory dated 17.07.2019 by all State Governments to 
expedite transition to EVs. 
(Para 42) 
 
13.  The Committee recommends that the Government should ensure strict 
adherence of “Battery Waste Management Rules, 2 020” by all stakeholders, for 
management of various types of waste batteries including lithium -ion batteries. 
The Committee hopes that with the imposition of ‘Extended Producer 
Responsibility’, producers of batteries would collect waste batteries, ensure i ts 
recycling and recovery of rare earth -metals and re -use recycled elements 
thereby promoting circular economy & minimizing the adverse impact on 
environment. 
(Para 44) 
 
14. The Committee is of the opinion that there is a strong need to align 
policies acro ss the Center and the State Governments as the difference in the  
structure and quantum of incentives across the Central and State policies, sales 
of Electric Vehicles are not picking up pace across the nation uniformly.  The 
Committee recommends that Government should  align the Central and State 
policies across the nation and calibrate them to create a ‘One India One Policy ’ 
for early adoption of Electric Mobility in India .  Further, this would give EV 

42 
 
manufacturers a clear direction to invest and create demand and facilitate mass 
adoption to EVs along the length and breadth of the country.  
(Para 47) 
 
15. The Committee is deeply concerned to note the poor uptake in the sales of 
EV i.e., less than 1% sale compared to that of the I nternal Combustion Engine 
(ICE) vehicle since the launch of FAME -I Scheme in the year 2015 by the 
Ministry of Heavy Industries, which was primarily targeted to promote Electric 
Mobility in India.  For proliferation of a robust EV transition, it is imperative 
to layout a clear and plan ned strategy for introduction of new technology or 
investments.  The Committee feels that the Ministry could not anticipate the 
evolution and adoption of the Electric Mobility , which at this point of time 
demands urgent mid-term course correction  to see the desired off -take in mass 
adoption of EVs. 
(Para 49) 
 
16. The demand for Electric vehicles in India have surged in the last five 
years, but there is still a long way to go for the industry to reach a parity point 
with Internal Combustion Engine (ICE) vehi cles. The Committee recommends 
that Government should endeavour to make India a global manufacturing hub 
of electric vehicles through various measures like policy support and creating a 
conducive and comprehensive EV ecosystem to bring a parity with ICE ve hicles 
so that consumers are encouraged to buy Electric Vehicles without any concern.  
 
(Para 52) 
 
17. The e3W segment is depressed in demand generation mainly due to 
challenges on affordability. The Committee, recommends that the demand 
incentive slab for e3W from Rs. 10,000/KWh to Rs.  15,000/KWh as done in the 
case of e2 W, which will generate demand for e3w and help in creating           
self-employment and reduce pollution. 
(Para 58) 
 
 
18. With the growing per capita income of the country, the purchase of  
Private e4 W was expected to go up rapidly since this category has high scope 
because electric car Models available in India are predominantly low cost  
segment. However , lack of incentives to individuals for purchase of e4W has 
been a big road block in the consumer’s mind before opting for purchase of 

43 
 
e4W. The Committee, therefore, urges that the Government shoul d extend 
incentives to purchase e4W by individual s to boost sales in this  category and 
Fame-II Scheme should be modified to this extent, as it is al ready providing 
subsidy for commercial e4Ws. 
(Para 60) 
 
19. The Committee notes that the EV industry is initially facing many 
challenges for take -off due to poor demand from consumers owing to high 
upfront cost of EVs in comparison to Internal Combustion E ngine (ICE) 
vehicles, inadequate charging infrastructure etc. The Committee urges the 
Government to play an important role as a catalyst for enabling faster adoption 
of Electric Mobility through subsidies, incentives and long -term sustainable 
policies for demand creation. Further, States which have not fully waived off 
road tax/registration fee on EVs should be directed to do so in order to attract 
consumers to go for EVs. Lowering the price of EVs and additional incentives 
on scrapping ICE vehicles for EVs  can also fast -track transition to Electric 
Mobility. 
(Para 66) 
 
20. The Committee observes that the number of existing charging stations is 
very negligible and is concentrated only in Metros and select cities. For a vast 
country like India with huge popul ation of vehicles, the existing charging 
facility is too inadequate. Lack of visible number of charging station s have been 
the major reason for strong hesitancy in consumers to accept Electric Mobility. 
Unless and until the issue of inadequate charging fac ility is addressed, the 
adoption of Electric Mobility is hardly going to take -off. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Government should emphasize on establishing 
dense, robust and fast charging infrastructure across the country over and 
above th e FAME (India) -II Scheme and if need be with Public Private 
Partnership (PPP), to allay the fears of range anxiety of customers and instill 
confidence in them for opting to EV. 
(Para 71 (i)) 
 
21. The Committee desires that all the EV manufacturers should  make 
provisions for EV Charging facility  in thei r show rooms & service stations , 
which will add up to the charging infrastructure to alleviate consumer’s range 
anxiety. 

44 
 
(Para 71 (ii)) 
 
22. The Committee was informed that for a universal and uniform charging 
provisions at charging stations , the Bureau of Indian Standards along with the 
Department of Science and Technology, the Principal Scientific Adviser and 
NITI Aayog are on the role to standardize the adapters so that transferability 
and inter-operability is possible. The Committee desires that it be apprised of 
the outcome of such strategies developed by BIS and other stakeholders . 
 
(Para 71 (iii)) 
 
23. To improve the mobility services, it is advisable to have a live database of 
active charging stations ins talled all over the country and the locations readily 
available for the consumers for their reference enabling them to easily track the 
nearest charging station at times of need while on the move.  The Committee , 
therefore, urges that the MHI in coordinati on with the Ministries/Agencies 
concerned, may put in place such a facility for enhancing the e -Mobility 
services. 
 
(Para 71 (iv)) 
 
24. The Committee desires that for increasing numbers of charging stations, 
the Government may explore installing Smart Mete rs on electric Poles  at 
dedicated locations and make small charging stations across the 
city/villages/highways and issue smart cards to the EV owners, who can charge 
their batteries anywhere which can be a good booster for faster adoption of 
EVs. 
 
(Para 71 (v)) 
 
25. The Committee further recommends that expenditure incurred on setting 
up of charging stations may be brought under the ambit of CSR for a limited 
period of 2 -3 y ears.  Further, renewal energy may be used for powering the 
Public Charging Stations. 
(Para 71 (vi)) 
 
26. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the Government needs to 
forge international partnerships to secure access to key minerals.  The 
Government may form consortium for joint research, investment pooling and 

45 
 
development of battery technology and battery recycling.  Since India is already 
a global powerhouse in information technology, communication, digital 
technologies, an excellent foundation may be set up for the development of 
cutting-edge battery management systems.   
(Para 78) 
 
27. Home to some of the most polluted cities on the earth, India is pivoting 
towards new-energy electric vehicles to clean up its toxic air. But with meager 
resources of lithium, the mineral essential to make batteries for electric 
vehicles, it is having to scout for resources overseas. India’s EV production will 
rely heavily on imports from China of  lithium chemicals used to make 
cathodes and battery cells  as China has a thriving lithium chemical, battery 
cathode, battery cell and EV supply chain. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that Government should explore other sources of battery raw 
material like Lithium etc. rather than solely relying on China for its import 
needs to ensure unhampered supply of raw materials.  
(Para 81) 
 
28. The Committee further recommends that Government should endeavour 
to achieve self -dependency in manufacturing Lithium -ion batteries to reduce 
dependency on other countries, especially China for unhindered availability of 
raw materials used in batteries. 
(Para 82) 
 
29. The Committee also recommends that Government should ensure 
strengthening supply chain network, e asy avai lability and accessibility to raw 
material and components for batteries, to promote EV adoption. 
(Para 83) 
 
30. The Committee notes that c urrently, loans for Internal Combustion 
Engine (ICE) vehicles are relatively easy to get with lower interest rates as the 
vehicle’s value is well -understood, making loans secure for the bank. However, 
this is not the case with EVs, as their residual value is not clear. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that Government should designate EV as a 
priority lending sector, e specially financing for commercial fleets, as they are 
critical to the transition towards cleaner mobility. Availability of easy loans 
with lower interest and longer tenures will make it easier for the consumer to 

46 
 
go for EVs, which ultimately lead  to faster adoption of electric mobility across 
the country.   
(Para 82) 
 
31. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government and all other 
stakeholders (especially manufacturers) should make use of every feasible 
promotional and advertising platform to highli ght the benefits of Electric 
Vehicles and EV technology. Informational campaigns across print and 
electronic media can make a huge impact. In addition to the obvious benefits 
such as anti -pollution and cost -efficiency, busting myths such as battery 
longevity that surround EV usage may also be highlighted. Return on 
Investment (RoI) and cost of ownership benefits of EVs vis a vis conventional 
Internal Combustion Engines (ICE) can be demonstrated. Customers may also 
be educated about the various benefit s, incentives and subsidies offered by the 
Government such as exemptions of EVs from road tax during vehicle 
registration, discounts offered on purchase of EVs etc. 
(Para 87) 
 
32. The Committee observes that there is no sufficient R&D Support by the 
Ministry for  technological advancement. The spending in India on R&D is 
point less than 1 percent whereas  the major economies spend around 5 to 6 
percent.  Because of poor funding, India is lagging behind in R&D.  Without 
sufficient R&D, technological improvements/adv ancement is not possible.   The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that R&D facilities should be improved and 
its funding should also be enhanced. The M inistry of Heavy Industries has 
centers/autonomous bodies like Automotive Research Association of India  
(ARAI) and National Automotive Testing and R&D Infrastructure Project 
(NATRIP) for R&D of I nternal Combustion Engine (ICE)  Vehicles. The 
Committee recommends that MHI should set -up R&D Cent ers for supporting 
EVs also for technological advancement. 
(Para 89) 
 
33. During the course of discussion it was suggested that Ministry of Heavy 
Industries and EV Manufacturers should jointly work together to undertake 
R&D for furthering the cause of ' Make-In-India' so that in the coming years 
country can become self-reliant in manufacturing EV batteries and components 
indigenously. The Committee , therefore, recommends that M HI and EV 

47 
 
manufacturers should make concerted efforts for setting up of a robust R&D 
infrastructure to promote indigenous manufacturing to reduce import s and 
achieving self-reliance through technology improvements and advancements 
(R&D). 
(Para 90) 
 
34. The Committee further recommends that the Government should focus 
on creating local manufacturing ecosystem at global scale in order to lower the 
price of EV batteries, which will ultimately help  to create EV demand. The 
Government should also focus on global competitiveness of indigenous EV 
industry. However, the most important element is to develop local EV parts 
manufacturing eco-system that is at global scale & quality. 
 
35. At p resent, there is no Government S cheme for incentivizing the local 
manufacturing of EV components other than battery cells. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that Government may mull over bringing a scheme 
focused on localizatio n of other critical EV components as that would give a 
good boost to Electric Mobility in India. 
(Para 92) 
 
36. Some of the Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs)  informed the 
Committee that they made a great progress in localizing major components. 
However, few child parts are still imported from other co untries like China. 
The import  duties have been increased from 5% to 15% to encourage local 
manufactures. But due to non -production of some of the                                  
child-parts/components, the cost of Production ha s increased due to hike in 
import duties. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Import duty may 
be raised only i n a phased manner till such components are manufactured 
locally. 
(Para 94) 
 
37. The aggressive push by the Governme nt and EV manufacturers will 
certainly see a massive EV I ndustry setup in the coming years , including 
battery production, EV specific assembly lines as well as the charging 
infrastructure.  This would naturally lead to a huge demand of technically 
skilled workforce in the area, as several auto makers have already announced 
their upcoming EV plans in the country.  Meeting this demand will not be 

48 
 
possible without the cooperation of the training institutes in the country. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends th at EV -specific trainings/courses should 
be included into the curriculum of premier institutes like  IITs, Engineering 
Colleges etc. to ensure that there is no scarcity of skilled manpower for India n 
EV Industry. 
 
(Para 96) 
 
38. The Committee further recomme nds that skill and capability building 
measures and skills improvement of manpower in handling fire safety hazards 
in case of EVs should be ensured. Up -skilling of workshop manpower to handle 
servicing and repair of electric powertrain, connected features,  vehicle analytics 
etc. should be done expeditiously. 
(Para 97) 
 
39. The Committee has been informed that at present EV Cars are taxed at 
5%, and big Hybrid Electric Vehicles (HEVs) are taxed at 43% (28% GST plus 
15% Cess). EVs reduce energy consumption by  75% over Internal Combustion 
Engine (ICE)  while HEVs reduce energy consumption by 30 -45% over ICE 
without any external charger. Hence , HEVs are also entitled for discount on 
GST rate as in the case of EVs. GST sup port of HEV would help the whole       
eco-systems and provide impetus to EVs. The Committee , therefore, 
recommends that the GST rates on HEV may also be at a lower rate to create a 
lucrative EV ecosystem. 
 
(Para 100) 
40. The Committee observes that the intervention by the Government for 
promoting EV adoption by way of subsidies, financial support, R&D etc. in 
India is very minimal compared to other countries , which is the reason why the 
offtake of EV adoption in India has been very low.  The Committee desires that 
the Government should have focuse d strategy for enhancing its involvement for 
supporting the EV transition. 
(Para 102) 
 
41. The objective of the Government for adoption of Electric & Hybrid 
Mobility is to achieve reduction in fossil fuel consumption, pollution and 
Carbon Emission, reducin g net imports, realizing energy security, enhancing 
local manufacturing, creation of jobs etc. The Automobile Industry as a whole, 
even before the onset of Covid -19 Pandemic was going through slowdown due 

49 
 
to poor demand because of non -availability of finance to consumers. Moreover, 
the automobile and auto components manufacturers had made huge 
investments for the transition from BS -IV to BS -VI emission norms w.e.f.        
1st April, 2020. The Covid -19 Pandemic has further stalled the Auto Industry. 
Hence, given the prevailing precarious situation in the automobile sector, the 
Committee feels that to achieve the end objective, a  technology neutral 
approach to the EV Mobility would be prudent to ensure de -risking from the 
rapid technology transformations. 
(Para 109 (i)) 
 
42. The Committee has also been informed that technology innovations are 
occurring rapidly and other options i.e. Hydrogen and alternate fuels such as 
Ethanol are also coming up.  Therefore, the committee is of the view that 
widening the techno logy options would be a better approach in the journey 
ahead.  Further, Government policy support may be provided to all electrified 
technologies (BEV, HEV, PHEV & FCEV) , which will ensure a disruption free 
and faster transition from ICE vehicles. 
(Para 109 (ii)) 
 
43. The Committee is hopeful that with the trend of fall in battery prices and  
indigenous production of batteries and EV Components, the gap between the 
price of EV in comparison with similar I nternal Combustion Engine (ICE)  
model/category will be  bridged soon and the consumers will shift to e -mobility 
given its low total cost of ownership.  The Committee further hopes that 
measures such as creation of demand for local manufacturing, reduction in 
GST rate for Hybrid EVs, announcements of long -term policy measures for 
Electric and Hybrid Vehicles, provision of subsidy for EVs, revisiting PLI 
Scheme, incentive for scrapping of ICE vehicles while purchasing EVs, 
availability of easy and affordable financing options for EV components, 
inclusion  of EVs in Priority Sector Lending, extension of subsidy under 
FAME-II scheme to e3Ws and private e4Ws, enhancing awareness among 
people about EV adoption, extension of Government support for Research & 
Development in the field of EV manufacture, robust EV chargin g 
infrastructure etc. would accelerate the EV penetration in transport sector, as 
per the targets set by the Government. 
 
(Para 109 (iii)) 
 
******** 

50 
  


51 
 
 


52 
 
 


53 
 
 


54 
 
 


55 
 
 


56 
 
 


57 
 
 


58 
 
 


59 
 
 


60 
 
 


61 
 
 


62 
 
 


63 
  


64 
  


65 
 
 


66 
  
