PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December
THREE HUNDRED AND TW
Promotion of Electric Vehicles in the Country 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
(Laid on the Table
 
 
 
 
  
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON INDUSTRY 
  
  
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2023 / Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTY FOURTH REPORT
 
ON 
 
Promotion of Electric Vehicles in the Country    
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20th December, 2023)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 20th December, 2023)
 
 
 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
REPORT 
 
, 2023) 
, 2023) 
  
  REPORT NO. 
324 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December
 
 
 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND TW
Promotion of Electric Vehicles in the Country 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
(Laid on the Tabl
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2023 / Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTY FOURTH REPORT
 
ON 
 
Promotion of Electric Vehicles in the Country 
  
 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20th December, 2023)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 20th December, 2023)
 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
REPORT 
Promotion of Electric Vehicles in the Country  
, 2023) 
, 2023) 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
 
  PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                              (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION (ii) 
3. ACRONYMS (iii)-(v) 
4. REPORT 1-42 
5. RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 43-52 
6. ANNEXURES 53 
7. 
 
MINUTES*  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
__________________ 
* To be appended later.  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Constituted  w.e.f.  13th September, 2023) 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1. Shri Tiruchi Siva    -   Chairman 
2. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
3. Shrimati Sulata Deo 
4. Shri Mithlesh Kumar 
5. Dr. Sikander Kumar 
6. Shri Hishey Lachungpa 
7. Shri Sandosh Kumar P 
8. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
9. Dr. Amee Yajnik 
10. *Shri Nagendra Ray 
     
   LOK SABHA 
 
11. Ms. Mimi Chakraborty 
12. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
13. Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse 
14. Dr. S. T. Hasan 
15. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
16. Shri Ravindra Kushwaha 
17. Shrimati Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
18. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
19. Shri Ramprit Mandal 
20. Shri Vincent H. Pala 
21. Shri Chirag Paswan 
22.  Shri T. R. V. S. Ramesh 
23. Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy 
24. Shri Ravi Kishan Shukla 
25. Shri Sunil Soren 
26. Shri Kumbakudi Sudhakaran 
27. Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare 
28. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar 
29. Shri Vijaykumar (alias) Vijay Vasanth 
30. ^Vacant 
31. #Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Vandana Kumar, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Swarabji B., Joint Secretary 
3.    Shri Jayanta Kumar Mallick, Director 
4.   Ms. Niangkhannem Guite, Deputy Secretary 
5.   Shri. Pratap Shenoy, Deputy Secretary 
 6.   Shri Abhimanyu Vishnoi, Assistant Committee Officer 
___________________________________________________________________________ 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 26.09.2023 
^Vacancy caused due to resignation of Smt.Gomati Sai w.e.f. 06.12.2023 
#Vacancy caused due to resignation of Shri Hanuman Beniwal w.e.f. 15.12.2023 
 
(i) 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorised by the Committee, hereby present this Three Hundred 
Twenty-Fourth Report on the subject Promotion of Electric Vehicles in the Country. 
 2.  The Committee took up the subject for detailed examination. As part of 
examination of the subject, the Committee deliberated in detail in its meetings held on 
10th January & 23rd June, 2023, wherein it heard the views of  the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries, Ministry of Power, Ministry of Road, Transport & Highway,  Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, 
Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
NITI Aayog,  SMEV and during its study visit to various leading EV Manufacturers of 
the Country.  
3.  The Report is based on the submissions made by the Secretaries  & Officers of 
various Ministries; representatives of SMEV and EV Manufacturers; and other materials 
such as Background Notes, Power-Point Presentations and replies to the questionnaires 
submitted to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry in 
connection with the examination of the subject. 
4. The Committee express its sincere gratitude to the Ministry of Heavy Industries 
Ministry of Power, Ministry of Road, Transport & Highway,  Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Ministry of New & 
Renewable Energy, Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), NITI Aayog,  SMEV 
and EV Manufacturers for placing their valuable suggestions in connection with 
examination of the subject before the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Industry. 
5.  The Committee considered and adopted the report in its meeting held on 19th 
December, 2023. 
 
 
 TIRUCHI SIVA  
NEW DELHI;                                                                                                        Chairman,  
19th December, 2023                                                      Department-related Parliamentary 
Agrahayana 28, 1945 (Saka),                                            Standing Committee on Industry, 
                                                                                                                           Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
(ii) 

 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
2W - Two Wheeler 
3W - Three Wheeler 
4W - Four Wheeler 
AAT - Advanced Automotive Technology 
AC - Alternating Current 
ACC - Advanced Chemistry Cell 
ADB - Asian Development Bank 
AIS - Automotive Industry Standards 
BE - Budget Estimates 
BEV - Battery Electric Vehicle 
BSS - Battery Swapping Station 
CCS - Combined Charging System 
CESL - Convergence Energy Services Limited 
CFA - Central Financial Assistance 
CMVR - Central Motor Vehicle Rules 
CNG - Compressed Natural Gas 
CO2 - Carbon Dioxide 
COP - Conference of Parties 
CRISIL -       Credit Rating Information Services of India Limited 
DC -       Direct Current 
DD -       Daman and Diu  
DISCOM - Distribution Company 
DNH - Dadra & Nagar Haveli  
DVA - Domestic Value Addition 
EESL - Energy Efficiency Services Limited 
EPR - Extended Producer Responsibility 
EU - European Union  
ER & D - Engineering Research & Development 
EV - Electric Vehicle 
EVCS - Electric Vehicle Charging Station 
EVSE - Electric Vehicle Supply Equipments 
 
(iii) 

 
 
 
FAME - Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid &) Electric 
Vehicles 
FY - Financial Year 
GCC - General Conditions of Contract 
GDP - Gross Domestic Product 
GHG - Green House Gas 
GSR  General Statutory Rules 
GST - Goods and Services Tax 
GWH - Giga Watt Hour 
HEV             - Hybrid Electric Vehicle 
ICE             - Internal Combustion Engine  
IEC - Information, Education and Communication 
IIT - Indian Institute of Technology 
IPR - Intellectual Property Rights 
KW - Kilo Watt 
KWH - Kilo Watt Hour 
LFP - Lithium Iron Phosphate 
LiB - Lithium ion batteries 
LNG - Liquefied Natural Gas 
LDV - Light Duty Vehicle 
MHI - Ministry of Heavy Industries 
MNRE - Ministry of New & Renewable Energy 
MoRTH - Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways 
MOU - Memorandum of Understanding 
MW - Mega Watt  
NCR - National Capital Region 
NE - North East 
NGO - Non Governmental Organization 
OEM - Original Equipment Manufacturer 
OMC - Oil Marketing Company 
 
 
(iv) 

 
 
PCS - Public Charging Station 
PHEV - Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicle 
PIB - Press Information Bureau 
PLI - Production Linked Incentive 
PPP - Public-Private Partnership 
PSU - Public Sector Undertaking 
R&D - Research and Development 
RE - Revised Estimates 
ROV - Remotely Operated Vehicle 
SMEV - Society of Manufacturers of Electric Vehicles 
SO - Statutory Orders 
STC - State Transport Corporation 
STU - State Transport Undertaking 
UAV - Unmanned Aerial Vehicle 
USD - United States Dollar 
UT - Union Territory 
YoY - Year Over Year 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
Electric vehicles are gaining popularity across the globe. Due to fast 
depletion of fossil fuels, the automotive industry is also shifting from 
traditional fuel based technology to eco-friendly technologies. The 
automotive sector has emerged as one of the most dynamic and rapidly 
growing sector in the world. The sector has witnessed remarkable progress 
and is now considered a key contributor to economic growth of the nations. 
The growth of this sector in India has been fuelled by several factors, 
including rising income levels, increasing urbanization, improved road 
infrastructure, and the expansion of the middle-class population. The sector 
encompasses a wide range of vehicles, catering to various segments and 
consumer preferences. Two-wheelers, such as motorcycles and scooters, and 
Three Wheelers dominate the automotive market of developing nations such 
as India, owing to their affordability and convenience in navigating 
congested urban areas. Passenger cars have also witnessed significant 
growth, with a rising demand for compact and mid-size vehicles. 
Furthermore, the commercial vehicle segment, including trucks and buses, 
plays a pivotal role in supporting robust transportation and logistics network. 
 
2. The automotive sector also faces its share of challenges. These include 
the need for continuous technological advancements, stringent emission 
norms, infrastructure development, and skilled labour availability etc. 
Nonetheless, industry stakeholders, including manufacturers, policymakers, 
and consumers are actively working towards overcoming these obstacles and 
fostering a sustainable and competitive automotive ecosystem. Pollution is a 
significant concern in the automotive sector, primarily due to the rapid 
growth of vehicles on the roads and the associated emissions. However, 
efforts are made within the auto sector to mitigate its environmental impact 
and promote sustainability.  
Indian Automotive Sector: 
3. The Automotive Industry in India has come a long way from its 
nascent state at the time of India’s independence in 1947 to its present day 
dynamic form. Today, the industry produces a wide range of automobiles 
and auto-components catering to both the domestic as well as foreign 
markets. The development of the industry has been shaped by the demand on 
the one hand and the government interventions on the other. 
 
4. India represents the third largest automobile market of Passenger 
vehicles and Commercial vehicles in the world. India is the world's largest 
manufacturer of Three Wheelers, second largest manufacturer of Two-

2 
 
Wheelers, and fourth largest manufacturer of Passenger Vehicles. Indian 
Automotive Industry has the presence of all Global automobile 
manufacturers from Europe and Asia such as Suzuki, Honda, Toyota, Isuzu, 
Yamaha, Nissan, Hyundai, Kia, Renault, Volkswagen, Skoda, BMW, 
Mercedes, PSA, JLR, Fiat, Cummins, MG Motor, etc.   
 
5. The turnover of Indian Automobile Industry is USD 151 Billion (Rs 
12.4 lac crore), that translates into a large contribution to country’s economy 
and manufacturing sector. At present, 30.7 million jobs (Direct: 4.2million 
and Indirect: 26.5 million) are supported by the Indian Automotive 
Industry. Indian Automotive Industry exported vehicles and auto 
components amounting to about USD 35.7 billion. The production and sales 
statistics of automotive motors in the country for the year 2022-23 as 
informed by the Ministry of Heavy Industries is as under: 
 
Category-wise production & sales statistics for 2022-23 
(No. of Units in Lakh) 
Category of 
Vehicles 
Total 
Production 
Total 
Sales 
Total 
Export 
Worldwide ranking in 
Manufacturing 
2 Wheelers 194.6 158.6
2         36.5 Among Top 2 in the 
World 
3 Wheelers 8.55 4.89  3.66 No.1 in the World 
Passenger 
Vehicles* 45.78 38.90  6.63 Among Top 4 in the 
World 
Commercial 
Vehicles** 10.35 9.62  0.79 Among Top 6 in the 
World 
 
6. India is massively dependent on oil imports and pollution in many 
Indian cities has reached alarming levels. The Indian Government has 
implemented several policies and initiatives to address this issue and 
promote cleaner and more sustainable transportation. In recent years, the 
Indian automotive sector has embraced the global shift towards sustainable 
mobility. Electric vehicles (EVs) have gained traction, driven by 
Government initiatives, favourable policies, and growing environmental 
awareness. Several automakers are investing in EV technology and 
infrastructure development, leading to an increasing number of electric 
vehicles on Indian roads. 
Electric Vehicles (EVs): 
7. Electric Vehicles (EVs) includes road and rail vehicles, surface and 
underwater vessels, electric aircraft and electric spacecraft. Electric road 
vehicles include electric passenger cars, electric buses, electric 

3 
 
trucks and personal transporters such as electric buggy , electric 
tricycles, electric bicycles and electric motorcycles/scooters. Though the 
concept of electric vehicles has been around for a long time, it has drawn a 
considerable amount of interest in the past decade amid a rising carbon 
footprint and other environmental impacts of fuel-based vehicles.  
 
8. An electric vehicle (EV) is propelled by an electric motor, powered by 
rechargeable battery packs, instead of an internal-combustion engine (ICE) 
that generates power by burning a mix of fuel and gases. The electric motor 
gets its power from a controller which in turn is powered by a rechargeable 
battery that is recharged by plugging the vehicle into an electric power 
source, or may be self-contained with a battery, solar panels, fuel cells or an 
electric generator to convert fuel to electricity. Thus the electric vehicles 
operate on the principle of converting electricity to kinetic energy to drive 
motor(s) which in turn rotates the wheels of the vehicle.  
 
9. Unlike conventional technologies, there are no tail-pipe emissions 
from electric vehicles. Compared to traditional gasoline-powered vehicles, 
EVs produce fewer emissions and are more energy-efficient & cost-
effective. While EVs were once seen as a product suitable for a particular 
group of people, they are now becoming increasingly popular as battery 
technology improves and availability of charging infrastructure gradually 
improving to facilitate the users of electric vehicles.  
 
10. Based on the input used to power the vehicle, electric vehicles (power 
trains) are categorized into four distinct types: 
Battery Electric Vehicle (BEV)  
BEVs are also known as All-Electric Vehicles (AEV). Electric Vehicles 
using BEV technology run entirely on a battery-powered electric drive train. 
The electricity used to drive the vehicle is stored in a large battery pack 
which can be charged by plugging into the electricity grid. The charged 
battery pack then provides power to one or more electric motors to run the 
electric vehicle. 
Hybrid Electric Vehicle (HEV) 
HEVs are also known as series hybrid or parallel hybrid. HEVs have both 
engine and electric motor. The engine gets energy from fuel, and the motor 
gets electricity from batteries. The transmission is rotated simultaneously by 
both engine and electric motor. This then drives the wheels.   
Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicle (PHEV) 
The PHEVs are also known as series hybrids. They have both engine and a 
motor. One can choose among the fuels, conventional fuel (such as petrol) or 

4 
 
alternative fuel (such as bio-diesel). It can also be powered by a rechargeable 
battery pack. The battery can be charged up with electricity by plugging into 
an electrical outlet or electric vehicle charging station (EVCS). PHEVs have 
much larger battery packs when compared to other HEVs and therefore can 
run larger distances on battery energy.  
Fuel Cell Electric Vehicle (FCEV):  
FCEVs are also known as Zero-Emission Vehicles. They employ ‘fuel cell 
technology’ to generate the electricity required to run the vehicle. The 
chemical energy of the fuel is converted directly into electric energy. FCEVs 
are also known as Zero-Emission Vehicles. They employ ‘fuel cell 
technology’ to generate the electricity required to run the vehicle. The 
chemical energy of the fuel is converted directly into electric energy.  
 
11. Transport is a fundamental requirement of modern life, but the 
traditional combustion engine is quickly becoming outdated. Petrol or diesel 
vehicles are highly polluting and are being quickly replaced by fully electric 
vehicles. Among the most notable advantages of EVs is their contribution in 
reducing air pollution. Electric Vehicles produce zero tailpipe emissions. If 
coupled with the use of renewable energy sources, EVs become a crucial 
tool in achieving India's targets under the Paris Agreement. 
 
12. The availability of fossil fuels is limited, and the Toxic emissions 
from petrol and diesel vehicles lead to long-term, adverse effects on public 
health. In comparison, the emissions impact of electric vehicles is much 
lower than the petrol or diesel vehicles. Fully electric vehicles have zero 
tailpipe emissions, but even when electricity production is taken into 
account, petrol or diesel vehicles emit almost 3 times more carbon dioxide 
than the average EV. To reduce the impact of charging electric vehicles, 
India is ambitious to achieve about 40 per cent cumulative electric power 
installed capacity from non-fossil fuel-based energy resources by the year 
2030. Therefore, electric vehicles are the way forward for Indian transport 
sector. 
 
13. There are two major concerns why there is a need to switch over to 
electric energy in the automotive sector and promote electric vehicles, which 
are briefly enumerated below: 
 
(i) Air pollution, especially particulate matter, is a serious 
challenge in India, and transport is a significant factor in the nation’s air-
quality problems. The transport sector of the country is also expanding 
rapidly and the number of vehicles on the roads is expected to rise very 

5 
 
sharply in the future. However, the transport sector is an important sector 
that facilitates the overall development of industries and commercial 
activities in any economy. In India, therefore, development of the transport 
sector is a priority area for the Government. Emissions from the transport 
sector are mainly driven by fossil fuel consumption in the road sector, even 
as vehicle ownership in India is far below the world average and much 
below the levels of other developed and emerging economies. Overall, 
transportation sector contributes to about 9.7 per cent of the country’s total 
Greenhouse Gas emissions. Moreover, increasing sales of internal 
combustion engine (ICE) vehicles have more than doubled the fuel 
consumption and related GHG emissions from the transport sector. The road 
transport sector accounts for about 87 per cent of passenger traffic and 60 
per cent of freight traffic movement and sustainable development of this 
sector is a critical element in the long-term development strategy of the 
country. 
 
(ii) Energy consumption of the transport sector accounts for 18 per cent 
of the total energy consumption in India. This translates to an estimated 94 
million tonnes of oil equivalent (MTOE) energy. Indian transport sector 
accounts for 13.5 per cent of India's energy-related CO2 emissions, with 
road transport accounting for 90 per cent of the sector's total energy 
consumption. 
 
14. India has committed to Net-Zero carbon emissions by 2070 and to 
reduce the total projected carbon emissions by one billion tones by 2030. 
India also submitted its Long-Term Low Emission Development Strategy to 
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), 
during the 27th Conference of Parties (COP27) held at Sharm-el-Sheikh, 
Egypt in November, 2022. One of its strategies is to develop an Integrated, 
Efficient, and Inclusive Low-Carbon Transport System.  
 
15. Technological breakthroughs and innovations have periodically come 
up to cater to these issues sustainably. Electric Mobility is one such 
alternative that has started finding acceptability globally to restrain emission 
of greenhouse gases and diminish air and noise pollution thus, providing 
both environmental and socio-economic benefits to countries. It is believed 
that faster adoption and promotion of electric vehicles will not only reduce 
dependence on fossil fuels but also bring down the oil import bill and the 
pollution arising from the use of ICE vehicles in the country.  
 
 

6 
 
 
Initiatives by Government to promote EVs in the Country: 
 
16. National Electric Mobility Mission Plan (NEMMP) 2020: The 
Ministry of Heavy Industries, being the nodal Ministry for the automotive 
sector, has been funding research, design, development and demonstration 
projects and also spearheading the electric mobility initiative in the country. 
In this direction, the Government of India approved the National Mission on 
Electric Mobility (NMEM) in 2011. Subsequently, the National Mission on 
Electric Mobility Plan 2020 (NEMMP 2020), which was unveiled in 2013, 
was one of the most important initiatives initiated by the Central 
Government to bring in a significant change in the Automobile and 
Transportation Sector. This is the culmination of a comprehensive 
collaborative planning for promotion of hybrid and electric mobility in India 
through a combination of policies aimed at gradually increasing Electric 
vehicle population in India along with a certain level of indigenization of 
technology, thereby ensuring India’s global leadership in some vehicle 
segments. 
The Vision Statement of this plan is - 
“To encourage reliable, affordable and efficient xEVs that meet 
consumer performance and price expectations through Government – 
Industry collaboration for promotion and development of indigenous 
manufacturing capabilities, required infrastructure, consumer awareness 
and technology; thereby helping India to emerge as a leader in the xEV Two 
Wheeler and Four Wheeler market in the world by 2020, with total xEV 
sales of 6-7 million units thus enabling Indian automotive Industry to 
achieve global xEV manufacturing leadership and contributing towards 
National Fuel Security” 
 
17. The National Electric Mobility Mission Plan 2020 (NEMMP 2020) 
was intended to provide the future roadmap, establish common set of 
priorities, broad principles and framework for promoting the adoption of the 
full range of electric mobility solutions for India, which can enhance 
national fuel security, provide affordable and environment friendly 
transportation and enable the Indian automotive industry to achieve global 
manufacturing leadership. The main policy to achieve targets set out in the 
NEMMP is the "Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid &) Electric 
Vehicles" (FAME) scheme. 
 
18. It was expected that by achieving the targeted sale penetration levels 
for xEVs by 2020, the electric mobility initiative is likely to not only result 
in significant savings in liquid fuel consumption thereby lowering the 

7 
 
petroleum import bill but will also result in mitigation of impact of mobility 
on the environment with significant reductions in emissions and also net 
decrease in CO2 emissions on a “well to wheel” basis. 
 
19. Ministry of Heavy Industries: Electric vehicles have been making 
headlines for decades. But it is only in recent years that EVs have been 
attracting seminal interest, innovation, and investments. Significantly, India 
has the world’s third highest CO2 emissions and embracing EVs will help in 
reducing CO2 and curbing air pollution. In this regard, during the 
examination of the subject Promotion of Electric Vehicles in the Country, 
the representatives from the Ministry of Heavy Industries apprised the 
Committee of the initiatives taken by the Government towards promoting 
electric mobility in the country, as follows: 
“On efforts to promote electric mobility, the Government schemes can 
be divided into two parts-on the demand side and on the supply side. On the 
demand side, we have FAME scheme which has an outlay of Rs.10,000 crore 
launched on 1.4.2019. It will go on till 31.3.2024. The main objective is to 
reduce upfront cost of the electric vehicles to the buyer as generally they are 
costlier. On the supply side, there are two schemes which help in reducing 
the manufacturing cost of electric vehicles, and advanced automotive 
technology component scheme. One is the PLI Auto Scheme. It has an outlay 
of Rs.26, 000 crore launched in September, 2021. The other is the PLI ACC 
which is for batteries with an outlay of Rs.18, 100 crore launched in June, 
2021.”  
 
Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of Electric (&Hybrid) Vehicles in 
India (FAME India): 
20. The Ministry informed the Committee that the Government approved 
the scheme titled Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of Electric (&Hybrid) 
Vehicles in India' (FAME India) in March, 2015 for a period of 2 years w.e.f 
1st April, 2015 with an aim to reduce dependency on fossil fuel and to 
address issues of vehicular emissions. The Phase-I of FAME India Scheme 
has been extended from time to time till 31st March, 2019 with enhancement 
of total outlay to Rs. 895 crore. The scheme had four focus areas i.e. 
Technology Development, Demand Creation, Pilot Project and Charging 
Infrastructure. 
 
21. In the First Phase of the FAME Scheme about 2.8 lakh hybrid and 
electric vehicles were supported by way of demand incentive amounting to 
Rs. 359 crore (approx). Projects worth Rs. 158 crore (approx) were 
sanctioned for the technology development like establishment of Testing 

8 
 
Infrastructure, setting up of Centre of Excellence for Advanced Research in 
electrified transportation, Battery Engineering etc. to various 
organisations/institutions like Automotive Research Association of India 
(ARAI), IIT Madras, IIT Kanpur, Non Ferrous Material Technology 
Development Centre (NFTDC), Aligarh Muslim University (AMU) etc. In 
Phase-I, the Government has also supported for deployment of 425 Electric 
buses in about 9 cities by way of incentive amounting to Rs. 280 crore 
(approx), and sanctioned Projects for setting up of 520 EV Charging Stations 
for Rs. 43 crore (approx) in cities like Bangalore, Chandigarh, Jaipur and 
NCR of Delhi and major highways such as Delhi-Chandigarh, Mumbai-
Pune, Delhi-Jaipur, Delhi-Agra etc. Out of these 520 Charging Stations, 461 
Charging Stations have been installed as on 21st January, 2022.  
 
22. The Ministry apprised the Committee that based on the experience 
gained during Phase I of FAME Scheme and suggestions of various 
stakeholders, the Ministry of Heavy Industries notified Phase-II of the 
Scheme vide S.O. 1300 dated 8th March 2019, with the approval of Cabinet. 
Phase-II of the scheme is for a period of 5 years, commencing from 1st April 
2019, with an outlay of Rs. 10,000 crore. The main objective of the scheme 
is to encourage faster adoption of Electric and Hybrid vehicles by way of 
offering upfront incentive on purchase of Electric vehicles and also by 
establishing the necessary charging Infrastructure for electric vehicles. The 
FAME-II Scheme was allocated an outlay as per details given below: 
 
FAME-II Scheme Outlay 
  Components Previous outlay (₹ 
crore) 
Revised outlay  
(₹ crore) 
1 Demand Incentives 8,596  8,757 
2 Charging Infrastructure 1,000 839 
3 Admin. Exp. including 
Publicity, IEC activities 
38 38 
4 Committed Expenditure 
of Phase-I 
366 366 
Total 10,000 10,000 
 
23. In this Phase II of the scheme, more emphasis is given on affordable 
& environment friendly public transportation options for the masses that 
include shared transport. Demand Incentives on operational expenditure 
model for electric buses will be delivered through State/City Transport 

9 
 
Corporation (STUs). In 3W and 4W segments, incentives will be applicable 
mainly to vehicles used for public transport or registered for commercial 
purposes. In the e-2Ws segment, focus will be on private vehicles. The 
Scheme initially aims to create demand by way of supporting 7210 e-Buses, 
5 lakh e-3 Wheelers, 55000 e-4 Wheeler Passenger Cars and 10 lakh e-2 
Wheelers. Creation of charging infrastructure will be supported in selected 
cities and along major highways to address range anxiety among users of 
electric vehicles under the Scheme.  
 
24. The Physical and Financial Progress of FAME-II Scheme (including 
claims under process) as on 19.06.2023 with revised targets as apprised to 
the Committee is given below: 
 
Category Number of Vehicles Amount (in Rs. Crores) 
Revised 
Targets 
Achievement % Revised 
Targets 
Achievement % 
e-2W 9,68,000  6,89,016 71% 3,500  3,160 90% 
e-3W 1,26,000  80,341 64% 700  456 65% 
e-4W 11,000  8,115 74% 250  189 76% 
e-Buses 
7,090  
2,838 – supplied 
6,862 - 
committed 
97% 4,307 
1,181 – paid 
3,151– 
committed 
73% 
Total 11,12,090 7,80,310 70%  8,757 4,986 57% 
 
25. The Committee notes that the initial targets were revised by 
bringing down the number of vehicles to be supported under the 
FAME-II Scheme. The Committee is of the opinion that in order to 
facilitate the transition momentum to Electric Mobility, more number 
of electric vehicles need to be supported and, therefore recommends 
that the Ministry should broaden the scope and extend the FAME-II 
Scheme for at least 3 more years in consultation with the Industry 
stakeholders to make the Scheme more inclusive.       
 
26. The Committee notes that initially the Government had the target 
of supporting 55,000 e-4 Wheelers under the FAME II Scheme, but the 
revised targets have reduced the number of vehicles to the committed 
funds only i.e. for 11,000 e-4 Wheelers. Though 2 Wheelers is a 
dominant category, share of 4 Wheelers is also significant in the 
automotive sector of the country. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should increase the number of electric vehicles to be supported 
in the 4 Wheelers category and also include private e-4 Wheelers in the 
domain of FAME II Scheme with a cap based on the cost and battery 
capacity of the vehicle. 

10 
 
 
27. The Committee was informed by the Ministry of Heavy Industries that 
in Phase-II of the FAME Scheme, the demand incentive was initially linked 
to battery capacity i.e. Rs. 10,000/kWh for all eligible electric vehicles, 
except e-Buses (for which the incentive is Rs. 20,000/kWh), subject to 
capping at certain percentage of cost of eligible vehicles (i.e. 40 per cent for 
e-Bus and at 20 per cent for all other categories of eligible vehicles) 
restricted to vehicles with prices less than the threshold value. Further w.e.f. 
11th June 2021, Demand Incentive for e-2 Wheelers has been increased to 
Rs.15,000/KWh from Rs.10,000/KWh subject to increase in capping to 40 
per cent from 20 per cent cost of eligible e-2 Wheelers which has been 
revised further to Rs.10,000/kWh (maximum 15 per cent of ex-factory price) 
w.e.f. 1st June, 2023. The number of vehicles proposed to be supported in 
different category of vehicles is as under: 
 
28. In its replies to the queries of the Committee regarding rationale 
behind the reduction in subsidy, the Ministry informed that, it was necessary 
as with the prevailing rate for demand incentive (i.e. ₹15,000 per kWh 
battery capacity with a maximum cap of 40 per cent of the ex-showroom 
price), the funds envisaged under the Scheme (Rs. 2,000 crore) had already 
been exhausted and to reach the Scheme target of 10 lakh e-2Wheelers, 
either the demand incentive outlay had to be enhanced or the incentive per 
vehicle had to be reduced or a combination of both. In this regard, the 
Ministry had a stakeholder’s consultation with the Original Equipment 
Manufacturers of e-2Whleers wherein various options for re-allocation of 
funds between different segments within the overall budget of FAME II 
Scheme and incentive per vehicle were considered. After detailed 
Category of 
vehicle E-Buses e-2W e-3W e-4W Cars 
EV Technology Electric Electric Electric 
Strong Hybrid, 
Plug in Hybrid 
and Electric 
Used for Public 
Transport 
Private Use, 
Commercial Use 
Shared Transport 
Commercial 
Use  
Shared transport 
Commercial Use 
Shared Transport 
Incentives Rs. 20000/- 
per KWh 
Rs. 10000/-  
Per KWh 
Rs. 10000/-  
Per KWh 
Rs. 10000/- 
Per KWh 
Mode of 
Reimbursement 
Through 
STU 
Through online 
Portal of FAME II 
Through online 
Portal of FAME 
II 
Through online 
Portal of FAME II 
No of Vehicles to 
be supported About 7090 About 1 million About 5 lakh About 55000 

11 
 
deliberations, it came out that the continuity of the subsidy for a longer 
duration was more important and accordingly, the following decisions were 
taken:  
 The scheme outlay of e-2Wheelers was revised from Rs. 2,000 crore 
to Rs. 3,500 crore. 
 The formula for calculation of subsidy payable on e-2Wheelers was 
revised as: Rs. 10,000 per KWh of battery capacity, or 15 per cent of 
the ex-factory price (revised from ex-showroom price), whichever is 
lower. 
 
29. The Ministry deduced that this would enable the Scheme to support 
about 9.68 lakh electric vehicles at the current sales and battery capacity 
estimates. This estimate of 9.68 lakh electric vehicles has been calculated at 
average price of Rs.1.42 lakh per vehicle.   
 
30. The sales statistics of Electric Vehicle-2W for the year 2023-24 
(excluding Telangana) as follows: 
 
Month/Year April,23 May,23 June,23 July,23  Aug,23 Sep,23 
E-2W 66873 105556 46067 54591 62744 64027 
         (Source: SMEV) 
 
31. The Committee notes that reduction of subsidy w.e.f. 1st June, 
2023 in case of e-2Wheelers has negatively impacted their sales. It also 
notes that the budget constraint was the major reason behind the 
reallocation of funds and for the revision of targets under the FAME-II 
Scheme. As there is an instant need to decarbonise the transport sector, 
the Committee recommends that the Ministry should restore the 
subsidy on e-2Wheelers and, if required, project enhanced budget 
allocations in order to maintain the momentum and pace of electric 
vehicles penetration, so that the desired target could be achieved by 
2030.  
 
32. During the deposition before the Committee, the issue of e-
Quadricycle was discussed and the Committee was informed by a 
stakeholder that e-Quadricycle will give a big fillip to last-mile 
connectivity and, based on a study, CRISIL had indicated that India 
could be one of the largest manufacturers of e-Quadricycles, which 
would help in reducing two lakh tones of CO2 emissions. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should develop an ecosystem 
to include e-Quadricycle in the FAME-II Scheme as the e-Quadricycle 

12 
 
would not only help reduce CO2 emissions but would be an employment 
generation initiative for the youth of the country.  
 
33. In order to boost EV penetration as well as to promote electric 
mobility in public transport systems especially in the State Transport 
Corporations, the Ministry informed the Committee that proposals were 
invited from cities and State Transport Corporations through an Expression 
of Interest (EoI) for deployment of Electric Buses under Operational cost 
model basis. After examining the proposals, Ministry of Heavy Industries 
sanctioned 6315 electric buses to 65 cities/STUs/State Government entities 
for intra-city operations. Out of these 6315 electric buses, Supply Order for 
about 3738 electric buses for intra-city, inter-city operation and last mile 
connectivity have been issued. Out of these 3738 buses, 2838 electric buses 
have been deployed: 720 in Maharashtra, 450 in Gujarat, 600 in Uttar 
Pradesh, 400 in Delhi, 292 in Karnataka, 50 in Goa, 100 in Andhra Pradesh, 
80 in Chandigarh, 50 in Odisha, 16 in West Bengal, 30 in Uttarakhand, 25 in 
Bihar, 25 in Dadra and Nagar Haveli. 
 
34. In addition to above, Ministry of Heavy Industries vide Gazette 
Notification dated 11th June 2021, nominated EESL to aggregate demand for 
E-Buses under FAME-II Scheme in 9 major cities having population of over 
4 million (Mumbai, Delhi, Bangalore, Hyderabad, Ahmedabad, Chennai, 
Kolkata, Surat and Pune).  CESL (wholly owned subsidiary of EESL) issued 
Grand Challenge Document on 30th September, 2021 regarding the demand 
for 5450 e-Buses which was received from 5 of the 9 nominated cities out of 
which 3472 e-Buses were allocated under FAME-II Scheme.  Total demand 
allocation of e-Buses city-wise under General Conditions of Contract tender 
is as under:  
 
City Allocation under FAME-II 
(pro-rata basis) 
Delhi 921 
Bangalore 921 
Hyderabad 300 
Surat 150 
Kolkata 1180 
TOTAL 3472 
 
Thus, under FAME-II scheme, a total of 3738+3472=7210 e-Buses 
will be eventually deployed in various States.           
 

13 
 
35. A safe, reliable and cost-effective public transport system would 
definitely have a positive impact on improving the air quality in urban 
areas as well as reducing the number of private vehicles on road. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should allocate more funds 
for developing a decarbonised mass public transport system and also 
project for enhancement of the budgetary allocation for e-Buses under 
FAME Scheme so that it does not suffer due to shortage of funds.  
 
36. The Committee is of the opinion that frequent changes in the 
policies relating to Electric Vehicles create uncertainties in the market 
as well as in the EV Industry. This will also creates doubt in the minds 
of people and the end users about the Government actions which may 
negatively impact the growth of the EV industry. The Committee 
recommends that the Government should strive towards formulation of 
a consistent and stable national policy on Electric Mobility so that a 
propitious environment is created for the EV industry in order to 
promote sustainable and clean transportation system in the country. 
Charging Infrastructure: 
 
37. During the examination of the subject, the Ministry informed the 
Committee that the Government of India’s incentive on EV Charging 
Stations is Rs. 1,000 crores. It is given only on the electric vehicle supply 
equipment, that is, the electrical part. There are three categories. One 
hundred per cent of the cost is reimbursed if it is in hospitals or educational 
institutions.  Seventy per cent cost is reimbursed if it is in markets, malls, 
metro stations, bus stands, etc. And, fifty per cent cost is reimbursed if it is 
in cooperative societies and private taxi services. This is the categorisation 
of the incentives. The same has been reflected in table below: 
 
Within Cities 
Category Subsidy on EVSE Cost Locations 
A 70 per cent of the cost of 
EVSE 
Markets, Malls, Metro  Stations, Bus 
Stops & Railways Stations etc. 
B 100 per cent of the cost of 
EVSE 
Hospitals, Educational Institutions & 
all Government office complexes for 
official purposes etc. 
C 50 per cent of the cost of 
EVSE 
Co-operative/Housing Societies & 
Private Taxi Services etc. 
 
 38. The Ministry also informed that for highways and expressways, the 
target is to have one EV charger on every hundred kilometers on both sides 
and fast chargers, which are 50 KW, one charger every 25 kilometers on 
both sides of the highways.   

14 
 
39. Further, regarding chargers, the Ministry of Heavy Industries 
informed the Committee that they were not able to install most of the 
chargers and therefore, a decision was taken that Ministry of Petroleum will 
install the chargers in their retail outlets. It was also informed that there were 
a number of issues regarding the charging infrastructure. One issue was the 
requirement of ten number of guns for slow chargers and six for fast 
chargers. However, the Programme Implementation and Steering Committee 
(PISC) reduced this number from ten to five so that initial capital expenses 
could be kept less.  For fast charging stations, it was reduced from six to 
three. Earlier, for upstream infrastructure, no funds were provided. Now, 
subsidy is given for upstream infrastructure also, which will make the 
installation of charging stations easier. There was also the issue of obsolete 
technology. CHAdeMO charger was one requirement earlier. But then, the 
requirement of CHAdeMO was removed. Only CCS and Bharat Stage-I was 
kept.  
Support for Upstream Infrastructure is as given below: 
# Particulars Tentative Cost  
(Rs.)  
Maximum subsidy 
(Rs.) 
1 Up to 50 Kw PCS 6,04,000 4,00,000 
2 Up to 100 Kw PCS 14,80,000 8,00,000 
3 Up to 150 Kw PCS 19,00,000 12,00,000 
4 Above 150 Kw PCS 24,00,000 15,00,000 
 
40. During deliberations of the Committee with the stakeholders, the issue 
of Incentivisation of charging stations figured to a large extent. Stakeholders 
were of the view that currently incentives under FAME-II are given to PSUs 
or Ministries for charging station installation, whereas in EV segment, the 
subsidies are given to the end users as well. The stakeholders informed that 
adoption of charging stations by individual investors or small entrepreneurs 
have been seen in some cases. Therefore, the stakeholders were of the view 
that the Ministry may consider incentivizing the installation of charging 
stations to individual investors also. The Committee is of the view that the 
proposal of stakeholders hold merit and recommends that the Ministry 
of Heavy Industries in consultation with Industry partners should 
expand the scope of FAME-II or any future Scheme to incentivize 
installation of charging stations to individual investors in order to 
achieve the goal of setting up of charging stations throughout the length 
and breadth of the country as well as to eliminate road anxiety among 
potential customers. The Committee also recommends that Women Self 
Help Groups and Cooperative Societies may be given assistance to open 
and operate Charging Stations. They may be provided an assured 
return by the Government from its own funds. 

15 
 
 
41. The Committee was informed by the Ministry that Bharat Heavy 
Electricals Limited (BHEL) was providing Engineering, Procurement and 
Construction (EPC) solution for Electric Vehicle charging stations including 
solar based charging stations and also for Battery Energy Storage Systems 
(BESS). The Committee recommends that keeping in view the 
importance of EV Mobility as a key ingredient of reducing the pollution 
level in the country, the Ministry of Heavy Industries should play a 
proactive role through BHEL in providing EPC solutions to support 
electric vehicle (EV) charging stations, including solar based EV 
charging stations and, if required, more funds may be allocated to 
BHEL to facilitate popularizing the EV Mobility. Every Public Sector 
Undertaking and Government institutions may be asked to participate 
in the installation of Charging Stations in their own premises for the use 
of the vehicles coming to their premises. 
 
Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Automobile and Auto 
Components: 
42. The Committee was informed by the Ministry that the Government 
has approved the Production Linked Incentive Scheme for Automobile and 
Auto Components on 15th September, 2021 for enhancing India’s 
manufacturing capabilities for Advanced Automotive Products with the 
budgetary outlay of ₹25,938 crore for a period of 5 years (FY 2022-23 to FY 
2026-27). Incentives of 13-18 per cent will be provided on Electric Vehicle 
and Hydrogen Fuel Cell vehicles and their components. Besides, incentives 
of 8-13 per cent will be given on AAT components. 
 
43. Further, the Committee was informed that the objective of the Scheme is 
to boost manufacturing of Advanced Automotive Technology (AAT) Products, 
Promote deep localization and attract investments and build large-scale 
manufacturing capacities. The Scheme is focused on Zero Emission Vehicles 
(ZEVs) i.e. Battery Electric Vehicle and Hydrogen Fuel Cell Vehicle. The 
scheme also incentivizes auto components related to Safety, Connected 
Vehicles, Emission Control, Passenger Convenience, Flex Fuel Vehicles (an 
internal combustion engine capable of operating on gasoline and any blend of 
gasoline and ethanol up to 83 per cent), CNG & LNG and Sensors, etc. The 
scheme incentivizes only those eligible AAT products for which minimum 50 
per cent Domestic Value Addition (DVA) is achieved and has been certified by 
Testing Agencies (TAs) of the Ministry of Heavy Industries. This criterion is 
aimed to reduce imports, facilitate deep localization for AAT products and 
enable creation of domestic as well as global supply chain.   
    

16 
 
44. As per the submission made by the Ministry of Heavy Industries, this 
Scheme will act as a catalyst for Indian Automobile Industry, enabling it to 
move up the value chain into higher value-added products and attract fresh 
investments in indigenous supply chain of AAT products. AAT products 
include 19 categories of vehicles and 103 AAT Components. The Scheme 
has also attracted commitment of investment of ₹67,690 crore (against the 
target estimate of ₹42,500 crore) over a period of five years.  
 
45. In its replies, Ministry of Heavy Industries informed the Committee 
that PLI-AUTO requires applicants to meet threshold of cumulative 
minimum new domestic investment for each year of the scheme to be 
eligible for incentive. Threshold for minimum investment and minimum 
Domestic Value Addition (DVA) has been kept so as to encourage 
advancement of technology and R&D for AAT components. The Capital 
expenditure on Engineering Research & Development (ER&D) and product 
design & development at all stages in the entire value chain of the goods 
proposed to be manufactured, including software integral to the functioning 
of the same to the eligible AAT products, shall be allowed for the purpose of 
investment under the PLI-Auto Scheme. Such expenditure shall include test 
and measuring instruments, prototypes used for testing, purchase of design 
tools, software cost (directly used for ER&D) & license fees, expenditure on 
technology & transfer of technology (ToT) Agreements including the 
purchase of technology, Intellectual Property Rights (IPR), Patents and 
copyrights for ER&D. Thus, these allowed investment expenditures are 
thereby creating an ecosystem to manufacture components of EVs locally.         
 
46. As regards the Minimum cumulative new domestic investment and 
Minimum Determined Sales of AAT Products to be achieved by the 
applicant in each financial year, the Ministry informed the Committee as per 
details given below: 
                                                                                                                       (₹ in crore) 
Cumulative new 
domestic investment 
to be achieved  
Champion 
OEM 
(Except 
2W & 3W)  
Champion 
OEM  
(2W & 3W)  
Component 
Champion 
New Non-
Automotive  
investor 
(OEM) 
New Non-
Automotive  
investor 
(Component) 
Up to or before 
March 31, 2023 
300 150 40 300 80 
Up to or before 
March 31, 2024 
800 400 100 800 200 
Up to or before 
March 31, 2025 
1400 700 175 1400 350 
Up to or before 
March 31, 2026 
1750 875 220 1750 440 
Up to or before 
March 31, 2027 
2000 1000 250 2000 500 

17 
 
                                                    
                                                                                                           (₹ in crore) 
Scheme Year Minimum Threshold Determined 
Sales Value for Champion OEMs 
Minimum Threshold 
Determined Sales Value for 
Component Champions 
FY 2022-23 125.00 25.00 
FY 2023-24 137.50 27.50 
FY 2024-25 151.25 30.25 
FY 2025-26 166.38 33.28 
FY 2026-27 183.01 36.60 
 
47. Ensuring Domestic Value Addition (DVA) is an important aspect 
of the PLI Scheme for Automobile and Auto Components. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should take necessary steps 
for achieving better scheme output, including policy changes and 
financial outlay, for enhancement of manufacturing capabilities for 
Advanced Automotive Technology products thus creating an ecosystem 
to manufacture components of electric vehicles locally and promoting 
manufacturers as global Automotive Champions. 
 
PLI Scheme: National Programme on Advanced Chemistry Cell (ACC) 
Battery Storage: 
48. The Ministry informed the Committee that the PLI scheme - National 
Programme on Advanced Chemistry Cell (ACC) Battery storage - has been 
approved by the Union Cabinet on 12th May 2021 with budgetary outlay of ₹ 
18,100 crore. The scheme envisages enhancing manufacturing capabilities of 
Advanced Chemistry Cell (ACC) by setting up of Giga scale ACC and 
battery manufacturing facilities in India with emphasis on maximum 
domestic value addition.  
 
49. The Committee was also informed by the Ministry that the likely 
demand of ACC in India on a conservative basis is estimated 106 GWh 
while on an accelerated basis it is likely to be 260 GWh by the year 2030. In 
the absence of the scheme, the cumulative import bill of ACC cells in India 
during the scheme period (2 years plus 5 years) could be up to ₹ 2.7 lakh 
crore. The average YoY potential of Advanced Chemistry Cell and its 
components import savings is expected to be around Rs. 20,000 crore. 
Moreover, the scheme is expected to create ~9000 direct jobs and the 
demand side for Advanced Chemistry Cells is expected to generate in excess 
of 30 lakh jobs considering fresh investments being made in manufacturing 
electric vehicles and the support infrastructure. 
 

18 
 
50. The Committee was informed that the beneficiary firm has to ensure 
domestic value addition of at-least 25 per cent and raise it to 60 per cent 
domestic value addition within 5 Years while also making the mandatory 
investment of ₹225 crore/GWh within 2 Years. The investment here captures 
the expenditure spent on R&D and product development related to Advance 
Chemistry Cell. Such expenditure shall include test and measuring 
instruments, prototypes used for testing, purchase of design tools, software 
cost (directly used for R&D) and license fee, expenditure on technology, 
Intellectual Property Rights, Patents and Copyrights for R&D/ all non-
creditable taxes and duties would be included in such expenditure thereby 
creating an ecosystem to manufacture batteries of electric vehicles locally.  
 
51. During the examination of the subject, the representatives from the 
Ministry of Heavy Industries apprised the Committee that - According to the 
estimates by the NITI Aayog, at present, 21 per cent of the requirements of 
the battery are going into EVs, and by 2030, the expected demand to be 250 
GWh for cells.  Out of that 250 GWh, 70 per cent will be consumed by 
electric vehicles and nearly 30 per cent or 28 per cent will be consumed in 
the grid storage, the stationary storage, used for power systems. And, the 
other 2-3 per cent is for home electronics and consumer electronics.  So, the 
major part of the cells will be in the EVs. 
 
52. The Ministry of Heavy Industries also informed the Committee that 
bids were received from 10 companies for a total capacity of ~128 GWh. 
After evaluation of the bids based on Quality and Cost Based Selection 
(QCBS) mechanism, 9 companies met the conditions of eligibility and were 
ranked on the basis of their combined technical and financial score. 
Accordingly, letter of award was issued to 4 successful beneficiary firms on 
28th March 2022, out of which 1 firm has been disqualified.  
 
53. All the beneficiary firms have to start setting up the plants from 1st 
January, 2023 and commence manufacturing of Advanced Chemistry Cells 
within 2 years from the appointed date i.e. latest by 31st December 2024. The 
details of the phase wise committed capacity and Domestic Value Addition 
of beneficiary firms is as follows: 
 
 
 
Timeline 
Ola Cell 
Technologies Pvt. 
Ltd. 
Reliance New Energy 
Battery storage Pvt. 
Ltd. 
ACC Energy 
Storage Pvt. Ltd. 
DVA Capacity 
(GWh) 
DVA Capacity 
(GWh) 
DVA Capacity 
(GWh) 
Dec 2023 25% 1 0% 0 70% 1 
Dec 2024 30% 5 25% 5 75% 2 

19 
 
Dec 2025 40% 10 40% 5 80% 3 
Dec 2026 55% 20 60% 5 85% 4 
Dec 2027 60% 20 70% 5 90% 5 
 
54. According to report of NITI Aayog, Battery manufacturing presently 
represents one of the largest economic opportunities. For India to achieve its 
ambitious targets of 500 GW of non fossil fuel energy by 2030 and also to 
have Electric Vehicles make up 30 per cent of its new vehicle sales by 2030, 
a robust domestic battery ecosystem is required for domestic value addition. 
Thus development of a domestic battery ecosystem will boost the demand 
for Advanced Chemistry Cell battery technologies and create significant 
growth from some of the largest sectors, such as transport and power. 
Moreover, India’s contribution towards creating advanced battery 
manufacturing hubs has not been encouraging so far, due to lukewarm 
domestic demand and lack of the rare metal reserves that are key ingredients 
for Lithium-ion Battery chemistries. But due to advancement in battery 
technologies with higher performance and improved affordability, the 
requirement of rare metals is losing its importance, which gives India an 
opportunity to establish a battery manufacturing ecosystem on the basis of 
new-age technologies that exploit abundantly available indigenous materials 
such as sodium and aluminium.  
 
55. Further, promoting the domestic manufacturing of ACC batteries also 
provides India with the opportunity to reduce its dependence on imports to 
meet the future demands of the energy requirements. In view thereof, the 
ACC manufacturing PLI scheme can encourage investments for creating 
domestic battery manufacturing hubs and new job opportunities which can 
contribute in advancing battery technologies across various sectors and 
influence the adoption of Electric Vehicles in the country.  
 
56. Although the Ministry of Heavy Industries is striving hard 
towards Make in India and Atmanirbhar Bharat with the Schemes like 
PLI-Auto, PLI-ACC and Phased Manufacturing Programme under 
FAME-II Scheme, the Committee is of the view that to make India a 
Global EV Hub, the Ministry should have supportive, transparent, and 
consistent government frameworks at national, state, and local levels 
and also focus towards establishing dedicated Manufacturing Hubs and 
Industrial Parks for manufacturing of batteries, cells and Electric 
Vehicle auto components. The Committee believes that this would 
encourage and strengthen economic development of the country. 
 

20 
 
Ministry of Road, Transport & Highways (MoRTH): 
57. Ministry of Road, Transport & Highways is responsible for 
formulation of broad policies relating to road transport and automotive 
norms. For the promotion of electric vehicles, various initiatives have been 
taken by the. Some of the initiatives as apprised to the Committee by the 
MoRTH are as under:  
 
(i) E-Rickshaw: MoRTH has amended the Motor Vehicles Act and 
the Rules to include specifications regarding manufacture, 
operation, registration and issue of driving license to E-Rickshaw 
drivers under the ambit of CMVRs. Further, the Ministry vide S.O. 
Notification 2812(E) dated 30.08.2016 has exempted transport 
vehicle of the category e-cart and E-Rickshaw from the 
requirement of permit. 
(ii) Unique Number Plate: To distinguish registration mark for zero 
emission vehicles, from all other motor vehicles on road, it was 
decided that the background colour of the registration plate shall be 
Green. Accordingly, MoRTH vide GSR 749(E) dated 07.08.2018 
has prescribed specification of registration mark for Battery 
Operated Vehicles to Yellow colour on Green background for 
transport vehicles and, for all other cases, in White colour on 
Green background. 
(iii) Battery Operated Transport Vehicles exempted from the 
requirements of permit: In order to create an ecosystem of 
Electric Mobility in the country through non-fiscal Incentivisation 
and to promote electrification in Public Transport and last mile 
connectivity, the MoRTH vide S.O. 5333(E) dated 18.10.2018 has 
exempted Battery Operated Transport Vehicles from the 
requirements of permit.  
(iv) Hybrid Electric Vehicles (HEV): MoRTH has Notified GSR 
167(E) dated 01.03.2019 for retro-fitment of hybrid electric system 
or electric kit to motor vehicles or conversion of motor vehicles for 
pure electric operation with fitment of pure electric system kit.  
(v) Exemption from payment of registration/renewal fee: In order to 
incentivize Electric Vehicles vis-a-vis ICE vehicles, MoRTH vide 
GSR 525(E) dated 02.08.2021 has exempted Battery Operated 
Vehicles from the payment of fees for the purpose of issue or 
renewal of registration certificate and assignment of new 
registration mark. As per Vahan Portal, 18 States/UTs namely 
Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Ladakh, Union Territory of DNH and 
DD, Chhattisgarh, Punjab, Odisha, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Goa, 

21 
 
Delhi, Maharashtra, Manipur, West Bengal, Assam, Jammu and 
Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh and Meghalaya have exempted the 
Registration fees for Electric Vehicles.  
(vi) Zero cost All India Tourist Permit for electric vehicles: MoRTH 
has issued a Notification vide GSR 302(E) dated 18.04.2023 to issue 
All India Tourist Permit for battery operated vehicles without 
payment of any permit fee.  
(vii) Automotive Industry Standards (AIS): MoRTH has also notified 
the various Automotive Industry Standards (AIS) for aspects related 
to safety, range, power, Central Motor Vehicle Rules type approval 
etc. for electric vehicles to enable their development as per the 
Annexure-I. 
 
58. Further, the Committee was informed by the Ministry of MoRTH on the 
recommendation of NITI Aayog for the promotion of electrical 2 and 
3Wheelers that they have advised the States and UTs to delink the cost of 
battery (which accounts for 30-40 per cent of the total cost) from the vehicle 
cost. As a result, the vehicles can be sold in the market without the battery and 
it will reduce the upfront cost of the electrical 2 and 3 Wheelers and make them 
comparable vis-a-vis ICE 2 and 3 Wheelers. In the present registration process 
(Form 22A of CMVR), the details of engine number and motor number are 
only required and the details of battery is not captured. The Ministry vide its 
letter dated 12.08.2020 had advised all States and Union Territories that 
vehicles without batteries can be sold and registered based on the type approval 
certificate issued by the Test Agency. It was further clarified that there is no 
need to specify the Make/Type or any other details of the Battery for the 
purpose of Registration. 
 
59. The Committee was also informed by the MoRTH that it has issued an 
advisory dated 17.07.2019 to all States and Union Territories regarding 
Incentivisation of electric vehicles and induction of electric vehicles in shared 
mobility and public transport operations. The States/UTs were requested to 
consider waiving the road tax to the maximum possible extent on the electric 
vehicles so as to reduce the initial cost of the vehicle for the users. As per 
details available on the Vahan Portal, 19 States/UTs viz. Chhattisgarh, 
Chandigarh, Delhi, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Odisha, 
Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttarakhand, Jammu and Kashmir, Karnataka, Ladakh, 
Puducherry, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Kerala and West Bengal have 
provided exemption/rebate from road tax on electric vehicles.  
  
60. The Committee notes that MoRTH has issued various guidelines 
and advisories to States and Union Territories so as to incentivize and 
 

22 
 
bring down the initial cost of electric vehicles. Many States have 
complied with these guidelines and included the measures in their 
respective EV policy but, to increase the targeted penetration of electric 
vehicles by 2030, more needs to be done. Since 19 States/Union 
Territories are only providing exemptions and rebate in road tax, the 
Committee recommends that the MoRTH should take up the issue with 
the remaining States/Union Territories in order to bring in all the States 
and Union Territories such as Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Haryana etc. on a 
common platform as well as make efforts to slash down the road tax 
further and provide other possible exemptions in respect of electric 
vehicles. MoRTH, in order to decarbonise the Automotive Sector, 
should also make electric vehicles mandatory for public transport in 
cities with high rate of air pollution. 
 
Ministry of Power: 
61. In order to expedite the rollout of public EV charging infrastructure 
across the country, the Committee was informed by the Ministry of Power 
that Charging Infrastructure for Electric Vehicles - Guidelines and 
Standards has been issued on 14.12.2018 with amendments issued on 
01.10.2019, 08.06.2020, 14.01.2022, 07.11.2022 and 27.04.2023, giving 
details of the roles and responsibilities of various stakeholders at the Central 
& State level. The salient features of the Guidelines issued are:  
 Supporting creation of Electric Vehicles Charging Infrastructure in 
order & provide affordable tariff chargeable from Public EV Charging 
Station Operators/Owners and Electric Vehicle users. 
 Enabling owners of Electric Vehicles to charge their EVs at their 
residence/offices using their existing electricity connections. 
 Introducing revenue sharing model for provision of land at 
promotional rates for public charging stations. 
 Providing electricity connection to Public Charging Station (PCS) 
within stipulated timelines. 
 Permitting DISCOMs to leverage funding from Revamped 
Distribution Sector Scheme for general upstream infrastructure 
augmentation. 
 Prescribing single part EV tariff for Public Charging Stations and 
shall not exceed Average Cost of Supply (ACoS) till 31.03.2025. 
 Specifying ceiling limits on service charges being levied by public 
charge point operators on the EV customers to recover the cost of 
servicing the capital investments (including GST) made by it in 
setting up the Public Charging Station. The amendment specifies a 
ceiling of Rs 2.50 per unit and Rs 3.50 per unit of electricity used for 

23 
 
slow AC charging of EVs at PCS during the solar and non-solar hours 
respectively. Additionally, a ceiling limit of Rs. 10 per unit and Rs. 12 
per unit of electricity used for DC Fast charging of EVs at PCS during 
the solar and non-solar hours respectively.  
 
62. In its replies, the Ministry of Power informed the Committee that 
Central Electrical Authority (CEA) has carried out generation expansion 
studies and prepared National Electricity Plan with the projected All India 
peak electricity demand and electrical energy requirement (as per 20th 
Electric Power Survey Projections) which includes electricity demand due to 
charging of Electric Vehicles. The likely installed electricity capacity of the 
country for the year 2031-32 is to be around 900,422 MW and, the projected 
installed capacity for the said year is capable to meet the demand at all 
instances of time including the demand due to electric vehicles.        
                                
63. Ministry of Power informed that  Public Electric Vehicle Charging 
Stations are expected to have Fast Chargers with power capacities in excess 
of at least 50 kW to allow topping up of vehicle batteries within short 
durations. The heavy duty chargers are expected to deliver high power to the 
vehicle in short durations from the Grid, thus require equivalent upstream 
capacities in the distribution network to cater to such high power demand. 
The existing distribution network in the country may not have the required 
capacity to cater to such high power requirements especially when such 
chargers are located towards the end of the distribution feeders or otherwise 
at the feeder nodes with frequent low voltage profiles. Therefore, to integrate 
such high power charging stations with the Grid, upstream infrastructure 
including transformers of appropriate capacity, isolation and other safety 
equipment is required. Such upstream infrastructure entails additional cost, 
which may be as high as 60 per cent of the total cost of setting up a Public 
Charging Station and acts as a deterrent in widespread setting up of public 
charging stations. In view of this, the Ministry of Power vide its Guidelines 
and Standards for Public Charging Stations dated 14.01.2022 has made a 
provision enabling the Public Charging Station developers to leverage the 
funds available under the Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme (RDSS) for 
augmenting the upstream distribution network to integrate such high power 
capacity charger in the grid without any financial implication to EV 
customer.            
 
64. In response to the query of the Committee regarding electricity tariff 
structure, the Ministry of Power informed the Committee that currently, 
there is no provision to have a single tariff system for Public Charging 
Stations across the country due to differences in the cost of power generation 

24 
 
and power purchase by Electricity Distribution Companies (DISCOMs) 
from the power generating companies. Moreover, in terms of the guidelines 
and standards, Ministry of Power has introduced a single part supply tariff 
for public charging stations not exceeding ACoS (Average cost of electricity 
supply) till 31st March 2025.                                 
 
65. The Committee notes the efforts of the Ministry of Power towards 
augmentation of distribution network through Revamped Distribution 
Sector Scheme (RDSS). The Committee is of the view that with more 
penetration of electric vehicles, EV owners may prefer to charge their 
vehicles at home during non-solar hours which may lead to surge in 
electricity demand ultimately overloading the electrical systems. The 
Committee recommends that Ministry of Power should encourage solar 
hours charging of electric vehicles through advertisements, including 
regional languages, to minimize the load on electrical systems during 
non-solar hours and promote establishing charging stations/points at 
work locations/office buildings/premises with minimum parking facility 
to increase charging network as well as solar hours charging to 
minimize load on electric system. Ministry of Power should also 
encourage Solarization of EV Charging Stations, in coordination with 
the Ministry of Heavy Industries, by providing subsidy for installation 
of EV Charging Stations both under public as well as private sector.  
 
66. In its deposition before the Committee, Ministry of Power informed 
that EV Yatra Portal was launched by the Hon’ble President on 14th 
December, 2022, in which all the charging stations have been mapped and 
connected in the country. The EV Yatra App is user-friendly for the EV 
users and helps dispel range anxiety by locating the charging station and 
slot, which is available nearby. The Committee is of the view that the 
Ministry of Power should popularize such Apps and recommends that 
the scope of the EV Yatra App should be enlarged to help even the 
potential electric vehicle buyers to know about the cost of the vehicle, 
cost of battery, insurance and comparison between EV and ICE vehicles 
as a single stop solution for all issues related to electric vehicles. 
 
67. Further, the Ministry of Power informed that a Portal has been 
launched by Bureau of Energy Efficiency through which anybody applying 
for electric connection from the respective State DISCOMS can utilise the 
facilities available in this Portal. Electric connection through this Portal is 
time bound and action is taken against DISCOM through State Government 
for not providing connection within the timeframe. In this regard, Guidelines 
have also been issued for setting up of EV Charging Stations in public place. 

25 
 
The Committee appreciates such a move of the Ministry of Power and 
recommends that the benefits of the aforesaid Portal and Guidelines 
should be given wide publicity vigorously in all prominent languages 
through various modes of media, including social media. 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas: 
68. The Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas informed the Committee 
that Oil Marketing Companies have taken a target of installing 22,000 EV 
Charging Stations across the country by December, 2024. As on 1st June, 
2023, 8440 EV Charging Stations have already been installed across the 
country. Furthermore, OMCs have plans to reach 11,748 EV Chargers by 
December, 2023 and 22,000 by December, 2024. 
 
69. Oil Marketing Companies have developed a phase-wise roadmap to 
achieve the above target as enumerated below: 
Phase 1: High priority 9 cities & Major 
Highways/Expressways - The 9 cities viz., Mumbai, 
Delhi, Bangalore, Hyderabad, Ahmedabad, Chennai, 
Kolkata, Surat & Pune and Major 
Highways/Expressways are being taken up in Phase 1 
for installation of EV Charging Stations. 
Phase 2: State Capitals & Major cities (>1 million 
populations) - In the next 2-3 years, electric vehicles 
will gain popularity amongst the urban consumers of 
these markets. 
Phase 3: Smart Cities -The 100 Smart Cities are planned to be 
covered considering the consumer shift to electric 
vehicles and expansion of the EV network by the 
Automobile Original Equipment Manufacturers in these 
cities. 
Phase 4: Cities with more than 2 lakh population (not covered 
under Phase 1-3) - There are 234 cities with more than 
2 lakh populations. Oil Marketing Companies are 
preparing a roadmap to cover these cities and keeping 
pace with the expansion of the EV network by the 
Automobile OEMs. 
 
70. The Committee was informed by the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural 
Gas that Oil Marketing Companies have recently been sanctioned a subsidy 
of ₹800 crore under FAME Scheme (Phase-II) for setting up 7,432 Charging 
Stations (as part of the targeted 22,000 Chargers) based on techno-
commercial and safety viability. The 7,432 EV fast Chargers of CCS-2 type 

26 
 
of capacity 50/60 KW and 100/120 KW will be set up in the following 
regions: 
 
S. No. Regions Covered No. of 
Chargers 
1 4 Million plus cities (9 cities viz. Delhi, Mumbai, 
Chennai, Kolkata, Bangalore, Hyderabad, Ahmedabad, 
Pune & Surat) 
681 
2 Rest Million plus cities (44 cities) 563 
3 Smart cities, cities in Hilly States not covered under the 
above 
324 
4 Highways connecting adjoining major cities/Expressway 79 
5 Major Expressways 5785 
 Others - 
 Total 7,432 
 
71. Range anxiety is the concern/worry of an individual driving a vehicle 
that the battery may drain out of power before the arrival of the destination 
or next charging station. Cost is also another important factor in choosing a 
vehicle and, there is a huge price gap between the Electric Vehicle and ICE 
Vehicle. Lack of Visible Charging Infrastructure along with range anxieties 
in the minds of the people are posing hindrance to the adoption of Electric 
Vehicles. Although the Government is working to increase the Charging 
Network in the country, long distance travel with Electric Vehicles is still a 
concern and EV owners are compelled to travel intra-city or short-distance 
journeys. 
72. A common thread arising out of deliberations with the 
stakeholders/Ministry concerned was that in order to make Electric mobility 
a ‘way of life’ throughout the length and breadth of the country ‘adoption of 
small cities’ with respect to provision of Charging Infrastructure and 
providing employment to the local youth there is necessary.  
 
73. Electric Vehicles have range constraints as its range depends on 
battery capacity and therefore, the vehicles need charging at frequent 
intervals, whereas ICE Vehicles have a fuel tank which gives them 
range advantage vis-a-vis electric vehicles. The Committee recommends 
that Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas should also consider 
including the sub-urban and rural areas under the target areas for 
establishing Charging Stations, as installations of charging stations only 
at retail outlets of Oil Marketing Companies would not be adequate due 
to range anxiety in case of electric vehicles. Further, in view of the 
targeted Electric Charging Stations of 22,000, the sanctioned Charging 

27 
 
Stations of 7,432 for installation under FAME-II is way below the target 
and, therefore the Committee recommends that sincere efforts should 
be made for setting up of more Charging Stations to address the issue of 
range anxiety and boost the EV penetration in the automotive sector in 
the country. 
 
74. The Committee was informed by the Ministry of Heavy Industries 
that 520 Charging Stations had been sanctioned under the Phase-I of 
FAME India Scheme. Further, 2,877 charging stations in 68 cities across 
25 States/UTs and 1576 charging stations across 9 Expressways and 16 
Highways have been sanctioned under FAME-II India Scheme. The 
Committee recommends that other Ministries should be roped in along 
with charging infrastructure operators to put in place a comprehensive 
plan for establishment of a Charging Network in the country to address 
the issue of road anxiety of electric vehicle owners.  
 
75. The Committee was informed that Battery swapping provides a 
method of decoupling of batteries from electric vehicles and reducing their 
upfront costs. It also ensures reduced waiting/charging time for vehicles and 
offers a promising alternative to increase the adoption of electric vehicles in 
commercial segment. The rate of adoption of battery swapping in India has 
remained low because of multiple pitfalls associated with it viz. lack of 
standardization, unsuitable battery pack design, higher costs over the electric 
vehicle life, shorter commercial life of battery packs etc. However, it 
provides several advantages to the electric vehicle owners, battery swapping 
system owners, and electricity distribution companies. Some of the benefits 
of battery swapping stations are as under: 
 The benefits to electric vehicle owners include reduced cost of 
ownership, reduced downtime/charge time and reduced range anxiety 
in presence of wide network of Battery Swapping Stations (BSS). 
 The benefits to battery system operators include reduced cost of real 
estate (no need for large parking space), minimization of electricity 
cost (in ToU scenario) and option of having another revenue stream 
by participating in electricity market. 
 The benefits to the distribution companies include planned 
development of infrastructure, treatment of battery swapping systems 
as flexible loads and the increased predictability of load, which 
otherwise would be difficult to have in high EV penetration scenario. 
 
76. In its reply to the query of the Committee, the Ministry of Petroleum 
& Natural Gas informed that currently there is no standardization & 
interoperability for batteries used in battery swapping. Due to lack of 

28 
 
standardization, the proposition of battery swapping is not expanding in a 
way it can. Battery Swapping Station can serve only few vehicles of specific 
make. OMCs are setting up battery swapping stations on pilot basis in 
alliance with battery swapping players.  
 
77. The Committee is of the view that one of the biggest barriers to 
the widespread adoption of Electric Vehicles remains the lack of 
charging infrastructure and the overall time required to charge such 
batteries. With a Battery Swapping System, EV owners will save on the 
high cost of buying a new set of battery at periodic intervals as they can 
simply replace the exhausted batteries for fully charged ones at Battery 
Swapping Stations. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of 
Heavy Industries should conduct a study regarding the feasibility of 
battery standardisation and formulate a stable Battery Swapping Policy 
with the highest levels of safety standards that can infuse confidence in 
consumer’s decision making thereby boosting demand whilst inducing 
infrastructure build-out by swapping operators, which has a huge 
potential to invite FDI into the battery swapping network creation in the 
country.  
  
Ministry of Finance: 
78. During the examination of the subject, the Committee was apprised by 
the Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance that: “The present GST 
rate on electric vehicles is 5 per cent. It is the lowest GST slab. EV Chargers 
also attract the same rate of duty i.e., 5 per cent. These were fixed in 2019-
post 36th meeting of the GST Council. Further, regarding the direct tax 
provisions in relation to electric vehicles, a provision was brought in 2019 
under the Income Tax Act to provide for deduction to person i.e., buyer of 
the vehicle of Rs. 1.5 lakh interest on loan to promote electric vehicles.  It 
was in the context of too much of pollution in the country at that point of 
time. Now, the stated policy of the Government is that we are phasing out 
exemptions, deduction and going towards rationalization of tax rate.”   
 
79. In response to a query of the Committee, Department of Revenue 
informed that at the time of introduction of GST, electric vehicles attracted 
GST at a rate of 12 per cent based on the recommendation of the GST 
Council in its 14th Meeting held on 18.05.2017. However, in order to 
promote the faster penetration and adoption of electric vehicles, the GST 
Council in its 36th Meeting held on 25.07.2019 recommended a GST rate 
reduction from 12 per cent to 5 per cent. During the said meeting the GST 
Council had also recommended a GST rate reduction on EV Chargers from 

29 
 
18 per cent to 5 per cent. These rate changes were effective from 
01.08.2019.  In addition, based on the recommendation of the GST Council 
in its 28th Meeting held on 21.07.2018, the GST rate on Li-ion batteries was 
reduced from 28 per cent to 18 per cent. Li-ion batteries are extensively used 
in electric vehicles, hence aforementioned reduction in the GST rate on such 
batteries would contribute to lower the costs associated with EV 
manufacturing. 
 
80. In response to a query of the Committee regarding the tax incentives 
provided by the Ministry of Finance to promote the adoption of electric 
vehicles and whether there are any plans to introduce tax breaks or 
exemptions for electric vehicle manufacturers or importers to encourage the 
growth of the electric vehicle industry in India, the Ministry informed that it 
is the stated policy of the Government to remove exemptions and deductions 
available in the Income-Tax Act 1961 while simultaneously reducing the 
rates of tax. Existing domestic companies can opt to pay tax at reduced rates 
of 22 per cent plus applicable surcharge and cess given that they do not avail 
any specified exemption or incentive. In addition, new domestic 
manufacturing companies, including companies manufacturing electric 
vehicles, (registered on or after 1st October, 2019 and starting manufacturing 
on or before 31st March, 2024) can opt to pay tax at the rate of 15 per cent 
plus applicable surcharge and cess given the condition that these companies 
do not avail any specified exemption and incentive. Furthermore, such 
companies shall not be required to pay any Minimum Alternate Tax (MAT). 
 
81. The Committee was also informed that the Income-Tax Act 1961 also 
contains specific provisions relating to promotion of electric vehicles in 
India such as, under section 80EEB of the Act, deduction up to an amount of 
Rs. 1.5 lakh is allowed on interest payable by an individual on loan taken 
from any financial institution for the purpose of purchase of an electric 
vehicle. The deduction under this section shall be allowed only if the loan 
has been sanctioned by the financial institution beginning on 01.04.2019 and 
ending on 31.03.2023. Besides, the depreciation allowance as percentage of 
written down value in the case of renewable energy devices (which includes 
electrically operated vehicles) is 40 per cent. 
 
82. In response to a query of the Committee that whether the Ministry is 
planning to extend the duration of the loan sanctioned beyond 31st March 
2023 for claiming additional tax deduction of Rs 1.5 lakh on the interest paid 
on loan for purchase of electric vehicles, the Ministry informed that the end 
date for taking loan for the purpose of purchase of electric vehicles for 
claiming additional tax deduction of Rs. 1.5 lakh on the interest paid for 

30 
 
such loan under Section 80EEB of the Income Tax Act 1961 has not been 
extended beyond 31.3.2023 and there is no proposal to extend it. 
Furthermore, there is no proposal to make the same/similar 
clause/exemption available under the new tax regime. This is in line with the 
stated policy of the Government to remove exemptions and deductions 
available in the Income-Tax Act 1961 while simultaneously reducing the 
rates of tax. 
 
83. The Committee is of the view that one of the major challenges to 
make electric vehicles more affordable and economical to operate is 
their high ownership cost vis-a-vis ICE vehicles, as the electric vehicles 
include a battery pack that forms about 40-45 per cent of their 
ownership cost. Since the Lithium-ions Batteries (LIBs) for electric 
vehicles has a greater durability with relatively high energy and power 
density, the Committee recommends that Government should explore 
the possibility of shrinking further the GST on Lithium-ion batteries to 
bring down the ownership cost of electric vehicles. Further, there is a 
need to address the issue of GST for manufacturers as well in order to 
reduce the high cost of electric vehicles and consequently its 
affordability for the potential buyers to promote faster adoption of 
electric vehicles. 
 
84. Section 80EEB of the Income Tax Act 1961 allows an individual to 
claim tax savings of up to Rs. 1.5 lakh on interest paid on a loan made 
specifically to purchase an electric vehicle. Section 80EEB specifically 
states that the deduction benefits in case of purchase of electric vehicles 
are available only if the loan is approved by the Financial Institutions 
during the period 1st January 2019 to 31st March, 2023. The Committee 
is of the view that pollution is still a major concern and therefore, there 
is a need to work towards Green Grow. In order to facilitate faster 
adoption of electric vehicles, the Committee recommends that the 
provision under Section 80EEB may be considered for extension at least 
up to 31st March, 2025. 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
85. Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change apprised the 
Committee that switching to Electric Vehicles would replace use of fossil 
fuels such as petrol & diesel and consequently Electric vehicles will have 
significant environmental benefits such as drastic reduction in air and noise 
pollution. However, there are certain challenges associated with the 
increased use of Electric Vehicles. As Electric Vehicles uses onboard 
electricity storage systems (battery packs) for the storage of energy, the 

31 
 
increase in use of electric vehicles will lead to increase in production of 
batteries, and certainly the need for effective disposal of batteries to 
safeguard the environment .  (Replies to questionnaire MoEFCC) 
 
86. In its replies to the questionnaire about the impact of increased Battery 
production on environment due to increase in demand for Electric Vehicles, 
the Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Change informed the 
Committee that Government of India notified the Battery Waste 
Management Rules, 2022 on 22nd August, 2022 to ensure environmentally 
sound management of waste batteries replacing the Batteries (Management 
and Handling) Rules, 2001. The rules cover all types of batteries viz. Electric 
Vehicle batteries, portable batteries, automotive batteries and industrial 
batteries and provide an enabling framework for environmentally sound 
management of waste batteries generated from all Electric Vehicles. 
Stakeholders in the rules are producers (including importers), recyclers and 
refurbishers. Regulatory bodies are Central Pollution Control Board and 
State Pollution Control Boards.  
 
 
87. The rules function based on the concept of Extended Producer 
Responsibility (EPR) where the producers (including importers) of batteries 
are responsible for collection and recycling/refurbishment of waste batteries 
and use of recovered materials from wastes into new batteries. EPR 
mandates that all waste batteries to be collected and sent for 
recycling/refurbishment, and it prohibits disposal in landfills and 
incineration. To meet the EPR obligations, producers may engage 
themselves or authorize any other entity for collection, recycling or 
refurbishment of waste batteries. Producers (including importers) haves 
mandated targets for collection and recycling/refurbishment of waste 
batteries in the range of 30-90 per cent depending on the type of batteries. 
However, the remaining batteries are also to be collected in 7-14 years 
compliance cycle. Recyclers are mandated to recover minimum percentage 
of battery materials from the waste batteries in the range of 55-90 per cent 
depending on the type of batteries starting from the FY 2024-25. Producers 
are mandated to use minimum percentage of recycled materials out of the 
total dry weight of a battery in the range of 5-40 per cent depending on the 
type of batteries starting from the FY 2024-25.  
 
88. The rules enable setting up a mechanism and centralized online portal 
for exchange of EPR certificates between producers and 
recyclers/refurbishers to fulfill the obligations of producers. Online 
registration & reporting, auditing, and Committee for monitoring the 

32 
 
implementation of rules and to take measures required for removal of 
difficulties are salient features of rules for ensuring effective implementation 
and compliance. 
 
89. The Committee was also informed that on the principle of Polluter 
Pays Principle, environmental compensation will be imposed for non-
fulfillment of Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) targets, 
responsibilities and obligations set out in the rules. The funds collected 
under environmental compensation shall be utilised in collection and 
refurbishing or recycling of uncollected and non-recycled waste batteries.        
 
90. Lithium-ion batteries, which are the most common type of battery 
used in electric vehicles, are made up of various materials such as cobalt, 
nickel, and lithium. While these materials are recyclable, the recycling 
process is expensive and requires a significant amount of energy. Moreover, 
the current recycling rate for Lithium-ion batteries is not up to the mark, 
which means the majority of these batteries are being discarded as e-waste, 
leading to environmental concerns as well as health hazardous. The 
Committee is of the view that proper disposal and recycling of Lithium-
ion Batteries (LIBs) are crucial to minimize the threat they pose to the 
environment as well as to the public health and therefore, there is a 
need for advanced battery recycling technologies and increased 
awareness of the importance of proper disposal of e-wastes. The 
Committee recommends that initiatives should be taken to encourage 
advanced R&D efforts for development of sustainable e-waste recycling 
technologies and to develop Sodium-ion as an alternative to Lithium-ion 
in battery manufacturing in coordination with the OEMs and Channel 
Partners for a more sustainable future. Besides, training modules 
should be designed for proper training and skilling of recyclers and 
labourers engaged in the business for effective management and 
disposal of LIBs and e-wastes.  
 
Ministry of New & Renewable Energy 
91. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) informed the 
Committee that it is the Nodal Ministry for promotion of renewable energy 
(RE) including wind, solar, small hydro, bio energy, etc., and also new 
technologies like ocean energy, geo-thermal energy, etc. in the country. The 
Ministry also informed that the major schemes and programmes are targeted 
towards generation of electricity from RE resources. 
 
 

33 
 
92. The renewable energy sources such as wind and solar are intermittent 
in nature, thus the Electric Vehicle (EV) charging stations with stand-alone 
wind and/or solar power cannot provide reliable power for charging EVs. 
Therefore, the charging stations have to be connected to the grid in which 
the electricity is mainly supplied by local power distribution company 
(DISCOM). However, the power supply to the charging station through the 
grid can be from any sources of electricity generation, including renewable 
energy. With notification of Green Energy Open Access Rules, the EV 
charging stations can demand green power from the concerned DISCOM. 
With this mechanism, the EVs can be charged through green power.   
 
93. In response to a query of the Committee regarding the steps being 
taken by the Ministry for providing renewable energy solutions for EV 
charging infrastructures at home and in residential societies, the Ministry 
replied that under Rooftop Solar Programme, Ministry is providing Central 
Financial Assistance (CFA) up to 40 per cent for installation of rooftop solar 
at homes. With net-metering arrangement, the solar power generated can 
also be used to negate the electricity consumption of the house, including the 
electricity consumption for charging electric vehicles. Similarly, CFA up to 
20 per cent is being provided for installation of rooftop solar in residential 
societies to utilise the generated solar power for common utilities, including 
for charging Electric Vehicles. 
 
94. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy informed the Committee 
that concerted efforts are being made for increasing the share of renewable 
energy in electricity mix and in line with the announcement made by the 
Hon’ble Prime Minister at COP26, they are working towards achieving 500 
GW of installed electricity capacity from non-fossil sources by 2030. 
 
95. The Committee notes the efforts made by the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy for harnessing of renewable sources of energy such 
as wind and solar energy to supplement the generation of electricity. It 
is of the considered view that a pragmatic and earnest focus on 
generating renewable and non-fossil energy will go a long way in 
meeting the electricity demands of the society. Moreover, players in the 
automotive sector are moving the needle on renewable energy transition 
by leveraging cutting-edge auto electrification technologies. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should make all out efforts to 
tap the maximum energy that can be harnessed from such renewable 
energy sources to supplement the current electricity demand arising 
from households and industries, including EV Charging Stations, to 
support the Electric Mobility in the country. EV-Ready India Dashboard 

34 
 
should also be given wide publicity, especially in regional languages, to 
encourage electric vehicles as a cleaner and more efficient alternative to 
ICE vehicles.  
 
NITI Aayog 
96.  NITI Aayog is involved in taking various initiatives and formulating 
policies for faster adoption of electric mobility in the country. It has been 
informed that Electric Mobility is one of the greatest technology 
advancement of recent times and India is strongly committed to take it 
forward. A host of policy measures, regulations, and interventions have 
already been made in that direction which broadly fall into regulatory norms 
(e.g., State EV policies), incentives for demand creation & charging 
infrastructure set up (purchase subsidy under FAME-2, lower GST) and 
promotion of local manufacturing (ACC PLI, Auto & Auto Components 
PLI). While these measures will help in accelerating the adoption of EVs, 
the absence of advanced research and technology base hurts the global 
competitiveness of Indian electric vehicles industry.  
 
97. In this connection, the Committee was informed by the Ministry of 
Heavy Industries that in order to address the challenge on future of 
workforce and to develop world class ecosystem for R&D and Innovation in 
Transformative Mobility, NITI Aayog created an R&D Platform with IITs. 
The platform is to build indigenous technologies and conduct India specific 
studies. Consultations with IITs were organised to introduce New M.Tech 
Programmes to promote research on energy storage & battery chemistry. 
Various R&D initiatives have been taken up by 16 out of 23 IITs. 
 
98. In addition to the above, several promotional campaigns and 
initiatives have been taken up by the NITI Aayog to encourage the adoption 
of electric vehicles. Some of them, as apprised to the Committee by the NITI  
Aayog,  are: 
 e-AMRIT (Accelerated e Mobility Revolution for India’s 
Transportation): 
E-AMRIT Portal, which was launched on 10.11.2021, has been designed to 
serve as a ‘one-stop site’ to provide all the information related to the 
adoption of electric vehicles in India. E-AMRIT Portal is instrumental to 
raise EV awareness to consumers, enhance EV uptake and attract 
investment. E-AMRIT complements the initiatives of the government on 
raising awareness on electric vehicles and sensitizing consumers on the 
benefits of switching to electric vehicles. As an accelerator of change, e-
AMRIT will influence various stakeholders, including millions of users, to 

35 
 
adopt electric vehicles, drawing more investments into the sector. It has 
inspired Karnataka, Telangana and Gujarat to develop State EV Awareness 
Portals. 
 Shoonya-Zero Pollution Mobility: 
Shoonya–Zero Pollution Mobility is a consumer awareness campaign 
administered by NITI Aayog in partnership with leading companies working 
in the electric vehicle ecosystem in India. Shoonya aims to set the ride-
hailing and delivery segment on a pathway to 100% electrification. Major  
 
 
components of the campaign are as under:  
i. Corporate Branding Program: To recognise the efforts made by 
industry partners towards electric vehicles; parcels, vehicles, and 
driver uniforms for electric deliveries and rides are branded with the 
Shoonya logo.  
ii. Consumer Awareness Drive: To highlight the health and 
environmental benefits of EVs and solidify Shoonya as a slogan in 
every household in India, NITI Aayog uses both traditional and digital 
media channels.  
iii. Resource Toolkit: To allow EV users to understand the cost and 
emission benefits of switching to EVs, financing options, and existing 
policies, the toolkits are hosted on the Shoonya website 
(https://shoonya.info/Toolkit). 
 
Shoonya has kick-started a widespread transition to a sustainable and clean 
mobility future. Within 18 months of the campaign launch, Shoonya has 
achieved the following milestones under each component:  
a) Corporate Branding: 
 The industry partner cohort of the Shoonya campaign grew from 35 to 
149 corporate. The companies include two, three and four-wheeler 
manufacturers, charging infrastructure providers, fleet aggregators, 
financing institutions, and e-commerce and ride-hailing companies.   
 In the first year of the Campaign, the estimated number of electric 
deliveries and rides completed by corporate partners via the Shoonya 
campaign was close to 70 million and 40 million, respectively, 
mitigating 13,000 tonnes of carbon dioxide.  
b) Consumer awareness drive:  
 Shoonya launched an engaging brand film, created an infomercial 
video, produced monthly newsletters and blogs, installed over 300 
Shoonya-branded billboards/hoardings across key metro cities, and 
undertook social media promotions to enhance consumer awareness in 
India.  

36 
 
 The brand film and infomercial video received 65 million+ views 
across social media channels of Shoonya. Additionally, the 
infomercial has received over 60,000 views. 
 Additionally, NITI Aayog partnered with MyGov to take the Shoonya 
campaign to the masses and increase awareness around electric 
vehicles in India. Together, NITI Aayog and MyGov hosted several 
contests such as quizzes, doodle, and photography competitions. The 
Shoonya podcast series launched in partnership with MyGov served as 
a platform to share the stories of India’s sustainable mobility 
champions.  
c) Resource Toolkits: NITI Aayog launched two toolkits on the Shoonya 
website:  
 EV Calculator informs consumer choices by highlighting the cost 
and environmental benefits of switching to Electric Vehicles  
 Financing Resources allow users to understand the lending process 
and choose the right financing option to save money when buying an 
Electric Vehicle.  
 
99. The Committee notes the initiatives undertaken by NITI Aayog 
such as e-AMRIT Portal and Shoonya Campaign and hopes that 
launching comprehensive nationwide awareness campaigns to educate 
the general public about the environmental and financial advantages of 
electric vehicles would help dispel the misconceptions and increase 
acceptance of the electric vehicles among the populace. The Committee 
is of the view that help of NGOs, social media and popular celebrities 
may also be considered for creating awareness and popularising electric 
vehicles (EVs). Further, the Ministry of Heavy Industries, in 
coordination with the NITI Aayog, should take initiatives to encourage 
the Governments of States/UTs to develop their respective EV Portals, 
in line with the e-AMRIT Portal, to generate public awareness 
regarding the advantages of electric vehicles. 
 
100. Further, the Committee was apprised that State EV policies play a 
crucial role in fostering electric vehicle manufacturing and accelerating EV 
uptake in India. State Governments along with Central Government are also 
working in the same direction to step up the faster adoption of Hybrid and 
Electric Vehicles. To promote EV ecosystem and to take stock of EV 
initiatives in the country, the EV Mission in NITI Aayog has organised 
workshops with States/UTs. To identify mobility challenges in North 
Eastern states and exchange learning on best practices, Regional Workshops 
have been organised. Through this platform the EV Mission is able to inspire 

37 
 
about 33 States/ UTs to come up with EV policies. Of the 33 States/UTs so 
far 26 States/UTs have notified their EV policies and 7 States/UTs EV 
policies are in draft stage.  
 
101. The Committee is of the view that the States are drivers of electric 
mobility movement in the country and they need to be equipped with 
efficient tools and policies to make electric vehicle revolution a success 
and contribute towards net zero emission. The Committee recommends 
that a comparative analysis of the notified EV policies of States/UTs 
should be conducted and based on the analysis outcome, a 
comprehensive stable EV policy may be adopted to address the 
misconceptions regarding electric vehicles among the people and to 
boost EV revolution in the country. Further, States/UTs, which are yet 
to notify their EV Policy, should be provided expert guidance and 
scientific assistance by NITI Aayog and other related organisations in 
formulation of their EV policy. 
 
102. The Committee was informed that various State/UT Governments 
have set targets to upgrade their fleet of buses in respective STUs/STCs to 
Electric, such as Haryana Government has set a deadline of 100 per cent of 
bus fleet owned by State Transport Undertakings in the state into electric 
buses by 2029, similarly Delhi Government has also plans to make 80 per 
cent of their fleet to electric by the end of 2025. The Committee notes the 
efforts made by some of the State/UT Governments in decarbonising 
their respective bus fleet and is of the view that, along with buses, the 
logistics sector also needs to be decarbonised as it is a major contributor 
to air pollution. Therefore, in order to decarbonise the Transport 
Sector, efforts should be made to set a deadline for making Transport 
Sector in the country mandatorily electric. 
 
103. Although India has seen the rise in sales and production of Electric 
Vehicles in the recent years, still there are certain challenges which are 
hampering the widespread adoption of electric mobility in the country. Some 
of the major challenges are: 
 
Lack of Financing  
104. In response to a query of the Committee, the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries informed that one of the significant barriers to scaling up EV 
adoption is the limited access to affordable commercial finance. While EVs 
offer lower operating costs compared to internal combustion engine (ICE) 
vehicles and have achieved total cost of ownership (TCO) parity in some 

38 
 
segments, their high upfront costs and limited financing options hinder 
widespread affordability and adoption.   
 
105. Besides, the nascent nature of the Electric Vehicle sector leads 
commercial lenders to perceive significant risks, resulting in a low level of 
commercial financing. Only a limited number of financial institutions 
operate in this space, and they often provide financing with dissuasive terms, 
such as high interest rates, short maturity, or low loan-to-value (LTV) ratios. 
Access to financing through commercial banks and Non-Banking Financial 
Corporation (NBFCs) is restricted, especially for low and middle income 
individuals who constitute the majority of e-2/3W (electric two-wheelers and 
three-wheelers) purchasers. They face challenges such as high interest rates 
(ranging from 20-25 per cent), lower LTV compared to conventional 
vehicles, and shorter loan tenures. Additionally, concerns regarding the 
long-term performance of EVs and supply-side constraints deter commercial 
lenders from providing financing. While NBFCs are more active in EV 
lending, they face their own challenges, including high cost of financing, 
limited access to long-term funds, market fragmentation, and high 
underwriting and collection costs, leading to higher interest rates compared 
to commercial banks. 
 
106. Further, the Committee was informed that in order to accelerate the 
transition to e-2/3Ws in India, it is crucial to de-risk and provide affordable 
financing options. In response to this need, the GoI is formulating a catalytic 
policy response and has requested the World Bank (WB) to design and offer 
financial interventions to overcome these barriers and stimulate the growth 
of the e-2/3Wheeler market. 
 
107. Based on the detailed studies and extensive market consultations, the 
World Bank and Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI), in 
consultation with NITI Aayog, are recommending a combination of credit 
enhancement and concessional loans. It aims to develop a more sustainable 
ecosystem for e-2/3Whleers. The proposed initiative, named Electric 
Vehicles Operations and Lending for a Vibrant Ecosystem (EVOLVE) to 
address the major issues in EV Financing and to unlock the market. 
EVOLVE RSP seeks to establish a pan-India program with a budget of 
US$250 million. Under EVOLVE RSP, SIDBI to unlock affordable 
commercial financing for e-2/3Wheelers and the associated charging 
infrastructure. 
 
108. Despite many positive developments within the electric vehicle 
industry, the EV financing market is marred with several fundamental 

39 
 
challenges such as higher interest rates for non-premium vehicle categories 
to a general lack of understanding about EVs and apprehensions about their 
battery life. Therefore, purchasing an Electric Vehicle currently has higher 
financing costs than traditional ICE vehicles. The Committee notes the 
challenges associated with financing the Electric Vehicles and is hopeful 
that the efforts of NITI Aayog, World Bank and SIDBI will be helpful in 
addressing the issue of finance availability for the potential EV buyers. 
Taking into consideration the efforts of the Government for promoting 
Electric Vehicles and green asset creation, the Committee recommends 
that Electric Vehicles should be brought under the Priority Sector 
Lending (PSL) category until the 30 per cent penetration target fixed 
for 2030 is achieved, for accelerating India’s commitment towards net-
zero emissions. Further, cooperation between EV Original Equipment 
Manufacturers (OEMs) and lenders may be encouraged to improve EV 
buyers accessibility to finance. Ministry of Heavy Industries may also 
consider including private EV Four Wheelers in FAME-II so as to 
improve their share in the Electric Mobility Mission. 
Supply of Raw Materials/Components 
 
109. According to a report titled “Critical Minerals of India” by Ministry of 
Mines, India imports 100 per cent of its Lithium requirement and the major 
import sources are Chile, Russia, China, Ireland and Belgium. In this regard, 
in response to the query of the Committee about the lithium resources and 
dependence on import of Lithium, NITI Aayog apprised the Committee that 
NITI Aayog, in collaboration with ADB and EY, has undertaken a 
comprehensive study to analyze the entire value chain of critical minerals 
and active materials involved in the production of Lithium-ion Batteries 
(LIBs). Outcome of this study provides insights into the policy approach 
NITI Aayog which aimed at reducing India's dependence on lithium and 
lithium-ion battery imports, taking into account recent discoveries of lithium 
resources within the country. 
   
110. The policy roadmap will also focus on scaling up LIB recycling 
infrastructure to complement above efforts and support the domestic critical 
mineral requirements including Lithium. It will also aid in promoting 
environmentally sustainable battery disposal and waste management 
practices. Further, the policy roadmap will promote R&D for earth abundant 
alternatives to critical minerals used in LIBs, support commercialization of 
lab to market for such products, provide start-up incubators and technology 
industrialization centres, and facilitate demonstration projects.              
 

40 
 
111. Recently, through amendments to the Mines and Minerals 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 6 minerals (including Lithium minerals) 
have been ommitted from the list of 12 atomic minerals. Upon removal of 
these minerals from the list of atomic minerals, exploration and mining of 
these minerals will be open to private sector. As a result, exploration and 
mining of these minerals is expected to increase in the country. 
 
112. Lithium is very critical for the development of EV industry. 
Consequently rise in demand for raw materials for batteries is expected 
with the progress of PLI-ACC scheme. Over two-third of World’s 
known lithium reserves are in the Lithium Triangle of Argentina, 
Bolivia and Chile. With the recent findings of reserves of Lithium in 
Jammu & Kashmir and Rajasthan, India could also become a game 
changer in the EV industry by boosting its domestic battery 
manufacturing industry. The Committee recommends that the 
Government should take initiatives such as framing of rules and 
guidelines to accelerate the process of lithium extraction so that India 
become Atmanirbhar in the field of Lithium-ion Battery manufacturing 
to facilitate transition to Electric Mobility. 
 
113. In its replies to the questionnaire, Ministry of Heavy Industries 
informed the Committee that India is importing various components/parts 
such as motor, controller compressor, etc mainly from China and Europe. 
Though China, USA, Europe and South Korea have made good progress in 
setting up manufacturing plants of ACC, India has to catch up. Presently 
India, is also importing its requirement of ACC, however battery assembly 
has started in India. In order to cut down imports and produce the 
components locally, the government has launched National Programme on 
Advanced Chemistry Cell (ACC) Battery Storage and PLI Auto. 
 
114. The Committee notes the achievements of Schemes such as PLI-
Auto and National Programme on ACC, but until the benefits of these 
schemes spread across the country and self-sufficiency in 
manufacturing of batteries and auto components is achieved, the 
Government should ensure adequate supply of components, cells and 
batteries for growth of Electric Vehicles vis-à-vis ICE Vehicles. The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to foster international 
cooperation/partnership with global suppliers/countries to ensure and 
maintain the supply chain requirements of the domestic Electric Vehicle 
industry. Ministry of Heavy Industries should also work in coordination 
with the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises to help 
develop a Manufacturing Network for manufacture of Battery and EV 

41 
 
components and progress in this regard may be shared with the 
Committee. 
Consumer perception/Awareness: 
115. Consumer’s perception influences their decisions on whether they 
should go for the newer technologies like EV or stick with the technology 
already in place. Although, many people especially those concerned with the 
environment are already opting for EVs but still lot many are reluctant. 
Therefore, awareness among the masses is crucial for accelerating the 
adoption of electric mobility in the country. In this direction, the Bureau of 
Energy Efficiency under the guidance of the Ministry of Power, GoI 
launched “GO ELECTRIC” campaign in year 2021, to spread awareness on 
e-mobility in the country. The “GO ELECTRIC” campaign has been 
designed to educate the masses about the Central/State Government policy 
initiatives pertaining to the promotion of e-mobility in the country & 
benefits of EVs over conventional vehicles. The campaign has been 
designed and developed in consultation with the industry like the OEMs, 
State Nodal Agencies, Oil marketing companies (OMCs) and Public Sector 
Units of Government of India.  
 
116. Ministry of Heavy Industries informed the Committee that as per 
Vahan Portal, EV sales in FY 2022-23 were 11.8 lakh units, which are 2.5 
times of EV sold during FY 2021-22. In FY 22-23, 7.2 lakh e-2Wheelers, 4 
lakh e-3Whleers, 47,479 Passenger Cars and 2973 Commercial Vehicles 
were registered, which is about 6 per cent of total internal combustion 
engine vehicle sales in FY 2022-23.  
 
117. For the promotion and penetration of Electric Vehicles, creating 
awareness regarding the environmental and economic benefits of 
adoption/migration to Electric Vehicles among the people is necessary. 
It's equally important to convey the initiatives taken by the Central & 
State governments to promote e-mobility in the country. The Committee 
recommends that awareness campaigns, events, etc. at the local level in 
coordination with urban local bodies/municipalities, etc. should be 
organised in the regional languages in the States to promote Electric 
Vehicles and their wide acceptance by general public. Print, Audio 
Video, Radio, and Social Media modes should also be utilised to enhance 
the outreach. 
 
118. According to a report of NITI Aayog, Indian Gig force is expected 
to rise to 23.5 million by 2029-30, from the current workforce of 7.7 

42 
 
million. Most of the delivery start-ups especially in food & grocery 
delivery employ gig force on a large scale, which could be a potential 
driving agent for increasing the Electric Vehicles penetration in the 
country, particularly in 2-Wheeler segment. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should take steps in coordination with 
the stakeholders to make the vehicle fleet of 2-Wheelers in these start-
ups/companies mandatorily to be Electric Vehicles in order to achieve 
the 30 per cent target of EV penetration by the year 2030.   
PM e-Bus Sewa: 
 
119. According to a release of Press Information Bureau, the Union 
Cabinet has approved the PM e-Bus Sewa for augmenting the city bus 
operations by e-Buses on Public-Private Partnership (PPP) Model. The 
Scheme would have an estimated cost of ₹57,613 crore, out of which 
support of ₹20,000 crore will be provided by the Central Government. The 
Scheme will support bus operations for 10 years. The scheme will cover 
cities with a population of 3 lakh and above and priority will be given to 
cities not having organised bus services. Through this scheme, e-Buses will 
be deployed on PPP Model in 169 cities and Infrastructure will be upgraded 
in 181 cities under the Green Urban Mobility Initiatives. Cities will also be 
supported for development of charging infrastructure under Green Urban 
Mobility Initiatives.120. The Committee is of the view that support to bus 
priority infrastructure shall not only accelerate the proliferation of state-of-
the-art, energy efficient electric buses but also foster the innovation in the e-
mobility sector as well as development of resilient supply chain for electric 
vehicles. It will also bring in economies of scale for procurement of electric 
buses through aggregation for e-buses. Adoption to Electric mobility will 
reduce noise and air pollution and curb carbon emissions.  
121. The Committee observes that in phase-2 of FAME Scheme, only 9 
major cities having population of over 4 million were targeted in 
aggregation model for e-buses and very few States have earlier 
participated in operational cost model. With the announcement of PM 
e-Bus Sewa, the Committee is hopeful that the Scheme will help 
transform urban mobility landscape in smaller cities also. The 
Committee recommends that the concerned Ministry(ies) should strive 
for the early implementation of the scheme so that the benefits of the 
scheme will proliferate in an efficient manner and timely. 
 
******* 

43 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations at a Glance 
 
1. The Committee notes that the initial targets were revised by 
bringing down the number of vehicles to be supported under the 
FAME-II Scheme. The Committee is of the opinion that in order to 
facilitate the transition momentum to Electric Mobility, more number 
of electric vehicles need to be supported and, therefore recommends 
that the Ministry should broaden the scope and extend the FAME-II 
Scheme for at least 3 more years in consultation with the Industry 
stakeholders to make the Scheme more inclusive.  
(Para 25) 
 
 
2. The Committee notes that initially the Government had the target 
of supporting 55,000 e-4 Wheelers under the FAME II Scheme, but the 
revised targets have reduced the number of vehicles to the committed 
funds only i.e. for 11,000 e-4 Wheelers. Though 2 Wheelers is a 
dominant category, share of 4 Wheelers is also significant in the 
automotive sector of the country. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should increase the number of electric vehicles to be supported 
in the 4 Wheelers category and also include private e-4 Wheelers in the 
domain of FAME II Scheme with a cap based on the cost and battery 
capacity of the vehicle. 
(Para 26) 
 
3. The Committee notes that reduction of subsidy w.e.f. 1st June, 
2023 in case of e-2Wheelers has negatively impacted their sales. It also 
notes that the budget constraint was the major reason behind the 
reallocation of funds and for the revision of targets under the FAME-II 
Scheme. As there is an instant need to decarbonise the transport sector, 
the Committee recommends that the Ministry should restore the 
subsidy on e-2Wheelers and, if required, project enhanced budget 
allocations in order to maintain the momentum and pace of electric 
vehicles penetration, so that the desired target could be achieved by 
2030.  
(Para 31) 
 
4. During the deposition before the Committee, the issue of e-
Quadricycle was discussed and the Committee was informed by a 
stakeholder that e-Quadricycle will give a big fillip to last-mile 
connectivity and, based on a study, CRISIL had indicated that India 

44 
 
could be one of the largest manufacturers of e-Quadricycles, which 
would help in reducing two lakh tones of CO2 emissions. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should develop an ecosystem 
to include e-Quadricycle in the FAME-II Scheme as the e-Quadricycle 
would not only help reduce CO2 emissions but would be an employment 
generation initiative for the youth of the country. 
(Para 32) 
 
5. A safe, reliable and cost-effective public transport system would 
definitely have a positive impact on improving the air quality in urban 
areas as well as reducing the number of private vehicles on road. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should allocate more funds 
for developing a decarbonised mass public transport system and also 
project for enhancement of the budgetary allocation for e-Buses under 
FAME Scheme so that it does not suffer due to shortage of funds.  
(Para 35) 
 
6. The Committee is of the opinion that frequent changes in the 
policies relating to Electric Vehicles create uncertainties in the market 
as well as in the EV Industry. This will also creates doubt in the minds 
of people and the end users about the Government actions which may 
negatively impact the growth of the EV industry. The Committee 
recommends that the Government should strive towards formulation of 
a consistent and stable national policy on Electric Mobility so that a 
propitious environment is created for the EV industry in order to 
promote sustainable and clean transportation system in the country. 
(Para 36) 
 
7. The Committee is of the view that the proposal of stakeholders 
hold merit and recommends that the Ministry of Heavy Industries in 
consultation with Industry partners should expand the scope of FAME-
II or any future Scheme to incentivize installation of charging stations to 
individual investors in order to achieve the goal of setting up of 
charging stations throughout the length and breadth of the country as 
well as to eliminate road anxiety among potential customers. The 
Committee also recommends that Women Self Help Groups and 
Cooperative Societies may be given assistance to open and operate 
Charging Stations. They may be provided an assured return by the 
Government from its own funds. 
(Para 40) 
 
 

45 
 
8. The Committee recommends that keeping in view the importance 
of EV Mobility as a key ingredient of reducing the pollution level in the 
country, the Ministry of Heavy Industries should play a proactive role 
through BHEL in providing EPC solutions to support electric vehicle 
(EV) charging stations, including solar based EV charging stations and, 
if required, more funds may be allocated to BHEL to facilitate 
popularizing the EV Mobility. Every Public Sector Undertaking and 
Government institutions may be asked to participate in the installation 
of Charging Stations in their own premises for the use of the vehicles 
coming to their premises. 
(Para 41) 
 
9. Ensuring Domestic Value Addition (DVA) is an important aspect 
of the PLI Scheme for Automobile and Auto Components. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should take necessary steps 
for achieving better scheme output, including policy changes and 
financial outlay, for enhancement of manufacturing capabilities for 
Advanced Automotive Technology products thus creating an ecosystem 
to manufacture components of electric vehicles locally and promoting 
manufacturers as global Automotive Champions. 
(Para 47) 
 
10. Although the Ministry of Heavy Industries is striving hard 
towards Make in India and Atmanirbhar Bharat with the Schemes like 
PLI-Auto, PLI-ACC and Phased Manufacturing Programme under 
FAME-II Scheme, the Committee is of the view that to make India a 
Global EV Hub, the Ministry should have supportive, transparent, and 
consistent government frameworks at national, state, and local levels 
and also focus towards establishing dedicated Manufacturing Hubs and 
Industrial Parks for manufacturing of batteries, cells and Electric 
Vehicle auto components. The Committee believes that this would 
encourage and strengthen economic development of the country. 
(Para 56) 
 
11. The Committee notes that MoRTH has issued various guidelines 
and advisories to States and Union Territories so as to incentivize and 
bring down the initial cost of electric vehicles. Many States have 
complied with these guidelines and included the measures in their 
respective EV policy but, to increase the targeted penetration of electric 
vehicles by 2030, more needs to be done. Since 19 States/Union 
Territories are only providing exemptions and rebate in road tax, the 
Committee recommends that the MoRTH should take up the issue with 

46 
 
the remaining States/Union Territories in order to bring in all the States 
and Union Territories such as Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Haryana etc. on a 
common platform as well as make efforts to slash down the road tax 
further and provide other possible exemptions in respect of electric 
vehicles. MoRTH, in order to decarbonise the Automotive Sector, 
should also make electric vehicles mandatory for public transport in 
cities with high rate of air pollution. 
(Para 60) 
 
12. The Committee notes the efforts of the Ministry of Power towards 
augmentation of distribution network through Revamped Distribution 
Sector Scheme (RDSS). The Committee is of the view that with more 
penetration of electric vehicles, EV owners may prefer to charge their 
vehicles at home during non-solar hours which may lead to surge in 
electricity demand ultimately overloading the electrical systems. The 
Committee recommends that Ministry of Power should encourage solar 
hours charging of electric vehicles through advertisements, including 
regional languages, to minimize the load on electrical systems during 
non-solar hours and promote establishing charging stations/points at 
work locations/office buildings/premises with minimum parking facility 
to increase charging network as well as solar hours charging to 
minimize load on electric system. Ministry of Power should also 
encourage Solarization of EV Charging Stations, in coordination with 
the Ministry of Heavy Industries, by providing subsidy for installation 
of EV Charging Stations both under public as well as private sector.  
(Para 65) 
 
13. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Power should 
popularize such Apps and recommends that the scope of the EV Yatra 
App should be enlarged to help even the potential electric vehicle buyers 
to know about the cost of the vehicle, cost of battery, insurance and 
comparison between EV and ICE vehicles as a single stop solution for 
all issues related to electric vehicles. 
(Para 66) 
 
14. The Committee appreciates such a move of the Ministry of Power 
and recommends that the benefits of the aforesaid Portal and Guidelines 
should be given wide publicity vigorously in all prominent languages 
through various modes of media, including social media. 
(Para 67) 
 
 

47 
 
15. Electric Vehicles have range constraints as its range depends on 
battery capacity and therefore, the vehicles need charging at frequent 
intervals, whereas ICE Vehicles have a fuel tank which gives them range 
advantage vis-a-vis electric vehicles. The Committee recommends that 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas should also consider including the 
sub-urban and rural areas under the target areas for establishing 
Charging Stations, as installations of charging stations only at retail outlets 
of Oil Marketing Companies would not be adequate due to range anxiety 
in case of electric vehicles. Further, in view of the targeted Electric 
Charging Stations of 22,000, the sanctioned Charging Stations of 7,432 for 
installation under FAME-II is way below the target and, therefore the 
Committee recommends that sincere efforts should be made for setting up 
of more Charging Stations to address the issue of range anxiety and boost 
the EV penetration in the automotive sector in the country. 
(Para 73) 
 
16. The Committee was informed by the Ministry of Heavy Industries 
that 520 Charging Stations had been sanctioned under the Phase-I of 
FAME India Scheme. Further, 2,877 charging stations in 68 cities across 
25 States/UTs and 1576 charging stations across 9 Expressways and 16 
Highways have been sanctioned under FAME-II India Scheme. The 
Committee recommends that other Ministries should be roped in along 
with charging infrastructure operators to put in place a comprehensive 
plan for establishment of a Charging Network in the country to address 
the issue of road anxiety of electric vehicle owners.  
(Para 74) 
 
17. The Committee is of the view that one of the biggest barriers to the 
widespread adoption of Electric Vehicles remains the lack of charging 
infrastructure and the overall time required to charge such batteries. With 
a Battery Swapping System, EV owners will save on the high cost of 
buying a new set of battery at periodic intervals as they can simply replace 
the exhausted batteries for fully charged ones at Battery Swapping 
Stations. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries should conduct a study regarding the feasibility of battery 
standardisation and formulate a stable Battery Swapping Policy with the 
highest levels of safety standards that can infuse confidence in consumer’s 
decision making thereby boosting demand whilst inducing infrastructure 
build-out by swapping operators, which has a huge potential to invite FDI 
into the battery swapping network creation in the country. 
(Para 77) 
 
 

48 
 
18. The Committee is of the view that one of the major challenges to 
make electric vehicles more affordable and economical to operate is 
their high ownership cost vis-a-vis ICE vehicles, as the electric vehicles 
include a battery pack that forms about 40-45 per cent of their 
ownership cost. Since the Lithium-ions Batteries (LIBs) for electric 
vehicles has a greater durability with relatively high energy and power 
density, the Committee recommends that Government should explore 
the possibility of shrinking further the GST on Lithium-ion batteries to 
bring down the ownership cost of electric vehicles. Further, there is a 
need to address the issue of GST for manufacturers as well in order to 
reduce the high cost of electric vehicles and consequently its 
affordability for the potential buyers to promote faster adoption of 
electric vehicles. 
(Para 83) 
19. Section 80EEB of the Income Tax Act 1961 allows an individual to 
claim tax savings of up to Rs. 1.5 lakh on interest paid on a loan made 
specifically to purchase an electric vehicle. Section 80EEB specifically 
states that the deduction benefits in case of purchase of electric vehicles 
are available only if the loan is approved by the Financial Institutions 
during the period 1st January 2019 to 31st March, 2023. The Committee 
is of the view that pollution is still a major concern and therefore, there 
is a need to work towards Green Grow. In order to facilitate faster 
adoption of electric vehicles, the Committee recommends that the 
provision under Section 80EEB may be considered for extension at least 
up to 31st March, 2025. 
(Para 84) 
20. The Committee is of the view that proper disposal and recycling 
of Lithium-ion Batteries (LIBs) are crucial to minimize the threat they 
pose to the environment as well as to the public health and therefore, 
there is a need for advanced battery recycling technologies and 
increased awareness of the importance of proper disposal of e-wastes. 
The Committee recommends that initiatives should be taken to 
encourage advanced R&D efforts for development of sustainable e-
waste recycling technologies and to develop Sodium-ion as an 
alternative to Lithium-ion in battery manufacturing in coordination 
with the OEMs and Channel Partners for a more sustainable future. 
Besides, training modules should be designed for proper training and 
skilling of recyclers and labourers engaged in the business for effective 
management and disposal of LIBs and e-wastes.  
(Para 90) 

49 
 
 
21. The Committee notes the efforts made by the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy for harnessing of renewable sources of energy such 
as wind and solar energy to supplement the generation of electricity. It 
is of the considered view that a pragmatic and earnest focus on 
generating renewable and non-fossil energy will go a long way in 
meeting the electricity demands of the society. Moreover, players in the 
automotive sector are moving the needle on renewable energy transition 
by leveraging cutting-edge auto electrification technologies. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should make all out efforts to 
tap the maximum energy that can be harnessed from such renewable 
energy sources to supplement the current electricity demand arising 
from households and industries, including EV Charging Stations, to 
support the Electric Mobility in the country. EV-Ready India Dashboard 
should also be given wide publicity, especially in regional languages, to 
encourage electric vehicles as a cleaner and more efficient alternative to 
ICE vehicles.  
(Para 95) 
 
22. The Committee notes the initiatives undertaken by NITI Aayog 
such as e-AMRIT Portal and Shoonya Campaign and hopes that 
launching comprehensive nationwide awareness campaigns to educate 
the general public about the environmental and financial advantages of 
electric vehicles would help dispel the misconceptions and increase 
acceptance of the electric vehicles among the populace. The Committee 
is of the view that help of NGOs, social media and popular celebrities 
may also be considered for creating awareness and popularising electric 
vehicles (EVs).  Further, the Ministry of Heavy Industries, in 
coordination with the NITI Aayog, should take initiatives to encourage 
the Governments of States/UTs to develop their respective EV Portals, 
in line with the e-AMRIT Portal, to generate public awareness 
regarding the advantages of electric vehicles. 
(Para 99) 
 
23. The Committee is of the view that the States are drivers of electric 
mobility movement in the country and they need to be equipped with 
efficient tools and policies to make electric vehicle revolution a success 
and contribute towards net zero emission. The Committee recommends 
that a comparative analysis of the notified EV policies of States/UTs 
should be conducted and based on the analysis outcome, a 
comprehensive stable EV policy may be adopted to address the 
misconceptions regarding electric vehicles among the people and to 

50 
 
boost EV revolution in the country. Further, States/UTs, which are yet 
to notify their EV Policy, should be provided expert guidance and 
scientific assistance by NITI Aayog and other related organisations in 
formulation of their EV policy. 
(Para 101) 
 
24. The Committee notes the efforts made by some of the State/UT 
Governments in decarbonising their respective bus fleet and is of the view 
that, along with buses, the logistics sector also needs to be decarbonised as 
it is a major contributor to air pollution. Therefore, in order to 
decarbonise the Transport Sector, efforts should be made to set a deadline 
for making Transport Sector in the country mandatorily electric. 
(Para 102) 
 
25. The Committee notes the challenges associated with financing the 
Electric Vehicles and is hopeful that the efforts of NITI Aayog, World 
Bank and SIDBI will be helpful in addressing the issue of finance 
availability for the potential EV buyers. Taking into consideration the 
efforts of the Government for promoting Electric Vehicles and green asset 
creation, the Committee recommends that Electric Vehicles should be 
brought under the Priority Sector Lending (PSL) category until the 30 per 
cent penetration target fixed for 2030 is achieved, for accelerating India’s 
commitment towards net-zero emissions. Further, cooperation between EV 
Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) and lenders may be 
encouraged to improve EV buyers accessibility to finance. Ministry of 
Heavy Industries may also consider including private EV Four Wheelers 
in FAME-II so as to improve their share in the Electric Mobility Mission. 
(Para 108) 
 
26. Lithium is very critical for the development of EV industry. 
Consequently rise in demand for raw materials for batteries is expected 
with the progress of PLI-ACC scheme. Over two-third of World’s known 
lithium reserves are in the Lithium Triangle of Argentina, Bolivia and 
Chile. With the recent findings of reserves of Lithium in Jammu & 
Kashmir and Rajasthan, India could also become a game changer in the 
EV industry by boosting its domestic battery manufacturing industry. The 
Committee recommends that the Government should take initiatives such 
as framing of rules and guidelines to accelerate the process of lithium 
extraction so that India become Atmanirbhar in the field of Lithium-ion 
Battery manufacturing to facilitate transition to Electric Mobility. 
(Para 112) 
 
 

51 
 
27. The Committee notes the achievements of Schemes such as PLI-
Auto and National Programme on ACC, but until the benefits of these 
schemes spread across the country and self-sufficiency in 
manufacturing of batteries and auto components is achieved, the 
Government should ensure adequate supply of components, cells and 
batteries for growth of Electric Vehicles vis-à-vis ICE Vehicles. The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to foster international 
cooperation/partnership with global suppliers/countries to ensure and 
maintain the supply chain requirements of the domestic Electric Vehicle 
industry. Ministry of Heavy Industries should also work in coordination 
with the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises to help 
develop a Manufacturing Network for manufacture of Battery and EV 
components and progress in this regard may be shared with the 
Committee. 
(Para 114) 
 
28. For the promotion and penetration of Electric Vehicles, creating 
awareness regarding the environmental and economic benefits of 
adoption/migration to Electric Vehicles among the people is necessary. 
It's equally important to convey the initiatives taken by the Central & 
State governments to promote e-mobility in the country. The Committee 
recommends that awareness campaigns, events, etc. at the local level in 
coordination with urban local bodies/municipalities, etc. should be 
organised in the regional languages in the States to promote Electric 
Vehicles and their wide acceptance by general public. Print, Audio 
Video, Radio, and Social Media modes should also be utilised to enhance 
the outreach. 
 (Para 117) 
29. According to a report of NITI Aayog, Indian Gig force is expected 
to rise to 23.5 million by 2029-30, from the current workforce of 7.7 
million. Most of the delivery start-ups especially in food & grocery 
delivery employ gig force on a large scale, which could be a potential 
driving agent for increasing the Electric Vehicles penetration in the 
country, particularly in 2-Wheeler segment. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should take steps in coordination with 
the stakeholders to make the vehicle fleet of 2-Wheelers in these start-
ups/companies mandatorily to be Electric Vehicles in order to achieve 
the 30 per cent target of EV penetration by the year 2030.   
(Para 118) 

52 
 
30. The Committee observes that in phase-2 of FAME Scheme, only 9 
major cities having population of over 4 million were targeted in 
aggregation model for e-buses and very few States have earlier 
participated in operational cost model. With the announcement of PM 
e-Bus Sewa, the Committee is hopeful that the Scheme will help 
transform urban mobility landscape in smaller cities also. The 
Committee recommends that the concerned Ministry(ies) should strive 
for the early implementation of the scheme so that the benefits of the 
scheme will proliferate in an efficient manner and timely. 
(Para 121) 
 
******** 
 
 
 
 
 
  

53 
 
Annexure-I  
Automotive Industry Standards (AIS) for aspects related to safety, range, power, 
Central Motor Vehicle Rules (CMVR) type approval, etc. for electric vehicles: 
(1) Requirements for Construction and Functional Safety (AIS-038 Rev 1) 
 
(2) Safety Requirements for Electric power trains of Passenger and goods 
vehicles (M& N Category) and Rechargeable Electrical Energy Storage 
System (REESS) (AIS-038 (rev 2)) 
 
(3) Measurement of Electrical Energy Consumption (Wh/km) (AIS-039 Rev 
1) 
 
(4) Method of Measuring the Range (km) (AIS-040 Rev 1) 
 
(5) Measurement of Net Power & Maximum 30-minute power (AIS-041 Rev 
1) 
 
(6) CMVR Type Approval for Electric Vehicles (AIS-049 Rev 1) 
 
(7) Safety Requirements for Traction Batteries (AIS-048) 
 
(8) Safety Requirements for Electric power trains of 2 Wheelers, 3 Wheelers 
and Quadricycles and Rechargeable Electrical Energy Storage System 
(REESS) (AIS-156) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 