                                                     
 PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
                                              
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
THE REVIVAL AND RESTRUCTURING 
Of 
HINDUSTAN PAPER CORPORATION LIMITED 
PERTAINING TO 
 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
(DEPARTMENT OF HEAVY INDUSTRY)  
____________________________________________________________________________  
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 23rd  FEBRUARY, 2011) 
   (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 23rd  FEBRUARY, 2011) 
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
23rd FEBRUARY, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932 (SAKA) 
218

                      PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
  
  
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
THE REVIVAL AND RESTRUCTURING 
Of 
HINDUSTAN PAPER CORPORATION LIMITED 
 
PERTAINING TO 
 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
(DEPARTMENT OF HEAVY INDUSTRY)  
 
 (PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 23rd  FEBRUARY, 2011) 
   (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 23rd  FEBRUARY, 2011) 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
                             23
rd FEBRUARY, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932 (SAKA) 

CONTENTS 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………………(i)  
 
2. INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………..  (ii) 
 
 
3. REPORT……………………………………………………………………….. 1 - 18 
 
 
 
 4.      MINUTES ………………………………………………………………………    ---------- 
                  
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Date of Constitution 22nd September, 2010 w.e.f 31.09.2010) 
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
   1.   Shri Tiruchi Siva                —                Chairman 
2. Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy 
3. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4. Shri Ashk Ali tak 
5. Shri K.B. Shanappa 
6.   Shri Natuji H. Thakor 
7. Shri S.P. Singh Baghel 
8. Shri K.V. Ramalingam 
9. Shri  Nandamuri Harikrishna 
       10.   Dr. Vijay Mallya  
 
LOK SABHA 
11.   Shri Suvendu Adhikari 
12.   Shri Badruddin Ajmal 
13.   Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
14.   Shri Bansagopal Chowdhury 
15.   Shri Sabbam Hari 
16.   Smt. Poonam Veljibhai Jat 
17.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
18.   Shri M. Krishnaswamy 
19.   Shri Pakauri Lal 
20.   Smt. Ingrid Mcleod 
21.   Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal 
22.   Shri Devendra Nagpal 
23.   Shri Gorakhnath Pandey 
24    Shri Kishanbhai V. Patel 
25.   Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
26.   Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
27.   Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
28.   Shri Raju Shetti  
29.   Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware 
30.   Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
31.   Smt. Putul Kumari 
  
 SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary 
Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Director 
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Assistant Director 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
  
 I, the Chairman of the Departme nt-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Industry, having   been authorized by the Committee, hereby 
present this Two Hundred and Eighteenth Report on the Revival and Restructuring 
Of Hindustan Paper Corporation L imited pertaining to Department of Heavy 
Industry. 
 
2. The Committee held detailed discussion with Hindustan Paper Corporation  
Limited at Guwahati on 25th October, 2010.  The representative of the Department 
of Heavy Industry (Ministry of Heavy Indus tries and Public Enterprises) was also 
present there. 
 
3. I thank the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises 
(Department of Heavy Industry) and Hindustan Paper Corporation  Limited for 
furnishing the valuable inputs during the meetings.  
 
4.  The Committee in its meeting held on 15th February, 2011 considered and 
adopted the report. 
 
   
Tiruchi Siva 
Chairman                   
Department related Parliamentary 
                                         Standing Committee   on   Industry 
 
New Delhi 
15 FEBRUARY, 2011 
 
 
(ii) 
 

 
 
REPORT 
 
OVERVIEW 
 
The framework of mixed economy adopted in our country after 
we attained independence  encompassed in its sc ope the vital role of 
both the public and private sector s for regenerating our economy 
which suffered retardation due to cent uries of colonial rule. At that 
point of time the magnitude of the task involving the massive scale of 
investment and employment of expe rtise and technolo gy was beyond 
the capability of the private sector. Therefore the State through public 
sector enterprises remained in the forefront for laying the foundation 
of our economy, genera ting employment oppo rtunities for people, 
addressing the challenge of ba lanced regional development and 
ushering the process of industrialisa tion. It was the responsibility of 
unparalleled significance for building infrastructure for the revival and 
growth of our economy so that other players could play their 
legitimate role in the field of bu siness and the larger interests of 
society and nation are served. No wonder that our first Prime Minister 
Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru hailed th e PSEs as the commanding heights 
of economy. The growth and devel opment of our country and the 
accelerated movement to register new heights of progress owes a lot to 
the basic and substant ial work done by the PSEs in the formative 
period of our nation building.  T he prominent leaders  of the private 
sector have duly acclaimed the perf ormance of the PSEs in taking the 
country forward and creat ing supporting conditions for unleashing the 
economic and entrepreneurial poten tial of our people. While taking 
due note of the role played by t he PSEs in serving the nation, it is 
important to be mindful of the fact  that we have not  been able to 
harness their full potential. In spit e of the monopoly enjoyed by them, 
some of these enterprises b ecame sick and unviable due to 
inefficiency, bureaucratic control and many other factors. 
 
2. With the onset of reforms u ndertaken to deregulate our economy 
to a considerable extent the era marked by a protective environment  
 
 
 

2 
 
for the functioning of the public sector has come to an end. The 
process of economic globalisation an d the progressive integration of 
Indian economy with the worl d economy have created a new 
competitive and challenging environm ent for all segments of industry 
which includes the public sector enterprises. The advantages these 
enterprises had before the economic reforms are no more there. A new 
and expanding enviro nment marked by comp etition, innovation, 
adoption of new technologies and  varied and improved customer 
preferences is determining the cour se of trade and commerce. The 
trend of our new geo-economic age is  customer entitlement for wide 
variety of choices, continuously improved quality of product and 
efficient and fast delivery of services.  
 
3. These revolutionary changes have altered the way in which 
business is conducted. The Public Sector Enterprises have no option 
but to remain tuned to these chan ges and adopt innovative ways to 
improve their productivity and com petitive edge. They have to raise 
the bar of their performance and at the same time discharge their 
obligations to society which constitute their core mandate. Even as it is 
a formidable challenge and arduous task, it is doable. While displaying 
managerial competence these enterpri ses have to live up to the social 
commitment. It demands high degree  of entrepreneurial ability and 
innovative practices. Many of ou r PSEs have set an example of 
combining these two core aspects.  
 
4. The Prime Minister of our country Dr. Manmohan Singh has 
categorically stated that the Government of India is committed to a 
strong and effective public sector pu rsuing both social objectives and 
commercial principles. It is hearte ning to note that the Standing 
Conference of Public Enterprises (SCOPE) in its journal Kaleidoscope 
articulated the vision that the Publ ic Sector Enterprises are not holy 
cows and they want to face challe nges and prosper in  a competitive 
environment. In fact it is a matter of satisfaction to note that the 
Articles of Association of the SCOP E have been modified embodying 
a new vision for the public sector ente rprises. It urges them to remain 
competitive at the national and glob al market.  Acceptance of these 
parameters by them and willingness to perform in th ese challenging 
settings is a good sign.   

 
3 
 
5. The Public Sector Enterprises located across the country deserve 
serious attention for upgrading thei r performance levels and ensuring 
their viability and profitability. This is particularly so in the context of 
the north eastern regi on which receives prio rity attention for 
promoting its economic development, ensuring the security and safety 
of its people and safeguarding the un ity and integrity of our nation. Of 
late the geographical si gnificance of this regi on has been understood 
with added significance as the gateway to promote trade and 
commerce with many of the south and south East Asian countries of 
the world. It is, therefore, factored  into our look east policy which 
form important component of our strategy for cultivating relations 
with those countries for augmen ting and expanding our economic 
engagements with them.     
 
6. Taking into account the host of challenges and difficulties faced 
by this region the public sector enterprises functioning there have to be 
studied with greater care, concer n and sensitivity. Therefore, the 
Committee, after due consideration of all aspects of the matter, took a 
decision to visit the area to interact with the officials of some of the 
PSEs and understand the ground realities. It therefore, chose the 
following two Central Public Sect or Enterprises (CPSEs) functioning 
under the administrative jurisdicti on of the Department of Heavy 
Industry and   situated in the North Eastern Region: 
 
 Hindustan Paper Corporation Ltd. (HPCL), Nagaon & Cachar 
Paper Mills (NPM &CPM), Assam, Nagaland Pulp & Paper Company 
Ltd. (NPPC), Nagaland, Cement Co rporation of India Ltd.(CCI), 
(Bokajan Unit), Assam and Andrew  Yule & Company Ltd.(AYCL), 
(Tea Gardens), Assam.  
 
7. The Central Public Sector Enterp rises established in this region 
discharge their responsibilities in tough and often hostile 
circumstances. The difficult terrai n of the region combined with 
inadequate and often absence of qua lity infrastructure pose serious 
problem for harnessing their potentia l. Besides, the unfavourable law 
and order situation cau sed by extremist activ ities paralyse their 
functioning and result in huge loss to the exchequer.  

4 
 
8. The all round development of the north eastern region   rests on 
the setting up of industri al enterprises, creation of better infrastructure 
and generation of employment opportunities for people. The 
Government of India has substantia lly increased inve stment for this 
purpose. It is important, therefor e, to assess the functioning of the 
Central Public Enterprises in the region and suggest measures for 
making them vibrant and profitable. There are strong possibilities to 
do so. The officials manning these enterprises are hopeful of doing it. 
They are pulsating with the spirit to  revive these units and make them 
competitive at the national level.  Their problems need to be addressed 
boldly.  
 
Hindustan Paper Corporation Limited (HPC) 
An Over View of Paper Industry 
 
9. In our scheme of industrial development the paper industry 
occupies a prominent place. Since our freedom from British rule it has 
forged ahead and registered im pressive progress by congenial 
atmosphere created by the Governme nt in extending support which 
includes fiscal incentives. In spite of shutting down of  98 units with a 
capacity of 1.1 million mt due to their non-compliance with 
environmental standards, we have in our country  around 666 units by 
the completion of the tenth five year plan with the installed capacity to 
produce 8.50 million mt of paper and paper board. The 5.80 million mt 
we produce is indicativ e of the capacity utilisa tion of these units. The 
Paper industry is rated as one of the 35 high priority industries in India 
and is presently growin g at a rate of 6.3% per annum. The magnitude 
of its importance is indicated by its annual turnover which stands at 
approximately Rs.17000 crore. It gives about Rs.2500 crore to the 
national exchequer. It creates dire ct employment opportunities for 0.3 
million people and indirect employ ment opportunities for around 1 
million people. All these facts br ing out its significance for our 
economy.  
 
10.  India is self sufficient in pr oducing a wide variety of papers and 
paper boards to meet our requirements and our dependence on imports 
is limited to some special varietie s such as coated  paper and cheque 
paper. We stand unfavourably with many developed countries and  

5 
 
even some of the Asian countries which include China and other East 
Asian countries in terms of per capita  use of paper. While ours is 7.2 
kg, China is way ahead of us with 45 kg and the figures for the East 
Asian countries is more than doub le that of India. However there 
seems to be good future prospects fo r the industry.  This is due to 
strong possibility for increasing de mand for paper in our country on 
account of growth in economic activities, rise  in literacy rate and 
expansion of opportunities to our growing population to have greater 
access to education and learning.  
 
11. To prepare itself to meet the growing demand fo r paper in our 
country the industry has to adop t new technology in place of the 
existing ones which ar e not helpful to face the new challenges. The 
failure of the industry in doing this will arrest its growth and 
expansion. High production cost com bined with pollution the industry 
causes has always been its major problem. Besides, the quality of the 
paper manufactured by our paper mills does not match with the 
international standards. These issu es are of paramount importance 
which merit serious attention.   
 
12. One of the major constraints faced by the industry is the 
restricted availability of raw materi al.  While wood and agro products 
required by many paper mills are met from indigenous sources the raw 
material in the form of waste paper and wood pulp used in other mills 
are imported. The quantity of importe d raw material and its cost has 
been increasing over the years. Availability of inadequate raw material 
particularly the wood and agro based raw material is the most 
important reason behind lack of growth of industry.  
 
13. Thus, the issue of technological  obsolescence and accessibility to 
raw material has to be addressed boldly by the industry to keep it 
competitive. Besides, efficient and prudent use of water and energy 
and measures to properly treat effl uent discharged by it will go a long 
way in making the industry environment friendly.  
 
 
 
 

 
6 
Hindustan Paper Corporation Limited (HPC)   
 
14. The Committee visited Guwahati a nd interacted with officials of 
the HPC which is the largest public sector enterprise in the paper 
industry. It was incorporated on 29 May 1970 at a time when the 
country was gripped by paper famine , for manufacturing writing and 
printing paper.  It thus embodied the vision to supply the users of our 
country enough quantity of  paper by employing  th e state- of- the- art 
technology in the production proce ss and utilising bamboo as the raw 
material. The location of the industry in the north eastern region of our 
country enables it to get easy ac cess to bamboo which constitutes the 
critical and renewable fibrous raw material and is grown abundantly in 
the forests of the region. 
  
15. The HPC has two units and two subsidiaries. The details of the 
locations of the units an d subsidiaries and their installed capacities are 
given below. 
 
SI. No. UNITS INSTALLED CAPACITY 
1. Nagaon Paper Mill 
(NPM) 
Jagiroad, District- 
Morigaon, Assam, 
Brahmaputra Valley. 
1,00,000 tpa  
1,00,000 tpa  
 
2. Cachar Paper Mill, CPM 
Panchgram, District-
Hailakandi, 
Assam, Barak Valley. 
1,00,000 tpa  
 
 
SUBSIDIARIES 
SI. No. UNITS INSTALLED CAPACITY 
1. Hindustan Newsprint  
Limited (HNL) News 
Print Nagar, Kerala. 
1,00,000 tpa  
 
2. Nagaland Pulp & Paper 
Company (NPCC) 
Tuli, District-
Mokokchung, Nagaland. 
30,000 tpa 
 

7 
 
16. While the Nagaon Paper Mill was commissioned  in October 
1985, the Cachar Paper Mill came into operation on April 1988. These 
are the only 100% bamboo based m ills in India. The Committee was 
informed that fifteen years later i. e. during 2000-01 the Nagaon Paper 
Mill achieved 100% capacity utilisatio n. In case of Cachar Paper Mill 
100% capacity utilisation was ac hieved 17 years after it’s 
commissioning i.e. during 2005-06 and 2006-07.   
 
17. The annual turnover of the HP C for the year 2009-10 stands at 
Rs 579.40 crore. If Rs. 284.39, the annual turnover of HNL, is added 
the total amounts to Rs 863.79. If this  annual turnover of Rs 863.79 of 
the largest public sector paper mill of our country is juxtaposed with 
the annual turnover of th e paper industry of ou r country which stands 
at Rs.17, 000/- crore then one can gauze its contribution to the national 
exchequer.  
 
18. One of the noteworthy features of the HPC is that it employs 
large number of people and also  creates indirect employment 
opportunities benefiting thousands of  the residents inhabiting the 
regions where the paper mills of the HPC are located.  On the issue of 
direct employment opportunities created by the HPC, it has been found 
that 3852 people are beneficiaries  of such opportunities whereas 
approximately 30,000 people are indirectly employed.   
  
19. A fair estimation of the order book position of HPC for the last 
three years is available from the documents made available to the 
Committee.  While during 2007-08 th e order booking was to the tune 
of 210895 MT, the figures available for the year 2008-09 is 192449 
MT.  It is evident that there is a declining trend in order book position 
of the company.  If we move to th e year 2009-10 we notice that it has 
come down to 131408 MT.  As far as the order booking for 2010-11 
(Upto September 2010) is concerne d, it has further come down to 
84227 MT.  Thus, it could be concluded with certainty that over the 
years the order book of HPC is re gistering less number of orders 
which does not augur we ll for the public sector enterprise.  Even 
though all   the   orders   are   reported to    have   been    executed, the  
 
 

8 
 
Committee notes that such declin ing trend demonstrate the dismal 
outlook for the future growth and expansion of the company.      
  
20. Profit before tax is an important indicator of the commercial 
viability of the operations and ov erall functioning of the company.  
The figures concerning profit before  tax of the HPC as given below 
testifies to its state of affairs.   
 
 The Profit Before Tax (PBT) for the last 3 years is as follows:-   
         
  Y e a r       T a r g e t           Actual    
     ( R s  C r o r e )           ( R s  C r o r e )   
  2007-08       69.99   136.74 
  2008-09       62.38    60.73 
  2009-10       57.50        (-) 96.56 
  2010-11       32.22        (-) 62.12  
  (Upto September 2010) 
 
21. It is crystal clear that actual profit be fore tax which was             
136.74 crore during 2007-08 drastically declined to 60.73 crore during 
2008-09.  The figures for 2009-10 which stood at (-) 96.56 showed 
that the Miniratna HPC suffered loss.  It is continuing to be a loss 
making company upto September 2010 for the financial year 2010-11.   
 
22. There could be several reasons  for the loss suffered by the 
company.  But it is a matter of se rious concern that the HPC which 
was conferred with the Miniratna status has come to such a pass.    
 
23. However, the officials of th e HPC have assured the Committee 
that manifold measures  have been taken to ad dress the issue. They 
expressed confidence that the f unctioning of the Corporation would 
improve in future.       
 
24. The Committee notes with sa tisfaction that the HPC as the 
largest public sector enterprise in the paper industry has many 
distinctions to its credit.  It has achieved Excellent MoU ratings for six 
years in the last ten years since the financial year 1999-2000.  It has 
been the recipient of the MoU Excellence Award for being one of the 
top ten central Public Sector Enterprises for the financial year 2005-06  

9 
 
and 2007-08.  It has been paying dividend since the financial year 
2005-06 and the dividend (including tax) paid so  far is Rs.63 crore 
(Rupees sixty three crore).  The re demption of Preference Shares for 
the HPC amounts to Rs.38 crore (Rupees thirty eight crore).  It has 
uninterrupted record of making prof it since 1986-87.  It is an ISO 
(International Organisation for Standardization) certified Public Sector 
Enterprise which has got IS O 9001:2000 and ISO 14001:2004 
certificates.  It has also been certif ied by the Occupati onal Health and 
Safety Advisory Services (OHSAS) and received the OHSAS 
18001:2007 certificate.   
 
25. The Committee has great pleasu re in noting that the HPC was 
conferred with Miniratna status on 9 January 2009.  It is a new feather 
in its cap and provides ample levera ge to all those who man its affairs 
to take independent decisions on host of issues.   
 
26. However, the Committee notes wi th concern that it is incurring 
loss and could not pay dividend dur ing 2009-10 due to such loss. A 
Miniratna Company suffering loss erodes its credibility. There could 
be many constraints and difficulties which have  contributed to the 
decline of the HPC. The Comm ittee recommends that concerted 
efforts must be made by the Depa rtment of Heavy Industry, the 
management and employee s of the HPC and othe r stakeholders such 
as the State Governments of Assam and Nagaland to address the 
problem and revive it and take it to the status of a profit making body.   
 
27. The Committee noted with concer n and anxiety the upward trend 
of turnover when the sales figure sh ows the downward trend.  In spite 
of enjoying the status of A Gr ade Paper Mill and a Miniratna 
Company, the HPC has not executed any export order during last three 
years.  
 
28. The Eleventh Five Year Plan  document outlined the reasons 
arresting the growth and expansion of paper industry in our country 
and its failure to produce quality paper of intern ational standard.  It 
observed that “… the industry ha s failed to keep pace with the 
technological advances and is beset with major difficulties such as  
 

 
10 
 
high production cost, pollution pr oblems and finished paper quality 
not conforming to international standards”.   
 
29. The catalogue of d ocuments provided to the Committee by the 
HPC states that one of the constr aints faced by the Hindustan Paper 
Corporation is the state of te chnology which was adopted three 
decades back.  It was fi rmly argued by the offici als of the HPC before 
the Committee that such technology needs upgradation on a priority 
basis.   
 
30. The Committee notes that the HP C has taken some measures for 
the modernisation and technological up gradation of its paper mills.  It 
was particularly stated that the ambitious Modernisation & 
Technological Upgradation Plan t (MTUP) has been taken up for 
augmenting its competitive ability to improve quality paper and 
comply with the manda tory environmental no rms.  Already, some 
standalone schemes are in opera tion to achieve the aforementioned 
goals.  The company has invested Rs .7800 lakh and used the in-house 
expertise for this pu rpose. The following stand alone projects 
commissioned by the HPC are given below:- 
 
¾ Winder Up-gradation at NPM & CPM 
¾ Two Street SSP Feeding at NPM & CPM 
¾ QCS for L&T Machine at NPM & CPM 
¾ Multified AFBC Boiler at NPM 
¾ Cut Size Sheeter at CPM 
 
31. The Committee was inform ed that M/s. Development 
Consultants Pvt. Ltd., Kolkata were appointed by the HPC as project 
management consultant for impl ementing large and integrated 
schemes as given below:- 
 
¾ Conversion of Mercury Cell to Membrane Cell 
¾ New Chlorine Di-oxide Plant 
¾ Elemental Chlorine Free Bleaching 
 
 

11 
 
¾ ESP for Coal fired Boiler 
¾ Modernization of Paper Machine & Capacity Upgrade at 
NPM 
¾ New TG for NPM 
¾ Upgradation of Recovery & Causticizing Plant 
 
32. While, on the one hand, the HPC claims that the aforementioned 
projects were to be implemented by  generating internal resources, at 
the same time it notes that owing to paucity of funds only one scheme, 
i.e., the Conversion of Mercury Cell to Membrane Cell at Nagaon 
Paper Mill could be taken up on a pr iority basis on the directions of 
the Central Pollution Control Board.  All other sche mes have not been 
taken forward and kept on hold.  The HPC has been under pressure 
from the Central Pollution Control Board for measures to reduce 
pollution from the paper mills under its jurisdiction and take 
appropriate environment related sche mes.   The Eleventh Five Year 
Plan document has also stated that effluent treatment by the paper 
mills will be a significant step to mitigate environmental problems.    
 
33. The modernisation and technological upgradation of the 
units under the Hindustan Pape r Mill is of paramount 
importance.  The plants and machinery based on three decade old 
technology is unacceptable in th e competitive environment of 
twenty first century.  Besides, in house research and development 
capability must be developed by  using internal resources. The 
HPC by virtue of its status as a Miniratna Company enjoys 
necessary autonomy to adopt mo dern technologies. As the HPC 
was a profit making company investment of requisite amount for 
this purpose should have been done as a matter of routine strategy 
to augment its competitive ability. Absence of any action in this 
regard stands testimony to the failure of the management to take it 
forward and make it a leading pl ayer in the paper industry. The 
Department of Heavy Industry mu st adopt a strategy to address 
this problem on an urgent basis.  If necessary it must mobilise the 
Planning Commission to allocate  more resources to modernise 
such plants.  The Committee feels that a public sector enterprise 
like that of the HPC which has been conferred with the status of  
 

12 
 
Miniratna Company must provide leadership to other PSEs by 
adopting new technologies.  Th e Committee notes that the Prime 
Minister of our country  Dr. Manm ohan Singh has declared that 
the Government is committed to  improving the standards of 
efficiency and competitiveness of public sector enterprises and 
wanted to see them as model empl oyers and global players in the 
years to come.  The Committee strongly feels that modernisation 
and technological overhauling of the units of the HPC must be 
done on a continuous basis by a llocating more resources for this 
purpose. Apart from enhancing its competitive ability vis-a vis the 
private players and improving its functioning it will contribute in 
its own way to the development of  the north-eastern region which 
has been receiving special atte ntion from the Government of 
India.  It will also go a long way in inspiring the employees of the 
HPC to scale up their efforts for raising its productivity. 
 
34. The HPC was established in the north-eastern region essentially 
to take advantage of the plentiful bamboo available there.  The success 
of any enterprise rests critically on  the assured and adequate supply of 
raw material and access to quality infrastructure.  I n  c a s e  o f  t h e  
Nagaon Paper Mill (NPM) and Cachar Paper Mill (CPM) of the HPC, 
right since their inception, there wa s an implicit assurance from the 
Government of Assam that bamboo, the basic raw material for paper 
industry, would be made available from Dima Hassao Hills (formerly 
HC Hills) District and Karbi Anglong Hills District.  However, off late 
that implicit assurance is not bein g fulfilled. The Committee was told 
that there are host of reasons behind the inadequate supply of bamboo.   
 
35. One such factor is that life cy cle of bamboo is 60 years and on 
completion of that cycle it dies.  The General Mana ger of the HPC 
informed the Committee that due to the flowering of the bamboo after 
sixty years, its life cycle comes to an end.  The gregarious flowering of 
muli bamboo has been cite d by the officials of the HPC as a major 
factor behind the sub-optimal production at CPM since 2007-08.  This 
has resulted in short supply of this crucial raw material for 
manufacturing of paper in the units  of the HPC located in the north-
eastern region. The Committee was informed that due to the  
 

 
13 
gregarious flowering the CPM had to take recourse to intermittent 
shut-down/sub-optimal operations of its paper mills.      
     
36. The Committee wanted to know  the steps taken by the HPC for 
re-plantation of the bamboos and if it had co-ordinated with the 
appropriate ministry in anticipation of the flowering of the bamboo to 
meet the crisis.  The Committee made  this observation because of the 
alarming decline on the production front.  Responding to this 
observation of the Committee, the HPC officials stated that they were 
in touch with the State Forest Department and the Dima Hasao 
Autonomous Council and Bamboo Mission on this aspect.  It was also 
brought to the knowledge of the Committee that Nagaon Paper Mills 
(NPM) has established ‘state-of the-ar t’ Tissue Cultur e Lab at its unit 
for developing bamboo plantlets with the objective of augmenting high 
yielding, quick growing and disease resistant species of bamboo for 
HPC mills.  The Committee was inform ed that the annual capacity of 
the tissue culture la boratory is twenty lakh seedlings and the same are 
distributed to the farmers as well as NGOs. One of the Members of the 
Committee wanted to know if the HPC had tried high yielding Chinese 
& Malaysian Variety which grows fast er than the local one. He also 
queried to get the present status of  regeneration since flowering took 
place in the year 2006. It is hear tening to note that the HPC has 
adopted a future roadmap  which includes 100% ca pacity utilization of 
Cachar Paper Mill with improved bamboo availability expected in the 
later part of 2011-12.   
 
37. It has been mentioned in the Mo U signed by the HPC that land 
would be allocated for captive plantation by the Government of Assam 
to ensure sustained supply of raw material to the mills and for meeting 
the demand arising out of their  expanded capacity.  However, the 
Committee notes that Ministry of Environment and Forests continues 
to oppose this proposal and, theref ore, no allocation of land has been 
made so far.   
 
38. The Eleventh Five Year Plan document under the heading 
strategies for the paper industr y states that “The foremost 
problem that needs to be addresse d is increasing the raw material 
base of the industry.  Vast opportunity exist on degraded forest  

 
14 
 
land but the rights of local comm unities and the principle of JFM 
constitute an insurmountable obst acle in leasing out such land to 
paper mills.  If these lands remai n bereft of forests for prolonged 
periods, the issue would need to be revisited.  In the meantime, 
wastelands should be considered  for developing forests under 
appropriate Public Private Partnership arrangements, with the 
participation of local communiti es.  The State Government also 
need to consider ways of stimulating agro-forestry”. The 
Committee strongly recommends a ll the stakeholders including 
the Ministry of Environment and Forests to pay serious attention 
to the above observation of the Planning Commission for 
strengthening the raw material ba se of the HPC.  Besides, due 
consideration must be given to use non-wood raw material which 
includes straw, bagassee, and waste paper for manufacturing 
paper.  So far, the entire paper production process is dependent on 
wood, and agri-residue as raw mate rial.  However, the trend has 
been to use more non-wood raw material. The Third Five Year 
Plan document under the chairm anship of Prime Minister 
Jawaharlal Nehru had observed th at “…the paper and newsprint 
industries will have to depend upon new raw materials in place of 
bamboo which has so far been their mainstay”.  The Committee 
recommends that this may be seriously examined to lessen 
dependence on bamboo for ma nufacturing of paper. The 
Committee has inferred from its disc ussion that most of the paper 
industries use pulp instead of ba mboo. However, as mentioned 
earlier it is understood that this is mostly imported. Use of such 
imported raw material might in volve additional expenditure on 
the part of HPC and make it more dependent on foreign countries. 
Therefore cost factor must be ta ken into account while opting for 
such raw material. The HPC units are located in infrastructure 
deficient regions. Impediments for transportation of such raw 
materials may prove this option unsuccessful. On the whole this 
will lead to accentuation of loss be ing incurred by it.  Most of the 
HPC units were established in th e north eastern region due to 
abundant availability of bamboo there. Therefore the Committee 
is of the opinion that access of these units to wood pulp through 
organised and sustainable plantation in the region itself sounds to  

15 
 
be more reasonable, practical an d economical and attention be 
focused on this aspect. 
 
39. Access to quality infrastructure  is a key to run a commercially 
viable enterprise.  It has been pa infully noted by the Committee that 
the HPC is facing enormous trans portation bottleneck, particularly the 
rail transportation.  Among the conc erns and constraints faced by the 
HPC units in the north-eastern r egion, lack of adequate connectivity 
through road and rail limits the proc urement of raw material.  In the 
background note supplied to the Committee, the HPC stated that 
“Bamboo transportation by rail takes  a back seat as limited railway 
resource is prioritized for foodgrains and other essential commodities”.  
Railway rake for supply of bamboo from Dima Hasao Council to the 
HPC mills are not adequately available.  Besides, there is a restriction 
of nine tonne load for movement of raw material on truck.  These have 
severely limited the capacity utilisa tion of the HPC paper mills.   
There has been a long standing demand from th e HPC for conversion 
of the century old meter gauge railway line connecting CPM with 
National Highway 44 to broad ga uge for quick and adequate inward 
and outward material movement.  Th is demand has the backing of the 
people of the locality who stand to benefit from such conversion.  The 
Ministry of Railways has been repres ented on number of occasions to 
meet the demand of the HPC and the local people.   
 
40. Even the then Minister of  Heavy Industries and Public 
Enterprises of the Government of India, Shri Vilasrao Deshmukh, 
wrote a letter to the Minister of Ra ilways on 18 June 2009 wherein he 
stated that the survival of the CP M is dependent upon availability of 
rail rakes.  He described  the issue as a matter of great concern and 
requested the railways to provide  two empty rakes per day for CPM 
for transportation of bamboo fo r inbound journey and also for 
transportation of paper for out-bound journey on a regular basis.   
 
41. The Committee is disappointed to note that no action has 
been taken in this regard to a ddress the major infrastructural 
bottlenecks faced by the HPC.  In fact, it has been found that from 
October 2008 onwards the railways  are not booking certain raw 
materials  for  manufacture  of  paper.   As  a  result,  the  HPC   is  

 
16 
 
compelled to unload such raw material at Guwahati and re-
loading them in trucks for onward  journey to CPM.  Often such 
journey undertaken in the hilly terra in gets disrupted due to land 
slides.    Over and above this, a load restriction has been imposed 
on road transport due to the or der of the Hon’ble Supreme Court 
of India. This restriction has further aggravated the problems 
faced by the CPM.  It has escalate d the transportation cost of raw 
material and finished products.  The problem has been further 
compounded by the losses suffe red on account of handling of 
material at several places.  Th e Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends that the Railway Mini stry must act on an urgent 
basis to pay heed to the reque st of the Minister of Heavy 
Industries and Public Enterp rises for addressing the 
transportation problem of the HPC.  The Committee underlines 
that the inter-ministerial co-ordination must be augmented for 
enhancing the efficiency of the public sector enterprises.  This 
should be vigorously pursued in the context of the north-eastern 
region where public sector enterprise s have to function in difficult 
terrain combining both the commer cial and social objectives for 
the benefit of people inhabiting in the region.   
 
42. The Committee was informed t hat levy of entry tax by the 
Assam Government puts additional burden on the materials taken 
through the HPC units.  This is a valid concern of the HPC which 
needs to be addressed.  The Committee was given a list of points on 
which the HPC sought assistance.  All the points enumerated in the 
lists are given below:- 
 
• Financial Assistance for moderniz ation and upgradation of the 
Mills. 
 
• Fiscal relief/concession on acco unt of logisti cal problems and 
locational disadvantages to enable HPC to compete with private 
paper mills on a level playing field 
 
• Accelerated completion of railw ay line in Lumding-Badarpur 
section from MG to BG 

17 
• Priority in completion of Lumd ing-Halflong-Silchar section of 
East West Corridor by NHAI 
 
• Assistance from NF Railway for allotment of rakes for inward 
transportation of bamboo and outbound transportation of paper  
 
• Removal of Entry Tax on all inputs and im position of Entry Tax 
on inflow of Paper from other state.  
 
• 5% custom duty on waste paper to be eliminated as import of 
Newsprint does not attract any custom duty. 
       
43. The Committee strongly feels that the catalogue containing 
the requirement of the assistance by the HPC is valid, sound and 
prudent.  This should be seri ously taken note of by the 
Department of Heavy Industry, the Government of Assam, the 
Ministry of Railways, National Highway Authority of India and 
Planning Commission.   
 
44. The Committee notes that the HP C has a future road map which 
is given below:- 
 
• Enhancement of value added paper with increased production of 
Copier & Maplitho Paper. 
 
• 100% capacity utilization at Cachar Paper Mill with improved 
bamboo availability expected in the latter part of 2011-12. 
 
• Capacity Expansion at Nagaon Paper Mill to 1, 40,000 tpa. 
 
• Imminent Modernization of NPM & CPM. 
 
45. The detailed interaction the Committee had with officials of 
the HPC generate hope that it ca n achieve goals outlined in the 
road map.  The Committee is mindful of the fact that the HPC 
once was a profit making body and its manifold accomplishments 
brought it the status of Miniratna.   The loss suffered by it can be 
mitigated by addressing its concerns and constraints.   

 
18 
 
46. Our first Prime Minister Pand it Jawaharlal Nehru who as the 
architect of the mixed economy wher e both public sector and private 
enterprise co-existed had insightful ly articulated the way in which the 
public sector enterprises should be run on business principles.  He 
wrote the following more than fifty years back. 
 
“The way a Government function is not exactly the way that 
business houses and enterprises no rmally function…when one deals 
with a plant and enterprise where qui ck decisions are necessary; this 
may make a difference between succ ess and failure.  I have no doubt 
that the normal government procedure applied to a public enterprise of 
this kind will lead to the failure of that public enterprise”. 
 
47. In recalling these words of Pr ime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru we 
need to pay serious attention to the issues involving the effective 
functioning of the HPC.  Quick decis ions have to be taken to address 
the concerns and constraints fa ced by the Hindustan Paper 
Corporation.  These concerns and constraints are genuine and sound.  
Quick decisions have to  be taken by the Ministry of Railways, the 
Department of Heavy Industries, the Government of Assam and all the 
stakeholders for making the HPC an  efficient, effective and socially 
responsible enterprise.   
 
 
 
****** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 