PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY

ONE HUNDRED - THIRD REPORT
ON

ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN COMMITTEE'S 87°
REPORT ON THE IMPLEMENTATION STATUS OF
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE -CUM-RESTRUCTURING
PACKAGE AND REVIVAL OF BHARAT REFRACTORIES
LTD. ( MINISTRY OF STEEL)

(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 197" DECEMBER, 2002)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 197 DECEMBER., 2002)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

DECEMBER, 2002/AGRAHAYANA, 1924 (SAKA)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

INTRODUCTION

Report OF THE COMMITTEE
OBSERVATIONS!CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE

MINUTES

PAGES

(9-00
(in)
1-14

15-16
19-21


COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
(Date of Constitution - 1* January, 2002 )

Dr. P.C Alexander — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Prof. M.M, Aggarwal
Dr . Abrar Ahmad
Shri Jayantilal Barot
Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
Smt. Saroj Dubey
Shri Faguni Ram
Smt, Sumitra Mahajan
Shri P.K. Maheshwari
. Shri MJ, Varkey Mattathil
. Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
. Shri S. Sivasubramanian
. Smt. Sushree Devi
. Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
. Vacant

LOK SABHA

16. Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
17. Kumari Mamata Banerjee
18. Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
19, Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
20. Shri Nepal Chandra Das
21. Shri Deepak Kumar
22. Shri Thomas Hansda
23, Dr. S. Jagathrakshakan
24. Shri A.C. Jose
25. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
26. Shri Brijlal Khabri
27. Shri Sunil Khan
28. Shri Manjay Lal
29, Dr. K. Malaisamy
30. Shri A. Narendra
31; Shri Ananta Nayak
32. Shri Dayabhai V, Patel
____33. ShriDharam Raj Singh Patel
@ Appointed Chairman and Member of the Committee w.e,f 12” November, 2002 vice Shri T.N, Chat’
who ceased to be the Member of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 20" August, 2002.

cS)

CRIAWER WY

BERGoONAS

(0)


— Shri Uttamrao Patil
. Shri Malyala Rajaiah
. Shri P, Rajendran
. Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
५ Shri Tarachand Sahu
. Shri Ramanand Singh
. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
. Chowdhary Talib Hussain
- Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
. Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari
> Shri Beni Prasad Verma
- Vacant

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary

Shri D.P. Ahuja ,Under Secretary

Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer

Gi)


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Industry, having been authorised by the Committee, hereby present this One Hundred -third
Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Committee's 87" Report on the Implementation Status of Financial Assistance-cum-

Restructuring package and Revival of Bharat Refractories Ltd. (BRL) pertaining to Ministry of
Steel . है

2; The Committee examined and considered the Action Taken note on recommendations
contained in the 87" Report on the Implementation Status of Financial Assistance-cum-
Restructuring package and Revival of Bharat Refractories Ltd. (BRL) .

3; The Committee at its meeting held on 17" December, 2002 considered and adopted the
Report,
New DELHI; DR. P.C. ALEXANDER

December 17, 2002

Chairman
Department -related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry


COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
(Date of Constitution - 1* January, 2002 )

@1. Dr. P.C Alexander — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Prof. M.M. Aggarwal .
3. Dr, Abrar Ahmad

4. Shri Jayantilal Barot

5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee

6. Smt. Saroj Dubey

7. Shri Faguni Ram

8. Smt, Sumitra Mahajan

Shri P.K. Maheshwari

10. Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil

11. Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
12. Shri S. Sivasubramanian

13, Smt. Sushree Devi

14, Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi

15. Vacant

LOK SABHA

16. Smt. Jayashree Banerjee

17, Kumari Mamata Banerjee

18. Shri Ajoy Chakraborty

19. Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
20, Shri Nepal Chandra Das

21. Shri Deepak Kumar

22. Shri Thomas Hansda

23. Dr. S. Jagathrakshakan

24. Shri A.C. Jose

25. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan

26. Shri Brijlal Khabri

27. Shri Sunil Khan

28. Shri Manjay Lal

29. Dr. K. Malaisamy

30, Shri A. Narendra

31: Shri Ananta Nayak

32. Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
Danang Se Ral Singh Patel TF कम रूरू ॉफज्ा चल Shri Dharam Raj Singh Patel

ws

Appointed Chairman and Member of the Committee w.e,f 12” November, 2002 vice Shri T.N. Chat
who ceased to be the Member of Rajya Sabha w.e.f 207 August, 2002.

0)


. Shri a Patil

- Shri Malyala Rajaiah
- Shri P. Rajendran

. Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah

- Shri Tarachand Sahu

. Shri Ramanand Singh

. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh

- Chowdhary Talib Hussain

» Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur

- Smt. DM, Vijaya Kumari
. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
५ Vacant

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K, Singh, Deputy Secretary

Shri D.P. Ahuja ,Under Secretary

Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer

ii)



INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Commitice on
Industry, having been authorised by the Committee, hereby present this One Hundred -third
Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in (he
Committee's 87" Report on the Implementation Status of Financial Assistance-cum-

Restructuring package and Revival of Bharat Refractories Ltd, (BRL) pertaining to Ministry of
Steel . 7

2. The Committee examined and considered the Action Taken note on recommendations
contained in the &7" Report on the Implementation Status of Financial Assistance-cum-
Restructuring package and Revival of Bharat Refractories Ltd. (BRL) .

3. The Committee at its meeting held on 17” December, 2002 considered and adopted the
Report,

NEW DELHI; DR. P.C. ALEXANDER
December 17, 2002

Chairman
Department -related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry


REPORT

The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Steel on the
Recommendations contained in the 87" Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry on the Implementation Status of Financial Assistance -cum-

Restructuring Package and Revival of Bharat Refractories Limited (BRL) pertaining to the
Ministry of Steel.

2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Steel in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report, These have been categorized as follows:

Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry of Steel
(Chapter - I)
Recommendations:- 1.3, 2.5, 7.10.2 , 8.3, 8.6, 9.2 10.3.3 13.3 , and 15.4,

Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of
the Government's replies : (Chapter - 1)

Recommendations:- 3.2 ,4.4 and 4.5,

Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies
of the Ministry of Steel :, (Chapter - III).

Recommendations:- 5. 4, 6.2 , 6.4, 7.5 and 10.2.5.

Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry of Steel
have not been received. (Chapter - IV),

Recommendations:~ 7,2, 7.9, 8.2, 11.2, 12.3, 14.3 and 16.3.2

3i The Committee is pleased to observe that the Ministry of Steel has accepted its
recommendations as mentioned in Chapter —I of the Report.

4. In respect of the recommendations made in Chapter-II_ the Committee is convinced

with the logic and explanation advocated by the Ministry of Steel and therefore does not want
to pursue further .

5, The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of recommendations
contained in Chapter-III and therefore the Committee desires that the Ministry of Steel would
furnish logical explanation in respect of these recommendations

6. In respect of recommendation placed in €hapter-IV, the Ministry of Steel has either
furnished the interim replies or couched its language in vague terms like noted for
compliance/guidance therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry of Steel should furnish
Action Taken Note in respect of recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to
the point, as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee.

7. Observations/recommendations of the Committee are given in Chapter (v).

8. The Details of the Action Taken Report -is being discussed in various Chapters in the
succeeding pages.


= -I

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT

Recommendation (Para 1.3)
COMMON MISSION FOR ACHIEVING COMMON ORGANIZATIONAL GOAL

The Committee notes the stages involved in the formation of Bharat Refractories Ltd.
(BRL) and hopes that BRL management would leave no storie untumed in assessing the strength
ofall the four units of BRL and chalk out a short and long term strategic course of action for early
turnaround of Company as a whole. The Committee recommends that BRL management work to
ensure that all four units of BRL are making effort towards the common mission for achieving
common organizational goal and are contributing to the physical and financial performance of the

' Company. None of them must prove a burden on the Company.

Action Taken

A Techno-Economic Viability study of BRL was conducted by MECON Limited. This
study provides a complete road map for BRL to Teorganize its activities and revive its financial
and physical performance. Based on this study the Company proposed a revival package which
Was approved, by the Government in June, 2002. Following this approval, the Company and the
Government have taken steps to implement the revival plan in a time bound manner. It is
anticipated that the positive impact of this revival plan, based on the above mentioned study,
would start to become evident from January, 2003 onwards.

Recommendation (Para 2.5)

CAPITAL STRUCTURE

The Committee is constrained to exits its concern over the deteriorating balance sheet
of BRL. The Committee in its 34" and 50% Report has been recommending to the Government
to provide sufficient working capital to BRL at the earliest so that it could reduce its losses, loans
and liability and readjust itself for profit making track. The Committee, in this regard,
recommends that the BRL management and the Ministry of Steel should examine and assess the
capital structure of BRL, from time, to time and Suggest measures for capital restructuring, in
such a way that BRL achieves the break even point and economy of scales ensuring maximum
Retum on Investment (ROI).

Action Taken

The Government of India has already approved a revival package for BRL based on a
Techno-Economic Viability study conducted by MECON Limited. This package provides for
Government of India loans, on soft terms for implementing a new VR Scheme and for liquidating
liabilities towards unpaid statutory dues, wages and salaries to all employees availing of VRS.
Additionally the Government of India has agreed to provide a Government of India Guarantee to
enable the Company to raise Rs.30 crores for its working capital requirements. As part of capital
restructuring the Government of India has converted its existing loans to the extent of Rs. 97.89



ee into equity. The Government of India has also provided equity of Rs, 7 crore each y
5 years to enable the Company to undertake AMR Jobs. With these measures It is hoped that the

Company would be able to improve its balance sheet and achieve break even point within the
next 2 to 3 years.

Recommendation (Para 7.10.2)

The Committee hopes that with the rationalisation of manpower labour cost in BRI.
would come down and would become competitive vis-a-vis units in private sector.

Action Taken

Government is hopeful that with the teduced manpower of 1311 employees, the
Company's wage bill will be reduced considerably thereby making its products competitive,

Recommendation (Para 8.20)

WORK ORDER POSITION

The Committee Tecommend the BRL management should continue with the production
of value added item and may also undertake Measures for product-mix or for diversification of
products as required by SAIL, RINL and other modem steel plants.

Action Taken

The Company has noted the recommendation of the Committee for necessary action.

Recommendation (Para 8.3 )

BRL’S MARKET SHARE IN PRIVATE STEEL SECTOR

Action Taken

The Company has noted the Tecommendation of the Committee for necessary action.
Further, the Company has obtained orders from TISCO recently.

Procurement of work-order for BRL
Recommendation (Para 8.6)

The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by the Ministry of Steel for procurement
of work-order for BRL. The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Steel would continue to
assis/help BRL management in the procurement of work orders. The Committee desires that the
Ministry of Steel, in its Action Taken Note on the Present report, should furnish the details of
Steps taken in this regard in the form of actual volume of work order procured for BRL,


Action Taken

At the = of Ministry of Steel, SAIL has agreed to place orders on BRL for supply
of 20% value added refractories of its Tequirement at LI price. A Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) has been signed between SAIL and BRL in this regard,

During 2001-02 BRL received an order for 35118 MT from SAIL and during the current
year (up to September, 2002) BRL has received orders for 11941 MT from them. Efforts are
being made for similar MOU between RINL and BRL,

Recommendation (Para 9.2 )

POSITION OF INVENTORIES.

It is but natural that a Company which lacks sufficient working capital and there is a low
demand of its products would have little inventories, and Bharat Refractories Ltd. is no exception
to this rule, the Committee observes. However, the Committee feels that the BRL management
should keep a constant watch on the inventories and dispose of the inventory as and when the
same accumulates because even small inventory, since the volume of production is confined to
the availability of capital and market demand, would further block the scarce resources of
working capital and thereby creating ‘Vicious - circle’ of insufficient working capital, high low
production and no inventories. Sufficient working capital, high volume of production and low
inventory should be the motto of the Company,

Action Taken

The Company has noted the observations and comments of the Committee for necessary
action,

Recommendation (Para 10,3.3 )
ADDITIONAL MODIFICATIONS & REPLACEMENTS (AMR)

The Committee is of the opinion that modification, replacement in existing machinery’s
and addition of new equipment is essential to keep the production process going smoothly and
effectively. The Committee feels that since BRL is continuously making loss and is not is ina
position to generate internal revenue, therefore, it is but natural that budgetary support from the
Government is required to carry on the AMR schemes. The Committee hopes that once BRL is
put on the revival track and start making profit, it would not require budgetary support any
longer.

Action Taken

Under the new revival package, Rs.35 crore will be provided to the Company towards
AMR during the 10" Five Year Plan period at the rate of Rs. 7 crore every year. The
Government also agrees with the Committee that once BRL is put on the revival track and starts
making profits, it would not require budgetary support any longer.



Recommendation ( Para 13.3 )

Text Structure

The Committee is pleased to note that Government is giving due consideration to the
matter of rationalized tax structure in its Annual General Budget. In General Budget 2001-02 as
well as 2002-03 some tax concession have been given to refractory industries, However, the
Committee is of the opinion that the Ministry of Steel should keep on studying tax- structure |

Suitable for refractory industry and accordingly approach the Ministry of Finance for suitable
action.

Action Taken

The Ministry of Stee! has always articulated the legitimate requests of the refractory
industry on tax rationalization and will continue to do so in future.

Recommendation ( Para 15.4)

MANPOWER IN BRL AND VRS

The Committee opines that proper human Tesource management is key to the success of
any Company. The first step in this regard is optimization of manpower i.e. a rational labour
order, besides appropriation of right man at night place in right time. In this regard the
Committee appreciates the Tecommendation of viability study as conducted by MECON Ltd. for

Action Taken

The Government agrees with the opinion expressed by the Committee and wishes to
inform the Committee that it has already released Rs.90 crore provided for in the revival package
to the: Company in September, 2002. To further encourage employees to take VRS, the
Government has also released financial assistance of Rs. 55 crore to the Company to enable it to
fully liquidate all the dues of the employees who have availed of VRS. It has been informed that
the response to the new VR Scheme launched by the Company has been very encouraging.


=| -I

Recommendation (Para 3.2 )
SICKNESS OF BRI, AND IFICO,

The Committee notes the reasons for BRL and IFICO becoming sick and coming under
the purview of BIFR in 1992. The Committee observes that due attention for revival of BRL was
not considered at the appropriate time and that is the’reasons why BRL continued to make losses
year after year, 1 other result might be expected, from a loss making Company which
continued to operate With obsolescent machinery; under utilisation of installed capacity; low
labour productivity and shortage of capital than falling in the net of BIFR. BRL missed the (the
first Opportunity for revival), the Committee concludes,

Action Taken

Recommendation ( Para 4,4 )

IDBI’S REVIVAL SCHEME

The demand for refractories had not been of the level expected.

It is but natural that, in the above scenario, the Company was unable to generate internal
Tesources so as to meet its plan and non-plan expenditure. BRL ended 1997-98 with a cash loss
Of Rs. 14.33 crore and the same adverse trend persisted during 1998-99.



Action Taken
The Government notes and agrees with the conclusion of the Committee.
Recommendation ( Para 4.5 )

BRL’S INHERENT PROBLEMS

The Committee understand that the general recession in steel industry in addition to
BRL’s inherent problems i.e, under utilization of installed capacity, interruption in power supply,
problems in the procurement of raw-material due to lack of working capital followed by non-
implementation of IDBI’s revival scheme led to the continued dwindling in physical and financial
performance of the Company.

Action Taken

The general recession in the steel industry in addition to other limitations affected the
physical and financial performance of the Company adversely,


= ER—ID

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY OF STEEL,

Recommendation ( Para 5.4 )

SECOND REVIVAL PACKAGE FOR BRL

The Committee is Constrained to express its anguish over the fact that the Second Revival
Package for BRL had not envisaged the true picture of BRL and, henceforth the second revival
package could not redress to the actual problems being faced by BRL. Like IDBI’s revival
Package, the Second Revival Package for BRL failed, the Committee is perturbed to note,

Action Taken

The second revival package gave financial assistance to BRL, which was much below the
financial assistance that the Company had asked for, Against the non-plan Tequirement of Rs.110
crores, only Rs. 20 crore could be Provided to the Company. Consequently, the C ompany could
not achieve the level of production envisaged in the revival plan.

FURTHER RECOMMENDATION

The Committee understands that a provision of ६ fund merely 0 Rs,20.00 crore against
the requirement of Rs.110.00 crore could hardly solve the problems being faced by Bharat
Refractories Ltd. Since only token financial assistance were provided to BRL , therefore,
failure of the revival package for BRL is but natural , The Committee opines that the managers
in the Ministry of Steel at the relevant time must have failed in apprising and persuading the
Ministry of Finance with the actual requirement of BRI.

Recommendation (Para 6.2)
PHYSICAL AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF BRL.

The Committee notes the physical production of BRL and observes that since tefractory
industry is linked with the development and growth of Steel Industry ‘and since Steel industry

Action Taken

The Government agrees with the observations and the comments of the Committee. ‘The
recently approved revival plan contains a production plan for each of the units of the Company,
The Company is committed to the implementation of this production plan which will also be
closely monitored by thé Government. It is hoped that this will significantly improve the physical
and financial performance of the Company.



FURTHER RECOMMENDATION

The Committee feels that had the Ministry of Steel furnished the details of production
plan for each of the four units of the BRL and the monitoring mechanism for the
implementation of this production plan , the Committee would have been in a better position to

understand the actual steps taken for improving the physical and financial performance of the
Company .

Recommendation (Para 6.4)

FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF BRL

The Committee is constrained to express its concern over the financial performance of
BRL and observes that unless and unti] the revival package for BRL is implemented successfully
financial performance would not improve. Therefore, the Committee recommends that BRL
management would make all out efforts to implement the revival package without time over-run.

Action Taken

The Company is making concerted efforts to implement the latest revival plan and the
Government is closely monitoring its implementation te ensure that the results are commensurate
with the projections made for the revival plan.

FURTHER RECOMMENDATION

The Committee is of the opinion that the Ministry of Steel should have furnished in its
action taken notes the details of mechanism for implementation of revival package , steps taken
to avoid time and cost over-run , specific projections made in the revival plan and course of

action envisaged to achieve the projections and tangible impact on the financial performance of
BRL,

Recommendation ( Para 7.5 )
PRICE WAR SITUATION AND UNFAIR TRADE PRICE

‘The Committee observes that technological improvement in stec! making has not only led
to the increasing demand of superior quality Refractories and reduction in total consumption of
refractories but generated a price war situation and unfair trade price due to excessive competition
among refractories producers. The Committee is of the view that improvement in steel making
technology is a welcome and necessary development for betterment of steel industry while
reduction in total consumption of refractories is an unavoidable development and it may be hoped
that with the sign of recoyery in steel industry the demand of refractories would increase. So far
as the situation of price war due to excessive competition is concerned, the Committee
recommends that the Ministry of Steel should take up the matter to ensure that healthy
competition would prevail in the refractories industry and competition should not result into
unfair trade price. The price of the refractories product be allowed to be determined by the free
market forces of demand and supply.



Action Taken
The Government | the concerns voiced by the Committee with Tegard to the
price situation of refractory items. Howeve » 88 prices of refractory items are determined by free

market forces of demand and supply, the Ministry of Steel has a limited role to play in the
matter.

FURTHER RECOMMENDATION

The Committee understands that in a liberal economy the free market forces of demand
ply determine the price of the product, However, the Committee feels that the Ministry of
Steel should not remain short of its proclaimed duties and responsibility of that of a facilitator and
co-ordinator, and in that capacity, the Committee reiterates its tecommendation that the Ministry
of Steel should take up the matter to ensure that healthy competition would prevail in the
refractories industry and competition should not result into unfair trade price.

Recommendation (Para 10:2.5 )

JUSTIFICATION FOR REQUIREMENTS OF FUNDS
(New Scheme )

The Committee is of the considered view that setting up of Continuous Casting System
(RCC) is long overdue, The Standing Committee on Industry has recommended in its earlier
Teports for setting up of refractories for Continuous Casting System at the earliest for ensured
survival of the Company, The RCC has got the merit of positive feasibility report as prepared by

i.e. Rs.23 croes has already overrun to the tune of RS. 38.00 crore. The only deterring factor
earlier was the lack of fund for the Project as BRL was not ina Position to generate sufficient
internal resources to meet the cost of the Project. However, this problem seems to be solved as
M/s Monnet Ispat Ltd. has offered the Proposal to become a joint venture partner with BRL with
the equity ratio of 60:40 and, not only that BRL’s equity of 40 Per cent would be adjusted by the

be solved by the Ministry of Steel in its Action Taken Note of the present Report. The
Committee is, otherwise of the view that the having been given the latest revival package for
BRL, setting up of RCC should not be delayed further,

Action Taken

The Ministry of Steel recognizes the importance of the Company quickly implementing
the project for producing continues casting refractories. The initial attempt of the Company was
to enter into a Joint Venture with a private sector partner, However, issues relating to control
over the JV arose. Hence, it was decided to explore the possibility of entering into a JV with
another sister PSU under the Ministry of Steel i.e. Ferro Scrap Nigam Limited (FSNL).

10



Discussions are on between BRL and FSNL for taking forward this project and the Ministry of
Steel will ensure expeditious action in this regard.

FURTHER RECOMMENDATION

The Committee is of the considered view that setting up of Continuous Casting System
at the earliest is the need of the hour for the ensured survival of BRL. The Committee finds that
setting up of Continuous Casting System (RCC) is long overdue, so in the better interest of the
Company the Ministry of Steel should expedite the discussion between BRL and FSNL so that
actual action is being taken for setting up of RCC system within a period of three months.

11


=| TER - IV

RECOMM ENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE MINISTRY OF STEEL HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED,

Recommendation ( Para 7.2)
PROBLEMS BEING FACED BY REFRACTORIES INDUSTRY

The Committee is of the view that, since 75 per cent of the total refractories produced in
the country are consumed by steel industries and steel industry is demanding superior grade of
refractories, the Ministry of Steel should facilitate the refractories industry in general and BRL in
particular to undertake adequate research work for production of such superior grade of
refractories which suits the requirements of Steel industry. The Committee recommends that
research work in refractories industry may take into consideration the Tequirement of steel
dustry which inter-alia include reduction in fuel consumption, incurred furnace capacity,
meurred furnace life and availability and improved product quality.

Action Taken

The Government notes the recommendations made by the Committee for taking
necessary action.

Imbalance between manufacturing cost and selling price
Recommendation (Para 7.9 )

The Committee understands the problems being faced by Refractories industry erising
due to imbalance between manufacturing cost and selling price. The Committee observe that the
Price of the finished Products has been drastically reduced (ranging from 30 to 44 एल cent)
whereas there is a trend in increase in the Price structure of input materials
(ranging from 5 to 17 per cent). This is the double loss to the refractory industry and under the
said circumstances any industry is bound to be affected, Therefore, the Committee is of the view
that refractories industry in general and BRL management in particular should chalk out a two
pronged strategy ie. one to arrest the fall in the selling price of refractories and to reverse the
tend and other strategy is required to minimize the cost of Production so that the margin of profit
for refractories industry may increase. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of
Steel should act as a facilitator and guide the BRL management to undertake measures for
maximization of profit,

Action Taken

The Government notes the observations of the Committee. It would, however, like to
point out that the selling price of refractory is determined by forces of demand and supply.
However, the Ministry of Steel has been taking up with the Ministry of Finance the matter
regarding rationalization of custom duties on finished refractory items and input material for
refractories. In addition to above, with regards to BRL, in particular, Ministry of Steel has been
working with BRL to ensure that wherever possible, cost of production of refractories should be
cut through various measures,



a ( Para 8,2)

WORK ORDER POSITION

The Committee recommend that the BRL management should continue with the
production of value added item and may also undertake measures for product-mix or for
diversification of products as required by SAIL, RINL and other modem steel plants,

Action Taken

The Company has noted the recommendation of the Committee for necessary action.

Recommendation (Para 11.2)
SWOT ( Strength, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threat) analysis of BRL

The Committee is of the view that BRL management should keep on reviewing the
SWOT-analysis of the Company. The Committee further recommends that BRL management
should take advantage of its strength and avail all opportunities which come its way. The
Committee hopes that with the sanction of revival package by the Government BRL would be
able to overcome most of its weaknesses i.e. surplus manpower and obsolete technology and non-
availability of working capital etc. The Committee further hopes that once the revival package is
implemented, properly and in time, the Company would be able to combat all the threats. As
regards the irregular supply of power by Jharkhand State Electricity Board, the Committee
recommends that the Ministry of Steel assist the BRL management in taking up the matter with
the State Government.

Action Taken

The Government notes the observations made by the Committee for necessary action and
also the recommendation that the Ministry of Stee! assist BRL in taking up the matter with the
State Government of Jharkhand regarding irregular supply of power by Jharkhand State
Electricity Board. The matter has since been taken up with the Government of Jharkhand.

Recommendation (Para 12.3 )

MANAGEMENT BY OBJECTIVES (MOB)

The Committee is happy to note that BRL management is guided by the principle of
management by objectives in letter and spirit. The Committee, however recommends that BRL
management should re-orient its objectives as per changing industrial scenario and make its
efforts to achieve the corporate objectives and mission. The Committee further recommends that
BRL management may chalk out Key Areas for Intensive Action’ for better performance of
Company,


Action Taken

The Company and the = have noted the recommendation of the Committee
with regard to reorientation of the Company's objectives as per changed scenario and direct its
efforts to achieve the corporate objectives and mission,

Recommendation ( Para 14.3 )

FOREIGN COLLABORATION

effective manner and Products of quality production, In this context, the Committee is happy to
note that BRL has entered into collaboration for technical know how with Central Glass &
Ceramic Research Institute, Kolkata, SAIL, Kawasaki Refractories Company, Japan, Sinagawa
Refractory Company Japan, and Plibrico, France and technology taken from these organizations
have effectively been adopted in BRL. However, the Committee desires that impact of the
transfer of technology &its absorption in BRL must be reflected in the improved physical and
financial performance of BRL.

Action Taken

The Company and the Government agree with the views of the Committee regarding
importance of absorbing/adapting technical know-how into production system for achieving cost
effective and quality production. The technical collaboration entered into by BRL have had a
positive impact on BRL’s production in that BRL has obtained 3 qualitative edge over its
competitors. With the implementation of the latest revival package, this positive impact will
become evident in the form of improved financial performance,

Recommendation (Para 16.3.2)
LATEST REVIVAL PACKAGE FOR BRL
The Committee hopes that with the approval of the latest revival package for BRL, the

BRL management would leave no stone unturned in making efforts for turning the Company
around.

Action Taken
The Government has directed BRL to take all Possible steps for effective timely

implementation of the revival scheme to achieve the desired tumaround, Government is also
monitoring the progress of implementation of revival package,

14



a AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
AT A GLANCE

Recommendation ( Para 5.4 )
SECOND REVIVAL PACKAGE FOR BRL

The Committee understands that a provision of a fund merely of Rs.20.00 crore against
the requirement of Rs.110.00 crore would hardly solve the problems being face by Bharat
Refractories Ltd. Since only token financial assistance were provided to BRL therefore, failure
of the revival package for BRL is but natural. ‘The Committee opines that the managers in the

Ministry of Steel at the relevant time must have failed in apprising and persuading the Ministry
of Finance with the actual requirement of BRL.

Recommendation (Para 6.2)
PHYSICAL AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF BRL,

The Committee feels that had the Ministry of Steel furnished the details of production
plan for each of the four units of the BRL and the monitoring mechanism for the
implementation of this production plan , the Committee would have been in a better position to

understand the actual steps taken for improving the physical and financial performance of the
Company ,

Recommendation (Para 6.4)
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF BRL

The Committee is of the opinion that the Ministry of Steel should have furnished in its
action taken notes the details of mechanism for implementation of revival package, steps taken to
avoid time and cost over-run, specific projection s made in the revival plan and course of action
envisaged to achieve the projections and tangible impact on the financial performance of BRL.

Recommendation (Para 7.5)
PRICE WAR SITUATION AND UNFAIR TRADE PRICE

The Committee understands that in a liberal economy the free market forces of demand
and supply determine the price of the product. However, the Committee feels that the Ministry of
Steel should not remain short of its proclaimed duties and responsibility of that of a facilitator and
co-coordinator, and in that capacity, the Committee reiterates its recommendation that the
Ministry of Steel should take up the matter to ensure that healthy competition would prevail in the
Refractories Industry and competition should not result into unfair trade price.


" (Para 10.2.5)

JUSTIFICATION FOR REQUIREMENTS OF FUNDS
(New Scheme )

The Committee is of the considered view that setting up of Continuous Casting System at
the earliest is the need of hour for the ensured survival of BRL. The Committee finds that setting
up of Continuous Casting System (CCC) is long overdue, so in the better interest of the
Company, the Ministry of Steel Should expedite the discussion between BRL and FSNL so that
actual action is being taken for setting up of CCC system within a period of three months,

16


MINUTES



si

Bee स On es

XIV

FOURTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.30 P.M, on Thursday, the 17" December, 2002 in Committee
‘A’, Ground Floor Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT

. Dr. P.C. Alexander —Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

Prof, M.M. Aggarwal

Smt. Saroj Dubey

Shri Faguni Ram

Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
Shri P.K. Maheshwari

Shri M.J, Varkey Mattathil
Shri S. Sivasubramanian
Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi

LOK SABHA

|. Smt. Jayashree Banerjee

. Shri Nepal Chandra Das

. Shri Thomas Hansda

. Shri A.C, Jose

. Shri Sunil Khan

. Shri Majay Lal

. Shri A. Narendra

. Shri Ananta Nayak

. Shri P. Rajendran

. Dr. 8.8. Ramaiah

. Chowdhary Talib Hussain
» Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary

Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary

19


2, At the outset the Chairman = the Members of the Committee and apprised them
of agenda for the meeting of the day

3; Thereafter, the Committee took up following draft reports for consideration:~

(i) 95" Draft Report on inter PSUs cooperation in engineering and Construction
Sectors the Department of Public Enterprises;

(ii) 100" Draft Report on performance review of National Mineral Development
Corporation Ltd. (NMDC) (Ministry of Steel);

(iit) 103" Draft Report on the action taken on fecommendations contained in

Committee’s 87" Report on the implementation Status of Financial Assistance-

cum-restructuring Package and Revival of Bharat Refractories Ltd. (Ministry of
Steel);

(iv) 104" Draft Report on the action taken on recommendations contained in
Committee’s 85" Report on the Implementation Status of Financial Assistance-

cum-restructuring package and Revival of Bharat Refractories ltd. (Ministry of
Steel)

(vy) 105" Draft Report on the Action Taken on recommendations contained in

Committee’s 64" report on Modernisation, Restructuring and Expansion
Programmes and Post Disinvestment Performance of Hindustan Zinc Ltd. (HZL)
Ministry of Coal and Mines;

(vi) 106" Draft Report Globalisation and Capital Goods Industry the Department of
Public Enterprises, (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);

(vii) 107" Draft Report on Liquidated Damages and Related Issues (Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises);

(viii) 108” Draft Report on the action taken on recommendations contained in
Committee’s 91" Report on Coir Board-A Performance Review pertaining to the
Ministry of agro & Rural Industries;

(ix) 109" Draft Report on the Action Taken on recommendations contained in

Committee’s 84" Report on implementation of Prime Minister's Rozgar Yojana

(PMRY) in ‘Andhra Pradesh, Kamataka and Kerala, Ministry of Agro & Rural
Industries; and

(x) 110" Draft Report on the Action Taken on recommendations contained in
Committee's 86° Report on Performance Review of metai Scrap Trade Corporation
Ltd, (MSTC) Ministry of Steel.

3.1 The Chairman specifically invited the attention of the Members to draft 95", 105" and
106" Report. * = 2

*Relates to other matters

20



MINUTES


Fam

FOURTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 17" December, 2002 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi,

PRESENT
1, Dr. P.C. Alexander —Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Prof. M.M. Aggarwal

Smt, Saroj Dubey

Shri Faguni Ram

Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
Shri P.K. Maheshwari

+ Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
Shri S. Sivasubramanian
Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi

PEN 9 ७ # ७ 1७

LOK SABHA

10. Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
11. Shri Nepal Chandra Das

12, Shri Thomas Hansda

13, Shri A.C. Jose

14. Shri Sunil Khan

15, Shri Majay Lal bs
16. Shri A. Narendra

17. Shri Ananta Nayak

18. Shni 7. Rajendran

19. Dr. 8.8. Ramaiah

20. Chowdhary Talib Hussain

21, Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari

SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary

Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri 0.7. Ahuja, Under Secretary

19


2. = the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them
of agenda for the meeting of the day

3. Thereafter, the Committee took up following draft reports for consideration:-

i) 95% Draft Report on inter PSUs cooperation in engineering and Construction
Sectors the Department of Public Enterprises;

(ii) 100" Draft Report on performance review of National Mineral Development
Corporation Ltd. (NMDC) (Ministry of Steel);

(iii) 103 Draft Rep ort on the action taken oh recommendations contained in
Committee's 87" Report on the implementation Status of Financial Assistance-

cum-restructuring Package and Revival of Bharat Refractories Ltd. (Ministry of
Steel);

(iv) 104" Draft Report on the action taken on recommendations contained in
Committee’s 85" Report on the Implementation Status of Financial Assistance-

cum-restructuring package and Revival of Bharat Refractories Itd. (Ministry of
Steel)

( 105" Draft Report on the Action Taken on recommendations contained in
Committee’s 64 report on Modemisation, Restructuring and Expansion
Programmes and Post Disinvestment Performance of Hindustan Zine Ltd. (HZL)
Ministry of Coai and Mines;

(vi) 106” Draft Report Globalisation and Capital Goods Industry the Department of
Public Enterprises, (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);

(vii) 107" Draft Report on Liquidated Damages and Related Issues (Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises);

(viii) 108" Draft Report on the action taken on recommendations contained in
Committee’s 91" Report on Coir Board-A Performance Review pertaining to the
Ministry of agro & Rural Industries;

(ix) 109" Draft Report on the Action Taken on recommendations contained in
Committee’s $4” Report on implementation of Prime Minister’s Rozgar Yojana
(PMRY) in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Kerala, Ministry of Agro & Rural
Industries; and

(x) 110 Draft Report on the Action Taken on recommendations contained in
Committee’s 867 Report on Performance Review of metai Scrap Trade Corporation
Ltd. (MSTC) Ministry of Steel.

3.1 The Chairman specifically invited the attention of the Members to draft 95", 105" and
106" Report. * * *

Relates to other matters

20



3.2 ‘Thereafter, the Chairman invited the attention of Members of the Committee to the draft
105" Report on the Action Taken on recommendations contained in Committee's 64” report on
Modernisation, Restructuring and Expansion Programmes and Post Disinvestment Performance
of Hindustan Zine Ltd.(HZL) under the Ministry of Coal and Mines where the Committee had
discussed new issue in the changing economic scenario, The Department of Mines stated that the
Government had disinvested 20% equity of HZL and the management of the company had been
transferred on 11" April, 2002 to the Strategie Partner ($,7,) namely, M/s Sterlite opportunities
and Ventures Ltd. With these disinvestments the stake of Government in the company had ० ome
down to 49.92%, Even after disinvestments the Government stake continued to be to the tune of
49.92%, which indicated Government's substantial stake in the company. The Government's
representatives would be the Members of Board of Directors’ who would participate in the
meeting of the Board and act as a link between the new management of the company in post
divested phase and the Government, and by virtue of such representatives of Government would
be in the flow of the functioning of the company and therefore the company would remain in fact
under the overall supervision of the Government. The Hindustan Zine Lid. Even m the post-
divested era would continue to utilize the national resources and, therefore, should continue to be
responsible and responsive to the Nation/Government and people of the country in general, The
purpose of disinvestments was although to generate revenue, but most importantly to inject
operational efficiency and managerial effectiveness in the company and for the general benefit of
the economy, The purpose was not doing away of accountability in the system. In order to avoid
the repetition of what happened to VSNL and TATA quagmire over a decision regarding
investment, it was suggested that the companies management should continue to be responsible 10
the Government in the post divested phase and on this count Government should continue to
furnish information to Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee as and when asked

for.

33 * * *

34 After a brief discussion all the reports were adopted unanimously without any
modification,

3.5 The Chairman nominated two Members from Lok Sabha and three Members from Rajya
Sabha to present the reports to both Houses of Parliament.

4; * . .

5. The Committee then adjourned at 5.45 P.M.

| to other matters.