49th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/49threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:26]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
FORTY NINTH  REPORT
 
ON
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2001-2002)
MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE
INDUSTRIES AND AGRO & RURAL
INDUSTRIES
 
(PRESENTED ON  24TH MAY, 2001)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
AUGUST, 2001 SRAVANA, 1923  (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
                                                                                                                           
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                               
2.         PREFACE                                                                                                            
3.         REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                              
4.         OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE –AT   A  GLANCE
5.         MINUTES                                                                                                                              
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
1.   Shri  Ramdas Agarwal   -   Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
Shri Khan Gufran Zahidi
Dr. Faguni Ram
Shri P.K. Maheshwari
Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma
Shri Jibon Roy
Shri Somappa R. Bommai
Smt. Saroj Dubey
Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhundar
Shri S. Sivasubramanian
Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha
Prof. M.M. Aggarwal
Shri Shibu Soren
 
LOK SABHA
 
Shri A. Narendra

49th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/49threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:26]
Shri Ramdas Athawale
Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
Shri Nepal Chandra Das
Shri K.P. Singh Deo
Shri Anant Mahadeoappa Gudhe
Shri Thomas Hansda
Shri G.J. Javiya
Shri A.C. Jose
Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
Shri Sunil Khan
Shri Deepak Kumar
Shri Manjay Lal
Shri K. Malaisamy
Shri G. Mallikajunappa
Shri K.H. Muniyappa
Shri Nagmani
Shri Anant Nayak
Shri R. Basanagouda Patil
Shri Uttamrao  Deorao Patil
Shri M. Rajaiah
Shri P. Rajendran
Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
Shri Tarachand Sahu
Shri Ram Sajivan
Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
Shri Ramanand Singh
Shri Chunnilal Thakur
Shri Rizwan Zaheer
                
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
P R E F A C E
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry having been
authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Forty ninth  Report on the Demands for Grants (2001-02) pertaining to
the Ministry of Small Scale Industries and Agro & Rural Industries.
 
2.         The Committee heard the oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Small Scale Industries and Agro
& Rural Industries on 4
th April, 2001.
 
3.         The Committee at its meeting held on 14
th May, 2001  considered and adopted the Report.
 
NEW DELHI;
May 14 ,2001
RAMDAS AGARWAL
                                                                                                             Chairman
Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry

49th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/49threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:26]
REPORT
 
I           INTRODUCTION
 
1.1       The Ministry of Small Scale Industries and Agro & Rural Industries (SSI & ARI) is the nodal ministry for policy
formulation, promotion, development and protection of small scale industries. It also monitors the implementation of
these policies.
 
1.2       Ministry of SSI & ARI designs  and implements the policies through its field organizations for promotion and
growth of small and tiny enterprises, including the coir industries. The Ministry also coordinates with other
Ministries/Departments on behalf the Small Scale Industries (SSI) sector.
 
1.3       Implementation of   policies and various programmes/schemes for providing infrastructure and support services
to small enterprises is undertaken through its attached office, namely the Small Industries Development Organisation
(SIDO), statutory bodies/other organizations like Khadi and Village Industries Commission (KVIC) and Coir Board; a
Public Sector Undertaking – National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC); and three training institutes – National
Institute of Small Industry Extension Training  (NISIET), Hyderabad; National Institute for Entrepreneurship and Small
Business Development (NIESBUD), New Delhi and Indian Institute of Entrepreneurship (IIE), Guwahati.
 
1.4       The Committee has been given to understand that small industry continues to get the benefits as long as it
remains small. As soon as it attains the status of a medium scale, it becomes ineligible for such benefits. The 
Department,  in this  connection, have informed the Committee that the Abid Hussain Committee examined the
jurisdiction of the Ministry of Small Scale Industries and Agro and Rural Industries and observed as under:
 
“ The Department of Small Scale  Industries  is  conceived to  be  structured as an umbrella body for the promotion of
small enterprises.  Since, this department is  now envisaged to promote small scale enterprises in general, the Expert 
Group  recommends that  its nomenclature be  now changed to the Department of Small scale Industries and Business
Enterprises.”
 
1.5       The Committee has also been informed that the  Expenditure  Reforms  Commission examined the issue   of re-
defining the role of the  Ministry of Small Scale Industries and Agro & Rural Industries.  The Commission examining
the issue at  length  felt that it is the opportune time to review the policy  for the growth of small  sector to include not
merely small scale industries but also small establishments in the fast expanding service sector.  The committee also 
made the  following observations:
 
“To the extent that governmental support  on a graded scale is    required to be provided to small and medium 
establishments it would be appropriate  to rename  the Ministry of Small Industries and Agro and Rural Industries as
Ministry of Small and  Medium  Establishments.”
 
1.6       The Committee observes  that the idea of having  small and  medium  Enterprises instead  of having 
compartmentalized   small scale industries has become a global concept .  If Government  support is  given to small and
medium enterprises,  it will have  salutary  effect   on the economy.
 
1.7         The Committee, however, would like to discuss the issue with all concerned before coming to a conclusion and
making any recommendation in this regard.
 
1.8       With the removal of Quantitative Restrictions (QRs) as part of WTO commitments, the SSIs are faced with new
challenges. Reduction of tariffs and dismantling of non-tariff  barriers has resulted in opening up of imports and
increased competition in all product categories, including those  items, which have been exclusively reserved for
manufacture in the small-scale sector. As the imports surge, relatively cheaper and qualitatively superior foreign goods
will be flooding the market. As a consequence the most affected sector will be  the SSI sector.
 
1.9       Ministry’s role at this juncture becomes of paramount importance as it has to evolve
mechanisms/directives/guidelines which will go a long way in shaping the course of  things in future.   In view of these

49th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/49threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:26]
threats,  safeguarding the interests of indigenous  industry is the major responsibility of  the Ministry while formulating
policies.  Government should provide  level playing field  for  the small scale industry to meet the  challenges of stiff 
competition from  global  players.
 
1.10     The Committee has been given to understand that the competitive fervor unleashed by the liberalization process
has led to a paradigm shift in the nature of manufacturing activity in the country. In such a scenario it has become
imperative that the policy of protection for  small scale sector  should pave its  way to a more proactive approach of
helping such units to enhance their competitiveness in a market driven economy. If small and  tiny enterprises have to
compete in globalized environment they now require an enabling and responsive environment  which provides adequate
and timely credit and pragmatic institutional, technological and infrastructural support. The Committee hopes that the
above proposals announced in the budget would mitigate the hardships faced by the SSI sector. The Government should,
however, not feel complacent about this.The Committee has noted that the budget for 2001-02 has made the following
proposals which are aimed at providing an impetus for growth of the SSI sector:
 
      -     Excise duty exemption on SSI raised from Rs.50 lakh to Rs. I crore for the small scale sector.
Provisions of budgetary support of Rs. 100 crore for the new  Credit Guarantee Scheme (CGS) in the current year. The
limit of loan without collateral raised from Rs. IO lakh to Rs.25 lakh under this scheme.
The items related to leather goods,  shoes and toys dereserved.
Accelerated depreciation  at  the rate of 50 percent on plant and machinery  purchased under the Technology
Upgradation Fund  Scheme for weaving, processing and garment sectors of the textile industry.
 
1.11.    During the course of oral evidence one of the representatives of Industrial  associations  stated :   “Sir, one of the
biggest  problems we faced in the SSI sector is that of rules and regulations, different Acts, etc. If they are simplified,
then it will make a big  difference.   Sir, Inspector Raj is   one of the biggest  problems of the SSI sector.  It has come
out of the laws which have with us.  We  have the Government Interaction  Cost (GIC).  That also is extremely high, at
the moment.  The  amount of money which we has to be passed on to the inspectors  is very  substantial.   Therefore, 
we want reduction  in that cost.  It  should  come down” Another   representative informed  committee:  there are so
many inspectors  who  come to the small entrepreneurs. If these problems  are taken  care of, then the Indian 
entrepreneurs are  capable of facing the world  competition.    If  he is not harassed on those issues, then he would 
concentrate his time on marketing his products, etc.”
 
1.12     In  view  of the above the  Committee feels that adequate steps are  required to  be taken to  remove   the
Inspector  Raj.  The Committee also recommends that simplification  of  rules, regulation and  amendment of labour   
laws   may be  done  so that   SSI  units are  not subject to unnecessary harassment.    The Ministry  of SSI  and Agro &
Rural Industries may  take up the  matter with the concerned  administrative ministries.  By taking these measures, the
Committee feels that SSI sector would get a level  playing field to   a large extent.
 
II.         DEMAND NO.71
       (Rs. in crore )
                  Budget 2000-2001             Revised 2000-2001                  Budget 2001-2002
Major
Head
Plan Non-
Plan
Total Plan Non-
Plan
Total Plan Non-
plan
Total
Revenue 729.47 133.77 863.24 705.97 131.44 837.41 776.53 140.68 917.21
Capital 42.08 1.81 43.89 24.03 1.61 25.64 21.03 2.10 23.13
Total 771.55 135.58 907.13 730.00 133.05 863.05 797.56 142.78 940.34
 
2.1       Total outlay for the current year is Rs.940.34 crores (Rs.797.56 crores Plan and Rs.142.78 crores as non-plan)
which is an increase of Rs.77.29 crores over the allocation made in the RE 2000-01 i.e. Rs.863.05 crores (Rs.730.00 
crores plan and Rs.133.05 non-plan) for the year 2000-01.
 
2.2       Overall plan outlay in B.E. 2000-01 was Rs.771.55 crores; however, in the revised estimate for the same year,
the allocation was reduced to Rs.730 crores. Explaining   the reasons for reduction in outlay at the revised stage,  the
Ministry apprised that the reduction in outlay was mainly under the Rural Employment Generation Programme (REGP)

49th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/49threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:26]
by Rs.30 crores. There has also been reduction of outlay at RE stage for Coir Board by Rs.3.25 crores as  response to the
“Cooperativisation Scheme” has not been very encouraging. Similarly, the outlay for the National Small Industries
Corporation (NSIC) has been reduced by Rs.6 crores as the scheme on  brand promotion is at formative stage. There 
has also been a reduction of Rs.1.5 crores in case of Indian Institute of Entrepreneurship. Guwahati after mid year
review of the requirement of capital expenditure.
 
2.3       The Committee disapproves of reduction in plan outlay at the RE stage. This trend is inimical to the  growth of
small industry sector. This leaves the ongoing schemes in the lurch for want of money.
 
2.4       The Committee therefore  recommends that the Ministry should visualize the pros and cons of schemes before
earmarking funds. Allocation of funds should be made  depending  on feasibility of scheme only.
 
III        DEVELOPMENT COMMISSIONER FOR SEMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES (INCLUDING LIBRARY)
 
3.1.      There is a plan allocation of Rs.1.10 crores in BE 2001-02 for the purpose. Compared to the allocation in the 
year 2000-01 which was to the tune of Rs.2.02 crores in RE, the present allocation is showing a down slide.
 
3.2       The Ministry have informed that the outlay under this head includes provision for modernization of SIDO
libraries and renovation of SIDO Headquarters. For this purpose the provision for current year is Rs.80.00 lakhs and the
need for completion has been assessed at Rs.35.00 lakhs only during 2001-02. The outlay for Technical Publicity which
was Rs.1.22 crore at RE Stage 2000-2001 has been reduced to Rs.0.75 crore at BE 2001-2002 based upon the
reassessment of actual needs and with a view to curtailing expenditure.
 
3.3       Explaining about the role  of Development Commissioner, SSI (DC) in the changed  scenario, the Ministry
informed that apart from the ongoing task of formulation of policies and programmes for the promotion and
development of the small scale industries and implementation of schemes relating to credit infrastructure, technological
entrepreneurship and marketing development and collection of statistics, the new role of Office of DC (SSI) in the era of
stiff competition with the withdrawal of all quantitative restrictions from April 2001 is as under :-
 
To keep abreast and updated with regard to the WTO Agreements.
 
Disseminate information to SSI Associations  and SME units regarding recent developments in view of implementation
of WTO Agreements and preparing them to face the challenges arising out of globalisation.
 
To prepare the policy for SSIs in tune with the WTO Agreements and also to fine tune the existing policies and
programmes which are WTO  compatible.
 
To organize WTO Sensitization Seminars. Workshops international conferences etc. not  only to create awareness
amongst SSI Associations about the WTO Agreements and their implications but also to make   them ready to face the
situation.
 
To coordinate with other Ministries and Departments like Ministry of Commerce and Industry. Directorate General  of
Foreign Trade. Director General of Anti-dumping and Allied Duties. Deptt. of IP&P (In respect of Intellectual Property
Rights (IPRs). Patent laws and similar isues) and Dte. General of Safeguards. M/o Finance etc.
 
To build data base in regard to export or import of products sensitive to SSIs so as to initiate appropriate policy
measures.
 
To assist the SSI units,  SSI associations etc. in regard to solving problems arising out of dumping of goods in India
initiating anti-dumping investigations and for initiating safe-guard measures.
 
To provide level playing field to SSI units to make them globally competitive.
 
3.4       The office of DC (SSI)  which is also known as Small Industries Development Organization is an apex body of

49th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/49threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:26]
Major
Head
Plan Non-
Plan
Total Plan Non-
Plan
Total Plan Non-
plan
Total
2851 22.00 5.50 27.50 34.25 5.50 39.75 29.00 5.50 34.50
Major
Head
Plan Non-
Plan
Total Plan Non-
Plan
Total Plan Non-
plan
Total
2851 67.80 36.00 103.80 67.21 35.28 102.49 102.21 38.03 140.24
3601 3.85 - 3.85 4.21 - 4.21 26.92 - 26.92
3602 0.15 - 0.15 0.18 - 0.18 0.40 - 0.40
4851 0.08 - 4.08 4.03 - 4.03 4.03 - 4.03
Total 75.88 36.00 111.88 75.63 35.28 110.91 133.56 38.03 171.59
the Ministry and its role has increased to a great extent after the lifting of quantitative restrictions. The Committee feels
that the office of DC  should help the Small Scale Sector in evolving marketing strategies.   To help the SSI sector, it
should have well equipped computer network for dissemination  of information  to that  sector.  Technological
upgradation is another area  where  its help to   Small Scale Sector is needed  most  and the office of DC should play a
key  role in  improving  the  quality of the products of the SSI sector. Therefore, the office of DC needs to be further
strengthened and, if necessary,  its present  allocation may be  revised.
 
3.5       The Committee recommends that the office of DC should gear  up to face the new    challenges arising out of
W.T.O. commitments and help the SSI units to reorganise  themselves. An all out effort towards providing information
for market access, giving  technological and  infrastructural  support including  training  for quality  control has to be
made by  the Ministry   if the small scale sector has  to sustain itself  in  a free  market economy and grow.  
 
IV        GRANTS TO NATIONAL SMALL INDUSTRIES CORPORATION   FOR DEVELOPMENT OF
SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES
(Rupees in crores)
              Budget 2000-2001                 Revised 2000-2001                  Budget 2001-2002
 
4.1       NSIC is responsible for promotion and development of small scale industries through supply of machinery on
hire purchase market promotion, arrangement  of both indigenous and imported raw materials common facilities for
prototype development and export of turnkey projects.
 
4.2       The Ministry has informed that the budget provision for National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) for 2000-
2001 was Rs.40 crores of which Rs.18 crores was for investment (contribution to equity) and Rs.22 crores was grant for
various other schemes. A view was taken not to provide further equity to NSIC and the amount was surrendered and
brought as savings of the Ministry.  An additional Rs.18 crores was provided to NSIC to clear a part of the
Government’s commitment to meet the deficits of NSIC in running of the Prototype Development and Training Centres
(PDTCs).
 
4.3       It was further stated that during 2001-02 it has been decided not to provide any funds for investment (equity) in
NSIC. Hence, the allocation for NSIC during 2001-02 is lower than the allocation in 2000-01.
 
4.4       The Committee observes that the Government  is not  providing financial assistance to the NSIC in the form of
equity.  NSIC is  projected to generate Rs.120.00 crores in budget  2000-01 . Devoid of equity-support, NSIC would be
hard pressed to generate revenue on its own now. The Committee therefore recommends that NSIC should take
measures to increase IEBR and explore ways and means for more revenue generation to become self sufficient. Till
NSIC becomes self reliant,   the Govt. may continue to provide funds for the corporation so that its development
activities continue   unabated. 
 
V         OTHER SMALL SCALE INDSUTRIES SCHEMES
(Rupees in crores)
              Budget 2000-2001                 Revised 2000-2001                  Budget 2001-2002
 
5.1       This provides mainly for specialized institutions for various schemes on quality up gradation and  modernization
of small scale industries in order to improve the quality of products, increase the export potential, process modification,
energy conservation, pollution control etc.For other small scale industries, a plan allocation of Rs. 67.80 crores in BE

49th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/49threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:26]
Major
Head
Plan Non-
Plan
Total Plan Non-
Plan
Total Plan Non-
plan
Total
 
2851 201.00 - 201.00 201.00 - 201.00 193.50 - 193.50
2000-01 and Rs. 67.21 crores in RE for 200-01 was made.  In BE 2001-02, the allocation has been raised to Rs. 102.21
crores.
 
5.2       The Ministry has informed that the enhanced amount of Rs. 34.41 crores over BE 2000-01 is proposed to be
utilized during  2001-02 in implementation of Plan Schemes relating  mainly to:  Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme for
Technology Upgradation,  Integrated Infrastructural Development Scheme,  Technology Upgradation and collection of
statistics etc.
 
5.3       The Committee hopes that the schemes would be implemented successfully and the targets fixed-both physical
and financial would be achieved.   In view of lifting of Quantitative Restrictions, the time has come to lay  more
emphasis  ontechnological upgradation and modernization.  For this purpose, if need be, allocation may be increased.
 
VI        CENSUS OF SSI UNITS
 
6.1       Rs.26.92 crores as plan outlay have been allocated in BE 2001-02.  An allocation  of Rs. 4.21 crores in RE 2000-
01 was made for the purpose.
 
6.2       The Ministry has stated that  in the BE 2001-02 the allocation under the Head 3601 has been raised to include
the expenditure on Third Census.  This is in accordance with the announcement made by the Prime Minister on 30
th
August, 2000.  The field operations of the Third Census would be taken up by the State Directorates of Industries during
2001-02.  Besides, the States will also take up publicity data entry and validation jobs.  For this purposes.  grants-in-aid
has to be  released to the  States.
 
6.3       Apart from the provision for meeting the committed expenditure on collection of statistics, the major increase in
outlay is on account of census.  The remaining part of the estimated expenditure  on census will be provided in the next
year’s budgetary provision.
  
6.4       Dr. S.P. Gupta  Committee on the development of small enterprises in its interim report submitted to the
Planning Commission on 13
th July 2000 recommended for  Third Census of Registered SSI units urgently.  which
should  capture the impact of the liberalization/globalisation on the growth of SSI sector.  The census should also cover
issues like sickness, closure, impact of reservation/dereservation, the units engaged in exports etc.  The DC (SSI) should
conduct census of registered SSI units regularly at 10 year intervals. This  Committee in its report on  the demands for
grants  of the Ministry of SSI  and ARI for the financial year 2000-2001  recommended that the  Government should
have up-to-date data   not only for the registered SSI units but also for  unregistered SSI units.
 
6.5       The Committee, therefore, recommends that the  census  should be undertaken  and completed within the
stipulated time frame so as to  evolve a uniform  approach towards the  SSI Units.  The funds earmarked for the purpose
should be utilized  in a proper manner
 
 
VII       PRIME MINISTER’S ROZGAR YOJANA (PMRY)
(Rupees in crores)
              Budget 2000-2001                 Revised 2000-2001                  Budget 2001-2002
                                                                                               
7.1       Prime Minister’s Rozgar Yojana for providing self-employment to educated unemployed youth has been in
operation since 2
nd October, 1993. The scheme aimed  at assisting the eligible youth in setting up self employment
ventures in industry, service and business sector. It was envisaged  to provide employment by establishing seven lakh
micro-enterprises during the 8
th Plan.
 

49th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/49threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:26]
7.2       The Committee has noted that the  PMRY has emerged as a major Central Sector Scheme for employment
generation among the educated unemployed youth, by providing financial and other entrepreneurial development
assistance in establishing self-employment ventures. The Committee was also informed that significant progress has
been achieved in the  implementation of the scheme and as reported by the RBI, 7.74 lakh persons have been sanctioned
loans under PMRY, since its inception during the 8
th plan.
 
7.3       The scheme is continuing in the 9
th Plan. During the year 1997-98 and  1998-99 and 1999-2000 loans had been
sanctioned to 7.91 lakh persons as per reports available. Further 0.73 lakhs persons had been sanctioned loans during 
2000-01 upto November, 2000. The anticipated target under PMRY for 2001-01 is 2.20 lakh beneficiaries
 
7.4       An amount of Rs. 193.50 crores  has been earmarked in BE 2001-02 for PMRY which is at low side considering
the amount of Rs. 201 crores earmarked in BE and RE 200-01 for the purposeThe Ministry has stated that under the
PMRY scheme, the cases sanctioned in a particular programme year are continued to be disbursed in the subsequent
programme year.  Further the RBI furnishes the consolidated amount to be released to the banks  as  subsidy after the
loans have been disbursed.  Therefore, the funds requirement for capital subsidy under the scheme spills over to the
subsequent years.  During the year  2001-02 the allocated amount of Rs.  193.50 crores in B.E. 2001-02 for PMRY
would be considered sufficient to meet the requirement of funds for entrepreneurial development and for capital subsidy
for the cases disbursed during the year 2001-02 along with the part liabilities of capital subsidy of the previous years,
the Ministry added   Further requirement of the capital subsidy under the scheme would be met from the  budget for
subsequent years.         
 
7.5       The Committee is constrained to note that  the    difference between  the sanctioned cases and disbursal made 
has been continuing over the years and the backlog  has been increasing. Targets   for  PMRY  beneficiaries  is  set at
2.20 lakh persons during 2000-01 and total sanctioned cases were 98,341 persons   but the actual disbursal was in the
cases of 50715 only.   This reflects that there is under achievement of the target  set for PMRY  which may lead to
abandonment  of the scheme at later stages , the Committee apprehends.      
 
7.6       The Committee recommends that efforts should  be made  to bridge the  gap between  the sanctioned cases and
actual disbursal of loans.  The Committee also recommends that the number of  beneficiaries should  be increased.  If
necessary, allocation may be increased at R E  stage.
 
 
VIII     KHADI AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES
(Rupees in crores)
     Budget 2000-2001              Revised 2000-2001                  Budget 2001-2002
Major
Head
Plan Non-
Plan
Total Plan Non-
Plan
Total Plan Non-
plan
Total
2851 106.00 48.10 154.10 107.00 48.10 155.10 106.30 52.25 158.55
2851 60.00 - 60.00 62.00 - 62.00 86.70 - 86.70
Total 166.00 48.10 214.10 169.00 48.10 217.10 193.00 52.25 245.25
 
8.1       The Khadi and Village Industries has enormous potential of generating employment opportunities and
production of marketable goods even in the present atmosphere  of liberalization and globalisation.  However, the
potential has not been fully tapped.  In the era of global competition, there is an urgent need to support and strengthen
the Khadi and VI sector so that this sector becomes viable, vibrant and sustainable.  There is an immediate need to
upgrade technology and quality of Khadi and Village Industries products besides continuous and sustainable
innovations where necessary in products, design and packaging.
 
8.2       There is an allocation of Rs.193.00 crores as plan and 52.25 crores as non-plan outlay for Khadi and Village
Industries.  There is a provision of Rs.106.30 crores as Plan and Rs.52.25  crores as Non-Plan outlay for Khadi
Industries which shows marginal difference over the allocation made for the previous year (107 crores as Plan and 48.10
crores as Non-Plan in RE 2000-01) .  Allocation for other village industries  shows an increase  in the plan outlay  by 
Rs. 24.70 crores  which is Rs. 86.70 crores in the BE  2001-02 compared to the allocation in RE of Rs. 62.00 crores in

49th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/49threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:26]
RE 2000-01.  
 
8.3       The  Secretary, Ministry of SSI and A and RI  in his oral evidence before the Committee apprised that  the
original demand for the  KVI sector was projected  at Rs. 475.00 crores  and the allocation against the same   made was
Rs.350 crores by the Planning Commission.  Explaining the reasons of increase in BE grant from Rs.62 crores in RE
2000-01 to Rs.86.70 crores in BE 2001-02,  the Ministry has stated that the funds had been sought for some new
activities such as quality assurance, setting up of Product Design and Packaging Centre. Cluster Development
Programme, Renovation and modernization of Bhavans, Marketing Promotion of VI Sector, etc.  
 
8.4       The Committee recommends that special concessions should be provided to promote the use of Khadi as this
sector has a large potential for employment generation in non-farm sector.  The Committee hopes that the new activities
proposed to be started would take off as expected and the targets set would be achieved.  A perfect planning is needed
for this.   
 
8.5       Grants are given to Khadi and Village Industries Commission (KVIC)  for providing rebate on khadi and khadi
products including poly vastra during festival season, purchase/hiring premises advertisement and publicity,
introduction of new designs etc.  The Committee notes that grants to KVIC  are production based. A high power
Committee recommended for abolition of  grant to KVIC  and instead recommended for Market Development
Assistance  which is sale based, the Committee noted.
 
8.6       The Committee recommends that the Market Development Assistance Scheme  (MDAS) be introduced for
promotion of Khadi sector.   While introducing the MDAS, the Government may find it difficult to continue rebate on
khadi.  In view of the people’s  sentiments attached to khadi historically, it may not be possible to abolish rebate  on 
khadi  totally.  But Government may consider reducing it gradually.  
 
8.7       The Committee is constrained to note that the quality of khadi has deteriorated and on the other hand the prices
have gone up and khadi is no longer within the reach of poor man. The original idea of making khadi available to poor
people does not, therefore, hold good any longer. The Committee views this very seriously. Necessary steps may be
taken to improve the quality of khadi products. Similarly steps also may be taken to reduce the cost.
 
8.8       On the occasion of the 125
th anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi, a high powered  Committee under the
Chairmanship of the then Prime Minister Shri P.V. Narsimha Rao had envisaged employment for 20 lakh persons by the
end of Eighth Plan period. The Committee notes with  discontentment  that the said target for providing   employment
has  not been achieved. Even by the end of Ninth Plan period only 15 lakh persons could be employed in the Khadi
Sector.   Perhaps one of the reason might be that work of village industries is divided under  different ministries.
Multiplicity of agencies in this regard may be done away with in the interest of village industries.
 
8.9       The Committee recommends that dispensation of rural industries which is split with various ministries should be
integrated under the aegis  of a single ministry for smooth functioning.
 
8.10     The Ministry have informed that the tenure of KVIC  constituted  in 1994 for five years was over on 5
th
September, 1999. The new commission is yet to be constituted.   The ambivalence on the part of the Ministry to
reconstitute the new Commission has affected its functioning and has increased interference of bureaucracy in day to
day  affairs of the Commission.
 
8.11     The Committee is constrained to note the inordinate delay in reconstituting the Commission. The term expired in
September, 1999 and the Ministry should have initiated steps well in advance for reconstitution of the Commission. It is
unfortunate that even after one and a half years of expiry of the term, there is still no ray of hope for its reconstitution.
The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry  should not resort to such dilly dallying tactics. The Commission
may be reconstituted immediately without further delay.
 
8.12                 The Committee observes that the administrative expenses for  KVIC  have increased from Rs.24.10
crores in RE  2000-01  to Rs.28.25 crores  in BE 2001-02 which is on high side. 

49th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/49threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:26]
 
8.13     The Committee recommends that the  administrative expenses for KVIC i.e the non-plan expenditure may be
reduced suitably. 
 
IX        COIR INDUSTRY
 
9.1       Provisions are made  to meet expenses on account of grants to promote   development of coir industry in the
country including Science & Technology and promotion of  export of coir products.  The  provision also includes  funds
for the  centrally sponsored schemes for cooperativisation of coir  industries, rebate and model coir villages and the
scheme for modernization  of coir industries.
 
9.2       The Committee observes  that a lot of products can be developed by blending coir fibre with other natural fibres,
but there is no definite  mandate for the Coir Board to develop such projects.  Of late, the Board has taken up definite
programmes  for developing blended products using other natural fibres like pineapple fibre, wild banana fibre,
domestic fibre etc. which are available in plenty.   
 
9.3       The Committee recommends that   new and varied forms of blended  products especially other natural fibres 
which have potential  apart from pineapple banana etc.  should be developed by Coir Board  to promote this industry
and suitable technology may be developed.   The Committee also suggests that  Government should expand the
mandate  for Coir Board in this regard.  This will not only  enable the Coir Board to be financially  strong but also
prevent the ecology of North-Eastern and Himalayan region from  being destroyed.
 
9.4       The Committee also observes  that the coir products which are eco-friendly have vast prospect of export. 
Attempts should be made to increase the export of coir products in future.  The committee also recommends that steps
should be taken to popularise the use of coir.
 
X         CREDIT
 
10.1     The Committee has been informed that  lack of adequate and  timely credit is a frequent complaint of the  small
scale industry. Besides, there is no dedicated credit delivery system for SSI. Representatives of industrial associations
added that banks insist on collateral, which the small entrepreneurs, with limited resources, are unable to furnish. The
Committee has also noted with dismay that tiny and low budget investment is discouraged by the banks. The Ministry
has apprised the Committee in this regard  that the major thrust during the current year is to implement the policy
package announced by the Prime Minister in August, 2000. The important aspects of this policy comprise of Credit 
Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme for Technology  Upgradation  and a Credit Guarantee Scheme to provide collateral free
loan to SSI  units.  In the package a provision of Rs.100 crore for  new Credit Guarantee Scheme to encourage banks to
lend to the small and tiny sector,  without insisting on collateral has been made SIDBI will also contribute Rs.25 crores
making it a total of Rs.125 crores in the ratio of 4:1. It was envisaged to enhance the corpus fund size to Rs 2500 crores
in five years time. The Committee has, however, been informed by some representatives of industry that even when the
policy package has been announced, the banks are still reluctant to give loans. A period of about eight months have
since elapsed and the proposal is yet to  take off, it was added.
 
10.2     The Committee recommends that   the policy package for credit guarantee scheme may be made  operational at
the earliest in case it has not been made as yet.   The Committee also feels that the lengthy bureaucratic red tapism in
clearing credit needs to be removed and rules  be simplified and made easy.
 
The Committee  is also of the view that the amount allocated under the scheme is too meager to serve a meaningful
purpose considering the gross under-financing of the sector by the banks. Hence the Committee recommends that the
provision under the scheme may  be  enhanced substantially in initial years. The larger the size of the corpus in the
initial years , the better credibility and viability of the scheme.
 
XI.  CREDIT LINKED SUBSIDY SCHEME FOR TECHNOLOGY UPGRADATION
 
11.1     There is  a provision of  Rs.2500 lakhs in BE 2001-02 which is five times higher to Rs. 500 lakhs allocated  at

49th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/49threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:26]
RE 2000-01.  The new Scheme announced by the Prime Minister on 30.8.2000,  intends to provide 12 percent  back
ended  capital subsidy on loans raised by  small scale industrial units  for technological upgradation for induction of
proven technology.
 
11.2     The business landscape, the world over, has undergone a complete transformation as a result of which
technological sophistication and knowledge intensity of a company is a sine qua non for commercial success. This
makes it imperative for SSIs to pay special attention to technology upgradation and adopt new technologies. It is
therefore, essential to source technology from abroad wherever it is available. 
 
11.3     The Committee recommends that in order to assist the SSIs to develop state of the art technology, Ministry
should encourage SSIs to source technology from abroad. The Government should set up structures/institutions to help
SSI in making assessment of technology available abroad and advise SSI on its appropriate price. Technical counseling
and financial assistance also need to be made through institutional arrangements.
 
11.4     The Committee has been given to understand that a  lot of innovations do take place among the small enterprises
but there is not enough support mechanism to transform their innovations into practical propositions. In order to sustain
themselves in the international competitive market, the SSIs need  financial and technological support to undertake
R&D activity and to transform these developments and innovations into viable commercial activities.
 
11.5     The Committee, therefore, recommends that the government should create a corpus fund for supporting R&D
activity of small scale industry. The Committee also feels that some of the SSI units consider R&D as an eye wash and
do not put in considerable effort on this. There needs to be an attitudinal change in this regard.    
 
11.6     The Committee is concerned about the problem of loan faced by the small industry sector in Gujarat’s Kutch
region, which was rocked by a powerfull earthquake on 26
th January 2001. The Committee has come to know that the
banks there are not disbursing loan of Rs.one lakh to the SSI Sector without collateral, which is affecting the SSI Sector
adversely. If the situation persists, the SSI will be left with no alternative but to close down due to financial crunch.
 
11.7     The Committee desires that the Ministry should play a pro-active role in disbursal of loans to the SSI Sector in
the region. The Committee advises the Ministry to set up a monitoring cell for the purpose and arrange for loans for the
SSI Sector for a period of at least 2 years.
 
XII       BILL DISCOUNTING SYSTEM
 
12.1     When the Secretary was asked to comment on Bill Discounting System and  possibility of its introduction in SSI
sector, he had stated that the scheme is available through SIDBI to large manufacturers.   But for that the large
manufacturer has also to accept those  Bills because the small scale entrepreneurs are not so strong and the large
manufacturers take undue advantage of this in case of delayed payment; they will not agree to discounting and the bank
will not accept it.  He further stated they had in the last package got this  done with the RBI and RBI  had now 
instructed all the commercial banks that the working capital limits of large manufacturers shall have a percentage
against which payments will be made only to small scale entrepreneurs.   Secondly, there is a thing called the factoring
service.  The small entrepreneur goes to the bank and the bank gives him some money and the bank, in turn, receives it
from the large manufacturer.  He stated that they have requested that a legislation be introduced in India on the lines it is
available in some other countries.  Then, in the balance sheet they  will have to specify how much do they owe.  These
are the two measures that they have now thought of.  He ,however, agreed that if we had more and more banks having 
this kind of situation, then some payments would  flow to the small entrepreneurs as well.
 
12.2     The Committee recommends that the banks should set up subsidiaries for bill discounting and other services.
The  factoring system should be strengthened and made effective. This would foster growth of trade and industry in the
present liberalised competitive environment. The RBI and the government should also establish discount houses on the
pattern of discount houses in London and other cities to help small enterprises. In case,  it is essential,  a legislation may
be enacted  in this regard on the lines of other countries.
 

49th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/49threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:26]
 
XIII      SMALL INDUSTRIES DEVELOPMENT BANK OF INDIA (SIDBI)
 
13.1     SIDBI is the principal financial institution for small scale industries which financies units having  investment in
plant and machinery upto Rs.100 lakh. While the world over , the concept of small and medium enterprises is more
prevalent, this statutory restriction  prevents SIDBI  from  operating widely which affects  the  competitiveness of
SIDBI vis-à-vis commercial bank and othe Development Financing Institutions (DFIs).
 
13.2     The Committee therefore recommends that SIDBI should enlarge the scope of  its assistance to small and
medium enterprises. Expansion by SIDBI  in the operational canvas will generate additional revenue for SIDBI thus
helping it to undertake more promotional and developmental activities for strengthening tiny/SSI Sector in the WTO
regime.
 
13.3     Due to continued sizable assistance at below the cost of funds under refinance, special schemes of assistance and
various promotional and developmental activities, there has been squeeze on the spirit available to SIDBI particularly in
the last few years. SIDBI has been requesting Government of India to allow access to concessional sources of funding to
enable the Bank to continue concessional lending to SSIs and take developmental activities in tandem with the policy
prescriptions of Government of India in the WTO regime.
 
13.4     The Committee recommends that Ministry should impress upon the Ministry of Finance/RBI to assist SIDBI  for
raising low cost resources so as to remain viable while taking up various developmental activities in the SSI sector.
 
13.5     The Union Budget 2001-02 has, interalia, withdrawn the tax-exempt status hitherto available to SIDBI under
Section 50 of SIDBI Act. This would have a negative impact on the profitability and viability of SIDBI particularly
when no other perceptible form of resource support is made available to the Bank. This may also have an adverse
impact on the rating of SIDBI  which is already under strain on account of proposed transfer of SFCs shareholding from
IDBI to SIDBI.
 
13.6     The Committee, therefore, recommends that the tax - exempt status as provided in the Small Industries
Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act,  2000,  may be retained. Ministry of Finance may be approached to
restore the status of SIDBI as before.
 
13.7     While it is desirable that SIDBI should operate on a larger canvass, it would also be appropriate to rope in
private banks for financing purposes. In that case government would have to extend tax benefits to these  financial
institutions when they lend to tiny units. 
 
13.8     The Committee therefore recommends that tax relief may be provided to private banks in case they carve out
certain percentage of the funds to lend to the tiny sector.Ministry of Finance may be approached in this regard.
 
13.9     The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry in its 40
th Report had also
recommended that SIDBI should take initiative and act as a watchdog to monitor the activities of Indian and foreign
banks. However, this would require adequate provisions for SIDBI to monitor the activities of primary lending
institutions with regard to their assistance and policies towards SSI sector.
 
13.10   The Committee,  reiterating its earlier recommendation, further suggests that the necessary administrative
powers be bestowed  on SIDBI to enable it to discharge its co-ordination role effectively.  
 
13.11   The Committee has been informed that the attitude of the lower level bank officials is very negative towards the
SSI units. The non-cooperation on their part hampers the development of  Small sector.
 
13.12   The Committee feels that there should be regular meeting of banks and SSIs representatives  to monitor loan
requirement of SSI. The Committee recommends that attitudinal changes should be brought in the mindset of lower
level bank officials towards the SSI units and they may be given proper training, incentives etc. for the purpose.   The

49th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/49threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:26]
Committee also recommends that  a sample survey  may be  conducted in four  or five States  to find out the  extent to
which it was implemented  and the  feed back may be sent to the Committee. 
 
13.13   The Committee also recommends that a percentage should be fixed for departments of the Government of India
for  purchases from SSI units on regular basis so as to promote the cause of SSI sector in the country.
 
XIV     PROVIDING INFRASTRUCTURE SUPPORT TO SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES
14.1     The Committee has been informed that providing basic infrastructure to SSI clusters through industrial estates
has been the traditional strategy of most governments for promoting small scale industries. However, increasingly small
scale units, especially in hi-tech areas, are in need of specialized infrastructure and services of international standards.
Pure private initiative in infrastructure is not feasible because of low  returns and long gestation periods,  it was added.
 
14.2     The Committee recommends that  specialized facilities can be jointly funded by government and user industries
and thereafter handed over to specialist private agencies for maintenance. Joint ventures between the Government and
industry associations for the  purpose can also be considered.
 
XV       SUPPORT TO FIGHT ANTI DUMPING PRACTICES
 
15.1     The small scale sector finds itself constrained from meeting the threat posed by dumping on account of their
unorganized nature, ignorance, lack of necessary data and limited resource availability, the representatives of industrial
organisations informed.
 
15.2     Hence the Committee suggests  that financial and legal assistance be provided by the government to fight the
anti - dumping cases abroad and for filing antidumping petitions within the country.
 
15.3     The Committee observes that it takes 90 days to review economic fallout of imported goods in country and 
imposition of  anti-dumping duty thereon. By that time huge financial losses would  have already occurred   to the
country which are irretrievable. The Committee observes that in order to preclude the possibility of economic losses,
anti-dumping monitoring should be expedited. The Committee therefore recommends that the administrative ministry
should review the pros and cons in this regard and take timely action. The system that exists in other countries may be
examined. India can also emulate such a system.
 
15.4     The Committee was informed by the Secretary, Ministry of Small Scale Industries  and Agro and Rural
Industries that in America there exists a law under which on a complaint, antidumping duty is imposed on the imported
goods in the first instance.  After considering all pros and cons only, a decision will be taken either to lift ban or
continue it.
 
15.5     The Committee understands that enacting law in this matter is not the concern of this ministry.  The Committee,
therefore,  recommends that the matter may be taken up with the concerned administrative ministry for making a law, if
necessary.  Otherwise necessary regulations may be prepared by the concerned Ministry and the Ministry of Small Scale
Industries   and Agro & Rural Industries  may pursue it.
 
15.6     One of the representatives of the industries stated that even if we were not able to hold the imported goods with
tariff barriers, but at least we can have non-tariff barriers.  We can ask them to comply with our regulations.  Printing of
MRP should be made compulsory on the imported goods.  Similarly, these goods should comply with ISI regulations. 
He was confident that by these steps, we can stop dumping of goods.
 
15.7     Secretary informed the Committee that the provisions related to MRP  as well as ISI mark should apply in the
same manner on the imported goods as they apply to the indigeniously manufactured items.  Any packed commodity
that is  sold in India shall have to have the year of manufacturing, expiry date and  maximum retail price.  Any importer
can sell his imported goods in India only when he meets these requirements.  The items should also indicate  the
contents  inside the pack.  Wherever it is written in the concerned country’s  language then it shall have the English
version also.  Similarly, he informed the Committee that  the imported items should meet the Indian standard just as in
the case of indigenously  manufactured products.   He  further stated that they had implemented these things four

49th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/49threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:26]
months ago and informed Commerce Ministry and the Ministry of Small Scale Industry had also written to customs.  
The Secretary further informed the Committee that the Ministry  would like to propose to the Ministry of Commerce for
implementation of a scheme under which the imported products shall carry a  guarantee from the country of origin.”  In
other countries imported goods carry a guarantee from the country of its origin.  The Secretary stated that the same
guarantee should be available in India as well. 
 
15.8     The Committee feels that availability  of    imported commodities, relatively of cheap quality without  carrying 
MRP   and ISI labels, poses a serious threat to the domestic industries, particularly the small   scale sector. The
Government should look into this matter on priority basis and take all appropriate measures to protect the interests of
domestic industries from unfair competition from imported goods.
 
15.9     The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry is contemplating to implement the guarantee system in
consultation with the Ministry of Commerce. The Committee recommends that an immediate action may be taken in
this regard and implemented expeditiously.
 
XVI     RATIONALIZATION OF TAXES AND TARIFFS FOR SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES
 
16.1     There is an urgent need for rationalization and simplification of tax structure to enhance the competitiveness of
small scale industry. While the budget has   endeavored to rationalize the tax structure, some anomalies still remain.
Some of  the problems faced by SSIs with respect to distortions arising out of iniquitous tax structure, have been 
brought to the notice of the Committee.
 
16.2     For the cable industry, while cables are allowed to be imported at the basic customs duty of 15 percent or 25
percent, the raw material which goes into the manufacture of cables has a basic customs duty of 35 percent plus 16
percent CVD plus 4 percent Special Auxillary Duty (SAD). This increases the cost of production of the domestic
manufacturer as compared to the     imported product. There is an urgent need to take remedial measures to rationalize
the  customs duty on raw materials.       
 
16.3     The Committee  suggests that the SAD on raw material be made MODATABLE as this would reduce the raw
material cost.
 
16.4     The Committee was also informed that  granite and marble  industries  should be  treated at par . It was also
stated that  in the edible  oil Industry, the running mills  have to pay  75%  duty were as  the sick  units have to pay 55%
duty and   this differential duty  for sick. Mill and running mill should not be there.  It   was also pointed out during the
course of discussion  that the  limit of  one crore rupees on roller  bearings industry has been removed.  It was felt that 
there should be one crore rupees limit.   The Committee appreciates  that most of these  demands have been met  by the
Government  in the recent budget.
 
16.5     The Committee recognizes that special and friendly relations exist between India and Nepal in all spheres of
activities including bilateral trade. The manufacturers’ representatives of vanaspati, silk, woolen, copper wire, etc.
operating in the small scale sector explained their difficulties vis-à-vis the imports from Nepal. These representatives
mentioned that the manufacturers in Nepal have an edge over them in pricing of their products in as much as they are
allowed import of raw-material at zero customs duty. The Indian  manufacturers, however, have to pay customs duty on
imported raw-material.
 
16.6     The Committee would like the Ministry to look into this aspect of unfair competition being posed by the imports
from Nepal. The Committee understands that the Indo-Nepal Trade Treaty is due for review during the later part of
2001. It would, therefore, recommend that this matter may be looked into and corrective measures taken.
 
16.7     The  Committee also desires that the items like footwear, agricultural implements etc. used by the poorer
sections of the society should be available at cheaper prices. Government may consider reducing taxes on such items.
 
XVII    MARKETING 
 

49th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/49threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:26]
17.1     Marketing companies are assuming an increasingly important role in the emerging competitive environment.
The Committee has been informed that  marketing outfits in all the developing economies have the prime role in
marketing of products. Our banking sector does not recognize marketing as an essential activity for SMEs and,
therefore, adequate financing is not available for the sector.
 
17.2     The Committee, therefore, is of the view  that the marketing and distribution companies need to be considered
for being  given the status of industry for the purpose of getting financial assistance from banks and Fls as well as lead
institutions.
 
17.3     Marketing and developing brand image of the SSI products also has not been handled effectively. The role of
KVIC in marketing the products has been increased in Budget 2000-2001, but no new marketing techniques or
involvement of private institutions have been envisaged.
 
17.4     The Committee  recommends promotion of private sector participation in marketing of SSI products through
proper incentives like granting  tax relief in a manner similar to 80 HHC currently available on exports for companies
marketing SSI products.
 
XVIII   EXPORTS BY SSI SECTOR
 
18.1     The SSI sector in India covers a wide spectrum of industries categorized under small, tiny and cottage segments
ranging from small artisan/handicraft units to modern production units with significant investments and produces a vide
range of products exceeding 7500. The industrial policy 1990 laid emphasis on the steps to enhance the contribution of
SSI sector in  overall exports,  employment  generation and   dispersal  of
industries in rural areas. 800 items are currently reserved for exclusive manufacture in the SSI sector although there is
no regulation or restriction on marketing the reserved items by large industries.
 
18.2     But the Committee notes with dissatisfaction  that even as the industrial policy laid emphasis on the steps to
enhance  the contribution of the SSI Sector in over all exports, the performance of the SSI sector in this regard  has been
disparaging  and the contribution is negligible.  The Committee feels that perhaps serious marketing efforts were not
made by those concerned and it was left to its own fate. Though Government has been extending preferences in respect
of purchase of items manufactured by SSIs and  a number of steps taken in the recent post reform period by the Govt.
like FDI, establishment of growth centers, export promotion, marketing etc. exports of SSI products have not taken off 
at the expected level.
 
18.3     The Committee, therefore, observes that efforts made for export of SSI products are inadequate and  there is
need to improve the quality of products for this purpose.
 
18.4     The Committee also  recommends that exports should be increased by making SSI products qualitatively better
and cost effective.
 
XIX     PROBLEM OF DELAYED PAYMENTS TO SSI UNITS
 
19.1     The Committee has been given to  understand that at present Balance Sheet of the Companies indicate the
amount due to SSI units. But interest due to SSI units on account of delayed payment is not shown separately. As a
result, there is no authentic source on which the Income Tax authorities can rely to disallow the interest due, payable or
paid by any buyer in accordance with the Delayed Payment Act, 1993 for the purposes of computation of income under
Income Tax Act 1961 as deduction.
 
19.2     The Committee, recommends that the interest due or payable or paid to SSI units on account of delayed
payments as per the provisions of the Delayed Payments Act 1993 (as amended) may be shown separately in the
Balance Sheet of Companies. 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 

49th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/49threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:26]
            The Committee observes  that the idea of having  small and  medium  Enterprises instead  of having 
compartmentalized   small scale industries has become a global concept .  If Government  support is  given to small and
medium enterprises,  it will have  salutary  effect   on the economy.
(Para 1.6)
 
              The Committee, however, would like to discuss the issue with all concerned before coming to a conclusion and
making any recommendation in this regard.
 (Para 1.7)
 
            Ministry’s role at this juncture becomes of paramount importance as it has to evolve
mechanisms/directives/guidelines which will go a long way in shaping the course of  things in future.   In view of these
threats,  safeguarding the interests of indigenous  industry is the major responsibility of  the Ministry while formulating
policies.  Government should provide  level playing field  for  the small scale industry to meet the  challenges of stiff 
competition from  global  players.
(Para 1.9)
 
            The Committee has been given to understand that the competitive fervor unleashed by the liberalization process
has led to a paradigm shift in the nature of manufacturing activity in the country. In such a scenario it has become
imperative that the policy of protection for  small scale sector  should pave its  way to a more proactive approach of
helping such units to enhance their competitiveness in a market driven economy. If small and  tiny enterprises have to
compete in globalized environment they now require an enabling and responsive environment  which provides adequate
and timely credit and pragmatic institutional, technological and infrastructural support. The Committee hopes that the
above proposals announced in the budget would mitigate the hardships faced by the SSI sector. The Government should,
however, not feel comp1.12            In  view  of the above the  Committee feels that the   adequate steps are  required to 
be taken to  remove   the Inspector  Raj.  The Committee also recommends that simplification  of  rules, regulation and 
amendment of labour    laws   may be  done  so that   SSI  units are  not subject to unnecessary harassment.    The
Ministry  of SSI  and Agro & Rural Industries may  take up the  matter with the concerned  administrative ministries. 
By taking these measures, the Committee feels that SSI sector would get a level  playing field to   a large extent.
(Para 1.10)
 
            In  view  of the above the  Committee feels that adequate steps are  required to  be taken to  remove   the
Inspector  Raj.  The Committee also recommends that simplification  of  rules, regulation and  amendment of labour   
laws   may be  done  so that   SSI  units are  not subject to unnecessary harassment.    The Ministry  of SSI  and Agro &
Rural Industries may  take up the  matter with the concerned  administrative ministries.  By taking these measures, the
Committee feels that SSI sector would get a level  playing field to   a large extent.
(para 1.12)
 
 
The Committee disapproves of reduction in plan outlay at the RE stage. This trend is inimical to the  growth of small
industry sector. This not only leaves the ongoing schemes in the lurch for want of money.
(Para 2.3)
 
The Committee therefore  recommends that the Ministry should visualize the pros and cons of schemes before
earmarking funds. Allocation of funds should be made  depending  on feasibility of scheme only.
(Para 2.4)
 
            The office of DC (SSI)  which is also known as Small Industries Development Organization is an apex body of
the Ministry and its role has increased to a great extent after the lifting of quantitative restrictions. The Committee feels
that the office of DC  should help the Small Scale Sector in evolving marketing strategies.   To help the SSI sector, it
should have well equipped computer network for dissemination  of information  to that  sector.  Technological
upgradation is another area  where  its help to   Small Scale Sector is needed  most  and the office of DC should play a
key  role in  improving  the  quality of the products of the SSI sector. Therefore, the office of DC needs to be further
strengthened and, if necessary,  its present  allocation may be  revised.
(Para 3.4)

49th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/49threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:26]
 
            The Committee recommends that the office of DC should gear  up to face the new    challenges arising out of
W.T.O. commitments and help the SSI units to reorganise  themselves. An all out effort towards providing information
for market access, giving  technological and  infrastructural  support including  training  for quality  control has to be
made by  the Ministry   if the small scale sector has  to sustain itself  in  a free  market economy and grow.  
(Para 3.5)
 
            The Committee observes that the Government  is not  providing financial assistance to the NSIC in the form of
equity.  NSIC is  projected to generate Rs.120.00 crores in budget  2000-01 . Devoid of equity-support, NSIC would be
hard pressed to generate revenue on its own now. The Committee therefore recommends that NSIC should take
measures to increase IEBR and explore ways and means for more revenue generation to become self sufficient. Till
NSIC becomes self reliant,   the Govt. may continue to provide funds for the corporation so that its development
activities continue   unabated. 
(Para 4.4)
 
            The Committee hopes that the schemes would be implemented successfully and the targets fixed-both physical
and financial would be achieved.   In view of lifting of Quantitative Restrictions, the time has come to lay  more
emphasis on technological upgradation and modernization.  For this purpose, if need be, allocation may be increased.
 
(Para 5.3)
            The Committee, therefore, recommends that the  census  should be undertaken  and completed within the
stipulated time frame so as to  evolve a uniform  approach towards the  SSI Units.  The funds earmarked for the purpose
should be utilized  in a proper manner.
 
(Para 6.5)
 
            The Committee recommends that efforts should  be made  to bridge the  gap between  the sanctioned cases and
actual disbursal of loans.  The Committee also recommends that the number of  beneficiaries should  be increased.  If
necessary, allocation may be increased at R E  stage.
(Para 7.6)
 
            The Committee recommends that special concessions should be provided to promote the use of Khadi as this
sector has a large potential for employment generation in non-farm sector.  The Committee hopes that the new activities
proposed to be started would take off as expected and the targets set would be achieved.  A perfect planning is needed
for this.   
 
(Para 8.4)
 
            The Committee recommends that the Market Development Assistance Scheme  (MDAS) be introduced for
promotion of Khadi sector.   While introducing the MDAS, the Government may find it difficult to continue rebate on
khadi.  In view of the people’s  sentiments attached to khadi historically, it may not be possible to abolish rebate  on 
khadi  totally.  But Government may consider reducing it gradually.  
(Para 8.6)
 
            The Committee is constrained to note that the quality of khadi has deteriorated and on the other hand the prices
have gone up and khadi is no longer within the reach of poor man. The original idea of making khadi available to poor
people does not, therefore, hold good any longer. The Committee views this very seriously. Necessary steps may be
taken to improve the quality of khadi products. Similarly steps also may be taken to reduce the cost.
 
(Para 8.7)
 
            The Committee recommends that dispensation of rural industries which is split with various ministries should be
integrated under the aegis  of a single ministry for smooth functioning.
(Para 8.9)

49th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/49threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:26]
 
            The Committee is constrained to note the inordinate delay in reconstituting the Commission. The term expired in
September, 1999 and the Ministry should have initiated steps well in advane for reconstitution of the Commission. It is
unfortunate that even after one and a half years of expiry of the term, there is still no ray of hope for its reconstitution.
The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry  should not resort to such dilly dallying tactics. The Commission
may be reconstituted immediately without further delay.
 
(Para 8.11)
 
            The Committee recommends that the  administrative expenses for KVIC i.e the non-plan expenditure may be
reduced suitably. 
(Para 8.13)
 
            The Committee recommends that  new and varied forms of blended  products especially other natural fibres 
which have potential  apart from pineapple banana etc.  should be developed by Coir Board  to promote this industry
and suitable technology may be developed.   The Committee also suggests that  Government should expand the
mandate  for Coir Board in this regard.  This will not only  enable the Coir Board to be financially  strong but also
prevent the ecology of North-Eastern and Himalayan region from  being destroyed.
(Para 9.3)
 
            The Committee also observes  that the coir products which are eco-friendly have vast prospect of export. 
Attempts should be made to increase the export of coir products in future.  The committee also recommends that steps
should be taken to popularise the use of coir.
(Para 9.4)
 
The Committee recommends that   the policy package for credit guarantee scheme may be made  operational at the
earliest in case it has not been made as yet.   The Committee also feels that the lengthy bureaucratic red tapism in
clearing credit needs to be removed and rules  be simplified and made easy.
(Para 10.2)
 
           Committee  is also of the view that the amount allocated under the scheme is too meager to serve a meaningful
purpose considering the gross under-financing of the sector by the banks. Hence the Committee recommends that the
provision under the scheme may  be  enhanced substantially in initial years. The larger the size of the corpus in the
initial years , the better credibility and viability of the scheme.
(Para 10.3)
 
            The Committee recommends that in order to assist the SSIs to develop state of the art technology, Ministry
should encourage SSIs to source technology from abroad. The Government should set up structures/institutions to help
SSI in making assessment of technology available abroad and advise SSI on its appropriate price. Technical counseling
and financial assistance also need to be made through institutional arrangements.
(Para 11.3)
 
            The Committee, therefore, recommends that the government should create a corpus fund for supporting R&D
activity of small scale industry. The Committee also feels that some of the SSI units consider R&D as an eye wash and
do not put in considerable effort on this. There needs to be an attitudinal change in this regard.
    (Para 11.5)
 
            The Committee desires that the Ministry should play a pro-active role in disbursal of loans to the SSI Sector in
the region. The Committee advises the Ministry to set up a monitoring cell for the purpose and arrange for loans for the
SSI Sector for a period of at least 2 years.
(para 11.7)
 
The Committee recommends that the banks should set up subsidiaries for bill discounting and other services. The 
factoring system should be strengthened and made effective. This would foster growth of trade and industry in the

49th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/49threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:26]
present liberalised competitive environment. The RBI and the government should also establish discount houses on the
pattern of discount houses in London and other cities to help small enterprises. In case,  it is essential,  a legislation may
be enacted  in this regard on the lines of other countries.
(Para 12.2)
 
            The Committee therefore recommends that SIDBI should enlarge the scope of  its assistance to small and
medium enterprises. Expansion by SIDBI  in the operational canvas will generate additional revenue for SIDBI thus
helping it to undertake more promotional and developmental activities for strengthening tiny/SSI Sector in the WTO
regime.
(Para 13.2)
 
            The Committee recommends that Ministry should impress upon the Ministry of Finance/RBI to assist SIDBI  for
raising low cost resources so as to remain viable while taking up various developmental activities in the SSI sector.
(Para 13.4)
 
            The Committee, therefore, recommends that the tax - exempt status as provided in the Small Industries
Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act,  2000,  may be retained. Ministry of Finance may be approached to
restore the status of SIDBI as before.
(Para 13.6)
 
            Committee therefore recommends that tax relief may be provided to private banks in case they carve out certain
percentage of the funds to lend to the tiny sector.Ministry of Finance may be approached in this regard.
(Para 13.8)
 
            The Committee,  reiterating its earlier recommendation, further suggests that the necessary administrative
powers be bestowed  on SIDBI to enable it to discharge its co-ordination role effectively.  
(Para 13.10)
 
            The Committee feels that there should be regular meeting of banks and SSIs representatives  to monitor loan
requirement of SSI. The Committee recommends that attitudinal changes should be brought in the mindset of lower
level bank officials towards the SSI units and they may be given proper training, incentives etc. for the purpose.   The
Committee also recommends that  a sample survey  may be  conducted in four  or five States  to find out the  extent to
which it was implemented  and the  feed back may be sent to the Committee. 
(Para 13.12)
 
            The Committee also recommends that a percentage should be fixed for departments of the Government of India
for  purchases from SSI units on regular basis so as to promote the cause of SSI sector in the country.
(Para 13.13)
 
            The Committee recommends that  specialized facilities can be jointly funded by government and user industries
and thereafter handed over to specialist private agencies for maintenance. Joint ventures between the Government and
industry associations for the  purpose can also be considered.
(Para 14.2)
 
            Hence the Committee suggests  that financial and legal assistance be provided by the government to fight the
anti - dumping cases abroad and for filing antidumping petitions within the country.
(Para 15.2)
 
            The Committee observes that it takes 90 days to review economic fallout of imported goods in country and 
imposition  of anti-dumping duty thereon. By that time huge financial losses would have already occurred   to the
country which are irretrievable. The Committee observes that in order to preclude the possibility of economic losses,
anti-dumping monitoring should be expedited. The Committee therefore recommends that the administrative ministry
should review the pros and cons in this regard and take timely action. The system that axists in other countries may be
examined. India can also emulate such a system

49th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/49threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:26]
(Para 15.3)
 
            The Committee understands that enacting law in this matter is not the concern of this ministry.  The Committee,
therefore,  recommends that the matter may be taken up with the concerned administrative ministry for making a law, if
necessary.  Otherwise necessary regulations may be prepared by the concerned Ministry and the Ministry of Small Scale
Industries  & Agro and Rural Industries  may pursue it.
(Para 15.5)
 
            The Committee feels that availability of imported commodities, relatively of cheap quality without  carrying 
MRP   and ISI labels, poses a serious threat to the domestic industries, particularly the small   scale sector. The
Government should look into this matter on priority basis and take all appropriate measures to protect the interests of
domestic industries from unfair competition from imported goods.
(Para 15.8)
 
            The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry is contemplating to implement the guarantee system in
consultation with the Ministry of Commerce. The Committee recommends that an immediate action may be taken in
this regard and implemented expeditiously.
(Para 15.9)
 
            The Committee  suggests that the SAD on raw material be made MODATABLE as this would reduce the raw
material cost.
(Para 16.3)
 
            The Committee would like the Ministry to look into this aspect of unfair competition being posed by the imports
from Nepal. The Committee understands that the Indo-Nepal Trade Treaty is due for review during the later part of
2001. It would, therefore, recommend that this matter may be looked into and corrective measures taken.
(Para 16.6)
 
            The  Committee also desires that the items like footwear, agricultural implements etc. used by the poorer
sections of the society should be available at cheaper prices. Government may consider reducing taxes on such items.
(para 16.7)
 
            The Committee, therefore, is of the view   that the marketing and distribution companies need to be considered
for being  given the status of industry for the purpose of getting financial assistance from banks and Fls as well as lead
institutions.
(Para 17.2)
 
            The Committee   recommends promotion of private sector participation in marketing of SSI products through
proper incentives like granting  tax relief in a manner similar to 80 HHC currently available on exports for companies
marketing SSI products.
 
(Para 17.4)
 
            The Committee, therefore, observes that efforts made for export of SSI products are inadequate and   there is
need to improve the quality  of products for this purpose.
 
(Para 18.3)
 
            The Committee also   recommends that exports should be increased by making SSI products qualitatively better
and cost effective.
(Para 18.4)
 
            The Committee, recommends that the interest due or payable or paid to SSI units on account of delayed
payments as per the provisions of the Delayed Payments Act 1993 (as amended) may be shown separately in the

49th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/49threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:26]
Balance Sheet of Companies. 
(Para 19.2)
MINUTES
IV
 
FOURTH  MEETING
 
 
            The Committee met at 11.00 A.M.  on  Tuesday,  the 4th April, 2001 in Committee Room `A`, Ground Floor, 
Parliament House  Annexe, New Delhi.
 
                          PRESENT
 
1.         Shri Ramdas Agarwal    -      Chairman
 
             RAJYA SABHA
 
Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
Dr. Faguni Ram
Shri P.K. Maheshwari
Shri Jibon Roy
6.         Smt. Saroj Dubey
7.         Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhundar
8.         Prof. M.M. Aggarwal
 
LOK SABHA
 
Shri Ramdas Athawale
Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
Shri Nepal Chandra Das
Shri K.P. Deo
Shri Anant Mahadeoappa Gudhe
Shri G.J. Javiya
Shri A.C. Jose
Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
Shri Sunil Khan
Shri Deepak Kumar
Shri Manjay Lal
Shri G. Mallikarjunappa
Shri K.H. Muniyappa
Shri  Nagmani
Shri Uttamrao Deorao Patil
Shri P. Rajendran
Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
Shri Tarachand Sahu
Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
Shri Ramanand Singh
Shri Rizwan Zaheer
 
WITNESSES
 
I.                      Confederation of Indian Industry (CII)

49th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/49threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:26]
 
Shri G.C. Narang, Senior Member, National Committee on Small Industry
Shri Gurpal Singh, Senior  Director, SSI Division
 
II.         PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry
 
Shri Arun Kapur, Vice President
Shri Sudarshan Sareen, Member
Shri Ashok Kapur, Member
Shri R.N. Khanna, Member
Ms. Shobha Ahuja, Economist
 
III.       Laghu Udyog Bharati
Dr. S.S. Aggarwal, National President
Shri M.C. Garg, Member
 
IV.       World Association of  Small  and Medium Enterprises
Shri Vir Chandra
Shri V.N. Prasad
 
V         Ministry of SSI and ARI
Shri V. Anand, Secretary
Shri K.K. Jaswal, Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser
Shri Shankar Aggarwal, Joint Secretary
Shri Sat Paul, Director
Shri A.K. Sinha, Director
Shri  S. Nayak, Director
Shri K.M. Shahid, Director
 
VI.                   Small Industries Development Organisation
Shri S. K. Tuteja, Additional Secretary & Development Commissioner
Dr. C.S. Prasad, Additional Development Commissioner
Shri K.S. Ludu, Additional Development Commissioner
Shri Amir Subhani, Joint Development Commissioner
Shri Pankaj Jain, Director
Shri Sandeep Dave, Director
 
VII.                  National Small Industries Corporation Ltd.
 
                                    Shri M. Ahmad, Chairman-Cum-Managing Director
 
30
VIII.                Khadi and Village Industries Commission
 
Dr. Mahesh Sharma, Chairman
Shri Ratnakar Gaikwad, Chief Executive Officer
Shri K.K. Gupta, Deputy Chief Executive Officer
 
IX.                   COIR Board
 
                                    Shri Christy Fernandez, Chairman
 
X.                    Small Industries Development Bank of India
 

49th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/49threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:26]
Shri P.B. Nimbalkar, Chairman-Cum-Managing Director
Shri G.K. Saxena, Deputy Managing Director
Shri G.A. Nayak,  Chief General Manager
Shri N.K. Maini, CGM
Shri N.K. Narula, DGM
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta,  Director
Shri  P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretry
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
 
2.         The Committee heard the representatives of CII, WASME, PHD Chambers of  Commerce and Laghu Udyog
Bharati on the Budgetary Proposals for 2001-2002 with specific reference to lifting of Quantitative Restrictions and its
impact on the SSI Sector.
 
3.         The Committee then heard the Secretary Ministry of Small Scale Industries and Agro & Rural Industries on
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) pertaining to the Ministry of SSI and A&RI.
 
                    A verbatim of the record of the proceedings was kept.
 
4.                                 *                                  *                                  *
 
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M.
______________________________________________________________________________*** Relates to other
matters.
 
VI
 
SIXTH   MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 11.00 A.M.  on  Monday,  the 14
th May, 2001 in Committee Room `A`, Ground Floor, 
Parliament House  Annexe, New Delhi.
 
                          PRESENT
 
1.         Shri Ramdas Agarwal,    -    Chairman
 
 
            RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Dr.  Faguni Ram
Shri P.K. Maheshwari
Shri Jibon Roy
Smt. Saroj Dubey
Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhundar
Prof. M.M. Aggarwal
 
LOK SABHA
 
Shri A. Narendra

49th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/49threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:26]
Shri Ramdas Athawale
Shri Ram  Raghunath Chaudhary
Shri Anant Mahadeoappa Gudhe
Shri G.J. Javiya
Shri  A.C. Jose
Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
Shri Sunil Khan
Shri Deepak Kumar
Shri Manjay Lal
Shri K.H. Muniyappa
Shri Nagmani
Shri Uttamarao Deorao Patil
Shri M. Rajaiah
Shri P. Rajendran
Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
Shri Ram Sajivan
Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri  Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta,  Director
Shri  P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
 
32
2.                                 *                                  *                                  *
 
3.         Thereafter,  the Committee  took up  the following Reports for consideration  :-
 
i.                                  *                                  *                                  *
 
ii.                                  *                                  *                                  *
 
iii.                                 *                                  *                                  *
 
iv.                                 *                                  *                                  *
v.         49
th Draft Report on Demands for Grants  (2001-2002) pertaining to Ministry of              Small             Scale
            Industries and Agro & Rural Industries  (SSI and A&RI))
    
      iv.                           *                                  *                                  *
 
vii.                                *                                  *                                  *
 
After  some  discussion, the Reports ware  adopted with some changes.
 
4.                                 *                                  *                                  *
 
5.         The Committee,  thereafter .  adjourned at  1.30 P.M.   to meet again  on  24
th May, 2001.
______________________________________________________________________________*** Relates to other
matters.