69th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/69threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:34]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
SIXTY-NINTH REPORT
 
ON
 
OFFSHORE AREAS MINERAL
(DEVELOPMENT & REGULATION ) BILL,2001
 
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON  14TH     MAY, 2002)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE  LOK SABHA ON  14TH  MAY, 2002)
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
MAY, 2002/JYAISTHA,1924  (SAKA)
 
C O N T E N T S
 
                                                                                                                                   
1.         COMPOSITION OF  THE COMMITTEE
                                                                   
2.         INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                     
3.         REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                   
4.         OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS  AND RECOMMENDATIONS  OF THE COMMITTEE
 
5.         ANNEXURE--I A NOTE OF  DISSENT GIVEN BY SHRI  JIBON  ROY   AND SHRI  SUNIL KHAN)
  
           
6.         ANNEXURE-II  (A COPY OF THE  OFFSHORE AREAS MINERAL (DEVELOPMENT AND
REGULATION) BILL, 2001                                                  
 
7.         MINUTES  (RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE) (TO BE ANNEXED AT
THE TIME OF PRINTING OF THE REPORT)
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
(Date of Constitution - 1st January, 2002  )
 
            Shri T.N. Chaturvedi — Chairman @
 
RAJYA SABHA

69th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/69threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:34]
 
2.   Dr . Abrar Ahmad@@
3.    Prof. M.M. Aggarwal
Smt.  Saroj Dubey
 Shri Faguni Ram
 Shri P.K. Maheshwari
 Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
 Shri Jibon Roy
 Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
 Shri S. Sivasubramanian
 Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
#
 
LOK SABHA
 
Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
Kumari Mamata Banerjee
Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
Shri Nepal Chandra Das
Shri Thomas Hansda
*Chowdhary Talib Hussain
Dr. S. Jagathrakshakan
Shri A.C. Jose
Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
Shri Brijlal Khabri
Shri Sunil Khan
Shri Deepak Kumar
Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari
Shri Manjay Lal
Dr. K. Malaisamy
Shri A. Narendra
Shri Ananta Nayak
Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
Shri Basangouda R. Patil
@ Appointed as Chairman of the Committee w.e.f. 15
th April, 02 vice Sh Ramdas Agarwal ceased to be the member of
the Committee w.e.f. 09.04.02 consequent upon his cessation to be Member of Rajya Sabha
@@Nominated w.e.f. 22.04.02 vice Ms. Frida Topno who  ceased to be the member of the Committee w.e.f. 02.04.02
consequent upon her cessation to be Member of Rajya Sabha
# Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha ceased to be the member of the Committee w.e.f. 09.04.02 consequent upon his cessation to
be Member of Rajya Sabha
*Nominated to be the Member of the Committee w.e.f.  15.03.02
Shri Uttamrao Patil
Shri Malyala Rajaiah
Shri P. Rajendran
Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
Shri Tarachand Sahu
Shri Ramanand Singh
Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
Shri Beni Prasad Verma
SECRETARIAT
 

69th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/69threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:34]
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director
Shri D.P. Ahuja,  Under  Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani,  Committee Officer
** Shri G. Mallikarjunappa ceased to be the Member of the Committee w.e.f.  25.02.02
 
I N T R O D U C T I ON
 
I,  the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry,  having   been authorised  by
the Committee, hereby present this Sixty-ninth .Report on the Offshore Areas Mineral (Development & Regulation )
Bill,2001.
2          The Offshore Areas Mineral (Development & Regulation )Bill,2001 was introduced in Lok Sabha on 31
st
August, 2001,  and was referred  *  to the Committee on Industry by the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 7th
September , 2001 under Rule  270 (b) of the Rules of procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha for
examination and report thereon.
3.         The Committee in its meeting held on 5th April, 2002  took oral evidence of Secretary of  Department of Mines,
Ministry of Coal and Mines , Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel of Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs (
Legislative Department.    The Committee also took up the clause-by-clause consideration of the  Bill   on the same
date.
4.         The Committee wishes  to thank the representatives of  the Department of Mines , Ministry of  Coal and Mines 
and Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs ( Legislative Department) for appearing before the Committee  for
oral evidence and placing their considered  views before the Committee.  The  Committee also   wishes to thank the
Ministry of Coal  and the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs  (Legislative Department) for furnishing the
replies to the questionnaire and the points raised during the course of oral evidence.
The Committee considered and adopted the report on the Bill in its meeting held on     8
th April , 2002.
A note of  dissent given by Shri  Jibon Roy,  M.P.  and Shri  Sunil Khan,  M.P. is appended to the report as Annexure-I
 
NEW DELHI;
MAY, 2002
 
 
T.N. CHATURVEDI                                                           
Chairman,
Department -related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry
 
 *Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II. No.39152  dated   the 7th September,   2001.
REPORT
 
            The Offshore Areas Mineral (Development And Regulation) Bill, 2001 was referred to the Committee on
Industry by the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on  7
th September, 2001 under  Rule 270(b) of the Rules of Procedure
and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha for examination and report thereon.
2          The Bill aims to provide for development and regulation of mineral resources in the territorial  waters,
continental shelf, exclusive economic zone and other maritime zones of India and   to provide  for matters connected
therewith or incidental  thereto.
3          According to   the statement of objects and reasons of the Bill, the need was felt to have  proper legal   frame
work for   regulation and  development of minerals occurring  in the offshore areas, that is,  territorial waters,
continental shelf, exclusive  economic zone and other maritime zones of  India, in order to develop the offshore  areas
scientifically and  systematically.   India  has approximately 3.3 million square kilometres  of land area  with a coast line
of 8041 kilometres. The area of the Exclusive Economic Zone is 2.02 million square kilometres and  in terms of the UN
Convention on the Law of the Sea, 1982,  the coastal states have specific rights and jurisdiction, inter alia,  for exploring
and exploiting the natural resources over the continental margin, which will add about 0.80 million square kilometres in
addition to the area of Exclusive Economic Zone. In  India, beach placer deposits have been economically exploited
since long. The mining and processing of different minerals obtained from these placer deposits into valuable products

69th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/69threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:34]
are also well established. India is richly endowed in mineral sands in the Eastern and Western Coasts. Heavy mineral
sand containing mostly  ilmenite with some rutile, leucoxene (a decomposition product of ilmenite), garnet, zircon,
monazite and aluminium silicates like silimanite and kyanite occur in isolated to extensive spreads all along the sea
coast.
4          The proposed legislation would enable streamlining of mineral exploration and development in the offshore
areas and ensure systematic and scientific exploitation of mineral reserves (except petroleum, natural gas and
hydrocarbon resources) for attracting private investment in the mineral sector.
5.         Under the Law of the Sea  convention, 1982, the coastal states   are  entitled to territorial sea (12 nautical miles), 
contiguous zone (24 nautical miles) exclusive  economic zone (200 nautical miles) and   continental shelf (200/350
nautical  miles) drawn from normal base-line, which is the low-water line along  the coast,  over which the  coastal
States have specific rights and Jurisdiction, including for  exploring and  exploiting the natural  resources.  The
Convention   came into effect  on 16
th November, 1994 and became part of the  International Law, India has ratified the
Law of the Sea Convention on  29th June, 1995.  Article  297 of the Constitution of India was amended by the  40th
Amendment to the Constitution and according to amended Article 297 , all lands , minerals and other things of value
underlying the  ocean within the   territorial water, or the continental shelf, or the exclusive economic zone of  India, 
shall vest in the Union and be held for the purposes  of the Union.  In 1976, the Parliament passed the Territorial
Waters, Continental Shelf , Exclusive  Economic zone and other Maritime Zones Bill, 1976 delineating therein the
limits of the zones and rights and obligations in maritime zones.
6.         Entry  54 of   List-I of the Constitution gives powers to the Central Government for regulation of mines and
mineral development to the extent to which such regulation and  development under the control of the   Union is
declared by  Parliament by law to be  expedient in the public interest.  The Bill has been introduced accordingly. 
Further, the  clauses 16 and 17 of the Bill provide that royalty and fixed rent shall be payable to the Central Government
and, therefore, in accordance with Article 117 (1) of the  Constitution of India, which requires  that any Bill making
provision for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f)   of clause (1)  of article110   [Definition of   "Money
Bills."] ,  recommendation of the President has been obtained prior to introduction of the Bill.
7.         As per amendments  made  on November, 10, 1992 to the  Allocation of  Business Rules,  1961, legislation for
regulation  of mines and development of minerals underlying  the ocean within the territorial waters, or the continental 
shelf of the exclusive   economic zone and other maritime   zones of India has been placed under the charge of the
Department of Mines.  In May,.  1993 a working group was constituted, headed  by the Joint Secretary, Department of
Mines, for finalising the legislation for offshore areas .  Terms of reference of the working group were  (i) to suggest a
suitable legislation and rules for regulating prospecting and mining in the  Territorial Waters, c Continental Shelf and
Exclusive Economic Zone of India after examining the existing legislation of the  subject viz.  the Mines and Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957  (MMDR Act) , and the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive
Economic Zone and other Maritime Zone Act, 1976 and other related matters; and (ii) to make any  other
recommendations as may be considered necessary.  The working group    has taken into consideration the opinion
expressed  by Ministry of Law, ( January, 1974) that if, by virtue of special requirement of minerals in the offshore
areas, it is considered necessary to lay down conditions or restriction which are at variance with the existing statutory
provisions in the MMDR Act, 1957 , then under such circumstances, it would not be legally permissible to do  so
without first   amending the statute, i.e. MMDR Act, 1957  itself suitably.  It was  also observed that by virtue of Article
297 of the Constitution, the ownership of minerals in the offshore areas vests  in the Union and if the MMDR Act were
to be used for  framing rules applicable to offshore areas  it would require extensive amendments.   The Wording Group
also  examined the possibility of framing Rules under section 15 of the Maritime Zone act, 1976.  It was observed 
however, that the Maritime Zones  Act   is in the nature of umbrella legislation and if Rules are to be framed under this
Act, provisions normally included  in the Act will   have to  be  necessarily provided for in the Rules,   This  could be a
doubtful course of action, as it would amount to "excessive delegation"  through the rules which is not desirable in  any 
legislation.  The Working  Group, therefore, came to the conclusion that it would be advisable to frame a new Act for
mineral exploitation in offshore areas and submitted its report and draft of the proposed legislation accordingly in
December, 1995.   The Report and the proposed draft legislation was further examined in  extensive consultation with
all Departments and Ministries in the Government of India who have  stakes in off shore areas.  Accordingly the Bill has
been prepared, duly addressing the concerns of all stake holders.
8.         The Bill consists of   38 clauses spreading over six chapters  and two schedules .  Chapter-I of the proposed
legislation, i.e. Offshore Areas Mineral (Development and Regulation) Bill consists of first   4 Clauses of the Bill giving
details of  short title and commencement, Declaration  as to  expediency of Union control, Application, Definitions.   

69th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/69threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:34]
Chapter-II   commencing  from Clauses 5 to Clauses - 21 giving details of General Provisions for Acquisition of 
Operating Rights in the Offshore Areas.  Chapter-III deals with the Power of  entry  inspection, search  and  seizure. 
Chapter-IV consisting of  Clause 23 to  Clause  27 is on  offences  dealing with Previous sanction of  Central
Government for prosecution and  Offences triable by Court of session  Chapter-V  consists of  28th   Section on Civil 
liability and adjudication.  Chapter-VI  commencing from   Section 29 to Section 38  deals with various  miscellaneous  
provisions which inter-alia include   Extension of  enactments to offshore areas, Compounding of  offences, Recovery
of certain sums  as arrears of land revenue, Delegation of powers,  Protection of action taken in good faith, Appeals ,
Power to make rules, Relaxation in specific cases, persons to be public servants, and  Removal of difficulties.  Schedule-
I  deals with the rate of royalty  on  various minerals while the second schedule   is on the  rates of fixed  rent in  rupees  
per standard  block  per annum.
8.1       Clause-1 of the chapter -I gives preliminary information such  as : short title, extent and commencement, Clause-
2   contains   declaration as to expediency of Union to take under its control the regulation of the mines and
development of minerals in offshore areas to enable Parliament to enact the proposed legislation.   Clauses-3 species 
that the proposed legislation shall apply to all minerals in offshore areas except mineral oils and hydrocarbons and the
provisions of the  proposed legislation shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law for the  time being
in  force in the offshore areas.  This would  ensure that the strategic and defence  interests of the country are fully
safeguarded.   Clause -4   contains  the definitions in the proposed legislation, which, inter-alia, includes definitions like 
`administering authority', `exploration licence,   `exploration operations',  `mine',   `off shore areas',  `pollution of
offshore environment', `production lease', reconnaissance operation', reconnaissance permit etc. In the proposed
legislation  there would be three types of operating rights,  namely reconnaissance permit (non exclusive), exploration
licence and production lease. Clause 4 (v)  states that  reconnaissance permit means a permit granted under section 11
for the purpose of undertaking reconnaissance operation.  While  the production  lease means   a lease granted  under
section 13 which confers an exclusive right for the purpose of undertaking production operation.   Production operation
means any operation undertaken for the purpose of winning any mineral from the offshore area and includes any
operation directly or indirectly necessary therefor or incidental thereto.  Clause 4 (u) states reconnaissance operation
means any  preliminary geo-scientific  survey undertaken for the purpose of searching or locating mineral deposits.
8.2.      Chapter-II deals with  General Provisions for Acquisition of  Operating Rights in the Offshore Areas.  Clause 5,
provides that no person shall undertake any reconnaissance operation,  exploration operation or production   operation 
in the  offshore areas except under and in accordance  with the prescribed terms and conditions of the  reconnaissance 
permit,  exploration licence  or production lease granted under  the proposed legislation and the rules made thereunder. 
The clause also enables agencies of the  Central Government  including the  Geological Survey of India, Atomic
Mineral Directorate of Exploration and Research, Naval Hydrographic office, National Institute of  oceanography and
the  National Institute  of  Ocean Technology to carry out  reconnaissance  and  exploration operations without requiring
a permit or license  under the proposed  legislation.  This clause lays down the various requirements  regarding
dissemination of the data generated which the  permitee or licensee  or a lessee has to furnish   and also seeks to
empower the  Central Government to provide for  special measures as may be required for seaward artillery practice  ,
ensuring public safety and interest, defence of India and civil defence , conduct of naval operations and exercises,
national   security and other strategic  considerations.  This clause further ensures that scientific research carried out by
the Central Government  agencies is not fettered by the proposed legislation.
8.2.1    Clause-6  provides that operating rights can be  granted   only to Indian nationals and companies defined under
section -3  of the  Companies Act, 1956 , subject  to the conditions as specified in rules.
8.2.2.   Clause -7 specifies   the conditions under which   operating right once granted    can be prematurely terminated.  
Sub-Clause-(I) of Clause-7 states that 
"Where the Central Government, after consultation with the  administering authority, is of the opinion that it is
expedient in the interest of development and regulation of offshore mineral resources, preservation of natural
environment and prevention of pollution, avoidance of  danger to public health or communication,  ensuring safety of
any offshore structure, or conservation of mineral resources, the Central Government may prematurely terminate any
operating  right in respect of any mineral offshore in any area or part thereof".
 
8.2.3.   Clause-8,  provides that the  Central Government   may  reserve and deserve offshore areas not already held
under any operating right for the purposes of the  Central Government.
8.2.4.   Clause 9, specifies the circumstances in which the Central Government may close any area either in part  or 
whole  covered under any   operating right in the interest of national security including preservation of natural

69th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/69threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:34]
environment and prevention of pollution, danger to public  health and for the conservation of offshore  minerals, etc. 
Sub-Clause-(1) of Clause-9 states :-
"The Central Government may, in the public interest, by order in writing and communicated to the permittee,  licensee
or lessee, as the case may be, close any area either in part or whole, covered under any operating right, for the
preservation of natural environment and prevention of pollution, or to avoid danger to public health, or communication,
or to ensure safety of any offshore structure or platform, or for the conservation of mineral offshore, or for national
security or for any other strategic consideration".
 
8.2..5.  Clause-10  provides that the administering authority shall  declare the  parts of the  offshore areas which shall be 
available for grant   of operating  rights.  The  applications for grant of  operating  rights.  The  applications for grant of
operating     rights received before  such   declaration would be premature.  This clause also provides  that operating
rights shall be granted in standard block of five minutes longitude by five minutes latitude.
8.2.6..  Clause-11-13,  specify the parameters and other requirements for granting operating rights, namely,
reconnaissance permit, exploration license and production   lease  and the period   for  which such operating right may
be granted.  These clauses also contain provisions for renewal of reconnaissance permit and  pre-mature termination of
exploration licence and production lease, etc.
8.2.7.   The Department of Mines informed the Committee that  under  the proposed legislation reconnaissance  permit
is to be granted  for a maximum period  of 2 years with the provision for renewal for another maximum period of 2
years.  Exploration licence  shall be granted  initially for a maximum period of 3 years  with a provision for renewal so
that  the total period of exploration licence  does not  exceed 5 years.   Production lease shall be granted initially for a
period not exceeding 30 years with the provision for renewals  for 20 years.  However, renewal of   exploration licence
and production lease shall not be automatic and the Administering  Authority will take into consideration such factors
like whether or not the licencee/lessee has been conducting exploration/production operations in accordance with the
approved    work programme and the administering Authority is satisfied in this respect.
8.2.8.   The  grant of operating rights shall related to standard size of required shaped blocks, fitting into the pattern of
longitude   and latitude.  The standard block shall have  dimension of 5 minutes latitude and 5 minutes longitude, which
would cover an average area of 83 sq kms.   The grant would cover  more than one standard block so long as they are
contiguous.  The maximum area under reconnaissance permit, exploration licensee  and production lease would cover
blocks of 2 degrees latitude by 2 degrees longitude, 3 minutes latitude by 30 minutes longitude and 15 minutes  latitude
by 15 minutes  longitude, respectively. 
8.2..9.  The proposed legislation would  provide for work programme whereby the applicant for the grant of exploration
licence and production lease would be required to submit a work programme of exploration and production and this will
be an essential pre-requisite for grant of  exploration licence or production lease.  Any deviation from the  approved
work programme would result in the termination of licence or lease, as the case may  be.
8.2.10.Clause-14, provides  the period within  which a holder  of different operating rights shall commence the
operation.
8.2.11.The holder of the reconnaissance permit shall commence work within a period of  six months, the holder of the
exploration licence shall commence work within a period of  one year and the holder of the production lease shall  
commence commercial production within a period of two years from the date of grant.  However, the Central
Government would have powers to relax the above time schedule under conditions to be provided in the Rules to be
framed under the proposed legislation.
8.2.12.Clause-15, seeks  to empower the Central Government to authorise  any person or agency by notification in the
official Gazette  to conduct  survey, research and  diving  operations and scientific investigation in the offshore areas
including any areas covered under operating rights.  This clause also enables the permitee , licensee  or lessee to permit
such persons or agencies to undertake the said investigations in their respective   areas and to render such assistance as
may be necessary for conduct of the investigations.
8.2.13.Clause-16 and 17 alongwith the  First Schedule and the  Second Schedule to the Bill specify the manner and rate
at which royalty and fixed rent shall be paid by the lessee.  In order to provide stability in these rates, the rates of  
royalty   and fixed rent shall not be  enhanced more than   once during any period of three years.
8.2.14.Clause-18,  provides that a lessee  whose production operation extends beyond two hundred nautical miles  from
the base line from which the breadth of the territorial sea is measured shall be required to pay to the  Central
Government  the amount payable to the International Seabed Authority under Article 82 of the United Nations
Convention of   the Law of the Sea, 1982.  This amount  shall be payable in advance in addition to the other  payments
required under the proposed legislation.

69th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/69threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:34]
8.2.15.Clause -19 seeks to make responsible the permitee, licensee , lessee or any  other person undertaking the
reconnaissance operation, exploration operation or production operation to be responsible for the  contravention of
certain provisions, as well as safety and health norms.  The agency undertaking the reconnaissance operation or
exploration operation  without licence, permit or lease shall also be responsible unless such  agencies  prove that the
have taken all reasonable precautions with their means for enforcing the  provisions to prevent such contravention. 
This  clause also seeks to empower the Central Government to declare,  by notification in the  official gazette, the
norms  for  regulating the  safety and health of persons and safety of property engaged in operation.
8.2.16.Clause-20, seeks to provide that the holder of  the operating rights shall observe the provisions of the law for the
time being in force for the prevention and control of  pollution and protection  of marine environment and for
contravention thereof, he shall pay  compensation determined by the administering authority as provided  in this clause. 
This clause also seeks to empower the  Government to prescribe measures to be taken  for prevention and control of
pollution and   protection of marine environment due to activities in offshore  areas.
Sub-clause q of clause 4 specifies that  “pollution of offshore environment” means the introduction by any person,
directly or indirectly, of substances or energy into the offshore environment which results, or is likely to result, in
deleterious effect on living resources and marine life, hazards to human health, hindrance to marine activities, including
fishing and other legitimate uses of the offshore areas and impairment of quality of sea water for use and reduction of
amenities;
8.2.17.Clause-21, makes it binding for the operating  right  holders to comply with the directions issued by  the  Central
Government and administering authority for  conservation and systematic development of offshore minerals,  protection
of marine environment, prevention of pollution, etc.,  and to comply with the directions issued by the competent
authority or Coast Guard  regarding national security,  safety and national integrity.
8.3.      Chapter-III deals with Clause-22 which   seeks to enable  the  Central Government to take immediate action for
violation of the provisions of the  proposed legislation and rules made thereunder by giving power to      enter, inspect,
search  and seiz, arrest etc. to an officer authorised by    the  Central Government and also provides the details of
procedure and other matters related thereto.
8.4. Chapter-IV deals with  offences commencing  from clause 23 to clause 27 covers offences , offences by companies,
place of trial, previous sanction of Central Government for prosecution, offences triable by  Court of Session. 
8.4.1.   Clause-23, provides for  various offences committed under the proposed legislation by individuals and also
provides penalties for such offences.
clause 23 (1) (a) specifies that  Whoever undertakes any reconnaissance operation, exploration operation or production
operation in offshore area without any permit, licence or lease, as the case may be, granted under this Act shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine which may extend to fifty thousand
rupees, or with both.
8.4.2.   Clause-24 seeks to make liable persons in charge or, and responsible to company for the conduct of its business,
subject  to certain safeguards, for any  offence under  the proposed legislation committed by  the company.
8.4.3.Clause-25, provides  that  any persons committing offence under the proposed legislation  or the rules  made
thereunder shall be tried for the offence  in such place  and by such court as the Central Government may direct by 
order published the Official Gazette.
8.4.4.   Clause-26, provides that no prosecution  shall be instituted  against  any person under the proposed legislation
without the previous sanction of the Central Government or such officer or authority as may be authorised by the
Central Government , by order in writing  in this behalf.
8.4.5.   .Clause-27, provides that all offences under proposed legislation shall be triable by the Court of Session.
8.5.      Chapter-V on Civil  liability and adjudication  deals with Clause-28 which  seeks to provide civil liabilities of
the permitee,  licensee or lessee both in case of the  contravention of general terms and conditions imposed by the rules
under the proposed legislation  or the contravention of particular terms and conditions applicable to him.  The maximum
limit of amount payable to the  Central Government for  contravention of general terms and conditions shall not be less
than 5 lakh rupee and may be extended to 1 crore rupees and in case of   the  contravention of particular terms and
conditions it shall not be less than 1 lakh rupees and may be  extended  to 10 lakhs rupees.  This clause also provides
that the authorised officer shall have jurisdiction to hear and decide cases of civil liability and provides details of 
procedure for  disposing of such cases and powers of the authorized officer.
8.6.      Chapter-VI miscellaneous issues  which inter-alia include  extension of enactments  to offshore areas,
Compounding of offences, recovery of certain sums as arrears of land revenue, delegation powers, protection of action
taken in good faith, appeals, power to make rules, relaxation in specific cases, persons to be public  servants, removal of
difficulties.

69th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/69threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:34]
 
8.6.1.   Clause-29, seeks  to enable  the Central Government , by notification in the official Gazette,  to extend any 
enactment for the time being in force in India or any part thereof to the offshore  areas which shall have an effect as if
the offshore area is part of the territory of India   and to make such provision as it may consider necessary for facilitating
the enforcement of such enactment.
8.6.2.   Clause-30, provides for   compounding of offences and also provides that the sum payable in case of
compounding of an offence shall not  exceed the maximum amount  of   the  fine  which   may be imposed   for the
offence   so compounded , and no proceeding  shall be taken against the offender in respect of the offence so
compounded and the offender, if in custody, shall be discharged forthwith.
8.6.3.   Clauses-31,  seeks to enable the Central Government to  make  recovery of licence fee, royalty, fixed rent or
other  sums due to the  Central Government as arrears of land revenue. clause 31 says :-
8.6.4.   Any licence fee, royalty, fixed rent, or other sum due to the Central Government  under this Act or rules made
thereunder or under the terms and conditions of a reconnaissance permit, exploration licence or production lease may,
on a certificate issued by the administering authority, be recovered in the same manner as if it were an arrear of land
revenue and every such sum together with the interest due thereon, shall be the first charge on the assets of the
permittee, licensee or lessee, as the case may be.
8.6.5.   Clause-32, seeks to empower the Central Government to delegate any of the powers exercisable by  it under the
proposed legislation  or any rule made thereunder to any officer or authority subordinate to it by notification the officials
Gazette.
 
8.6.6.   Clause-33, makes    provision for protecting any  person from prosecution or other legal proceedings for the acts
done or intended to be  done in good faith under the proposed legislation or the rules made thereunder.
8.6.7.   Clause-34, provides  that   appeals filed by an aggrieved party against any order made by the administering
authority or any person or agency  exercising the  powers under the proposed legislation may be heard and disposed of 
by the  Central Government .
8.6.8.   Clause-35, empowers  the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the proposed
legislation.
8.6.9.   Clause-36, seeks to empower the Central Government  authorise in any special  case the grant, renewal or   
transfer of any operating  right to any  person in relaxation  of provisions of the proposed legislation.  The clause  also
provides  that the power of relaxation shall  be exercised  with reasons in writing and in the interest of  the  offshore
minerals development.
8.6.10.Clause-37, provides that  every  person appointed or authorised under the proposed legislation for  discharging
duties in pursuance of any provision of the proposed legislation or rules  made thereunder shall be deemed to be  a
public  servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
8.6.11.Clause-38, enables  the Central Government to make  provisions  as may be expedient for removing any
difficulty in giving effect to the provisions of the proposed legislation, by notification in the  official gazette. However,
in order to ensure that this enabling provision is not   used arbitrarily, it is provided that such provisions cannot be made
after the expiry  of three years and also that every order made under this   clause shall be laid before each House of
Parliament.
8.7.      The proposed legislation shall have  provision   for payment of royalty and in order to discourage  the acquisition
of  large areas for speculative  purpose, it shall also  have  provision for payment of fixed rent.  The rates  would be
provided for in this context in the  first and Second Schedules  to the Bill and royalty/rent shall not be enhanced  more 
than once  during  any period  of three  years.
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE
 
1.         The Committee understands that  oceans  cover about 71% of the total surface areas of the earth and are
repository of nature's trove consisting of living and non-living resources, which  have immense potential for catering to
the needs of mankind in the near future.  India has approximately 3.3 million square kilometre of land area with a  coast
line of 8041 kilometre.  The area of the continental shelf (0-200m water depth) is approximately 0.506 million    square
kilometre.  The area of the Exclusive  Economic Zone (200 nautical miles from the shore) is 2.02 million square
kilometre.  Further, in terms of the UN convention of the law of the sea, 1982, the extent of the Continental Margin for
India after delineation up to 350 nautical miles or 100 nautical miles from the 2,500 meter isobath, which ever is more,
will add about 0.80  million square kilometre in addition to the area of the Exclusive Economic  Zone.  In India beach

69th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/69threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:34]
placer deposits have been  economically exploited since long.  The mining and processing of different   minerals
obtained from these  placer   deposits into valuable products are also well established.  India is richy endowed  in
mineral sands on the Eastern and Western Coasts.  Heavy mineral sands containing mostly  ilmenite with some ruitile,
leucoene (a decomposition product of limenite), garnet, zircon, monazite and aluminium silicates like sillimanite and
kyanite occur in isolated  to extensive spreads all along the Indian sea coasts.
2.         During the course of  oral evidence the Department of Mines  informed the Committee  that  the Geological
Survey of India  (Marine Wing) undertakes sea-bed survey within the  Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) of India  for
non-living  resources and investigation relating to the earth-science.  During the   course of survey, Geological Survey
of India have delineated heavy mineral  sands comprising  ilmenite,  rutile, zicon, Silimanite monazite and granite off
the cost of Orissa, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala and Karnataka; phosphatised sedimentary  in water depths  of 200-1000
meters off Gujarat coast , high grade lime mud deposit in water  depths of 180-1200 meters off Gujarat coast, Oolites
and  calcareous sands in water depth of 50-200 meters of Maharashtra and  Gujarat Coasts, high grade  lime mud
deposit in  water  depths of 100-200 meters of Andhra coasts, phosphatised sediments in  water  depths of 100-200
meters  South east of  Chennai, Micro manganese nodules in water depth of  2800-4300  meters in Lakshadweep Sea,
high grade calcareous sands in shallow offshore and lagoons  of Lakshadweep  and  calcareous sediments in water
depths of 1000 meter west of  Andaman and  Nicobar  Group of   Islands. As per the preliminary  survey done by the
Geological Survey of India, the minerals which are likely to be found include ilmenite with some rutile, leucoxena ( a
decomposition product of ilmenite), granite , zircon, monazite, aluminium silicates like sillimanite and  kyanite, micro
manganese nodule, lime mud phosphates, etc. Under the legislation, however, all the minerals are being covered.
3.         The Committee was given to  understand  that  the   need to have a proper legal framework for regulation and
development of  minerals  occurring  in the offshore areas. i.e. territorial waters, continental shelf, exclusive economic
zone and other maritime zones of India. Replying to the Committee's  query  whether  the existing  legal framework on
the subject viz.  the Mines and Minerals ( Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 (MMDR Act) and the Territorial
Waters, Continental Shelf, exclusive Economic Zone and other  Maritime Zone Act, 1976 proved  deficient for making
rules for  development of offshore areas in a scientific and  systematic manner so much so that the need of separate  and
fresh legislation was felt the Department of Mines  stated that  in May 1993 a working group  was constituted  headed
by the Joint Secretary, Department of  Mines for finalizing the legislation for offshore areas.  The working group was 
asked  to suggest  a suitable legislation and rules  for  regulating, prospecting  and mining in the  territorial waters,
continental shelf AND EEZ  of  India after examining the existing legislation on the  subject, namely,  the Mines and
Minerals  ( Regulation and Development) Act,  1957 , the  Territorial Waters, Continental  Shelf, Exclusive Economic
Zone and other Maritime Zones Act, 1976 and other related matters.     The  Ministry  of Law  had advised that  if by
virtue of  special requirements  of minerals in the  offshore areas, it is considered necessary to lay down  conditions or
restrictions which are at variance with the existing statutory provisions in  the MMDR Act, 1957, then under such
circumstances, it would not be legally permissible to do so without first  amending the Principal Act.  The features 
unique to development of mineral resources in  the offshore   areas  were different    in the environment, the nature of
operations and  the equipments required and hence it was  felt  that rules framed under the MMDR Act would   not be 
adequate in  the matter. The other possibility was framing rules under   section 15 of the Territorial  Waters, Continental
Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and other Maritime Zones   Act, 1976.  Maritime Zones Act is in the nature of
umbrella legislation and  therefore if rules were to be framed under this Act, the provisions normally  included in the
Act were to be necessarily provided for in the  rules.  This could be  a doubtful course of action, as it would amount to
excessive delegation through  rules.  Accordingly, therefore, the Working Group came to the conclusion that it would
be  advisable to   frame a new  Act  for mineral exploitation in Offshore areas, which has  formed the  basis of the
Offshore Areas Mineral (Development and Regulation) Bill.    Further more the purpose of the Territorial Waters,
Continental Shelfs, Exclusive Economic Zones and other Maritime  Zone Act, 1976 is  mainly to define  and determine
the limit of the territorial water continental  shelf, exclusive    economic zone and other maritime zone of India and to
regulate certain other  limited matters relating to them.  The said Act   does  not specifically provides for  grant of
reconnaissance permit exploration license  or production lease  for the  purposes  of  extracting minerals from sea land. 
The Mines and Minerals  ( Development and Regulation) act, 1957 was enacted mainly for  the purpose of development
and regulation of mines and minerals under the  land only.  It was  not intended to regulate and develop the mines and
minerals in the offshore  areas.  The development and regulation of mineral resources in the  territorial water,
continental shelfs, exclusive economic zones and other maritime zones  need a different expertise, technical ability  and
separate methodology of operation performed or carried out by the use of vessel, erection, appliance, artificial island
and platforms, etc.  The measurement of wave tides, hydrography etc.  are required   for which separate conditions of
licenses and permits are  required to regulate the licenses, permits and leases of quite different nature   specifically for

69th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/69threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:34]
the purpose of offshore areas.   The  specific provision by way of the Offshore  Areas  Mineral ( Development and
Regulation) Bill, 2001 are required  to regulate the exploration and production  of mines and minerals in  offshore  areas
which  are not contained in Mines  and Minerals (  Development and Regulation) Act, 1957.  The  provisions of the Bill
as provided  in clause 3 (2)  thereof are in addition to and not in derogation of any other law for the time being  in force. 
As such, the provisions are within the  frame work of the existing  legislation and do  not put any hindrance in the
administration of other enactments.   The representatives of  the Legislative  Department  endorsed the view point of 
the Department of Mines .   
4.         The  Committee feels that in order to develop the offshore areas scientifically and systematically it is pertinent to
have a proper legal frame-work for regulation and development of minerals occurring in the offshore areas, that is,
territorial waters, continental shelf, exclusive economic zone and other maritime zones of India. The proposed
legislation would enable streamlining of mineral exploration and development in the offshore areas and ensure
systematic and scientific exploitation of mineral reserves (except petroleum, natural gas and hydrocarbon resources) for
attracting private investment in the mineral sector.
5.         The Committee  observe  that  under the law of the sea convention, 1982 , the coastal states  are entitled to
territorial sea (12 nautical miles), contiguous zone (24 nautical miles) exclusive economic zone (200 nautical miles) and
continental shelf (200/350  nautical miles) drawn from normal base-line, which is the low-water line along the coast,
over which the coastal States have specific   rights and Jurisdiction, including for exploring and exploiting the natural  
resources.  The Conventional came into effect on 16
th November, 1994 and became part of the International Law,  India
has ratified the Law  of the Sea Convention on 29th June, 1995.  The Department of  Mines  informed the Committee
that   Article 297  of the Constitution of   India was amended by the 40th Amendment to the Constitution and according
to amended Article 297, all lands, minerals and other things of  value  underlying the ocean within the territorial water,
or the continental shelf, or the exclusive economic zone of  India,  shall vest in the Union and be held for the purposes
of the Union.  In 1976, the  Parliament passed the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic  Zone and
other  maritime zones  Act, 1976 delineating therein  in the limit of the zones and  rights and obligations in maritime
zones.  Entry 54 of List-I of  the Constitution gives powers to the Central Government for  regulation of mines and
mineral development to the  extent to which such regulation and development under the control of the Union is declared
by Parliament by  law to be expedient in the public interest.  The Bill has been introduced accordingly.
6.         The Committee is of the  view  that  the proposed legislation  have sufficient legal  frame-work for making rules
necessary for development and regulation of offshore areas . Some of highlights which  takes care of all required legal-
framework  are as follows: —
There will be three types of operating rights, namely, Reconnaissance permit (non exclusive), exploration licence and
production lease.
The offshore areas will be released periodically for grant of operating rights only after inter-departmental consultation
with the Ministries/Departments  which have parallel interest in the offshore areas.
Exploration licence or production lease will be granted to any person over an area only upon submission of a work
programme for the exploration operation, or development of the mineral deposits in that area. This would ensure that
exploration and mining operations in the offshore areas are conducted on a scientific basis with due regard to
conservation.
No operating right shall be granted to any person unless such  person is an Indian national or a company as defined in
sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).
The holder of the reconnaissance  permit shall commence work within a period of six months, the holder of the
exploration licence shall commence work within a period of one year and the holder of the production lease shall
commence commercial production within a period of two years from the date of grant.
Reconnaissance permit will be granted for a maximum period of two years with the provision for renewal for another
maximum period of two years. Exploration licence shall be granted initially for a  maximum period of three years with a
provision for renewal so that the total period of exploration does not exceed five years. Production lease shall be granted
initially for a period not exceeding thirty years with the provision for renewal for twenty years.
The Central Government is being authorised by notification in the Official  Gazette to prescribe norms for the safety and
health of persons and safety and security of  property in offshore areas.
There is a provision  for payment of royalty and in order to discourage the speculative acquisition of large areas, there 
is also  provision for payment of fixed rent. The rate will be prescribed by notification, with the proviso that  royalty and
fixed rent shall not be enhanced more than once during any period of three years.
In order to safeguard defence and security of the country,  the provisions of the proposed legislation shall be in addition

69th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/69threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:34]
to and not in derogation of any other law for the time being in force in the offshore areas.
There is  an enabling clause for making rules to address problems of pollution of offshore environment and security and
safety of marine life including fin and shell fish, coral and other species. Every holder of the operating rights shall be
liable for any pollution or damage to marine environment resulting from  activities in the offshore areas.
7.         The Committee notes and endorses the contention  of the Department of Mines  that  the proposed  legislation  
would be able to  provide  for regulation and development of mineral resources in the territorial waters, continental
shelf, exclusive economic zone and other maritime zones of India  and to provide for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.  The Bill when enacted would help in streamlining mineral exploration and development in the
offshore areas for attracting private investment in the mineral sector.
8.         The Committee is of the opinion that  the procedure for grant of operating rights in the  proposed Bill is
considered reasonably flexible.  The Offshore Areas are repository of variety of natural  resources.  In order to exclude
overlapping of granting of operating rights   for exploration and mining of non-petroleum mineral resources   and
petroleum  resources, or for excluding areas rich in fishing     and for excluding areas sensitive  from security and
strategic point of view,  it  is  necessary    that the areas which  would be released for grant of operating rights under the
proposed legislation, are  released periodically in consultation with  all the concerned Departments/Ministries.  In
particular, the procedure for grant of reconnaissance permit is totally flexible, since reconnaissance permit is envisaged
as a non-exclusive permit and   any number of persons could be granted reconnaissance permit over the same area or
even for the same minerals.
9.         The Committee  notes that the offshore areas  would be released periodically for grant  of operating rights for
systematic development of mineral resources of the offshore area.  In order to exclude  overlapping of granting of
operating rights for exploration/mining of non petroleum mineral resources and petroleum resources,   or for excluding 
areas   rich in fishing , the  areas would  be notified for  grant in consultation  with the Ministry of Petroleum  and
Natural Gas, the Ministry of Commerce and Industry, and the Department of  Animal Husbandry and Dairying. 
Similarly, in order to  ensuing that the areas used  by the Indian Navy, Coast Guard, Indian Space Research
Organisation (ISRO) for exercises/firing  etc. and areas for traffic separation routes, maritime safety routes and the like
are  not notified for grant.  Consultation would be done with the Ministry of Defence before  notifying areas for grant.
10.       Replying to  the Committee's query regarding to  what  extent the proposed  legislation provides  encouragement 
to private sector  in the field of  offshore  areas the Department of Mines stated that   the Bill has been formulated to
provide  a legal  frame  work for entry of private sector in the offshore areas.  The Offshore Areas Mineral (
Development and Regulation ) Bill, 2001 provide equal emphasis on the development and  regulation aspects of
minerals as both aspects are essential.  The Mines and Mineral ( Development and Regulation) Act, 1957  also has
similar provisions for  ensuring conservation and regulation measures.  Provisions like, power of the  Central
Government to authorize entry, inspection, search and seizure, power to issue directions for conservation and systematic
development of offshore  Minerals, pollution, marine environment, coastal erosion, etc. are essential in the  national
interest and in the interest of mineral  conservation.  The proposed Bill  also  provides  that notwithstanding anything 
contrary contained in the legislation,  if the Central Government is  of the opinion that in the interest of offshore
mineral  development, it is necessary to do so,  it may in any specific case, authorize grant, renewal or transfer of any
operating right to any person on such terms and  conditions as it  may specify in this behalf.  This enabling clause
underlines the  intention of the Central Government that  development of minerals in the offshore areas is its primary
concern.
11.       The Committee observes that  the Offshore Areas Mineral ( Development and Regulation) Bill, 2001 empowers
the Central Government to make rules in case of pollution of offshore   environment and  security and  safety  of  
marine life including fin and  shell fish,  coral and other species.  Sub-clause 2 of  the clause  20 of the proposed Bill 
provides that  every holder of the operating right shall be liable for any pollution or damage to marine environment
resulting from his activities in the offshore areas.  Once the law is enacted, the rules would be framed in consultation
with the Ministries/Departments concerned.
12.       The representatives of  Legislation Department , Ministry of Law, justice and Company Affairs  impressed upon
the Committee that proposed legislation adequately safeguards the national interest in  all respect.      in order to
safeguard defence and security   interests of the  country, the  provisions  of   the  legislation are in  addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being in force in the offshore areas.  Further, the offshore areas would  be
released periodically for grant of operating rights only after inter-Departmental consultations with the 
Ministries/Departments ( including the  Ministry of  Defence)  who  have parallel interest in the offshore areas, and in 
order to  ensure that the areas   used by Indian Navy Coast Guard, etc. for  exercising, the areas for traffic separation
routes,  and maritime safety routes, are not notified. 

69th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/69threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:34]
13.       The Committee   understands that the  under proposed legislation   the reconnaissance permit would be a non-
exclusive permit, any number of persons could be granted reconnaissance permit over the same area or  even for the
same minerals.  Hence the question of determining priority will not arise in cases of grant of reconnaissance permits, nor
will be reconnaissance permit holder have any claim of priority for grant  of an exploration  licence.  No exploration
licence or production lease could be granted to any person over an area unless  he submits a work  programme for   the
exploration operation or development of mineral deposits in that area.  This incorporated to ensure that exploration and
mining operations in the offshore area   are  Government shall not grant an operating right to any person unless  such a
person is an Indian national or a company as defined in Section 3(1)  of the Companies Act, 1956.  Employment of  
foreigners by the operating right holder  shall be subject to separate Government clearance.  Production lease for atomic
minerals would only be granted after consultation with the  Department of Atomic Energy of the Government of India.
14.       The Department of Mines  informed Committee that proposed  legislation  provides for an enabling provision
whereby the Central Government,  by notification in the official gazette, may prescribe   norms for the safety and health
of persons , and safety and security of property in offshore areas. The Department of Mines further  informed
Committee that   proposed legislation shall  have an  enabling  provision for authorising  the framing of detailed rules by
the Central Government in case of pollution of offshore  environment and security and safety of marine life including 
fin and shell fish, coral and  other species.  Every holder of the operating rights shall be liable for any  pollution  or
damage to marine environment resulting from his activities in the offshore areas.
15.       The Department of Mines  impressed on the  Committee that   the opinion/comments of Departments and
Ministries in the Government of India , having stakes  in the offshore areas  were consulted and their  opinion were
sought while discussing and finalising the Bill.   The Department of Mines  had  consulted the Ministries of Defence,
Environment and Forests, External  Affairs, Petroleum and Natural Gas,  Commerce and Industry and  the 
Departments  of    Ocean Development, Atomic  Energy , Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Science and Technology,
Legal Affairs  and the Legislative Department  before formulating the Offshore Areas Mineral ( Development
Regulation)  Bill, 2001.   The process of consultation with the above  Ministries/Departments   has  continued for more
than two years.  There were no difference of opinion, while there have been suggestions for  modifications in the 
drafting of the Bill.  The suggestions given by the different Ministries/Departments have been incorporated in the
proposed Bill.
16.       Justifying  the criterion  for royalty and fixed rent as  indicated  in Schedule -I and Schedule-II of the proposed
legislation the Department of Mines apprised the Committee  that  the working group had felt that the offshore areas
legislation should contain the necessary enabling provision in order to discourage acquisition of   large areas for
speculative purposes.  It had also recommended that  in order to  avoid litigation, the rates of royalty for minerals on
offshore areas may be the   same.  Accordingly the provisions regarding royalty may be made on par with the provisions
in the Mines and Minerals ( Development and Regulation) Act, 1957.The rates of royalty under section 9 of the Mines
and Minerals ( Development and Regulation ) Act, 1957 have been notified last on 12
th September, 2000 and the rates
of royalty in Offshore Areas Mineral ( Development and Regulation) Bill, 2001 have been indicated at the same level.
Fixed rent  is basically the minimum royalty expected from a lease hold.  Rate of fixed rent for a standard block of 5
minutes by  5 minutes (covering an areas  of approximately 83 sq km. has been based on the  expected minimum
production from a standard block.  The representatives of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law, Justice and
Company Affairs endorsed  the view points of the Department of Mines.
17.       Having heard the Secretaries,  Department  of Mines and  Legislative  Department, Ministry of  Law  Justice and
Company  Affairs and the  clarifications given by them to the various queries and having considered the  papers
furnished by the Ministry, the Committee agrees with the proposal of the  Department of Mines that   the proposed bill 
rightly  intends to provide for  development and regulation  of mineral resources in the  territorial waters continental
shelf, exclusive economic zone and other maritime zones of India and to provide for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
18.       The Committee in its meeting held on 5
th April, 02 considered    and   adopted the Offshore Areas Mineral 
(Development and Regulation) Bill, 2001 with the following  amendments :-
Clause-I i.e.  the Enacting Formula and the Title, were adopted, with changes of consequential nature, namely 2001and
Fifty-second   to be substituted by  2002 and  Fifty-third,  respectively.
Clause-12 sub-clause-I (b) i.e. line 46, the word  basis is to be deleted  as the words parameters  and basis  connotes  
the  same meaning ;
Clause-13 sub-clause-(I) (b)  i.e. Line -14 the word  basis is to be deleted  as the words parameters  and basis  connotes  
the  same meaning ;

69th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/69threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:34]
Clause-13 (I)  Proviso (i)  i.e. line-35 the word "land"   is to be substituted  by word  "offshore areas "
  19.     The Committee therefore, recommends that   the Offshore Areas Mineral (Development and Regulation) Bill,
2001 as amended  to the Parliament for adoption.
Annexure
ANNEXURE-I
 
Note of Dissent Given by Shri Jibon Roy and Shri Sunil Khan
 
While agreeing with the general purpose  of the  Offshore Areas Mineral ( Development and Regulation) Bill, 2001, we
do not agree with the majority  view of the Committee on  specific points.   Our views on the Bill is as under :-
"In view of  the fact that  Offshore operation and exploration  carries  considerable security  risk we  feel that   licencing 
for such exploration  and operation should be restricted to Government Department or Pubic Sector .  We are  of the
further view   that  while granting such licences, consultation with the  concerned  state Government  should be made
mandatory ".
MINUTES OF THE MEETING
 
V
FIFTH    MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on 5
th   April, 02   in Committee Room `A’,  Ground Floor, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
Shri Ramdas Agarwal   —Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
Prof. M.M. Aggarwal
Smt.  Saroj Dubey
Shri Faguni Ram
Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
Shri Nagendra  Narth Ojha
Shri Jibon Roy
Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
 
LOK SABHA
 
Smt. Jayashree  Banerjee
Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
Shri A.C. Jose
Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
Shri Sunil Khan
Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari
Shri Manjay Lal
Shri A. Narendra
Shri Ananta Nayak
Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
Shri Basangouda R. Patil
Shri Uttamarao Patil
Shri Ramanand Singh

69th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/69threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:34]
Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
Shri Beni Prasad Verma
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
 
WITNESSES
Representatives  of  Department  of Mines
Dr. A.K. Kundra, Secretary
Shri  S.C.  Tripathi, Addl. Secretary
Shri S.P. Gupta,  Joint Secretary
Smt.  Aditi S. Ray, Director
Shri   S.S.  Mehra,   Director
Shri A.K. Bhandari, Director
 
Representatives of Legislative Department (Ministry of Law, Justice & Company Affairs)
 
Shri N.L. Mewena, JS&LC
Shri S.D. Singh, DLC
Shri K. Biswal, ALC
 
Representatives of Geological Survey of India  (GSI)
 
Shri D. Chatterjee, Sr. Director General
Shri A.K. Basu,   Deputy.  Director General
Shri P.C. Srivastava, Director
Representatives of Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM)
Shri K.S. Raju, Controller General
Dr. K.K.  Chatterjee, Chief  Mineral Economist.
 
2.         At the outset  the Chairman welcomed the Members of  the  Committee and apprised  them of  the agenda for the
meeting.
3.         ***                                                      ****                                        ******
4.         Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed  the Secretary and representatives of the  Department of Mines ( Ministry of
Coal and Mines) and Legislative Department ( Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs).   After that  the
Chairman requested the Secretary  to   commence   his presentation  on  the Offshore Areas Mineral (Development and
Regulation) Bill, 2001
5.         The Secretary , Department of Mines explained   the salient features of  the Offshore Areas Mineral
(Development and Regulation) Bill, 2001,  and necessity for  bringing the proposed  Bill.  After the  presentation the
Members asked various  questions relating to the Bill and the Secretary    and his colleagues   responded  accordingly. 
Joint Secretary   and Legislative Counsel made certain clarification with regard to legal aspects of the Bill.
 
Witnesses then withdraw.
6.         The Committee then adjourned  for lunch 1.30 p.m.   to re-assemble again at 3.00 p.m.  for   clause by clause 
considerable of the  Bill.
 
7.         In the  post lunch session , the Committee  re-assemble at  3.00 p.m. and took up  clause by clause  considerable
of the Bill.  The Committee considered    and   adopted the Offshore Areas Mineral  (Development and Regulation) Bill,
2001 with the following  amendments :-
Clause-I i.e.  the Enacting Formula and the Title, were adopted, with changes of consequential nature, namely 2001and
Fifty-second   to be substituted by  2002 and  Fifty-third,  respectively.
 

69th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/69threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:34]
Clause-12 sub-clause-I (b) i.e. line 46, the word  basis is to be deleted  as the words parameters  and basis  connotes  
the  same meaning ;
Clause-13 sub-clause-(I) (b)  i.e. Line -14 the word  basis is to be deleted  as the words parameters  and basis  connotes  
the  same meaning ;
    Clause-13 (I)  Proviso (i)  i.e. line-35 the word "land"   is to be substituted  by word  "offshore          areas "
8.         However, two Members, namely, Shri Jibon Roy and Shri Sunil Khan Submitted their note of the dissent,
whereupon, the  Committee decided to be append  the note to  the Committee's Report on the Bill.
 
            A verbatim record of the meeting was kept.
 
9.         The Committee then adjourned at  5.00 P.M.
 
 
*** Relates to other matters                                                                            
VI
 
SIXTH     MEETING
 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on 8
th   April, 02   in  Room  No. 63,  First  Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
Shri Ramdas Agarwal   — Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
Smt.  Saroj Dubey
Shri Faguni Ram
 
LOK SABHA
 
Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
Shri Nepal Chandra Das
Dr. S. Jagathrakshakan
Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
Shri Brijlal Khabri
Shri Deepak Kumar
Dr. K. Malaisamy
Shri Uttamarao Patil
Shri P. Rajendran
Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar,  Additional  Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
 
2.         At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them of the agenda for the
meeting
3.         The Committee , thereafter , took up the draft report on  the Offshore Areas Mineral (Development and 
Regulation) Bill, 2001 for consideration .  After a brief discussion the draft report was adopted.

69th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/69threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:34]
4.         The Committee then adjourned at  3.30  P.M.          
 