            
  
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2015/ Shravana, 1937 (Saka) 
 
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON  259 TH  REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON REVIEW OF THE IMPLEMENTATION 
OF KHADI AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES COMMISSION 
(KVIC) ACT, 1956  
 PERTAINING TO  
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES    
      
 (PRESENTED TO  THE RAJYA SABHA ON 5TH  August, 2015) 
( LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 5th  august, 2015) 
267 
 

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2015/ Shravana, 1937 (Saka) 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON  259 TH  REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON REVIEW OF THE IMPLEMENTATION 
OF KHADI AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES COMMISSION 
(KVIC) ACT, 1956  
 PERTAINING TO  
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES    
      
 (PRESENTED TO  THE RAJYA SABHA ON 5 TH  AUGUST, 2015) 
( LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 5TH  AUGUST, 2015) 
 

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ……………………(i)  
2. INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………(ii) 
3. REPORT ……………………………………………………….   1 
(i) CHAPTER-I 
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by 
the Ministry………………………………………………   2-6 
 
CHAPTER-II 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do es not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies …   7-10 
 
(ii) CHAPTER-III 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which th e Committee 
has either not accepted the replies of the Ministry  or has asked the 
Ministry to review its replies……………………………  11-16 
 
(iii) CHAPTER-IV 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which fi nal replies of 
the Ministry have not been received…………………….  17-20 
 
 4. *MINUTES ………………………………………………………………… 
                  
   
   ______________________________ 
* TO BE APPENDED AT PRINTING STAGE 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THECOMMITTEE 
(CONSTITUTED  W.E.F.  1 ST   SEPTEMBER,  2014) 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
1. Shri K.C. Tyagi  _   Chairman  
2. Shri Ramdas Athawale 
3. Shri Vivek Gupta  
4. Shri Bhupinder Yadav 
5. Shri T. K. Rangarajan 
6. Shri Narendra Budania 
7. Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
8. Shri Pramod Tiwari 
9. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas 
10. Dr. Chanderpal  Singh Yadav 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
11. Shri Deepak Adhikari (Dev) 
12. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer 
13. Shri Birendra Kumar Chaudhary 
14. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque 
15. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
16. Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena 
17. Smt. Poonamben Maadam 
18. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
19. Shri S. P. Muddahanumegowda 
20. Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
21. Shri M. Srinivasa Rao 
22. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
23. Shri Konda Veshweshwar Reddy 
24. Shri Y. V. Subba Reddy 
25. Shri Rajkumar Saini 
26. Shri B. Senguttuvan 
27. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
28. Shri Rameshwar Teli 
29. Smt. Savitri Thakur 
30. Smt. Dev Varma (Moon Moon Sen) 
31. Shri Rajan Vichare 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
 Shri A.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
 Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
 Shri Roshan Lal, Joint Director 
 Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 

 (i) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
  
  
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliame ntary Standing 
Committee on Industry, having been authorized by th e Committee, hereby 
present this Two Hundred Sixty Seventh Report on Ac tion Taken Note 
furnished by the Ministry of Micro, Small and Mediu m Enterprises on the 
recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hu ndred Fifty Ninth 
Report on Review of the implementation of Khadi and  Village Industries 
Commission (KVIC) Act, 1956.  
 
2. I thank the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises for 
furnishing the Action Taken Note on the recommendat ions contained in the 
Committee’s Two Hundred Fifty Ninth Report. 
  
3. The Committee in its meeting held on 30 
th  July, 2015 considered and 
adopted the report. 
 
  
 
  
K.C. Tyagi 
                          
Chairman                                                                                   
                Department -related Parliamentary  
                                                                     Standing  Committee   on    Industry  
 
New Delhi 
July, 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 

REPORT 
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with  the Action 
Taken by the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium En terprises on the 
recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hu ndred Fifty Ninth 
Report on Review of the implementation of Khadi and  Village Industries 
Commission (KVIC) Act, 1956  pertaining to the Ministry of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises. 
 
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Micro, 
Small and Medium Enterprises in respect of the reco mmendations contained 
in the Report. These have been categorized as follows:  
 
Chapter –I   The recommendations/observations, which have bee n accepted 
by the Ministry. 
 The Committee is pleased to observe that the Minis try has accepted its 
recommendations as mentioned in the Chapter – I of the Report. 
 
Chapter -II   The recommendations/observations which the Commit tee does 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies. 
 In respect of these recommendations the Committee is convinced with 
the logic and explanations advanced by the Ministry and therefore do not want 
to pursue them for the present. 
 
Chapter -III    The recommendations/observations in respect of w hich the 
Committee has either not accepted replies of the Mi nistry or has asked the 
Ministry to review its reply. 
 The Committee expresses its concern over the non-i mplementation of 
recommendations contained in Chapter – III and desi res that the Ministry 
should furnish logical explanations therefor. 
 
Chapter -IV    The recommendations/observations in respect of wh ich final 
replies of the Ministry have not been received. 
 In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has 
either furnished the interim replies or couched its language in vague terms like 
noted for compliance/guidance, therefore, the Commi ttee desires that the 
Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in respe cts of recommendations 
categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to the poin t, as per the intention and 
spirit of the recommendations of the Committee. 
 
3. The details of the ATR are being discussed in the succeeding pages. 
 
 

-2- 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
Recommendations/observations, which have been accep ted by the 
Ministry  
       
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee also recommends that like MSME Develo pment Act, 
the definition of  ‘Fixed per Capita’ investment sh ould only include plant and 
machinery and not the cost of land, work shed etc. 
(Para 31) 
Action Taken  
 
Agreed. As per the MSMED Act, a micro enterprise  is an enterprise 
where investment in plant and machinery [original c ost excluding land and 
building and the items specified by the Ministry of Small Scale Industries vide 
its notification No. S.O. 1722(E) dated October 5, 2006 does not exceed Rs. 
25 lakh. The same provision may be replicated for t he ‘Fixed per Capita’ 
investment for PMEGP. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee found an anomalous situation exists i n the Act as 
powers of the Commission under Section 4(1) have be en delegated to the 
CEO under Sections 5 (1), (1A) of the same Act and not through any 
subordinate legislation.    
(Para 36) 
Action Taken  
 
Agreed. The proposed amendment of the KVIC Act would address the issue.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee is of the opinion that the intent of the Act and its 
provisions is abundantly clear. The power of genera l and not specific 
supervision is given to Commission in order to ensu re its administrative 
autonomy required to facilitate its mandate. As the  Commission meets once a 
month and by implication cannot supervise day-today  affairs of the 
Commission, the Act itself empowers the CEO to supervise the day to day  

 
-3- 
 
affairs. In view of Sections 4(1), 5(1) and (1A) an d Rules 10, 11 and 12 made 
by the Central Government under Section 26, the Com mittee feels that the 
demarcation is fairly clear that Commission is esse ntially a policy making 
body and powers bestowed on it are incidental. 
 
(Para 37) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
Agreed. The proposed amendment of the KVIC Act woul d address the 
issue. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
Section 27 of the Act prescribe the Commissions pow ers to frame 
regulations thereby setting broad parameters of adm inistrative policies in 
consonance of its objectives, financial and human r esources. The CEO is 
required to carry out the administration and superv ision as per the broad 
administrative policies determined by the Commissio n through Regulations.   
The Committee is of the view that general superinte ndence on the part of 
Commission in its day-today affairs as envisaged in  Section 4(1A) is 
oxymoron. Committee accordingly recommends that tha t word “day to day” 
should be deleted. Similarly, General Superintenden ce on the part of Chief 
Executive Officer under Section 5(1) too should be deleted and consequential 
changes be made in the Act. As part of general supe rintendence, the 
Commission though may seek information from the CEO  on general 
administrative matters. 
(Para 38) 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
Agreed. The proposed amendment of the KVIC Act woul d address the 
issue. 
 
 
 

 
 
-4- 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee noted the constraints in achieving th e financial 
autonomy and also observed the reluctance in attain ing it. It was stated that 
the KVIC is basically a promotional body and does n ot engage in any 
commercial activities, the question of attainment o f financial sustainability in 
the present set up is too remote.  Instead it was l eft to the planners of our 
country to consider whether to change the present r ole of KVIC from a 
promotional body to a commercial body. 
(Para 44) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
Agreed. The Ministry agrees with the views of the C ommittee that role 
of KVIC should be changed from a promotional body t o a commercial body. 
The KVIC as of today is completely dependent on the  Government of India 
for operating the schemes of the Ministry through P lan funds and the entire 
salaries of KVIC are paid from the non-plan funds. However, KVIC should 
make efforts to raise resources and grow as a finan cial autonomous body, and 
to become a self-sustaining organization. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Ministry should persuade KVIC to leverage its p osition with financial 
institutions like SIDBI, NABARD, National Backward Class Finance & 
Development Corporation, National SC Finance Corpor ation, National ST 
Finance Corporation, National Minorities Developmen t Finance Corporation, 
Rashtriya Mahila Kosh etc. to raise finances for it s schemes.  For which the 
KVIC will have to evolve a sound business model. Th e Committee 
recommends that Rules 32, 33 and 34 should be made more substantive.  
(Para 49) 
 
Action Taken  
 
Agreed and noted 
 

-5- 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee is of the view that despite pronounce d objective of the 
Act, the KVIC may not be able to attain full administrative autonomy unless it 
attains financial autonomy.  It must shed its reluc tance and evolve into a self- 
sustaining organization. 
(Para 50) 
 
Action Taken  
 
Agreed and noted 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee may remind that the Khadi as a concep t evolved 
independent of government support. It was a tool an d symbol of protest and 
not a captive vocation of Government.  To continue to make it dependent of 
grants from the Government will defeat the very pur pose and message of 
khadi. 
(Para 54) 
Action Taken  
 
Agreed and noted 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee expresses serious concern over the er osion of statutory 
institutions prescribed under the Act. The National  KVI Board does not meet 
as per the provisions of Act. The Zonal Committee a re not fully formed 
despite Committee’s recommendation that same should  be notified within 30 
days. The Committee is persuaded to wonder if these  bodies are superfluous 
or have been relegated to redundance. In absence of  representation of States 
and Khadi Institutions, the Zonal Committee cannot fulfill its mandate.  In this 
regard the Committee recalls that the initial propo sal in the Act did not 
include the Khadi Institution and it was only on Co mmittee’s 
recommendations that the Khadi Institutions were in cluded in the Act. 
However, despite, provision in the Act, the Government does not comply. 
 (Para 75) 

-6- 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
Based on the letter no. 6(3)/2012-KVI-II dated 27.0 2.2014 of Ministry 
of MSME: for six geographical zones, the Zonal comm ittees have been 
formed by   KVIC on 28.02.2014 (the addendum S.O. N o. 1716 dated 
31.07.2012) making the CEO/secretaries of State KVI Bs as the members in 
the Zonal Committees. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should include 
the details of the activities/meetings/ agenda of t he boards/ committees/other 
bodies created under this Act. The Annual Report sh ould also include the 
Rules and Regulation made under relevant Sections of this Act.   
(Para 78) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
Every significant development and achievements of K VI sector are 
mentioned in the Annual Report of KVIC very coherently and cogently. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

-7- 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do es not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee takes note of the list of Village ind ustry included in the 
Schedule framed under Section 2 (h). The Committee is of the opinion that 
States should be given flexibility in deciding the Village Industry. This will 
facilitate greater coverage of the Village Industry  schemes and make them 
more relevant to local traditional crafts, skills and employment needs. 
(Para 32) 
Action Taken  
 
Even though the definition under the act is suffici ently flexible, 
however, the States may be given the option to incl ude more relevant and 
traditional crafts to make it more broad-based and far reaching. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee is of the view that the KVIC has neit her been given the 
financial autonomy nor was in position to attain fi nancial autonomy despite 
provisions in the Act.  It has to seek approval fro m the Government at every 
stage. The Committee is of the view that KVIC shoul d be allowed to re-
appropriate funds from Khadi and Village Industry funds, under the intimation 
to the Ministry. KVIC should also be allowed to spe nd the resources 
generated by it. 
(Para 46) 
Action Taken  
 
Scheme-wise funds are allocated to KVIC in the Budg et Estimates of 
the Ministry as per the demand of KVIC and the fund s released to KVIC on 
quarterly basis after assessing the performance and according to the guidelines 
of Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. Funds are also re-
appropriated in the last quarter according to the u tilization of funds and KVIC 
demand. KVIC allocates the funds schemes-wise and State/UTs-wise. 

-8- 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 
The Committee is also of the view that the Governme nt should release 
the Funds in time, but it should be the obligation of the KVIC of keeping the 
Government informed of the expenditure out of annua l Budgetary Grants. 
However, it is essential that KVIC even as a promot ional organisation for a 
commercially viable vocation like Khadi and Village Industries, must leverage 
itself to generate its own finances. 
(Para 47) 
 
 
Action Taken  
 
The Ministry supports the proposal of the Committee . KVIC has been 
implementing Khadi Reform and Development Programme , wherein various 
activities have been envisaged for generation of re sources, and to make KVIC 
and the KVI institutions self-sustaining. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
 
The Committee accepts the assertion that Section 16  of the Act does 
dilute the autonomous character of the KVIC to a great extent. The Committee 
also takes note  of an unprecedented arrangement un der Sections 10 and 11 
where 51 Member National KVI Board chaired by the M inister concern and 
largely consisting of Secretaries of relevant Ministries of Government of India 
will advise a 13 Member KVIC of which 10 Members are part-time Members. 
The Committee wonders if such an arrangement exists  anywhere in the 
Government where a larger body headed by the execut ive Minister renders 
advice to a smaller Commission under the administrative and financial control 
of that Ministry. 
 
(Para 59) 
 
 
 

-9- 
 
Action Taken  
 
(i) The Section 16 will be reviewed under the compr ehensive 
amendment of the KVIC Act. 
  
(ii) It is felt that the NKVIB being the advisory b ody should be 
involved in advising the Government rather than the KVI Commission. The  
suggestion of the Committee to reduce the size of t he NKVIB may be 
considered and the number of participants as members can be reduced suitably 
during the aforesaid amendment. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee wonders if the Minister, who discharg es executive 
functions could act in advisory capacity to another  body under its 
administrative control. Such an arrangement is furt her complemented by 
Section 16 of the Act which makes directions of the  Government obligatory 
upon the KVIC. The situation is indeed paradoxical if not oxymoron. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry must give time bound final approval 
to any administrative or financial proposal from the KVIC. 
(Para 60) 
Action Taken  
 
It is felt that the NKVIB being the advisory body s hould be involved in 
advising the Government rather than the KVI Commiss ion. The suggestion of 
the Committee to reduce the size of the NKVIB may b e considered and the 
number of participants as members can be reduced su itably during the 
aforesaid amendment. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
Moreover, during the evidence, the Secretary inform ed the Committee 
that the National KVI Board has not been meeting re gularly as mandated in 
the Act. The Committee takes such state of affairs seriously. A statutory 
Board headed by Minister breaching the statutory ma ndate is indeed a serious 
issue. It only highlights the redundancy of such a superfluous arrangement. 
(Para 61) 
 
 

-10- 
 
 
Action Taken  
 
It is felt that the NKVIB being the advisory body s hould be involved in 
advising the Government rather than the KVI Commission. The  
suggestion of the Committee to reduce the size of t he NKVIB may be 
considered and the number of participants as members can be reduced suitably 
during the aforesaid amendment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

-11- 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which th e Committee has 
either not accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry 
to review its replies  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee observed that the definitions of khad i and Poly-vastra 
are limited to cotton, woolen or silk yarns or mixt ure thereof. The definition 
does not include synthetic yarn. To that extent the  definition needs to be 
revised to include Poly-vastra. The definitions inc lude handspun fibre and 
handloom woven cloth. It does not include innovations like E-charkhas, which 
are meant to increase the productivity, which is on e of the objectives of the 
KVIC under Section 15 (2) (e). The Committee feels that the definition should 
be flexible enough to include technological advance s which are the mandate 
of the Commission. 
(Para 28) 
 
Action Taken  
 
The KVIC Act under Section 2 (d) defines: "khadi" m eans any cloth 
woven on handlooms in India from cotton, silk or wo ollen yarn handspun in 
India or from a mixture of any two or all of such y arns;”. However, “Poly-
vastra” is defined in the schedule under Section 2 (h) of the KVIC Act, the 
entry for “village industry”. Thus the two are diff erent set of products 
altogether. As far as the proposal to include synth etic yarn in the definition is 
concerned, it may be noted that as ‘Man-made-fibre’ is already included in the 
definition of ‘polyvastra’, which includes ‘synthetic yarn’ also. 
 
As regards introduction of e-charkha, all such tech nological 
advancements can be introduced for the products und er the category of 
“village industry”. This would maintain the purity and sanctity of khadi and 
would ensure the development of a niche market for it globally. The 
suggestion would be separately examined in consulta tion with main 
stakeholders. 
 

 
-12- 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee found reply ingenious.   Poly Vastra  is a derivative 
of Khadi but has been categorized as Village Indust ry.  Similarly, the 
produce of E-charkha will not be considered as Khad i.  The Committee 
wonders whether incentives available to Khadi will also be available to   
E-charkha products.  The reply in one single stroke  junks the objective 
under Section 15(2)(e).  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee notes that the Sections 2 (ff) pertai ning to ‘rural area’ 
and 2 (i) regarding village industry acknowledges t hat these are dynamic 
concepts and that the Government could change the p arameters by 
notifications. However, no notification has been is sued to change these 
definitions, ever since last amendment to the Act i n 2006.  The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should change the defi nition in consultation 
with the KVIC through notification. 
(Para 30) 
 
Action Taken  
 
The definition of rural area is in line with the ce nsus definition and as 
such it would not be feasible to have a separate de finition under KVIC Act. 
However, the same will be examined. 
The definition of village industry needs to be chan ged taking into 
account inflation by increasing the per capita investment from Rs 1 lakh to Rs 
5 lakh for plain areas and Rs 1.5 lakh to Rs 7 lakh  for Hills, A &N Islands, 
NER regions. This will be incorporated under the pr oposed amendment of 
KVIC Act. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Ministry contended that in the existing act th e definition of 
rural area was as per census.  While examining the issue, the Committee 
had sought the views of the Ministry regarding the need to amend the 
definition of ‘Rural area’ and the Ministry itself had suggested the need 
to change in definition.   

 
 
-13- 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee observes that no Rule has been framed  by the 
Government in this regard. The Committee is of the view that the terms and 
conditions for engagement of these two critical pos itions may be prescribed 
immediately. The terms of engagement should clearly specify the requirement 
of previous experience of prospective candidates in  the Khadi or Village 
Industries or associated fields. Also the choice of  candidates must not be 
limited to Government by deputation, instead should  be open to members of 
senior management of Banks, financial institutions and PSUs. The selection 
should be made through an independent body like Public Enterprises Selection 
Board. 
(Para 40) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
The PESB is mandated to “evolve a sound managerial policy for the 
Central Public Sector Enterprises and, in particular, to advise Government on 
appointments to their top management posts”.  Thus the suggestion for 
selection for the post of CEO, KVIC through an inde pendent body like PESB 
may not be appropriate as KVIC is a Statutory Commi ssion created under the 
Government of India and operating on cent percent f inancial assistance from 
the Government. The current practice of selection t hrough the ACC may be 
continued. As far as application for the posts are concerned, suitable persons 
can always apply for it.  
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 The reply obfuscates the issue raised by the Commi ttee in its 
report.  The Committee express its concern that the  rules for Selection/ 
appointment of the CEO and FA of KVIC have not been framed yet.  The 
Committee also reiterates its earlier recommendatio n that the selection 
by an independent body from a broader base as prescribed in the rules be 
framed immediately.  
  
 

 
-14- 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee also takes note of the composition of  the KVIC. The 
objective of the last Amendment of 2005 was to infu se greater 
professionalism to the KVIC. It provided for four e xperts as non-official part-
time Members of the Commission. The Committee is su rprised to note that 
despite having a specialized in-house body Mahatma Gandhi Institute for 
Rural Industrialization (MGIRI), the Act does not p rovide any scope for the 
Institute. The professional mandate of the Institut e almost coincides with the 
demands of the KVIC i.e to strengthen rural industr ialization, enhance rural 
employment in rural areas. The Institute is designe d as a ‘mechanism that 
would provide high quality of science, technology a nd management inputs 
and support in a comprehensive manner to KVI sector .” The Committee 
therefore recommends that the expert representative s of MGIRI may be 
included in the Commission under Section 4(2) (b) and existing part-time non-
government experts and also government representati ves may be involved 
with the KVIC as per requirement under Section 9 of  the Act. This will bring 
about a closer institutional linkage between KVIC and MGIRI.   
(Para 64) 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
Four Expert members from the fields of Science & Te chnology, 
Marketing, Rural Development and Technical Educatio n & Training are 
appointed to the Commission. MGIRI operates under t he guidance of General 
Council and Executive Council in which the Chairman  and CEO, KVIC are 
members of General Council and CEO & Director (S&T)  KVIC are the 
members of Executive Council of MGIRI. Such associa tions offer sufficient 
scope for interaction between KVIC and MGIRI on the  implementation of 
S&T programme in the sector and also to bring syner gy on the scientific 
approach of both organizations. The recommendation may be considered 
during comprehensive amendment of the KVIC Act. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
-15- 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 
 The Committee strongly feels that in terms of econ omy, the KVIC 
would be saving its crucial resources by involving internal resources 
agency MGIRI instead of engaging part time experts,  who could be 
engaged as per requirements under Section 9 of the Act.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee is of the view that given the shortag e of manpower and 
resources faced by the State Directorates of KVIC a nd considering similar 
mandate of State KVIBs, the Ministry has not been a ble to justify the 
existence of State Directorates. Instead the KVIC m ust conserve its scarce 
resources for more useful purposes than deputing th em for similar 
assignments as State KVIBs. For this there is a nee d for institutional linkage 
between the KVIC and State KVIBs supported by expli cit statutory provision. 
The Zonal Committee could provide a forum where KVI C and State KVIBs 
converge to discuss the impact and shortcomings of KVIC schemes. 
(Para 69) 
 
Action Taken  
 
KVIC functions as a nodal agency for Non-farm micro  industry sector 
in the country. It assumes the supervisory and moni toring role of the sector 
specific centrally sponsored programme and scheme. Assignment of such 
functions warrants presence of KVIC in all state. H owever, KVIC enters into 
partnerships with appropriate institutions as per t he need and requirement of 
each scheme. The strength and outreach of KVIBs als o need to be looked into 
before assigning any responsibility to them. Also t he institutional linkage 
between the KVIC and State KVIBs need to be revisit ed in the light of the 
observations of the Committee.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee reiterates its recommendation in the  interest of 
economy.  KVIC which strives for financial autonomy  must not waste its 
resources on its establishment where parallel KVIBs  already have 
presence.  

 
 
-16- 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
Also the Committee is of the view that in order to reduce the unwieldy 
size of Zonal Committees, the representative of the  State KVIC Directorates 
should be excluded, as the Zonal Deputy CEO of the Commission is included 
in the Zonal Committee. The Committee recommends that Ministry and KVIC 
should consider the recommendation and make necessary changes. 
(Para 76) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
State Directorates should be a part of the Zonal Co mmittees so that 
there can be effective monitoring and supervision b esides ensuring better 
implementation of the various schemes. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee also recommends that the Government s hould set up a 
statutory functional linkage between KVIC and State KVIBs and till such time 
should revitalize the Zonal Committees. 
(Para 77) 
Action Taken  
 
KVIC functions as a nodal agency for Non-farm micro  industry sector 
in the country. It assumes the supervisory and moni toring role of the sector 
specific centrally sponsored programme and scheme. Assignment of such 
functions warrants presence of KVIC in all state. H owever, KVIC enters into 
partnerships with appropriate institutions as per t he need and requirement of 
each scheme. The strength and outreach of KVIBs als o need to be looked into 
before assigning any responsibility to them. Also t he institutional linkage 
between the KVIC and State KVIBs need to be revisit ed in the light of the 
observations of the Committee.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation (Para 76 and 77) 
 
 The Committee reiterates its recommendation for th e sake of 
economy KVIC must deploy its scarce resources, judi cially to meet its 
mandate instead of spending the same on its establishment.   

 
-17- 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which fi nal replies of the 
Ministry have not been received 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
However, the Committee remains unconvinced of the statutory status of 
the KVIC Act. As per the reply of the Secretary and  the written reply, the Act 
was framed under Entry 97 of the Union List that ga ve the residuary powers 
which rest with the Union in 1956. However, with in clusion of Khadi and 
Village industries in the Eleventh Schedule enumera ting subjects under the 
powers and responsibilities of Panchayati Raj Insti tutions ( PRIs) read with 
the Article 243 (A), power of law making on the sub jects enlisted in the said 
Schedule including KVI sector, rests inter alia wit h the State legislature. And 
as such cannot be covered under the residuary power s of the Union in List I. 
Conversely, the State Government would not have the  legislative competence 
in respect of KVI sector regardless of Article 243 (A) as residuary powers are 
to be vested in the Union Government. The Committee  therefore recommends 
that the Ministry may review the statutory position  in consultation with 
relevant Ministry/agency to give KVIC firm statutory status. 
(Para 20) 
 
Action Taken  
 
The Ministry feels that the statutory status of KVI C has been 
decided already as KVIC has been formed by an Act o f Parliament. 
However, in the light of the specific recommendatio n of the committee 
to review the statutory status of KVIC, the same ma y be done by 
obtaining suitable opinion from the Law Ministry. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee may be apprised of the opinion of the Law Ministry 
in the matter.  
 
 
 

 
-18- 
  
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee is of the view that the Government mu st 
ascertain the ways of devolution of funds to Panchayati Raj Institutions 
(PRIs) and monitor and audit their performance in i mplementing the 
Government schemes. In this regard the Committee al so emphasizes 
the need for an institutional linkage between KVIC and the State KVIBs 
supported by explicit statutory provisions instead of implicit Rules. 
 
(Para 24) 
Action Taken  
 
The recommendations of the Committee are noted and ways and means 
for the engagement with PRIs for devolution of fund s will be examined in 
consultation with the States. KVIC guidelines under  PMEGP already include 
PRIs as one of agencies to identify the beneficiari es. Under PMEGP scheme 
the representatives of PRIs are already involved in  the selection process of 
beneficiaries at District Level Task Force Committe es (DLTFCs) as per the 
scheme guidelines.  
As far as developing an institutional linkage betwe en the KVIC and 
KVIBs, the current status of existing KVIBs will be  examined separately. 
Opinion of the States will be elicited. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee has sought the ways of devolution of  funds to 
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) instead of engag ing PRIs in certain 
Schemes.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee wonders that if KVIC could access the  funds like 
RIDF. The Ministry may explore if KVIC could avail institutional finances 
from Banks, as a Micro Finance Institution and from  RIDF. The Ministry 
should gradually promote KVIC as specialized resour ce agency and financial 
institution for village industries from being a pro motional organization. 
Sections 17, 17A and 21 give powers to KVIC to raise funds. 
(Para 48) 

 
-19- 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
The Ministry has written to KVIC to suggest and pro pose a road map 
for achieving financial autonomy. It may be stated that there is no bar on 
exploring institutional finance from banks and othe r financial institutions by 
KVIC with approval from the Ministry.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the prop osal’s 
outcome.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee recommends that the Government’s powe rs under 
Section 16 too should be mitigated. Rules should be framed under this Section 
to limit the powers of Government to give direction . Powers should also be 
given to KVIC to discuss the issue and apprise the Government of its views. 
(Para 62) 
 
Action Taken  
 
Noted 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Ministry may inform the Committee of the outcom e of the 
Committee’s recommendation. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee reiterates that the autonomy of KVIC is likely to remain 
constricted due to its continued reliance over Gove rnment for finances. It is 
the mandate given to KVIC to exercise autonomy and the Commission ought 
to generate resources independent of Government. Th ere are provisions in the 
Act to enable KVIC to generate resources provided K VIC formulates viable 
business case. 
(Para 63) 

 
-20- 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
The Ministry has written to KVIC to suggest and pro pose a road map for 
achieving financial autonomy. 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 
 The Committee may be updated of the steps taken by KVIC. 
 
 
 
 
******* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 