PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE  ON  INDUSTRY 
  
  
ONE HUNDRED THIRTY-FIRST REPORT 
ON 
  
THE CONSTRAINTS IN INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT OF 
NORTH EASTERN REGION 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 22ND DECEMBER, 2003) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK  SABHA ON 22ND DECEMBER, 2003)) 
  
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2003/PAUSA, 1925 (SAKA) 
  
E-mail : rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in 
Visitü:http://parliamentofindia.nic.in 
  
CONTENTS 
                                                                                                                                                             
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Date of Constitution - 1st January, 2003) 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
2. COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE 
3. INTRODUCTION 
4. REPORT 
5. OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE 
COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE 
6. ANNEXURE 
7. MINUTES 
Page 1 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

     1.   Dr. P.C. Alexander   ----   Chairman 
           RAJYA SABHA 
     2.   Prof. M.M. Agarwal 
     3.   Shri Jayantilal Barot 
     4.   Shri Prasanta Chatterjee 
     5.   Dr. M.N. Das 
     6.   Shrimati Saroj Dubey 
     7.   Dr. Faguni Ram 
     8.   Shri Lajpat Rai 
     9.   Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan 
   10.   Shri P.K. Maheshwari 
   11.   Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil 
   12.   Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy 
   13.   Shri S. Sivasubramanian 
   14.   Shrimati Sushree Devi 
   15.   Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
           LOK SABHA 
   16.   Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee 
   17.   Shri Ajoy Chakraborty 
   18.   Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary 
   19.   Shri Nepal Chandra Das 
   20.   Shri K. Francis George 
   21.   Shri Thomas Hansda 
   22.   Md. Anwarul Haque 
   23.   Shri A.C. Jose 
   24.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
   25.   Shri Mansoor Ali Khan 
   26.   Shri Sunil Khan 
   27.   Shri Deepak Kumar 
   28.   Shri Majay Lal 
   29.   Dr. K. Malaisamy 
   30.   Shri A. Narendra 
   31.   Shri Ananta Nayak 
   32.   Shri Dayabhai V. Patel 
   33.   Shri Uttamrao Patil 
   34.   Shri Malyala Rajaiah 
   35.   Shri P. Rajendran 
   36.   Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
   37.   Shri Tarachand Sahu 
   38.   Shri Ramanand Singh 
   39.   Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh 
   40.   Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur 
   41.   Shri V. Vetriselvan 
   42.   Shrimati D.M. Vijaya Kumari 
   43.   Shri Ram Prasad Singh 
   44.   Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
   45.   Shri Vijay Sankeshwar 
           SECRETARIAT 
           Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
           Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary 
Page 2 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

           Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary 
           Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary 
           Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer 
  
 SUB-COMMITTEE-III 
MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
     1.   Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah   ----  Convenor 
           RAJYA SABHA 
     2.   Shri P.K. Maheshwari 
     3.   Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy 
     4.   Shri S. Sivasubramanian 
     5.   Shrimati Saroj Dubey 
           LOK SABHA 
     6.   Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee 
     7.   Shri Ajoy Chakraborty 
     8.   Shri Deepak Kumar 
     9.   Shri Thomas Hansda 
   10.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
   11.   Shri Sunil Khan 
   12.   Shri Manjay Lal 
   13.   Dr. K. Malaisamy 
   14.   Shri A. Narendra 
15.    Shri Uttamrao Deorao Patil 
  
                                          
INTRODUCTION 
         I, the Chairman of the Department-r elated Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having
been authorised by the Committee, hereby present this Hundred and Thirty-first Report on the "The 
Constraints in Industrial Development of North Eastern Region".
 
2.      The Sub-Committee for Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises was constituted on the
6th January, 2003. The Sub-Committee has been examining the problems of the PSUs in the NER fo
r
quite some time. The Sub-Committee has deliberated el aborately on various problems being faced by the
industries in its 58th Report. Since there was no head way on the recommendations contained in the
report, the Sub-Committee took up the issues again with various Ministries/Departments connected with
the development of the NER.
 
3.      The report is based on the deliberations of the meetings held with various the 
Ministries/Departments. The Committee heard the oral evidence of representatives of various Ministries 
at New Delhi on 4th February, 24th June and 28th November, 2002, and 22nd April, 23rd July, 7th 
August, 4th September, and 13th October, 2003. 
4.      The Committee at its meeting held on 18th December, 2003 considered and adopted the Report. 
NEW DELHI; 
18th December, 2002 
DR. P.C. ALEXANDER 
Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry. 
Page 3 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

  
REPORT  
CHAPTER–I 
INDUSTRIAL SCENARIO IN THE NORTH EASTERN REGION 
1.0   The entire North East region is very sensitive and has been witnessing troubled socio-political 
disturbances since long.  As a consequence, the economic development has suffered badly, resulting in
poor industrial growth. 
1.1   The main reason for insurgency in the North East was the alienation of the people, which began
immediately after independence. The Government has taken some initiatives and a sizable number o f
insurgents have laid down arms. But immediately after, they have started looking for employment. 
Internal security problems cannot be resolved if such issues cannot be addressed. 
1.2   Every Government that has come to power at the center has been concerned about the developmen t
in the North East but progress has been rather ta rdy, if not stagnant, despite announcement of special
economic packages. In 1995, North East Development Bank with an authorized capital of Rs. 500 crores
was created but how far it has helped expansion and modernization of industrial enterprises is no t
known.  The region still lacks good roads, water and electricity, the basic needs for development. Wha t
can help boost growth is collection of unspent balance of the amounts earmarked for different Union
Ministries and spending of the same in the region with the emphasis on the feasible projects an d
sustaining the existing industries, which are facing diffi culties.  It has two objectives-one is the survival 
of the industry and the second is the generation of employment. The main objective is, however, the
reduction elimination of insurgency.  The existing units should be helped so that they can meet the social
obligation develop the area, generate employment. Everything should not be seen from the revenue poin t
of view. Unless existing industries survive, no investme nt from outside North East is likely to come as is
evident from the fact that after 1997 no new projects have come to the region. The fiscal concessions
along with peace initiative will change the economic climate of North East and bring it in the mainstream
of country and it will not be viewed as a distant territory. 
1.3   The Government of India had granted certain incentives to some specified industries located in the
North East.  These incentives were mainly in the form of excise duty relief and capital investmen t
subsidy. These incentives are applicable only for those started production after 24 th December 1997. The 
transport subsidy scheme 1971 was also included in the above policy. This step is in fact to encourage the
industrial growth in the North East Region. The underlying idea behind extending these incentives was to
provide the much needed impetus to the North Eastern States so that the region could overcome its
backwardness and the difficulties faced by it on account of geographical isolation and provide them a
level playing field.  The ultimate goal was to f acilitate setting up of new industries and sustain those,
which exist already and thus paving the way for all round economic development of the region. Howeve r
due to the incorporation of the cut-off date of 24th December 1997, a large section of the industries in the
area prior to this date were left uncovered by those well intended notification. 
STUDY OF HINDUSTAN PAPER CORPORATION LIMITED BY THE COMMITTEE ON
HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
1.4   The Committee of Ministry of the Heavy Indus tries and Public Enterprises ( of the Departmen t
Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry ) was constituted in May 2000 which examine d
the performance of Hindustan Paper Corporation Limited and its units viz-Cachar Paper Mills (CPM ) 
and Nagaon Paper Mills (NPM) located in the State of Assam as a case study in the above background. 
1.5   While examining the subject matter, the followi ng points surfaced in the meetings held with the
workers’ unions and the management of the Company on the 9th July, 2000 at Kolkata. 
Page 4 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

  
  
  
  
1.6   The Department of Heavy Industry had taken up the issues of transport subsidy, excise duty
exemption of the NE located units as conveyed vide its ATR (45th Report) on the Recommendations / 
Observations Contained in the 36 th report on PSUs of Heavy Industries under Disinvestments, Sickness
and Revival.  However, the persuasive efforts of Department of Heavy Industries were not bearing much
fruit. Besides it was observed by the Committee that these issues needed to be approached through a
coordinated effort and moreover the Committee also felt that there was a lack of appreciation of concerns
expressed by the Department of Heavy Industry in re spect of HPC’s operation by the other ministries.  
The Committee feels that at the strategic level th e problems facing industrial units in the NE,
notwithstanding whether it is private or public sector, are uniform and similar. 
1.7   The issues like transport subsidy, excise duty exemption etc.  encompassed all the public and private
units. Hence, the Committee thought to be benefited by the public sector as well as the private secto r
located in the NE.  It heard the view of the indust ries in the NE both in the public and the private secto r
on 8th August, 2001.  It emanated from the views expr essed by these that not only were the problems o f
the units grave but it was being further aggravated by a Supreme Court order of 13 th December, 1996 
related to debarring private plantation in the NE whic h violated the constitutional guarnteed rights of the
local tribals of the NE under Article 371 A-C and 371-H of the Constitution. It came to the observation of 
the Committee that this situation was leading to an insurgency in the NE region and needed to be
addressed on priority.  Realizing the gravity of the situation that Committee thereafter called upon the
Secretaries of Ministries of Environment and Fo rest, Law, Industrial Policy and Promotion, Banking
Revenue, Heavy Industry, Railways and the mana gement of HPC on 21 st August, 2001 with a view to 
Points raised by the workers’ Union Comments of the Ministry 
There should be excise duty holiday for the 
Cachar Paper Mills, Nagaon Paper Mill located 
in the North East. This will make their units 
more sustainable.
 
  
Subsidy scheme should be extended to Cachar 
Paper Mills till the conversion work from broad 
gauge to meter gauge of their sector is 
completed. 
Proposal was taken up with Ministry of Home 
Affairs who informed that PM’s package for NE 
region has already been decided.  The issue will 
be again taken up with the concerned 
Department.
 
The Standing Committee on Industry in its 36 th 
Report on PSUs of the Department of Heavy 
Industry Disinvestment, Sickness and Revival 
recommended transport subsidy to the North- 
Eastern units, which have been taken up with 
the Ministry of Home Affairs by this 
De
partment. 
Points raised by the workers’ Union Comments of the Ministry 
Proposal for writing off of interest upto  
31-3-1997 is also pending with the Government. 
The management reiterated that the extension of 
transport subsidy for the units of Assam would 
go a long way in making their product 
competitive.
 
Excise duty holiday for their manufacturing 
facilities in North East. 
Writing off of interest as suggested by the 
management is also a part of proposal for 
financial restructuring referred in para 1 above.  
The Standing Committee on Industry in its 36
th 
Report recommended transport subsidy to the 
North-Eastern units which has been taken up 
with the Ministry of Home Affairs by this 
Department.
 
The issue of Excise Duty concession would be 
taken up with the concerned Department. 
Page 5 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

begin the process of dialogue through witch some of the issues could be resolved.  Secretaries present in
this meeting decided to deliberate in detail and come back to the Committee within a period of fou r
weeks. 
1.8   On September 27,2001, the Secretaries came back to the Sub-Committee.  In the meantime, the 
Government had also formed a new Department of th e Development of North-East and the then Ministe r
of North-Eastern Development, had also expressed his eagerness to be educated on the Sub-Committee’s 
findings and their interaction in the matter so far.  Hence, he was also requested to join the meeting as a
special invitee.  In this meeting, the Hon'ble Minister began with the opening remarks that it would not be
appropriate to expect Government investments to rejuvenate the North East.  The need and focus of the
Government was to think of ways by which local initiative generated income at local level.  Thereafter,
he shared with the Committee some information relating to some of the projects in the power sector,
which have been cleared and also assured that all non-polluting activity would be supported by the  
Government.
 
1.9   The CMD, HPC, while giving a general idea about the locational disadvantage of North Eastern
Region emphasized that fiscal concession, the excise exemption and the transport subsidy continuance
was a necessity for ensuring sustained competence of HPC.  Also, he informed the Committee that Bara
k
Valley during the monsoons is cut off from the rest of the country.  The only way they could tackle the
problem of transport was using the waterway.  Upto a particular point, it would come by raft and then
trucks were to be used. But trucks could also not be used because approachable roads were not there. 
1.10The Chairman, Kit ply Industries, apprised the Committee that North Eastern States had been reeling
under the onslaught of the current economic slowdown and absence of any investment initiative
sharpened the problem of unemployment and thereby rendering the impressionable youth vulnerable to
the temptation of taking recour se to insurgency.  The employment potential of the pulp and pape r
industry and the plywood industry was undoubtedly one of highest, especially after taking into accoun t
the spin off effects in unorganized informal sector which the predominantly tribal population foun d
something akin to their traditional occupation. 
1.11The Chairman Kitply Industries further pointed out that transport subsidy, which was being presently
administered by the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion envisaged benefits under this scheme
to the units in the NE for the first five years of production.  However, the units in the NE suffered a
continuing disadvantage of poor in frastructure in inaccessibility and as long as these continuing
disadvantages existed, the transport subsidy sche me should be extended irrespective of the number o
f
years of commercial production by the units. 
1.12It was further brought to the notice of the Committee that the excise duty exemption and transpor t
subsidy envisaged for new industrial units being set up under the Government of India’s Industrial Policy 
for the North East (announced in December, 1997) have not paved the way for significant industrial
development in the region.  The existing industrial units were becoming increasingly uncompetitive
on account of the general economic slow down and adverse inbound and outbound logistics. It is,
therefore, fair and reasonable that the excise duty exemption and transport subsidy, as envisaged
in the newly emerging units, be extended to the existing units, which are teetering on the brink o
f
bankruptcy and eventual closure. 
1.13The representatives of the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion informed the Committee
that the issue raised by industries of NE are two fold –(1) excise exemption and (2) transport subsidy.  All 
these units had been set up before the notification issued on December 1997.  It would be very difficul t
under the existing policy to extend excise benefits for the units, which were existing on the date o f
notification because the main objective of the policy was to promote investment in the NE and not to
provide any competitive level. So, if the issues of this industry had to be seriously addressed then i t
would call for a modification of the existing policy. This would have revenue implications and the
Department would have to go to the Cabinet. As for the transport subsidy it was introduced in 1971 an d
in 1993 the scheme was modified and a cap was introduced because it was found that continued transpor t
subsidy was not called for. A period of 5 years was stipulated and consequently beyond 5 years from the
date of commercial 
production no trans port subsid y should be payable. The refineries, plantations an d
Page 6 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

power generating units were thus put under the ne gative list. The Department received request from
Department of Heavy Industries and a Cabinet Note from Department of Petroleum that the existing units
was considered for the purpose of excise benefits and transport benefits and they were examining both
the issues. 
1.14The Revenue Secretary informed the Committee that the basically these refineries were not viable in
the long run because there was not adequate crude available there and there was also not the adequate
demand there.  Once it was understood then the s ubsidies could be seen in a larger context. e.g. for the 
North East region this was the cost that the country would have to bear.  Based on the discussions hel d
with the various Ministries/Departments of Government of India, the Committee in its 58 th Report 
(presented on 7th December, 2001) observed as followed:--- 
“The Government Policy has been that they have  given a one time incentive and some limited time
incentive for development of remote areas.  One time incentive has been in the shape of capital
subsidy and the limited time incentive in the shape of transport subsidy or excise duty exemption o r
sales tax concession.  For areas like the North East, there is a continuing disadvantage and if there is
a one-time incentive or a limited time incentive it has not taken care of the continuing disadvantage. 
There is always a need for transporting the finished goods because they cannot be consumed locally. 
There are some raw materials, which are to be brought in.  If the industries are to survive in the
North East region, then these incentives must be on a continuous basis.  It has generally been seen
that a large volume of investments in remote and under-developed areas did not become fruitful 
because of continuous disadvantage of that area and could not be underwritten and as a consequence
they perished”. 
1.15Major recommendations/observations of the Committee in 58th Report were as under:-
 
        “ Based on the discussion held with the various Departments/ authorities, the Committee in its 58th 
          report had observed that: 
“Para 4.9In order to become self-sufficient in mee ting with the requirement of Bamboo for the two
mills of HPC and to reverse the deficiency of forest  resources in general, the need for taking up the
captive plantation by HPC should be recognized and clearance be given.  This also has a beneficial
effect to social up liftmen due to the manpower required for this activity.  Since early 1990, HPC has
been appealing to the Government of Assam, Ministry of Environment and Forests for allotment o f
degraded forest land which needs special consideration to allot sufficient land immediately. 
Para 4.12             As regards allotment for de graded forest land for raising captive plantation in
Assam, the Committee notes from the oral evidence tendered by the Secretaries, Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises and Ministry of Environment and Forests, that they would see tha t
working plans for extraction of Bamboo in the North East are approved expeditiously and permission
for construction of dirt road be granted to facilitate extraction of Bamboo from unexplored areas. 
Para 4.13             The Committee also notes that the agreement with private firms regarding
extraction of Bamboo on a long term basis from the forests areas reserved for the HPC would be
reviewed to see whether there are any violations of Forest Conservation Act.
 
Para 4.14            The Committee was informed that due to local compulsion forest areas could no t
be leased out for captive plantation. The Committee recommends that if land is not made available
by the State Government for afforestation then the HPC should enter into an agreement with state
forest departments to mobilize such plantations with necessary financial support with the condition
that the first charge on the crop at the time of harvesting would be of HPC’s. 
Para 4.16The Committee felt that there is need to address the issue of gregarious flowering, which
could lead to excessive rodent population and further aggravate the situation. The Committee
therefore recommends that Ministry of Environment and Forests should address the problem o f
gregarious flowering, remedial afforestation and construction of dirt roads for exploration o f
Bamboo in the inaccessible forest areas. 
Page 7 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

Para 4.17            The Committee also recommends  that HPCL should be facilitated in exploring the
utilization of inland waterways in transportation of its products and raw materials from interiors.” 
1.16The Committee, therefore, in its 58th Report strongly recommended continuance of transport subsidy
and excise duty exemption to the HPC units lo cated in the North East region till the relative
infrastructural disadvantages are completely overcome as are applicable to new industrial units under new
North East Policy of 24th December, 1997. 
1.17With regard to the transport subsidy and excise duty exemption (for wood- based industries), the 
Committee recommended that these fiscal facilities should be extended to these industries as  
non-extension of these benefits will make them uncom petitive and may lead to closure of these units an d
result in loss of employment, direct and indirect, aggravating the insurgency problem. 
2.1   However, so far no fruitful efforts have make in that direction.  The Committee therefore decided to
take up the issues afresh with the various Ministries/Departments connect with the development of North-
East Region. 
  
CHAPTER–II 
INTERACTION WITH MINISTRIES /DEPARMENTS OF GOVERNMENT OF INDIA  
2.0   Even after the observations/ recommendations given by the Committee on Industry in its 58 th
Report, there had been no headway with regard to excise duty concession and transport subsidy for the
industries in the North East region beyond the holiday/ stipulated period. The Sub-Committee, therefore, 
decided to discuss further the issue with the Ministries concerned. A summary of deliberations meeting-
wise is given below:----
 
Meeting held on 4th February 2002
 
2.1   The Committee met the Secretary, Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises, Special
Secretary, DONER joint Secretary, Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion, CMD, HPC,
President, Federation of Indian Plywood and Panel Industries, and representatives of Banking Division,
Ministry of Finance. The Committee expressed its concern over the fact that when various industries se
t
up their units in the North Eastern Region, were pro mised to be given various special considerations in
regard to various facilities.  However, unfortunat ely the Government agencies had not been able to
provide assistance and the infrastructure had not been developed properly in the region, which ha d
adversely affected these industries resulting in unemployment and insurgency. 
2.2   The Revenue Secretary informed the Committee that as far as petro-chemical industries / refineries 
were concerned, the reduction in excise duty would not solve the problems in the present market oriente d
economy.  He, however, opined that if Government felt these units were important for the North-East, 
instead of excise mechanism, transparent subsidy should be provide.  The Secretary, Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises, supported the view of the Revenue Secretary.  The Committee then
directed the Revenue Secretary to prepare a paper on it. 
2.3   Thereafter, the representatives of Industrial Policy and Promotion apprised the Committee that the
Ministry of Finance should extend the excise duty exemption to the existing industrial units also as well
as infrastructure facilities should be strengthened so as to make the industrial units viable. 
2.4   The President of Federation of Indian Plywood & Panel Industries, stated that the industrial units
located in North-East, who were earlier AAA companies, have been functioning in a very pitiable
condition due to the Supreme Court Orders.  He said that all these Companies should be treated like the
new ones. He further said that extension of subsidy and excise duty concessions should be provide to all
these industrial units for a period of three years so as to protect them from extinction. 
2.5   While concluding the meeting, the Committee, affirmed that with coordination and cooperation from
the banking sector and various concerned Ministries, the best possible method could be found to help
industries located in North –East region.  The Secretary, Department of Development of North Eastern
Re
gion was then decided to prepare a paper on the basis of the discussion held in the meetin g fo r
Page 8 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

consideration of the Committee. 
Meeting held on 24th June 2002
 
2.6   The Sub-Committee met the Secretary, Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises, CMD,
HPC, Executive Director, NPPC, Member, CBEC, Joint Secretary, D/o IPP, Director, DONER,
Representatives of State Government of Nagaland and Chief Engineer, DPCL, Kolkata.  Initiating the
discussion the Committee wanted to know the status of implementation of the 58 th Report with regard to 
the Transparent Subsidy. It was also recalled that the existing package for the North East did not meet the
requirements of the situation and as a result, the exis ting units in the North East were not doing well.  A
suggestion was however made that the existing package should be made more liberal so that the problems
of these units could be taken care of the better course  would be to give Transparent Subsidy, it was felt. 
The Revenue Secretary was then asked to come up with a proper proposal on these subjects.
 
Meeting held on 28th November, 2002
 
2.7   The Sub–Committee heard the Secretary, Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises,
Secretary, Revenue, Joint Secretary, Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion, CMD, HPC. 
Having gone through the pattern of subsidies given in North East.  It was found that a number of units,
which had started there, had become sick.  The Committee was therefore reviewing the position in
totality to find the best way to utilize the installed capac ity or put a new industry in that area so that there
was growth of infrastructure and generation of mo re employment. There were obvious constraints like
roads and railways were not developed, there was also the problem of raw material; and finished goods
had to come to the main market because that much consumption was not there. Unless and until
Government improved some of the facilities, the region would have to continue with the subsidies. The
Secretary, Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises, informed that all the companies may no
t
be able to survive for long if they did not get the concessions his Ministry had been requesting for. The
HPC employed 3000 persons. The units were located in very difficult areas. The product has to be
brought to North India for sale. This required transport subsidy. Therefore, HPC needed both i.e. (1) 
transport subsidy; and (2) concession extended to other sectors. 
2.8   The Secretary, Revenue, informed that in the case of North East, a package had already been
announced in 1999, which contained concessions on dire ct taxes and indirect taxes. In the case of direc t
taxes, units set up in Integrated Infrastructure Development Centre had exemption from income tax fo r
ten years. Units set up in thrust sectors before 31.2.2004 outside these growth centres were also eligible
for deduction of 100 per cent profits for ten years. Prof it of any other new industry set up at any time any
where were also eligible for deduction for first five years, followed by 25 per cent of profit for the nex t
five years. In the case of indirect taxes, excise duty was exempted for ten years to new industrial units se t
up in specified areas. Also, exemption from Central excise to identify was also there for a period of ten
years. These exemptions were given to new units or those going in for substantial expansion.
 
2.9   The representative of Ministry of Industrial Policy and Promotion then stated that based on the
recommendations given in the last meeting of the Co mmittee to look at the issue of transparent subsidy
they had a couple of meetings to work out the moda lities. Department of Expenditure had suggested tha t
since policy of the Government was to look at each and every unit, it w ould be difficult to have a general
policy, to have a policy prescribing budgetary support to all existing units. As the budgetary suppor t
would be only for the public sector and private sector  would not benefit from it. It was then agreed to
extend the excise exemption to the existing units, ma y be on a reduced scale. The argument put forth was
that the refineries in the NER were given 100 per cent excise exemption. Subsequently, other refineries
went to Finance Ministry saying that it did not provide a level playing field. The Ministry acceded to the
request to the extent of 50 per cent excise exemption to all the refineries. This gave other industries a
cause for claim of similar exemption.
 
2.10The Department of Revenue was also of the view that as far as possible, the tax structure should be
neutral. Keeping into consideration the difficulties of North East, the Government had issued exemption
to encourage further investment in order to create more employment. Giving full exemption to existing
units was not contemplated. Similar exemption had been  given to J&K. The Department of Revenue was
also 
getting re quests from Uttaranchal, Himachal Pradesh and other under develo ped States. It was
Page 9 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

difficult for the Department of Revenue to accede to  the request. It would have serious consequences on
the tax revenue which would affect the States because certain percentage went to the States also. It was
further clarified that concessions were meant to st abilize a new industry. On ce it was set, things woul d
improve. Next, after the announcement of North East package, others would also want some set o f
concessions, e.g. J&K, Himachal Pradesh and Uttaranchal. If this happened it would run counter to value
added tax. Also this would create tax heavens and it would create problem for the adjoining areas. 
2.11  The CMD, Hindustan Paper Corporation, stated that his corporation was affected the most. They
had been making profit for the last 5 years but they had 2 units out of  which one unit had accumulate d
losses of 162 crores. The other unit had made a profit of 36 crores. The accumulated loss was 126 crores.
They were not worried about what was happening today with the duty rates coming down. They were all
being charged excise duty @ 16 per cent. They got counter vailing advantage on merit. Now the lates t
ruling of Distribution Resolution Mechanism of WTO put counter vailing also under the general
provision of bound rate. WTO bound rate for writing and printing paper was 40 per cent. Coupled with
that was the assumption that when they were setting up this mill there were some infrastructural
inadequacies and this would get phased out ove r a period of time. Railways had gone in for gauge
conversion. As a result, transshipment, which wa s being done at Guwahati, was now done at Lumbding.
It was a single track and they were low on priority. The traffic density was so much that it was impossible
to transport bulk material using Railways. Still they could transport 42 per cent of their product last yea r
as against 28 per cent in the previous year. But Railways were not in a position to provide bulk suppor t
for inbound traffic. Raw material came from distant areas. Their major cost was logistics as local
consumption was only 10 per cent of the product. Although, raw material was in plenty but accessibility
and availability were problematic. The cost of insurgency was telling upon the cost of inputs. The only
salvation for the Cachar Paper Mill was gauge c onversion which was considerably delayed. The
disadvantage in inbound and outbound traffic could be compensated only by concessions that were
envisaged in the North East policy. Therefore, what ever had been done for the petroleum sector may be
extended to paper industries also.
 
2.12  The Committee observes that North East had transport subsidy because of transportation
constraints. Government had not so far improved transportation facilities there. Unless it was done they
needed subsidy, otherwise their performance would become sick. Only after making these facilities
available Government could withdraw the subsidies.
 
2.13  The representative of Industrial Policy and Prom otion suggested that in the case of North East, a
negative list of industries, which had given investment for the least employment ratio could be generated.
It could also include those which were likely to misuse concessions, Such industries could be put in the
negative list. This would set a balance between re venue consideration and the objective of developmen t
of North East. The employment generation could be created and at the same time revenue losses could be
minimized. 
2.14  Countering the suggestion the Revenue Secretary stated that it was not easy to generate a negative
list and then monitor it. Pressing need would be that a transparent subsidy scheme was evolved and then
it would be possible to evaluate. The Government w ould not find it possible to confine any major fiscal
concession to a specific area like the North East. Therefore, Department of Revenue would no t
recommend fiscal incentives but a more transparent s ubsidy, if it was justified. It could be industry
specific or unit specific. 
2.15  The Committee observes that the Government was very keen to develop potential for employmen t
in that area. It was directed that a Committee of Secretaries under the Chairmanship of Industrial Policy
and Promotion be constituted with Secretaries of Revenue, Heavy Industries, and North Eas t
Development as members to draft a workable proposal, which the Committee could consider, within one
month. 
2.15A  The Chairman, Committee on Industry observed that there were certain problem which should be
tackled irrespective of the revenue angle or what would happen if Government did this in some othe r
place and in doing such things Government should always remember that even the most advance d
countries in the world toda y had this t ype of policy of what the y considered to be relativel y depressed.
Page 10 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

Students of economic development would know that right from the stage when development was talke d
of, most of these countries in the West had resorted to some degree of subsidy. Secondly, if it was sai d
that certain concessions on merit were necessary, it would be immoral to say that these concessions
would be given only from a particular cut off date. Because some people had already started production,
and it should be proper to think that they did not deserve concessions, which were applicable to the new
cases. In other words, the incremental expenses for ensuring production and employment would be much
less in the case of the existing units than in the new unit. Therefore, this artificial distinction between one
unit which was there already and another which has going to come because of the new policy should no
t
weigh too much in Government’s mind when the Committee of Secretaries would meet. Government 
should not be overtly concerned as to what would happen if Himachal Pradesh demanded what had been
given to the North East or if some other State demanded what was done for the North East. I
f
Government took a total picture, if it was found that certain regions deserve special treatment fo r
handling them, Government should not close its mind saying that this would open door and more an d
more people would come in. These points may be kept in view and ultimately it should be political
decision rather than a revenue decision. 
Meeting held on 22nd April, 2003
 
         The Sub-Committee met the Secretary, Mi nistry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises,
Secretary, DONER, Secretary, D/o IPP, Representatives of Department of Revenue. 
2.16  With a view to give impetus to growth and employment generation in the North Eastern Region
which had been reeling under the clutches of terrorism, the Government of India came out with several
schemes and programmes to mitigat e problems being faced by the region. As a result the Governmen t
came out with the concept of the Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources to which all the Central
Ministries/Departments should earmark at least 10 per cent of their budgetary allocation for the
development in the North East Region. In this direction the Department of Development of North Eastern
Region (DONER) was set up in September, 2001 to act as the nodal Department of Central Governmen t
to deal with matters pertaining to socio-economic development of the region. On an average Rs.1500-
1600 crores accrued in the NLCPR over the years and a part of that money was made available to the
DONER. During the year 2002-03 the amount available to the Department was Rs.550 crores and it was
informed by the representative of the DONER that during the last three years the department had fully
utilized their budgetary allocation. However, insurgency just did not seem to be going away. The
DONER was trying to see that new industrial units were there and that existing industrial units were
sustained so that they contribute to the economic development of the region. The quantum of private
investment fell short because of (1) insurgency (2) connectivity (3) working system (4) the ability to
reach those places. Because of these shortcomings industrial development was not taking place there. The
solution was to sustain the industrial activity which was going. HPC is among one of them.
 
2.17  The Secretary, Industrial Policy and Promotion informed that as per Committee’s direction, the 
Committee of Secretaries held meetings. The report of Committee of Secretaries is placed at  
Annexure-I. The recommendations of the Committee were as under: 
         “(i)    Excise duty related concessions and other concessions should be extended to the existing 
units with a sunset clause. These concessions should be extended for a period of 10 years; 100 
per cent in the initial 5 years and 50 per cent for the subsequent 5 years and the same should be 
by way of outright exemption; 
         (ii)     Excise exemption granted to pe troleum sector was outside the scope of NEIP and therefore i t
may be considered on merits by Department of Revenue (Central Board of Excise and 
Customs) Separately; 
         (iii)    Hindustan Paper Corporation (HPC) and Nagaland Pulp & Paper Company (NPPC) have to
be considered separately for ex cise concessions as there are sufficient grounds for extending 
concessions to them under special dispensations; 
         (iv)    The minimum value added condition may be introduced for availing of the concessions to
encourage sustainable development; and 
Page 11 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

         (v)    List of trust industries which should be made eligible  for concessions irrespective of locations
and the list of negative industries will be fina lized by DIPP in consultation with Department o f 
Revenue. 
         (vi)    A revival package for the industria l units in the North East could be formulated based on the
parameters as outlined above.” 
2.18  The Department of Revenue reiterated that th ey were committed to the development of the NE an d
they were committed to excise concessions applicable  in respect of new units and also in respect o f
existing units, provided there was substantial expa nsion. They were getting a flood of requests fo r
concessions from different parts of the country. It had been extended to J&K and Kutch. If all requests
were acceded to, it would cause lack of funds at th e end of the year. Transport subsidy would be require d
as there was locational disadvantage. On other su bsidies a view had to be taken by the Committee o f
Secretaries. Department of Revenue would seek lit tle more time to deliberate on this and discuss this
matter with the Finance Minister. 
Meeting held on 23rd July, 2003
 
         In this meeting the Secretary, Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises, Secretary,
Revenue, CMD, HPC were present; 
2.19  The Committee appreciated the work done by the Committee of Secretaries and was in agreemen t
with its recommendations for providing a revival package for the industrial units of NE. It was felt tha t
also stated that there was a strong need to develop infrastructure for the industries apart from pape r
industry and to do so i.e. in order to develop infrastructure, finances were required. 
2.20  The Secretary, Department of Revenue, stated that the Department was very sensitive an d
sympathetic to the need of North East and was givi ng full excise duty exemption to all new industrial
units established after the new industrial policy. Old units, however, were getting this exemption only
when there was scope for 25 per cent expansion. C oncession for Hindustan paper would be forthcoming
in the form of transparent subsidy. Old units were required to expand to get Government assistance and to
generate employment. So far HPC or any other PSU  was concerned the Depa rtment of Revenue was
committed to help them through concessions and subsidies.
 
2.21  The Secretary, Department of IPP, stated that Department of Heavy Industries had already mooted a
proposal for giving relief to Hindustan Paper Corporation. The proposal was under its consideration. As
regard the transport subsidy, HPC has availed transport subsidy for five years, hence was not eligible fo r
it. The Secretary, Department of IPP, further stated that giving exemption to existing units would be
difficult as it would pave way for similar demands from other States like J&K, Uttaranchal and Himachal
Pradesh.    
2.22  The Secretary, Ministry of Heavy Industries a nd Public Enterprises, stated that Department o f
Heavy Industries and Department of Revenue were in agreement that the HPC deserved consideration fo r
exemption in excise duty. 
2.23  The Secretary, Department of North Eastern Region, stated that Department of IPP was making
efforts to ensure that all infrastructure was created so that investments could come up in the North East.
As regards giving exemption of transport subsidy to HPC, their role was limited.
 
2.24  The Committee desires that these units should be given protection by Government so that they can
provide employment. It is not a question of losi ng revenue by giving excise exemption. It was the
question of generating more and more employment. 
2.25  The CMD, HPC, pleaded that HPC needed upgr adation of plant and equipment. Union Minister o f
Environment and Forests had suggested that Indian paper units should conform to Kyoto protocol. All
this involved considerable expenditure. Apart from infrastructure disadvantage, there was disadvantage of
location and logistical disadvantage of Cachar Paper Mills which needed to be sorted out. Asked abou t
the sick units, the Revenue Secretary stated that her department was providing concession to sick units. It
was also considering total exemption from excise duty to them. The Secretary further stated that if the
State Government approached the Department of Revenue for  providing relief to old units, the Revenue
Department was committed to work in close liaison with the State Department. 
Page 12 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

2.26  When asked about expansion programme of HPC, he revealed that as the  company is on the list o f
disinvestment, the question of expansion did not arise. However, the demand for the kind of paper i.e.
newsprint, which the company was producing, was quite there especially in view of the impending
elections for Lok Sabha/States in the country. 
2.27  The Committee observed that other than HPC th ere were two PSUs in the North East i.e. AYCL
and CCI; As regards the concession likely to be given to these unit s in the light of Department o f
Revenue letter dated 10th June, 2003. Secretary, Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises informed that as
for the AYCL was concerned it was under disinvestment. In the case of tea plantations in the North East,
the Ministry had got to supplement their needs. As regards CCI, it was also on sale and whatever it sol d
was consumed in that area. 
Meeting held on 7th August, 2003
 
         The Sub-Committee met the Secretary, Mi nistry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises,
Secretary, Revenue, Joint Secretary, D/o IPP; CMD, HPC, CMD, AYCL; CMD, CCI. 
2.28  The Sub-Committee took note of the contents of letter dated 23.8.2003 (Annexure-II) from the 
Department of Revenue addressed to Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion, Department o f
Revenue stated as under: 
    “The Report of Committee of Secretaries (COS) has been examined. Department of Revenue 
(DOR) has been consistently opposing area – 
based exemptions on pure economic considerations. 
However, in view of the decisions of the Government, in select cases, the exemption has been given 
but restricted only to new industrial units or units undertaking substantial expansion. The question 
of granting exemption to existing units has been re-examined. It would be appreciated that if any 
relaxation is made in the scope of North East exemption by way of its extension to existing units, it 
will, sooner or later, generate similar demands from other areas like J&K, Kutch, Himachal and 
Uttaranchal. This will have serious consequenc es on revenue. Anyway, such existing units can 
always avail of the exemption through suitable expens ion. It may also be pertinent to mention that 
the core issue which the Sub-Committee-III set out to resolve, i.e. finding ways to solve the 
problems of Hindustan Paper Mills (HPC) has been pushed to background and instead rejuvenatin
g 
the existing units has come to centre stage. The Department of Revenue will certainly look into the
request for relief to PSUs sympathetically.” 
2.29  It has, therefore, not been found feasible to  agree to the suggestion made by COS to grant excise
duty exemption to existing units in North East. Instead , DOR reiterates its stand that transparent subsidy
should be provided to such units in case the DIPP take a view to support them. In the case of PSUs,
however, DOR is willing to example proposals for excise relief even for the existing units. 
2.30  The Committee wanted to know whether Department of Heavy Industries had also formulated any
scheme or suggestions in the light of the letter of  Department of Revenue and whether benefit propose d
to be given to units of HPC could be extende d to PSUs (Andrew Yule & Co. Ltd. and Cemen t
Corporation of India) located in the North Eastern Region under the Department of Heavy Industries. 
2.31  The Revenue Secretary then informed the Committee the Department of Revenue had not receive d
anything with regard to AYCL and CCI from the Ministry of Heavy Industries. But, so far as HPCL was
concerned, this had been under discussion for quite some time. Department of Revenue had, earlier,
before this Committee gave a commitment that so far as Department of Revenue was concerned, they
would be in a position to help the PSUs, preferably  through transparent subsidy, rather than though any
excise exemption. Essentially, the exemption in the excise duty disturbed the whole tax structure. The
Department of Revenue would certainly consider transparent subsidy. 
2.32  The Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, had put in about Rs.400 crores for its
restructuring and rehabilitation about two years ago. HPCL was now making operational profits. Its main
burden was on account of trans port cost. The inbound lo gistic disadvanta ge faced b y HPC came to
Page 13 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

Rs.700 per ton and outbound logistic disadvantage came to Rs.1335 per tonne. Therefore, in the long run,
a solution to this problem would be necessary. Excise concessions appeared to be feasible solution, but i t
was creating some more problems. Department of Revenue were thinking if it was possible keeping in
view the increased cost of raw material and higher cost of transport subsidy package on one-time basis. 
This had to be finalized as financial package. Sinc e it was going to be disinvested, it could be one of the
components of this package and the exact figure could be arrived on mutual discussion. 
2.33  The Secretary, Heavy Industry, also informed the Committee that as far as the CCI and AYCL were
concerned, DHI made no reference to the Ministry of  Finance so far. AYCL has nine tea Estates in the
North East and the rest are in the State of West Be ngal. Whatever was applicable to the tea industry in
general when the tea industry dominated the North Eastern part of the country, was applicable to the
AYCL as well. As far as CCI was concerned, one un it situated in Bokajan, Assam. The unit had been in
good health both from the production as well as from the profit-making point of view, although, it was a 
very marginal profit. In the case of this unit, whatever was produced was consumed there locally. It di d
not require transport anything outside the State of Assam and for that matter, the North East as a whole.
In the case of HPC, the higher production had to go out as North Eastern Region could not consume.
More than 15 per cent and 85 per cent had to go out and lots of raw materials had to come in. 
2.34  The CMD, HPC supplemented that the HPC suffered an adverse logistical disadvantage to the tune
of Rs.2000 per tone and they produced and sold 200000 tones. So it worked out to above Rs.40 crores.
The operating profit was around Rs.65 crores. This cannot be sustained for a long time, they could sell 10
per cent of their production in the North East. The No rth East in comparison to other regions was not a
major consumer for writing and printing papers. Apart from this, there were some other problems like
insurgency, infrastructure inadequacy, etc. and all were casting their shadow in an increased manner day
to day. They had definite disadvantage with respect to logistics. With all the plethora of concessions they
were having in NEIP, none of the corporate business house ventured to start a paper mill in that region.
 
2.35  He further informed that Government of India have said that there were lot of concessions, ten-yea r 
excise duty exemption, transport duty exemption, inco me tax exemption, etc. The very fact that industry
were not looking at the North East as a favoured destin ation of industrial potential in this country, there
may not be many worthwhile takers even if the co mpany was put on the disinv estments line. So, they
were not looking at next year’s financial results. Co mpany’s debt burden was also increasing. It was all 
penal interest and this penal interest was on account of ove r-capitalisation because of time overruns an d 
consequent cost overruns. During Assam agitation days there was a project. People stopped working on
that project, when there was a total ban on work in PSUs in North East. That penal interest was of very
high rate. HPC would still reiterate that they may be given what has been done in the case of oil
refineries. 50 per cent excise duty exemption had been granted notwithstanding the fact that they have
availed excise duty exemption already. 
2.36  The Committee impressed upon the representative of Department of Revenue that HPC was no t
asking for the special consideration. It was only because the Government were already giving it to the
refineries, which were making profits also, but providing little employment opportunities. On the othe r
hand, HPC had tremendous employment generating potential. The Committee then asked whethe r
Government were able to consider it on that basi s. Department of Revenue was therefore required to
explore the possibility that this issue may be examined along with other things on the same lines. It was
thus stressed that the Committee was not asking for special concessions. 
2.37  The CMD, Andrew Yule & Company Limited informed the Committee that they had nine estates in
Assam, which employed 9000 people. They produce about 5500 ton of tea, 50 per cent of which went out
of the State. The remaining 50 per cent was sold through Guwahati. Approximately Rs. 25 million –
Rs.10000 per truck – was the transportation cost per y ear. Transport subsidy in the order of Rs.2.5 crores
would be quite a lot for them. The tea industry was very large industry. If it has been the case of giving
special consideration to the whole tea industry, he would not have recommended for its because tha t
would put tremendous pressure on the subsidy. Tea industry, as a whole, was passing through an
extremely bad time. Even if they get 50 per cent of that, which came to about Rs.1.25 crores as subsidy, it
would help them to some extent. 
Page 14 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

2.38  As far as excise duty was concerned, they are not covered under the excise duty. It had been
converted into a cess. However, he said that some of their other divisions were making losses. The profi t
of tea industry subsidized the losses of those divisions. Therefore, due to this reason only in the past, they
had not been able to put enough money in terms of upgr adation of the factories and other related things.
Almost 30-40 crores would be required over a period of 2-3 years and they would like that money to be 
earmarked by way of equity as they are not in a position to take a loan.
 
2.39  The CMD, CCI, stated that as one date what ever they produced they consumed it in the nearby
areas. These units have been profitable only because they had a captive market and not a competitive
market. The cost of production was about Rs.2200 per metric ton. Still it  was able to make profits. Bu t
that did not justify that it should have such a high co st of production. It was only because of the logistics
involved. As a PSU, it had to compete with all the cement manufacturers coming from West Bengal an d
Assam. 
2.40  The Committee observed that as suggested by Reve nue Secretary it was for the Secretary Industry
to prepare a proposal and submit it to Committee for its examination. 
         The Committee also desired that Committ ee of secretaries consisting of secretaries of DHI,
Department of Revenue, Department of Finance be constituted to work out a workable proposal. 
Meeting held on 4th September, 2003
 
         In the meeting the following were present : Secretary, Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises; Secretary, Revenue; CMD, HPC. 
2.41The Revenue Secretary informed the Committee that the Finance Minister was apprised of the 
discussion held in the Sub-Committee, last meeting but he was of the view that a paper company could 
not be equated with refineries. However he has a lot of sympathy for the NE region. 
2.42The Committee then enquired how the refineries were comparable with the HPC as regards the 
concession. The historical background showed that only two refineries were getting concession and two 
oil refineries were not getting any concessions. Department of Revenue put one-year limit and it got 
revised every year automatically and it was announced that they would be given 50 per cent concession. 
In that case, as there was a disinvestment angle, it was thought that if there were any takers, its sale would 
be looked into. Since, the oil companies were now making a profit, the Department of Revenue would 
have to look at it again. All the Members of the North East met Hon. Finance Minister in this regard and 
suggested whether the Government could review its decision of disinvestments and consequent sale in 
this situation when some of the refineries were making very huge profits. Department of Revenue did 
agree to continue the policy and therefore no stipulation was put on it. 
2.43The CMD, HPC, thanked the Committee and Secretaries for demonstrating their concern for the HPC 
unit in the North East. HPC had been pleading for being equated with the treatment that would be given 
to any new unit or a unit undertaking substantial expansion. He said that these mills had already given 
back to the Exchequer Rs.1558 crores out of which excise duty alone accounted for Rs.615 crores. When 
they met for the first time, they had Member (Traffic) Railways in that meeting. He had given a 
commitment that the Railways would progressively increase their rail-rake movement. These two mills 
have given to the Railways, by way of freight, Rs.499 crores till 31st March, 2003. He underlined the 
observation of Chairman that these units were highly employment generating and there was a lot of 
multiplier effect in the informal sector because even today in the extraction of Bamboo, extraction of pulp 
wood etc. HPC had not gone for mechanical devices. HPC was of the view that they would not have an 
extremist approach of jobless growth and that they would go for job-led growth. HPC has already repaid 
all Government loans. HPC’s problems were arising out of time overrun. It was because of the Assam 
agitation in the early 80s. consequently they had  cost overrun and over capitalization. Rail-rake 
movement was driving down the cost on various aspects. The issue of transaction cost was there because 
whenever they got any material from local sources, there were many problems mostly relating to 
insurgency. However, with all these factors, without getting into any adverse position with the State 
Government or the local factors, they had somehow managed to achieve, for the first time, 100 per cent 
capacity utilization. They wanted to go further. As mentioned earlier, they had a set back of Rs.41 crores 
Page 15 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

in transport alone and even the relief of Rs.31 crores which came by way of 50 per cent excise duty 
exemption, would not be sufficient. It was because when the charges would go up due to inbound and 
outbound logistic disadvantages, their setback would proportionately increase compared to other mills 
located in the central area. The total setback was to the tune of Rs.41 crores because 90 per cent of the 
material would go out of the region. 
2.44The other point mentioned by the CMD, HPC was related to the freight cost. The Convenor might 
like to take it up with the Railways. If they could give some sort of concession for the transport to the 
tune of Rs.30-40 crores, that would also give them some help. 
2.45The CMD, HPC, added that the Railways were already giving some concessions to them in the form 
of parcel van. The concept of parcel van was applicable only to the North East. Giving a practical 
example he said that if one had to send a truck to Madurai from Cachar, the freight cost was around 
Rs.5000. But if one sent it by parcel van, there was a great deal of saving. Of course, there was some 
difficulty in transshipment. The railways were giving this favour to the HPC. So, there was an advantage 
to select centres. Now the question was that there is a non-viability issue. About this issue, he cannot say 
much or cannot say 20 years after commissioning. So may be with the passage of time, after 
disinvestment issues were crashed out, they have to sit once again to review what the impact would be of 
this excise duty exemption on the operation. 
CHAPTER–III 
  
ROLE OF RAILWAYS IN THE INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT OF  
THE NORTH EAST REGION 
3.0    As a result of meeting held on 4 th September, 2003 the Sub-Committee met the officials of the 
Ministry of Railways on the 13 th October, 2003. The Ministry of Railways brought to the notice of the
Committee the following position with regard to the railway network in the North East Region: 
         "(i)    Cachar Paper Mill (CPM) operati ng in the Barak Valley at Panchgram, is connected by the
meter gauge (Lumding – Badarpur Hill section) to the railway network. When the mill was se t
up the understanding was that the by 1990 the broad gauge connectivity would cover Bara k 
Valley also. The conversion from meter gauge to broad gauge has so far taken place only upto 
Lumding. The transshipment at Lumding which is a relatively smaller junction, as compared to 
Guwahati, where earlier transhipments used to take place has caused a lot of problems fo r 
movement of bulk material inputs like coal, Ba mboo, industrial grade salt, etc. and of the 
finished products i.e. paper reels/sheet. 
         (ii)     The Lumding-Badarpur Hill section was completed in 1903. The Railways are not investing
in track renewal or rolling stock with regard to meter gauge sections owing to the fact that 
broad gauge connectivity is envisaged for the entire network.
 
         (iii)    The meter gauge track between Lumding and Badarpur/Silchar rests upon 586 bridges – 73 
major and 151 minor – and goes through 37 tunne ls. The track is vulnerable to breaches an d
landslides, especially during the monsoon period. 
         (iv)    The Lumding – Badarpur/Silchar meter gauge serves as the life line for supply of essential
goods to the people of Mizoram, Manipur and Tripura apart from the inhabitants of Bara k 
Valley in Assam. Movements of materials to CPM receives a much lower priority in view o f 
the freight traffic density. 
         (v)    HPC has already fulfilled its commitments to the Indian Railways by transferring of finishe d
goods through rake movement – full rake, half rake and even parcel vans, ensuring reverse
loading advantage to the Railways. However, the number of rakes being made available to 
Cachar Paper Mill has dwindled considerably as compared to the previous years. Moreover, 
Page 16 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

the NE Frontier Railway are taking the loaded rakes from mid-way stations in Lumding – Badarpu r 
section back to Lumding for inspection before onward movement to CPM which is also 
causing considerable delays in receipt of material at CPM.
 
         (vi)    With the deteriorating condition of the rolling stock which is prone to derailment and the
vulnerability of the tracks in the hill section to natural calamities, it is becoming increasingly 
difficult to receive bulk material inputs by CPM and delivering finished goods as pe r 
committed schedules.” 
3.1    The Committee recalled that the matter was di scussed by it at its meeting held on 21.8.2001. The
Committee in its 58th report had observed that the railways response to the need of HPC was prompt. The
Committee noted in that report that there had been substantial improvement in the availability of wagons
and the problem of transshipment at Lumding was also being addressed to. The Committee recommended
that DHI should take up with the railways the matte r relating to additional requirement of wagons fo r
HPC so as to enable them to operate efficiently in an otherwise difficult terrain. 
3.2    As the position since then has undergone some changes, the Committee decided to hear the
Railways and the DHI in the matter at its mee ting held on 13.10.2003. The Committee was informed by
Department of Heavy Industries that the Hindustan Paper Corporation, a holding company has got two
major integrated pulp and paper mills i.e. Nagaon Paper Mills (NPM) at Jagi Road and Cachar Pape
r
Mills (CPM) at Panchgram in Assam. Each of thes e units had an annual production capacity of one lakh
metric tons of writing and printi ng paper. As against this capacity, last year, in 2002-03, the Nagaon 
Paper Mills produced 1,07,000 metric tons and the C achar Paper Mills produced 94,000 metric tons. Las t
year, their financial turnover was Rs.630 crores and generated a profit of Rs.40 crores. They employed a
total of 3,146 persons, which included 2,260 workme n. All the goods which were moved to and from
these two mills were moved by both rail and road. The railway trans portation was used mainly for the
movement of Bamboo, which was the primary raw material for making paper, to these two mills, the
NPM and the CPM. Apart from this, the other bulk inputs like salt, soap-stone powder and sodium
sulphate were also transported by rail. These things came from far-away places like Gujarat, Rajasthan 
and Madhya Pradesh. The finished product – paper- was also transported by rail. 
3.3   The Nagaon Paper Mills, located on the broad-gauge of the Railways network, at a distance of 60
kilometres from Guwahati. The Cachar Paper Mills  is located on the metre-gauge network, of 28 
kilometres from Silchar. Transportation of Bamboo  to the Nagaon Paper Mills by rail had not pose d
much of a problem, probably, because it was on the broad-gauge network where both the allotment o f 
rakes and the movement were faster. But the comp any had been facing problems continuously in respec t
of transportation of Bamboo to the Cachar Paper Mills. This mill required about two rakes of Bamboo
every day. But on an average, only about 0.3 rakes per day had been allotted, which came to 11 rakes pe r
month, whereas the requirement was 60 rakes per month. 
3.4   The year-wise figures showed that the cont ribution of the share of Bamboo transported by rail ha d
been dwindling over the past five years. For ex ample, in 1999-2000, 30 per cent of the Bamboo receive d 
at Cachar came through the Railways. But, in 2000-01, it came down to 14 per cent, and in the next yea r
to 10 per cent from the level of 30 per cent, last year, it was 17 per cent, and in the current year, it was 12
per cent. It had therefore come down to 10-15 per cent. Since there had been continuous problems in
allocation of wagons, the company had been liaisoning with the Railway authorities, and there had been
frequent interactions between the two. Last year, in  October, 2002 there was a meeting in which the N.F.
Railway Authority agreed that they would provi de wagons to transport 15,000 MT of Bamboo every
month. Unfortunately this promise was not kept. Th e quantity of Bamboo, which was transported by rail
during the current year in the last six months, was only 14,000 MT which was about 12 per cent of the
quantity actually assured at the last October’s meeting. Also, the time taken for fulfilment of the inden t
was also long, and the pendency of indents was increasing. In September, it went up to 258. The numbe r
of indents, which were pending, was increasing. On this particular issue, the company had been
requesting to provide two rakes per day. Now, these two rakes per day would mean transportation o
f
about 21,000 MT of Bamboo per month. There was a similar problem in other bulk im ports like soa p-
Page 17 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

stone powder, sodium sulphate and salt which were brought from other areas, he added. 
3.5   Besides there was a very long time lag betwee n the submission of the indent and the actual dispatch
allowed by the Railways. One particular indent kept pending for 87 days. But, on an average, the time
taken for bringing salt from Gujarat and Rajasthan was 25 days. For an indent to be fulfilled in case o f
soap-stone powder and sodium sulphate, it was slightly better, where the time taken was 15-18 days. On 
this issue, last year also, the company held cons ultations with the Railway authorities as well as the
Railway Board. They made a special request to th e Railway Board, and the Board was pleased to allow
exemption from the quota system which was operative in the North-Eastern region. But it was late r 
indicated that it was only for one month, that is, for the month of February. The company had been
requesting that this exemption from the quota should be allowed on a regular basis. What they neede
d
really was five rakes per month for transportation of these goods. If the quota was relaxed to that extent,
it would have sufficed.
 
3.6    The finished product i.e. Paper was also to be sent through the railways wagons. The company ha d
been co-operating with the Railways by increasing the backload of the wagons. The percentage o f
backload had been increasing over the past years.  In 1999-2000, it was 36 per cent. This had gone up by 
72 per cent in the current year. 
3.7    There was one another small problem. In the North Cachar hills, there were certain stations from
where Bamboo was loaded on to wagons. The contract for loading was normally with the party which
had won the contract with the company for supply of Bamboo. Now, the company had reported that a t
three places, the Railways had allowed lease to particular party. This was causing problems because only
the party, which had won the contract from the comp any, could only load the Bamboo. If this party
engaged by Railways did not win the contract from the company, there was problem. But this was a
recent problem and it was perhaps engaging the attention of the Railway authority. 
3.8    The Committee observes that it has been looki ng for more for the North-Eastern States and the 
Railways have to operate economically from th e revenue point of view. The Committee desires tha t
everybody has to be efficient. The North-Eastern re gion is a special case to the Committee where the
Committee wants to go out of the way to recommend it. In case the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime
Minister, and everybody was saying that the Go vernment should do something because of the
employment potential and the available raw material. The Railways have therefore to consider this region
as a special one, not just from the economical or feasibility points of view. 
3.9    As regards the supply of  the Coal the HPC informed that the Company was getting coal from
Meghalaya for the Cachar Paper Mills, and from Marg eratta to Jagiroad from the North-Eastern Coal 
fields by rail. The Railways wanted to give a one- time trial for Panchgram. Before the broad gauge came
into picture, they were transporting raw materials at Guwahati. The rake was coming from Panchgram to
Margaretta. In case it was possible to get coal also through rail, it would help them. They did face
problems of coal at Panchgram. 
3.10  The Committee observed that the movement of coal was a major problem. The Railways had to
look into three aspects; first, whether they were able to improve their lines; whether their meter gauge o r
the broad gauge were sufficient; and third, the transhipment should be minimised by various othe r
methods. But in taking care of all these, the basic object was to see to it that there was an improvement in
the employment opportunities. 
3.11  The Railways, informed the Committee that railway s had been quite conscious of the fact that the
North-Eastern Region deserved a special treatment, fo r various considerations. Efforts were on, both in
the short term, medium term and the long term, to take care of the bottlenecks and improve the
throughput. As the Jagiroad factory of the Hindustan Paper Corporation was concerned, in 2002-03, the 
monthly average of number of wagons which were loaded from this factory, was 258.3 wagons in the
first six months of the current financial year; that is, from April to August; the loading had gone up to
434.66 wagons, which was a substantial increase of 69 per cent. The second one was concerning the
Panchgram factory that was on the Lumding-Badarpur  section. It was the meter gauge section and was
about 38 kms. from Silchar. There, the last 
year average was 245 meter gauge wagons loaded per month,
Page 18 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

which had gone up to 304 and that was a rise of 24 per cent. As far as the inward traffic was concerned,
the feeding of the raw material like Bamboo and few other commodities, which were coming from
Rajasthan and Gujarat etc. were concerned, the main  limitations which the Railwa ys were facing was the
limited transhipment capacity at Lumding-Badarpur section. It was a broad gauge-cum-meter gauge 
point. This Lumding-Badarpur section had a total length of 181.98 kms. There were 28 stations and 37
tunnels in this section with lengths ranging from 40 to 586 meters and the most critical section lies
between two particular stations where there was acute gradience in the up-direction. This imposed a very 
severe constraint on the haulage capacity of the locomotives. And this was most vital rail link connecting
the rest of the country with the States like Tripura, Mizoram and Manipur. 
3.12  While the Railways very much appreciated and shared the concerned expressed by the Departmen t
of Heavy Industry about the functioning of the two units of the Hindustan Paper Corporation, the fac t
remained that the Indian Railways had a bigger responsibility of feeding the essential commodities like
foodgrains, sugar, fertilizer s, salts, cement to these North-Eastern States. For the Railways, the priority 
was higher for these States and in these areas. In their effort to improve matters, the immediate thing tha t
the Railways had done was to optimize the running of trains, that is, the operational part. The charte d
capacity of the section was only 10 trains and today their average was 10.9 trains, that is, 109 per cen t
capacity utilization as per today’s position. Now, w ith a view to give a long-term relief and improve 
matters, the Ministry of Railways had taken up a project for the construction of the Lumding-Silcha r 
section with a little modification by extending it. The total length now was 292 kms. Its anticipated cos t
was Rs.1496.42 crores. It was sanctioned in 1996. So far, the Railways had already spent Rs.184.38
crores on the project and another Rs.75 crores had been allocated for the current financial year. A General
Manger (Construction) based in Guwahati was looking after the construction of railway lines, doubling of
gauge conversion, etc. in the North-Eastern Region. Since the Railways had a large shelf of sanctioned 
projects, the Indian Railways had a genuine constraint  of funding of all the projects simultaneously and,
therefore, for these two projects, the Lumding-Silchar-Jaghiroad gauge conversion and the other one 
Kumaraghat-Agartala new line, the Hon’ble Railway Minister had made a special request to the Hon’
ble 
Prime Minister to see if something could be done to give special assistance for the development an d
execution of these projects, treating them on a sepa rate footing and considering them of national
importance. So, the Railways were pursuing it through their own channels for getting the funds. 
3.13  The Member, Traffic (Railway Board), request ed the Committee to help them get more funds fo r
the execution of these projects. NF  Railways, the Railways had done some modification of the project to
lay a new BG track on the MG lining. A part of the section and not the entire section is being converter as
was a critical section, of 97 kms. The Railways ha d sanctioned Rs.27 crores for undertaking this wor k
and it would give some relief in future. Within a year’s time. The representatives of Railways admitte d 
that there had been a substantial forfeiture or cancellation of indents at several stations i.e. North’ Cachar 
hill section, Hathikhali Lumbding, Mandardisa, and Kalachand stations. Supplying wagons should be
appreciated as it involved a lot of work on the part of Railways to mobilize wagons, carry them to various
places. Secondly the loading in MG from the plain area in Tripura State, Dharm Nagar etc. where loading
was not being done due to lake of indents. If some load was distributed to the plains area by the company
then from both the ends they could supply wagons in a better way. The availability of wagons would then
improve. 
3.14  The representative of HPC also clarified th at during the year 2003, if statistics from April to
September were taken, in no month HPC he got more than 133 wagons in the N.C. hills. Some of the
indents were withdrawn during the particular month as referred to by representative of Railway. During
the last ten days time they gave 282 wagons. Whereas, in the last eight or nine months, they had got no
t
even 200 wagons. 
3.15  The representative of HPC further informed that in meter gauge section, there are small stations like
Manderdisa, Hatikhali where the space to keep Bamboo here was limited. The commercial plots close to
the railway lines had been given to somebody else. So, they were not able to keep their Bamboo there.
Since they had not been able to get wagons for the last nine or ten months, they were facing problems. As
soon as the wagons came, they loaded and, once they completed loading, they would bring more
Bamboo. A
part from this, in the last four or five da ys, there had been incessant rains. Even the railwa y
Page 19 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

track had been closed for two to three days due to landslides. 
3.16  The representative of HPC further stated that the second aspect was about the load from the plain
areas. HPC had loaded at Hiravi in Mizoram 546 wagons from January to September. In Chowrabari,
they had loaded 886 wagons. The have loaded from Dharmnagar 930 wagons, which was the highest ever
loading. In fact, their production had gone up. Their capacity, during the last six years, had gone up from
50,000 tonnes per year to 94,000 tonnes per year. This clearly showed that their requirement ha d
increased. The Railways was catering to the PDS requirement. As a result, they were slightly giving low
priority to the industrial sector. At the same time, in the year 2000-01, they reco rded a maiden profit o f 
Rs.8 crores. And, now, it had came down to Rs.2 crores. Now, the mill was closed for about fifteen days
because of shortage of Bamboo. The road infrastructure was also bad. He requested the Committee to see
that they get more and more wagons to enable them to supply more and more Bamboo. 
3.17  The Member, Traffic informed that he had th e figures from the N.F. Railway about the load o f
Bamboo from Panchgram for the first six months of the current year and previous year from each section.
In the last year, the average number of wagons load per month was 233.3. This year it had gone up to
245. So, there was an increase of six wagons per month. But, from the plain sections of Tripura State
region, last year it was 284.5 wagons per month and this year in the first six months, it had declined to
137.3 wagons. It was less than half.
 
3.18  It was then enquired whether it was because indents were not there or because supply was not there.
The Member, Traffic said that there were no indents. The representative of HPC said that they started in
Tripura and Mizoram only a couple of years ago. Whatever statistics Railways may have, he woul d
submit that HPC had been taking much more from t hose areas and those areas were practically owned by
the private people. There the Bamboo procurement would start from April to October, whereas the NC
hill areas were under HPC’s control. Here, HPC operated from their own lands, whereas in the othe r
states they just bought. In Mizoram they had a system of leasing the Mehals to persons who were quoting
the maximum. In Mizoram, despite their sale of Mehals, they had been able to load 546 wagons. As ha d
been said that they had delayed the leasing of Mehals of Chowrabari and Dharmnagar. And the
operations had started only last year. 
3.19  The second aspect was that which should also be realized that a highly insurgency prone area,
particularly Tripura and Manipur. These were the places where insurgency was very high. For that matter,
it was almost the same case with the NC hills. And, saying that they had reduced the loading was no t
correct. As and when the material was available from the people, indents were placed and they were still
trying to get from Bhairvi, Chorabari and Dharmnagar. And, they were in constant touch with the N.E.
Railways. They also want to strengthen the Railways so that they could operate well and help HPC. 
3.20  The Committee pointed out that it had been given information about the wagons being loaded, an d
the figures of increase in loading also. What wa s the reason behind the increase in loading? Was i t
because earlier the availability of the wagons was not there and, subsequently, it got increased or was i t
the total indent of the company th at was there? Secondly, there was the issue of rakes being available to
the company. Their requirement was two rakes per day, but, ultimately, ten rakes in a month were being
given. Did that mean that their priority as far as the transportation was concerned, was towards goods
other than those, which were essentially required to run this company in order to generate not only profi t
but also employment for the people of the North-East ern region. So, the priorities, probably, had to be
seen together with the profitability of railways and the utility of the company. Could Railways tell the
Committee about their requirement? The company’s re quirement was known, but did they have any
special allocation dedicated to the paper mills? 
3.21  The Member, Traffic informed that it was not possible to make a separate dedicated allocation fo r
any consumer good because the rolling stock, which th ey had, was in a single pool. They made use of i t
for carrying anything that they had to carry. They would carry food grains, salt, Bamboo, cement,
fertilizers, etc. So, it was not desirable from the point of view of optimum utilization of resources tha t
Railways should dedicate the stock only for a particular user. 
3.22  It was also pointed out that it was not a question of dedicating it for a particular user. But as far as
allocation of wa gons was concerned, was it discretionar y or was it going to be on the basis of some
Page 20 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

scientific norms? The wagons carried many things, a nd in return, probably, the entire stock may not be
loaded. So, empty wagons may be coming back only because there was no load from the North-East. The 
idea was that in case the dedicated requirement was there, Railways may have seasonal transport as far as
other goods were concerned. 
3.23  On being asked about the norms for allocation of the wagons the member traffic informed that the
Railways had got preferential traffic schedule, based on priority. For example a defence requirement,
would get the highest priority. Movement of food grains for famine relief would get low a priority. It is a
fact that over the years, the pressure on the transportation network from various sources was growing.
The immediate solution to the problems referred to by HPC was that if they could divide the catchments
area between the hills as well as the plains, maximize the loading both from the hills and the plains, then,
the overall arrivals in the factory would bound to increase. In the plains, as the terrain was in favour o
f
the traffic with the same number of engines and wagons, Railways could provide much faster traffic in
the plains. The representative of Railways urged upon the Committee to consider giving a direction to the
company that it must make their best efforts to get maximum traffic loading from the plains also.
 
3.24  The Committee observed that there was no choice, because where there was employment potential,
where a paper mill was located. The Corporation had to utilize it. When there was nothing in the plains
the Railways had also to take this point into consideration. 
3.25  As regards the transhipment at Lumding the Member, Traffic informed per se it had fairly enough 
infrastructure. And the proof was in the fact that  Railways were able to take care of 115 broad gauge
wagons and 225 or so meter gauge wagons per day. But the problem was that the corresponding input o f
meter gauge loaded stock for broad gauge stream was not there. That section was so difficult that the
Railways could not haul with a single loco. The main constraint was therefore the terrain because in
meter gauge the haulage capacity of the loco was limited. It got severely accentuated because of the
gradient problem. That was why he submitted to the Committee that as an interim measure they ha d
sanctioned a scheme of Rs.27 crores to improve the situation. From the long-term point of view, gauge
conversion would come through in the next say 7 or 8 years, depending upon the fund flow. But they
were anxious to bring some succour and relief in the immediate future, that was why they had agreed fo r
this. 
3.26  The Committee then asked the DHI to give their main requirements. He felt that DHI had been
facing some seasonal problems. Railways would also  work out their strategy for meeting the maximum
requirements, in addition to other requirements which were also increasing. In any case, he would request
Railways to undertake some measures so that the situation could be improved. Railways already knew the
requirements in regard to coal, Bamboo, and other chemicals. On that basis, they should try to give
maximum, if that was possible. What did they require from the higher authorities in order to improve
their efficiency? As Railways had said, the capacity had increased and their requirements were also going
up. Did the Railways have any plans for future expansion? If so, the Committee would ask the
Government to sanction more money.
 
3.27  The Joint Secretary, DHI pointed out that the Committee had mentioned about the coordination
between the Company and the Railway Authorities and that there had been enough interaction between
the Company and the Railway Authorities and that there had been enough interaction between the
Company and the Railway authorities. They often met with each other and exchanged various
information. In fact, there had been a meeting in Oc tober last year between the N.F. Railway authorities
and the Company. He quoted a few lines from the minut es of that meeting which said, “In view of the 
above, following understanding had been reached between HPC/PNGM and N.F. Railways:
 
“The monthly requirement of Bamboo at PNGM Paper Mill would be 33,000 MT on an average pe r 
month. The rail share of total Bamboo requirement would be on an average 15,000 MT per month.” 
3.28  In that meeting, N.F. Railway Authority agr eed that they would provide wagons to transport 15,000
MT of Bamboo every month. Unfortunately, however, this promise had not been kept. But DHI ha d
learnt about the constraints of the N.F. Railways. They had come to know that they were operating a t
their 100 per cent capacity, but their capacity was used for various other purposes also. That was why
the
y had not been able to increase their allocation. 
Page 21 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

3.29  The representative of HPC informed the Committee that they had been coordinating with the
Railways. They had no problem on that account. His assessment of the situation was that the rolling
stocks, the wagons, diesel were aging and they were replacing them. During that time, every year, a
t
least, 200 to 300 wagons were being condemned. Th e wagons, which they were utilizing for Bamboo,
cannot take any other material because they were completely without panels. Railway was getting
revenue completely from damaged wagons. His suggestion was that they could transfer some of the
wagons which were in other areas to that area. If engine, the diesel engine, the wagons were transferred to
that area, it would ease the problem to a large extent. The Convenor observed that there should not be any
problem. Those engines and wagons could be diverted. 
3.30  The representatives of DHI clarified that the entire capacity of that particular section had already
been allocated. The possibility for Railways to increas e the availability of wagons could be explored to
some extent as in the absence of adequate number of wagons the company had to resort to transportation
by road which was more expensive. 
3.31  The representatives of Railways informed that the Railways had inducted three rakes in the last two
to three months. The Railways had increased transhipment from 90 to 105 and also were trying to
increase it up to 130 by the end of the year.
 
3.32  The Committee observes that the Railways have  to ensure to how they could improve more
handling of material including transhipment. As regards gauge conversion, the Committee feels that is
could be done at a faster pace even if by increasing the funds. The Committee observes that there is nee d
for coordination. The Committee therefore suggests that such problems should be resolved by having
weekly co-ordination between the Railway Department and the Industry Department. They can prioritise
their own arrangement with a view to minimize the problems. The Committee also agrees to the
suggestion of the Member traffic that the Chief Manager (Traffic) from Malin Gaon, Guwahati, who
oversee the North East frontier of Railway, being the nodal officer would request the HPC, that an office
r
of the appropriate level be nominated to hold these meetings. The Representatives of DHI also welcome d
the suggestion. The Committee therefore directs the Railways and the Industry to nominate appropriate
persons who would arrange these meetings because there should be parity of level. 
  
CHAPTER – IV 
OTHER PSUs UNDER DHI LOCATED IN THE NORTH EASTERN REGION 
4.0    The Committee had been pursing the case of industries located in the North Eastern Region fo r
transport subsidy and excise relief. The Committee recommended that a Committee of Secretaries be se t
up under the chairmanship of the Secretary, IPP, with secretaries of Department of Revenue an d
Department of Heavy Industries, Department of De velopment of North Eastern Region as members to
prepare a paper on transparent subsidy for the industries in the North Eastern Region. The Committee o f
Secretaries submitted a report to the Parliamentary Committee. Department of Revenue, however, made
an observation on the report of Committee of Secretaries, which is as under : 
“The question of granting exemption to existing units has been re-examined. It would be appreciated 
that if any relaxation is made in the scope of North East exemption by way of its extension to 
existing units, It will, sooner or later, generate similar demands from other areas like J&K, Kutch, 
Himachal and Uttranchal. This will have serious consequences on revenue. Anyway, such existing 
units can always avail of the exemption through suitable expansion. It may also be pertinent to 
mention that the core issue which the Committee set out to resolve, i.e. finding ways to solve the 
problems of Hindustan Paper Mills (HPC), has been pushed to background and instead rejuvenating 
the existing units has come to the centre stage. The subdivision of Revenue will certainly look into 
the question for relive to PSUs sympathetically.”
 
4.1   In view of the contents of the above letter, the Committee decided to delink the case of wood- based 
industry from the Committee’s consideration, as Depa rtment of Revenue would consider the case o f
PSUs only. The Committee was of the opinion that by virtue of Department of Revenue’s letter date d 
10th June, 2003 (Annexure-II), other PSUs under the DHI located in the North Eastern Re gion are also
Page 22 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

eligible for excise or any other relief which may be extended to the HPC. The Committee at its meeting
held on 7 th August 2003, asked whether the benefit proposed to be given to HPC could be extended to 
Andrew Yule & Company Ltd (AYCL) and Cement Corporation of India (CCI) which had units in North
Eastern Region Secretary, Heavy Industry, informed the Committee that AYCL had some tea gardens in
the North East. Whatever was applicable to the tea industry in general was applicable to the AYCL. As
regard CCI, it had one unit in Bokajan in Assam. This units was making marginal profits.
 
4.2   The CMD, AYCL informed the Committee on 7th August, 2003 that they had nine estates in Assam, 
which employed 9000 people. They pro duced about 5500 tonne of tea, 50 per cent of which went out o f
the State. The remaining 50 per cent was sold in Guwahati. Approximately Rs.25 million – Rs.10000 pe r 
truck – was the transportation cost per year. Transport subsidy in the order of Rs.2.5 crores would be
quite a lot for them. Tea industry, as a whole, was passing through an extremely bad time. Even if they
got 50 per cent of that, which came to about Rs.1.25 crores as subsidy, it would help them to some extent.
4.3   As far as excise duty was concerned, they are not covered under the excise duty. It had been
converted into a cess. However, he said that some of their other divisions were making losses. The profi t
of tea industry subsidized the losses of these divisions. Therefore, due to this reason only in the past, they
have not been able to put enough money in terms of upgradation of the factories and other related things.
Almost 30-40 crores would be required over a period of 2-3 years and they would like that money to be 
earmarked by way of equity as they are not in a position to take a loan.
 
4.4   The CMD, CCI, stated that as on date whatever  they produced they consumed it in the nearby areas.
These units have been profitable only because they had a captive market and not a competitive market. In
a cement mill when they stopped the production and rest arted it, they wasted a lot of energy. The public
sector units were installed in the remote corners of the country. It was a very remotely placed unit. The
mines were around 30 kms off. They had to bring everything by ropeway. The cost of production was
about Rs.2200 per metric ton. Still they were able to make profits. But that did not justify that they should
have such a high cost of production. It was only because of the logistics involved. They, as a PUS, have
to compete with all the cement manufacturers comin g from West Bengal and Assam. They wanted tha t
the extra cost of inputs that they have to incur should be given as a subsidy. The mining area was prone to
terrorist attacks. If they transport cement by truck from Assam to Imphal there was an additional cost o f
Rs.2000 that they have to pay to the NCCM, a Na galand terrorist group. So even though they were
making profits it got totally marginalized because of insurgency, the production stoppages, the high cos t
of power etc. 
4.5   The Convenor observed that the present issue stood as it was since the Revenue Secretary said that i t
was for the Secretary Industry to prepare a proposal and give it to him and then they would examine it.
Since she has mentioned about the public sector, she should be able to give it. He once again made a
request that instead of making it on a one-time basis, could they also go along with it. Whateve
r
Government would give, the Committee would consider on that basis. Secretary, Department of Revenue
should bring it to the notice of the Finance Minister.
 
4.6   However, the DHI vide their letter (Annexure-III) informed that Transparent Subsidy in the case o f
AYCL and Cement Corporation of India Ltd. Was discussed in a meeting by the Secretary, Departmen t
of Heavy Industry with Secretary, Department of Revenue on 21 st August 2003. It was felt that so far as 
the tea gardens of AYCL and one unit of CCI were concerned, it was noted that AYCL had separately
recommended for an equity infusion into the company being of greater use for their rehabilitation. It was,
therefore, decided that the issue of rehabilitation would separately be taken up in the ongoing
rehabilitation scheme presently under the consideration of Government. As regards CCI, it was noted tha
t
there would be administrative and legal complications  in considering such relief only for one of the 10
CCI units, particularly, in the context of the ongoing sale of assets of the said company. 
4.7   The Committee recalled that the Department of  Heavy Industry in the Action Taken Note on the
recommendations contained in the 72 nd report of the Committee had stated that AYCL had submitted a
project proposal for its tea gardens for sanction a nd release of budgetary support of Rs.5.50 crores unde r
the provisions of “Non-lapsable pool of Revenues from the North East”. The proposal was under active 
consideration. 
4.8   The Committee in its 101 st report recommended : “The Committee also expects that Department o f 
Heavy Industry will provide necessary support for tea gardens located in North East under the Provisions
Page 23 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

of “Non-Lapsable Pool of Resources for North East.” 
4.9   The Committee understands that DHI has to ear mark 10 per cent of total budget for spending on its
project in the North East. In case the DHI is not in a position to spend the amount on its own project in
the North East, the money goes to  the non-lapsable pool and it is  given to the Department o f
Development of North Eastern Region. The latter utilizes  the money for the last mile project of the North
Eastern States in consultation with the State Government in projects like power, bridges, irrigation, where
the State Governments could not complete their proj ects for want of fund. Department for Developmen
t
of North Eastern Region has no authority to spend the money for any PSU. 
4.10From the oral evidence tendered by the CMDs of AYCL and CCI, the Committee noted that thei r
units in the North East need help. The plants and machinery of tea gardens of AYCL are obsolete and in
order to compete in the competitive market these plants and machinery need to be modernized. The
Committee also feels that CCI unit in Bokajan in Assam is also operating in an unfriendly atmosphere.
Although both the companies are on the disinvestment lis t, it is unlikely that buyers would go all the way
to the North East to take over these units. The Committee also noted that the case of the closed Nagalan
d
Pulp and Paper Mill has been taken up separately. HM T also has a unit in Guwahati which too is running
at loss. 
4.11The Committee has given its observations/recommendations on the PSUs under DHI in the
concluding chapter.
 
  
 CHAPTER – V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
SUBSIDY 
5.0   Under the new industrial policy for the No rth Eastern Region finalized by the Government in
December 1997, the units located in the North East sector are eligible for transport subsidy only for the
first five years of commercial production till 31.3.2007 in addition, all the units in those zones would be
free from income tax, excise duty, for a period of 10 years from the commencement of production. 
5.1   The rationale for transport subsidy is to mitigat e the high cost of transportation of raw material an d
finished products due to location of  units in remote, hilly and inaccessible areas of the country, where
infrastructure is poor. 
5.2   The transportation cost of NPM and CPM for raw materials and finished products from and to the
main land is extremely high and hence needs to be mitigated through extension of subsidy. The grant o
f
transport subsidy should be reviewed in a different light. While units through improved performance may
become economically viable even after tax holiday, the transportation cost does not get mitigated unless
the requisite infrastructure is developed. 
5.3   The southern part of Assam, where the CPM is  situated, is highly monsoon prone area and the roads
are inundated with flood water every years and land slides occur causing disruption of road movement for
about 2-3 months every year. Thus CPM deserves some fiscal concessions from the Government to
become a viable unit. 
5.4   HPC, therefore, appealed to the Government of India to include the existing establishment which are
continuously being affected adversely due to their locational disadvantages, like the CPM, under the new
industrial policy and grant extension of excise duty payment for a period of ten years and to revive the
transport subsidy scheme w.e.f. April 1995 as a special case for CPM.  
5.5   The Department-related Parliamentary Sta nding Committee, while examining the problems of HPC
units located in the North East, felt that at the strategic level the problems facing industrial units in the
North East, notwithstanding whether it was private or public sector, were uniform and similar. The
Committee, after hearing the representatives of HPC, refineries and wood- based industries located in the 
North East recommended in its 58 th report that the facility of transport subsidy and excise concession
should be extended to the said industries. 
5.6   The Committee, however, to its disma y found that the Government in its 2002-03 bud get granted 
Page 24 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

excise relief to the refineries in the North East  and turned Nelson’s eye to the HPC and wood- based 
industries. It is pertinent to note that Revenue Secretary, at the Committee’s meeting held on 4.02.2002 
stated that as far as petrochemical industries/refineries were concerned, the reduction of excise duty
would not solve the problems in the present ma rket-oriented economy. He, however, opined that i f 
Government felt these units were important for th e North East, then instead of excise mechanism,
transparent subsidy should be provided. The Committee also recalled that the Finance Secretary at the
Committee’s meeting held on 27.09.01 had informed th e Committee that basically those refineries were
not viable in the long run because there was not adequate crude and there was no demand. Once it was
understood then subsidies could be s een in a larger context e.g. for the North East Region this was the
cost that the country would have to bear. Subsidies would provide relief for a few years but if the
consumption did not go up then it would come back as some other subsidy. 
5.7   Since the HPC and wood- based industries were kept outside the ambit of the excise concession
despite its strong recommendations, the Committee had seven meetings with the representatives o f
Departments of Heavy Industry and Public Enterpri ses, Industrial Policy and Promotion, North Eas t
Region, Revenue and Railways on 24.6.02, 28.1102,  22.04.03, 23.7.03, 7.08,03, 4.09.03 and 13.10.03 on
the subject. 
5.8   The Committee recommended that under the Chairm anship of Secretary, Department of IPP, a
Committee of Secretaries be set up with Secretaries,  Department of Revenue, Heavy Industry, Revenue
and Development of North Eastern Region as members to sort out the problem. That Committee
submitted its report to the Committee on 25.6.03 (Annexure-I) and inter-alia recommended as:
 
        (i)      excise duty related concessions and other concessions should be extended to the existing units
with a sunset clause. These concessions shoul d be extended for a period of 10 years. 100 pe r 
cent in the initial 5 years and 50 per cent for the subsequent 5 years and the same should be by 
way of outright exemption. 
        (ii)      Excise exemption granted to pe troleum sector was outside the scope of NEIP and therefore i t
may be considered on merits by Department of Revenue (Central Board of Excise and 
Customs) separately. 
        (iii)     Hindustan Paper Corporation (HPC) and Nagaland Pulp & Paper Company (NPPC) have to
be considered separately for ex cise concessions as there are sufficient grounds for extending 
concessions to them under special dispensations. 
        (iv)     The minimum value added condition may be introduced for availing of the concessions to
encourage sustainable development. 
        (v)     List of thrust industries which should be made eligible for concessions irrespective o f
locations and the list of negative industries will be finalized by DIPP in consultations with 
Department of Revenue. 
5.9   Department of Revenue again vide their letter dated 10 th June stated (Annexure-II) that they woul d 
not accept the report of the Committee of Secretaries in toto. However, they were agreeable to provide 
excise relief to PSUs only. 
5.10The Committee at this stage delinked the wood- based industries from the scope of its consideration.
The Committee, however, decided to examine the cases of PSUs under DHI located in the North Eas t
who are also facing the similar kind of problem. 
5.11The focus of the discussion was centred on two points i.e. 
        (i)      if excise concession is given to the North East units, the other States like Uttaranchal an d
Himachal Pradesh will also ask for similar facilities; and 
        (ii)      when refineries were given the excise, the other industries should be given some facility in
the North East or whether refineries can be equated with the paper industry. 
5.12The Committee observes that there are certain probl ems which should be tackled irrespective of the
Page 25 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

revenue angle or what would happen if the Government do this in some other place and in doing such
things the Government should always remember that even the most advanced countries in the worl d
today has this type of policy of what they consider to be relatively depressed. Right from the stage when
development is talked of, most of these countries in the west had resorted to some degree of subsidy.
Secondly, if it is said that certain concessions on merit are necessary, it would be immoral to say tha t
these concessions would be given only from a particular cut off date. Because some people have already
started production and it should not be proper to think that they do not deserve concessions, which are
applicable to the new cases. In other words, the incremental expenses for ensuring production an
d
employment would be much less in the case of the ex isting units than in the new units. Therefore, this
artificial distinction between one unit which is there already and another which is going to come because
of the new policy would not weigh too much in Government’s mind. The Government should not be 
overtly concerned as to what would happen if Him achal Pradesh demands what has been given to the
North East or if some other State demands what is done for the North East. If the Government takes a
total picture, if it is found that certain regions deserve special treatment for handling them, the
Government should not close its mind saying that this would open door and more and more people woul
d
come in. 
5.13As regards comparative status of petroleum and paper industry, the Committee observes that when
refineries in the North East were running at losses, excise relief was given to them and it is not known
what would happen when the excise relief would be withdrawn as they are now making profit in the ligh
t
of Dr. S. Narayan's Comments. But paper industry is  making profit even without excise relief. The only
requirement is that their hands may be strengthened in view of their potential for employment generation.
Two units of HPC are highly employment generating and there is a lot of multiplier effect in the informal
sector because even today in the extraction of  Bamboo, pulp, wood etc. HPC have not gone fo
r
mechanical devices. HPC is not havi ng an approach of jobless growth; they have an appr oach of job-led 
growth. HPC’s problems accentuated due to Assam agitation which resulted in cost overrun and time
overrun and their debt burden increased. The Co mmittee feels that the Government should have
considered the case of HPC along with refineries in the matter of excise relief. 
5.14The Committee, however, expresses its happiness as Secretary, Department of Revenue, informe d
the Committee that 50 per cent excise concession would be given for one year and thereafter it would be
reviewed. The Committee, however, recommends that HPC’s case should be reviewed by the 
Government on the lines of refineries till it is disinvested.
 
ALLOTMENT OF RAKES BY RAILWAYS 
5.15The Committee noted the following points from the oral evidence by the DHI and HPC: 
        (i)      HPC is facing problems continuously in respect of transportation of  Bamboo to the Cacha r
Paper Mill which is on the meter gauge network. The mill requires two rakes of Bamboo 
everyday but they are getting 0.3 rakes everyday. The year-wise figure shows that the 
contribution of share of Bamboo transported by rail is dwindling over the last five years. 
        (ii)      There is a long time lag betwee n the submission of the indent and the actual dispatch allowe d
by the Railways. 
        (iii)     The companies had been requesting Railways that exemption from quota system should be
allowed on a regular basis. 
        (iv)     Since the finished product – paper – is transported to the Northern India through Railways,
with the increased allocation of rakes the percentage of backload would increase. 
        (v)     The capacity of the CPM has gone  which shows their requirement has gone up. The Railways
is prioritizing the PDS requirement in the North East Region. As a result, industrial sector is 
given lower priority. At the same time, in the year 2000-01 they recorded a maiden profit o f 
Rs.8 crores and now it has come down to Rs.2 crores. Presently, the mill is closed for about 15 
days for shortage of Bamboo. 
        (vi)     There had been a meetin g the last October (2002) between the N.F. Railwa y and HPC where
Page 26 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

N.F. Railway promised to provide wagons to tr ansport 15,000 MT of Bamboo every month but tha t
promise had not been kept. 
        (vii)    Railways are replacing aging wagons. These wagons may be shifted to that area fo r
transportation of Bamboo as wagons carrying Bamboo cannot take any other material as they 
are completely without panels. Railways can earn revenue from damaged wagons. 
5.16The Committee noted the following points from oral evidence tendered by the Railways: 
        (i)      The main limitation which the Railways are facing is the limited transshipment capacity a t
Lumding-Badarpur section. It is a broad gauge-cum-metre gauge point. This section has a total 
length of 181.98 kms. There are 28 stations and 37 tunnels in this section with lengths ranging 
from 40 to 586 metres and most critical sec tion lies between two particular sections where 
there is acute gradience in the upward direction. This imposes a very severe constraint on the 
haulage capacity of the locomotives. This the most vital rail link connecting Tripura, Manipu
r 
and Mizoram with the rest of the country. 
        (ii)      Railways have greater res ponsibility of carrying the essen tial commodities like foodgrains,
sugar, fertilizers, salt, cement etc. to the North Eastern States. 
        (iii)     Railways have optimized the running of trains. The chartered capacity of the section was only
10 trains and now it is 10.9. 
        (iv)     With a view  to giving long term relief, Railways have  taken up a project for the construction
of the Lumding-Silchar section with a little modification by extending it. 
        (v)     For two projects i.e. Lumding-Silchar-Jagiroad gauge conversion and Kumarghat-Agartala 
new line, the Railway Minister had requested Hon’ ble Prime Minister for giving special 
assistance and treating them on a separate footing and considering their national importance. 
        (vi)     There has been substantial forfeiture of indents by HPC. It involves a lot of work on Railways
part to mobilize wagons and if the traffic is no t loaded, then it becomes difficult for Railways 
to come back with empty wagons. 
        (vii)    There are two catchment areas – one is  in the plains and the other is in the hills. In the hills,
the Railways have the capacity constraints as they  have to carry other transshipments also. I f 
some load is diverted to the plains area by th e company then from both ends they could supply 
wagons in a better way. 
        (viii)   Railways have made some modifica tions to the project of laying a new broad gauge track on
the metre gauge line at a cost of Rs. 27 crores which is likely to be completed within a year. 
This would give some immediate relief. 
EFFORTS MADE BY THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
5.17Meanwhile, the Committee has received the comments of the Ministry of Railways vide their O.M. 
dated the 25 th November, 2003 (Annexure-IV), wherein it ha s been mentioned the efforts made by the
Ministry in regard to the issue of allotment of rakes to the HPC and to declare the Lumding-Silchar-
Jiribam gauge conversion and Kumarghat-Agartala ne w line as National Projects to be funded through
additional budgetary support over and above the normal Railways plan. 
5.18After hearing both the sides, the Committee observed that both sides have some valid points to prove
as well as there are some conflicting views about loading from plain areas as well as hilly areas,
cancellation of indents, time lag in indents and actual availability of wagons, etc. 
SPECIAL STATUS OF RAILWAY PROJECTS IN NORTH EASTERN REGION 
5.19The Committee, however, agrees, that the North Eastern Region should be given a separate footing
with regard to expansion of railway network specially for two projects i.e. conversion of metre gauge to 
broad gauge line in the Lumding-Silchar section as well as new line on Kumarghat-Agartala section. The 
Committee therefore recommends that Government of India should provide adequate funds fo r
implementation of these two projects as on completion of these projects not only the movement o f
essential commodities will be faster but also improve the industrial scenario in the North East with the
movement of raw materials re
quired for industrial units. The economic lot of common people in the
Page 27 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

North East depends on the industrial development which should not be lost sight of. 
5.20The Committee also recommends that there should be close coordination between DHI and Railways
at the Central level. There should also be weekly meetings between the NF Railway and HPC a t
Guwahati at appropriate level to sort out all problems by mutual consultation and cooperation. Railways
should play a greater role in the industrial development by having such interaction with the HPC.
 
5.21The Committee further recommends that DHI should take up the points discussed at its meeting hel d
on 13.10.2003 with the Railways and submit a report to the Committee in its ATN on the report. 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE MADE IN ITS
58TH REPORT 
5.22Since not much headway has been made with re gard to the implementations of the recommendations
made by the Committee in its 58 th report, the Committee reiterates its observations made in the sai d
report and recommends that DHI should take up the following subjects relating: 
        (i)      to the allotment of degraded forest land for the development of captive plantation with the
Government of Assam and the Ministry of Environment and Forests. 
        (ii)      to expedite approval for implementing working plans for extractions of Bamboo in the North
East and construction of dirt road in unexploite d forest areas with the State Government and 
Ministry of Environment and Forests. 
        (iii)     reviewing of the agreement with private firms regarding extraction of Bamboo on a long term
basis from the forest areas reserved for HPC to see whether there are any violation of Forest 
Conservation Act.   
        (iv)     Entering into an agreement with State Forest Departments to mobilize plantation with
necessary financial support with the condition th at the first charge on the crop at the time o f 
harvesting would be HPC’s. 
        (v)     Problems of gregarious flower ing which could lead to excessive rodent population, with
Ministry of Environment and Forests. 
        (vi)     Exploring the utilization of inland waterways in transportation of its products and raw
materials for interiors, with the Ministry of Shipping. 
OTHER PSUs UNDER THE DHI LOCATED IN THE NORTH EAST REGION 
5.23The Secretary, Department of Development of NE Region informed the Committee that his
department had the responsibility for last mile developments for socio-economic infrastructure in the NE 
region. The Government decided that 10 per cent of the gross budgetary support of every departmen t
except certain departments would be earmarked for the NE region. If they were not able to use this
money, it did not lapse, it went into a Non Lapsable Central Pool of Resources. On an average Rs.1500-
1600 crores had accrued over the years and a part of that money was made available to his department fo r
sanctioning infrastructure projects in the NE. Duri ng 2002-03, the amount available to the Departmen t 
was Rs. 550 crores and the proposal in the current  budget (2003-04) too was Rs. 550 crores. During the 
last 3 years the Department had been able to make full use of their budget allocations. 
5.24The system evolved was that the department would write to the State Government to tell thei r
priorities. Planning and Development Departments coor dinate with the demands of various departments
and would see what can be funded out of the normal department funds and then for the last mile
requirements they would submit a list approved by Chief Secretary and Chief Minister. The Departmen t
then would take a full view depending on the national priority. Power had been a high priority area.
Roads and drinking water etc. too were high on priority. They were also going in for capacity building. 
5.25However, insurgency just did not seem to be  going away. The DONER was trying to see that new
industrial units were there and that existing industrial units were sustained so that they contribute to the
economic development of the region. The quantum of private investment fell short because of (1)
insurgency (2) connectivity (3) working system (4) the ability to reach those places. Because of these
shortcomings industrial development was not taking place there. The solution was to sustain the industrial
activit
y which was going on. HPC needed to be sustained. 
Page 28 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

ALLOCATION OF MORE FUNDS FOR PSUs IN NORTH EASTERN REGION 
5.26It is evident from the oral evidence that in spite  of endeavour, the economic and industrial situation
in the North East has not improved. Tea gardens of AYCL and cement factory of CCI at Bokajan, Assam,
have kept their heads high amongst the ruins despite a climate of apathy prevailing there. Although both
the units are on sale, it is a common knowledge that North East is not a favoured destination for the
investors. 
5.27The Committee, therefore, recommends that the DHI from 10 per cent of its total budget should par t
with some amount for those units located in the North East to strengthen their hands so that they do no t
face closure as overall condition of tea industry is very poor and CCI may also improve its profitability as
their profit is minimized as they have to work in hostile circumstances. DHI should also earmark some
amount of 10 per cent reserved amount for the HMT’s unit at Guwahati.
 
5.28The Committee observes that for extending such he lp from its own kitty to existing units of PSUs
under the DHI they are not required to knock the door of Finance Ministry and Planning Commission.
The DHI should prepare appropriate proposal for its units in the North East Region as the closure of these
units will give a wrong signal to the people of the North Eastern States. 
 
(Vide Para 2.25 of the Report)
 
 ANNEXURE–I
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF SECRETARIES (COS) ON EXTENSION  
OF TRANSPARENT SUBSIDY AND OTHER FISCAL CONCESSIONS TO  
REJUVENATE EXISTING INDUSTRIAL UNITS IN NORTH EAST 
        The Sub-Committee-III of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry in
its meeting held on 23.08.2001 has suggested the ex tension of Transport Subsidy Scheme for a perio d
beyond 5 years to the existing industrial units keeping in view the problems faced by the plywoo d
industry, paper mills and other industrial units located in North Eastern Region (NER). 
2.     The Sub-Committee also reiterated its earlier recommendations for extending the time limit for an
industrial unit to avail the transport subsidy beyond 5 years and provision for excise duty concessions to
the existing units and for incorpor ating these modifications in the North East Industrial Policy (NEIP)
package notified in December, 1997. However, Dr. S. Narayanan, the erstwhile Secretary, D/o Revenue
suggested that rather than extending the excise concessions as an ad hoc  measure, a “Transparen t 
Subsidy” for revival of existing units should be considered. 
3.     In view of the suggestion of D/o Revenue, the Sub-Committee desired Department of Industrial 
Policy & Promotion (DIPP) to prepare a paper on Transparent Subsidy with the consensus of all the
stakeholders. DIPP, in pursuance of this, held tw o meetings on 24.06.2002 and 06.08.2002 with Deptt. o
f
Revenue, Expenditure, Heavy Industries, North Eastern Region, NEDFI, FINER, etc. However, these
meetings failed to arrive at any consensus on parameters & modalities of the Transparent Subsidy. 
4.     The Sub-Committee in its subsequent meet ing held on 28.11.2002 desired that a Committee o f
Secretaries (COS) comprising of Secretaries of Deptt. of Revenue, Deptt. of Development of North
Eastern Region (DONER), Deptt. of Heavy Industries and Deptt. of IPP should suggest a solution such as
extension of the package with a view to revive the sick units in the North Eastern Region and to facilitate
the growth of existing operating units. The COS constituted by the Sub-Committee-III  
(Annexure-I – constitution of the Committee) was entrusted with the task of finalization of modalities o f
fiscal policy interventions for reactivating industrial units to rejuvenate investment in NER. The  
Sub-Committee also observed that revenue consideration should not come in the way of a revival
package and artificial distinction which were made in NEIP – 1997 between a new and existing uni t 
should not undermine the objective of the package which was announced for special problem areas. 
Page 29 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

DELIBERATIONS 
5.     The first meeting under the Chairmanship of  Secretary, Department of Industrial Promotion Policy
(IPP) was held on 24.12.2002 in Udyog Bhavan to discuss the issue of Transparent Subsidy, etc. to be
granted to industrial units in the North East. (List of participants indicated in Annexure-II).
 
6.     Welcoming the members, JS (DIPP) explained the background leading to the meeting and the
Memorandum to the Parliamentary Standing Committee submitted by Industry Associations for preparing
a revival package for the NE Region. 
7.     CMD, Hindustan Paper Corporation and representatives of DHI & DONER pleaded for providing
excise concession to the existing units. Explaining the constraints faced by HPC, CMD mentioned that in
the absence of proposed concessions, incremental investments in capacity expansion and/o
r
modernization and technology upgradation, which is essential and more economical than the green fiel d
new capacity cases, may not be possi ble. It was also mentioned that inbound logistic disadvantage face d
by HPC came to Rs. 700 per tonne and out bound logistic disadvantage to Rs. 1335 per tonne. The
infrastructural and other operating constraints increase the cost of production in NER and associate d
transaction costs. Therefore, continuance of incentives like Transport Subsidy and excise concessions and
their extension to the existing units would redress the hardships being faced by these units in the curren t
competitive market scenario. CMD, HPC further mentioned that most of the existing industrial units have
inherent disadvantage of having su ffered time and cost overruns leading to over-capitalisation due to 
external disturbances and law and order problems during the project construction and equipment erection
period. He also pointed out that the NEIP 1997 have not resulted in major industrial investments in
projects with an outlay of over Rs.50 crores and above. It appears that notwithstanding the liberal reliefs
and concessions, private enterprises are still shy of investing in medium and major projects in NER on
account of the continuing infrastructural deficiencies and endemic problems of insurgency. Moreover, i t
is difficult to attract professional talent to NER in managing modern enterprises. The earlier prevailing
concessions were envisaged for a limited period based on the assumption that the infrastructural facilities
would develop and the inherent disadvantages of industrial units located in NER will end in the
meantime.
 
8.     President, FINER requested for inclusion of existing units within the ambit of NEIP and suggeste d
for removing the artificial distinction made in NE IP between existing and new units. He informed tha t
industries located in the North East contribute less than 1 per cent of the total tax collections in the
country. The Oil sector PSUs and a few other units contribute more th an half of this. Providing excise
and income tax concessions to the existing units at par with the new units would result in foregoing
revenue of around Rs.250-300 crores. Small scale uni ts contribute virtually nothing by way of central
taxes. It was pointed out by President FINER that in  five years of NEIP, no large investment of Rs.50
crore and above has come to the re gion and there was a strong case of  an intervention which would make
existing units viable and functiona l. There was, therefore, need for not only extension of the NEIP
benefits to existing units but also need for enhancement of eligibility limit for availing capital investmen t
subsidy. He further stated that if concessions are extended to the existing units which are based on local
resources and industries which predominantly cater to the local demand, the viability of existing units can
be improved which will generate additional employment avenues and will encourage capacity expansion
of the existing units. The indirect and spin off effects of employment and investment could be substantial.
The ripple effect of rejuvenation of industrial investment could lead to economic revival of NER.
Concessions could, however, be restricted to specified industries.
 
9.     NEDFI’s representative requested for extensi on of interest subsidy to term loans and observed tha t
total excise exemption during four years of NEIP amounted to Rs.782 crore. 68 per cent of this was in
respect of oil PSUs. It was also stated that a revival package would definitely boost the industrial activity
in the region an would further supplement the progress achieved under NEIP. 
 
9.1   An impact evaluation study conducted by NEDFI in October 2002 found spurt in Industrial activity
after introduction of NEIP. Some of the briefly highlighted achievements mentioned by NEDFI
representative were:---- 
Page 30 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

        •      A total of 106 IEMs were filed between August 1991 and July, 1999 whereas the number o f
IEMs filed during August, 1999 to May, 2002 i.e. after the implementation of the policy was 
226, an increase of 113 per cent. 
        •      Against an investment of Rs.4403 crore during August 1991 to July 1999, additional committed
investment during the period form August, 1999 to May, 2002 was Rs.4257 crore. 
        •      The total number of 461 units (medium a nd large) are under various stages of implementation.
Actual investment of Rs.997 crore had already taken place. 
        •      Additional direct employment generated as a result of the above investment was to the extent of
33,763 persons. This also resulted in substantial indirect employment in the region. 
        •      However, the benefits of these investme nts and employment generation were confined mostly
to in and around Guwahati and part of Meghalaya, The Tea and Playwood industries were an
exception. Some units like HLL, Emami etc. had come up in the region to avail benefit of excise
exemption.
 
        •      The number of units which claimed Central Excise refund was 282 out of which 245 were
located in Assam and 26 in the State of Meghalaya. 
        •      A total amount of Rs.782 crore was refunded on account of excise exemption. Out of this,
Rs.530 crore (68 per cent) accounted for the petrol eum refineries. For all other companies, an
amount of Rs.252 crore (32 per cent) only was refunded. 
10.   Secretary, Department of Revenue, however, wa s of the view that the extension of benefits to
existing units would mean concessions in perpetuity and industry may remain dependent on these
concessions. He further indicated that the problem was not of fiscal concessions but of transport costs
which warrant Transport Subsidy only. 
11.   The members consciously agreed that there was a need to look at the fiscal concessions and the time
frame for which these concessions should be made available. To avoid the packaging industries cornering
these benefits, which do not result in any investment, employment or spin off benefits to the region, some
minimum value addition norms and outright exemption of excise duty rather than through a refun
d
mechanism need also be considered. 
12.   The second meeting of the COS was held on 23.01.2003 in Udyog Bhavan under the Chairmanship
of Secretary, D/o IPP. The meeting was attended by Sh ri C.S. Rao, Secretary, Revenue and Shri Zutshi,
Chairman, CBEC, Shri Atul Sinha, Secretary, DONER, Mrs. T. Kumar, Joint Secretary, DONER, Shri A.
Didar Singh, Joint Secretary, Heavy Industry and Shri S. Jagadeesan, Joint Secretary IPP (Membe
r
Secretary). 
13.   Secretary, DONER, strongly supported the need to revive the exis ting units in the North East on the
grounds that these units, which were based either on local resources or set up to cater to local demand,
continue to suffer from locational disadvantages.
 
14.   JS, (DHI) stated that at present there are three kinds of units in the North East, namely: 
        (i)Units using raw material from the North East and marketing their products in North East itself. 
        (ii)    Units using raw materials from the North East but marketing their products outside the North
East; and 
        (iii)   Units neither using the raw materials nor the markets of North East 
        It was also stated by JS, (DHI) that the Transparent Subsidy would be difficult to implement an d
hence the Transport subsidy which is a simple in nature and easy to implement should be continued,
especially for Hindustan Paper Corporation, beyond five year. 
15.   Secretary, IPP was of the view that issu e of extending transport subsidy beyond 5 years cannot be
Page 31 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

reopned now as it requires the approval of Cabinet. JS, DIPP clarified that the Transport Subsidy along
with the investment subsidy, insurance subsidy and interest subsidy already form part of the fiscal reliefs
which are implemented as part of North East Indus trial Policy 1997. The demand,  made on behalf of the
existing units, at present is for extending the excise concession to the existing units.
 
16.   Secretary, Deptt. of Revenue in his initial remarks expressed the view that the basic issue is whether
the existing units should be granted tax concessions or not. There is a possibility of units asking fo r
concessions in perpetuity and this may lead to de mand from other special category States also. Secretary,
DONER suggested that there can be a sunset clause  in the concessions and there are sufficient grounds
for North East for giving special dispensation. Se cretary, IPP responded by pointing out that deman d
from other States for similar package have to be ex amined on merits and can not be equated with the
situation obtaining in the North Eastern States. Secr etary,  DONER further explained that allocation of a t
least 10 per cent of the gross budgetary support for North East was introduced 4 years back, and no othe r
State has asked for a similar dispensation. North East has peculiar problems and reviving an d
strengthening the existing units would be a better option and will also help the North East to access res t
of India. Secretary, Deptt. of Revenue said ther e are already demands for similar packages from othe r
States like J&K. Secretary, IPP clarified that J&K,  Himachal and Uttaranchal packages of DIPP are no t
identical to that of the NEIP. 
17.   Chairman, CBEC, mentioned that this request for a revival package is backed by plywood industry
which has already made tremendous profits in the region. He assured that industries which are likely to
misuse the concessions would be identified and the DI PP would be requested for their inclusion in the
negative list so that misuse of concessions could be avoided. He clarified that the Department of Revenue
could look at the paper/newsprint un its separately as there is sufficient justification for this. As the
existing SSI units are already enjoying excise exem ptions, the question of granting such exemption coul
d
be considered on industry to industry basis. On a query  from Secretary, IPP he clarified that he was in
favour of drawing up a negative list and incorporating a sunset clause in the concessions sought to be
granted to existing units. 
18.   Secretary, DONER, agreed that broad categor ies, product-wise, may be identified for the purpose. 
Secretary, Deptt. of Revenue, intervened to say th at alongwith identification, a sunset clause, must be
included. SIPP suggested Department of Revenue to give a write-up on the sectors which could be 
excluded from the benefit of revival package. Secretary, Deptt. of Revenue, desired to have a list of units
closed down in the North East separately in the SSI and other sectors.
 
19.   It was agreed that NER continues to re main one of the most industrially backward area
notwithstanding the abundance of several unique natural resources. Inspite of liberal reliefs an d
concessions granted by the Government of India, very few establishments in the Private Sector have
come up in the NER and the industrial landscape of NER continues to be dominated by the Central Public
Sector Enterprises. 
20.   After a detailed discussions, a consensus emerged amongst the members on the need for extending
the excise duty related and other concessional benefits to the existing units alongwith sunset clause fo
r
identified industrial units. In order to enable the existing units acquire sustainable cost competitiveness
through up scaling capacities and upgrading facilities the existing constraints of location will need to be
neutralized through appropriate fisc al relief and concessi ons. The detailed analysis of the units which
require support could be prepared by DIPP in consultation with DoR. Similarly the industrial which do
not directly benefit the North Eastern Region, in  terms of employment generation or use of local
resources should be brought under negative. An analysis should be made whereby SSI units are exclude
d
and sectors which is help are identified. HPC should be considered separately through a separate
ensation.
 
21.   The Committee accordingly made the following recommendations: 
        (i)    Excise duty related concessions and other concessions should be extended to the existing units
Page 32 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

with a sunset clause. These concessions should be extended for a period of 10 years; 100 per cent in the
initial 5 years and 50 per cent for the subseque nt 5 years and the same should be by way o f
outright exemption; 
        (ii)    Excise exemption granted to petroleum sector was outside the scope of NEIP and therefore i t
may be considered on merits by Deptt. or Re venue (Central Board of Excise and Customs)
separately. 
        (iii)   Hindustan Paper Corporation (HPC) and Nagaland Pulp and Paper Company (NPPC) have to
be considered separately for excise concessions as there are sufficient grounds for extending
concessions to them under special dispensations; 
        (iv)   The minimum value added conditi on may be introduced for availing of the concessions to
encourage sustainable development; 
        (v)   List of thrust industries which shoul d be made eligible for concessions irrespective of locations
and the list of negative industries will be fina lized by DIPP in consultation with Department o f
Revenue. 
22.   Conclusion : A revival package for the industria l units in the North East could be formulated base d
on the parameters outlined in para-21 above. 
23.   The report has been circulated to the Department of Revenue, DONER and Heavy Industries before
submission to Parliamentary Sub-Committee and is concurred by Department of Heavy Industry an d
DONER. No comments have been received from the Department of Revenue. 
24.   This report is hereby submitted to the Sub- Committee-III of Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises. 
  
  
  
MINUTES 
  
  
II 
SECOND MEETING 
        The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 4 th February, 2003 in Room No. 62, First Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
        PRESENT 
   1.  Dr. P.C. Alexander             ----    Chairman 
        RAJYA SABHA 
   2.  Prof. M.M. Agarwal 
   3.  Shrimati Saroj Dubey 
   4.  Dr. Faguni Ram 
   5.  Shri Lajpat Rai 
   6.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan 
   7.  Shri P.K. Maheshwari 
   8.  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
        LOK SABHA 
   9.  Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary 
10.  Shri Thomas Hansda 
11.  Md. Anwarul Haque 
12.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
Page 33 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

13.  Shri Sunil Khan 
14.  Shri Manjay Lal 
15.  Dr. K. Malaisamy 
16.  Shri A. Narendra 
17.  Shri Uttamrao Patil 
18.  Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh 
19.  Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur 
20.  Shri V. Vestiselvan 
21.  Shri Ram Prasad Singh 
        SECRETARIAT 
        Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
        Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary 
        Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary 
        Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary 
        Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer 
        WITNESSES 
        Hi-Tech Gears Ltd. 
        Shri Deep Kapuriya, CMD 
        Lumax Industries Ltd.                            
        Shri D.K. Jain, VC & MD 
        Shriram Pistons & Rings Ltd.                 
        Shri Ashok Kumar Taneja, Sr. Executive Director 
        Denso India Ltd. 
        Shri H. Hiranhata, MD 
        Clutch Auto Ltd. 
        Shri V.K. Mehta, Vice Chairman & MD 
        Federation of Automobile Delears Association 
        1.   Shri Ajit Chordia, President 
        2.   Shri Rakesh Jain, Ex-President 
        Innotech Engineers 
        Shri V. Shankar, Consultant 
        Deptt. Of Heavy Industries 
        Shri Sushil Kumar, Economic Advisor 
2.     The Chairman welcomed the Members and representatives of automobile industry who had been
invited before the Committee to give their views on the Auto Policy of the Government. He apprised the
members and representatives that the Committee had been in the process of consulting various auto
industry/component/units as the Committee had to give its comments on the policy announced by the
Government and prepare a report thereon. It was in this background that the Committee had been
initiating discussions with the representatives of the component industry. The Committee would also visi
t
Pune, Gurgaon and Ludhiana to have discussion on the subject. The Chairman also apprised the
representatives about the inputs received during the Committee’s visit to Chennai. The Chairman then 
requested the representatives to start the discussion.
 
3.     Shri Deep Kapuria, CMD, High-tech Gears Ltd. stressed the need for modernization of the Auto
Component industry and its growth in terms of numbers. He stated that if value addition system was to be
implemented in the country, strong R&D base had to be created. Proper incentive was required to be
given for the purpose. He added that growth-rate of vehicle manufacturers was low and that shoul
d
improve. 
4.     He also informed that after software, auto-components were the next emerging industry in ou r
country. Therefore, there should be a separate policy for the auto-com ponents sectors apart from the auto 
policy proposed because what was true for one sector, can not be true for another. He further advocate d
Page 34 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

that there should be uniform duty structure for end- products as well as raw materials and VAT should be
implemented soon. 
5.     Shri D.K. Jain, VC&MD, Lumax Industries stated that in order to spur the growth of Auto Mobile
Industry, growth in volume of sale of automobiles should be stimulated because if the volume was high,
cost competitiveness would be high. Therefore, focus should be on raising the volume of sales. For this
purpose multifarious taxes, check post on travel of  goods etc. should be done away with; VAT should be
introduced; export should be facilitated for increase in  volume of sale and DEPB should also be looke d
into. 
6.     The Chairman, raised the issue of spurious products to which the representative of Shriram Piston
and Rings Ltd. responded that offence against spurious parts should be made a cognizable offience. 
7.     Shri H. Hiranhata, Denso India Ltd., stated that due to strong competition within the industry,
customers compared prices with European prices. Due to quality reasons, some parts were imported from
Japan which attracted import duties and prices of components go up. In order to survive and compete in
the market, there should be lower prices of components. Therefore, Government should consider the issue
of import duties. However, if imported products were to be produced indigenously, there was need fo
r
investment/tax support and labour support. India should follow the pattern of China for productivity
linked wages in case of labour.
 
8.     Shri V.K. Mehta, VC&MD, Clutch Auto Ltd., also emphasized that there was a need for a policy for
promotion of components industry. Spill over effects of Auto Mobile Industry are also sppread to steel,
chemical plastic and other areas. He therefore, desired that there was need for upgradation fund for R&D
purpose. 
9.     Shri Ajit, Chordia, President, Federation of Automobiles Dealers Association expressed the view
that there should be a cut on exci se duty on passenger cars and it should be brought to 14-16 per cent in 
phases from the present level of 32 per cent of excise  duty. There should also be terminal life policy fo r
vehicles and depreciation norms of cars/vehicles should also be altered. He also pleaded  for provision
providing tax on closing stock should be carried forward before moving into VAT. This provision existed
in some States. This should be extended to other States also. He further stated that he favoure d
registration of vehicles by automobile dealers as there was great rush at RTO office. There should also be
uniform road tax on non-transport vehicles. 
        A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
10.   The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 P.M. 
  
X 
TENTH MEETING 
        The Sub-Committee-III for Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (of Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Indus try) met at 11.30 A.M. on Monday, the 13 th October, 
2003 in Committee Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
        PRESENT 
   1.  Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah  ----  Convenor 
        RAJYA SABHA 
   2.  Shri P.K. Maheshwari 
   3.  Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy 
   4.  Shri S. Sivasubramanian 
   5.  Shrimati Saroj Dubey 
        LOK SABHA 
   6.  Shrimati Jayashree Benerjee 
   7.  Shri Ajoy Chakraborty 
Page 35 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

   8.  Shri Thomas Hansda 
   9.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
10.  Shri Sunil Khan 
11.  Shri Manjay Lal 
12.  Dr. K. Malaisamy 
13.  Shri Uttamrao Patil 
        SECRETARIAT 
        Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary 
        Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary 
        Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary 
        Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer 
        WITNESSES 
        Representatives of the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises  
        (Department of Heavy Industry) 
        1.   Shri Navin Kumar, Joint Secretary 
        2.   Shri Mukesh Nigam, Director 
        3.   Shri A.K. Bhatia, Director (Operations), HPC 
        Representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board)                              
        1.   Shri K.K. Agarwal, Member (Traffic) 
        2.   Shri S.B. Ghosh Dastidar, Addl. Member (Traffic) 
        3.   Shri S.C. Gupta, Adviser (Finacne) 
        4.   Shri R.D. Tripathi, Executive Director, T.T.(S) 
2.     The Convenor welcomed the Members and representatives of the Ministry of Heavy Industries an d
Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises) and Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) an d
recalled that there had been several meetings on the problems of the North Eastern States, which have
been facing constraints in the growth of the PSUs in the North Eastern Region under the prevailing
circumstance. The Joint Secretary, Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises briefed the
Committee about the problems related to Hindustan Paper Corporation (HPC) and Railways. 
3.     The Joint Secretary, Ministry of Heavy Industr ies and Public Enterprises (H.I.P.E.) stated that HPC,
a holding Company had two major integrated Pulp & Paper Mills namely Nagaon paper Mills at Jaggy
Road and Cachar Paper Mills at Panchgram. He al so apprised the Committee about the capacity, annual
turnover and strength of the mills and that the goods from the two mills are moved both by rail and road.
The rail transportation is mainly used for the movement of bamboos to these two mills, which is the
primary raw material for making paper to these two mills. Apart from this, the other bulk inputs like salt,
soap-stone powder and sodium sulphate are also transported by rail. These things come from far away
places like Gujarat, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh. The finished product, that is, the paper is also
transported by rail. He informed the Committee of  the problems faced by the two mills in terms o f
movement of raw materials particularly bamboos due to different size of the rail track on the routes of the
said paper mills. He told that the HPC has been liaisoning with the Railway authorities and the late r
agreed to provide sufficient wagons for transporta tion of bamboos. He further stated that Railways,
however, could not provide the wagons as per their assurance, which resulted in the increase in the
pendency of indents. He also requested for the exemption of the quota system in respect of the North
Eastern Region on regular basis and also put forth that the problem of transportation of the finishe d
paper, which is also transported by rail, is being faced by the Company in the absence of the sufficien t
number of railway wagons. He apprised the Committee about the higher cost of transportation under roa d
transport as against the rail transport, which u ltimately raised the cost of production and expresse d
concern that the local people also do not get the benefit of employment, as they have to go far off places
to get the bamboos. 
4.     The Director (Operations), Hindustan Paper Corporation (HPC), informed the Committee that the
Company had to resort to transportation of bamboos by rail and where it is not possible to get them it ha d
Page 36 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

to be brought by road. He also informed that they are also using coal as fuel and that the Company is
facing problems of coal at Panchgram. He further informed that for Cachar Paper Mills problems were
being faced at the small stations like Mandardisa, Hathikhali where there is less space to keep the
bamboos. He also put forth that since the Railways is also catering to the defence and PDS requirements,
the industrial sector, as a result, was to be given lo w priority. As, the road infrastructure in that region is
bad, the most of the burden shifts to Railways. 
5.     Member (Traffic), Railway Board, supporting the need to give a special treatment to the North-
Eastern Region, informed the Committee about monthly average number of wagons given to the HPC a t
its Jaghiroad and Panchgram factories and also utilization thereof by the HPC. He also informed abou t
the gauge conversion work was also going on in the North-Eastern Region and the Railways was 
committed to accord higher priority to the North-Eastern States. He further informed that the Railways
are doing their best to improve the operational part in  these areas and also stated that they are also
responsible for feeding the essential commodities like food grains, sugar, fertilizers, salt, cement to these
States. He also mentioned that the Railways had already spent crores of rupees for gauge conversion an
d
modification work and other projects on various s ections of the North Eastern Railways. He furthe r
requested for more funds for execu tion of these projects. He, however,  regretted Railways inability to
allocate a separate dedicated allocation for any c onsumer goods due to the rolling stock constraints. He
apprised the Committee that the Railways followed a preferential traffic schedule as per priority. He also
informed that he would request the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises and HPC to
coordinate with the Chief Manager (Road traffic) from Malin Gaon, Guwahati,  who is the Nodal Office r
of the North Eastern Frontier Railways so as solve the problem. He also total that the Nodal Officer is o f
the rank of the Joint Secretary and, as such, suggested  HPC to nominate an officer  of the equivalent rank
to have the coordination as well as to maintain the parity of the level. 
6.     A Member commented on the non-coordination existing between the HPC and the Railways and
suggested them to sit together so as to arrive at a solution as a short-time measure. He also supported a 
special assistance to Railways for converting Metre Gauge lines into Broad Gauge lines. He observed that 
insurgency also adds to the problems of the No rth Eastern Region. He further stressed on close
coordination between the Railways and the management of the Paper Mills in order to have the desire d
relief by modification of projects, to improve the e fficiency, to maintain the better coordination and as
also to reach short term solutions of the problems. 
7.     Another Member also asked the repres entatives of the Railway s and HPC to have bette r
coordination between them. He asked Railway authorities in particular to come forward to give special
emphasis and attention to the development of the North-Eastern Region. 
8.     A Member asked the Railways to look into the priorities together with the profitability of the
Railways and the utility of the Company. He furt her sought clarification from the Railways regarding
allocation of wagons and the norms under which such allocation is carried out. He also pointed out tha t
transhipment facility at Lumding needed to be improved. 
9.     A view was expressed for financial package for revival of Nagaland Pulp and Paper Mills. 
10.   It was stated that the thefts in Railways like changing or stealing of coal etc. take place quite
frequently and the Railways were asked whether they are taking steps to check such incidents. It was
sought to know how the Railways are going to improve their services for the revival of the Paper Mills. 
11.   The Convenor stressed for the special treatment  to the North Eastern Region so as to bring the
region into the mainstream. The Convenor also referred to various aspects of the two mills of HPC viz.,
capacity, turnover, availability of raw material, problems related in getting the raw material an d
transportation, availability of rail wagons and welcomed the suggestions in order to enhance and improve
the production capacity of the Mills as well as to extend the benefits of employment to the people of the
North Eastern Region. He also emphasized on close coordination between the Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises an d Railways so as to arrive at a concrete solution to the problems o f
allocation of rakes to HPC. 
Page 37 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

        A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
12.   The Committee then adjourned at 12.55 P.M. 
  
XIV 
FOURTEENTH  MEETING 
        The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry met at 3.30 P.M. on 
Thursday the 18th December, 2003 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi. 
        PRESENT 
   1.  Dr. P.C. Alexander             ----    Chairman 
        RAJYA SABHA 
   2.  Prof. M.M. Agarwal 
   3.  Dr. Faguni Ram 
   4.  Shri P.K. Maheshwari 
   5.  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
   6.  Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
        LOK SABHA 
   7.  Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee 
   8.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das 
   9.  Shri K. Francis George 
10.  Shri Thomas Hansda 
11.  Shri A.C. Jose 
12.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
13.  Shri Sunil Khan 
14.  Shri Manjay Lal 
15.  Dr. K. Malaisamy 
16.  Shri P. Rajendran 
17.  Shrimati D.M. Vijayakumari 
18.  Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
        SECRETARIAT 
        Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary 
        Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary 
        Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary 
        Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer 
2.     At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and recalled the wor k
transacted by the Committee during the year 2003. The Committee also took note of the work transacte d
by the four Sub-Committee. 
3.     The Committee then took up the following Report for its consideration :- 
        (i)     130th Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in Himachal Pradesh (Ministry of Small Scale
Industries); 
        (ii)    131st Report on constraints in Industrial Development of North Eastern Region (Ministry o f
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises); 
        (iii)   132nd Report on MoU performance in respect of PSUs of Power Sector (Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises); 
        (iv)   133rd Repor t on Action Taken by the Government on Recommendations contained in the
Committee's 117th Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of Small Scale 
Industries;
 
Page 38 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm

        (v)    134th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the
Committee's 119th Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Department of Public 
Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
 
        (vi)   135th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the
120th Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Department of Heavy Industries (Ministry o f
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises); 
        (vii)  136th Report on Action Taken by th e Government on Recommendations contained in the
Committee's 127th Report on MoU performance in respect of PSUs of Shipping Industry,
(Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);  
        (viii)  137th Report on Action Taken by the Government on Recommendations contained in
Committee's 122nd Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of Steel; 
        (ix)   138th Report on Action Taken by the Government on Recommendations contained in the
Committee’s 111th Report on Operational Efficiency and Survival of Alloy Steel Plant (ASP)
Durgapur (Ministry of Steel); 
        (x)    139th Report on Action Taken by the Government on Recommendations contained in the
Committee's 125th Report on Implementation Status of Modernization Expansion and  
Financial-cum-Business Restructuring Programme of SAIL at a Glance (Ministry of Steel); 
        (xi)   140th Report on Action Taken by the Government on Recommendations contained in the
Committee's 126th Report on Revival of Nagaland Pulp and Paper Mills (Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises);
 
        (xii)  141st Report on Potential and Promotion of Coir Industries in West Bengal and Andman and
Nicobar (Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries); 
        (xiii)  142nd Report on Action Taken by the Government on Recommendations contained in the
Committee's 123rd Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of Mines; 
        (xiv)143rd Report on level Playing Field for the Capital Goods Industries (Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises); and 
        (xv)  144th Report on Action Taken by the Government on Recommendations contained in the
Committee's 124th Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of Agro and Rural 
Industries. 
4.     The Chairman requested the Members to give any suggestion or change in the Report, if required.
After a brief discussion all the Reports were adopted. 
5.     The Committee authorized Prof. M.M. Agar wal and in his absence Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi,
Member Rajya Sabha, to present the Report to the Rajya Sabha. It also authorized Shrimati Jayashree
Banerjee and in her absence Shri A.C. Jose, Member Lok Sabha, to present the Reports in the Lok Sabha
on 22nd and 23rd December, 2003.
 
7.         The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M. 
  
  
6. * * * 
*** Relates to other matters. 
Page 39 of 39131st report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/131streport.htm