PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY

SIXTY-SIXTH REPORT

ON

PERFORMANCE REVIEW OF JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
ALUMINIUM RESEARCH DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN CENTRE
( JNARDDC) DEPARTMENT OF MINES ( MINISTRY OF MINES
AND COAL)

(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 8™ MARCH , 2002)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 8™ MARCH , 2002)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2002/PHALGUNA, 1923 (SAKA)


"9७ # YeN>

CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
COMPOSITION OF THE PREVIOUS COMMITTEE
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE -IV
INTRODUCTION

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE

MINUTES

PAGES
(i}(ii)
Gii{iv)

vy)

(vii)
1-12
13-16

17-27


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

(Date of Constitution - 1* January, 2002)

Shri Ramdas Agarwal - Chairman

RAJYA SABHA,

Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
Shri Faguni Ram

Shri P.K. Maheshwari

Ms. Frida Topno

Shri Jibon Roy

Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
Shri S. Sivasubramanian
Smt. Saroj Dubey

Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha
Prof. M:M. Aggarwal

Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil

LOK SABHA

Shri A. Narendra

Shri Tarachand Sahu

Shri G. Mallikarjunappa
Shri Basangouda R. Patil
Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
Shri Ramanand Singh
Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
Shri Ananta Nayak

Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
Shri Nepal Chandra Das
Shri Thomas Hansda

Shri Uttamrao Patil

Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
Shri A.C. Jose

Shri P. Rajendran

Shri Sunil Khan

Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
Shri Malyala Rajaiah
Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari
Shri Beni Prasad Verma
Shri Deepak Kumar
Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
Shri Brijlal Khabri

Shri Manjay Lal

(i)


(9)


COMPOSITION OF THE PREVIOUS COMMITTEE
Shri Ramdas Agarwal —Chairman

RAJYA SABHA
Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi

Dr. Faguni Ram

Shri 7.1९. Maheshwari

Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma
Shri Jibon Roy

Shri Somappa R. Bommai
Smt. Saroj Dubey

Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhundar
Shri S. Sivasubramanian
Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha
Prof. .M.M. Aggarwal

Shri Bangaru Laxman

LOK SABHA

Shri A. Narendra \
Shri Ramdas Athawale \
Shri Ram Ragnunath Chaudhary ~
Shri Nepal Chandra Das

Shri K.P. Singh Deo

Shri Anant Mahadeoappa Gudhe
Shri Thomas Hansda

Shri G.J. Javiya

Shri A.C. Jose

Shri Ram Singh Kaswan

Shri Sunil Khan

Shri Deepak Kumar

Shri Manjay Lal

Shri K. Malaisamy

Shri G. Mallikarjunappa

Shri K.H. Muniyappa

Shri Nagmani

Shri Anant Nayak

Shri R. Basanagouda Patil

Shri Uttamarao Deorao Patil

Shri M. Rajaiah

Shri P. Rajendran

Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah

Shri Tarachand Sahu

Shri Ram Sajivan

Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh

(iii)


41.

43.

Shri Ramanand Singh
Shri Chunnilal Thakur
Shri Rizwan Zaheer.
Smt. Renu Kumari

SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer

(५)


SO PrNAYM

COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-IV

Shri A.C. Jose —Convenor
RAJYA SABHA

Smt. Saroj Dubey
Shri Somappa R. Bommai
Dr. Faguni Ram

LOK SABHA

Shri R. Basangouda Patil
Shri Ramdas Athwale
Shri Thomas Hansda
Shri Nepal Chandra Das
Shri Nagmani

Shri K.H. Muniyappa

(vy)


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on

Industry, having been authorised by the Committee, hereby present this Sixty-sixth Report
of Sub-Committee-IV for Ministry of Mines ( of Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Industry) on performance review of Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminium Research
Development and Design Centre which is under the administrative control of Department of
Mines ( Ministry of Mines and Coal )
2. The Committee on Industry at its meeting held on 120 February, .2001 inter-alia
constituted Sub-Committee-IV for Ministry of Mines. The Sub-Committee took up the issue of
performance review of Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminium Research Development and Design Centre
(JNARDDC) . The Sub-Committee visited Nagpur from 11" to 14" September, 2001 and
interacted with the management and scientist of Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminium Research
Development and Design Centre (JNARDDC).

3. The Sub-Committee in its meeting held on 7" December, 2001 heard the Secretary,
Ministry of Mines and officials concerned. The Report has been prepared on the basis of on the
spot study and interaction with the Secretary , Ministry of Mines and officials of JNARDDC.

4 The Sub-Committee in its meeting held on 26" December, 2001 considered and adopted
the Report.

5. The Committee at its meeting held on 26" December, 2001 considered and adopted the
Report.

NEW DELHL RAMDAS AGARWAL
December 26, 2001 Chairman,

. Department -related Parliamentary

Standing Committee on Industry

i)


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU ALUMINIUM RESEARCH DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN
CENTRE (JNARDDC)

JNARDDC was registered as a society in 1987 to provide modern technological
inputs to primary and secondary aluminium Industries based on optimum utilisation of
existing facilities and further development of technical capabilities. The centre was set
up by the Ministry of Mines, Government of India as a project with assistance from the
United National Development Programme (UNDP) with a total cost of Rs.36.00 crore
consisting of a contribution of Rs.19.00 crores from Government of India and Rs.17.00
crores from UNDP. The Centre became fully operational since January, 1996 having the
capabilities for Geology and evaluation of bauxites; beneficiation and upgradation of
bauxites; total characterization of bauxites; technological testing of bauxites; energy
audit of alumina plant, foundry, system plant, chemical plant, etc.; process monitoring;
mathematical modeling; and downstream processing technology. The centre is equipped
with world class facilities for the study of bauxite, alumina and aluminium for the
benefit of the aluminium industry. It can also offer support to other non-ferrous
industries steel plants and the SSI in the areas of mining, chemical and mineralogical
analysis, energy auditing, failure analysis, microstructure studies and information
services. JNARDDC has six major divisions which includes  bauxite-alumina
technology; smelter-carbon technology; downstream technology; environment and waste
management; process control and modeling and process and product development.

1.2. JNARDDC _ is an autonomous body set up by the Ministry of Mines, Government of
India in April, 1989 to cater to the R&D needs of the Indian Aluminium Industries. The Sub-
Committee was apprised that JNARDDC isa "Centre of Excellence" with well established
facilities for the study of bauxite, alumina and aluminium. At the initial stage partial financial
and technological assistance was provided under United Nations Development Programme (
UNDP) of UNIDO. The Centre became fully functional since the beginning of 1996.
JNARDDC also offers analytical and testing facilities to other non-ferrous industries, to steel
plants and small-scale industries, mainly in the areas of mining, chemical and mineralogical
analysis, energy auditing failure analysis, micro structural studies and information services.

2.0 OBJECTIVES OF JNARDDC

2.1 The management of JNARDDC apprised the Sub-Committee of the objectives of
Centre which are as under:-

(i) To assimilate and adapt the technologies available in India for the production
of alumina and aluminium and to develop indigenous know-how and basic
engineering packages for future alumina and aluminium plants to be set up in
the country.

(ii) To undertake research programmes especially in the area of reduction in material
and energy consumption and to provide analytical services to the industries.

(iii) 10 set up and operate a data bank in the areas of bauxite, alumina and
aluminium production for the benefit of the industries.

(iv) 10 provide training to the personnel employed in the Indian aluminium industry
through organization of workshops, seminars and group training programmes.


2.2 The Sub-Committee was also apprised of the Mission Statement of JNARDDC which
stipulates "To provide modern technological inputs to primary and secondary aluminium
industries based on optimum utilisation of existing facilities | and further development of
technical capabilities". In order to achieve the mission statement JNARDDC has _ its
inherent capabilities which inter-alia include Geology and evaluation of bauxite deposits;
Computer based exploration and mine planning; Beneficiation and upgradation of laterites and
bauxites ; Total characterization of bauxites including trace elements and organic carbon ;
Techno-economic evaluation of bauxite’ deposit for bauxite production and non-metallurgical
application; Technological testing of bauxite including large scale laboratory tests for de-
silication, digestion, precipitation and settling, Pre-feasibility and basic engineering package
for bauxite mining and alumina plant; Energy audit of alumina plan, foundry, steam plant,
chemical plant etc., Mass and heat balances of Bayer’s process; Process monitoring of
aluminium _ electrolytic cell; Mathematical modeling of processes including simulation of
aluminium smelter process; and Defect characterisation and analysis in All alloy products.

2.3. The Committee , while appreciating the objectives for setting up the Research
Centre for Aluminium Industries has noticed during its visit that the Centre is well
equipped with modern analytical facilities and process development monitoring and control
facilities in order to carry out research work in the areas of bauxite, alumina and
aluminium smelting. The Committee recommends that the Centre should strive its
best to achieve its cherished goal and make all efforts towards removing the problems
being faced by the Indian aluminium industry .

3.0 PROJECTS COMPLETED BY JNARDDC

3.1 The Sub-Committee was apprised of the long term projects sponsored by the primary
aluminium industries, S&T wing of the department of mines and other Government agencies.
The projects completed by JNARDDC during the last ten years are as under :-

Projects completed by JNARDDC ~]
Geological and technological evaluation of Suitability of alternate source of

Kutrumali bauxite for L&T Mumbai aluminium fluoride for BALCO Korba smelter;
G . we . Electric. Thermal and Magnetic
ological and preliminary technological ig

evaluation of Rajnandgaon bauxite deposit for Merasurements at INDAL

BALCO, Korba alumina plant. Electric, Thermal And Magnetic

Measurements at NALCO

Technological evaluation of various
bauxite sources of BALCO, Korba alumina
plant

Evaluation of samripat bauxite of

HINDALCO for alumina production

Preliminary evaluation and technological
testing of Kodingamali bauxite deposit for
HINDALCO

Characterization and technological testing
of MALCO bauxite

Analysis of Performance of BALCO
smelter during the period Jan. 97 to Jan. 98

Bauxite Technical Data/Information Bank

Studies on Identification and
Quantification of Total Organic Carbon in
Totamoi, Tetrachloride

Recycling of Industrial Wastes into Glass
Ceramic Products

Estimation and_ Validation of Precipitation



oo

Modernisation of BALCO Alumina Plant

Modernisation of BALCO's Smelter Plant
at Korba

Electrical and Thermal Measurements at
BALCO Smelter.

Suitability of AIF3 from different sources
for Nalco Angul Smelter

De-silication, Digestion and Settling
studies for BALCO process bauxite

Participation and Monitoring during plant
scale trial of synthetic flocculant

Recovery of Valuables from Spent Pot
Lining of NALCO Smelter at Angul

Monitoring of Korba alumina poant
process

Developing Guidelines for Disposal and
Utilisation of Red Mud from Aluminium
Industry

Digestion and setting studies of bauxite for
BALCO, Korba

Energy Audit of Alumina plant at BALCO,
Korba

Energy audit of melting furnaces at Pennar
Aluminium Company, Mouda

Energy Audit of Foundry Shop at BALCO
Korba

Characterization of Metallurgical grade
C.P. coke- sponsored by RDCIS Ranchi
Electric. Thermal and Magnetic Measurements
at BALCO, Korba.

3.2 The Committee notes the projects undertaken and its participation in various
modernisation and upgradation projects .

4.0 ON-GOING PROJECTS OF JNARDDC

4.1 The Sub-Committee was informed that the Centre is presently working on the
technology oriented projects which inter-alia includes , De-ironing of East Coast bauxite; Low
pressure Digestion technology; removal and Control of Organics in Bayer process; recycling of
Aluminium scrap ; utilisation of aluminium industry wastes; and development of Can-stock
materials. The major ongoing projects are as under:-

1. De-ironing Eastern Ghat bauxite

2. Improvement of Digestion Efficiency of East Coast Bauxite and Enhancement of
Alumina Productivity

3. Extraction, characterisation and Removal/control of organic impurities in Byer
process :

Development of Certified reference materials for bauxite

High temperature mechanical behaviour of multiphase titanium aluminides
Development of a temperature sensor for aluminium electrolysis

In-situ analytical method for the classification of primary aluminium

awe



4.2. The Committee notes the projects undertaken by JNARDDC and. hopes that the
efforts made by the Centre would be utilised as the store house of all aluminium related
“experiments and observations " and the knowledge and experience skimmed of the
efforts would be helpful in removing the problems of aluminium industry. The
Committee also hope that each project under study by JNARDDC must involve the
highest degree of intellectual honesty as far as the relevance and the purpose of the
projects are concerned.

5.0 THRUST AREAS FOR R&D

5.1 Pertaining to the Sub-Committee's query regarding thrust areas identified by
JNARDDC for R&D work of Centre projected for the next five years the JNARDDC
management informed the Sub-Committee that in order to expand the present activities of
JNARDDC - steps have been taken regarding process monitoring and modeling , process
development and product development . Process monitoring and modeling include
mathematical modeling of electrolytic cell; simulation of Bayer process for alumina production;
process monitoring and technological auditing of alumina plants; simulation and optimisation of
alumina precipitation circuit ; technology audit of raw materials for the manufacture of anodes;
development of a technique to determine metal pad velocity in aluminium electrolysis ;
prediction of anode effect for aluminium smelter. The process of development covers,
evaluation of bauxite deposits from modern technological point of view for alumina as well as
non-metallurgical industries; bauxite benefication studies; double digestion study for Central
Indian Bauxites; extraction of alumina from flyash; microbial beneficiation of bauxite and red
mud; recycling of anode butts; and technological studies of Maharashtra and Gujarat bauxites.
Apprising the Sub-Committee of product development JNARDDC management stated that
efforts are being envisaged for development of low soda and high purity hydrate ; development
of new alloys and metal matrix composites; development of value-added special alumina
products; developing value added bauxite products such as various calcined, sintered bauxite
materials and alumina based chemicals for specific uses; utilisation of aluminium industry wastes.

5.2 The Committee understands the significance of adopting the practice of process
monitoring and modeling to carry out the research work in a result oriented manner .
The Committee, while noting the steps taken by JNARDDC regarding the
process development and product development, recommends that JNARDDC
should carry on such research work which may help aluminium industry in
developing new designs of products with the help of product mix. The research
work should — lead to evolution of process development for cost reduction.
JNARDDC should make a survey of the market demand and engage itself in
such research work which might lead to development of products in accordance
with market demands. The new initiatives being envisaged may be taken up at
the earliest.

5.3 The management of JNARDDC pointing out the undergoing rapid transformation of
industrial scenario unleashed by the process of globalisation and implementation of
liberalisation and disinvestment policy of the Government , stated that Aluminium Industry
has to gear up itself to function in an effective manner. The Sub-Committee was informed that
JNARDDC is playing its part to assist the Indian Aluminium Industry to meet the challenges.
The management of JNARDDC stated that the globally emerging trends that need to
implemented in the Indian Aluminium Industry include high and supér-high amperage potlines


for aluminium smelting ; use of inert anodes and non-wet table cathodes in the smelter pots; near
net shape processing; squeeze casting; modern precipitation techniques ; tube digestion
technology; use of pressure decanter technology ; hyper baric filtration for red mud disposal ;
and development of special grade alumina products.

5.4 The Committee desires that JNARDDC should involve itself in such research
work which would provide better quality, speed design engineering and cost effective
production for the ultimate survival and growth of indigenous Aluminium industry in
the changing scenario caused by globalisation and liberalisation. The globally emerging
trends that need to be implemented in aluminium industry may be addressed on a
emergency basis in collaboration with aluminium industry .

6.0 DIVERSIFICATION PROGRAMMES OF JNARDDC

6.1 Replying to the Sub-Committee’s query regarding the diversification programme of
JNARDDC the management stated that in keeping with the changing time and needs , the
Centre is diversifying its activities through downstream processing , waste recycling ,
emphasizing on the emerging field of mathematical modeling and process control; and
exploring new area for development of technology suitable for setting up small and medium
capacity alumina and aluminium plants.

6.2 Regarding the diversification programmes of JNARDDC , the Department of Mines
informed the Sub-Committee that the experimental _ facilities at the Centre have been entirely
oriented towards aluminium process metallurgy. Further, many of the existing facilities in
principle may also be used for R&D work related to other non-ferrous metals, particularly
titanium and magnesium. Scope, therefore, exists for diversification into related industries but
this is to be cleared by the Governing Body of the Centre.

6.3. Pertaining to JNARDDC's role in the setting up of small and medium capacity alumina
and aluminium plants, the Department of Mines stated that the widely held perception is that
only large and very large scale aluminium plants (1-3 million tpa) are viable. However, the cost
of setting up such plants being exorbitantly high, the possibility of such plant coming up in
India in the near future is negligible. However, many small and medium level investors may be
interested in setting up of plants with annual capacity of 20,000-100,000 tonnes. This may be
compared to the situation in China, where more than 80% of the plants are of such small and
medium capacities.

64 The Committee feels that JNARDDC should chalk out its diversification
programme in such away asto benefit the aluminium industry in the short as well as
long term. Since technology for setting up of such plants is not available in India,
SJNARDDC can play a vital role in developing such technologies. The Committee
recommends that research may be undertaken to develop and adapt new technology
which may help setting up of small and medium capacity alumina and aluminium plants.

7.0 . SEMINAR CONFERENCE

7.1. The Sub-Committee was informed that JNARDDC conducts seminars , conference.
It conducted International Interactive Meet on Bauxite and Alumina during December, 2001
with about 15 overseas participants from all over the world and over 100 National delegates.
Similarly during April, 1999 National Seminar on Aluminium Electrolysis was organized in
commemoration of the centre's anniversary celebrations.


72 Department of Mines informed the Sub-Committee that JNARDDC conducts
periodically seminars, conferences and technical programmes of international standards and
generates revenues by charging registration fee for the industrial delegates. For instance, in
December, 2000, JNARDDC had organised an International Meet on Bauxite-Alumina
Technology, which generated funds to the tune of Rs.11 lakhs.

73 The Committee appreciates the efforts made by JNARDDC in conducting
seminars and conferences and recommends that JNARDDC should conduct such
conferences and seminars more frequently . The Committee also recommends that
JNARDDC should make some nominal entry fee from all the participant in order to
raise funds to meet its financial requirements.

8.0 | TRAINING PROGRAMMES AND WORKSHOP.

8.1 JNARDDC management stated that the Centre periodically conducts training
programme and workshops in the field of alumina production , smelter technology,
characterisation of materials etc. In this regard the Centre conducted bauxmet -98.
international conference on aluminium; national workshop on X-ray analysis; workshop on anode
and cathode carbon; aluminium cast house technology- in plant training programme at NALCO,
BALCO ; computer based mathematical modeling of aluminium production process; production
and applications of special alumina chemicals; and alumina technology.

8.2 Conducting of training programmes and workshops provides a platform to
scientists for productive interaction and encourage them to gather knowledge and share
experience. JNARDDC should charge nominal fee from the participants for the training
programme to generate revenue to meet JNARDDC's non-plan financial requirements.
The Committee also recommends that JNARDDC should give wide publicity to its training
programmes.

9.0 | CONSULTANCY AND TESTING SERVICES

91 The Sub-Committee was informed that the consultancy and testing services cell (CTSC)
of JNARDDC was established in August, 1999, in order to streamline and provide efficient
tésting services to the industry. The consultancy and testing: services offered include mine
planning; beneficiation, upgradation, characterisation and technological testing of bauxite;
process monitoring of aluminium electrolysis cell; characterisation of carbonaceous raw
materiajs; energy auditing and process modeling using ASPEN plus software; failure analysis;
chemical, physical and physico chemical analysis. CTSC's services are regularly used by
primary aluminium producers like NALCO, BALCO, HINDALCO, INDAL and MALCO;
public sectors like HAL, SAIL, ordnance factory etc; carbon manufacturers like rain calcining
Itd., Bharat calciners, Goa carbon; R&D institutions like NEERI; private industries like L&T ,
Hindustan Lever Ltd., GIMPEX, CUMI, ESSORCTS, Ashapura, Trimex and many others.

9.2 The details of the resources raised by consultancy, projects and testing during the
Syears are given below:-

(Rs in lakhs)

टला [AT at ee



9.3 The Committee, while taking note of consultancy and testing services offered by
JNARDDC , is of the opinion that JNARDDC should generate sufficient fund to meet its
requirement of non-plan expenditure by opening avenues for generating revenue by
providing consultancy services. JNARDDC may stress on service mix and service
endowment by giving due importance to diversification in consultancy services and
exploring new ideas for generation of new project. The centre should try to provide
consultancy services out side the country as well.

10.0 SERVICE TO DOWNSTREAM SECTOR

10.1. |The Sub-Committee was apprised that the Ministry of Mines has been stressing upon the
need of secondary and downstream aluminium industry to improve the performance indices and
quality of products of the downstream sector. The downstream sector can be serviced by the
JNARDDC after the establishment of a Downstream Processing Laboratory (DSP). A project for
this purpose has been approved by the Ministry of Mines and a partial grant of 1.88 crores has
been granted. The DSP is scheduled to be set up by Dec. 2003. The manpower presently with the
Centre would also have to be adequately trained and sufficient time to be given for development
of expertise in this sector before it could cater to this new segment. The Core areas identified and
visualised for downstream sector may inter-alia include improvement of Aluminium Extrusion
process and alloy development; aluminium recycling (improvement of quality and yield;
innovation of casting technologies for automotive and general engineering application;
aluminium product development and application engineering; providing assistance to defence
agencies such as ordnance factory, Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre, DMRL etc. in development,
production and processing of defence related aluminium alloys.

10.2. The Department of Mines informed the Sub-Committee that downstream processing
laboratory is still in the process of establishment. Department of Mines, Government of India
has recently sanctioned Rs.188 lakhs for the establishment of facilities/equipment for this
laboratory. Some of the facilities are being procured and will be operational shortly. in the
meanwhile, utilizing the existing facilities the centre has offered following services:

(i) Conducted studies related to pinhole porosities problem faced in the production
of AI-Si alloy fan blades. Suitable remedial measures were suggested.

(ii) Peripheral Grain Growth in the extruded products of 2014 alloy at OFAJ was
studied and recommendations to avoid the problem were given.

(iii) Texture related studies for 3004 alloy for the development of beverage cans
were conducted for BALCO.

(iv) Gujarat Aluminium Extrusions was helped in eliminating Die Lines in the
production of 6063 alloy profiles.

10.3. The Committee is of the opinion that JNARDDC with its experience can provide
quality service to the down stream sector. Efforts for establishing the downstream
processing laboratory (DSP) may be accelerated and the staff be imparted necessary
training and expertise.


11.0 POLLUTION CONTROL AND ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT

11.1 The Sub-Committee was informed that the most challenging task for aluminium
industries is to reduce the environmental damage caused by the production process because of
emissions of CFs (8) and CO2(g) contributing to global warming. The Centre can collect World-
wide information on various aspects of pollution/waste management and control related to
aluminium industries and prepare realistic specifications for pollution control that may be
presented to the statutory bodies of local and Central Governments. The Centre can explore areas
like fluorine contamination (major pollutant in aluminium industry) in air, water and land
development of analytical method and procedure for estimation of fluorine, PAH etc.;
development of disposal and treatment standards for various waste generated in the aluminium
industry; development of various indigenous utilisation processes for waste from aluminium
industry; environmental auditing for various aluminium industries; environmental impact

11.2 The Sub-Committee gathered that to meet the above mentioned targets the Centre
should be provided with statutory powers in the field of environment and waste treatment and
Jawaharlal Nehru Aluniinium Research Development & Design Centre should be entrusted with
task of monitoring pollution and waste disposal methods employed by Indian aluminium
Industries on behalf of Central Government in order to safe guard national interest. Besides a
laboratory for environment and waste treatment may be set up with initial investment from
Government of India with sufficient funds. Initial training program may be provided to the
Scientist and sufficient time period may be given to develop any kind of expertise in the field.

11.3. However. the Department of Mines stated that IJNARDDC is engaged in developing
useful products from aluminium industry waste samples (glass and glass ceramics). It has also
worked on a project to develop guidelines for disposing of red mud. JNARDDC scientists are
members of the National task Force for Environmental Issues of Aluminium Industry constituted
by CPCB. JNARDDC is thus eminently placed to undertake study of various forms of
pollution in aluminium industry. This has helped further the availability of expertise at the
National Environment Engineering Research Institute ( NEERI), Nagpur.

11.4. The Committee observes that the problems of pollution is one of the threat
being faced by human society. JNARDDC can make significant contribution for
environmental impact assessment. Central Goveramenot may consider to entrust with
JNARDDC to undertake study on various forms of pollution and develop mechanism for
pollution/waste management and control. The Centre should be regularly in touch with
other related Ministries.

12.0 FORMATION OF CORE GROUP OF INDIAN ALUMINIUM INDUSTRY

12.1. The Sub-Committee was apprised of the fact that facilities and funds are required to
generate data through numerous laboratory experiments and monitoring at the plant for the
development and validation of models for the operations involved in alumina and aluminium
production. Services from the experienced Centres like IIT Kanpur, 1[Sc-Bangalore, EIL etc. are
also essential. Formation of core group of Indian aluminium industry, Centre and academic
institutions at the working level is need of the hour for development of industrially useful
mathematical models. Two project proposals were submitted to Department of science and
technology but they were turned down, further efforts with help of Government are to be taken to
get the funds from the aluminium industries. Once the complete models are developed and
validated, they are going to be useful for Centre in generating enormous funds through
improvements in the plant by optimisation of the plant parameters. The said core group may
cover modeling of aluminium electrolytic development of software packages for unit


operation/process like precipitation, digestion, red mud washing etc; software packages for
energy/mass balance of alumina plant; development of mathematical simulation package for
bayer process using ASPEN simulation package.

12.2. .The Committee is of the view that regular interaction of Scientists of the centre
with the experienced professional from IIT, EIL, TISL ete. to enhance the knowledge
and experience of Scientist of JNARDDC in developing various models far aluminium
industries. If necessary, working core group involving the Centre's Scientists and
academic institute may be formed. The Committee also recommends that scientist of
various institutions may be invited to the confereace and seminars for the exchange of
views on a regular basis.

13.0 ANNUAL BUDGETARY REQUIREMENT OF JNARDDC

13.1 The Sub-Committee was given an understand that the sustenance of JNARDDC
is becoming difficult due to lack of fund flow to meet the plan and Non-plan
expenditure. JNARDDC was setup by the Ministry of Mines with the assistance
from the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) with the total establishment
cost of Rs.36 crores. The Development of India provided Rs. 19 crores while UNDP
provided Rs.17 crores. During the project establishment (1989-96) the annual
budgetary requirements of the Centre were met from "Aluminium Development Fund"
through Government of India (Ministry of Mines) . The UNDP input was mainly for
equipment and training programmes. Salaries and recurring expenditures were to be met
by Government of India input.

13.2. The Sub-Committee was apprised of the possible means for raising the fund to
meet the centre's plan and Non-plan expenditure which might be explained as below:-

(i) There already exists an "Aluminium Development Fund" under the Ministry of
Mines. There is adequate balance in this fund and even the annual interest earnings on
the balances in this fund is adequate to take care of the recurring expenditure of this
Centre which is only 2 crores per annum. In the past when the founder Director was
offered to take care of this fund, he refused to take care of it due to lack of adequate
experienced manpower at the construction stage. Now with sufficient and experienced
manpower available with the Centre the possibility of transferring this fund to the
Centre may be explored which will help the Centre to concentrate on its primary
objective of R&D work instead of struggling for financial sustainability for most of the
time.

(ii) The Centre can provide its services by being funded from Indian Aluminium
companies collectively such as a certain percentage of net profit or on a basis like 0.1
% of selling cost per tonne of the aluminium produced. Training for the fresh recruits
for the industries can also be done by the Centre along with meeting the R&D needs of
the Indian aluminium industry.

13.3 The Department of Mines clarified that the present annual financial requirement of
JNARDDC is about Rs.180 lakhs which is expected to increase @ 5% annually. It is met from
Grants-in-aid from the Department of Mines to the tune of 80% of the salary expenditure;
Internal resource generation through project work, consultancy, testing, organization of
seminars, etc.; support from AMDF to meet the shortfall. The budgetary support given by the
Government to JNARDDC is in the nature of grants-in-aid to meet 80% of the salary budget
only. The salary budget amounts to approximately 50% of the total budget. Internal resource


generation being inadequate, shortfall is being met by support from the Aluminium
Modernisation and Development Fund (AMDF). Details of the budget provisions during the last
5 years are given in the following table.

Income ( Rupees in lakhs)

[_ कर्म 1997-98 1998-99 1999-2000 __| 2000-01

Grants in aid
Ministr

AMDF
[114 |

[io 75 102.12 139

13.4 The Committee is constrained to express its concerns over the languishing and
pathetic condition of Centre like JNARDDC due to lack of sufficient fund flow from the
Government where all research work pertaining to aluminium industry might be
carried on successfully . The situation emerging out of the development is really pathetic
and requires immediate attention. JNARDDC has an excellent layout with required
equipment and technology for research workin aluminium industry, therefore, the
Sub-Committee is of the view that such an extra-ordinary Research centre should not
languish because of financial crunch. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of
Mines should take stock of actual financial requirement of JNARDDC to meet its plan
and non-plan expenditure . The Committee further recommends that since JNARDDC is
a research centre and does not generate substantial revenue of its own except from
consultancy and services, JNARDDC should be allowed budgetary support to meet at
least its non-plan expenditure so that the scientist should remainin peace while doing
research work and have not to bother for their future survival. The Committee further
recommends that the Ministry of Mines should explore the possibility to
generate/appropriate funds out of Aluminium Development Fund and also from Indian
Aluminium companies to meet the plan-expenditure of JNARDDC. At the same time,
JNARDDC management and the Ministry of Mines should propagate the utility of
SJNARDDC for aluminium industries. The aluminium industries can refer to the Centre for
all of their R& D problems as their invgjvement would definitely help in the development of
technology packages for future expansion programmes. If the Central agency like
Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminium Research Development & Design Centre is involved in
importing technology for green field as well as brown field expansions there is a possibility
of saving a lot of foreign exchange by avoiding duplicate transfer of technology.

14.0 MERGER OF JNARDDC WITH NALCO

14.1 The employees of JNARDDC approached the Sub-Committee with the possibility of
handing over the supervision of the centre to National Aluminium Company (NALCO)
which is one the public sector undertaking of Government of india. Taking over of the
Centres by the NALCO wif छू cayse'any additional financial liability to the company as it is
already spending considegabhe ansount of fund-towards R&D in the field of aluminium . This
readymade setup available with JNARDDC (for carrying out R&D activities in the field
aluminium) will fyrther intensify the R&D activities of NALCO which will help this
company to further improve on their performance in terms of technology and monetary profit as
this Centre has world class facilities for cafrying aut R&D activities in the field of aluminium.

10

हि


14.2 The Department of Mines is of the view that attaching the centre to any one of the
primary aluminium producers may be against the objectives of setting up the centre in the first
place which is to develop Al technology in India. Besides NALCO has little interest in the
downstream processing area, which is the direction of diversification envisages for the Centre.
During the course of oral evidence , the Secretary , Department of Mines was of the view that
to some extent JNARDDC could not achieve its original objectives for which it was set up,
largely own R&D and therefore, JNARDDC face problems of work order.

14.3. The Committee understands that NALCO is a leading aluminium company with
the status of Mini Ratna and spends considerable amount of fund towards R&D in the
field of aluminium. The Committee agrees that attaching JNARDDC with NALCO
would defeat the basic objectives of the centre. Government should find ways to
strengthen the centre by infusing sufficient fund apart from budgetary support after the
projects are prepared.

15.0 SWOT ANALYSIS OF JNARDDC

15.1 The Department of Mines furnished the details of strength weaknessés, opportunities
and threats (SWOT Analysis) of JNARDDC which stated below:-

JNARDDC enjoys the unique position of being} (i) Very narrow area of research

the only laboratory dedicated to aluminium
research in the country .

It is equipped with facilities oriented
specifically for research into problems of the
alumina refinery and aluminium smelters such
as bauxite characterization, bauxite processing,
special alumina equipment, mobile van
equipped with instrument for  in-plagt

magnetic, electrical and thermal measurement
of smelter pots;

Specialised scientists in the area of aluminium
process metallurgy ;

nN

namely aluminium processing
metallurgy, catering only to
‘primary aluminiem processing
industry which severely restricts
the industrial clients who can
make use of the facilities at’
JNARDDC

(ii) Highly limited manpower because
of which diversification isto areas
like downstream processing is
GifGquit-

(iii) Avoidable expenditure on the
upkgep of a huge campus of 100
seres. Being located far away
from the city , few employees
want to stay on the Campus. हु



Opportunities Threats

(i) A healthy aluminium industry with considerable | (i) Worldwide recession in industry
scope for expansion because of the availability of which seems to affect aluminium
vast bauxite resources as well

(ii) Scope for considerable growth in per capita} (ii) Prohibitive cost of setting up of
consumption of aluminium in India (presently 0.5 new green field aluminium plants

kg/per person as against about 25 kg in USA)

necessitating increased aluminium availability (iii) looming threat of complete

privatization of aluminium

industry having its own R&D

facilities, thus reducing the scope

(iii) Possibility of setting up of new non-ferrous metal of work for an independent R&D
industries such as titanium and magnesitim. centre

which requires technology upgradation through
R&D

(iv) dwindling government support to
R&D activities

(v) Cheaper imports of aluminium
from neighbouring countries.

15.2 The Committee acknowledges the unique position of JNARDDC oriented towards
aluminium process metallurgy . The Committee recommends that JNARDDC should take
advantage of its opportunities and overcome its weaknesses by expanding and diversify its
activities and if necessary JNARDDC should induct trained experienced scientists from
various fields.

15.3. During the course of oral evidence the Secretary, Department of Mines assured the
Sub-Committee for proper utilisation of 100 acres land JNARDDC. The Secretary stated
that National Institute of Rock Mechanics ( NIRM) and National Institute of Mines Health
(NIMH) kolar are to be shifted there. The Secretary, further stated that vacant staff
quarters in the premises of JNARDDC would be allotted to the Scientists at the earliest
and improvement with regard to house keeping would also be made.

15.4 The Committee is of the view that JNARDDC has to inject sufficient competitive
resilience to survive in the competitive era. However, the Department of Mines should
take care of sufficient budgetary support for R&D activities for aluminium Industry.

15.5 The Committee recommends that the Department of Mines should examine the
issue of cheaper imports and get anti-dumping duty imposed if dumping is found.
15.6 The Department may ensure proper utilisation of the large building.

12



OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE

OBJECTIVES OF JNARDDC

The Committee , while appreciating the objectives for setting up the Research Centre
for Aluminium Industries has noticed during its visit that the Centre is well equipped with
modern analytical facilities and process development monitoring and control facilities in order to
carry out research work in the areas of bauxite, alumina and aluminium smelting. The
Committee recommends that the Centre should strive its best to achieve its cherished goal
on make all efforts towards removing the problems being faced by the Indian aluminium
industry .

(Para 2.3.)
PROJECTS COMPLETED BY JNARDDC

The Committee notes the projects undertaken and its participation in various
modernisation and upgradation projects .

(Para 3.2.)
ON-GOING PROJECTS OF JNARDDC

The Committee notes the projects undertaken by JNARDDC and hopes that the efforts made
by the Centre would be utilised as the store house of all aluminium related "experiments and
observations " and the knowledge and experience skimmed of the efforts would be helpful in
removing the problems of aluminium industry. The-Committee also hope that each project
under study by JNARDDC must involve the highest degree of intellectual honesty as far as the
relevance and the purpose of the projects are concerned.

(Para 4.2.)
THRUST AREAS FOR R&D

The Committee understands the significance of adopting the practice of process
monitoring and modeling to carry out the research work ina result oriented manner. The
Committee, while noting the steps taken by JNARDDC regarding the process
development and product development, recommends that JNARDDC should carry on
such research work which may help aluminium industry in developing new designs
of products with the help of product mix. The research work should 1680 to
evolution of process development for cost reduction. _JNARDDC should make a
survey of the market demand and engage itself in such research work which
might lead to development of products in accordance with market demands. The new
initiatives being envisaged may be taken up at the earliest.

(Para 5.2.)

The Committee desires that JNARDDC should involve itself .in such research work
which would provide better quality, speed design engineering and cost effective production for
the ultimate survival and growth of indigenous Aluminium industry in the changing scenario
caused by globalisation and liberalisation. The globally emerging trends that need to be

13


implemented in aluminium industry may be addressed on a emergency basis in collaboration
with aluminium industry .

(Para 5.4.)
DIVERSIFICATION PROGRAMMES OF JNARDDC

The Committee feels that JNARDDC should chalk out its diversification programme in
such a way as to benefit the aluminium industry in the short as well as long term. Since
technology for setting up of such plants is not available in India, JNARDDC can play a vital role
in developing such technologies. The Committee recommends that research may be
undertaken to develop and adapt new technology which may help setting up of small and
medium capacity alumina and aluminium plants.

(Para 6.4)
SEMINAR CONFERENCE

The Committee appreciates the efforts made by JINARDDC in conducting seminars and
conferences and recommends that JNARDDC should conduct such conferences and seminars
more frequently . The Committee also recommends that JNARDDC should make some
nominal entry fee from all the participant in order to raise funds to meet its financial
requirements.

(Para 7.3)
TRAINING PROGRAMMES AND WORKSHOP.

Conducting of training programmes and workshops provides a platform to scientists
for productive interaction and encourage them to gather knowledge and share experience .
JNARDDC should charge nominal fee from the participants for the training programme to
generate revenue to meet JNARDDC's non-plan financial requirements. The Committee also
recommends that JNARDDC should give wide publicity to its training programmes.

(Para 8.2)
CONSULTANCY AND TESTING SERVICES

The Committee, while taking note of consultancy and testing services offered by
JNARDDC , is of the opinion that INARDDC should generate sufficient fund to meet its
requirement of non-plan expenditure by opening avenues for generating revenue by providing
consultancy services. JNARDDC may stress on service mix and service endowment by giving
due importance to diversification in consultancy services and exploring new ideas for generation
of new project. The centre should try to provide consultancy services out side the country as
well.

(Para 9.3)
SERVICE TO DOWNSTREAM SECTOR

The Committee is of the opinion that JNARDDC with its experience can provide
quality service to the down stream sector. Efforts for establishing the downstream
processing laboratory (DSP) may be accelerated and the staff be imparted necessary training
and expertise.

(Para 10.3)

14


POLLUTION CONTROL AND ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT

The Committee: observes that the problems of pollution is one of the threat being
faced by human society. JNARDDC can make significant contribution for environmental
impact assessment. Central Government may consider to entrust with JNARDDC to undertake
study on various forms of pollution and develop mechanism for pollution/waste management
and control. The Centre should be regularly in touch with other related Ministries.

(Para 11.4)
FORMATION OF CORE GROUP OF INDIAN ALUMINIUM INDUSTRY

The Committee is of the view that regular interaction of Scientists of the centre with
the experienced professional from IIT, EIL, TISL etc. to enhance the knowledge and
experience of Scientist of INARDDC in developing various models far aluminium industries.
If necessary, working core group involving the Centre's Scientists and academic institute may
be formed. The Committee also recommends that scientist of various institutions may be
invited to the conference and seminars for the exchange of views on a regular basis.

(Para 12.2)
ANNUAL BUDGETARY REQUIREMENT OF JNARDDC

The Committee is constrained to express its concerns over the languishing and athetic
condition of Centre like INARDDC due to lack of sufficient fund flow from the Government
where all research work pertaining to aluminium industry might be carried on successfully .
The situation emerging out of the development is really pathetic and requires immediate
attention. JNARDDC has an excellent layout with required equipment and technology for
research work in aluminium industry, therefore, the Sub-Committee is of the view that such
an extra-ordinary Research centre should not languish because of financial crunch. The
Committee recommends that the Ministry of Mines should take stock of actual financial
requirement of JNARDDC to meet its plan and non-plan expenditure . The Committee further
recommends that since JNARDDC is 8. research centre and does not generate substantial
revenue of its own except from consultancy and services, JNARDDC should be allowed
budgetary support to meet at least its non-plan expenditure so that the scientist should
remain in peace while doing research work and have not to bother for their future survival.
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Mines should explore the possibility
to generate/appropriate funds out of Aluminium Development Fund and also from Indian
Aluminium companies to meet the _ plan-expenditure of JNARDDC. At the same time,
JNARDDC management and the Ministry of Mines should propagate the utility of JNARDDC
for aluminium industries. The aluminium industries can refer to the Centre for all of their R& D
problems as their involvement would definitely help in the development of technology packages
for future expansion programmes. If the Central agency like Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminium
Research Development & Design Centre is involved in importing technology for green field as
well as brown field expansions there is a possibility of saving a lot of foreign exchange by
avoiding duplicate transfer of technology.

(Para 13.4)

15


MERGER OF JNARDDC WITH NALCO

The Committee understands that NALCO is a leading aluminium company with the
status of Mini Ratna and spends considerable amount of fund towards R&D _ in the field of
aluminium. The Committee agrees that attaching JNARDDC with NALCO would defeat the
basic objectives of the centre. Government should find ways to strengthen the centre by
infusing sufficient fund apart from budgetary support after the projects are prepared.

(Para 14.3)
SWOT ANALYSIS OF JNARDDC

The Committee acknowledges the unique position of JNARDDC oriented towards
aluminium process metallurgy . The Committee recommends that JNARDDC should take
advantage of its opportunities and overcome its weaknesses by expanding and diversify 15
activities and if necessary JNARDDC should induct trained experienced scientists from various
fields.

(Para 15.2)

During the course of oral evidence the Secretary, Department of Mines assured the Sub-
Committee for proper utilisation of 100 acres land JNARDDC. The Secretary stated that
National Institute of Rock Mechanics ( NIRM) and National Institute of Mines Health ( NIMH)
kolar are to be shifted there. The Secretary, further stated that vacant staff quarters in the
premises of JNARDDC would be allotted to the Scientists. at the earliest and improvement with
regard to house keeping would also be made.

(Para.15.3)

The Committee is of the view that JNARDDC has to inject sufficient competitive
resilience to survive in the competitive era. However, the Department of Mines should take care
of sufficient budgetary support for R&D activities for aluminium Industry.

(Para 15.4.)

The Committee recommends that the Department of Mines should examine the issue of
cheaper imports and get anti-dumping duty imposed if dumping is found.

(Para 15.5)
The Department may ensure proper utilisation of the large building.

(Para 15.6)

"16


MINUTES



oye


या

THIRD MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday the 12" February, 2001 in Room No. 62,
Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Shri Ramdas Agarwal — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
Shri P.K. Maheshwari

Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma
Shri Jibon Roy

Smt. Saroj Dubey

Shri S. Suvasubramanian
Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

9० :+ 9४ ७ # WN

LOK SABHA

9. Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
10. Shri Anant Mahadeoppa Gudhe
11. Shri G.J. Javiya

12... Shri Ram Singh Kaswan

13. Shri Sunil Khan

14. Shri Deepak Kumar

15. Shri Manjay Lal

16. Shri K. Malaisamy

17, Shri K.H. Muniyappa

18. Shri Nagmani

19. Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah

20. Shri Ram Sajivan

21. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh

22. Shri Ramanand Singh

23. Shri A.C. Jose

24, Shri Ramdas Athawale

SECRETARIAT

Shri P.C. Paikray, Under Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer

19


2. The Chairman welcomed the Members and announced the formation of four Sub-
Committees of his Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry and also
the names of the Convenors of the Sub-Committees:

Sub-Committee I for Ministry of Steel ---- Convenor -Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi .

Sub-Committee II for Ministry of Small Scale Industries and Agro and Rural
Industries -- Convenor — Prof.M.M. Aggarwal

Sub-Committee III for Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises -- Convenor- Dr.
8.8. Ramaiah.

Sub-Committee IV for Ministry of Mines -- Convenor - Shri A.C. Jose

3. Thereafter, the Chairman also announced the subject matter of the stiidy for the Sub-
Committees i.e. Sub-Committee-I for the Ministry of the Steel and Sub-Committee-IV for the
Ministry of Mines will take up the issues of Modernisation, Restructuring and Expansion
Programmes in the PSUs of the Ministry of Steel and the Ministry of Mines respectively. The
Sub-Committee-III will continue with the subject matter of study ,i.e., Performance review of the
PSUs under the Ministry of Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises and Examination of MoU
system of select Central PSUs. The Sub-Committee-IV will also continue with the study of
Impact of Liberalisation and Globalisation on Small Scale Industries.

6. Thereafter, the Committee adjourned at 4.00 P.M.

*** Relates to other matters

20


I
FIRST MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 18™ June , 2001 in Committee Room

‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

Awa

Pepe

2.

PRESENT

Shri A.C. Jose -—- Convenor
RAJYA SABHA

Smt. Saroj Dubey

LOK SABHA

Shri Ramdas Athawale
Shri Thomas Hansda
Shri Nagmani

Shri K.H. Muniyappa.

SECRETARIAT

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer

WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministries of Mines

Shri Dipak Chatterjee, Secretary

Shri S.C. Tripathi, Additional Secretary
Smt. Aruna Bagchee, Joint Secretary
Shri S. P. Gupta, Joint Secretary

At the outset the Convenor welcomed the Members of the Sub-Committee to the

meeting . Members present discussed the proposed tour programme to Jaipur , Ajmer and
Udaipur from 24" to 30" June, 2001 to make study of Modernisation, Restructuring and
Expansion Programmes in the PSUs of Ministry of Mines. After a brief discussion the Sub-
Committee decided to undertake the said study visit to Khetri, Jaipur and Udaipur from 257
to 28" June, 2001.

3.

The Sub-Committee then heard the oral evidence of the Secretary of the Ministry of

Mines on the overview of the Mining Sector.

4.

A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
The Sub-Committee adjourned at 4.00 P.M.

21


0
SECOND MEETING

The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 9" August, 2001 in Room No.63,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Shri A.C. Jose — Convenor
RAJYA SABHA
Nil ;
“LOK SABHA
Shri Ramdas. Athawale
Shri K.H. Muniyappa.

bald

SECRETARIAT

Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee

At the outset the Convenor welcomed the Members of Sub -Committee - IV and
apprised them of the agenda for the meeting . Members present discussed status of various PSUs
under the administrative control of Ministry of Mines.

3. The Sub -Committee, thereafter, decided to make on the spot study of Modernisation,
Restructuring and Expansion Programmes in mining sector and in this connection decided to visit
Nagpur from 110 to 14" September ,2001 Vishakhapatnam, Bhubaneshwar and Ghatshila
(Jharkhand) from 247" to 28" September ,2001 and Kolkata and Sikkim from 8"to 13"
October ,2001

4. The Sub-Committee adjourned at 5.00 P.M.


The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 7* December , 2001 ‘in Committee
Room *A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. 80 8.८. Jose — Convenor

" RAJYA SABHA
Nil
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Thomas Hansda

SECRETARIAT

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee

WITNESSES

Representatives of Ministry of Mines
Shri Dipak Chaterji, Secretary

Shri S.P. Gupta, Joint Secretary

Smt. Aruna Bagchee, Joint Secretary

Shri Sutanu Behuria, JS&FA

Shri A.K. Bhandari, Director

Shri S.S. Mehra, Director (Fin.)

Smt. Aditi S. Ray, Director

Shri B.K. Menon, CMD, HCL

Shri S.K. Kar, Director, (F), HCL

Shri B.N. Mittal, CMD, HZL

Shri M.G. Desmukh, Director (T), MECL
Shri K.S. Raju, CG-IBM

Shri V.V. Kutumbarao, Director (INARDDC)

GHProSsrC er avrayrner

2. At the outset the Convenor welcomed the Members of the Sub-Committee and
Secretary, Department of Mines ( Ministry of Coal and Mines) and informed the agenda of the
meeting

3. The Convenor, thereafter, requested the Secretary to give his presentation on various
issues concerned to Hindustan Zinc Ltd ( HZL), Hindustan Copper Ltd. (HCL), Jawaharlal
Nehru Aluminium Research Development and Design Centre ( JNARDDC), Indian Bureau of
Mines (IBM) and Mineral Exploration Corporation Ltd. ( MECL), in the light of the Sub-

23


oy

Committee's visit and interaction with the respective management. The Secretary, deliberated
upon mainly on modernisation, restructuring and expansion programme of Hindustan Zinc Ltd.
and Hindustan Copper Ltd. and structural and functional aspects of JNARDDC, IBM and
MECL. After the Secretary's presentation, the Convenor and the Member present asked some
questions which were answered by Secretary and officials of the Department of Mines.

4, The Sub-Committee adjourned at 4.00 p.m.


IV
FOURTH MEETING

The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 26" December , 2001 in

Committee Room ‘A Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

wep

2

PRESENT

Shri A.C. Jose — Convenor
RAJYA SABHA

Smt. Saroj Dubey

Dr. Faguni Ram

LOK SABHA

Shri Ramdas Athawale
Shri Nagmani

SECRETARIAT

Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer

At the outset the Convenor welcomed the Members of the Sub-Committee and informed

them the agenda of the meeting.
3.

The Sub-Committee, thereafter, took up the following draft reports for consideration:-

(i) Draft 647 Report on the "Modernisation, Restructuring and Expansion
Programme of Hindustan Zinc Ltd. (HZL)";

(ii) Draft 65 Report on the "Modernisation, Restructuring and Expansion
Programme of Hindustan Copper Ltd. (HCL)";

(iii) Draft 66" Report on "Performance Review of Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminium
Research Development and Design Centre (INARDDC)";

(iv) Draft 67" Report on the "Organisational Structure and Performance Review of
Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM)"; and

(v) Draft 687 Report on the "Working and Performance Review of Mineral
Exploration Corporation Ltd. (MECL)".

After some discussions, the Reports were adopted.
The Sub-Committee adjourned at 3.00 P.M. to join the meeting of the Main Committee .

25


XVI :
SIXTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met ४ 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 26" December, 2001 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1, Shri Ramdas Agarwal —-Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
Dr. Faguni Ram

Shri P.K. Maheshwari
Shri Jibon Roy

Smt. Saroj Dubey

Shri S. Sivasubramanian
Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha
Shri Bangaru Laxman

99० :७० ७ # ४३ 0७

LOK SABHA

10. Shri A Narendra ..

11. Shri Ramdas Athawale
12. Shri Anant Mahadeoappa Gudhe
13. Shri GJ. Javiya

14, Shri A.C. Jose

15. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
16. Shri Manjay Lal —

17. Shri G. Mallikarjunappa
18. Shti Nagmani

19. Shri R. Basanagouda Patil
20. Shri Ram Sajivan ..,
21. Shri Ramanand Singh

22. Smt. Renu Kumari

SECRETARIAT

Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer

*** Relates to other matters

26


3. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft reports for consideration :-

(i) Draft 64" Report on the "Modernisation, ‘Restructuring and Expansion
Programme of Hindustan Zinc Ltd. (HZL)";

(ii) Draft 65" Report on the "Modernisation, Restructuring and Expansion
Programme of Hindustan Copper Ltd. (HCL)";

(iii) Draft 66" Report on "Performance Review of Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminium
Research Development and Design Centre NARDDC)";

(iv) Draft 67" Report on the "Organisational Structure and Performance Review of
Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM)";

(v) Draft 68" Report on the "Working and Performance Review of Mineral
Exploration Corporation Ltd. (MECL)". .

31 After some discussions, the Reports were adopted with certain modifications as
suggested by the Chairman and Members of the Committee.

4. The Committee thereafter, then decided that the Chairman of the Committee may
present the Reports to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha so that government may _ start
working on the recommendations of the Committee.

"5. The Committee adjourned at 4.30 P.M.

27