161st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/161streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON
INDUSTRY
 ONE HUNDRED SIXTY FIRST REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
COMMITTEE'S 132ND REPORT ON
MoU PERFORMANCE IN RESPECT OF SELECT PUBLIC
SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS
(MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES)
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 5TH MAY, 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK  SABHA ON 5TH MAY, 2005)
E-mail:rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
MAY,  2005/VAISAKHA, 1927 (SAKA)
CONTENTS
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2. INTRODUCTION
3. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
4. OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
5. MINUTES
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
   1.  Shri Santosh Bagrodia         –---       Chairman
        RAJYA  SABHA
   2.  Prof M.M. Agarwal
   3.  Shri Surendra Lath
   4.  Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
   5.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
   6.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   7.  Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
   8.  Dr. Vijay Mallya
   9.  Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
10.  Shrimati Vanga Geetha
        LOK  SABHA
11.  Shri Guharam Ajgalle
12.  Shri Kailash Baitha
13.  Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
14.  Shri Subhash Deshmukh
15.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan

161st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/161streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
16.  Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria
17.  Shri Sunil Khan
18.  Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato
19.  Shri Prakash Paranjpe
20.  Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel
21.  Shri Rajnarayan
22.  Shri Bagida Ramakrishna
23.  Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
24.  Shrimati Rubab Sayeda
25.  Shri Gurjeet Singh Rana
26.  Shri Manvendra Singh
27.  Shri Ganesh Singh
28.  Shri Suraj Singh
29.  Shri Chandramani Tripathi
30.  Shri Girdhari Yadav
31.  Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
        SECRETARIAT
        Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
        Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
        Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
        Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
        I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having been authorized
by the Committee, hereby present this One Hundred Sixty first 
 Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Committee’s 132 nd Report on MoU Performance in respect of select Public Sector
Undertakings pertaining to the Department of Public Enterprises.
2.     The Committee examined and considered the Action Taken Notes supplied by the Government (Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises) on the recommendations contained in its 132 nd Report on MoU performance in
respect of PSUs of Power Sector (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises)
3.     The Committee in its meeting held on 3rd May, 2005 considered and adopted the Report.
 
SANTOSH BAGRODIA
NEW DELHI ;                                                                                                                                                  Chairman,
3rd May, 2005                                                                                                             Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry.
REPORT
         The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Public Enterprises
(Ministry of Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises) on the Recommendations contained in the 132
nd Report (of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry) on MoU Performance in respect of PSUs of Power
Sector. The Report was presented /laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha on the 22nd December, 2003.
2.      Action Taken Notes have been received from the Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries
& Public Enterprises) in respect of the recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as
follows:
Chapter - I- The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry :
Para : 2.32; 3.6 ; 3.13 ; 3.22 ; 4.25 ; 4.26
The Committee is pleased to observe that the Ministry has accepted its recommendation as mentioned in Chapter -I of
the Report.

161st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/161streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
Chapter - II- The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies:
Para 2.31; 2.34; 3.1 l; 3.17 ; 3.21; 4.24;
In respect of these recommendations the Committee is convinced with the logic and explanation advocated by the
Ministry and therefore does not want to pursue further. Chapter - III- The recommendations/observations in respect of
which the Committee has not accepted replies of the Ministry:
Para 2.36; 2.37; 3.16; 3.19; 3.23; 4.28
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementations of recommendations contained in Chapter-III and
desires that the Ministry should furnish logical explanation in respect of these recommendations.
Chapter - IV- The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry have not been
received: Para 4.30
         In respect of recommendation Para 4.30 in Chapter-IV, the Ministry has either furnished the interim reply or
couched its language in vague terms like noted for compliance/guidance, therefore, the Committee desires that the
Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in respects of recommendation categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to
the point, as per the intention and spirit of the recommendation of the Committee.
3.      The Details of the ATR is being discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.
CHAPTER - I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
1.0    Measures to attain optimum growth
1.1    The Committee observes that although NTPC have taken measures to attain optimum growth of the company by
taking several measures like reducing the number of Government Directors on the Board, and inducting professional
from finance and technology side to improve its efficiency but there is still scope for improvement although the
Company has a happy experience of working along the MoU instrument. In view of the increasing global
competitiveness MoU parameters for NTPC should be modified to raise it to the status of the global Company that
NTPC needs to attain in the present scenario of liberalisation of economy.                                                     (Para 2.32)
Action Taken
1.1.1Ministry of Power and NTPC have informed that the company has already included parameter indicating
globalization efforts of the Corporation in the MoU.
1.1.2During the current year also, parameter indicating global nature of the Corporation has been incorporated.
Recommendation
1.2    Weightages Assigned to the Financial Parameters
1.2.1Having heard the explanation given by the representatives of the Corporation regarding any change to be
incorporated in the weightages assigned to MoU parameters the Committee observes that the weightages assigned to the
Financial Parameters under MoU may be revised to 60% from present level of 40%.                        (Para 3.6)
Action Taken
1.2.2Ministry of Coal and Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) have informed that Department of Public Enterprises in
its revised guidelines for drafting MoU for 2004-05, has fixed the weightage for the financial parameters as 50%.
However, NLC is in agreement with the views of the Committee.
Recommendation
1.3    Sustained R&D developed by NLC
1.3.1The Committee observes that the sustained R&D developed by NLC in the area of Lignite Mining and Power
Generation should be utilised effectively. The Committee is however of the view that the feasibilities from Lignite
Projects in other parts of the country should be explored.                                   (Para 3.13)

161st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/161streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
Action Taken
1.3.2Ministry of Coal and Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) have informed that NLC has planned to put up a lignite
mine-cum-power project at Bikaner, Rajasthan State. The project is in the advanced stage of approval by the
Government.
Recommendation
1.4    Deeper lignite and adverse geological conditions
1.4.1The Committee also expresses its concern over the progressively deeper lignite, adverse geological conditions and
the constraints in land acquisition for mining. The Committee therefore urges upon the Government to come out with
necessary action plan to meet the constraints facing the NLC to make it more viable.                  (Para 3.22)
Action Taken
1.4.2Ministry of Coal and Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) have informed that NLC is exploring the various
alternative technologies including Underground Coal Gasification (UCG) and extraction of Coal Bed Methane (CBM).
NLC has proposed to study the UCG process in a geologically suitable Lignite block in Rajasthan, on pilot scale. If the
technology becomes proven, the same will be utilised in NLC’s future projects.
Recommendation
1.5    Growth potential in the core area of EHV transmission
1.5.1The Committee also observes that the further growth potential in the core area of EHV transmission should be fully
utilised by the Government and thereby the target of National Grid would be achieved by the year 2012.  (Para 4.25)
Action Taken
1.5.2Ministry of Power and Powergrid Corporation of India Limited have informed POWERGRID completed first
phase of National Grid in September, 2002, establishing an inter-regional power exchange capacity of 5,000 MW.
Commissioning of projects associated with second phase of National Grid has already commenced and inter-regional
transfer capacity has been enhanced to 89500 MW. POWERGRID was able to facilitate transfer of 22,500 MU of
energy across the regions during the year 2003-04, an increase of 70% from previous year. Such transfer has taken place
mostly from power surplus Eastern Region to other regions. Thus, inter-regional transfer of power worth Rs. 4,500 crore
was facilitated most of which would have remained bottled up without the facilities created by POWERGRID.
1.5.3To implement various inter-regional transmission systems, Feasibility Report cum Detailed Project Report of
various projects have been/ are being prepared progressively. Expeditious investment approval of these and availability
of Non-Budgetary Support as equity would go a long way in achieving targets of National Grid by 2012.
Recommendation
1.6    Long distance communication
The Committee further observes that the potentials in the area of long distance communication and use of optic fibre and
state of the art technology should be fully exploited.                                      (Para 4.26)
Action Taken
1.6.1Ministry of Power and Powergrid Corporation of India Limited have informed POWERGRID had diversified into
Telecom to utilise spare telecommunication capacity of its Unified Load Dispatch Centre (ULDC) scheme and rolling
out over-head optical fibre cable on its transmission network with additional investment of about Rs.1,000 Crore.
POWERGRID’s over 20,000 Kms. of Telecom Network, to be commissioned shortly will provide a robust highway of
tele-communication at affordable cost with ultra modern and eco-friendly implementation techniques. Moreover, the
surplus created from this diversified business shall be utilised in funding the core business area. In fact, POWERGRID
has already operationalised 13,000 Kms. of telecom network and commercial operation already commenced on some of
the links, namely Delhi-Chandigarh, Delhi-Simla, Delhi-Jaipur-Lucknow-Mumbai-Ahmedabad.
CHAPTER - II
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES.

161st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/161streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
Recommendation
2.0    Rating needs to be modified
2.1    The Committee observes that the MoU rating in respect of NTPC over the last 16 years have been graded as
excellent this kind of rating needs to be modified in view of the power scenario in the country i.e. Gross generation of
Power and requirement. It is a fact that NTPC is the bulk power generator in the country. However, power supply of
country still fall short of the requirement. In view of this, excellent rating seems to be a misnomer. The Committee
therefore recommends that MoU ratio in respect of NTPC should be integrated with the actual need of the power of the
Country and production. Targets should be fixed in the national perspective.                                    (Para 2.31)
Action Taken
2.1.1The Ministry of Power and NTPC have informed that NTPC has been signing the MoU with Government of India
since the inception of the MoU system. The installed capacity of NTPC is only about 19% of country’s total installed
capacity and its generation is 27% of country’s generation. The targets with respect to generation and other parameters
for yearly MoU are fixed after detailed discussions/deliberations within the company, with Ministry of Power and
finally with Task Force in MoU keeping the company’s and national perspective in view.
2.1.2MoU ratings are declared by the Department of Public Enterprises based on the actual performance of the company
against pre-defined MoU targets at the end of the year.
Recommendation
2.2    Growth criteria for power generation
2.2.1The Committee observed that the growth criteria for power generation under MOU should be measured year after
year and not from what it was since its inception i.e. 1998-99 if the growth percentage is based from year to year, the
growth trend of this Company is not very encouraging. It is reflected in the gross generation and the total requirement of
the power in the country. MoU system should be framed in such a way so as to exhibit growth trend year after year and
encourage and invite it. Project should be completed with in a fixed time frame.                         (Para 2.34)
Action Taken
2.2.2Ministry of Power and NTPC have informed that the target for generation for the company are fixed based upon
actual installed capacity and new capacity addition during the proposal period. The targets are fixed and measured on
yearly basis i.e. year after year. The targets are discussed/deliberated within the company with Ministry of Power and
with Task Force on MoU in DPE and in the process, the targets are stretched one.
2.2.3NTPC has a good record of completing the projects within scheduled time-frame. All efforts are made to cut short
the project execution time.
Recommendation
2.3    Power generation and the skill
2.3.1The Committee observes that the expertise of NLC in view of its overall performance achieved in terms of power
generation and the skill should be properly utilised and further Company should avail the opportunities in this regard to
achieve self sufficiency in the power sector. The Committee feels that NLC has a long way to go to achieve self
sufficiency in the power sector and should not get complacent.                                      (Para 3.11)
Action Taken
2.3.2Ministry of Coal and Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) have informed that NLC was incorporated in the year
1956. The first lignite mine faced problem right from the commissioning. The imported Specialised Mining Equipment
could not operate to their rated capacity because of the presence of hard sand stone in the soil. The lignite output was
much below the rated capacity and consequently the capacity utilisation of the downstream units was also low. With the
addition of higher capacity mining equipment, NLC wiped out its accumulated losses in the year 1981-82. NLC put up a
second mine of 10.5 MTPA with the linked power station of capacity 1470 MW in the 1980’s, taking the total lignite
mining capacity to 17 MTPA and the power generating capacity to 2070 MW. The company further expanded by
putting up Mine-I Expansion project (4.0 MTPA) with a linked Thermal Power station of 420 MW and Mine-IA project
(3MTPA) to supply to an independent power producer (IPP) at a total cost of about Rs.3800 crores. The company has
also proposed other projects in Neyveli region as described below:
(i)    Mine-II Expansion-4.5 MTPA.

161st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/161streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
(ii)    Thermal Power Station-II Expansion-2X250 MW
(iii)   Mine-III-8MTPA
(iv)   Thermal Power Station-III-1000 MW
(v)   TPS-I Second Expansion-125 MW.
2.3.3NLC in its endeavour to become a leading mining and power company has also embarked on the following
projects:
(i)    Rajasthan Mine and Power project.
(a)   Lignite Mine project at Rajasthan-2.1 MTPA
(b)  Linked Power project-250 MW
(ii)    Coal based power project at Tuticorin-1000 MW
(iii)   Coal based power project in Orissa -2000 MW
(iv)   Coal based power project at Madhya Pradesh-1000 MW
(v)   Refinery residue based power project at Chennai-492 MW
2.3.4After completion of these projects, NLC shall have power generating utilities with installed capacity of 8857 MW
and a total mining capacity of 38.60 million tone of lignite per annum.
Recommendation
2.4    Safety related activities viz. risk assessment and safety audit
2.4.1 The Committee was informed that the safety related activities viz. risk assessment and safety audit for NLC
Mines, Thermal Power Station are regularly done and 2% weightage has been given in MoU 2003-04. The Committee
expressed its satisfaction with the performance.                     (Para 3.17)
Action Taken
2.4.2Ministry of Coal and Neyveli Lignite Corporation have informed that the observation of the Committee has been
noted.
Recommendation
2.5    Inordinate time taken in the appointment of non-official, part time Directors
2.5.1The Committee is constrained to note the inordinate time taken in the appointment of non-official, part time
directors and observes that the Government should not only avoid such delay but also expedite the process of
decentralization of power among the PSUs and thereby relieving them from the clutches of the archaic administrative
set up to give impetus to their development and further expansion in the wake of the competitive environment in the
light of liberalisation and globalisation.
(Para 3.21)
Action Taken
2.5.2Ministry of Coal and Neyveli Lignite Corporation have informed that  Board of Directors of Neyveli Lignite
Corporation Ltd. has been reconstituted in accordance with the extant instruction vide order No.
21/35/91-ASO dated 18.6.2002.
2.5.3The appointment of part time non-official Directors involves clearance from different Government agencies and
thus it took some time to notify the appointment. Therefore, the delay, which occurred in appointment of non-official
part-time Directors, was beyond the control of this Department. However, the observations of the Committee have been
noted and all efforts would be taken to comply with the said recommendations.
2.5.4The Board of Directors of Coal India Limited (CIL) in its 207
th meeting held on 1 st May, 2003 agreed to
implement the Government decision for delegation of power of procurement of all items from CIL to its coal producing
Subsidiary Companies, except for explosives. The decision has been communicated by CIL to its subsidiary companies

161st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/161streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
on 16.5.2003.
Recommendation
2.6    Import duty exemption PGCIL on the lines of BHEL
2.6.1The Committee, therefore recommends that the case of PGCIL should be sympathetically considered by the
Government for import duty exemption on the lines of BHEL which is given in terms of mega project.             (Para
4.24)
Action Taken
2.6.2Ministry of Power and Powergrid Corporation of India Limited have informed that as per the mega power policy,
power generation projects with capacity of 1000 MW and more for thermal and 500 MW and more for hydro and
supplying power to more than one State are considered as a mega project. Accordingly, such projects are exempted from
Custom Duty, avail Deemed Export benefit as per EXIM policy and enjoy tax holidays for any block of 10 years within
the first 15 years. Thus, Mega Power Project status reduces the cost of projects. However, it is presently not available to
associated transmissions schemes.
2.6.3It has been suggested that the fiscal concessions available for mega projects be extended to all those transmission
projects, which are associated with Mega Generation Projects. The matter is presently under inter-Ministerial
consultation.
2.6.4This matter was taken up with Ministry of Finance also and they have informed that no specific proposals for
import duty concessions for projects undertaken by PGCIL appear to have been received either from the Ministry of
Power or from PGCIL. Details such as the nature of the goods sought to be imported, the revenue involved, etc. are not
available and it would not be possible to offer any specific comments on the recommendation at this stage. However it is
observed in the context of the said recommendation of the committee :­ -----
(a)   Eleven specified mega power projects were originally exempted from import duties on the basis of a Cabinet
decision approving the mega power policy. The exemption was subsequently extended to eight more mega
power projects (also on the basis of Cabinet/CCEA approval) and as a policy, extended to all mega power
projects which satisfy the specified criteria, i.e. inter-state thermal plants of 1000 MW and above or inter-state
hydel power plant of 500 MW and above, in budget 2003-04. There is no such Cabinet approval in this case.
Hence, the request of PGCIL made to the Committee, in respect of transmission projects, cannot be treated at
par with the Mega Power Projects for the purpose of import duty exemption.
(b)   There is a strong domestic angle to transmission and distribution equipment, and hence any import duty
concession to such equipment is likely to affect the domestic industry. In fact, the Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises, in its comments on the Cabinet note on ‘Large sized Power Project Policy’,
prepared by the Ministry of Power, had opposed extending of duty exemption for goods imported for
transmission systems associated with large power projects.
(c)   There is already a concessional customs duty of 10% on transmission and distribution projects. Further,
specified goods required for high voltage power transmission project are also at a concessional customs duty
of 5%.
CHAPTER - III
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE HAS NOT
ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
Recommendation
3.0    Human productivity Index
3.1 The Committee observes that notwithstanding the excellent performance and improvement in the generation of
power, human productivity index should be evaluated in terms of international scale. In the Indian context, human
productivity index may be excellent but this should be comparably to average human productivity at the global scene.
MoU parameters should see to it that human productivity can be raised to optimum level and may be brought at par with
the international standards.
(Para 2.36)

161st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/161streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
Action Taken
3.1.1Ministry of Power and NTPC have informed that the observation of the committee has been noted.
Further recommendation
3.1.2The Committee is of the view that the element of human productivity in an organization should be given due
weightage in the administration of MoU system. The ratio of return on wage Bill should be the determining
criterion/parameter for awarding grades under the MoU system. This is to insure that the organization has rational
human planning system so that the right people are placed at right position in right time for effectively achieving the
objective of the organization. In a globalized and liberalized economy human productivity is the key factor for imbibing
‘competitiveness’ and resilience for catching up the global pace.
Recommendation
3.2    Ash Utilisation
3.2.1As regards the environmental criteria where NTPC has qualitative parameters in which the main parameter relates
to ash utilisation. NTPC has been trying to improve ash utilisation in their plants progressively. The Committee is happy
to note that the Centre for Power Efficiency Environment Protection (CENPEEP) promoted by the NTPC is playing a
major role in the Development of eco-friendly and eco-nurturing initiative towards environmental protection and
continue to sustainable power development in India. The committee feels that CENPEEP should be fully exploited so as
to ensure clean environment.
(Para 2.37)
Action Taken
3.2.2Ministry of Power and NTPC have informed that CENPEEP is making consistent efforts to improve performance
of power stations of NTPC and some of State-owned utilities. Two regional centres, one in Northern Region at
Lucknow and another in Eastern Region at Patna are fully functional and providing services in those regions. A regional
CENPEEP Centre at Western Region is also being established.
Further Recommendation
3.2.3The Committee is of the view that MoU system should incorporate provisions/parameters for giving adequate
weightage for protection of environment. In this regard, the Committee expects that NTPC’s would continue to promote
the Centre for Power Efficiency Environment Protection (CENPEEP) for undertaking eco-friendly and eco-nurturing
steps to ensure clean environment entails sustainable development.
Recommendation
3.3    Adequate Exposure and Awareness
3.3.1The Committee observes that the lack of adequate exposure and awareness to external events has been a weakness
of the NLC. The Committee therefore, recommends to design the training programmes so as to expose their employees
to external events also.                           (Para 3.16)
Action Taken
3.3.2Ministry of Coal and Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) have informed that all the training programmes of NLC
are designed and formulated every year based on organisational requirement and based on requirement from different
units and the feedback received from the faculty and participants. NLC also gives weightage to the training needs
indicated by the individual in their Annual Appraisal Reports. The training need are met by constantly re-designing the
training programmes from time to time. To provide adequate exposure and awareness to external events, NLC has the
scheme of deputation training within India and abroad. Based on the organisational requirement and based on
availability of different training programmes from premier training institutes and other societies, employees are deputed
to various programmes across the country and abroad. NLC deputed 552 employees for training within India and 15
employees to foreign countries during the year 2003-04. However, the observation of the Committee has been noted by
NLC for future guidance.
Further recommendation
3.3.3The Committee acknowledges the training programmes undertaken by the NIC. The Committee is however of the
view that process of liberalization and globalization is at the advance stage. The corporate working environment is fast
changing. Therefore, the training curriculum must incorporate the modern method of doing work. This can be imparted

161st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/161streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
through constant interaction among top executive through participation in conferences, debates and discussion in
various international fora/organization
Recommendation
3.4    Project management skills
3.4.1The Committee feels that necessary steps need to be taken by the Government to strengthen the organisation to
improve the project management skills through proper training and development programmes. The Committee further
observes that such programmes should be introduced in all the PSUs whereever there is such needs/demands.        (Para
3.19)
Action Taken
3.4.2Ministry of Coal and Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) have informed that NLC believes that its growth is
engineered by the growth of its manpower and the quality of its human resources. Accordingly, to inculcate the best
business practices required under the changing environment NLC had organised training programmes, both in-house as
well as through outside premier instituted in the country, enabling them to interact with other professional and to acquire
capabilities for performing with the high degree of motivation and commitment. The training programmes include ­ ----
-
1.     In-house training programme,
2.     Deputation Training-within India,
3.     Foreign Deputation,
4.     Quality Circle Departmental Activities,
5.     Apprenticeship Training Scheme,
6.     Industry-Institute Linkage and
7.     Workers Education Scheme.
3.4.3Exclusive in-house training programmes on project management are being conducted and deputation to premier
institutions is also being done by NLC. However, the observation of the Committee has been noted by NLC for future
guidance.
Further recommendation
3.4.4The Committee is pleased to note that NLC has the provision for inculcating among its executives the modern
business practices keeping in view the changing environment. However, skill development programmes should also be
developed so that new ideas and innovations may be imbibed through in-house-experiment and outcome of which may
be marketing to global corporate. Skill Development as per the changing external environment (say globalization and
liberalization) is the key to success for any organization. Such messages may be proliferated to all PSUs.
Recommendation
3.5    Lengthy procedure in the process of approval of projects
3.5.1The Committee also observes that the lengthy procedure in the process of approval of projects and the delays
involved should be minimized to avoid severe constraints in the functioning of any PSUs in terms of the MoU
parameters. The Committee stresses that the Government should simplify the procedure involved there by avoiding the
delay in approval of projects.                               (Para 3.23)
Action Taken
3.5.2Ministry of Finance has informed that with a view to simplifying and expediting the process of approval of
Government funded plan schemes/projects, Ministry of Finance has prescribed a time period of 16 weeks for appraisal
of projects (excluding the time taken for preparation of DPR) vide OM No. 1(2)-PF.II/03
dated 7.5.2003.
Further recommendation
3.5.3The Committee is of the opinion that not only the time taken for approval of the projects need to be
rationalised/shortened but the cumbersome procedure involved in the process of approval must also be simplified for
enabling the PSUs for improving MoU-performance.
Recommendation
3.6    State of Art the Technology

161st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/161streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
3.6.1The Committee observes that such losses can be reduced by better management and adopting the state of art the
technology available in the global arena. The Committee further observes that the role of State Electricity Boards can
not be ruled out in achieving the speedy implementation of the ongoing distribution reform programmes.           (Para
4.28)
Action Taken
3.6.2Ministry of Power and Powergrid Corporation of India Limited have informed POWERGRID has attached prime
importance to Technology up gradation. POWERGRID has taken many initiatives in this direction, adopting the State-
of-the-Art­-technologies available in the world, which has improved and will further improve the system performance.
The system availability has been consistently maintained above 99% through deployment of modern Operation and
Maintenance techniques at par with international standards.
3.6.3The huge Transmission and Development losses, we generally talk about, mainly take place in sub-transmission
and distribution systems, which are predominantly owned by State utilities. However, POWERGRID is extending its
expertise through consultancy assignments to various States, which shall help in designing optimal distribution system
leading to reduction in distribution losses.
3.6.4Ministry of Power, Government of India has undertaken Accelerated Power Development and Reforms programme
(APDRP) under distribution reforms programme. Under APDRP, POWERGRID has been assigned the role of Advisor-
cum-Consultant to oversee implementation of APDRP schemes in 105 distribution circles spread over 18 States. During
year 2003-04-APDRP Schemes for 35 circles/towns amounting to Rs. 1558 crore were approved where POWERGRID
was Advisor cum Consultant. In addition, POWERGRID has undertaken implementation of APDRP Schemes worth Rs.
850 crores on bilateral basis, in the States of Bihar, Goa, Mizoram and Meghalaya. POWERGRID is also executing
Rural Electrification works of 2400 villages in Bihar on behalf of BSEB costing about Rs.178 crore. It has also signed a
MoU with REC to electrify 1 lakh villages in next ten years.
Further recommendation
3.6.5The concern of the Committee is the loss of huge power, be it at transmission stage or at the sub-transmission
stage. Irrespective of the fact whether the such huge loss is owned by Central Government as transmission or
development loss or State utilities mainly taking place in sub-transmission and distribution system, it is in all counts the
national loss. Therefore, the Committee feels that the POWERGRID, which has been entrusted with the responsibility to
extend its expertise with all available State of the Art technologies to various States, must play its role of Advance-cum-
consultant to the States in designing optional distribution system for reducing distribution losses. POWERGRID must
honestly oversee the implementation of Accelerated Power Development and Reform Programme (APDRP) under
distribution reform for optimal transmissions/distribution of power without losses.
CHAPTER - IV
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE
MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED.
Recommendation
4.0    Accordance of ‘Navratna’ status to PGCIL
4.1    The Committee gathers a very good impression of the performance of PGCIL in term of MoU parameters as well
as physical and financial parameters. Further the Committee expresses that keeping in view of the achievements of
PGCIL the Government should look into the demand of PGCIL to accord ‘Navratna’ status to it. The Committee
strongly supports this demand of PGCIL.                  (Para 4.30)
Action Taken
4.1.1Ministry of Power and Powergrid Corporation of India Limited have informed that POWERGRID was accorded
“Mini-Ratna” Category-I status w.e.f. October, 1998. However, PGCIL feels that the delegations available under Mini-
Ratna are not sufficient to meet its requirement of enhanced operations and growth. A proposal for consideration of
POWERGRID as “Navratna” has been submitted to DPE.
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
COMMITTEE ----- AT A GLANCE

161st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/161streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
HUMAN PRODUCTIVITY INDEX
         The Committee is of the view that the element of human productivity in an organization should be given due
weightage in the administration of MoU system. The ratio of return on wage Bill should be the determining
criterion/parameter for awarding grades under the MoU system. This is to insure that the organization has rational
human planning system so that the right people are placed at right position in right time for effectively achieving the
objective of the organization. In a globalized and liberalized economy human productivity is the key factor for imbibing
‘competitiveness’ and resilience for catching up the global
pace.                                                                                                                                           (3.1.2)
ASH UTILISATION
         The Committee is of the view that MoU system should incorporate provisions/parameters for giving adequate
waightage for protection of environment. In this regard, the Committee expects that NTPC’s would continue to promote
the Centre for Power Efficiency Environment Protection (CENPEEP) for undertaking eco-friendly and eco-nurturing
steps to ensure clean environment entails sustainable
development.                                                                                           (3.2.3)
ADEQUATE EXPOSURE AND AWARENESS
         The Committee acknowledges the training programmes undertaken by the NIC. The Committee is, however, of the
view that process of liberalization and globalization is at the advance stage. The corporate working environment is fast
changing. Therefore, the training curriculum must incorporate the modern method of doing work. This can be imparted
through constant interaction among top executive through participation in conferences, debates and discussion in
various international
fora/organization                                                                                                                                     (3.3.3)
PROJECT MANAGEMENT SKILLS
         The Committee is pleased to note that NLC has the provision for inculcating among its executives the modern
business practices keeping in view the changing environment. However, skill development programmes should also be
developed so that new ideas and innovations may be imbibed through in-house-experiment and outcome of which may
be marketing to global corporate. Skill Development as per the changing external environment (say globalization and
liberalization) is the key to success for any organization. Such messages may be proliferated to all
PSUs.                                          (3.4.4)
LENGTHY PROCEDURE IN THE PROCESS OF APPROVAL OF PROJECTS
Further recommendation
         The Committee is of the opinion that not only the time taken for approval of the projects need to be
rationalised/shortened but the cumbersome procedure involved in the process of approval must also be simplified for
enabling the PSUs for improving MoU-performance.                                                                                            (3.5.3)
STATE OF ART THE TECHNOLOGY
         The concern of the Committee is the loss of huge power, be it at transmission stage or at the sub-transmission
stage. Irrespective of the fact whether the such huge loss is owned by Central Government as transmission or
development loss or State utilities mainly taking place in sub-transmission and distribution system, it is in all counts the
national loss. Therefore, the Committee feels that the POWERGRID, which has been entrusted with the responsibility to
extend its expertise with all available State-of-the-Act technologies to various States, must play its role of Advance-
cum-consultant to the States in designing optional distribution system for reducing distribution losses. POWER GRID
must honestly oversee the implementation of Accelerated Power Development and Reform Programme (APDRP) under
distribution reform for optimal transmissions/distribution of power without
losses.                                                                                   (3.6.5)
MINUTES
XIV
FOURTEENTH  MEETING
         The Committee met at 5.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 3
rd May, 2005 in Committee Room 'E', Basement, PHA, New
Delhi.
         PRESENT

161st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/161streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
   1.   Shri Santosh Bagrodia   —   Chairman
         RAJYA  SABHA
   2.   Prof M.M. Agarwal
   3.   Dr. K. Malaisamy
   4.   Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   5.   Dr. Vijay Mallya
   6.   Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
         LOK  SABHA
   7.   Shri Guharam Ajgalle
   8.   Shri Kailash Baitha
   9.   Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
10.   Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria
11.   Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel
12.   Shri Rajnarayan
13.   Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
         SECRETARIAT
         Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
         Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
         Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
2.      At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee.
3.      The Committee then took up the following Reports for its consideration:-----
(i)    161
st Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 132 nd
Report on MoU Performance in respect of Select Public Sector Undertakings.
 (ii)   162nd Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 146th
Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in Maharashtra.
(iii)   163rd Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 147 th
Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in the Region of Bulandshahr.
(iv)   164th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 150 th
Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises).
(v)   165th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 151 st
Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Department of Heavy Industries (Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises).
(vi)   166
th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 152nd
Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries.
(vii)  167th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 153 rd
Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Ministry of Small Scale Industries.
(viii)168th Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) pertaining to Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises).
(ix)   169 th Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) pertaining to Department of Heavy Industries (Ministry of
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises).
(x)   170th Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) pertaining to Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries.
(xi)   171st Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) pertaining to Ministry of Small Scale Industries.

161st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/161streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
4.      The Committee decided to present these reports in the current session. After a brief discussion the Report were
adopted.
5.      The Committee authorized Prof. M.M. Agarwal and in his absence Dr. K. Malaisamy to present the Reports to the
Rajya Sabha. Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel and in his absence, Shri Rajnarayan to lay the copies of the Reports in the
Lok Sabha.
6.      The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 P.M.