PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYASABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
THIRTY-FIRST REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (1999-2000) 
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF MINES 
(MINISTRY OF STEEL & MINES) 
(PRESENTED ON THE 23RD APRIL , 1999) 
RAJYA SABRA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
APRIL, 1999NA!SHAKHA, 1921 (SAKA) 
• 
Ind. 31199 

CONTENTS 
Cmu,)SIT>ON o• THE Cm>MITII !i 
2 R hi'OKT OF nm co~""'TF.~ 
.\. ANN I,XUK" (M I NUTE~ IWTII~ MLI-.IlNO~) 
PAGF.S 
(i)·(i i) 
1-5 
7-1 1 

COMPOSmON OF THE COMMITfEE 
I. Shri Raghavji - Chairman 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Shri Govindrao Adik 
3. Shri Maurice Kujur 
4. Shri Karma Topden 
5. Shri Rajubhai A. Parmar 
6. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
7. Dr. Ranbir Singh 
8. Shri C.O. Poulose 
9. Shri P. Prabhakar Reddy 
I 0. Shri Nagmani 
I I. Shri Bhagaban Majhi 
12. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
# 13. Shri Samosh Bagrodia 
@14. Shri Shibu Soren 
$15. Shri Gaya Singh 
LOKSABHA 
16. Shri Muni Lall 
17. Shri M. Srinivas 
18. Shri Vijay Shankar 
19. Shri Gyan Singh 
20. Shri Tarachand Sahu 
21. Shri Ramanand Singh 
22. Shri Annasaheb M.K. Patil 
23. Shri Jual Oram 
24. Shri Anand Ratna Maurya 
25. Shri Punnulal Mohale 
26. Shri Nadendla Bha.~kar Rao 
27. Shri K. H. Muniyappa 
t Nomuwed w.<.f. 17.7.1998. 
@ Nomiroled •-a.f. 4.8.1998. 
S NominJted w.ef. 11.8.1998. 
n1 RS F-2-A 
(i) 
. . 

28. Shri Datta Meghe 
29. Shri Konijeti RosaJah 
30. Shri Bijoy Krishna Handique 
31. Dr. Shakeel Ahmad 
0 32. Shri Ananda Pathak 
33. Shri Sunil Khan 
34. Shn Kirti Vardhan Singh 
35. Shri K. Palaniswami 
36. Shri Surendra Prasad Yadav (Jahanabad) 
37. Shn Shakuni Choudhury 
38. Shri Malyala Rajaiah 
39. Shri Prabhat Kumar Samantaray 
40. Shri Ajay Chakraborty 
41. Shri Zora Singh 
42. Shn Ajll Kum:u-Panja 
43. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
44. Prof. Jogendra Kawade 
-45. Shri Anand Mohan 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar. Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta. Director 
Shri P. C. Paikray; Under Secretary 
Sbri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Officer 
Nonunatcd w.<.f 9.6.1998 vi<C Shri Moiuul Hassan. 
• :-;.,m,....,al ... .~ 22.2.1999. 
(ii) 
mRS f-2·8 

THIRTY-FIRST REPORT OF THE COMMiTTEE 
I. the Chairman, Department -related Parliamentary Standing Comm ittee on Industry having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Repon on its behalf, present this Thiny-first Repon of the 
Commiuee on the Demands for Grants of the Department of Mines for 1999-2000. 
While examining the sa id Demands for Grants. the Commiuee also considered the Action Taken 
Notes of Dcp~nment of Mines on its 24th Repon penaining to the Demands for Grants of Department of 
Mme~ for 1998-99. Tite Commineeexamined the relevan t docume nts and papers relating to the Demands 
for Gra nts for 1999-2000 received from the Department of Mines. It also heard the oral evidence of 
Secretary. Depanment of Mtnes on the budgetary provisions as contained m the detailed o.;mands for 
Grants. 
The Committee adopted the Repon in its meeting held on the 16th April, 1999. 
The comments and observations with suitable recommendation~ of the Committee are given in the 
succeeding paragraphs : 
I. Gcologtcal Survey of India is a premier organisatton under the umbrella of Department of Mines. 
It goes without saying that ever since its inception. it has made immense contribution to the growth and 
development of mining sector of the economy. The servtces of Geological Survey of India in the field of 
geological surveying and mapping have helped the nation in the exploration and the exploitation pf the 
mineral re~ources. The vast tract of the minerals would h3vc remained unutilised but for the untiring 
endeavour of GSI to locate more mincrnl-rich areas. The Dcpanmcnt Related Parliamentary Standing 
Commiuec on lnduMry has, time and again, appn.>ciated the efTons of the Geological Survey of India and 
once again .tpplauds the unflagging commitment of the technocrat s of this organisation to the goal of 
optimum ham<.:ssing of mineral resources of the country. Thi~ is precisely the reason why this Commiuee 
has been advocating for higher budgetary allocations for it. It ha.~ been the considered view of the Commiuee 
that orgamsatio ns hke GSI must not be allowed to feel th" pmch of the cash swrved economy of India. As 
the efforts of >uch organisations have done yeoman's service to the well being of millions of Indians. The 
Commiuec also lauds the effons of Depanment of Mines in pursuing the case of GSI with as much zeal 
a> 11 had expected it to do. As a result of this, the budgetary allocation earmarked for GSI has registered 
an upsw ing over the years. This in turn. has allnwcd GSI to function without any major financial 
unpcdiment> . It augurs well for this core sector of the economy. 
Yet. there are <1 coup le of other problems which are staring at GSI as it looks forward to enter the 
next millennium. TI1e nineues of the 20th century witnessed major policy upheaval s on the econom•c 
front in India . At a time the buuword m world economies both capitalist and socialist, was to mtegratc 
with the new emergmg world order, India could not have afforded to isolate itself from the main$tream. 
This urge to integrate with the world economy sowed the seeds of economic liberalisation in India. The 
prO<:ess of hberalisauon brought the crucial element of competition mto the mind>et of lndtan entrepreneurs 
and the organisatio ns engaged in the promotion of ovemll industrial growth. Being one among them, the 
Geologica l Survey of India, although. h;t~ kept pace with the changing times yet it needs to equip itself 
with the latc't state of the an technology in order to sustrun the tempo of its endeavours. The Commiuee 
ha~ taken a very sympathetic view of the obsolescence of the equtpments being used by the GSI. Its age· 
old ship has also failed to keep strides with the needs of a comple tely changed economic and industrial 
scenario. lienee, the modernisation of Geological Survey of India. 

2 
The Committee, the~rore, recommends the setting up or an expert panel to look into all the· 
aspects or modernisation Including the aerial prospecting system of the Geological Survey of India 
and to prepare a comprehensive action plan along with its financial implications. The Committee 
also recommends that the modalities of the expert panel should be as comprehensive as possible so 
os to include all the aspects of modernisation. Also, the expert panel should have a definite deadline 
for submitting its report within the current rmancial year in order to avoid any kind of delay as it 
would totally defeat the very purpose behind the setting up of the panel. 
As regards the replacement of GSI's ship, the Committee is of the opinion that till such time 
a decision is taken to purchase a new ship for it, the Department of Mines maY. allow GSI to take a 
~hip on lease from the Department or Ocean. 
2. With the announcement of the New Mineral Policy. the doors of mining sector were opened for 
the private and foreign investment. The aim behtnd liberal norms as envisaged in the New Mineral Policy 
was to bring in more area.~ into prospecting and mining of precious metals and minerals. Industrialisation 
of backward areas as a result of the exploitation of available natural resources was also one of the intended 
purposes. The flow of foreign investment in this sector was also expected to make enough funds available 
for being diverted to the social sector. However, given the figures of the outgoing financial year, the 
picture of foreign direct investment is not as rosy as the policy makers of the country might have envisioned . 
According to the Secretary. Department of Mines the actual inflow of foreign investment in mining sector 
in the year 1998-99 is only Rs. 80 crore ;u against the approvals of Rs. 3300 crore. This glaring wedge 
between the actual inflow and the approvals of FDJ proposals bears a testimony to the existing state of . ,, 
affairs on this front. Since, the approval of the concerned State Government is must before a project gets 
the green signal, it is alleged that the proposals get stuck in the Secretariats of the State Governments. 
Hence, the delay in the clearance of the projects. Therefore. the State Governments are, primarily. 
responsible for the targeted FDI flow not fructifying. 
But in the view of the Committee, it would be totally unjustifiable to hold the State Government 
alone, responsible for the delay in the clearance of the mining projects. The Union Government cannot 
exonerate itself by blaming the State Governments. Rather, it should stnve hard to see that the proJeCL~ 
are cleared in time. Anyway, it is not the intention of this Comm1nee to act as an arbiter between the two. 
What, however, needs the observation of this Committee is the absence of an effective mechanism to 
precipitate speedy and timely clearance of FDI propos;! IS at all stages and levels. 
With this view in mind, the Committee recommends that the Department of Mines should 
constitute a high powered authority on the lines of the propO$cd "Foreign Investment Implementation 
Authority" to ensure that the actual inflow of foreign investment does not lag behind the total 
approvals. Such an authority should have the representation of the concerned State Governments 
as its full time members in order to see that the hurdles in the way of on FDI proposal are removed 
forthwith. Once a mechanism like this, the Committee hopes, is put into place, it would go a long 
way in not only improving the credibility of the country among the foreign investors but would al~o 
help the mining sector grow manifold. 
3. Public Sector Undertakings, from time to time embark upon modernisation and expansion of 
their existing manufacturing equipment and capacities . Likewise PSUs under the administrative control 
of Depanment of Mines, namely, NALCO, BALCO, HZL and HCL are implementing or going to 
implement modernisation and expansion programmes in their various production units. like the expansion 
of BALCO's Bauxite Mine and Alumina Refinery Complex and Smelter & Captive Power Plant, 
modernisation of BALCO's Alumma Plant at Korba, Aluminium Smelter at Korba. Cast llouse Unit, 
Steam Generation Plant and Conductor & Foil Plant (BBU) and expansion of its Captive Power Plant. 
expansion of HZL's Zinc Smelter, modernisation of concentrator plants of Hindustan Copper Ltd. at 
• 

3 
Indian Copper Complex, Khetri Copper Complex and Malanjkhand Copper Project and expans ion of 
smelter and PMR Plam (Refinery) of Indian Copper Complex, Khetri. 
All these modernisation and expansio n programmes involved a hefty outgo of financial resources of 
these companies . If these programmes are not striclly implemented within t11e prescribed deadlines, there 
arises a situation whereby, they run imo cost and time over-runs. The point, the Commictcc wishes to 
make is that it is quite worrisome and disturbing that PSUs have a common history of not being able to 
implement ~uch programmes within the time and cost limits. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Department of Mines, in consultation with 
the Management of the PSUs under its administrative jurisdiction, should con~titutc a Special 
Ta_~k Force to oversee the implementation of modernisation and expansion programm es of these 
!'SUs in order to avoid cost and time over-runs. The Committee, also recommends that accountability 
should be fixed and appropriate punitive action is taken , if any over-runs are detected. 
4. The Government is going to divest its majority stake in BALCO. A global advisor called M/s 
Jardine Fleming has also been engaged for this purpose. The Commictee would like to draw the allcntion 
of Department of Mines to the allegations often, levelled against certain Public Sector Undertakings 
wherein their shares were, clandc$tinely, offered at much less a price than their actual market value. in the 
name of disinvestment. Transparency, in the whole e~ereise, was also not maintained. 
This is why, the Committee is of the considered view that Department of Mines should see to 
it thnt the disinvestment programme of BALCO is closely monitored, transparency is maintained 
and the real value of the equity shares i.s realised. In thl~ whole process, the interests of tbe workers 
of BALCO should not only be kept in mind but be pr otected also. 
5. Hindustan Copper Ltd. has been incurring losses over the years due to a host of factors. In order 
that this PSU regain its viability. the Government has sanctioned Rs. 414 crore for its restructuring plan 
to be implemented in the next couple of years. It is the considered view of the Committee that the health 
of PSUs. in general. is prone to sickness owing to a variety of reasons. Their health being so susceptible 
to the onslaughts of the market forces, it becomes even more vital that they are not allowed to slip into the 
morass of siclmess. Forthis, managerial dexterity and acumen should be the order of the day if a PSU bas 
to survive the vagaries of the fast changing economic and industrial scenario. The country, already short 
of adequate financial resources, cannot afford to pump crorcs of rupees into the PSUs at the expense of 
other social obligations. 
It is, therefore, recommended that both the Department of Mines as well as the Management 
of Hindustan Copper Ltd. should ensure proper implementation of the restructuring plan of the 
company in order to see that it bears the desired fruitful results. The Committee also recommends 
that funds earmarked as per the sanct ioned package a.re made timely available to HCL and it 
· ~hould be ensured that the funds are spent within a specified timeframe. 
6. Mineral Exploration Corporation Ltd. is another PSU of Department of Mines which has been 
pas~ing throug h difficult times. The Committee was informed that the recommendations of the Expert 
Committee set up for the revival of MECL. are being implemented. As a result, it ha.~ been possible to 
reduce the losses of the Corporation in 1998-99. Still, tlte excess manpower of this PSU is proving to be 
a major hurdle in its efforts to become viable. Around 700 workers need to be separated. With this aim in 
mind, a sum of Rs. 3.45 crore i~ proposed to be spent from the central pool of a new scheme or Grants-in­
aid for implementation of Voluntary Retirement Scheme by the PSUs in the year 1999-2000. The amount 
of Rs. 3.45 crore is too meagre to fully shed the surplus manpower. Interestingly, Hindustan Copper Ltd. 
777 RS F-3·A 

4 
has bee n allocated Rs. 100 crore for 1999·2000 for the rational isation of its manpower, of course, from 
the overall package of Rs. 414 crore meant for its capi tal restructuring which inter-olio involves separation 
of 11000 surplus workers. The Commiuee fails to comprehend the reason as to why 700 workers cannot 
be scpanued at one go by making adequate budgetary provision for the purpose and that too keeping in 
mind the precarious condition of MECL. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends that Mineral Exploration Corporation Ltd. should be 
provided with sufficient funds to enable It to separate its surplus manpower either from the pool of 
Grants-in-aid scheme or any other bud getary source without any further dela y. 
7. The Committee is deeply anguished and concerned at the sorry state of affairs prevailing in 
Bhar.1t Gold Mines Ltd. In the absence of a clear-cut policy on the pan of the Government, the fate ofthi~ 
PSU contin ues to hang in balance for long. This apparent dithering on the part of the Government has 
resu lted in the accentuation of the clouds of uncert.ainty ove r BGML . The direct victims of this 
indecisiveness are the workers of BGML. The long pending case before BIFR has also added to the woes 
of the workers. 
According to the candid submission of Secretary, Depanment of Mines before the Com mittee, the 
cost of opemtions in the gold mines is too high as a result ofwhtch the whole production is unviable. The 
idea of fmding a joint venture panner ha.~ also been broached . It appears that the Government might be 
totking the final dec ision in respect of Bharnt Gold Mines Ltd. 
The Committee is oft he view that while taking :any final decision on the future of Bharat Gold 
M incs Ltd., the Government should adopt a sympat heti c approach towards the workers. A generous 
VRS package ror the workers could be a way out to mitigate the hardships of the workers . 
8. While examining the Demands for Grants ofDepanmen t of Mines for 1999-2000, the Committee 
was informed that the Departmen t has set up a 'Mi neral Exploration Fund' with a view to lessen the 
dependence ofMineral Explomtio n Corporation Ltd. on budget support. This fund will receive contributions 
from profit maki ng PSUs of Departmen t of Mines. namely NALCO, BALCO and HZL at the rateof20 % 
pertonne of crude reso urces ofthe mineral being explo ited by them. The fund, at present, has a corpu s of 
Rs. 6.2 crore. 
The Committee appreciat es the crution of ' Mineral Exploration Fund' and hopes that it will 
prove to be a shot in the ann of the Mineral Explo rati on Corporation Ltd. and wiU go a long way 
in meeting the need ror financial resourc es in the rield of expl oration activiti es. At the same time, 
the Comm itte e would also Uke to recomm end that the Department of Mines should also explore the 
feos ibiUty of involving Jlrivate sector companies for contributing to this Fund like the private 
sec tor steel company TIS CO makes contri butions to the 'Steel Development Fund'. Ln the opinion 
of the Committee , contributions from both publi c as well as private sector companies to the Fund 
would be in the overall interest of the mining sector. 
9. Sikkim Minmg Corporation is another loss making PSU under the administrative jurisdiction of 
Department of Mines. It is also in dire straits. It has been recurring constant losses. The Department of 
Mines in its Action Taken Repon on the recommen dation pertaining to Sikkim Minmg Corporat ion as 
con tained in the 24th Report of the Commi uce on Demand s for Grants of Department of Mines for 1998-
99, has stated that the Sikkim Mining Corporat ion has plans to pursue a number of expansion and 
diversificat ion schemes to make the Corpomtion flexible and more viable. 
With the budgetary provision of mere Rs. 38 lakh for 1999-2000 and no proposal to raise IEBR, the 
Committee wonders ns to how this PSU is going to pursue its planned expansion and dive rsification 
schemes. 

5 
The Committee, therefore, is or the view that the Department of Mines should come up with a 
definite expansion and diversification scheme aimed at making the Sikklm Mining Corporation a 
viable public enterprise. Any kind or ambivalence either on the part of Department of Mines or the 
Management of this Corporation is not going to help it become viable. 
New DFJ..HI; 
April 16. 1999 
RAGHAVJI. 
Chainnan, 
Departmen~related Parliamentary 
Standing Commillu on Industry 

ANNEXURE 
MlNUTES OF TH£ MEETINGS 
XI 
ELEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on the 31st March, 1999 in Room No. 63, Fim Floor. Parliament 
House. New Delhi. 
PRE SEN T 
I. Shri Raghavj i - Cltairm.an 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Shri Govindrao Adik 
3. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
4. Dr. Ranbir Singh 
s. Shri C.O. Poulose 
6. Shri Nagmani 
7. Shri Santosh Bagrodia 
8. Shri Gaya Singh 
LOKSA BHA 
9. Shri Muni Lall 
10. Shri Vijay S hankar 
II. Shri Gyan Singh 
12. Shri Anand Rama Maurya 
13. Shri Punnulal Mohale 
14. Shri Nadendla Bhaskar Rao . 
15. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
16. Shri Dana Mcghe 
17. Shri Konijcti Rosaiah 
18. Shri Bijoy Kris~ na Handiquc 
19. Dr. Shnkccl Ahmad 
20. Shri Suni l Khan 
21. S hri Anand a Pathak 
22. Shri Shakuni Choudhury 
23. Shri Prabhat Kumar Samantaray 
24 . Shri A Jay Chakraborty 
• SECRETARIAT 
Shri Tapas Oas Gupta, Director 
Shri P.C. Paikray, Under Secretary 
Shri :MoJ11 Raj Singh, Committee Officer 
7 

8 
WITNESSES 
Represe ntatives of Ministry of Steel and Mines (Del"'rtmen t of Mines) 
I . Sh ri Arvind Varma, Secretary 
2. Shri P.K. Mohamy, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri A.H. Jung, Additional Secretary & Financia l Advisor 
4. Shri S.P. Gupta, Joint Secretary 
5. Smt. Aruna Bagchee, Joint S<.-cretary 
6. Stui N. Sanyal, Director 
7. Shri Alok Shcel, Director 
8. Shri·S.S. Mehra, Director (F) 
9. Shri R·.L. Munshi , Director 
10. Shri Devendra Mishra, Deputy Secretary 
II. Shri S:mJeev Ranjan, Deputy Secretary 
12. Shri S.K. Ghosh;CMD, BALCO 
13. Shri I'. Majumdar, Director (F). BALCO 
14. Shri S.D. Prasad, CMD, MECL 
15. S hri Rajcsh Kumar, Director (F), MECL 
16. S hri S.N. Johari, CMD, NALCO 
17. Shn C. Vcnkataramana, Director (F), NALCO 
18. S hn K. V. K. Scshavatar.un. CMD. ~IZL 
19. Shn P. Parvathisem, CMD. IICL 
20. Shri U. Sen. Director (P). HCL 
21. Shri R Gup ta, MD, BGML 
22. Shri S.K. Achary a, Director General. GSI 
23. Or. A. Gup tu. Director, GSI 
24. Shri A.N. Bose, CG. Indian Bureau of Mines 
25. Shri T;~pan Biswas. COM. lnd•an Bureau of Mine:, 
2 t\t the outset, the Chairman "cleomcd the Secretary and other Officials of Dcpanmcnt of Mmes 
and the C~tD, of the PSUs of the Dcpanmcm and requested the Secretary to make a bnef prc~cntauon 
regardmg the Demands forGr•nts of the Dcpanmem for 1999-2000. Speaking on behalf of the Department 
of l'v1mes und the PSUs under iL' admilm tra!Jvc jurisdic tion, the Secretary dwelt upon a number of issues 
like th" sanc uoning of 20 mining pro'p"cting projects. constnuuon of Grani te Dcvclopmel\1 Council, 
acri~ l pro,J>CCI ing, importance of Mmcra l Advisory Counci l. FDI proJlosuls cleared in the outgoing fiscal 
and actu.ll mllow offoreign direct inve.~uncnt in the mining ~ector. c•tc. ~le Rlso expressed nis grati tude to 
the Comnllllce for recommendin!! lu~her allocauon for the Depanment in the previous years. 
3. P.mic•J'31ing in thcdiS4:u,s•on.thc Chamnan and the Member.; present asked a number of qucnes 
on the po1nts that emerged out of the pre-en tat Jon of the Secrewry like a big gap between the appro, ·als 
and thL' ''"tual in now of foreign mve~tmem m the mining sector, separation of excess manpower of 
llindu,tan Copper Ltd. and the Minemll;;~ploration Corporation Ltd., continued uncc11ainty over the fate 
of Bharat Gold Mu:cs Ltd., divestmen t of Government eq01ty in BALCO, Government spend1ngs in the 
• 

9 
Nonh-East, Gold deposit s in Munger district of Siha.r. GSI's cxpen ise in asse-'sment of natural hazards, 
technology transfer and the technologica l requirements of the GSI, replacement ofGSI's ageing ship. etc. 
4. The Secretary replied to the questions and assured the Comm ittee to send written comme nts on 
the points on which information was not readily available. 
s . • • * 
6. * • 
7 . • • • 
A verbatim of the proceed ings was kept. 
8. The Comm ittee, then, adjourned at 5.10 P.M. to meet again at I 1.00 A.M. on the 1st April, 1999. 
·~"Relrue.s to olhcr matters. 
• 

XIV 
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
The Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, 
the 16th April,l999 10 Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
I . Shri Raghavji- Chaimmn 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Shri Karma Topden 
3 ~ · Dr. Ranb ir Singh 
4. Shri C.O. Poulose 
5. Sbri San jay Nirupam 
6. Shri Samosb Bagrodia 
LOKSABHA 
7. Sbri Annasabeb M.K. Patil 
8. Shri Konijeti Rosaiah 
9. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
10. Shri K. Palaniswamy 
II. Sbri Surendra Prasad Yadav (Jabanabad) 
12. Shri Malyala Rajaiah 
13. Shri A jay Chakraborty 
14. Shri Zora Singh 
15. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
16. Prof. Jogendra Kawade 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Salish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director 
Shri P. C. Paikray, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh. Committee Officer 
' 2. The Committee first took up for discussion the draft Thirty-first Report on the Demands for 
Grants ( 1999-2000) of Dep<trtmem of Mines (Ministry of Steel and Mines). During the course of the 
discussion. some Members gave their suggestions/views which were unanimously incorporated in· the 
body of the Report. 
3 ... • * 
4 .• * " 
5. After the U>corporalioo of the suggestions/views given by the Chainnan and tb~Members, all the 
three Reports were unanimously adopted by the Comminee. 
·· ·•Relates to other matcers 
10 
• 

II 
6 The Commin cc then dcctdcd to present/lay all the three Rcpons to the both Houses ofParlia m~ nt 
on Tuesday. the 20th ,\pnl. I <J99. It wus also decided that:-
(it) The Chainn~n ;nu.l m hts absence Shn Santosh Bagrodia will present the Rcpom to the Rajya 
Sabha. 
(b) S hri Anna>ahd> M. K. Patil nnd in his absence Prof. Jog~ndra Kawadc will lay the Repons on 
the Table of the Lok Sabha. 
7 The Comminec then adjourned at 4.15 ~.M. 
---- ~ 