  
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
              November, 2014 / Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND SIXT Y THIRD REPORT  
ON 
 
ACTION TAKEN ON THE 246 th  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON  
Revival of Nagaland Pulp and Paper Co. Ltd 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES (DEPARTMENT OF HEAVY 
INDUSTRY) 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26th  November.2014) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 27 th  November.2014 ) 
    REPORT NO.  
263  

  
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
                                                         November, 2014/ Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND SIXT H THIRD REPORT  
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON THE 246 th  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
         ON  
Revival of Nagaland Pulp and Paper Co. Ltd 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES (DEPARTMENT OF HEAVY 
INDUSTRY) 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26th  November.2014 ) 
                                ( Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 27 th  November.2014 ) 

  
C O N T E N T S 
PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  ……..………………………………………………..      (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………  ……….………………………        (ii) 
3. REPORT ……………………………………………………….………………………………..        1  
(i)  CHAPTER – I   Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry  .2  
(ii)  CHAPTER–II 
  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view 
  of the Government's   replies…………………………………… ………..……………….......3 
(iii)  CHAPTER–III 
   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  the Committee has not                        
accepted the replies of the Ministry and has asked the Ministry to review its                
replies……………………………………………………………..……………………………..4 
(iv)  CHAPTER – IV 
  Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry have not been 
received…………     ……………………………….……………………………………......5-7 
 
4. Minutes……………………………………………………………………….…………………….……    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 (Date of Constitution 1 ST  SEPTEMBER, 2014 ) 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
1. Shri K.C. Tyagi  _   Chairman  
2. Shri M. P. Achuthan 
3. Shri Ramdas Athawale 
4. Shri Vivek Gupta  
5. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
6. Shri Praful Patel 
7. Shri T. K. Rangarajan 
8. Shri Narendra Budania 
9. Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
10. Shri Pramod Tiwari 
 
LOK SABHA  
11. Shri Deepak Adhikari (Dev) 
12. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer 
13. Shri Birendra Kumar Chaudhary 
14. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque 
15. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
16. Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena 
17. Smt. Poonamben Maadam 
18. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
19. Shri S. P. Muddahanumegowda 
20. Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
21. Shri M. Srinivasa Rao 
22. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
23. Shri Konda Veshweshwar Reddy 
24. Shri Y. V. Subba Reddy 
25. Shri Rajkumar Saini 
26. Shri B. Senguttuvan 
27. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
28. Shri Rameshwar Teli 
29. Smt. Savitri Thakur 
30. Smt. Dev Varma (Moon Moon Sen) 
31. Shri Rajan Vichare 
       
 

  
SECRETARIAT  
Shri A.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
Shri Roshan Lal, Joint Director 
Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having 
been authorized by the Committee, to hereby present  this Two Hundred and Sixty-third Report on Action 
Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Heavy Indu stries and Public Enterprises (Department of Heavy 
Industry) on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred and Forty-sixth Report on 
the Revival of Nagaland Pulp and Paper Co. Ltd pertaining to Department of Heavy Industry. 
2.  I, thank the Ministry of Heavy Industries and P ublic Enterprises (Department of Heavy Industry) 
for furnishing the Action Taken Notes on the recomm endations contained in the Committee’s Two 
Hundred and Forty-sixth Report. 
3.  The Committee in its meeting held on the 20 
th  October, 2014 considered and adopted the report. 
 
 
 K.C Tyagi        
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
 
New Delhi 
October, 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
-1- 
REPORT 
 The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals wit h the Action Taken by the 
Department of Heavy Industry, Ministry of Heavy Ind ustries and Public Enterprises on the 
recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hu ndred and Forty- sixth Report on the 
Revival of Nagaland Pulp and Paper Co. Ltd 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the M inistry of Heavy Industries and Public 
Enterprises (Department of Heavy Industry) in respe ct of the recommendations contained in the 
Report. These have been categorized as follows: 
Chapter I -  The recommendations/observations which have been  accepted by the Ministry. 
 The Committee is pleased to observe that the Minis try has accepted its recommendations 
as mentioned in the Chapter – I of the Report. 
Chapter -II -  The recommendations/observations which the Commi ttee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies. 
 In respect of these recommendations the Committee is convinced with the logic and 
explanations advanced by the Ministry and therefore do not want to pursue them for the present. 
Chapter -III -  The recommendations/observations in respect of w hich the Committee has not 
accepted replies of the Ministry and has asked the Ministry to review its reply. 
 The Committee expresses its concern over the non-i mplementation of recommendations 
contained in Chapter – III and desires that the Min istry should furnish logical explanations 
thereof. 
Chapter -IV - The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry 
have not been received. 
 In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either furnished 
the interim replies or couched its language in vagu e terms therefore; the Committee desires that 
the Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in r espects of recommendations categorized in 
Chapter-IV in detail and to the point, as per the i ntention and spirit of the recommendations of 
the Committee. 
3. The details of the ATR are being discussed in the succeeding pages. 
 
 
 

  
-2- 
CHAPTER – I 
The Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry. 
 
Recommendation/observation 
 The Committee notes that there is no engineering c ollege and polytechnics in the State of 
Nagaland. The Company may have to induct local youth trained in other parts of the country. For 
long term sustained supply of skilled manpower for industrialization and gainful self 
employment, there was urgent need for setting up quality professional institutions.  
Para No.22 
 
Action Taken Reply 
 Noted 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
-3- 
CHAPTER–II 
The Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government's replies. 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee has also learnt that the provisions of 
North East Industrial and Investment 
Promotion Policy  (NEIIPP) have been gradually diluted. These conces sions have been factored 
into comprehensive revival plan of the Company. If this be so any further dilution of the 
provisions of NEIIPP will adversely impact the revival of the Company. 
Para No.21 
Action Taken Reply 
 Dilution of the permission of NEIIPP will not have  any adverse impact on the revival of 
the Company 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee appreciates the support being offered  by the State Government. It was 
informed that there will be regular interaction bet ween the MD of the Company, and the Chief 
Secretary of State, to resolve remaining bottleneck s in smooth operations of the Company. The 
State Government was also keen to provide necessary  infrastructure and linkages and also to 
address the law and order issues. The Committee sup ports the resolve of the Central and State 
Governments in reviving the Company. Revival and su stainability of NPPC will improve the 
investment climate in the State and the region and will expedite process of normalization after 
prolonged phase of disturbance. The Committee there fore, reiterates its recommendation to 
revive the NPPC. 
Para No.26 
Action Taken Reply 
 The Company is in close liaising with the State Go vernment for smooth implementation 
of Revival package. It was also envisaged that Govt . of Nagaland would also extend their co-
operation in smooth running of the Company. 
 
 
 
 

  
-4- 
CHAPTER–III 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted the 
replies of the Ministry and has asked the Ministry to review its replies. 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Nagaland Pulp and Paper Company is the only in dustrial unit existing in the State of 
Nagaland. Therefore, the Government of Nagaland is keen to revive this unit. It is important to 
extend support to the State Government, the Hindustan Paper Corporation and the Nagaland Pulp 
and Paper Company to sustain the unit. However, clo se monitoring on the part of DHI is 
necessary for implementing revival plan and making the company financially viable and 
profitable. 
Para No.25 
Action Taken Reply 
 Noted 
Further Recommendation/ observation 
 
 The Committee notes the chronology. The consultant submitted a Rs. 679 crore 
proposals for rehabilitation of NPCC in January, 20 11 which was eventually approved by 
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs  (CCEA) after 2-1/2 years in June, 2013. In view of 
such delay, the Committee had recommended strict mo nitoring by DHI, against delay and 
cost escalation. However, the reply does not assuag e the apprehension of the Committee. 
The Committee finds the reply to be routine. No inf ormation has been furnished regarding 
any institutional arrangements being made to monito r the revival plan neither any 
information has been provided on the meetings to review the implementation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
-5- 
CHAPTER – IV 
Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry 
have not been  received. 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee notes that with every successive Draf t Revival Plan, the projected cost 
for revival increased exponentially. With delay the  accumulated liabilities increased, thereby 
raising the cost of revival further. The Committee also notes that the original cost of the renewed 
revival was quoted as Rs 879 crore which was reduce d by Rs 200 crore to Rs 679 crore. The 
Committee expects that this reduction of Rs 200 cro re would not hamper the present revival 
process.  
Para No.15 
Action Taken Reply 
 As approved by Cabinet Committee of Economic Affair s (CCEA), the implementation of 
Phase-1 of Revival and Upgradation Plan would be co mpleted with an estimated cost of Rs. 489 
Crore which has been arrived at by the renowned Consultants who have prepared the DPR. 
Further Recommendation/ observation 
 
 At January, 2011 prices, two phases of revival were planned for Rs. 679 crore.  First 
Phase was to produce 50 tonnes of paper for Rs. 489  crore and may also include 8.5x2 MW 
Power Plant. The Committee has not been apprised if  the Phase- I has been completed 
within the Rs. 489 crore and the status of power pl ant.  The Committee may be apprised of 
time line for the completion of Phase-I of 2011 pri ces. Whether the revival plan provides 
for increase in accumulated liabilities due to dela y since January, 2011 till revival plan was 
actually approved in 2013. 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee noted that proposed erection of power  plant of higher capacity and 
related sub-system too added to cost stated that th ose huge costs have not been envisaged in the 
DPR. Therefore, the Committee expects that the Gove rnment will provide every assistance for 
setting up the power plant of higher capacity and related subsystems.  
Para No.18 
 Action Taken Reply 
 8.5 x 2 MW Power Plant and its related sub-systems have been considered in the DPR of 
Revival and Upgradation Plan which got approved by CCEA on 4 
th  June, 2013.  

  
-6- 
Further Recommendation/ observation  
 The Committee may be apprised of the status of Powe r Plant. Whether there is cost 
escalation and delay in completion of project.  Whether the revival plan accounted for 
increase in cost due to delay since January, 2011 t ill revival plan was actually approved in 
2013? 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee sought to know the terms and conditio ns on which the Government 
would give its guarantee to Banks  
Para No.19 
Action Taken Reply 
 Government Guarantee would be asked for and provide d to the Banks on the same terms 
and conditions against which Company would draw Term Loan from the Bankers. 
Further Recommendation/ observation 
 
 The Committee may be apprised of the standard terms  and conditions of loan for 
which Government agreed to bear the guarantee.  The  Committee may also be informed if 
the written off loans/interest were owed to Banks and if so, whether Government has borne 
guarantees towards Banks. Also, whether the liabili ties towards Banks increased due to 
delay since 2011, when DPR was submitted, and June 2013 when it was approved. If so, 
whether Government of India’s liabilities towards guarantee too was increased? 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee recommends that the Department of Hea vy Industry should take up the 
issues with the State Government, Ministry of Railw ays and other concerned Union Ministries. 
The Committee also suggests that the State Governme nt may extend this support to the 
Company. The Committee is of the view that the Comp any, in addition to being a commercial 
entity, is also an instrument of inclusive developm ent of the region and empowerment of local 
people. It will give an expression to the talent an d skill of local professionals and gradually 
mitigate the residual traces of ali 
enation among small section of people.                                                                                                                                          
                          Para No.24 
 
 

  
-7- 
Action Taken Reply 
 Local talents would be given preference on and afte r implementation of Revival Plan of 
the company. 
Further Recommendation/ observation 
 
  The Committee may be apprised of the progress mad e with the State Government 
and Ministry of Railways in respect of its recommendation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
-8- 
VI                                             
Sixth Meeting  
 The Committee met at 11.30 a.m. on Monday, the 20 th  October, 2014 in Committee 
Room `A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present  
Shri K.C. Tyagi - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA  
1. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
2. Shri Ramdas Athawale 
3. Shri Vivek Gupta 
4. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
5.    Shri T.K. Rangarajan 
6.    Shri Narendra Budania 
7.    Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
8.    Shri Pramod Tiwari 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
9. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer 
10. Shri Birendra Kumar Chaudhary 
11. Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena 
12  Smt. Poonamben Maadam 
13. Shri S.P. Muddahanumegowda 
14. Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
15. Shri M. Srinivasa Rao 
16. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
17. Shri Konda Veshweshwar Reddy 
18. Shri Y.V. Subba Reddy 
19. Shri Rajkumar Saini 
20. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
21. Shri Rameshwar Teli 
22. Smt. Savitri Thakur 
 
SECRETARIAT  
1. Shri A.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
       3. Shri Roshan Lal, Joint Director 
       4. Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Directo r  

  
-9- 
WITNESSES  
MINISTRY OF MS&ME  
 
1. Shri Madhav Lal, Secretary 
2. Shri Amarendra Sinha, AS & Development Commissioner 
3. Shri S.N. Tripathi, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri B.H. Anil Kumar, Joint Secretary 
5. Shri Samarendra Sahu, ADC 
6. Shri M.P. Singh, ADC 
 
1. At the outset the Chairman of the Committee welcome d the members of the Committee 
and briefed them that the agenda of the meeting was  to consider and adopt the draft 262 nd  and 
263 rd  Reports of the Committee on Action Taken on the 23 7 th  Report on Revival and 
Restructuring of Hotel Corporation of India Ltd. and on the 246 th  Report on Revival of Nagaland 
Pulp and Paper Co. Ltd. The Committee considered th e draft 262 nd  and 263 rd  Reports and 
adopted the same after brief discussion.  Thereafte r the Chairman welcomed the Secretary of the 
Ministry of MS&ME alongwith their officers. In his opening remarks the Chairman underlined 
the very important issue of skill development. He a lso underlined that the MSME sector has a 
huge potential of employment generation, preserving  and developing traditional skills and 
aligning them with expending market.  He also infor med that recently, the Prime Minister has 
launched a programme for demand-based skill development and sought to know the Ministry has 
done any mapping of emerging job market and has ali gned its skill development institutions to 
the job requirement.  The Chairman also observed th at the Ministry was expected to train 8.5 
lakh youth every year to achieve the target of 1.5 crore by 2022, however, by 2013-14; the 
Ministry had reached a target of 6.1 lakh persons o nly.  He also noted that the Prime Minister's 
Task Force had given specific recommendations with specific timelines and the working group 
of MSME sector had proposed setting up of 100 such Tool Rooms. The Committee sought to 
know the status on these counts. 
2. Thereafter, the Secretary, Ministry of MS&ME mad e a presentation on the mandate and 
the working of the Ministry and its schemes and gav e an overview of their performance in 
Entrepreneurship Development and Skill Development through their various institutions and 
through the budgetary support under plan.   
3. The Development Commissioner, MS&ME gave the ove rview of the performance of the 
Tool Rooms and Technology Centres and the expansion plans. 
4.   The Secretary also informed that the KVIC are conducting the training and capacity 
building programmes and likewise, there are program mes for the coir sector being conducted by 
the Coir Board.  The cluster development programme in which one of the components is to 
enhance the capacity and skills of those people who  are running the cluster and those who are 
employed in such clusters.   
5. Members asked the question pertaining to setting  up of more industry specific Tool 
Rooms in various parts of the country.  Members als o enquired about employability of the short 
term courses in such tool rooms and source of their revenue. 

  
-10- 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Meet ing was kept. 
7. The Committee then adjourned at 1.25 p.m. 
 
************* 
 
 
 
 
 