Ind. 22197 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
TWENTY-SECOND REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (1997-98) 
OF THE MINISTRIES OF STEEL, 
MINES AND INDUSTRY 
(Presented on 22nd April , 1997) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELli 
April, 1997/Vaisakha, 1919 (Saka) 

• 
CONT ENTS 
PAGES 
l. CoMPOSITION OP THE CoMMITTEe ......................... , ... , . , .... . , .......•............ , . , .... , ... , . . . . (i)-(ii) 
II. REPORTOPTHECoMMIJTEe.................................... .............................................. 1- 9 
ill. ANNEXURE (MINUTEs OF THE ME.!:-nNOS) ................................................................. 11-23 

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
1. Shri Ashok Mitra - Chairman 
RA,JYA SABUA 
2. Shri Maurice Kujur 
3. Syed Sibtey Raz.i 
4. Shri Govindrao Adik 
5. Shri Rajubhai A. Parmar 
6. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
7. Shrimati Anandiben Jethabhai Patel 
8. Shri Kanak Mal Katara 
9. Shri Ram Deo Bhandari 
10. Shri Ani! Kumar 
11. Shri T.M. Venkatachalam 
12. Shrimati Jayaprada Nahata 
13. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
14. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
15. Chaudhari Cbunni Lal 
LOK SABHA 
16. Shrimati Jayawantiben Mehta 
17. Shri Ritlal Pd. Verma 
18. Sbri Radha Mohan Singh 
19. Shri Prabbu Dayal Katberia 
20. Sbri Nitish Bbaradwaj 
21. Sbri Namdevrao Diwathe 
22. Shri Ananth Kumar 
23. Shri M.K. Patil 
24. Shri Shyamlal Bansiwal 
25. Shri Sunderlal Patwa 
26. Shri Nawal Kishore Sharma 
27. Kbmari Frida Topno 
28. Shri Sanat Mehta 
29. Sbri Udaysinghrao Gaikwad 
30. Sbri Chitturi Ravindra 
31. Sbri K. H. Muniyappa 
32. Shri Pradeep Bhattacharya 
33. Dr. N. Subramanyam 
34. Shrimati Usha Meena 
35. Shri B. L. Shankar 
36. Shri Naval Kishore Rai 
37. Shri Sunil Khan 
38. Shri L. Adaikalaraj 
39. Shri M. Ramananthan 
40. Sbri Anandrao Adsul 
(i) 

-
(ii) 
41. Shri V. Alagirisamy 
42. Shri Bhakta Cbaran Das 
43. Shri Chandra Sekbar 
44. Shri Darbara Singh 
45. Shri P. C. Thomas 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Om Parkash, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Deepak Goyal, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Officer 

REPORT 
Authorised by the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry , 
I, Ashok Mitra, hereby present the Twenty-second Report of the Committee on the 
Demands for Grants for 1997-98 of the Ministries of Industry, Steel and Mines. 
2. The background of this joint report on the Demands for Grants of the three 
Ministries calls for some explanation. FoUowing the adjournment of Parliament on the 
conclusion of the general discussion of the budget proposals far 1997-98 on March 21, 1997, 
the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Comminees were expected to avail of the 
period till April 21 to prepare and submit their reports on the Demands for Grants of the 
different Ministries alongwith the usual appraisal of the performance budgets for 1996-97 of 
each Ministry. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry 
accordingly met and examined witnesses on March 31, April1, April 2, April 3, April 7 and 
April 8, 1997. (See Appendix). The Standing Committee had scheduled meetings for April 
11, 15 and 17 to discuss the draft reportS on the Demands for Grants. However , these 
meetings had to be postponed because of political developments, including the non-passage 
of the vote of confidence in the Government in the Lok Sabha. In view of the directive of 
the President to the Prime Minister, Parliament is being reconvened on April 21 at 
11.00 a.m. Whether the business placed before Parliament on this date would be confined to 
the passing of a vote on account or whether more substantive issues arc proposed to be 
taken up is not yet known; the constitutional issues involved arc also not altogether clear. 
3. In this circumstance, the Standing Committee has chosen to present to Parliament a 
brief joint report on the activities and proposed Demands for Grants of the three Ministries, 
namely, the Ministry of Mines, the Ministry of Steel and the Ministry of Industry. 
4. The Standing Committee is perturbed at the persistent signs of a slackening in the 
rate of growth in industrial production in recent months. The depressed condition, it was 
initially thought, was a feature of only infrastructural industries such as power and mining. 
Developments in the second quarter of 1996-97 suggest that the malaise is much more 
widespread, and recession appears to be enveloping the capital and consumer goods sectors 
as well, including consumer durables. The growth in the small scale segments of industry is 
assumed to have been over this period somewhat higher than in the organised sector. But 
the reasons underlying the hypothesis are at best wobbly. The time perhaps has arrived 
when an expert committe~ is invited to undertake a thorough restructuring of the index of 
industrial production; such restructuring should proceed far beyond merely shifting the base 
year and reassigning weights to the commodities covered by the index, and concentrate on 
improving the scientific basis of data collection from the small-scale industrial sector. 
5. A major issue of concern which came to the fore during the Standing Committee's 
discussions with representatives of the Ministries is the apparent lack of adequate functional 
coordination between the different Ministries and even between the Departments of the 
same Ministry. In the wake of the on-going liberalisation and the progressive dismantling of 
industrial and exchange controls, the Ministries, it would seem, are proceeding on the 
assumption that inter-ministerial and inter-departmental coordination need not be as greatly 
emphasised as was the wont in the pre-reforms days. Two trends are distinctly visible of late: 
(a) a gradual reduction in Plan allocations for each of the Ministries this Standing 
Committee is concerned with, or at least a perceptible fall in the rate of growth of these 
allocations; and (b) a growing reluctance on the part of the Ministries to assume 
responsibility for projecting the pace and pattern of industrial growth in the foreseeable 
1 

2 
future; it is as if the en tire burden of responsibility in this area has already been shifted to 
the private sector and to foreign investors. What is equally dist urbing is the growing attitude 
that the promotion of infrastructural indus tries is a task that does not belong to any of the 
Ministries. 
6. The authofities may have, from their point of view, good reasons for withdrawing to 
such a positio n; contai ning the fiscal deficit must be one principal consideration. The private 
secto r may not necessarily concur with !he official view. For example, one or two major 
associations representing the chambers of commerce and industry in the organised sector 
had, on the eve of the presen tation of this year's budget proposals, pleaded for an across­
the-board increase in public investment so as to dispel the current spell of industrial 
recession. In the light of the many encouraging proposal s in the budget favouring indu.~try, 
art icula tion of the need for public investment o n a selective bas is in the infrastructural 
sphere as well as in basic industrial sectors has been temporarily halted; the lowering of 
interest rates may have also boosted the expectations with respect to private investment. 
What should, however , be discouraged is exaggerated expecta tion regarding the flow of 
direc t investment from over~eas. li essential investmen ts in key sectors are neglected in the 
immediate period on the ground that foreign investors would soon take up the slack, current 
perfornJ<mce might get still even depressed, thereby further inhibiting the intrusion of 
foreign capital. 
7. It is in view of such considerations that the Standing Committee does not have the 
least hesitation in recommending that Plan allocations indicated in the Budget for 1997-98 
for the Ministries of Industry, Steel and Mines, including allocations for the public 
undertakings under their umbrella, should be doubled . This would mean, other things 
remaining the same, realloc<Jtion, or fresh allocation, of around Rs. 1,500 crore ill favour of 
the three Ministries, which would still be less than one per cent of the Union Government's 
toral budgetary outlay proposed for the year. 
8. The Standing Committ~e is setting forth below reasons in justification of this 
particular recommendatio n. 
9. Despite the rap id de-regulation of industrial controls and nearly open-ended 
invitat ion to private enterprises to enter the industrial sectors of the economy-an invitation 
whtch has since been extended to foreign investors too-actual investment by the private 
secto r in important segments of industry has been till now most restrained: the only major 
beneficiaries of private capital expansion are the light consumer goods sector and a few 
service industries. The recent drop in the rate of industrial growth, might indeed have a 
·,uuJtipher' eiT<!ct, thereby fur!:hcr depressing investment activities across the length and 
breadth of the industrial sector. It is then:fore, in the Standing Committee's view, imperative 
for the State to activise itself beyond what has been its role in recent years. Not that the 
Comm ittee has made up its mind that private and foreign investment would continue to 
eventuate in constipated doses in the coming years. Its only tl10ught is to ensure that 
valuable time is not lost in the essential areas of investment while the government waits for 
an augmentation of private and external capital inflow. 
10. As far as the Ministry of Mines is concerned, the Standing Commitlee would 
recommend that the enhanced Plan allocations should b~ equitably distributed between the 
Geological Survey of India, the Ind ian Bureau of Mines and the Mineral Exploration 
Corporat ion. Each of these units, the Standing Committee feels, should .be allowed a large 
measure of functional autonomy , including autonomy to enter into contractual arrangements 
with outside parties for expanding survey activities as well as for organising commercial 
exploitation of proven mines and fields with the help of external collaborators: 

3 
On any reckoning, hug'! deposits of metals and stones of various descriptions arc lying in 
wait over the entire stretch of the country for exploration and development. It would be an 
enormous pity if allocations in driblets prevent thoroughgoing modernisation in the mining 
sector. The Ministry of Mines has to enter fully into the spirit of liberaHsation. lt shou ld 
only insist that. while entering into external contracts, institutions such as the Geological 
Surwy of India follow the broad guidelines laid down by the government and the aspect of 
transparency i' kept to the fore . The Geological Survey of India , in the opinion of the 
Commiuee, ought to be declared as a full-nedged scientific department with all the 
attendant advantages accruing therefrom . 
I I. It i> also for consideration whether a part of the enhanced Plan allocations 
recommended for the Ministry should not now to the dp-ection of the I lindustan Copper 
Limited and the llindustan Zinc Limite~. Both units have suffered heavily because of the 
drastic reduction in import duties over the past couple of years. While the units can 
justifiably argue for a reconsid erulloo of the decision to lower duties for processed metals in 
these product lines, at least some temporary relief ought to reach out to them. To suggest 
the fostering efficiency by exposing domestic units to exposure to foreign competition is a 
school of thought which has its merits; the pace at which this exposure takes place has 
however to be carefully decided upon. The smelters at Khetri and Udaipur, it is generally 
agreed, need thorough overhauling; the Standing Committee strongly recommends that 
necessary resources be immediately allocated for the purpose. Addttional allocations may 
also be considere d for augmenting in-built power generating capacity of the Bharat 
Aluminium Company and the National Aluminium Company units. and for restructuring 
Bharat Gold Mines. 
12. Given the crucial necessity of extricating the Hindustan Zinc and the Hindustun 
Copper units from the difficulties they are currenlly facing, the Standing Committee 
recommends that the import duty reductions enforced through the budgets of the past two 
}wrs which have directly affected these two units be kept in abeyance and the staJUs quo 
anre prevailing before the presentation of the 1996-97 budget restored. This could be a 
temporary arrangement, pending a detailed scrutiny of the prospects and problems facing the 
two units. 
13. TI1e Standing Committee has taken note of the progress registered by the steel 
sector in the recent period , and the significant strides in production both in the primary and 
the secondary categories. II would. nonetheless, be difficult to deny that recession.try 
conditions have not emerged in this sector as well; there has, of late, been stockpiling of 
several times of steel. The industry, however, h3S done relatively well in the export sector; it 
has been one of the few areas where the rate of growth in 1996-97 has exceeded 10 per cent. 
The profits the Steel Authority of lndia have been registering in recent years and the 
remittance of dividend to the government are encourag ing developrncn!s. 
14. The Standing Committee, though feels constrained to make a number of 
observation;. in this connection. The first relates the apparent indifference of the Ministry of 
Steel as well as the Steel Authority of India to explore the possibilities of developing high 
quality coal within tbe country and, instead , depend on import of selective categories of coal 
involving substant ial outlay of foreign exchange. The Ministry of Coal cannot also be 
absolved of its responsibility in the matter. This is a most unusual situation: the Geological 
Survey of India asserts thut the country possesses the world's largest reserves of coal and yet 
steel processing in the country continues to depend upon import of efficient-calibre coal 
from other countries . The responsibility for arranging inv~tments which could lead to the 
mining of superior quality coal and establishment of washeries for the purpose, the Ministry 

4 
of Steel m~n 'nnccivably argue, devolves exclusively on the Mmastry of O:>al Can. This is 
much too self-centred a view. The Commiuee would urge th at the Planning O:>mmission, the 
Ministry of O:>al and the Ministry of Steel jointly examine the underlying issues and prepare 
a time-bound programme to ensure that indigenous production of improved qualities of coal 
grad ually leads tO a marked reduct ion tlf dependence on import ed coal on the part of the 
steel production units. 
15. The second issue the O:>mmittee would like to refer to pertains to the prospect~ of 
revival of the Indian Iron and Steel O:>mpany. The revival plan spon~red by a major public 
financial in.'titution and veued by an eminent body of coum.elling engineers has been waitmg 
government approval for more than three years now'. At a certain point. the Steel Authority 
of India had reportedly requested budgetary funds to the extent of roughly Rs. 500 crore 
over a five-year period which could obviate the need for further external capital for re· 
structuri ng the unit. The question that cun be legitimately posed is whether instead of 
transferring dividends to the government, the Stee l Authority of India could not consider 
alloC<~ting llddilional funds up to Rs. 100 cro re annually for a period of five years for 
reconstruction of the unit. It is also a moot point v•hether rehabiliwtion of the Vizag Steel 
Plant and the Nilanchal Works should not have precedence over arranging remittance of 
dividend to the government. 
16. As far as the USCO case is concerned, it would be UJ1fonunate if the impres~aon 
spread~ tbat the gover nment is adopting a dog-in-the-manger policy. Should budgctury funds 
or surp lus generated by the Steel Authority be not made available for the purpose of rc· 
buildiug the JuJian !ton and Steel Comp<uly, the authorities would have little justification 
not to approve the use of 400 million dollars out of the Russian debt fund for enabling the 
engineering conglomerate Tyazhpromexput (TPE) to uct as sales collaborator in 
restructuring the liSCO plant. 
17. The Standing Commiuee would also urge the Minbtry of Steel and the Steel 
Authority of India to place gn··•ter attention than heretofore on the scale factor. Thi~ 
country has the potential and capability to raise the level of bo th output and cxport of Meel 
items by severa l times . What is called for is a well-designed, time-bound plan to indu ct 
newer and newe r technologies and dficiency norms from which our steel industry could 
benefit-as also maintain an appropriate balance in the production of prim3ry and secondary 
steel items over time. The Committee hopes the Ministry of Steel would give appropri;tte 
ancntion to these is~ues. 
The O:>mminec is equally concerned about the well being of the ship-breaking industry 
in the country, particularly at Alang in Gujarat. There has been considerable growth in thi~ 
indlL~try over the past two decades. For instan ce, in 1982-1983, the total number of ,hips 
beac hed wa~ merely five with 24,706 LOT. This had gone up to 82 ships beached in 1989-90 
with 4,51,243 LUT. ln the year 1995·96, lhc number of ships bcac.:hcd h;1d reached the figure 
of l83 with 12,52,800 LDT. The ship-breaking industry is emp loyn1ent oriented. its 
requirement of power and sheds, etc. is not large. The State and the Central Government 
now collect R~. 1,600 crores as tax revenue and there is hardly any investment from the 
Centre. The Committee feels that tbb industry needs help, nourishment and encour~gement 
from the Union Government. The Comminee acknowledges that the budgetary proposals for 
the year 1997-98 provide for ~me rc:.d to this industry but, there is an app~_ehension that it 
might be affected by likely amendments in the mode of levy of duty. In the opinion of the 

5 
Committee, some method should be so devised that the burden of MODVAT does not fall 
on the mother industry. 
18. For the Ministry of Industry, the Standing Committee would like to offer a set of 
addit ional recommendations. First, alongside the tentative programme the government has 
announced for nine major public sector industrial units to be rendered into 'global giants', it 
should also simultaneously announce concrete, time·bound measures for rehabilitating, to 
begin with, at least a dozen sick or closed units already referred to the Board for Industrial 
and Financial Reconstruction. As the Twenty-first Report of the Committee has suggested in 
fairly great detail, none of these units have benefited from their referral to the BlFR. 
Official procrastination has piled upon official procrastinat ion. The provisions of the Skk 
Industries Undertakings Act have been of little avail for 'restructuring the uniL~; schemes 
submitted to the BIFR have got tied up in seemingly intractable legal and technical tangles. 
Drib lets of funds paid out to meet essential wage·bills have kept some hopes (lickering, but 
there is no question that such funds could have been easily put to more meaningful 
purposes. All wid, iL is a depressing scenario. further, the authorities appear to have 
narrowed down the objectives laid down in the original 0 . R. 
The resources lying with the National Renewal Fund have been prevented from possible 
utilisation for reviving sick units, and hardly any initiative has been exhibited to dispose of 
rich urban property belonging to ma ny of the units to augment funds needed for 
rehabi litation. The authorities have, for example, failed to implement the Area 
Regeneration Scheme at Ahmedabad and land , building and other valuable assets of the 
mills with infrastructure facilities are being sold to the land sharks at throw away prices. The 
Comminee urges upon Government to restrain the sale of these valuable properties at 
ridiculously low prices and evolve measures to see that new industr ies come up on these 
lands. It is also important that the workers shou ld get their legal dues without fail. The 
degree of confusion in official procedures in this area is mind-boggling. The Sick Industries 
Undertakings Act comes under the jurisdiction of tbe Ministry of Finance, the Board for 
Industrial and Financial Reconstruction is under the purview of another wing of Lhe 
Ministry, namely, the Depar tment of Banki ng, while the Nationa l Renewa l Fund is 
admin istered by the Ministry of Industry . In the Standing Committee's view, it should be 
possible to revive several strugg ling industrial units, within a span of twelve months or less, 
and employment ensured or thousands of workers if only minor changes in legislation could 
render the BIFR into a properly functional body with resources for its activities assured from 
the Nationa l Renewal Fund, banks and financial institutions and, in add ition, through the 
sale of surplus land lying with the units. 
19. The Standing Committee's concern for the revival of sick industrial units both in 
private and public sectors has an obvious rationale. It is a transitiona l phase the oountry is 
going through; the e ntry of heavy doses of foreign capital is still uncertain, and industrial 
growth is slowing down because of a lack of availability of capital funds. In this situation. it 
makes sense to avail of the capacity latent in the sick and closed units. With a modest 
allotment of either bank and institutional cred it or budgetary funds, many of thes e units 
could not only contribute to producti on , but also to employment . The Commillee has in 
mind severa l cement units and the mini steel plants. Apart from employment generatio n, 

6 
these units and the ancillary advantage of use of locally available limestone and there by 
lessen the bu rden or transport. 
20. The Standing Commiuee has misgivings about the proposal to continue with the 
policy of disinvesting the equity of profit-making public enterprises. The effusive words 
expended in the Finance Minister's budget speech have not been able to conceal the fact 
that the essential purpose of the exercise is to generate budgetary funds for the government 
and linlc else. The Standing Committee hopes that the Disinvestment Commission will have 
a moderating influence on the government and the nation's 'crown jewels', to use the 
picturesque description of the Union industry Minister, are not thoughtlessly frittered away. 
21. And yet, selective shedding of equity by public financial corporations in private 
corporate bodies, accompanied by occasional limited unloading of shares of well-placed 
public enterprises, may be one way of resource-raising for languishing public sector units, 
such as the National Textile Corporation and its ancillaries, the Mining and Allied 
Machinery Corporation, the Bhara t Ophthalm ic Glass Limited, the NEPA Paper Mills, and 
so on. Several of these units have been victims of shifts in official policy, such as reduction 
in import duties; several others are victims or official absentmmdedness in product planning. 
It would be a gross national waste if the problems of these industrial units are not ex~mincd 
at the micro level and satisfactory solution sought to be worked out in lieu of abrupt issue of 
death warrants. ln this connection, the Committee would comment on the dcptor::!ble 
practice of the government's fauing to meet contractu~! obligations for industrial 
underwkings owned by it. 
22. The Standing Committee would urge the Ministry to concentrate its ancntion in 
equal measure on the difficult condirion obtaining in the small-scale sector, including in 
particular the Khadi and Village Industries and bandloom units. The small scale units are 
responsible for roughly 30 per cent of total employment generated in the country; they are 
also responsible for an estimate 30 per cent of the aggregate exports from the country. Any 
substantial improvement in the sta te of these small scale industries would also mean a 
substanti~l reduction in the level of national poverty. lt is, therefore, a maner of the gravest 
concern that not even 0.3 per cent of the Union government's total budget is currently 
saparable for the small scale sector. In the case of Khadi and Village Industries, the 
Committee notes with concern that despite the increase in generation of employment to the 
extent of more than five l<tkhs and production also substantially going up, the revised 
estimates for the year 1995-96, and budgetary for 1997-98 have been reduced for no 
allegation appar ent good reason. It is not only that the multinational corpora tions have 
penetrated areas reserved for the small scale sector with impunity, and the government has 
tended to ignor such infringements of the law. One of the biggest lapses on the part of the 
Government in the last three decades has been the lack of will to enforce laws and 
regulations made thereunder for protecting the) Small Scale Sector from the onslaughts of 
MNCs and big Lndian companies. The recent ly anno unced measures of deregulation of small 
units are having awkward conseq uences for small scale activities of different descriptions . 
In the opinion of the Committee, the Small Scale Industries are not receiving adequate 
attention at the bands of Government. There bas been a marginal increase of 1.39% only in 
the net bank credit over the period from March, 1993 to March, 1996. The Committee 

7 
further notes that large sums have been provided for malcing available infrastructw·aJ 
facilities for the Small-Scale Units but the same could not be spent. For example. there were 
large savings under the I lend "Openi ng of Tool Rooms" from allocation for the years 1993-
94 to 1995-96. Further, the new tax proposals in the currem budget olso do not take 
<1dequate care of the Sma ll Scale Sector and some of the proposals an; bound to adversely 
a[[ect industries in Sector engaged in manufacture of products like pharmaceutical 
formulations, plastic bags. roofing tiles, handloom towels, pickles, electric switch and socket 
and molasses. The Committee feels that when the budget has extended large duty 
concessions on items like air-conditioners, etc. no case exist for increase in duty on items 
produced by the small scale sector. 
The Committee would also like Government to examine the Report of the Committee 
appointed to study the problems of ceramic industry in Saurashtra area which has since been 
submitted . 
23. It is a difficult $ituation, and the appare nt indifference exhibited by the aut horities 
hns disturbing implications. To stave off any further worsening of the crisis in the smal l scale 
sector, the Standing Committee would recommend the following immediate steps: {i) a four­
fold increase in the Plan allocations for the small scale sector, and a ~ix-fold increase in the 
Khadi Village Industries and Handloom sector, compared to what has been indicated in the 
1997-98 budget proposals; (ii) a halt to the further de-regulation of small industries until a 
committee of experts has made an overall appraisal of the impact of the de-regulations that 
h:1vc taken place in recent years, including on earnings and employment; (iii) keeping in 
abeyance the import duty restructuring affecting small scale ~perat i ons that htts taken place 
through the 1996-97 and 1997-98 budgets umil the expert committee has reported; (iv) an 
open ·ended provi~ion for the Khadi Village Industries and the Handloom sectors to enable 
subsidies for the Khadi units to be augmented several times antl arr3ngemcnts improved for 
ensuring regular supply of inputs at substantially low rates to Khadi Village lnc!ustries and 
I landloom units and measures for improving the marketing infrastructure for the finished 
products. 
24. The Committee will now refer to number of miscellaneous issues: Attention should 
be given, in the opinion of the Standing Committee, to the conditions obtaining in the 
specialised industry of ship-break ing, including problems involving import and excise duties. 
Environmen tal issues arc increasingly coming into prominence both in the administr~tion of 
old industrial settlements and the planning of new settlements. Titis is a delicate area and 
the Ministries must exercise continuous vigilance so •hat contentious issues get amicably 
senled . • There is the related, and equally important problem of soctal welfare measures . 
Labour and welfare legislations call for meticulous observance; in th~ sensitive times, no 
relaxation of vigilance can be on the agenda, and the Ministries must take the lead to make 
sure that social welfare obligations are enforced with both objectivity and compassion. 
25. To sum up, the Standing Committee would make the following recommendations 
with respect to Lbe demands for grants of the Ministries of Industry, Steel and Mines: 
(a) While aggregate Plan allocation for the year for the three Ministries should be 
increased by one hundred per cenl, the increase in the small SC'dlc seclor should be 
'II has been reported thai sail-producing acti,ity on the border of linte Rann of Kutchch in Gujarat has been 
dosed down on account of diretlions of the Supreme Cour1 of India. In the opin~on ol lhe Commillcc, the 
Dcpanmenl of Industrial Development may consider exclusion of the o.rC3 "'here this aclivity is going on by a 
neces.sary notification as it invoh•c:s the livelihood of almost 10.000 families. 

8 
four-fold and in the khadi and villa~e industries and haodloom sector, it should be 
six-fold; 
(b) An expert committee should unde rtake a thorough restructuring of the index o£ 
industrial production with emphasis on improving the scientific basis of data 
collection from the small scale sector; 
(c) Arrangements should be initiated to ensure greater coordination of work and 
responsibilities between the different departm ents of the Ministry of Industry, the 
Ministry of Steel, the Ministries of Coal, Power and ,Mines as well us the Planning 
Commission; 
(d) An augmentation of public investment now is immediately necessary for improving 
the prospects or private and forei~n investments in future; 
(e) The Geol~ical Survey of India must not only be provided with amp le funds, but 
shoul d also be allowed the status of a scientific department to enable it to function 
as no independent entity which can freely enter into contractual arrange ments 
wilh outside agencies; 
(0 The reduction in import tariffs which has affected the profitability or Hindustan 
Zinc Limited and Hindustan Copper Limited ought to be reviewed and funds be 
released to these units so that their smelters could be re-cast and rendered more 
cost effective; 
(g) Funds should also be set aside for the rehabilitation of Bharat Gold Mines, and 
Cor expanding in-plant power generating capacity of Bharat Aluminium and 
National Aluminium; 
(b) The Ministry of Steel should set aside funds for upgrading managerial skills and 
installed technology to help promote both production and exports; it should at tbe 
same time assume responsibility for building washeries and have recourse to other 
modalities to raise the output of high quality coal in the country, thereby 
obviating the need for coal imports; 
(i) The re-stru cturing of the Indian Iron and Steel Company should be one of the 
priorities for the Ministry of Steel and the Steel Authority of India; the financial 
resources called for the purpose are not beyond their capabilities; 
(j) The Ministry of Industry shoul d announce concrete lime-bound revival packages 
initially for at least a dozen sick or closed industrial unit.s and ensure budgetary 
allocations therefor; 
(k) Fresh leg,islation coocemin g sick industrial units should be taken in hand to make 
the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstru ction a more purposive body 
with guarantee of fun ds from either the National Renewal Food or banks and 
financial institutions; 
0) Part icular attention should be given toward the rehabilitation of the National 
Textile Corporation units, the Bhar at Ophthalmic Limited, the NEPA Paper units, 
the Mining and Allied Machin ery Corporation and the Tyre Corporation of India; 
(m) Disinvestment of the equity of profit-makin g public enterprises should be 
undertaken witb great circumspection and the Disinvestment Commission may be 
urged to uplore alternative modalities for resource-raising which would not 
affect the nation 's 'cro wn jewels'; and 

9 
(n) The de-regulation of small scale industries announced a few weeks ago should be kept 
in abeyance, and the lowering of import duties which has directly affected the 
prospects of small scale activities should be revoked until a committee of experts has 
complc!W an overall appraisal of the impact of these measures on the viability of the 
small scale units. 
New D Et..HI; 
April 22, 1997 
ASHOK lVliTRA 
Chairman, 
Departmel!l-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry. 

I 
} 
ANNEXURE 
{MINUTES OF TilE MEETINGS) 
XIV 
FOURTEENTU MEETING 
The Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry met at 
3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 31st March, l997 in Room No. 139, First Floor, Purliamcnt House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Ashok Mitra -- Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Sycd Sibtey Razi 
3. Shri Rajubhai A. Parmar 
4. Shri Kanak Mal Katara 
5. Shri Ram Deo Bhandari 
6. Shri Ani! Kumar 
7. Shri T.M. Venkatachalam 
8. Shri Jayam Kumar Malhoutra 
9. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
LOK SAHHA 
10. Sbrimat i Jayawant ibcn Mehta 
11. Shri Ritlal Pd. Verma 
12. Sbri Radba Mohan Singh 
13. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
14. Shri Nitish Bbaradwaj 
15. Shri Namdcvrao Diwathe 
16. Shri M.K. Paul 
17. Shri Shyamlal Bansiwal 
18. Shri Sunderl~l Patwa 
19. Shri Nawal Kishore Sharma 
20. Kumari Frida Topno 
21. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
22. Sbri Pradeep Bhattacharya 
23. Shri B .L. Shankar 
24. Shri Sunil Khan 
25. Sbri M. Ramanantha n 
11 

26. Shri Darbara Singh 
27. Shri P.C. Thomas 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Om Parkash, Deputy Secretary 
12 
Shri Dcepak Goyal, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
I. Representatives of F ICCI 
1. Shri A.S. Kasliwal, President 
2. Shri Siddhartha Dasgupta, Sr. Assistant Secretary 
n. Representatives of C.I.I. 
1. Shri Deepak Singh, Chairman, C.l.l., Public Policy Committee 
2. Shri Yijai Kapur, Chairman, C.l.l., Telecom Committee 
3. Shri Ranjit Purl, Cbairman, C.l.l., Consumer Affairs Committee 
4. Shri S. Sen, Sr. Director, C.l.l. 
5. Shrimati M. Roy, Sr. Director, C.l.l. 
2. The Committee heard oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses in respect of 
Demands for Grants (1997-98) of the Ministries of Industry, Steel and Mines. The witnesses 
were directed to furnish written notes on various points, as promised by them during the 
course of oral evidence, at the earliest. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
J. The Committee then adjourned at 5.10 P.M. to meet on the 1st April, 1997. 

XV 
FlFf EENTB MEETING 
1lte Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry met at 
10.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the lst April, 1997 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexc, New Delhi. 
I' RESENT 
1. Shri Ashok Mitra -- Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Maurice Kujur 
3. Syed Sibtey Razi 
4. Shri Govindrao Adik 
5. Shn Rajubhai A. Parmar 
6. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
7. Shri Konak Mal Katara 
8. Shri Ram Deo Bhandari 
9. Shri Ani! Kumar 
10. Shri T.M. Venkatachalam 
ll. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
12. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
LOK SABRA 
13. Shrimat i Jayawantiben Mehta 
14. Shil Ritlal Pd. Verma 
15. Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
16. Sbri Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
17. Shri Nitish Bharadwaj 
18. Shri Namdevrao Diwathe 
19. Shri Ananth Kumar 
20. Shri M.K. Patil 
21. Shri Shyamlal Bansiwal 
22. Shri Nawal Kishore Sharma 
23. Kumari Frida Topno 
24. Shri Sanat Mehta 
25. Shri Pradeep Bhattacharya 
26. Dr. N. Subramanyam 
27. Shri Sunil Khan 
28. Shri Darbara Singh 
13 

14 
SECRETARiAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Om Parkash, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Deepak Goyal, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
- ---- ---~ 
I. Representatives of the Department of Industrial Development 
L Shri P.G. Mankad, Secretary 
2. Shri Ajay Vikara:m Singh, AS & FA 
3. Shri Pushpendra Rai, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri B. Bhanot, Deputy Director-General 
5. Shri S. S. Sharma , Director-Genera l, NPC 
6. Shr i Vikas Satwalekar, Executive Director, NID. 
II. Representatives of the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion 
1. Shri T.R. Prasad, Secretary 
2. Shri Ajay Vikaram Singh, AS & FA 
3. Shrimati Pratibl:ta Karan, Joint Secretafy 
4. Shri Ashok Kumar, Joint Secretary 
ill. Representatives of Standing Conference of Public Enterprises (Scope) 
1. Dr. Udesh Kohli, Chairman , SCOPE & CMD , Power Finance Corporation of India 
2. Shri M.A. Hakeem, Secretary-General 
2. The Committee heard oral evidence of the representative s of the Department of 
Indusuial Development, followed by the represen tatives of the Department of Industrial 
Policy and Promotion in respect of Demand for Grants (1997-98) of the Ministry of Industry . 
l11e witnesses were d irected to furnish written notes on various points, as promised during 
the course of ora l evidence , at the earliest. The Commiuee also heard the representatives of 
SCOPE in its afternoon session on the various aspects of the Central Public Secwr 
Enterp rises. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 5.10 r.M. to meet on the 2nd April, 1997. 

,, 
XVI 
SIXTEEJ'Io'TB MEETlJ';G 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Commiuee on Industry met at 
10.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 2nd April. 199? in Commirtee Room 'A', Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
I' RESENT 
l. Shri Asbok Mitra - Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Syed Sibtey Razi 
3. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
4. Shri Kanak Mal Katara 
5. Sbn Ram Deo Bhandari 
6. Shri Anil Kumar 
7. Shri T.M. Venkatachalam 
8. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
LOK SABRA 
9. Shrimati Jayawantibcn Mehta 
10. Shri Ritlal Pd. Verma 
11. Shri l'rabhu Dayal Katheria 
12. Shri Nitish Bharadwaj 
13 Shri Namdevrao Diwathc 
14. Shri Ananth Kumar 
15. Shri M.K. Patil 
16. Shri Shyamlal Bansiwal 
17. Shri Nawal Kishore Sharma 
18. Kumari Frida Topno 
19. Shri Sanat Mehta 
20. Shri Chitturi Ravindra 
21. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
22. Shri Pradeep Bhattacharya 
23. Dr. N. Subramanyam 
24. Shrimati Usba Meena 
25. Shri Sunil Khan 
26. Shri Bhakta Charan Das 
27. Shri Darbara Singh 
15 

16 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Om Park ash, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Dcepak Goyal, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Officer 
WJTNESS.ES 
Representatives of the Ministry of Mines 
l. Shri B.B. Tandon, Secretary 
2. Shri M.L. Majumdar, Addl. Secretary 
3. Shri A. Prasad, AS & FA 
4. Shri S.D. Sharma, Jt. Secretary 
5. Shri K.S. Bajwa, Jt. Secretary 
6. Shri S.K. Acharya, DG-GSI 
7. Shri S.K. Ghosh, CMD -BALCO 
8. Shri S.N. Johri, CMD-NALCO 
9. Shri K. V.K. Seshavatram, CMD-HZL 
10. Shri R. Gupta, MD-BGML 
11 ~hri K N. Ghosh , CMD-HCL 
12. Shri S.D. Prasad, CMD-MECL 
2. The Committee heard oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses in respect of 
Demand for Grants (1997-98) of the Ministry of Mines. The Secretary, Ministry of Mines 
was directed to furnish written notes on the information, promised to be furnished by him 
during the course of oral evidence, at the .:artiest. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 1.30 P.M. to meet on the 3jd April, 1997. 

xvn 
SEVENTEENTH MEETING 
The Department-related Parliame ntary Standing Committee on Industry mel at 
10.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 3rd April, 1997 in Comm ittee Room 'A', Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ashok Mitxa-Chairman 
RA.}Y A SABHA 
2. Shri Maur ice Kujur 
3. Sycd Sibtey Razi 
4. Shri Govindrao Adik 
5. Shri Rajubhai A . Parmar 
6. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
7. Shri Kanak Mal Katara 
8. Shri Ram Deo Bhandari 
9. Shri Anil Kum;~r 
10. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
l l . Shri San jay Nirupam 
LOK SABllA 
12. Shrima ti Jayawantib en Mehta 
13. Shri Ritlal Pd. Verma 
14. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
15. Shri Nitish Bharadwaj 
16. Shri M.K. Patil 
17. Shri Sb yamlal Bansiwal 
18. Shri Nawal Kishore Sharma 
19. Kumari Frida Topno 
20. Shr i Sanat Mehta 
21. Shr i Pradeep J:lhallacharya 
22. Dr. N. Subramanyam 
23. Sbr imati Usha Meena 
24. Shri Sunil Kl1an 
25. Shri Bhakta Charan Das 
26. Shri Darbara Singh 
SECRETAIUAT 
Shri Salish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shr.i Om Parkash, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Deepak Goyal , Under Secreta ry 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
Representatives of the Ministry of Steel 
1. Dr. J .K. Bagchi, Secretary 
2. Shri A. Prasad , A. S & F. A . 
l7 

18 
3. Shri Narcsh Narad, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri S. Manoharan , Joint Secretary 
5. Shri Arvind Pandc, Cha irman, SAIL 
6. Shri T. Ramamurthy, Acting Chairman, VSP 
2. The Committee heard oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses in respect of 
Demand for Grants (1997-98) of the Ministry of Steel. The Chairman directed the Secretary, 
Ministry of Sleel to furnish written commenl~ on the various points, promised by them 
during the course of oral evidence , at the earliest. There was a brief mention of the 'Action 
Taken Reports' received from the Ministries in response to the reports of the Commince. It 
was decided that the A TRs may be taken up for consideration by the Committee. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 1.15 v.M. to meet on the 7th April, 1997. 

xvm 
EIGHTEENm MEETING 
~-----·-
The Department-related Parliam entary Standing Committee on Industry met at 
10.00 1\.M. on Monday, the 7th April. 1997 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor , 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
L Shri Ashok Mitra-Cirairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Maurice Kujur 
3. Shri Rajubhai A. Parmar 
4. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
5. Shri Ram Deo Bhandari 
6. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
7. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shrimati Javawantibcn Mehta ' . 9. Shn Prabh u Dayal Katheria 
10. Shri Namdevrao Diwathe 
11. Shri M.K. Patil 
12. Shn Shyamlal Bansiwal 
13. Shri Nawal Kishore Sharma 
14. Kuman Frida Topno 
15. Shri Sanat Mehta 
16. Sbri Uday singhrao Gaikwad 
17. Shrl K.H. Muniyappa 
8. Shmnati Usha Mecna 
19. Shri B.L. Shankar 
20. Shn M. Ramananthan 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri S:nish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shn Om Parkash, Deputy Secretary 
Sltn Deepak Goyal, Under Secretary 
'>hri Mom Raj Singh. Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
L Representatives of the Department of Heavy Industry 
l. Shri Prabir Sangupta, Secretary (HI) 
2. Shri Ajay Vikram Singh, AS & FA, (Represented Department or Public Enterprises 
as well) 
3. Shri D.C. Samnnt, Jt. Secretary 
4. Shri A.K. Mohapatra, Jt. Secretary 
5. Shri Anup MukCrJCC, Jt. Secr.:tary 
n. Repre~entatives of the Public Enterprises 
1. Shri P.G. Mankad, Secretary 
2. Shri S. Talwar, JS (F) 
19 

20 
3. Shri Tej Singh, JS (M) 
ill. Representative of tbe Disinvestment Commission 
Shri P. Shankar, Member Secretary 
IV. Represent.atives of lbe Trade Unions 
A. Hind Mavloor Sabha 
I. Slui A. Subramaniam, Vice President 
2. Shri Arun Kumar, Research Officer 
B. Indian Nali01wl Trade Union Co11gress (/NTUC) 
l. Shri Gopeshwar, General Secretary 
2. Shri S. L. Passey, Secretary 
2. The Coiilllllttee heard oral evidence of the Secretaries of Department of Heavy 
Industry and Public Enterprises in respect of Demands for Grants (1997-98) of the Ministry 
of Industry. 
3. The Committee in its afternoon session heard lhe views of the Member Secretary, 
Disinvestment Commission on the issue of Disinvestment and criteria for identifying lbe 
public sector undertakings for purpose of disinvestment. This was followed by the oral 
evidence of the representatives of the Trade Unions. 
4. The witnesses were requested to furnish written notes on the various points, as 
promised by them during the course of oral evidence, at the earliest. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
5. The Committee adjourned at 5.05 P.M. to meet again on the 8th April, 1997. 

XIX 
NINETEENTH MEETING 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry met at 
10.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 8th April, 1997 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Sbri Ashok Mitra-Chairman 
RA.JY A SABRA 
2. Syed Sibtey Razi 
3. Shri Govindrao Adik 
4. Shri Rajubhai A. Parmar 
5. Sbrimati Anandiben Jethabhai Patel 
6. Shri Ram Deo Bhandari 
7. Sbri T.M. Vcnkatachalam 
8. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
9. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
LOK SABRA 
10. Shrimati Jayawantiben Mehta 
11. Sbri Rilla! Pd. Verma 
12. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
13. Sbri Namdevrao Diwathe 
14. Shri M.K. Patil 
15. Sbri Shyamlal Bansiwal 
16. Sbri Nawal Kishore Sharma 
17. Kumari Frida Topno 
18. Shri Sanat Mehta 
19. Dr. N. Subramanyam 
20. Shrimati Usha Meena 
21 .. Shri V. Alagirisamy 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Om Parka!>h, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Dcepak Goyal, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Of!icer 
WITNESSES 
I. Repnsentatives of the Small Scale Industries and Agro and Rural Industries 
I. Shri S.S. Boparai, K.C., Secretary (SSI & AR1) 
2. Shri Ajay Vikram Singh, AS & FA 
3. Shri K.V. lrniraya, AS & DC, SS1 
4. Dr. C.S. Prasad, Add!. DC, SS! 
5. Shri K.S. Ludu, Add!. DC, SSI 
6. Shri Brahm Dutt, Joint Secretary 
7. Shri M. Ahmed , CMD, NSIC 
8. Shri K. George Joseph, Chairman, COIR Board 
21 

-
22 
ll. Representatives of the Laghu Udyog Bharlltl, New Delhi 
1,- Shrl Vishwa Mittra Bah!, President 
2. Shri Sudersen Sarin, Vice President 
3. Shri Rajendra Rastogi, Executive Member 
4. Shri Ravindra Bansal, General Secretary (Delhi Unit) 
2. The Committee heard oral evidence of the Secretary, Department of Small Scale 
Industries and Agro and Rural Industries in respect of Demands for Grants (1997·98) of the 
Ministry of industry. 
3. The Committee thereafter heard the views of the representatives of the Laghu Udyog 
Bharati, New Delhi on tJ1e problems of Small Scale Sector. 
4. The witnesses were requested to furnish written notes on various points, as promised 
by them during tbe course of oral evidence, at the earliest. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kepi. 
5. 1l1e Committee adjourned at 1.45 P.M. 
' . 

1 
•• 
XX 
TWENTIETH MEETING 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Commillcc on Industry mel at 
10.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 22nd April, 1997 in Room No. 139, Fir:t Floor , Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ashok Mltra-C11Dirman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shrimati Anandiben Jethabhai Patel 
3. Shn Kanak Mal Katara 
4. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
LOK SABRA 
5. Shrimati Jayawantiben Mehta 
6. Shri Ritlal Pd. Verma 
7. Snri Nitish Bharadwaj 
8. Shri Namdevrao Diwathe 
9. Shri M.K. Patil 
10. Kumari Frida Topno 
11. Shri Sanat Mehta 
12. Shri Udaysinghrao Gaikwad 
13. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
14. Shri.n.tti Usha Meena 
15. Shr' S. ;1 Khan 
16. Shri Anandrao Adsul 
17. Shri Bh&ku Chamn Das 
SECRETAR'AT 
~ hri Om P .trkash, Deputy Secretary 
~hri Deepak Goyal, t.lmlcr Secretary 
Shri !vfom R:tj Singh. Committee Officer 
L.. 'lbc Committee took up for consideration the draft Twe11ty-second report and after 
some discussion. adopted rhc same with minor modifica1ions. 
J . The Commillc<: decided to present the report to both !he llou•es of Parliament the 
same day. 
4. The Committee authorised the Chairman and in his absence Shri Saujay Nirupam to 
present the report in the Rajya Sabha and Shrimati Jayawantibcn Mehta and Kumnri Frida 
Topno to lay the repon in the L<>k Sabha. 
The Comn:irtee then adjow·ned at 10.30 A.M. 
23 