82nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/82ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:16:44]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
EIGHTY SECOND REPORT
 
ON
 
MOU SYSTEM IN THE STRATEGIC SECTOR PSEs
THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES,  (MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC
ENTERPRISES)
 
(PRESENTED ON THE TABLE OF RAJYA SABHA ON 8TH AUGUST, 2002)
(LAID ON THE TABLE   OF  LOK SABHA   ON 8TH AUGUST, 2002)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
AUGUST, 2002/SRAVANA, 1924  (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
 
                  
1.         COMPOSITION OF  THE  COMMITTEE
                                                                       
                                                                                                      
2.         PREFACE
                                                                                                           
                                                           
3.         REPORT
                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                
5.         OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE –AT A GLANCE
 
6.         ANNEXURE
                                                                                                    
 
7.         MINUTES
                                                                                                    
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
Shri T.N. Chaturvedi — Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
Prof. M.M. Aggarwal
         3.   Dr . Abrar Ahmad
    4.   Shri Jayantilal Barot
  5.   Shri Prasanta Chatterjee 

82nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/82ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:16:44]
Smt. Saroj Dubey
Shri Faguni Ram
       8.   Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
Shri P.K. Maheshwari
Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
Shri S. Sivasubramanian
  13. Smt. Sushree Devi
Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
 
LOK SABHA
 
Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
Kumari Mamata Banerjee
Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
Shri Nepal Chandra Das
Shri Deepak Kumar
Shri Thomas Hansda
22. Dr. S. Jagathrakshakan
Shri A.C. Jose
Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
25. Shri Brijlal Khabri
26. Shri Sunil Khan
27. Shri Manjay Lal
Dr. K. Malaisamy
Shri A. Narendra
Shri Ananta Nayak
Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
  32. Shri Dharam Raj Singh Patel
33. Shri Uttamrao Patil
34.Shri Malyala Rajaiah
35.Shri P. Rajendran
Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
Shri Tarachand Sahu
Shri Ramanand Singh
Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
Chowdhary Talib Hussain
Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari
Shri Beni Prasad Verma
 
 SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani,  Committee Officer
P R E F A C E
 
I, the Chairman of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry having been authorised by
the Committee, hereby present this Eighty Second Report on the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) System in the
Strategic Sector PSEs pertaining to the Department Public Enterprises, Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public

82nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/82ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:16:44]
Enterprises
 
The Committee, in this context, heard the oral evidence of CMDs of Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd. (HAL) and Bharat
Earth Movers Ltd. at Banglore on 10th and 11th June, 2002 and Nuclear Power Corporation of India Ltd  (NPCIL) at
Mumbai on 3rd July, 2002.
 
3.      The Committee in its meeting held on  the  8
th August, 2002  considered and adopted the Report.
 
                                                                                                           
 
NEW
DELHI;                                                                          
               , 2002                           
                                                 
 
T.N. CHATURVEDI
  Chairman
 Department Related Parliamentary
 Standing Committee on Industry
REPORT
 
I.          Introduction
 
1.1       The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry in 2002, appointed the following Sub-
Committees for detailed examination of Annual Reports:
            (i)         Sub-Committee I
            (ii)        Sub-Committee II
Sub-Committee III
Sub-Committee IV
                       
1.2       The Sub-Committee on Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises, as part of examination of the Annual Report of
Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises, took up the examination of MoU system.
 
1.3       The Sub-committee, for a detailed study of the   MoU system and its effectiveness with regard to the
performance of the PSEs took up PSEs, of various Strategic sectors. 
 
BEML, Bangalore 
HAL, Bangalore
NPCIL,  Mumbai
 
As a part of examination of MoUs of PSEs of strategic sector, the Sub-Committee visited Bangalore to have first hand
information on the implementation of MoUs in BEML and HAL from 10
th – 11th June 2002.  The Committee also
visited NPCIL on 3rd July 2002 at Mumbai.   Extensive discussions were held with the Chief Executives of selected
PSEs and the Officials concerned with the MoU system. 
 
II.         BACKGROUND OF MOU SYSTEM
 
2.1       The Department of Public Enterprises in their Background Note on the MoU system have stated that as a major
policy initiative, the MoU system was introduced by the Central Government as an important tool to improve the
performance of the Central Public Sector Enterprises (PSEs).  The New Industrial Policy of 1991 laid greater emphasis
on the MoU system requiring all PSEs to be brought under the ambit of the MoU system.  Beginning with 4 PSEs in
1987-88, the MoU system has now been extended to a large number of PSEs during the course of time and during the
year 2000-2001, 108 PSEs have signed the MoUs.
 
2.2       It was stated that the main objectives of the MoU system are to improve the performance of the PSEs by
imparting increased autonomy and accountability and to provide a method of evaluation of the performance of the
managements of the PSEs in an objective and transparent manner.  Further, the objective of providing clarity of goals to

82nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/82ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:16:44]
be achieved by PSEs is another dimension of the MoU system.
 
2.3       The Committee has noted that there is a High Power Committee (HPC) at the apex level, headed by the Cabinet
Secretary which is basically a policy making body for the MoUs.  This HPC consists of Secretaries of all nodal
Departments of Government such as Finance, Expenditure, Planning Commission and Programme Implementation, etc. 
The HPC undertakes the evaluation of the performance of the PSEs and in addition the HPC also provides a forum to
resolve inter-ministerial issues.
 
2.4       To assist HPC in this task and also to provide the technical inputs and to finalise the MoUs, there is an Advisory
Body called Adhoc Task Force (ATF), it was stated.  The members of the ATF are drawn from various fields having
vast experience in their areas and include retired Secretaries, Chief Secretaries, top experts in different disciplines like
finance, management, science and technology, and prominent academicians.  This body provides the neutrality and
objectivity to the MoU system.
 
2.5       The Department have also informed that under the present set up there is a small MoU Division under the
Department of Public Enterprises, Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises, which co-ordinates the entire
exercise of finalizing the MoUs in respect of all the PSEs numbering 108. In addition to finalizing the MoUs, the MoU
Division is also responsible for the evaluation of performance of PSEs, both on the basis of the provisional results as
well as the audited results.
 
2.6       Explaining about the process of preparing MoUs, the Department have stated that the MoU process starts with
the issuing of guidelines by the DPE to the PSEs/Administrative Ministries for drafting the MoUs.  The PSEs prepare
their MoUs on the basis of these guidelines and these draft MoUs are then discussed with the Administrative Ministries
and in the Boards of the PSEs and are then submitted to the DPE.  DPE prepares background papers and its comments
on each draft MoU keeping in view the past performance of the PSE, its future potential, the industry scenario and the
economic environment of the PSE, it was added.  It was further stated that these draft MoUs are discussed in the MoU
negotiation meetings where the ATF members, managements of the PSE, officials from the Administrative Ministries
and the representatives from nodal Government Agencies like Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation and Planning Commission are also present.  The MoUs and the targets are finalised in these
meetings through mutual discussions.
           
III.       PERFORMANCE OF MOU SYSTEM IN THE STRATEGIC SECTOR
 
            The Sub-Committee now deals with the performance of MoU system of BEML HAL and  NPCIL in the
succeeding pages.
 
IV.       BHARAT EARTH MOVERS LIMITED, BANGALORE
 
4.1       Bharat Earth Movers Limited (BEML) came into being in May 1964 as a Public Sector Undertaking, with the
transfer of its present Bangalore Complex (formerly known as Rail Coach Division) from the Hindustan Aircraft
Limited, Bangalore. BEML is a company under the administrative control of the Department of Defence Production &
Supplies, Ministry of Defence. The Registered Office of the Company, including Marketing Headquarters, is located at
Bangalore. BEML commenced its operations from January, 1965 with the production of rail coaches and assembly of
spare parts at the Bangalore complex.
 
4.2       Since March, 1992, the company status has changed to a “Partly Owned Government Company” from “Wholly
Owned Government Company”. Presently, the  Government owns 61.2 percent of the total equity.
 
4.3       BEML is managed by a Board comprising Directors and headed by a Chairman and  Managing Director.
 
4.4       PRODUCTION UNITS
 
            The company has manufacturing units established at Kolar Gold Fields (KGF) Mysore and Bangalore – all in the
State of Karnataka.

82nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/82ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:16:44]
 
 
4.5       KGF COMPLEX
 
KGF Complex comprises three manufacturing units, viz., Equipment Division, Heavy Equipment Shop and Hydraulics
and Power line Division. The Equipment Division has been producing since 1968 wide range of earthmoving equipment
such as Mounted Bulldozers, Hydraulic Excavators, Wheel Dozers and Loaders, Pipe Layers, Tyre Handlers and
Hydraulic Cranes. A recent addition has been Engineering Mine Ploughs. The Heavy Equipment Shop, with
sophisticated facilities, manufactures heavy earthmoving equipment like giant Walking Dragline, Electric Rope Shovel,
Higher Capacity Excavators, Dozers and other major welded structures. The Hydraulics and Power line Division, set up
in 1986-87, manufactures Transmissions and Allied Assemblies.
 
4.6       MYSORE COMPLEX
 
Truck Division produces different capacities of earthmoving equipment such as off the highway Rear Dump Trucks,
Motor Graders and Water Sprinklers. Aircraft Towing Tractors and Aircraft Weapon Loading Trolley. The Engine
Division manufactures different capacities of diesel Engines required for earthmoving equipment produced by BEML.
 
4.7       BANGALORE COMPLEX
 
            The Bangalore complex production unit manufactures various types of railway products such as Rail coaches,
Tower Wagons, Treasury vans, Rail bus and Milrail Coaches and Wagons for Indian Railways and the Ministry of
Defence. It also manufactures defence vehicles and aggregates such as BEML-Tatra Heavy Duty Truck/its variants for
tank transportation, ground support vehicles for integrated guided missile development projects viz., Prithvi, Trishul,
etc., vehicles for radar mounting, Field Artillery Tractor and Crash Fire Tender, Pontoon Bridges, Tank Transportation
Trailers and Ejector & Air cleaner assemblies BEML has been nominated as the Nodal Agency for Tatra family of
vehicles and also 155mm self propelled (tracked) gun system  (BHIM T-6).   BEML   reached a level of 49 percent  of
its total sales for defence sector in 2001-02. The Details are as follows:
 
                                                                                                          (Rs. Crores)
Year Total turnover Sales to defence
sector
Percentage
(%)
1995-96 1011.10 137.22 13.57
1996-97 1169.79 162.10 13.86
1997-98 1259.71 145.14 11.52
1998-99 1212.62 208.78 17.22
1999-2K 1317.09 304.86 23.15
2000-01 1347.40 438.23 32.52
2001-02
(Provnl.)
1421.00 690.69 49.00
 
 
4.8       FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE AND ORDER BOOK STATUS
 
The turnover of the Company started with Rs. 5.17 crores in 1965-66 and crossed the Rs.1421 crore mark by end of
March, 2002. Since its inception, the company has been making profits. The financial performance of the company for
the last five years is enclosed at Annexure-I. BEML has maintained a steady growth in its financial performance right
from its inception. The year 2000-2001 was one of mixed fortunes. Subdued market conditions, worldwide recession,
liquidity crunch, and increased competition. US sanctions and a  host of other negative factors brought in considerable
strain on  business. Likewise, liberalized imports of capital goods, anomalies in custom duty tariffs adversely affected
the industry. Despite all these odds BEML share of EM (Earth Mover) business in 65percent out of total sales turnover.
Defence share in the sales turnover has gone up considerably to 49 percent.
 
4.9       QUALITY

82nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/82ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:16:44]
 
            All the manufacturing divisions of BEML and its subsidiary units have been accredited with ISO 9001
certifications.
 
4.10     RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT DIVISION
 
            The Company has a strong base of in-house design and development. The company’s R&D division at KGF has
successfully designed, developed and produced a range of new products.  The R&D division is making continuous
efforts to assimilate and update  technology. The activities of R&D include import substitution, cost reduction and
product development for the domestic and export market. Products developed by R&D have been exported to the UK,
Syria and West Asia.
 
4.11     MARKETING
            The Registered Office of the company, including Marketing Headquarters, is located at Bangalore.
 
4.12     EXPORTS
            BEML’s products are exported to West Asia, Syria, Tunisia, UK, South Africa and Jordan. A total of Rs.116.65
crores worth of products were exported during 2001-02, including deemed exports.
 
4.13     PERSPECTIVE PLAN
            The Ministry has approved the perspective Plan of BEML. A growth rate of around 8 percent per year has been
envisaged in the plan keeping in view the prevailing market conditions and areas of diversification possible in the
coming years. New products envisaged in the perspective plan include port equipments, material handling equipments,
road construction and mining equipments, mine ploughs, BHIM T-6 with 155mm gun, etc.
 
4.14     MOU of BEML
            The Memorandum of Understanding between Bharat Earth Movers Limited and the Department of Defence
Production and Supplies, Ministry of Defence, is an agreed document setting out the mission and objectives along with
performance parameters for monitoring and evaluating the performance of Bharat Earth Movers Limited for 2001-2002.
It also indicates assumptions and assistance expected from the Government in achieving MoU performance level.
 
4.15     MISSION:
            To be a leader in the field of development, manufacturing and marketing of state-of-the-art heavy engineering
products and also make presence in global market through quality, reliability, customer orientation with thrust on
profitability.
4.16     OBJECTIVES:
To maintain BEML’s role in the supply of engineering goods and services to the core sectors of the Indian economy.
To retain 60 percent market share of Earth Moving and heavy-duty vehicles in domestic markets with a well-knit
dealership network region-wise with a view to ensure after-sales service and product support for attaining utmost
customer satisfaction.
To improve profitability with a view to get a fair return on Capital Employed by year 2002-03.
To maximize physical exports with a gradual growth of 10 percent - 20 percent and develop regional export markets.
To achieve minimum 25% contribution to the  Defence Sector.
To reduce cost through improved efficiency and productivity.
To improve the quality of products and after-sales service.
To continuously review and implement up-gradation of technologies in respect of product-lines, facilities and
diversification plans to cater to the needs and demands of the market.
To concentrate on diversification of product-mix in Bangalore Complex with a view to optimize utilization of plant and
machinery and manpower for improving the profitability of Bangalore Complex at optimum level.
To reduce the Cost of Capital and Capital Employed.
To concentrate on infrastructural development through thrust on Road Building Equipments.
4.16.1  In the MOU, in addition to the profit related financial parameters, dynamic criteria such as Inventory Control,
Customer Satisfaction, Sundry Debtors, Delivery Schedule Adherence, Technology Development and R&D have also
been included. In addition, new criteria such as Indigenisation, IT initiatives, Patenting and benchmarking have also

82nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/82ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:16:44]
been incorporated in the MOU to improve the performance of the company.
 
The details of targets and achievements under major parameters in respect of BEML are at Annexure-II and the MoU
ratings of BEML are given at Annexure-III.
4.17                 DISCUSSIONS WITH THE MANAGEMENT OF BEML
 
4.17.1  The convener Dr. B.B.Ramaiah, appreciated the performance of BEML in context of the company having made
profits since its inception.He,however, expressed concern over the fact that the rate of profit have been declining over
the years and the very survival of BEML is going to be at stake if this trend continues. Dr. K. Aprameyan, the CMD,
apprised the committee of the work being done by BEML mainly on BEML’s strength in multirole vehicles, transport
trailors which have found total acceptance with the defence forces. He further informed that BEML has carved a niche
for itself for its rugged products and at the moment, it commands a major share in the domestic earthmover industry.
The Committee was apprised that BEML has a vast range of heavy duty trucks with great amount of operational
flexibility and functional adaptability. Besides, BEML has vehicles, which are used for tank transportation including
vehicles which can move payload upto 10,000 kg weight. BEML also has a marked presence in all terrain vehicles,
which involve mounting of radar and bridge laying systems. BEML has equipments which can be used in case of
emergencies like earthquakes and BEML has done significant work during the Gujarat catastrophe.  The Committee was
informed that BEML has developed vehicles that can be fitted with multifunctional cranes and can be used for loading
ammunition. BEML has developed the Field artillery tractor for gun towing applications involving 130mm/155mm
medium guns with accessories and ammunition. BEML has developed vehicles, which can lay bridges, carry radars and
build pontoon bridge systems for the defence forces. BEML has also developed aircraft towing tractors that find
applications at aerodromes for towing aircraft. Other vehicles manufactured by BEML include the armoured recovery
vehicle that has been developed in collaboration with Burma, Poland and are deployed in wartime operations/forward
areas to salvage damaged tanks. BEML has also indigenously developed aircraft weapon loading equipment for lifting
and positioning weapons, missiles, fuel tanks and aviation components onto the wings and fuselage of fighter aircraft.
The Committee was informed that BEML is backed by world class R&D and state of the art technology from global
partners like Bucyrus, Komatsu, Tatra, Voest Alpine, IGM and Bumar labedy and this has enabled BEML to achieve
high standards in product engineering and gain international competence.
 
4.17.2  The Committee was apprised of BEML’s strength in the area of railway equipment like broad-gauge rail
coaches, day coaches, parcel vans, luggage cum brake vans. BEML has a dedicated facility to produce integral rail
coaches and other railway-related equipment. BEML has also taken up manufacture of electric-multiple units heralding
its entry into intra –city urban rapid transport system.
 
4.17.3  The Committee was informed that 60 percent of BEML’s annual sale of machines goes into coal and mining
sectors. Railway and Defence sectors  add up to 10 percent of the sales. The rest constitutes users like electricity boards,
port trusts, cement companies, irrigation/construction projects and private contractors. When asked about the efforts
been made by BEML to enter the export route the committee was informed that BEML has been recognized as a star
export house and has been exporting to over 30 countries. The committee also enquired into the efforts being taken by
BEML for cost reduction. The CMD informed that BEML is now adopting an integrated manufacturing programme
including on-line decision making to reduce the time and cost factor. He also informed that the marketing operations
nationwide are connected by wide-area network to a central database at Head quarters, enabling the company to stay
closer to users and also provide the management with authentic feedback.
 
4.17.4  The CMD apprised the Committee that BEML has not been getting adequate cooperation from the Ministry of
Railways as far as placing of work orders for its railway coach manufacturing facility is concerned resulting in a huge
non utilization of the facility rendering a large number of employees idle.
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
 
4.18.1  The Committee was pleased to note that BEML had been showing profits since its inception. However, the
Committee was concerned to note that there has been a constant decline in the profits over the past several years. The
Committee feels that BEML has not made adequate efforts to expand its market base. The Committee recommends that
BEML should resort to aggressive marketing and explore new areas beyond their traditional customers to expand their

82nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/82ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:16:44]
market base. In this context the Committee feels that BEML should develop value added products so as to garner a
larger share of the market. The Committee is of the view that with the infrastructure sector looking up there are
tremendous opportunities for BEML. The Committee also feels that BEML should also explore the possibilities of
providing maintenance service for high cost machines.
 
4.18.2  The Committee was deeply concerned to note that BEML has not been able to get adequate work orders for its
railway coach-manufacturing unit at Bangalore. The Committee is of the opinion that BEML should approach
organizations like the Delhi metro corporation to obtain work orders, and the issue should be taken up with the Railway
authorities at the highest level.
 
4.18.3  The Committee also observed that having regard to the vital sector in which the unit is operating the structure of
the MOU should be more appropriately geared to this factor.  It was observed the focus on financial performance, which
is being reiterated in the MOU, should be altered to shift the focus on more important factors of national interest. Hence
the MOU should accord higher weightage to performance parameters relating R&D, contribution to defense, product
development for difficult terrains like high altitude movement vehicles, movement vehicles for areas like Rann of Kutch
etc.
 
4.18.4  This apart, the Committee felt that since the MOU is a mutually agreed document on performance parameters, a
focus shift in the contribution of Government for this type of PSE is also imperative.  The performance parameters of
the Department of Defense Production and Supply in the MOU should lay emphasis on more tangible factors like
facilitating more orders from Railways for their products, export promotion for their remote controlled armoured
vehicles, extension of use of export offices of other PSUs like Bharat Electronics etc in other countries for promotion of
BEML products etc.
 
4.18.5  The committee also felt that MOUs should contain weightage for energy efficiency and resource efficiency
efforts as they also are to liable to reflect in the Balance Sheet of the Company under the Companies Act.
 
4.18.6  The Committee also felt that since the unit is operating in a strategic sector it is imperative that it has a sound
policy for retention and upgradation of skills of its Human Resource.  This is more than imperative for an unit like
BEML having regard to its strategic contribution to India’s defence and infrastructure sector. It is, therefore, felt that the
weightage for HRD should also be higher.
 (V)      HINDUSTAN AERONAUTICS LIMITED
 
5.1       Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL), was established in 1940 at Bangalore by a Private Entrepreneur – Shri
Walchand Hirachand as Hindustan Aircraft (Pvt.) Limited. In 1945, it was taken over by Government of India and
placed under Department of Industry & Supplies. In 1951, it came under the administrative control of the Ministry of
Defence in view of strategic considerations. In August 1963, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) was incorporated as
a company wholly owned by the government of India to undertake manufacture of MiG-21 series aircraft and engines
under licence from the then USSR. Hindustan Aircraft Limited and Aeronautics India Limited (AIL) were merged to
form Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) on 1
st October, 1964. HAL is the largest Defence Public Sector Unit and is
an MoU Company and has been declared as a “Mini Ratna”, Category-1 Company. HAL’s major customers are, Indian
Air Force, Indian Navy, Indian Coast Guard, Border Security Force and Department of Space. A Board, consisting of
Chairman and seven full time Directors, in addition to three Government Directors, three Customer Directors and three
non-official Directors, guides the operation of the company.
 
5.2       The company has produced over 3,400 aircraft and 3,100 engines and has indigenously taken care of the
maintenance of these aircraft and engines. In the recent past, the company has designed and developed four variants of
Advanced Light Helicopter (ALH) in Military and Utility versions. HAL has since produced and delivered for the first
time ALH to IAF, Navy and Coast Guard during March, 2002. HAL has also designed and developed low cost Light
Attack Helicopter (LANCER) for meeting various roles requirements such as Attack, Counter insurgency, Riot
handling, Anti-Smuggling Roles. The first batch of Lancer was supplied to Indian Army during the year 2000-01. HAL
is a major participant in the Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) programme. The company has launched the Design and
Development of Intermediate Jet Trainer (IJT) Programme. This will provide cost effective solution for training needs

82nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/82ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:16:44]
of Armed Forces. General contract for Licence production of SUKHOI-30 Mk. 1 aircraft at HAL, Nasik was signed in
December, 2000 Also various Upgrade Programmes for MiG-27M and Jaguar Aircraft have been taken up. As of its
enlarged mission to globalize itself the company has in its anvil, the co-development and production of 100 seater Civil
Aircraft. The Divisions of HAL have ISO 9000/9001/9002 accreditation as applicable.
 
5.3       HAL’s turnover has been growing continuously over the years. From a turnover of Rs.927.00 crores during
1990-91, it has achieved a turnover of Rs.2401 crores during the year 1999-2000. During the year 2001-02, HAL
achieved an all time high turnover of Rs.2730 crores and profit of Rs.305 crores.
 
5.4       MISSION
 
5.4.1    To become a globally competitive aerospace industry self-reliant in design manufacture and maintenance of
aerospace defence  equipment.  HAL has 14 divisions. Eight of these are located at Bangalore. The others are situated at
Hyderabad, Nasik (Maharashtra), Kanpur, Lucknow, Korwa (UP) and Koraput (Orissa). HAL’s major activities
encompass: -
 
Design, Development, Manufacture, Overhaul and Upgradation of aircraft, helicopters, engines, accessories, avionics
and allied system equipment.
 
Manufacture of structures, tanks, engine and other components required to support country’s missiles and space
programme.
 
Manufacture of Castings, Forgings, Rolled Rings, Brake pads and Composites.
 
5.4.2      Ten types of aircraft and one Helicopter, i.e., Advanced Light Helicopter (Dhruv) have been designed and
produced. To meet the customers requirement, HAL has also undertaken licence manufacture of various aircraft and
helicopters and have manufactured 2,234 aircraft of 13 types. Current programmes are 17 jaguar 2-seater aircraft, 20
single seater aircraft, 10 Dornier DO-228 aircraft (7 for Coast Guard and 3 for IAF), 10 Cheetah for IAF, 123 MiG-21
BIS upgrade and Limited Series/Series Production of ALH.
 
 5.5        Growth over last 10 years
 
Particulars 1992-93 2001-02 Growth
Sales (Rs. In crores) 1086 2730 151%
Sales per employee 2.8 8.7 211%
Value added per Employee (Rs. in lakhs) 1.8 5.3 194%
Profit (Rs. in crores) 59 305 417%
Manpower (Nos.) 38.700 31,652 Reduction of 
7048
Sales growth of 151% achieved over 10 years with a manpower reduction of 18.2%.
 
 
5.5.1    All the Divisions of HAL have obtained ISO 9001/9002 Certification by the International Accreditation Quality
Agencies. HAL has been exporting spares for aircraft, helicopters and engines to a number of countries such as
Malaysia, Namibia, Zimbabwe, Nepal, Mauritius, Argentina, Thailand, and Oman etc. During the financial year 2001-
02, HAL has achieved an export of Rs. 67.27 Crores. Significant achievements of HAL during 2001-02 are :-
 
First Batch of seven Advanced Light Helicopters have been delivered to the Indian Defence Services.
First Batch of six Upgraded MIG-21 BIS aircraft have been delivered to IAF.
Completion of upgradation of the first HS-748 aircraft.
The structures manufactured by the Company for aerospace programme used in Geo-Synchronous Satellite Launch
Vehicle GSLV-D1, which was successfully launched from Shriharikota Range on 18 April, 2001.
The Company declared an all-time record dividend of 40 percent for the year 2000-01.
Major awards bagged by the Executives/Employes of the Company are indicated

82nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/82ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:16:44]
      below :
 
Prime Minister’s MoU Award
SCOPE “Gold Trophy” as best PSU.
“IIIE Enterprise Excellence Award for 1999-2000.
“Indira Gandhi Sadbhavana” conferred on Shri N.R. Mohanty, Chairman.
Prime Minister’s “Sham Shree” Award conferred on Shri A.K. Vijayaraghavan of Engine Division, Bangalore.
 
5.5.2    HAL’s endeavour will be to accelerate its growth in the years to come and ensure that the requirements of the
Defence Services are fully met. HAL will continuously strive to improve the quality of the products designed,
developed, manufactured and overhauled.
 
5.6       MOU OF HAL  
 
5.6.1         In the MOU of HAL, in addition to the normal profit related financial parameters viz. Gross Margin and Net
Profit/Net Worth, efficiency parameters such as Inventory Control, Value added per Employee, Indigenisation,
Customer Satisfaction, Patenting, IT, R&D efforts have been included. The criteria of timely completion of projects and
diversification efforts have also been incorporated in the MOU. Thus an attempt has been made to measure the
performance of HAL in an objective and transparent manner so that all crucial activities of the company get reflected in
the MoU. The details of targets and achievements under major parameters in respect of HAL are at Annexure-IV and
the MOU ratings of HAL are given at Annexure-V.
 
5.6.2     HAL, which is a Miniratna PSE, has won the National Top R&D Awards viz. DSIR National Award 1998 for
R&D efforts in Industries in Mechanical and Engineering sector for ALH Design and Development. HAL has also
bagged the Top Exporters Award ,       from Engineering Export Promotion Council, Chennai for 1996, during 1998-99,
for the  fifth consecutive time. As a result of the company’s efforts, HAL was assessed as Excellent PSU under the
MOU Awards scheme. In HAL also bagged ITE Award for Excellent performing public sector enterprise award for the
year 1998-99 from the Indian Institute of Industrial Engineering. HAL has been assessed as Excellent under the MOU,
consecutively for the eight year.
 
5.7       DISCUSSIONS WITH THE MANAGEMENT OF HAL
 
5.7.1    During the course of discussions on the performance of HAL, Dr. B.B. Ramiah appreciated HAL for its
excellent performance over the past several years. HAL Chairman  Shri N.R. Mohanty was asked to spell out the vision
of the company in the future so as to enable it to withstand the pressures of changing times. Shri Mohanty informed  that
HAL was making efforts to diversify into other areas. He added that, at the moment the Indian Air force was its main
customer but HAL was now trying to enter the international market through the export route. In this context HAL has
begun making components for several international aircraft manufacturers and has also begun servicing of aircrafts.
HAL was also developing a multi-role aircraft with a seating capacity of hundred passengers and a capacity to carry 15-
20 tonnes of cargo. This multirole aircraft will enable HAL to make a significant presence in the International market.
Besides, Shri Mohanty informed that HAL has been doing sub-contract jobs from ISRO and HAL had substantial
expertise in this area. Work from ISRO has enabled HAL to generate additional revenue. Besides HAL is also trying to
involve the private sector in the development of several components on sub-contract basis with HAL acting as the
nucleus. When asked about the problems being faced by HAL, Shri Mohanty informed that Government should resort to
imports only in cases where indigenous production is not possible. Besides Government should also provide incentive
for exports so that products manufactured by HAL are competitive in the international market. In this context
Government may provide some sort of subsidy to encourage exports, as HAL would make money out of after sales
service and repair.
5.8                   OBERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
 
5.8.1    The Committee was pleased to note that HAL had been showing profits since its inception. In addition, the
Committee felt that HAL needs to make adequate efforts to expand its market base as well as its product and services
base. In this context, the Committee asked the management to outline the vision of the HAL over a 20-year period. The

82nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/82ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:16:44]
Committee recommends that HAL resort to diversifying  its market base into aviation sector of State Governments,
Agro Aviation, remote sensing etc. and also should expand to new products and services instead of present dispensation
of excessive dependence on the Indian Air Force. In this context the Committee feels that HAL should develop testing
and servicing facilities, drawings and design consultancies etc.  so as to ensure their presence in  a larger arena in the
market especially with better coordination with Ministry of Civil Aviation, State Governments, Ministry of Agriculture,
Disaster Relief Agencies etc.
 
5.8.2    The Committee also observed that having regard to the vital sector in which the unit is operating the structure of
the MOU should be more appropriately geared to this factor.  It was observed the focus on financial performance being
reiterated in the MOU should be altered to shift the focus on more important factors of national interest. Hence the
MOU should accord higher weightage to performance parameters relating R&D, contribution to defence, contribution to
Indian Space Research Programme, Disaster Management and Relief efforts etc.
 
5.8.3    This apart, the Committee felt that since the MOU is a mutually agreed document on performance parameters, a
focus shift in the contribution of Government for this type of PSU is also imperative.  The performance parameters of
the Department of Defense Production and Supply in the MOU should emphasis on more tangible factors like
facilitating more orders from non Defence areas for their products, export promotion activities for their products,
extension of use of export offices of other PSUs like Bharat Electronics etc in other countries for promotion of HAL
products and services etc. In addition it was also felt by the Committee that Government should also extend its
assistance in ensuring HAL’s participation in UN Projects, including sale of its helicopters for UN Peace Keeping
Missions, UN activities in other relief and rehabilitation programmes in war torn, disaster affected areas.  The
Government should also enable HAL in ensuring their participation in such activities of other multilateral agencies. In
addition, during a demonstration of Helicopter testing the Committee appreciated the testing competence of the HAL. 
The Committee felt that these facilities and competencies are of international standards and the government should
strive hard to enable the export of these facilities and services to other countries.
 
5.8.4    The Committee also felt that MOUs should give weightage to energy efficiency and resource efficiency efforts
as they also are to liable to reflect in the Balance Sheet of the Company under the Companies Act.
 
5.8.5    The Committee also felt that since the unit is operating in a strategic sector it is imperative that it has a sound
policy for retention and upgradation of skills of its Human Resource.  This is more than imperative for an unit like HAL
having regard to its strategic contribution to India’s defence and infrastructure sector. It is thereore felt that the
weightage for HRD should also be higher.
 
5.8.6    Also, higher weightage should be accorded in the MOU for safety parameters besides, developing fail-safe
technologies in the helicopter developmental area.
 
5.8.7    In the context, of the fact that India is importing advance jet trainers the Committee sought to know why HAL
cannot develop these advance jet trainers.  It was observed by the Committee that there is requirement of sufficient lead
time with continuous and adequate support for taking up such projects, and hence the committee felt that it was
imperative for the Government to not only extend continuous and adequate support, but also ensure a participation in the
for HAL in the defence demand and technology forecasting endeavors.
 
5.8.8    The Committee was concerned to note that several equipments, which could have been indigenously developed
with the expertise of HAL, were imported at substantial costs. The Committee recommends preference to HAL to
manufacture all such components/equipments should be given.
VI.       NUCLEAR POWER CORPORATION OF INDIA LTD.
 
            Nuclear Power Corporation of India Ltd. (NPCIL) is a public sector enterprise under the Department of Atomic
Energy (DAE), Government of India. It was registered on 17 September 1987 with the objective of operating the atomic
power stations and implementing the atomic power projects for generation of electricity in pursuance with the schemes
and programmes of the GOI under atomic energy act 1962.
 
6.1       Background Prior To Formation of NPCIL

82nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/82ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:16:44]
Prior to the formation of NPCIL, the design, construction and operation of the nuclear power plants were carried out as
a departmental activity under DAE. In 1967, Power Projects Engineering Division (PPED), a unit of DAE,  was formed
with the responsibility of design, construction and operation  of the Nuclear Power Plants. PPED was converted into
Nuclear Power Board (NPB) in the year 1984 which was again a governmental unit of DAB with increased delegation
of  powers to the unit. In September 1987, NPB was converted into NPCIL and the assets of  NPB  except the first unit
of Rajasthan Atomic Power Station (RAPS-l ) were transferred to NPCIL.
 
6.2       Authorized Share Capital
 
The authorised share capital of the company is Rs. 100,000 million, of  which Rs.63,826.70 million is paid up as on
March 31, 2002 and is fully subscribed by the Government of India.
 
6.3       Major Activities of NPCIL
 
6.3.1    The main activities of the company are design construction, commissioning and operation of nuclear power
plants. The company is operating six nuclear power stations with 14 units and is implementing, construction of four
ongoing nuclear power projects. The existing operating power stations of the Company are Tarapur Atomic Power
Station Units-l&2 (TAPS-l&2-2X160 MWe) Maharashtra, Rajasthan Atomic Power Station Unit-2 to 4 (RAPS-2-, 3&4-
lX200 + 2X220 MWe), Madras Atomic Power Station Units-1 &2 (MAPS-1&2- 2X170 MWe) Tamil Nadu, Narora
Atomic Power Station Units-l &2 ( NAPS-1&2-2X220 MWe) UP, Kakrapar Atomic Station LTnits-l&2 (IT..APS-l&2-
2X220 MWe) Gujarat and Kaiga Atomic Power station (Kaiga-l&2- 2X220 MWe),  Karnataka  RAPS-l- 100 MWe
Rajasthan is managed by  NPCIL on behalf of DAE.   The aggregate nuclear capacity  in operation in the country,
including RAPS-1, is 2720 MWe.
 
6.3.2    The projects currently under execution are 2X54O  MWe PHWRs  at Tarapur, Maharashtra (TAPP-3&4), 2X220
MWe PHWRs at   Kaiga, Karnataka,   2X220 MWe PHWRs at Rawatbhata, Rajasthan and  2X1000 MWe  VVERs  at
Kudankulam, Tamilnadu   (KK-1&2) .  The  project at Kudankulam is being set up in  co-operation with Russian
Federation.
 
6.4       Development Phase of Nuclear Power in India
 
6.4.1    The basic research in the nuclear field commenced about four decades ago in units of DAE. The initial R&D and
the experience in setting up and operations of  research reactors provided the core competence for the nuclear power
programme.  DAE, the Administrative Ministry, has  established over the years  comprehensive .capability in the entire
spectrum of nuclear fuel cycle in terms of fuel, special materials for nuclear power plants and nuclear waste
management facilities etc.
 
6.4.2    NPCIL has acquired comprehensive capability for designing, constructing, commissioning and operating nuclear
power plants. PHWRs of 220 MWe -unit size developed indigenously have reached a significant level of maturity.
Development of 540 MWe PIIWR has also been carried out indigenously and the  first  two  units are being set up at
Tarapur (TAPP-3&4). The 540 MWe unit rating of PHWR.s is also being updated to about 680 MWe with minimal
design changes and partial , boiling in the coolant channels for setting up PHWRs beyond TAPP-3&4.
 
6.4.3    The path of self- reliance has been chosen from the very beginning of the programme. Cost of generation from
nuclear power plants is comparable to contemporary coal thermal power plants located away from coal-mines. Nuclear
power is also associated with the advantage of being devoid of carbon-dioxide releases. The indigenous industries have
gained intense experience and are now in a position to take up the manufacture of critical nuclear components with high
precision.
 
With this background, nuclear power programme is now poised for rapid growth.
 
6.5       Potential of Nuclear Energy in India
 
6.5.1    With the approach of three-stage nuclear power progrmnme of DAE with pressurized heavy water reactors

82nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/82ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:16:44]
(PHWRs) using natural uranium in the first stage, fast breeder reactors (FBRs) in the second stage and reactors using
U233 in thorium-U233 cycle in the third stage, the potential for electricity generation in the long-term is significant.
India's uranium resources are modest, but thorium resources are large, and the three-stage programme as above  will
enable utilising the full energy potential of uranium by  recycling pollution in the  second stage and ultimately utilize
thorium in third stage for electricity generation. The first stage programme of PHWRs with 220 ~1Vle and 540 MWe
unit sizes is well underway. As an additionally a 2X 1000 MWe Light Water Reactor  (LWR) units have also been
approved for construction at Kudankulam, Tamil nadu  in  co-operation with the Russian  Federation.
 
6.5.2    The Indira Gandhi1Center  for Atomic Research of DAE has embarked  upon  design of 500 MWe protype  
Fast  Breeder Reactor (PFBR) .  Construction of PFBR is  planned  to commence in X Plan.  PFBR being prototype 
commercial scale fast reactor,   will be front   runner of FBR  technology.
 
6.5.3    An Advanced Heavy water Reactor (AHWR), as technology demonstrator   for large-scale  utilisation of thorium
for power production, is also planned for commencement of  construction in the X plan by BARC.
 
6.6     Safety & Environmental Protection
 
6.6.1    NPCIL accords the highest priority on Quality Assurance (QA) and safety and environmental protection at all
stages of the nuclear power programme. The Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB) which is an independent and
statutory body in terms of the Atomic Energy Act 1962, monitors, prescribes and enforces safety review at NPCIL.
Well-known design safety principles like defence-in-depth, multiple barriers, release of radioactivity and fail safe
designs are adopted in the engineering of the plants so that  releases from the plants will be well within the prescribed
limits stipulated by AERB.
 
 
During safety review at operational stage, release from the plants are monitored and regulated to be within the stipulated
limits. Environment Survey Laboratories are set up at each operating nuclear power station, which monitor a number of
samples of air, water, road and other products in the environment around the power station for radioactivity and the
reports of these laboratories are reviewed by AERB. Nuclear power is one of the environmentally clean sources for bulk
generation of electricity. It is very relevant in protection of the environment from greenhouse gases, acid rain and smog.
6.7          Human Resource Development
 
Human resource development has been given the required priority from the  early stages of nuclear power development
consistent with knowledge, expertise  and skill   required for setting up and operating the nuclear power stations. 
Specialised training units like BARC Training School and NPCIl Nuclear Training Centre and well designed
programmes like in-plant induction training, qualification of operation staff to different positions as per requirements of
AERB, on the job training and training in specific specialised in the human resource development in NPCIL.
 
6.8       Tasks before NPCIL
Tasks before NPCIL are:
Faster capacity addition of nuclear power in the country to increase  the nuclear share
To accelerate the progress on going projects.
To sustain and further improve the high capacity factors of operating  power stations
Step up renovation and plant life extension programmes for the nuclear Power station
Sustain excellence in safety performance
Move towards financing capability through internal resource generation
Obtain financial resources required to set up the projects to achieve enhanced growth rate of nuclear power.
 
            NPCIL is taking action on all fronts to complete the above tasks
 
6.9           MISSION
            To develop nuclear power technology and produce in a self-reliant manner nuclear power as a safe,
environmentally benign, economically viable source of electrical energy to meet the growing electricity needs of the
country.

82nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/82ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:16:44]
 
 6.10        OBJECTIVES
(i)         To maximize the power generation and profitability from nuclear power stations in operation with a motto of
achieving the excellence in “safety first and production next, ” In a self-reliant, safe, economical and rapid manner.
To develop personnel at all levels with a view to further improve their skills and performance consistent with the high
technology operation.
To continue and strengthen the environmental protection measures relating to nuclear power generation. NPCIL accords
the highest priority to Quality Assurance (QA), and safety and environmental protection at all stages and monitors,
prescribes and enforces safety review; long term plans of the company includes strategic plan for future growth,
introduction of benchmarks of efficiency at the national/international level and bringing in more efficiency.
To bring out modernization and technological innovation in its activities.
To explore and promote participation of Indian Industry, SEBs and PSUs nuclear power capacity addition programme
by forming Joint Sector Projects.
In addition to financial parameters other important physical parameters gross power generation and availability factor
have also been included in the MOU. As further expansion of the Company is very crucial.
Project implementation was given a significant weightage of 19 percent in the MOU.
Growing outstanding are adversely affecting the availability of the company to generate the resources for their future
expansion plans. Keeping in view this situation, the collection of current billing with the help of the Ministry was
included as one of the parameters.  Strategic Plan, Benchmarks, HRD, Environmental Protection and Public Awareness
and R&D have also been included as parameters in the MOU.
6.11     HISTORY OF MOU SYSTEM IN NPCL
 
6.11.1    The company, after its formation in September, 1987 studied the MOU system which a few Public Sector
Enterprises (PSEs) had adopted them,.  Seeing the advantages of the system for performance  improvement of the
company, NPCIL   for the first time entered into MOU with the Administrative Ministry i.e. Department of Atomic
Energy for the year 1991-92.  Since then, every year, MOU has been  signed between NPCIL and DAE.   The
performance evaluation is carried out based   on the stated commitments in the MOU.
 
6.11.2     The process of arriving at MOU is as follows:
 
(i)         Compiling comprehensive set of criteria for company’s performance evaluation.  These criteria broadly cover
the Generating Performance, profitability, Project milestones, quality assurance, Human Resource Development,
Research & Development, Environment Protection & Public Awareness, etc.  This   fulfills one of the objectives of the
industrial policy resolution of  1956 that the performance of all PSE’s should be judged by their over-all results.
 
(ii)        NPCIL assigns weightages to different criteria of the MOU based on the relative importance of the indicators
and priorities between different objectives of the company.The aspects stated above are evolved through a process of
participation by respective functional Directorates. The target values for, each parameter are fixed, based on the
commitment of executing agencies. The process of involvement is complemented by other documents like performance
budget, annual plan or capital budget and revenue budget generated by the company. After in-house deliberations and
finalisation, the details are reviewed at DAE, before the MOU is proposed for consideration of DPE. The institutional
arrangement for MOU facilitates the third party vetting by Department of Public Enterprises (DPE). The industry
specific Adhoc Task Force (ATF) of DPE vigorously examines the MOU and gives clearance for entering into
performance contract of MOU of NPCIL and DAE.
(iii)       The    performance   of the company for the   last    six   years   is   enclosed   at Annexure-VI
 
NPCIL MOU  RATINGS
YEARS                       RATINGS
GOOD
VERY GOOD
POOR**
POOR**
VERY GOOD

82nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/82ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:16:44]
EXCELLENT
VERY GOOD
VERY GOOD
0                      VERY GOOD
1                      EXCELLENT
2                      EXCELLENT
 
(iv)       ** Performance was affected due to fire incident and Turbine blade failure at NAPS-1. Subsequently inspection
and modifications of LP Turbines of similar Units at MAPS, NAPS and KAPS were also carried out. The details of the
MOU rating of a company for the last five years is at Annexure-VII.
 
6.12     DISCUSSIONS WITH THE MANAGEMENT OF NPCIL
 
6.12.1    Shri V.K. Sharma, the acting CMD of NPCIL, made a presentation on the history of the corporation since its
incorporation in 1987 till today, including its ongoing projects and thereafter, the Committee deliberated with officers of
the NPCIL and the following points emanated from the discussions.
 
6.12.2   Since 1987 additional capacity of 1760 MWE has been created through commencement of commercial
operation at NAPS-1&2, KAPS and kaiga
 
6.12.3    The present Nuclear power capacity in the country is 2720 Mwe and projection for enhancement of this
capacity is 6680 Mwe by 2008 in the light of additional capacity enhancement of 3960 Mwe through completion of
ongoing projects at TAPP, KAIga and Rapp and Kudankulam. Overall contribution of Nuclear energy in the total
energy component of the country being a meagre three percent it was informed that Nuclear energy is highly cost
intensive and it has also to be seen in the context of energy contribution growing in other traditional sector through
capacity creation. Nuclear energy generation involves higher iterative process due to high order risk to ensure reduction
of occurrence of risk or to ensure improbability of occurrence of risk.  Incidentally the Nuclear power sector in the
country has zero accident record since 1968. In addition, availability of raw material uranium of 238 category is scarce
and India has deposits of U235 only and conversion of U 235 to 238 is also a cost intensive process.
 
6.12.4    The committee also sought an assurance against occurrence of a Chernobyl type accidents.  In this context, the
Committee was reassured that Chernobyl type technology is not licensable, and the NPCIL follows an extremely
transparent policy besides, having a sound system of in built periodic safety audits and stock taking.
 
6.12.5   In addition, the NPCIL is also learning from accidents in other countries.Moreover, as a member of IAEC India
is bound by their safety and other provision of Nuclear Power use and hence accidents are near improbable.
 
6.12.6    The Committee was also informed that the capacity utilization is about 87 percent  and there is a continuous
improvement of capacity factors.
           
6.12.7   The Committee was informed that one of the reasons for the slow growth of nuclear power in our country has
been the indigenous technology development phase that the nuclear power programme had to go through. Nuclear
power plants are very complex and require millions of smaller and bigger items/components to be designed, fabricated
and assembled. The licensing of nuclear power plants involves a complex regulatory process in which all the safety
aspects are checked. The nuclear power plants have been installed in advanced countries by sharing of technology
developed by different countries and using their fabrication capabilities. On account of the restrictive trade barriers and
technology denial regime prevalent for India, all the development had to be done within the country and this took time
initially.
 
6.12.8     The Committee was also apprised that Nuclear power has no significant avenues for overseas financing. It has
to rely on Government budgetary support in combination with domestic borrowing and internal surplus. A programme
of setting up of 10,000 MWe of nuclear power capacity by 2000 was formulated. There were problems on the
availability of financial resources during the VIII Five-Year Plan. Therefore, this programme could not be implemented
as envisaged.

82nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/82ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:16:44]
 
6.12.9   The Committee was also informed the realization of dues from the SEBs has been a problems in the past. With
the acceptance of the MS Ahluwalia Committee Report by the states, the problem is likely to be under control.
However, the settlement of the part dues in terms of long maturity bonds puts a considerable pressure on the liquidity of
the company.
6.13     OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
 
6.13.1    The Committee was pleased to note that NPCIL had been performing extremely well since its inception.
 
6.13.2    The Committee also observed that having regard to the vital sector in which the unit is operating the structure
of the MOU should be more appropriately geared to this factor.  It was observed the focus on financial performance
being iterated in the MOU should be altered to shift the focus on more important factors of national interest. Hence the
MoU should accord higher weightage to performance parameters relating R&D, contribution to defense, contribution to
Indian Space Research Programme, Disaster Management and Relief efforts.
 
6.13.3    The Committee felt R&D, especially in the areas of import substitution in terms of development of new
materials as well as new process technologies, should be accorded much higher weightage in the interest of impetus to
Indian Nuclear Programmes.
 
6.13.4    This apart, the Committee felt that since the MOU is a mutually agreed document on performance parameters, a
focus shift in the contribution of Government for this type of PSE is also imperative.  The performance parameters of
the Department of Atomic Energy in the MOU should emphasis on more tangible factors like facilitating more in
enabling the company in recovering dues from SEB.
 
6.13.5  The committee also felt that MOUs should contain weightage for energy efficiency and resource efficiency
efforts as they also are to liable to reflect in the Balance Sheet of the Company under the Companies Act.
 
6.13.6    The Committee also felt that since the unit is operating in a strategic sector, it is imperative that it has a sound
policy for retention and upgradation of skills of its Human Resource.  This is more than imperative for a unit like
NPCIL having regard to its strategic contribution to India’s defence and infrastructure sector. It is therefore felt that the
weightage for HRD should also be higher.  At the same time the excellent expertise and human resource base should
also be exported in the form participation in safety audit teams constituted by IAEC, mutual inspection teams etc
 
6.13.7   Also higher weightage should be accorded in the MOU for safety parameters besides, developing fail safe
technologies and excellent safety record and also the environment of high improbabity of risk.  
 
6.13.8  Ecological and environmentally sustainable operation is also a vital area of concern for Nuclear Power. 
Weightage to this should also be accorded appropriately.
 
6.13.9  As regards introduction of systems upgradation like Extra Resource Planning etc, the Committee observed that
the NPCIL is having its own LAN systems and felt little need for a performance enhancing systems application like
ERP.  In this context, it is the considered view of the Committee that NPCIL, which is working in high tech sector,
needs to be alert to organizational decays and take remedial measures through process reengineering of its work
systems. Hence, MOU weight should also be accorded for this appropriately.
 
The Committee feels that considering the self-reliant manner in which nuclear power has been developed, Government
should provide higher financial allocation and resources for the growth of Nuclear power.
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
            The Committee was pleased to note that BEML had been showing profits since its inception. However, the
Committee was concerned to note that there has been a constant decline in the profits over the past several years. The
Committee feels that BEML has not made adequate efforts to expand its market base. The Committee recommends that

82nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/82ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:16:44]
BEML should resort to aggressive marketing and explore new areas beyond their traditional customers to expand their
market base. In this context the Committee feels that BEML should develop value added products so as to garner a
larger share of the market. The Committee is of the view that with the infrastructure sector looking up, there are
tremendous opportunities for BEML . The Committee also feels that BEML should also explore the possibilities of
providing maintenance service for high cost machines.
(4.18.1)
 
            The Committee was deeply concerned to note that BEML has not been able to get adequate work orders for its
railway coach-manufacturing unit at Bangalore. The Committee is of the opinion that BEML should approach
organizations like the Delhi metro corporation to obtain work orders, and the issue should be taken up with the Railway
authorities at the highest level.
(4.18.2)
            The Committee also observed that having regard to the vital sector in which the unit is operating the structure of
the MOU should be more appropriately geared to this factor.  It was observed the focus on financial performance, which
is being reiterated in the MOU, should be altered to shift the focus on more important factors of national interest. Hence
the MOU should accord higher weightage to performance parameters relating R&D, contribution to defense, product
development for difficult terrains like high altitude movement vehicles, movement vehicles for areas like Rann of Kutch
etc.
(4.18.3)
            This apart, the Committee felt that since the MOU is a mutually agreed document on performance parameters, a
focus shift in the contribution of Government for this type of PSE is also imperative.  The performance parameters of
the Department of Defense Production and Supply in the MOU should lay emphasis on more tangible factors like
facilitating more orders from Railways for their products, export promotion for their remote controlled armoured
vehicles, extension of use of export offices of other PSUs like Bharat Electronics etc in other countries for promotion of
BEML products etc.
(4.18.4)
 
            The committee also felt that MOUs should contain weightage for energy efficiency and resource efficiency
efforts as they also are to liable to reflect in the Balance Sheet of the Company under the Companies Act.
(4.18.5)
 
            The Committee also felt that since the unit is operating in a strategic sector it is imperative that it has a sound
policy for retention and upgradation of skills of its Human Resources.  This is more than imperative for an unit like
BEML having regard to its strategic contribution to India’s defence and infrastructure sector. It is, therefore ,felt that the
weightage for HRD should also be higher.
(4.18.6)
 
            The Committee was pleased to note that HAL had been showing profits since its inception. In addition, the
Committee felt that HAL needs to make adequate efforts to expand its market base as well as its product and services
base. In this context, the Committee asked the management to outline the vision of the HAL over a 20-year period. The
Committee recommends that HAL should resort to diversifying  its market base into aviation sector of State
Governments, Agro Aviation, remote sensing etc. and also should expand to new products and services instead of
present dispensation of excessive dependence on the Indian Air force. In this context the Committee feels that HAL
should develop testing and servicing facilities, drawings and design consultancies etc.  so as to ensure their presence in 
a larger arena in the market especially with better coordination with Ministry of Civil Aviation, State Governments,
Ministry of Agriculture, Disaster Relief Agencies etc.
(5.8.1)
 
            The Committee also observed that having regard to the vital sector in which the unit is operating the structure of
the MOU should be more appropriately geared to this factor.  It was observed the focus on financial performance being
reiterated in the MOU should be altered to shift the focus on more important factors of national interest. Hence the
MOU should accord higher weightage to performance parameters relating R&D, contribution to defence, contribution to
Indian Space Research Programme, Disaster Management and Relief efforts etc.
(5.8.2)

82nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/82ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:16:44]
            This apart, the Committee felt that since the MOU is a mutually agreed document on performance parameters, a
focus shift in the contribution of Government for this type of PSU is also imperative.  The performance parameters of
the Department of Defense Production and Supply in the MOU should emphasis on more tangible factors like
facilitating more orders from non Defence areas for their products, export promotion activities for their products,
extension of use of export offices of other PSUs like Bharat Electronics etc in other countries for promotion of HAL
products and services etc. In addition it was also felt by the Committee that Government should also extend its
assistance in ensuring HAL’s participation in UN Projects, including sale of its helicopters for UN Peace Keeping
Missions, UN activities in other relief and rehabilitation programmes in war torn, disaster affected areas.  The
Government should also enable HAL in ensuring their participation in such activities of other multilateral agencies. In
addition, during a demonstration of Helicopter testing the Committee appreciated the testing competence of the HAL. 
The Committee felt that these facilities and competencies are of international standards and the government should
strive hard to enable the export of these facilities and services to other countries.
(5.8.3)
            The Committee also felt that MOUs should give weightage to energy efficiency and resource efficiency efforts
as they also are to liable to reflect in the Balance Sheet of the Company under the Companies Act.
(5.8.4)
 
            The Committee also felt that since the unit is operating in a strategic sector it is imperative that it has a sound
policy for retention and upgradation of skills of its Human Resource.  This is more than imperative for an unit like HAL
having regard to its strategic contribution to India’s defence and infrastructure sector. It is thereore felt that the
weightage for HRD should also be higher.
(5.8.5)
 
            Also, higher weightage should be accorded in the MOU for safety parameters besides, developing fail-safe
technologies in the helicopter developmental area.
(5.8.6)
 
            In the context, of the fact that India is importing advance jet trainers the Committee sought to know why HAL
cannot develop these advance jet trainers.  It was observed by the Committee that there is requirement of sufficient lead
time with continuous and adequate support for taking up such projects, and hence the committee felt that it was
imperative for the Government to not only extend continuous and adequate support, but also ensure a participation in the
for HAL in the defence demand and technology forecasting endeavors.
(5.8.7)
 
            The Committee was concerned to note that several equipments, which could have been indigenously developed
with the expertise of HAL, were imported at substantial costs. The Committee recommends preference to HAL to
manufacture all such components/equipments should be given.
(5.8.8)
              The Committee was pleased to note that NPCIL had been performing extremely well since its inception.
(6.13.1)
 
   The Committee also observed that having regard to the vital sector in which the unit is operating the structure of the
MOU should be more appropriately geared to this factor.  It was observed the focus on financial performance being
iterated in the MOU should be altered to shift the focus on more important factors of national interest. Hence the MoU
should accord higher weightage to performance parameters relating R&D, contribution to defense, contribution to
Indian Space Research Programme, Disaster Management and Relief efforts.
(6.13.2)
 
The Committee felt R&D, especially in the areas of import substitution in terms of development of new materials as
well as new process technologies, should be accorded much higher weightage in the interest of impetus to Indian
Nuclear Programmes.
(6.13.3)
  
This apart, the Committee felt that since the MOU is a mutually agreed document on performance parameters, a focus

82nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/82ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:16:44]
shift in the contribution of Government for this type of PSE is also imperative.  The performance parameters of the
Department of Atomic Energy in the MOU should emphasis on more tangible factors like facilitating more in enabling
the company in recovering dues from SEB. 
(6.13.4)
 
The Committee also felt that MOUs should contain weightage for energy efficiency and resource efficiency efforts as
they also are to liable to reflect in the Balance Sheet of the Company under the Companies Act.
(6.13.5)
The Committee also felt that since the unit is operating in a strategic sector, it is imperative that it has a sound policy for
retention and upgradation of skills of its Human Resource.  This is more than imperative for a unit like NPCIL having
regard to its strategic contribution to India’s defence and infrastructure sector. It is therefore felt that the weightage for
HRD should also be higher.  At the same time the excellent expertise and human resource base should also be exported
in the form participation in safety audit teams constituted by IAEC, mutual inspection teams etc
(6.13.6)
            Also higher weightage should be accorded in the MOU for safety parameters besides, developing fail safe
technologies and excellent safety record and also the environment of high improbabity of risk.  
(6.13.7)
 
 Ecological and environmentally sustainable operation is also a vital area of concern for Nuclear Power.  Weightage to
this should also be accorded appropriately.
(6.13.8)
 
            As regards introduction of systems upgradation like Extra Resource Planning etc, the Committee observed that
the NPCIL is having its own LAN systems and felt little need for a performance enhancing systems application like
ERP.  In this context, it is the considered view of the Committee that NPCIL, which is working in high tech sector,
needs to be alert to organizational decays and take remedial measures through process reengineering of its work
systems. Hence, MOU weight should also be accorded for this appropriately.
(6.13.9)
 
            The Committee feels that considering the self-reliant manner in which nuclear power has been developed,
Government should provide higher financial allocation and resources for the growth of Nuclear power.
(6.13.10)
ANNEXURE-I
 
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE FOR THE LAST FIVE YEARS   (BEML)
 
(Rs. Crores)
ITEMS 1997-98 1998-99 1999-00 2000-01 2001-01
(Prov.)
Value of Production 1285.96 1244.15 1293.85 1343.17 1470.00
Value of Sales 1259.71 1212.62 1317.09 1347.40 1421.00
Profit before Tax 16.05 2.72 23.60 10.65 1421.00
Profit after Tax 10.65 0.62 14.60 6.00 12.50
Equity 36.87 36.87 36.87 36.87 5.20
Export 71.89 181.49 322.40 149.80 36.87
Dividend (percentage) 20% -Nil- 20% 10% 116.65
Dividend amount in Rs. 8.11
 8.97 4.05 *
Govt. Loan 25.25 14.40 0.00 0.00 0.00
Networth 569.22 577.52 577.74 557.00 578.39
Manpower 15349.00 15471.00 15117.00 4357.00 13838.00
Value added 538.09 506.77 517.00 547.77 528.79
Capital employed 1276.05 1282.15 1052.42 844.02 777.45

82nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/82ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:16:44]
Value added/labour 0.035 0.033 0.034 0.038 0.038
Value added/Capital
employed
0.42 0.40 0.49 0.65 0.68
Working capital 1065.10 1086.55 865.52 675.12 624.57
Authorised share capital 60 60 60 60 60
Value of Production      
-Defence 145.14 208.78 304.86 438.23 690.69
-Civil 1140.82 1035.37 988.99 904.94 779.31
Total 1285.96 1244.15 1293.85 1343.17 1470.00
Value of Sales      
Defence 145.14 208.78 304.86 438.23 690.69
-Civil 1114.57 1003.84 1012.23 909.17 730.31
Total 1259.71 1212.62 1317.09 1347.40 1421.00
 
                                                Annexure-II
BHARAT EARTH MOVERS LTD.
CRITERIA UNIT
 1996-97 1997-98 1998-99 1999-00 2000-01 2001-01
Gross Margin Rs. Cr. Target 168.07 186.00 165.22 140.00 120.36 100.00
  Actual 170.72 170.72 171.01 121.79 65.25 60.74
NP/CE % Target 4.96 4.96 2.50 2.13 N.A. N.A.
  Actual 2.46 1.26 0.21 2.24 1.26 N.A.
NP/NW % Target N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 1.49 2.31
  Actual N.A. 1.87 0.11 2.53 1.08 0.90
Turnover Rs. Cr Target 1250 1350 1412 1253 1342.80 1547.39
  Actual 1169.79 1259.71 1212.62 1317.09 1347.40 1421.39
Order Book Position Rs. Target N.A. N.A. N.A. 1750.00 1500.00 1625.00
  Actual 1729.45 1714.78 2284.34 1837.50 2602.40 3446.41
Value added per
Rupee of Wages
Days Target N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 2.00 1.82
  Actual 2.69 2.47 2.10 1.96 1.49 1.66
Inventory as No. of
days of VOP
Days Target N.A. N.A. 150.00 164.00 N.A. N.A.
  Actual 187 187.00 199.00 172.00 N.A. N.A.
Production related
Inventory
Days Target N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 110.00 100.00
  Actual 120 123.00 114.00 100.00 106.00 90.00
Sales related
Inventory
Days Target N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 69.00 50.00
  Actual 67 65.00 87.00 71.00 65.00 74.00
Note : The Actual figures for the year 2001-02 are Provisional.
                           A. stands for Not Applicable.                                                                              
 
 ANNEXURE-III
 
BHARAT EARTH MOVERS LTD.
 
MOU SCORE
 
YEAR MOU SCORE MOU RATING
1996-97 3.39 GOOD
1997-88 3.80 FAIR
1998-99 4.60 POOR
1999-2000 2.03 VERY GOOD
2000-2001 1.70 VERY GOOD

82nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/82ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:16:44]
 
            Annexure-IV
HINDUSTAN AERONAUTICS LTD.
 
CRITERIA UNIT
 1996-97 1997-98 1998-99 1999-00 2000-01 2001-01
Gross Margin Rs. Cr. Target 254.46 301.95 301.95 335.00 414.00 435.00
  Actual 300.14 334.22 362.26 463.89 404.70 459.97
NP/CE % Target 6.65 7.39 7.73 11.00 19.91 N.A.
  Actual 11.95 15.50 17.19 21.41 22.23 N.A.
Turnover  Rs. Cr Target 1500.00 1719.72 1800.00 2000.00 2440.00 2556.00
  Actual 1770.21 1869.93 2047.73 2400.88 2446.55 2730.03
Civil Sector Rs. Cr Target 88.59 103.29 115.00 125.00 135.00 187.00
  Actual 148.36 111.62 157.18 231.00 282.67 210.31
Exports Rs. Cr Target 35.00 36.00 36.00 45.00 47.00 62.00
  Actual 33.17 41.01 44.03 47.00 58.61 67.27
Spares Rs. Cr Target N.A. N.A. 110.00 140.00 204.00 310.00
  Actual N.A. N.A. 254.47 295.00 375.31 345.00
Order Booking Rs. Cr Target N.A. N.A. N.A. 330.00 500.00 565.00
  Actual N.A. N.A. N.A. 452.00 590.39 796.43
Value
added/Employee
Rs. lacs Target 2.75 3.03 3.40 3.60 4.39 5.30
  Actual 3.00 3.65 3.85 5.09 5.41 5.60
Inventory as a % of
VOP
Rs. Cr Target N.A. N.A. 44.00 44.00 47.00 48.00
  Actual N.A. N.A. 39.62 40.00 47.17 46.00
                            Note :                 The Actual figures for the year 2001-02 are Provisional.
                                                          N.A. stands for Not Applicable.
 
                                                                         ANNEXURE-V
 
 
HINDUSTAN AERONAUTICS LTD.
 
MOU SCORE
 
YEAR MOU SCORE MOU RATING
1996-97 3.39 EXCELLENT
1997-88 1.22 EXCELLENT
1998-99 1.07 EXCELLENT
1999-2000 1.03 EXCELLENT
2000-2001 1.65 VERY GOOD
 
ANNEXURE -VI
NUCLEAR POWER CORPORATION
 
S.NO. PERFORMANCE
PARAMETER
 
 1996-97 1997-98 1998-99 1999-2000 2000-01 2001-02
1. Gross Margin
(Rs.Cr.)
Target 374 476 487 500 791 1236
  Actual 536 568.11 691.78 849.81 1549.13 2227.31
2. NP/CE (%) Target 3.23 8 6.45 8.5 4.07 *
  Actual 8.41 808 11.23 11.57 6.29 *
3. Generation (MU) Target 6260 6705 7895 8300 10358 13668

82nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/82ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:16:44]
  Actual 7083 7725 8986 10358 13330 16954
4. Availability Factor
(%)
Target 69.5 63.8 71 72 78 80
  Actual 74 79 80 86 88 87.3
5. Collection of current
billing (%)
Target NA NA 85 85 85 82
  Actual 63 96 90 78 86 90
 
*This parameter has been replaced by Net Profit/Net Worth.
 
ANNEXURE-VII
NUCLEAR POWER CORPORATION
MOU SCORE
YEAR MOU SCORE MOU RATING
1996-97 1.30 EXCELLENT
1997-88 1.77 VERY GOOD
1998-99 1.55 VERY GOOD
1999-2000 1.53 VERY GOOD
2000-2001 1.30 EXCELLENT
 
MINUTES
XI
Eleventh Meeting
 
 
            The Sub-Committee for Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry) met at 4.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 8
th August, 2002 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
            1.         Dr. B. B. Ramaiah – Convenor
 
RAJYA SABHA
Shri P.K. Maheshwari
Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
LOK SABHA
 
4.         Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
5.         Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
6.         Shri Sunil Khan
Shri Manjay Lal
Dr. K. Malaisamy
Shri A. Narendra
Shri Malyala Rajaiah
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri  Tapas Das Gupta, Director
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
2.         The Sub-Committee took up for consideration its draft report on MoU System in Strategic Sector PSEs and MoU
System in Allied Sector PSEs and adopted the same with minor amendments.  The Sub-Committee decided to place the

82nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/82ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:16:44]
report before the Main Committee for consideration and adoption.
 
3.         The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M.
 