 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON INDUSTRY 
  
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
Rajya Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2025 / Chaitra, 1947 (Samvat) 
  
 
THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in 
the 324th Report of the Committee on Promotion of Electric Vehicles in the Country 
pertaining to Ministry of Heavy Industries 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 24th March, 2025) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 24th March, 2025) 
 
  
  REPORT NO. 
325 

 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2025 / Chaitra, 1947 (Samvat)                                                    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the 324th Report of the Committee on Promotion of Electric 
Vehicles in the Country pertaining to Ministry of Heavy Industries 
 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 24th March, 2025) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 24th March, 2025) 
 

 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
  PAGES 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …………………………….. ……………     (i) –(ii) 
 
2.  INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………………….    (iii) 
 
3.  ACRONYMS………………………………………………………………………..  (iv) – (vi) 
 
4.  REPORT 
 
 
  CHAPTER – I The Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Ministry……………………….................... 
 
1-12 
  CHAPTER–II The Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
does not desire to pursue further in view of  the Ministry's 
replies.……………………………........................................ 
 
 
 
13-22 
  CHAPTER–III 
 
The Recommendations/observations in respect of which the 
Committee has not accepted the replies of the Ministry........ 
 
 
23-29 
 
CHAPTER–IV The Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
the final replies of the Ministry are still awaited................... 
 
 
30-31 
 
5. * MINUTES (to be appended at the time of printing the Report)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* To be appended later. 

(i) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Constituted  w.e.f.  13th September, 2023) 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 1. Shri Tiruchi Siva         -       Chairman 
  2.  Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya     
 3. Shrimati Sulata Deo 
 4. Shri Mithlesh Kumar 
 5. Shri Sandosh Kumar P  
 6. Shri Hishey Lachungpa 
 7. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
 8. Dr. Amee Yajnik 
 9. Dr. Sikander Kumar 
 10. + Vacant 
     
   LOK SABHA 
 
 10.   Shri Hanuman Beniwal 
 11.   Ms. Mimi Chakraborty 
 12.   Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
 13.   Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse 
 14.   Dr. S. T. Hasan 
 15.   Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
 16.   Shri Ravindra Kushwaha 
 17.   Shrimati Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam   
 18.   Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
 19.   Shri Ramprit Mandal 
 20.   Shri Vincent H. Pala 
 21.   Shri Chirag Paswan 
 22.   Shri T. R. V. S. Ramesh 
 23.   Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy 
 24.   Shrimati Gomati Sai 
 25.   Shri Ravi Kishan Shukla 
 26.   Shri Sunil Soren 
 27.   Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare 
 28.   Shri Su.Thirunavukkarasar 
 29.   Shri Vijaykumar (alias) Vijay Vasanth 
 30.   *Shri Kumbakudi Sudhakaran 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Vandana Kumar, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri S.Jason, Joint Secretary 
3.    Shri Jayanta Kumar Mallick, Director 
4.   Ms. Niangkhannem Guite, Deputy Secretary 
5.   Shri. Pratap Shenoy, Under Secretary 
  
 
 Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 11.10.2022 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 13.02.2023 
+ Vacancy due to demise of Shri Hardwar Dubey on 26th June, 2023 
 
 

(ii) 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Constituted w.e.f 26th September, 2024) 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Shri Tiruchi Siva    -   Chairman 
2. Shri  Golla Baburao 
3. Shri Mahendra Bhatt 
4. Shrimati Sulata Deo 
5. Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
6. Shri Jose K. Mani 
7. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
8. Shri Sandosh Kumar P 
9. Dr. Parmar Jashvantsinh Salamsinh 
10. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Afzal Ansari 
12. Shri Hanuman Beniwal 
13. Shri Chandan Chauhan 
14. Shrimati Veena Devi 
15. Shri Arvind Dharmapuri 
16. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
17. Shri Subbarayan K. 
18. Dr. Ganapathy Rajkumar P. 
19. Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel 
20. Km. Sudha R. 
21. Shri Khalilur Rahaman 
22.  Shri Rakesh Rathor 
23. Dr. Mallu Ravi 
24. Shri Konda Vishweshwar Reddy 
25. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
26. Shri Daroga Prasad Saroj 
27. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
28. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
29. Shri E. Tukaram 
30. Shrimati Smita Uday Wagh 
31. Shri Rajabhau Parag Prakash Waje 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. K. S. Somasekhar,  Additional Secretary         
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan, Joint Secretary 
3.    Ms. Niangkhannem Guite, Deputy Secretary 
4.   Smt. Rajni Grover, Under Secretary 
 

(iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, do hereby present this 325th Action 
Taken Report on the recommendations/observations contained in the 324th Report of the 
Committee on Promotion of Electric Vehicle s in the Country pertaining to Ministry of 
Heavy Industries. 
 
2. The 324th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20 th December, 2023 and laid on the Table 
of the Lok Sabha on the same day. 
 
3. The Ministry of Heavy Industries furnished the Action Taken Notes on the 
recommendations contained in the Committee’s 324th Report of the Committee on 
Industry on 03rd April, 2024. 
 
4. The Committee in it s meeting held on  20th March, 2025 considered and  adopted 
the report. 
 
 
 
 
 
Tiruchi Siva 
New Delhi                 Chairman 
20th March, 2025                                                           Department -related Parliamentary 
Phalgun, 1947 (Samvat)                                                     Standing Committee on Industry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(iv) 
 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
2W Two- Wheeler 
3W Three-Wheeler 
4W Four Wheeler 
ABS Anti-Lock Braking Systems 
ACC Advanced Chemistry Cell 
AE Actual Expenditure 
AIS Automotive Industry Standards 
AYCL Andrew Yule and Company Ltd. 
BS Bharat Stage 
B&R Bridge & Roof Company Ltd. 
BE Budget Estimates 
BHEL Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited 
BHU Banaras Hindu University 
BMS Battery Management System 
BPCL Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited 
CAPEX Capital Expenditure 
CBS Combined Braking Systems 
CCEA Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
CCI Cement Corporation of India Ltd. 
CGD Core Group of Secretaries on Disinvestment 
CHCs Custom Hiring Centres 
CMTI Cental Manufacturing Technology Institute 
CMVR Central Motor Vehicles Rules 
CPSE  Central Public Sector Enterprises 
DA&FW Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
DEWG Digital Economy Working Group 
DFS Department of Financial Services 
DMRC Delhi Metro Rail Corporation 
DRDO Defence Research and Development Organisation 

(v) 
 
EEPC Engineering Export Promotion Council 
EESL Energy Efficiency Services Limited 
EPIL Engineering Projects (India) Limited 
EV Electric Vehicle 
FAME  
Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid &) Electric 
Vehicles 
FPO Farmer Producer Organizations 
FY Financial Year 
GSR General Statutory Rules 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
GTRI Global Trade Research Initiative 
HEC Heavy Engineering Corporation 
HMT Hindustan Machine Tools 
HSL Hindustan Salts Limited 
ICE Internal Combustion Engine 
ICEMA Indian Construction Equipment Manufacturers Association 
 
I&EBR Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources 
IFCI Industrial Finance Corporation of India 
 
IISC Indian Institute of Science 
IIT Indian Institute of Technology 
MCCIA Mahratta Chambers of Commerce, Industry and Agriculture 
MHI Ministry of Heavy Industries 
MoRTH Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways 
MSTC Metal Scrap Trade Corporation Limited 
MT Metric Tonne 
MTL  Machine Tools Limited 
MW Mega Watt 
NBFC Non Banking Financial Company 
NSTL Naval Science & Technological Laboratory 
OBD On-Board Diagnostics 
OMCs Oil Marketing Companies 
OEMs Original Equipment Manufacturer 

(vi) 
 
OPEX Operating Expenses 
PIOs Project Implementation Organizations 
PLI Production Linked Incentive 
PMA Premarket Approval 
PSEs Public Sector Enterprises 
PSU Public Sector Undertakings 
PV Photovoltaic 
QRR Quarterly Recurring Revenue 
RBI Reserve Bank of India 
R&D Research and Development 
RE Revised Estimates 
REIL Rajasthan Electronics and Instruments Limited 
RMDP Revival and Mill Development Plan 
SIAM Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers 
SHGs Self Help Groups 
SIL Scooters India Limited 
SMAM Sub-Mission on Agricultural Mechanization 
SPV Special Purpose Vehicles 
SSL Sambhar Salts Limited 
TMMA Textile Machinery Manufacturers Association 
UPSIDA Uttar Pradesh State Industrial Development Authority 
VNIT Visvesvaraya National institute of Technology 
VRS Voluntary Retirement Scheme 
 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by 
the Ministry on the recommendations contained in the Committee‟s Three Hundred 
and Twenty Four Report on  Promotion of Electrical Vehicle in the Country 
pertaining to Ministry of Heavy Industries.  
 
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries in respect of the recommendations/observations as contained in the 324th 
Report. These have been categorized as follows: 
 
Chapter-I The Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the 
Ministry. 
   
Para: 31, 32, 35, 36, 40, 41, 47, 56, 60, 65, 66 and67  
(Total  12) 
 
 
Chapter-II  The Recommendations/observations which the Committee does 
not desire to pursue further in view of the Ministry‟s replies. 
 
  Para: 84, 90, 95, 99, 101, 102, 112, 117, 118 and 121 
  (Total 10) 
 
Chapter-III The Recommendations/observations in respect of which the  
Committee has not accepted the replies of the Ministry. 
  
Para: 26, 73, 74, 77, 83, 108 and 14 
(Total 07) 
 
Chapter-IV The Recommendations/observations in respect of which the final 
replies of the Ministry are still awaited.  
 
Para: 25 
(Total 01) 
  
 
3. The details of the Action Taken Replies of the Ministry and further 
recommendations/observations of the Committee thereon wherever found 
necessary are given in the succeeding pages.  

2 
 
CHAPTER – I 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY 
 
ELECTRIC VEHICLES (EV) SUBSIDIES AND INCENTIVES 
(EV Subsidy & Fame-II Scheme) 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes that reduction of subsidy w.e.f . 1st June, 2023 in case 
of e -2Wheelers has negatively impacted their sales. It also notes that the budget 
constraint was the major reason behind the reallocation of funds and for the 
revision of targets under the FAME -II Scheme. As there is an instant nee d to 
decarbonise the transport sector, the Committee recommends that the Ministry 
should restore the subsidy on e -2Wheelers and, if required, project enhanced 
budget allocations in order to maintain the momentum and pace of electric 
vehicles penetration, so that the desired target could be achieved by 2030. 
 (Para 31) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
The subsidy on e -2Wheeler has been moderated w.e.f. 01.06.2023 in order to 
incentivize more number of e-2Ws.  It is evident from the figures placed below that 
subsidy has not impacted the claims of number of e -2W on FAME-II portal during 
the period 01.06.2023 till 29.02.2024, except for a brief period from June to 
October 2023. 
Month e-2W 
 
 Jun-23 70,721 
Jul-23 62,154 
Aug-23 48,867 
Sep-23 54,024 
Oct-23 51,210 
Nov-23 67,132 
0
10,000
20,000
30,000
40,000
50,000
60,000
70,000
80,000
90,000
100,000
May 23 Jun 23 Aug 23 Oct 23 Nov 23 Jan 24 Feb 24
No. of claims 
e-2W
e-2W

3 
 
 
Further, the total 15.50 lakh of e -2Ws are to be incentivized under the FAME -II 
scheme with a total demand incentive of Rs.5,311 crore as per revised scheme 
outlay of Rs.11,500 crore  which translates into 46% share in total scheme outlay. 
The amount has been enhanced by nearly 2.66 times upward revision from original 
demand incentive outlay of Rs.2,000 crore announced on 08.03.2019. 
PUBLIC TRANSPORT & CHARGING STATIONS 
(E-Quadricycles & Last Mile Connectivity) 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. During the deposition before the Committee, the issue of e -Quadricycle was 
discussed and the Committee was informed by a stakeholder that e -Quadricycle 
will give a big fillip to last -mile connectivity and, based on a study, CRISIL had 
indicated that India could be one of the largest manufacturers of e -Quadricycles, 
which would help in reducing two lakh tones of CO2 emissions. The Committee 
recommends tha t the Ministry should develop an ecosystem to include e -
Quadricycle in the FAME -II Scheme as the e -Quadricycle would not only help 
reduce CO2 emissions but would be an employment generation initiative for the 
youth of the country.                              
   (Para 32) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
As the FAME-II scheme is ending on 31.03.2024, suggestion is noted. 
 
PUBLIC TRANSPORT & CHARGING INFRASTRUCTURE 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. A safe, reliable and cost -effective public transport system would definitely 
have a positive impact on improving the air quality in urban areas as well as 
reducing the number of private vehicles on road. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry should allocate more funds for developing a decarbonised mass public 
transport system and also project for enhancement of the budgetary allocation for 
e-Buses under FAME Scheme so that it does not suffer due to shortage of funds.  
Dec-23 85,827 
Jan-24 89,935 
Feb-24  71228  

4 
 
 (Para 35) 
Action Taken Replies 
Ministry of Heavy Industries has been consistently supporting e -mobility in public 
transport by making regular provision for subsidy. After bringing Faster Adoption 
of electric vehicles through FAME -I for supporting e -mobility/ public transport 
another schem e in Phase -II has been implemented as FAME -II for further 
strengthening public transport by providing subsidy/incentive for e -vehicles. The 
FAME-II scheme is ending on 31.03.2024. Decarbonising mass public transport 
and allocation of funds for e -Buses deployment is also proposed under FAME -III 
scheme.  Alternate routes for promoting e -buses through Payment Security 
Mechanism (PSM)and to scale up the deployment of e-Buses for public transport is 
also under consideration in the Ministry of Heavy Industries. 
POLICIES AND NATIONAL FRAMEWORK 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee is of the opinion that frequent changes in the policies 
relating to Electric Vehicles create uncertainties in the market as well as in the EV 
Industry. This will also create doubt in the minds of people and the end users about 
the Government actions which may negatively impact the growth of the EV 
industry. The Committee recommends that the Government should strive towards 
formulation of a consistent and stable national policy on Electric Mobility so that a 
propitious environment is created fo r the EV industry in order to promote 
sustainable and clean transportation system in the country.                              
 (Para 36) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
The Ministry of Heavy Industries formulated FAME India Scheme Phase -II 
commencing from 01.04.2019, after detailed deliberation of the Auto Industry 
Association and the assessment of Phase-I of FAME India Scheme.  
Further, it is informed that necessary amend ments / modification / changes have 
been made by the Government of India in the FAME India Scheme Phase -II from 
time-to-time on the basis of inputs and suggestions received from various 
stakeholders and entities including Auto Industry.   
 
 
 

5 
 
 
PUBLIC TRANSPORT & CHARGING INFRASTRUCTURE 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee is of the view that the proposal of stakeholders hold merit 
and recommends that the Ministry of Heavy Industries in consultation with 
Industry partners should expand the scope of FAME-II or any future Scheme to 
incentivize installation of charging stations to individual investors in order to 
achieve the goal of setting up of charging stations throughout the length and 
breadth of the country as well as to eliminate road anxiety amon g potential 
customers. The Committee also recommends that Women Self Help Groups and 
Cooperative Societies may be given assistance to open and operate Charging 
Stations. They may be provided an assured return by the Government from its own 
funds. 
 (Para 40) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
Ministry of Heavy Industries has been making all -out efforts for strengthening the 
charging infrastructure. Initially the charging stations have been allotted to public 
sector entities. To ensure extensive charging infrastructure network, MHI has 
allotted 7432 charging stations to 3 OMCs namely Indian Oil Corporation Limited 
(IOCL), Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPCL) and Bharat Petroleum 
Corporation Limited (BPCL). These OMCs will setup the charging stations at their 
retail outlets spread across the length and breadth of the country. As the ecosystem 
for charging infrastructure is developing, more participants, which may include 
Women Self Help Groups and Cooperative Societies may also participate in 
operations of charging stations in future depe nding upon the requirements and 
suitability.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee recommends that keeping in view the importance of EV 
Mobility as a key ingredient of reducing the pollution level in the country, the 
Ministry of Heavy Industries shou ld play a proactive role through BHEL in 
providing EPC solutions to support electric vehicle (EV) charging stations, 
including solar based EV charging stations and, if required, more funds may be 
allocated to BHEL to facilitate popularizing the EV Mobility . Every Public Sector 
Undertaking and Government institutions may be asked to participate in the 

6 
 
installation of Charging Stations in their own premises for the use of the vehicles 
coming to their premises.               
(Para 41) 
Action Taken Replies 
The Ministry of Heavy Industries has been playing a pivotal role in facilitating in 
embracing of Electric Vehicles (EVs) across the nation through offering various 
schemes / incentives besides providing Engineering, Procurement and 
Constructions (EPC) solutions, adequate infrastructure in the form of EV charging 
stations. Under FAME-I scheme of the Ministry of Heavy Industries, Bharat Heavy 
Electricals Limited (BHEL) has installed EV (Electric Vehicle) chargers / charging 
stations at following locations in the country: 
i. 20 Nos. solar based EV charging stations have been commissioned  
 along Delhi Chandigarh Highway  
ii. 2 Nos. DC001 (15KW) Charger at UdyogBhawan, Delhi 
iii. 2 Nos. AC001 Solar Based EV charging station at Scooters India Limited 
 (SIL), Lucknow. 
Apart from FAME -I scheme, BHEL has also installed / is installing EV chargers 
against orders received as mentioned below:  
i. 60 DC001 (15kW) EV chargers at various locations for EESL 
ii. 02 Nos (01 no. DC001 & 01 No AC001) solar based EV Charging 
 stations at AIC EMPI, Chattarpur Delhi. 
iii. Currently executing an order received from BPCL for 70 Nos (50 kW) 
 EV chargers 
Further, to support faster implementation of EVs across the nation, BHEL 
capabilities may be leveraged for installing EV Charging Stations in offices/  plants 
/ townships in their own and other Central/State govt. entities under grant from the 
government, subject to feasibility. Additionally, BHEL can also extend support/ 
consultancy services to other Govt. entities with respect to feasibility study, DPR  
etc. for installing EV charging stations. 
 
POLICIES AND NATIONAL FRAMEWORK 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. Ensuring Domestic Value Addition (DVA) is an important aspect of the PLI 
Scheme for Automobile and Auto Components. The Committee recommends that 

7 
 
the Min istry should take necessary steps for achieving better scheme output, 
including policy changes and financial outlay, for enhancement of manufacturing 
capabilities for Advanced Automotive Technology products thus creating an 
ecosystem to manufacture compone nts of electric vehicles locally and promoting 
manufacturers as global Automotive Champions.     
 (Para 47) 
Action Taken Replies 
i. In automotive sector, MHI has launched production linked incentive (PLI) 
scheme for automobile &  auto components (PLI -AUTO Scheme) with outlay 
of Rs.25,938 crore.  
ii. PLI-AUTO Scheme proposes financial incentives to boost domestic 
manufacturing of advanced automotive technology (AAT) products and to attract 
investments in the automotive manufacturing va lue chain. The prime objectives of 
this scheme include overcoming cost disabilities, creating economies of scale and 
building a robust supply chain in areas of AAT products. Further, the PLI -AUTO 
scheme incentivizes only those eligible AAT products for whi ch minimum 50% 
Domestic Value Addition (DVA) is achieved and has been certified by Testing 
Agencies (TAs) of MHI. This criterion shall reduce imports, facilitate deep 
localization for AAT products and enable creation of domestic as well as global 
supply chain. 
iii. To facilitate ease of doing business (EODB) in the scheme, MHI published 
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for DVA certification on 27.04.2023, after 
extensive stakeholder consultation. Till date 3 Applicants have received DVA 
certification from testing agencies for their 22 variants of AAT products. 
iv. Many applicants represented that acquisition of technology/ localisation of 
parts/ supply chain is taking time and there is a long cycle of validation. As a 
result, applicants needed time to achieve DVA o f minimum 50% and therefore 
requested for extension of tenure of the Scheme by at least one year. Considering 
the need of the industry, MHI has issued a Gazette Notification to announce the 
extension of tenure of the Scheme by one year. Under the amended S cheme, 
incentive will be applicable for determined sales for a total of five consecutive 
financial years, starting from the financial year 2023 -24 to 2027 -28 and 
disbursement of incentive will take place in the following financial year. All other 
provisions of the scheme are kept intact including the yearly thresholds for new 
domestic Investment. 
 
 

8 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. Although the Ministry of Heavy Industries is striving hard towards Make in 
India and Atmanirbhar  Bharat with the Schemes like PLI -Auto, PLI -ACC and 
Phased Manufacturing Programme under FAME -II Scheme, the Committee is of 
the view that to make India a Global EV Hub, the Ministry should have supportive, 
transparent, and consistent government frameworks  at national, state, and local 
levels and also focus towards establishing dedicated Manufacturing Hubs and 
Industrial Parks for manufacturing of batteries, cells and Electric Vehicle auto 
components. The Committee believes that this would encourage and str engthen 
economic development of the country.                        
(Para 56)  
 Action Taken Replies 
The recommendations of the committee have been noted. 
Further, to give impetus to the faster adoption of electric mobility with a focus 
towards dedicated m anufacturing hubs, Ministry of Heavy Industries has recently 
formulated 2 (two) new schemes and notified the same as under: - 
 
S.N. Name of the scheme Notified on 
01 Electric Mobility Promotion Scheme (EMPS) 2024 13.03.2024 
02 Scheme to Promote Manufacturing of Electric Passenger 
Cars in India 
15.03.2024 
 
G 
 
GOVERNMENT POLICIES AND PUBLIC AWARNESS 
(Enhancing State-Level Support for Electric Vehicles and Public Transport) 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee notes that MoRTH  has issued various guidelines and 
advisories to States and Union Territories so as to incentivize and bring down the 
initial cost of electric vehicles. Many States have complied with these guidelines 
and included the measures in their respective EV policy  but, to increase the 
targeted penetration of electric vehicles by 2030, more needs to be done. Since 19 
States/Union Territories are only providing exemptions and rebate in road tax, the 
Committee recommends that the MoRTH should take up the issue with th e 
remaining States/Union Territories in order to bring in all the States and Union 
Territories such as Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Haryana etc. on a common platform as 
well as make efforts to slash down the road tax further and provide other possible 

9 
 
exemptions in respect of electric vehicles. MoRTH, in order to decarbonise the 
Automotive Sector, should also make electric vehicles mandatory for public 
transport in cities with high rate of air pollution.  
(Para 60) 
Action Taken Replies 
 
MoRTH has issued an advisory dated 17.07.2019 requesting States to waive of 
road tax on EVs to reduce initial cost of the vehicles.  Further, the details of the 
exemption/waiver provided in Road Tax on registration of Electric Vehicles by 
States are provided in  the Appendix -A.  As on 02.01.2024, 26 States/UTs have 
provided exemption on road tax on EVs.  
As regards the recommendation of the committee to make electric vehicles 
mandatory for public transport in cities with high rate of air pollution, in order to 
decarbonise the Automotive Sector, it is submitted that Road Transport is a State 
subject and as such, initiatives for planning and management of sustainable urban 
transport system are taken by the respective cities/states/UTs.   
Further, in this regard a sc heme “PM -eBusSewa” for augmenting city bus 
operations has been launched by MoHUA wherein e -Buses are to be deployed on 
PPP model in 169 cities and infrastructure is to be upgraded in 181 cities under 
Green Urban Mobility initiatives.  Further, a scheme for  Payment Security 
Mechanism for assisting procurement and operation of electric buses by the State 
Transport Unit (STUs) is also under formulation in MHI. 
 
PUBLIC TRANSPORT & CHARGING INFRASTRUCTURE 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee notes the effort s of the Ministry of Power towards 
augmentation of distribution network through Revamped Distribution Sector 
Scheme (RDSS). The Committee is of the view that with more penetration of 
electric vehicles, EV owners may prefer to charge their vehicles at home during 
non-solar hours which may lead to surge in electricity demand ultimately 
overloading the electrical systems. The Committee recommends that Ministry of 
Power should encourage solar hours charging of electric vehicles through 
advertisements, including regional languages, to minimize the load on electrical 
systems during non-solar hours and promote establishing charging stations/points 
at work locations/office buildings/premises with minimum parking facility to 
increase charging network as well as solar  hours charging to minimize load on 
electric system. Ministry of Power should also encourage Solarization of EV 
Charging Stations, in coordination with the Ministry of Heavy Industries, by 

10 
 
providing subsidy for installation of EV Charging Stations both und er public as 
well as private sector. 
(Para 65) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
Ministry of Power amended its Consolidated Guidelines for Charging 
Infrastructure for EVs on 27.04.2023 vide which it included provisions to 
incentivize the charging of EVs at Public charging stations during the solar hour 
and discourage it in the non-solar hour. Details of these provisions are as follows:  
i. Cost of electricity supply by an Electricity Distribution Company 
(DISCOM) to a public electric vehicle charging station shall be 0.8 times of 
Average Cost of Supply (ACoS) during solar hours and 1.2 times Average Cost of 
Supply (ACoS) during non-solar hours. Solar hours mean 9:00 AM to 4:00 PM and 
non-solar hour mean the remaining period of the day. 
ii. Ceiling limits of service charges being levied by public electric vehicle 
charge point operators on  the EV customers to recover the cost of servicing the 
capital investments (excluding GST) made by it in setting up of public charging 
station has been specified as Rs.2.50 per unit and Rs.3.50 per unit of electricity 
used for slow AC charging of EVs at pu blic charging stations during the solar 
hours (9 AM to 4 PM) and non -solar hours (for remaining part of the day) 
respectively. Additionally, a ceiling limit of Rs.10.0 per unit and Rs.12.0 per unit 
of electricity used has also been specified for DC Fast ch arging of electric vehicles 
at public charging stations during the solar and non-solar hours respectively. 
Further, with the objective of accelerating use of renewable energy adoption, 
ensuring access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and green energy, “Green 
Energy Open Access Rules 2022” have been notified with Open Access 
Transaction limit reduced from 1 MW to 100 kW and appropriate provisions for 
cross-subsidy surcharge, additional surcharge, which will incentivize the common 
consumers to get Green P ower at reasonable rates. This is expected to encourage 
Public charge point operators to avail Green Energy through open access from 
Grid for charging of EVs. 
In addition to this, Ministry of Power notified the Electricity (Rights of 
Consumers) Amendment Rules, 2023 on 14.06.2023 wherein a clause on Time -of-
Day Tariff (TOD) has been included with a provision for promoting power 
consumption during solar hours. The clause is as re-produced below: 

11 
 
"(8A) Time of Day Tariff. - The Time-of-Day tariff for Commercial and Industrial 
consumers having maximum demand more than ten Kilowatt shall be made 
effective from a date not later than 01.04.2024 and for other consumers except 
agricultural consumers, the Time of Day tariff shall be made effective not later 
than 01.04.2025 and a Time of Day tariff shall be made effective immediately after 
installation of smart meters, for the consumers with smart meters: 
Provided that, the Time -of-Day Tariff specified by the State Commission for 
Commercial and Industrial consumers dur ing peak period of the day shall not be 
less than 1.20 times the normal tariff and for other consumers, it shall not be less 
than 1.10 times the normal tariff: 
Provided further that, tariff for solar hours of the day, specified by the State 
Commission shal l be atleast twenty percent less than the normal tariff for that 
category of consumers: 
Provided also that the Time -of-Day Tariff shall be applicable on energy charge 
component of the normal tariff: 
Provided also that the duration of peak hours shall not b e more than solar hours as 
notified by the State Commission or State Load Despatch Centre. 
Explanation: - For the purposes of this rule, the expression “solar hours” means the 
duration of eight hours in a day as specified by the State Commission.” 
PUBLIC AWARENESS AND PROMOTION OF EV 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Power should popularize 
such Apps and recommends that the scope of the EV Yatra App should be enlarged 
to help even the potential electric vehicle buy ers to know about the cost of the  
vehicle, cost of battery, insurance and comparison between EV and ICE vehicles 
as a single stop solution for all issues related to electric vehicles. 
(Para 66) 
Action Taken Replies 
As per information received from the Mini stry of Power (MoP),“EV Yatra” web -
portal & Mobile App was launched on 14.12.2022 with the objective of creating 
awareness among the EV users and masses at large to promote e -mobility in the 
country. The web -portal has been developed to evolve as a Nationa l online 
database of operational public EV charging stations, in the country wherein EV 
users can check availability of the nearest EV chargers compliant with their 
electric vehicles for charging. As per information received from Bureau of Energy 

12 
 
Efficiency (BEE), in addition to this, features and information like details about 
Central Government and State Government initiatives, EV charging standards, 
tools that help potential EV buyer to choose between different models of electric 
vehicles, compare total cost of ownership of electric vehicles and ICE vehicles and 
make informed decision before switching to electric vehicle have also been 
provided on this portal. BEE is also using social media to promote use of “EV 
Yatra” portal. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
12. The Committee appreciates such a move of the Ministry of Power and 
recommends that the benefits of the aforesaid Portal and Guidelines should be 
given wide publicity vigorously in all prominent languages through various modes 
of media, including social media.  
(Para 67) 
Action Taken Replies 
As per information received from the Ministry of Power (MoP), the EV Yatra 
Portal has been launched by BEE which provides information about various 
outreach and promotional activities carried out by BEE under “Go Electri c” 
Campaign. The “Go Electric Campaign” is dedicated to create awareness on the 
benefits of EVs and EV charging infrastructure in India. The campaign is being 
implemented in coordination with State Designated Agencies (SDAs) and SNAs 
and under this, States  have conducted 180 webinars, 110 roadshows and several 
other awareness activities such as airing of road jingles, poster/leaflets distribution, 
creating awareness through social media platforms. Social media is also being used 
to promote use of „EV Yatra‟ Portal. 
The aforementioned portal for monitoring the requests for grant of electricity 
connections by DISCOMs to PCS operators is incorporated into the “EV Yatra” 
web Portal and can be accessed by using the “Login” provision available on the 
“EV Yatra” Portal. Provision has been made in the “Login” page for Charge Point 
Operators to submit grant of connection request with any DISCOM. A secured 
access into this portal has been provided to all the DISCOMs through the home 
page of “EV Yatra” Portal. PCS opera tors can upload request for grant of 
electricity connection with any DISCOM in this portal status of request can then be 
monitored by the respective DISCOMs, Bureau of Energy Efficiency, State Nodal 
Agencies and Charge Point Operators. Ministry noted the r ecommendations for 
giving wide publicity of the above portal and the charging guidelines issued by 
MoP. 

13 
 
CHAPTER–II 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE FURTHER IN VIEW OF THE 
MINISTRY‟S REPLIES 
 
ELECTRIC VEHICLE (EV) SUBSIDIES AND INCENTIVES 
(Extension of Section 80EEB of the Income Tax Act) 
Recommendation/Observation 
13. Section 80EEB of the Income Tax Act 1961 allows an individual to claim tax 
savings of up to Rs.1.5 lakh on interest paid on a loan made specifically  to 
purchase an electric vehicle. Section 80EEB specifically states that the deduction 
benefits in case of purchase of electric vehicles are available only if the loan is 
approved by the Financial Institutions during the period 1 st January 2019 to 31st 
March, 2023. The Committee is of the view that pollution is still a major concern 
and therefore, there is a need to work towards Green Grow. In order to facilitate 
faster adoption of electric vehicles, the Committee recommends that the provision 
under Section 80EEB may be considered for extension at least up to 31st March, 
2025.  
(Para 84) 
Action Taken Replies 
As per the information received from Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance, 
Section 80EEB of the Income Tax Act 1961 allows an individual to claim tax 
savings of up to Rs.1.5 lakh on interest paid on a loan made specifically to 
purchase an electric vehicle. Section 80EEB specifically states that the deduction 
benefits in case of purchase of electric vehicles are available only if the loan is 
approved by the Financial Institutions during the period 01.01.2019 to 31.03.2023. 
The end date for taking loan for the purpose of purchasing an electric vehicle for 
claiming additional tax deduction of Rs.1.5 Lakh on the interest paid for such loan 
under Section 80EEB of the Act has not been extended beyond 31.03.2023, in 
view of the policy of the Govt. to move away from exemptions and deductions. 
Furthermore, due to the same reason, there is no proposal to make the same/similar 
clause/exemption available under the new tax regime. This is in line with the stated 
policy of the Government to phase out exemptions and deductions. 
 
 
 

14 
 
ENVIRONMENT & SUSTAINIBILITY 
(Disposal & Recycling of Lithium-Ion Batteries) 
Recommendation/Observation 
14. The Committee is of the view that proper disposal and recycling of Lithium -ion 
Batteries (LIBs) are crucial to minimize the threat they pose to the environment as 
well as to the public health and therefore, there is a need for advanced battery 
recycling te chnologies and increased awareness of the importance of proper 
disposal of e -wastes. The Committee recommends that initiatives should be taken 
to encourage advanced R&D efforts for development of sustainable e -waste 
recycling technologies and to develop So dium-ion as an alternative to Lithium -ion 
in battery manufacturing in coordination with the OEMs and Channel Partners for 
a more sustainable future. Besides, training modules should be designed for proper 
training and skilling of recyclers and labourers en gaged in the business for 
effective management and disposal of LIBs and e-wastes.            
(Para 90) 
Action Taken Replies 
As per information received from Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change (MoEFCC): 
To address the safe disposal of batteries including batteries generated from Electric 
Vehicles in environmentally sound manner, Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change (MoEF&CC) has notified Battery Waste Management Rules, 
2022, as amended from time to time. Extended Producer Respon sibility (EPR) 
targets have been prescribed for Producers under the rules for collection and 
recycling or refurbishment of waste batteries.  
Under the Battery Waste Management Rules, 2022, as amended, the Extended 
Producer Responsibility certificate for recycler or for refurbisher shall be generated 
based on the weight of waste Battery processed or refurbished, as the case may be, 
and weight of Battery material produced as per guidelines of the Central Pollution 
Control Board and the Central Pollution Contr ol Board shall ensure that every 
certificate is issued based on the waste Battery processed or refurbished. 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) has established 
Centre of Excellence on E -waste Management at Centre for Materials for 
Electronics Technology (C -MET) Hyderabad, with the basic objective to create 
physical infrastructure and cost-effective recycling technologies to manage India‟s 
e-waste and necessary processing equipment for the same are developed by the 
Centre at pilot plant scale. The developed technology envisages selective recovery 

15 
 
of Lithium (Li), Cobalt (Co), Manganese (Mn) and Nickel (Ni) values from 
assorted types of discarded lithium -ion batteries (LIBs). The technology has been 
transferred to 15 industries, so far, on non -exclusive basis for establishing 
recycling facilities on pan India basis. The major areas of R&D activities under the 
centre include:  
Recovery of valuable metal contents from discarded lithium -ion batteries (LIBs); 
Extraction of rare earth elements (REE) from spent permanent magnets;  
Recycling of spent Printed Circuit Boards (PCBs) for effective recovery of 
precious metals such as gold, silver, palladium, copper etc., and  
Recovery of valuable materials from End of Life (EoL) Silicon Solar cells.  
Further, to promote state-of-art recycling facility in the country, MeitY has notified 
a subsidy Scheme for Promotion of Manufacturing of Electronic Components and 
Semiconductors (SPECS) vide Gazette Notification No. dated 01.04.2020. The 
scheme provides f inancial incentive of 25% on capital expenditure for e -waste 
recycling facility for extraction of precious metals from identified electronic 
components, including PCBs (both bare and populated), Li -ion batteries, spent 
magnets, solar PV panels, catalytic c onverters and any other components from 
electronic waste.  
MoEF&CC has notified E -Waste (Management) Rules, 2022 vide G.S.R. 801(E). 
dated 02.11.2022, wherein the producers and recyclers shall be responsible for 
creating awareness through media, publicatio ns, advertisements, posters or by any 
other means of communication. Under the rules, CPCB shall perform the duty to 
conduct awareness programmes on e -waste management, Resource Efficiency / 
Circular Economy label, legislation to make consumers responsible towards 
product usage and safe disposal.  
Skill Council for Green Jobs (SCGJ) has been identified as one of Sector Skill 
Councils (SSCs) under Skill India Mission by Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship (MSDE) to cater to qualifications and c ontent in skilling in the 
domain of renewable energy, sustainable development, circular economy, and 
other environmental issues. A total of around 50 qualifications across various sub -
domains, of renewable energy, conservation of materials, waste managemen t 
aiming towards circular economy along with their courseware and training content 
have been placed on the National Qualification Register (NQR).  
Sector Skill Councils (SSCs) and District Skill Committees (DSCs) have been 
engaged in determining the demand  of new age courses including those in the  

16 
 
circular economy at the district level to enable availability of training infrastructure 
(institutions, courses, trainers, etc.) for delivery of such skilling. 
  
RENEWABLE ENERGY FOR  EV CHARGING 
Recommendation/Observation 
15. The Committee notes the efforts made by the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy for harnessing of renewable sources of energy such as wind 
and solar energy to supplement the generation of electricity. It is of the considered 
view that a pragmatic and earnest focus on generating renewable and non -fossil 
energy will go a long way in meeting the electricity demands of the society. 
Moreover, players in the automotive sector are moving the needle on renewable 
energy transition by leve raging cutting-edge auto electrification technologies. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should make all out efforts to tap the 
maximum energy that can be harnessed from such renewable energy so urces to 
supplement the current electricity demand arising from households and industries, 
including EV Charging Stations, to support the Electric Mobility in the country.  
EV-Ready India Dashboard should also be given wide publicity, especially in 
regional languages, to encourage electric vehicles as a cleaner and more efficient 
alternative to ICE vehicles. 
(Para 95) 
Action Taken Replies 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) is the Nodal Ministry for 
promotion of renewable energy (RE) including wind, solar, small hydro, 
bioenergy, etc., and new technologies like ocean energy, geo -thermal energy, 
battery energy storage system etc. in the country. As per the information received 
from MNRE, as on 31.12.2023, the installed capacities of non-fossil fuel sources in 
the country are given below: 
Sector  Installed capacity (GW) 
Solar Power  73.31 
Wind Power 44.73 
Bio Energy  10.84 
Small Hydro 4.98 
Large Hydro  46.88 

17 
 
Nuclear (upto 30.11.2023) 7.48 
Total  188.22 
 
MNRE has shared the EV Ready India Dashboard (www.evreadyindia.org) with 
all the State Nodal Agencies (SNAs), working in the area of Renewable Energy for 
wider publicity to encourage electric vehicles as a cleaner and more efficient 
alternative to ICE vehicles. 
 
PUBLIC AWARENESS & PROMOTION OF EV 
Recommendation/Observation 
16. The Committee notes the initiatives undertaken by NITI Aayog such as e -
AMRIT Portal and Shoonya  Campaign and hopes that launching comprehensive 
nationwide awareness campaigns to educate the general public about the 
environmental and financial advantages of electric vehicles would help dispel the 
misconceptions and increase acceptance of the electric  vehicles among the 
populace. The Committee is of the view that help of NGOs, social media and 
popular celebrities may also be considered for creating awareness and 
popularising electric vehicles (EVs).  Further, the Ministry of Heavy Industries, in 
coordination with the NITI Aayog, should take initiatives to encourage the 
Governments of States/UTs to develop their respective EV Portals, in line with the 
e-AMRIT Portal, to generate public awareness regarding the advantages of 
electric vehicles.        
(Para 99) 
Action Taken Replies 
Noted. MHI and NITI Aayogare completely aligned to the idea that there is a need 
for National Campaign to generate/awareness regarding the advantages of EV that 
will encourage the adoption and proliferation of Electric Vehicles. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
17. The Committee is of the view that the States are drivers of electric mobility 
movement in the country and they need to be equipped with efficient tools and 
policies to make electric vehicle revolution a success and contribute tow ards net 
zero emission. The Committee recommends that a comparative analysis of the 
notified EV policies of States/UTs should be conducted and based on the analysis 

18 
 
outcome, a comprehensive stable EV policy may be adopted to address the 
misconceptions rega rding electric vehicles among the people and to boost EV 
revolution in the country. Further, States/UTs, which are yet to notify their EV 
Policy, should be provided expert guidance and scientific assistance by NITI 
Aayog and other related organisations in formulation of their EV policy. 
 (Para 101) 
Action Taken Replies 
NITI Aayog is already engaging with States for formulating, amending and 
improving upon the State EV Policies. 
 
ENVIRONMENT & SUSTAINABILITY : DECARBONISING THE 
TRANSPORT SECTOR 
Recommendation/Observation 
18. The Committee notes the efforts made by some of the State/UT Governments 
in decarbonising their respective bus fleet and is of the view that, along with buses, 
the logistics sector also needs to be decarbonised as it is a major contributor to air 
pollution. Therefore, in order to decarbonise the Transport Sector, efforts should 
be made to set a deadline for making Transport Sector in the country mandatorily 
electric.  
(Para 102) 
Action Taken Replies 
NITI Aayog is specifically collaborating through E -Fast platform on logistics 
sector decarbonization. 
 
MANUFACTURING & INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT (Li- EXTRACTION) 
Recommendation/Observation 
19. Lithium is very critical for the development of EV industry. Consequentl y, 
rise in demand for raw materials for batteries is expected with the progress of PLI-
ACC scheme. Over two-third of World’s known lithium reserves are in the Lithium 
Triangle of Argentina, Bolivia and Chile. With the recent findings of reserves of 
Lithium in Jammu & Kashmir and Rajasthan, India could also become a game 
changer in the EV industry by boosting its domestic battery manufacturing 
industry. The Committee recommends that the Government should take initiatives 
such as framing of rules and guidelin es to accelerate the process of lithium 

19 
 
extraction so that India become Atmanirbhar in the field of Lithium -ion Battery 
manufacturing to facilitate transition to Electric Mobility. 
(Para 112) 
Action Taken Replies 
Ministry of Mines has stated that in order to accelerate the process of lithium 
extraction, the following reforms have been implemented: 
i. The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 [MMDR 
Act, 1957] was amended through the MMDR Amendment Act, 2023 with effect 
from 17.08.2023. 
ii. Through the said amendment, Lithium -bearing minerals have been omitted 
from the list of atomic minerals specified in Part -B of the First Schedule to the 
MMDR Act. Consequent to removal of these minerals from the list of atomic 
minerals, mineral concessions  regarding these minerals can be granted to private 
sector companies through auction as being followed for other major minerals. 
iii. Further, the Central Government has been empowered to exclusively auction 
mining lease and composite licence for 24 critical minerals listed in the new Part-D 
of the First Schedule to the said Act which includes the mineral Lithium. 
iv. The objective of the said amendment is to increase exploration and mining of 
critical minerals including Lithium and ensure self -sufficiency in supply of critical 
minerals which are essential for the advancement of many sectors, including high - 
tech electronics, telecommunications, transport and defence. They are also vital to 
power the transition to a low -emission economy, and the renewable technologie s 
that will be required to meet the „Net Zero‟ commitment of India by 2070. 
v. The auction of critical and strategic minerals brings several key benefits, 
including bolstering domestic production, reducing import dependency, promoting 
sustainable resource man agement, attracting investments in the mining sector and 
the development of key industries crucial for India's industrial and technological 
advancement. This is a step towards creating a reliable supply chain of these 
mineral and making an „Atma  Nirbhar Bharat‟ and contribute towards increased 
economic growth. 
vi. The Central Government has launched the first tranche of e -auction of 20 
mineral blocks of critical and strategic minerals on 29.11.2023 which includes two 
blocks of Lithium and associated minerals for grant of composite licence which on 
completion of G2 level of exploration followed by production aims to ensure 
steady supply of these minerals, thus reducing our reliance on imports and ensuring 
a more secure and resilient supply chain. 

20 
 
vii. Besides auction of critical minerals by the Central Government, in order to 
further boost exploration of critical and deep -seated minerals, a new mineral 
concession namely, exploration licence has been introduced for 29 critical and 
deep-seated minerals. Critical and d eep-seated minerals such as Cobalt, Lithium, 
Nickel, Gold, Silver, and Copper are difficult to explore and mine as compared to 
surfacial or bulk minerals. The country is mostly dependent on imports of these 
minerals. The exploration licence granted through auction shall permit the licencee 
to undertake reconnaissance and prospecting operations for critical and deep-seated 
minerals mentioned in the newly inserted Seventh Schedule to the MMDR Act. 
viii. Exploration license aims to create an enabling mechanism where in the Junior 
Mining Companies will bring in expertise from across the world in acquisition, 
processing and interpretation of exploration data and leverage the risk -taking 
ability in discovery of deep -seated mineral deposits through adoption of expertise 
and latest technologies. 
ix. KABIL, a Joint venture between 3 central PSE of Ministry of Mines has 
signed a Moll with CAMYEN, Govt. Company in Catamarca province of 
Argentina on 29.12.2020 to explore sourcing of lithium and other mineral assets in 
Argentina. Subsequently, KABIL has entered into an agreement with CAMYEN 
on 15.01.2024 to start its first ever Exploration and Development project for 
Lithium exploration followed by exploitation of 5 lithium blocks covering an area 
of 15000 ha in Catamarca province of  Argentina. All the above measures are 
aimed to ensure that India will become Atma  Nirbhar in the field of Lithium -ion 
battery manufacturing to facilitate transition to Electric mobility. 
 
PUBLIC AWARENESS & PROMOTION OF EV 
Recommendation/Observation 
20. For the promotion and penetration of Electric Vehicles, creating awareness 
regarding the environmental and economic benefits of adoption/migration to 
Electric Vehicles among the people is necessary. It's equally important to convey 
the initiatives taken by  the Central & State governments to promote e -mobility in 
the country. The Committee recommends that awareness campaigns, events, etc. at 
the local level in coordination with urban local bodies/municipalities, etc. should 
be organised in the regional langu ages in the States to promote Electric Vehicles 
and their wide acceptance by general public. Print, Audio Video, Radio, and 
Social Media modes should also be utilized to enhance the outreach.                                     
 (Para 117) 

21 
 
 
 
Action Taken Replies 
NITI Aayog's  Shoonya campaign is already a successful template for outreach 
enhancement aimed at swift EV adoption by multiple stakeholders. 
 
EV PENETRATION & GIG ECONOMY 
Recommendation/Observation 
21. According to a report of NITI Aayog, Indian Gig force is expected to rise to 
23.5 million by 2029 -30, from the current workforce of 7.7 million. Most of the 
delivery start -ups especially in food & grocery delivery employ gig force on a 
large scale, which c ould be a potential driving agent for increasing the Electric 
Vehicles penetration in the country, particularly in 2 -Wheeler segment. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should take steps in coordination with 
the stakeholders to make the vehicle fle et of 2 -Wheelers in these start -
ups/companies mandatorily to be Electric Vehicles in order to achieve the 30 per 
cent target of EV penetration by the year 2030.  
(Para 118) 
Action Taken Replies 
Noted. NITI Aayog's Shoonya campaign also focuses on Gig Industry and delivery 
ecosystem. 
 
ELECTRIC VEHICLE (EV) SUBSIDIES & FAME-II SCHEME 
Recommendation/Observation 
21. The Committee observes that in phase -2 of FAME Scheme, only 9 major 
cities having population of over 4 million were targeted in aggregation model for 
e-buses and very few States have earlier participated in operational cost model. 
With the announcement of PM e -Bus Sewa, the Committee is hopeful that the 
Scheme will help transform urban mobility landscape in smaller cities also. The 
Committee recommends that the concerned Ministry  (ies) should strive for the 
early implementation of the scheme so that the ben efits of the scheme will 
proliferate in an efficient manner and timely.         
  (Para 121) 

22 
 
Action Taken Replies 
NITI Aayog has noted.  PM e-Bus Sewa Scheme covers deployment of 10,000 e -
buses in 169 Indian cities. CESL is aggregating the demand for this scheme and 
consent on Payment Security Mechanism (PSM) is mandatory for states to avail 
benefits of this scheme. In line with this, MHI is working on Payment Security 
Mechanism (PSM) scheme to address monthly payment defaults by Public 
Transport Authorities (PTAs) to Original Equipment Manufacturers 
(OEMs)/operators. For this purpose, MHI has carried out multiple stakeholder 
consultations involving concerned ministries/departments, PTAs, private operators, 
financing institution, fund donors etc. Based on this, the proposal was prepared. 
The proposal for seeking approval as per rules is under process. 
 

23 
 
CHAPTER–III 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
THE COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
ELECTRIC VEHICLE SUBSIDY & FAME SCHEME 
Recommendation/Observation 
22. The Committee notes that initially the Government had the target of 
supporting 55,000 e -4 Wheelers under the FAME II Scheme, but the revised 
targets have reduced the number of vehicles to the committed funds only i.e. for 
11,000 e -4 Wheelers. Though 2 Whee lers is a dominant category, share of 4 
Wheelers is also significant in the automotive sector of the country. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should increase the number of electric vehicles to be 
supported in the 4 Wheelers category and also inc lude private e-4 Wheelers in the 
domain of FAME II Scheme with a cap based on the cost and battery capacity of 
the vehicle.  
(Para 26) 
Action Taken Replies 
With greater emphasis on providing affordable and environmentally friendly public 
transportation options for the masses, the scheme is applicable mainly to vehicles 
used for public transport or those registered for commercial purposes in 3W, 4W 
and Bus segm ents. However, privately owned registered 2Ws are covered under 
the scheme as a mass segment.  
Therefore, the number of supported EVs under the e -4W segment remained lower. 
The details of supported EVs under FAME India Scheme Phase -II as on 
15.03.2024 are as under: 
Vehicle type Total No. of Vehicles supported under FAME-II 
2-wheeler 13,07,047 
3-wheeler 1,50,934 
4-wheeler 19,028 
Total 14,77,009 
                Source: https://fame2.heavyindustries.gov.in/dashboard.aspx 
 

24 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry should 
increase the number of electric vehicles to be supported in the 4 Wheelers and 
also include private e-4 wheelers in FAME-II or yet to be approved FAME III 
Scheme. Further, the Committee feels that emphasis should be given to  
publicity of the long -term benefits of e -vehicles to impact a wide outreach 
while popularizing the schemes of the Government to pr omote transition to 
electric mobility in the country. 
 
PUBLIC TRANSPORT & CHARGING INFRASTRUCTURE 
Recommendation/Observation 
23. Electric Vehicles have range constraints as its range depends on battery 
capacity and therefore, the vehicles need charging at frequent intervals, whereas 
ICE Vehicles have a fuel tank which gives them range advantage vis -a-vis electric 
vehicles. The Commi ttee recommends that Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
should also consider including the sub -urban and rural areas under the target 
areas for establishing Charging Stations, as installations of charging stations only 
at retail outlets of Oil Marketing C ompanies would not be adequate due to range 
anxiety in case of electric vehicles. Further, in view of the targeted Electric 
Charging Stations of 22,000, the sanctioned Charging Stations of 7,432 for 
installation under FAME -II is way below the target and, t herefore the Committee 
recommends that sincere efforts should be made for setting up of more Charging 
Stations to address the issue of range anxiety and boost the EV penetration in the 
automotive sector in the country. 
 (Para 73) 
Action Taken Replies 
As pe r the information received from Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
(MoPNG), Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) have targeted to set up 22,000 
Charging stations by December, 2024.  Ministry of Heavy Industries under FAME-
II Subsidy scheme have also granted a subsidy of Rs.800 crore to OMCs for setting 
up 7432 fast EV chargers which is a part of overall target of setting up 22000 EV 
chargers.  Rest of the charging stations i.e. 14,568 will be set up by OMCs with 
their own capex without any subsidy.  As on 01.01. 2024, OMCs have provided 
10,771 EV charging Stations (IOCL – 7394, BPCL-975 and HPCL-2402).  Further, 
as per advice from the committee, OMCs will also set up charging stations in sub -
urban and rural areas within overall target of 22,000 charging stations. 

25 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Heavy Industries should 
explore the possibility of setting up more charging stat ions in suburban and 
rural areas beyond the overall target of 22000 charging station to address the 
issue of Range Anxiety of EV's in the country  for which, a relook in the 
budgetary projection may be made in a holistic manner. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
24. The Committee was informed by the Ministry of Heavy Industries that 520 
Charging Stations had been sanctioned under the Phase -I of FAME India Scheme. 
Further, 2,877 charging stations in 68 cities across 25 States/UTs and 1576 
charging stations across 9 Expressways and 16 Highways have been sanctioned 
under FAME-II India Scheme. The Committee recommends that other Ministries 
should be roped in along with charging infrastructure operators to put in place a 
comprehensive plan for establishment of a Charging Network in the country to 
address the issue of road anxiety of electric vehicle owners.       
  (Para 74) 
Action Taken Replies 
Heavy Industries has consulted and roped in the Ministry of Power (MoP), 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways (MoRTH) and Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas (MoPNG) for comprehensive plan for establishment of a Chargi ng 
Network in the country. 
Ministry of Heavy Industries has sanctioned Rs.800 crore  as capital subsidy to the 
three Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) namely Indian Oil Corporation Limited 
(IOCL), Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPCL) and Bharat Petroleum 
Corporation Limited (BPCL) of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
(MoPNG) for establishment of 7,432 electric vehicle public charging stations. 
These OMCs will setup the charging stations at their retail outlets spread across the 
length and breadth of the country. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
The Committee while apprecia ting the role of the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries, feel that there is a  pressing need to put in place a comprehensive 
plan for establishment of charging network in the country and reiterates it 
recommendation for putting in place such a comprehensive plan to address 
the issue of road anxiety of electric vehicle owners. 

26 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
25. The Committee is of the view that one of the biggest barriers to the 
widespread adoption of Electric Vehicles remains the lack of charging 
infrastructure and the overall time required to charge such batteries. With a 
Battery Swapping System, EV owners will save on the high cost of buying a new set 
of battery at periodic intervals as they can simply replace the exhausted batteries 
for fully charged ones at Battery Swapping Stations. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry of Heavy Industries should conduc t a study regarding the 
feasibility of battery standardisation and formulate a stable Battery Swapping 
Policy with the highest levels of safety standards that can infuse confidence in 
consumer’s decision making thereby boosting demand whilst inducing 
infrastructure build -out by swapping operators, which has a huge potential to 
invite FDI into the battery swapping network creation in the country.  
(Para 77) 
Action Taken Replies 
As per the information received from NITI Aayog, it is informed that Battery 
swapping is an alternative to charging the Electric Vehicle which involves 
exchanging discharged batteries for charged ones. Battery swapping is popularly 
used for smaller vehicles such as 2 and 3 wheelers which have smaller batteries. 
Battery Swapping is already operational in India and more new swapping stations 
are coming up every year in the country. While stakeholder discussions with a 
wide spectrum of stakeholders representing Battery Swapping Operators, Battery 
Manufacturers, Vehicle OEMs, Financial Institutions, CSOs, Think Tanks and 
other experts have been held, it may be noted that Electric Vehicles' battery 
ecosystem is a complex domain involving variety of technologies which are still 
evolving.  It must also be noted that India's present Battery Swapping practice is as 
per global best practices. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
The Committee while appreciating that the present Battery Swapping practice 
in India is as per global best practices, reiterates it s recommendation that in 
near future Ba ttery swapping P olicy s hould be conceptualized and 
implemented to ensure consumer confidence in Electric Vehicles. 
 
 

27 
 
MANUFACTURING AND INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT: LI- BATTERIES 
Recommendation/Observation 
26. The Committee is of the view that one of the major challenges to make 
electric vehicles more affordable and economical to operate is their high 
ownership cost vis -a-vis ICE vehicles, as  the electric vehicles include a battery 
pack that forms about 40 -45 per cent of their ownership cost. Since the Lithium -
ions Batteries (LIBs) for electric vehicles has a greater durability with relatively 
high energy and power density, the Committee recommends that Government 
should explore the possibility of shrinking further the GST on Lithium-ion batteries 
to bring down the ownership cost of electric vehicles. Further, there is a need to 
address the issue of GST for manufacturers as well in order to reduce the high cost 
of electric vehicles and consequently its affordabili ty for the potential buyers to 
promote faster adoption of electric vehicles.  
(Para 83) 
Action Taken Replies 
As per the information received from the Department of Revenue, Ministry of 
Finance, the GST rates and exemptions are based on the recommendation of the 
GST Council, accordingly, the issues of GST rate reduction on batteries for electric 
vehicles (EV) and parts of EVs was placed before the Council in its 52nd and 47th 
Meeting respectively, however no changes have been recommended by the Council 
in this regard. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Heavy Industries should 
relentlessly pursue  the issue of GST rate reduction with the D/o Revenue, 
keeping in  view the greater good which would result in reduction in cost of 
electric vehicles and also help Government meeting its zero emission targets 
within the time frame set for the same. 
 
ELECTRIC VEHICLE (EV) SUBSIDIES AND INCENTIVES 
Recommendation/Observation 
27. The Committee notes the challenges associated with financing the Electric 
Vehicles and is hopeful that the efforts of NITI Aayog, World Bank and SIDBI will 
be helpful in addressing the issue of finance availability for the potential EV 
buyers. Taking into consideration the efforts of the Government for promoting 
Electric Vehicles and green asset creation, the Committee recommends that 

28 
 
Electric Vehicles should be brought under the Priority Sector Lending (PSL) 
category until the 30 per cent penetration targe t fixed for 2030 is achieved, for 
accelerating India’s commitment towards net-zero emissions. Further, cooperation 
between EV Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) and lenders may be 
encouraged to improve EV buyers accessibility to finance. Ministry of H eavy 
Industries may also consider including private EV Four Wheelers in FAME -II so 
as to improve their share in the Electric Mobility Mission.                           
(Para 108) 
Action Taken Replies 
NITI Aayog will engage with RBI and Ministry of Finance  on this 
recommendation of DRPSC for treating EVs as Priority Sector Landing (PSL) 
Category. 
Further, the FAME-II scheme is ending on 31.03.2024 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
The Ministry , in  early part of this report had replied Electric mobility 
promotion scheme 2024 has been notified for a period of 4 months, w.e.f 
01.04.2024 to 31.07.2024  and FAME III has been formulated for approval. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may consider 
including Four Wheelers in the FAME III so as to improve their share in 
Electric Mobility Mission. 
 
MANUFACTURING & INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT : INTERNATIONAL 
COOPERATION 
Recommendation/Observation 
28. The Committee notes the achievements of Schemes such as PLI -Auto and 
National Programme on ACC, but until the benefits of these schemes spread across 
the country and self-sufficiency in manufacturing of batteries and auto components 
is achieved, the Govern ment should ensure adequate supply of components, cells 
and batteries for growth of Electric Vehicles vis -à-vis ICE Vehicles. The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to foster international 
cooperation/partnership with global suppliers/countries to ensure an d maintain 
the supply chain requirements of the domestic Electric Vehicle industry. Ministry 
of Heavy Industries should also work in coordination with the Ministry of Micro, 
Small and Medium Enterprises to help develop a Manufacturing Network for 

29 
 
manufacture of Battery and EV components and progress in this regard may be 
shared with the Committee.                  
 (Para 114) 
Action Taken Replies 
NITI Aayog has noted.  
As per the extent policy and guidelines of Government of India there is no 
restriction on import of raw materials, components, child parts of conventional led 
acid cells and Advance Chemistry Cell (ACC). As regards, maintaining the supply 
chains requirements of the domestic Electric Vehicle Industry, the Indian cell and 
Battery Manufacturers are individually entering into supply, technology transfer 
etc. agreement with foreign counter parts. Ministry of Heavy Industries (MHI) has 
been assisting the Indian companies in getting VISA for their foreign employees 
for their visit to India to install, commission etc. machinery equipments supplied 
by overseas partners. The Ministry of Heavy Industries makes efforts to foster 
global partnership with suppliers/ countries to enable cooperation in the auto sector 
including supply chain of EVs and cells. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
The Committee while appreciating the steps taken towards maintaining the 
supply chain requirements of the domestic Electric Vehicle Industry, 
reiterates its recommendation that Ministry of Heavy Industries should work 
in coor dination with  medium Enterprises to help develop a Manufacturing 
Network for manufacture of Battery and EV components. 
  

30 
 
CHAPTER–IV 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
ELECTRIC VEHICLE SUBSIDY & FAME SCHEME 
Recommendation/Observation 
29. The Committee notes that the initial targets were revised by bringing down 
the number of vehicles to be supported under the FAME-II Scheme. The Committee 
is of the opinion that in order to facilitate the transition momentum to Electric 
Mobility, more numbe r of electric vehicles need to be supported and, therefore 
recommends that the Ministry should broaden the scope and extend the FAME -II 
Scheme for at least 3 more years in consultation with the Industry stakeholders to 
make the Scheme more inclusive.  
(Para 25) 
Action Taken Replies 
Initially, FAME India Scheme Phase-II was launched by Government of India for a 
period of three (3) years commencing from 01.04.2019, with an outlay of 
Rs.10,000 crore. After various stakeholders  consultations including with the auto 
industry, FAME India Phase II scheme has been extended for a period of two (2) 
years i.e. up to 31.03.2024. 
Further, to make the scheme more inclusive, the outlay of the scheme has been 
enhanced from Rs.10,000 crore to Rs.11,500 crore. 
The Scheme for Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of Electric Vehicles in India 
Phase III (FAME -III) for promotion of Electric Mobility in the country with an 
outlay of Rs.10,000 crore over the period of two years has been formulated by t his 
Ministry. The proposal for seeking approval as per rules is under process. 
 
Electric Mobility Promotion Scheme -2024 (EMPS) – After review of the FAME -
II, Electric Mobility Promotion Scheme -2024 has been notified vide S.O. 1334(E) 
dated 13.03.2024 with an outlay of Rs.500 crore to be implemented over a period 
of 4 months, w.e.f. 01.04.2024 to 31.07.2024, for faster adoption of electric two 
wheeler (e -2W) and three wheeler (e -3W) to provide further impetus to the 
mobility and development of electric vehic le (EV) manufacturing eco -system in 
the country.           
 

31 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
The Committee has been informed during its meeting with the Ministry on 
07.10.2024 that the PM-E Drive Scheme, implemented from 01.10.2024 by the 
Ministry of Heavy Industries (MHI), has replaced FAME -III and is expected 
to provide enhanced support for the adoption of electric vehicles and the 
development of necessary charging infrastructure. However, the Committee 
expresses its co ncerns regarding the rationale behind launching the PM -E 
Drive Scheme. Despite the successful implementation of FAME -I and FAME-
II, which have garnered significant popularity and familiarity among the 
target beneficiaries, the Government have launched PM-E Drive with similar 
objectives, a budget outlay of ₹10,900 crore (comparable to the proposed 
₹10,000 crore for FAME -III), and largely similar components. The 
Committee is concerned that this may create confusion among the 
beneficiaries, as the new scheme more or less mirrors the objectives of FAME-
III except minor new features like Face- Recognition and E- Vouchers.  
Moreover, FAME-III was scheduled to be rolled out in August 2024  and the 
launch of the PM-E Drive Scheme has resulted in an unnecessary delay of two 
months. In the light of this, the Committee calls for a comprehensive 
explanation regarding the need to introduce the PM -E Drive Scheme, 
especially considering the existing popularity and famili arity of the FAME 
Schemes, which has a very similar sco pe and components, albeit under a 
different name. The Committee seeks clarification on the reasons for this shift 
and the potential implications for the beneficiaries. 
 
 
******* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 