  
235   
 
           PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
            RAJYA SABHA 
 
                                                   
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-13) 
 
PERTAINING TO 
 
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES  
____________________________________________________________________________  
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 4TH  MAY, 2012) 
 
   (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 4TH MAY, 2012) 
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
MAY, 2012 VAISAKHA, 1934 SAKA 
  

  
         PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
            RAJYA SABHA 
 
                                                    
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-13) 
 
PERTAINING TO 
 
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES  
____________________________________________________________________________  
 
 (PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 4TH  MAY, 2012) 
 
   (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 4TH MAY, 2012) 
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
MAY, 2012 VAISAKHA, 1934 SAKA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
C O N T E N T S 
 
                                                                                                               PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …………………………………………  ( i ) 
 
2. INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………   (ii) 
 
3. REPORT ……………………………………………………………………………    
 
4. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE – AT A  
    GLANCE…………………………………………………………………………… 
 
5. MINUTES………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 (CONSTITUTED  W.E.F.  31ST  AUGUST,  2011) 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1.   Shri Tiruchi Siva  — Chairman 
2. Vacant 
3. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4.   Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
5.   Vacant 
6.   Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor 
7.   Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel 
8.   Shri Srinjoy Bose 
9.   Shri Nandamuri Harikrishna 
10.  Dr. Vijay Mallya 
 
LOK SABHA
 
 
11.   Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala 
12.   Shri Kamlesh Balmiki 
13. Shri Sabbam Hari 
14. Smt. Poonamben Veljibhai Jat 
15. Shri Ramsingh Kaswan 
16. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
17. Smt. Putul Kumari 
18. Shri M. Krishnaswamy 
19. Smt. Ingrid Mcleod  
20. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal 
21. Shri Somen Mitra 
22. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey 
23. Shri Kishn  V. Patel  
24. Shri R. K. Singh Patel 
25. Shri B. Y. Raghavendra 
26. Shri Ramsingbhai Patalbhai Rathwa 
27. Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
28. Shri E. G. Sugavanam 
29. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
30. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware  
31. Shri Subhash Bapurao Wankhede 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.      Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary 
2.      Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
3.      Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Director 
4.      Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Assistant Director 

  
 (i) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-re lated Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred 
and Thirty Fifth Report on Demands for Grants  (2012-13) pertaining  to Ministry of 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. 
 
2.  The Committee heard the representati ves of Ministry of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises and organizations under th e administrative control of Ministry of 
MSME, representatives of the Public Sector  Banks and select MSME Associations on 3
rd 
March, 2012.  The Report is based the mate rial, Annual Report, Notes on Demands and 
other background papers of the Ministry.  
 
3.  The Committee in its meeting held on 2
nd May, 2012 considered and adopted the 
report. 
 
 
 
 
 
TIRUCHI SIVA        
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
 
 
New Delhi,  
May, 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 

  
 
REPORT  
 
The strength of any economy is best reflected in the strength and dynamism of the 
medium, small and micro enterprises.  In our own country, these enterprises constitute the 
mainstay of the architecture of our ec onomy.  These are n ecessary to provide 
employment opportunities to large segments of our population living in far corners of our 
country.  In strengthening and promoting the MSMEs, the culture of inclusive growth is 
promoted.  The significance of the MSMEs can be realized by th e fact that 8 per cent of  
our GDP come from the MSMEs sector.    However, if we look at the percentage share of 
the MSMEs in countries like U.S.A., U.K. and Ch ina, it comes to 40 to 60 per cent.  This 
means that in our country, we have not been able to harness the potential of the MSME 
sector.   
 
2. In the documents supplied to the Committee, it is stated that the vision for 
Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterp rises is to ensure an orderly and robust 
growth and development of Micr o, Small and Medium Enterpri ses so that these could be 
strengthened to accelerate our economic growth.   
 
3. The documents also outline the Mission of the Ministry to promote growth and 
development of globally competitive Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, including 
Khadi, Village and Coir industries, in cooperation with concerned 
Ministries/Departments, State Governments and other stakeholders by providing support 
to existing enterprises and enc ouraging creation of new enterprises.  These also state that 
the Mission includes in its scope  the objective to achieve a cu mulative growth of 40% in 
the number of registered enterp rises and enhance this sector 's contribution to GDP from 
the present 8 per cent to 10 pe r cent by the end of 12th Plan.  The Ministry of MSME is 
thus engaged in the task of promoting gr owth and development of MSMEs for creating 
new enterprises with special focus on development of skills of entrepreneurs and the 
work force engaged in this sector and improving the performance of PSUs and other 
responsible organizations.  
 

  
4. With the broadening of the definition of enterprise under the MSME Act by  
including  the service sector , trading and manufacturing, th e scope of the MSMEs have 
been vastly increased.  The Background Note on Demands for Grants for 2012-13 
submitted to the Committee indicated that: 
 
(Rs. Crore) 
2012-13 
Proposals for M/o MSME to the Planning 
Commission 
Sanctioned Allocation to the M/o MSME 
6379.40 2835.00 
 
5.  It is quite evident from the above ta ble that the Planning Commission reduced the 
proposal of the MSME Ministry drastica lly.  The cut from Rs.6379.40 crores to 
Rs.2835.00 crores would be considered by any reckoning as a huge cut.  The Committee, 
while interacting with the MSME associations, has gathered the fact that the allocation of 
funds to the MSME sector in proportion to its contribution to the GDP is quite less.  The 
aforementioned figures are indicative of th e reduction in Demands for Grants for the 
Ministry affected by the Planning Commission.  However, the Ministry has stated that the 
sanctioned allocation of Rs.2835.00 crores for 2012-13 is five per cent higher than the 
budgetary estimates for the financial year 2011-12 which stood at Rs.2700 crores.   
 
6. The representatives of the MSME associati on also feel that issues such as credit 
facilities, finance, technology upgradati on, infrastructure, skill development and 
marketing cannot be adequately addressed by the budgetary provisions for the Ministry.  
There is a strong feeling that many programmes and projects which have been planned by 
the Ministry would be severely affected due  to the reduced allo cation of funds by the 
Planning Commission.   
 
7. There are many schemes which the Ministry of MSME has  adopted and which 
have been described by it as growth game changers for 12th Plan.  These are: 
• Procurement policy for Goods/services  from MSEs by the Government 
Departments and Central PSUs. 
• Launching of SME exchange System fo r enabling SMEs to benefit from 
Off-set policies. 
• On-line filing of  Entrepreneurs Memoranda (Ems) by MSMEs. 
• Increased penetration of IT in MSMEs 

  
• Enlarging the scope of Credit Linked  Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS) 
for supporting technology acquisiti on and upgradation of production 
facilities. 
• Developing Clusters of Excellence. 
• B2B International portal of NSIC. 
• Revamped Skill Development & Capacity Building Programme. 
• PMEGP – Electronic Tracking System. 
• Leveraging Defence Offset Policies in favour of MSMEs. 
 
8. The officials of the Ministry of Medium, Small and Micro Enterprises  
during their interactions with the Committee in formed that due to shortage of funds, 
many of the schemes would not be implemen ted to their full capacity.  Due to such 
problems, the Ministry of MSME is also ex ploring the possibility  of approaching the 
International Financial Institutions which includes the World Bank to get necessary loan.   
 
9. The Committee strongly feels that a cri tical and strategic sector like the 
MSME  deserves higher allocation of f unds from the Planning Commission.  The 
Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh while presenting the National Awards to 
Micro, Small and Medium Ent erprises on 28 August 2009,  reiterated Governments' 
commitment to “support, nurse and encour age this very important segment and 
sector of our economy".  The sharp curt ailment of the proposals of the MSME 
Ministry by the Planning Commission is no t in consonance with the vision of the 
Prime Minister to “support, nurse and enco urage this very important segment and 
sector of our economy”.  When the country glowingly acknowledges the vital role of 
MSME sector to increase productivit y, enhance exports, create employment 
opportunities, develop skills of our youth  and promote inclusive growth, it is 
important to give substantially higher allocation to the MSME Ministry.      
10. The Committee feels that allocation of inadequate funds for the MSME 
Ministry is an indication of the mind set of the conc erned organizations of the 
Government which is more aligned to the co rporate sector than the MSME sector.  
Given the importance of the MSME sector for our economy, the Committee strongly 
recommends for the change of such mind set on the part of the   Planning 
Commission and the Ministry of Finance for strengthening the MSME Ministry and 
the MSME sector.   

  
11. While taking note of the money sanctione d by the Planning Commission to the 
Ministry of MSME, the Committee found that expenditure in compar ison to the Budget 
Estimates in 2009-10 in 2010-11 is low.  The answer provided by the Ministry Officials 
to this observation of the Co mmittee was not satisfactory.  On  the one hand, the Ministry 
is asking the Planning Commi ssion for a substantial alloca tion of funds; on the other 
hand, expenditure, as stated above, is falling short of the budgeted estimates.  The 
Ministry Officials acknowledged that there is a shortfall.   
12. The Committee demands an explanation fr om the Ministry to enable it to 
understand the real reasons behind such shortfall.   
13. It has also been noted by the Committ ee that in 2009-10, out of Rs.20 lakhs, 
allocated for the Market Support Scheme, only Rs .13 lakhs could be spent.  It is evident 
that the entire amount could not be used.  However, the Ministry maintained that the 
target achieved was more than what was fi xed.  Similarly, for the year 2010-11 out of 
Rs.30 lakhs only Rs.19 lakhs were spent.  Ho wever, the Committee was told that the 
target could not be achieved.   
 If the responsibility of the Government is to allocate funds, it is the duty of the 
Ministry to utilize the allocated funds properly and fully. 
14. The Committee fails to understand the reasons behind non-utilisation of 
funds.  It is important that the Ministry  must use the money allocated to it for 
meeting its targets.  The Committee woul d like to get an explanation from the 
Ministry in this regard.  
15.    The Committee was given to unders tand that the Office of Development 
Commissioner discontinued seven schemes for the Twelfth Five Year  Plan.  Some of 
these schemes are: WTO sensitization wo rkshops, biotechnology programmes, scheme 
on training courses for new entrepreneurs to select business school and technical 
institutions, support for five se lect universities or college s to run 1200 entrepreneurship 
clubs, training-cum-product-development cente rs scheme for capacity building.  When 
the Committee wanted to know the reasons be hind the discontinuation of such schemes, 
the officials of the Ministry stated that to run such schemes only few lakhs of rupees were 

  
allocated for the whole country.  For instance, the MSME Ministry stated that one of such 
schemes was to be operated by spending Rs.50 lakhs across the countr y.  The Secretary, 
M/o MSME maintained that when the sche me was launched, nobody ever applied one’s 
mind as to how a scheme could be implemente d across the country with so little money.  
Therefore, it was decided by the Ministry that such schemes could be reduced to increase 
their impact.  However, the Committee was given to understand by th e Officials of the 
Ministry that such schemes have been made part of the other larger schemes.   
16. The Committee feels that the scheme s discontinued could have been 
implemented initially on a pilot basis. It is rather deplorable that adequate planning 
was not made to start such schemes which sounded quite good.  The Committee feels 
that the plans must be devised by the Minist ry by taking into account its Vision and 
Mission which have been so eloquently outlined by the Ministry.   
17 One of the flagship programmes of the Ministry is Tool Room & Technical 
Institutions.  This is a highl y successful programme of the Ministry which showcases the 
ability of the Ministry to provide skilled manpower to the MSME sector and cater to their 
tooling requirements.  The Ministry of MSME  has a plan to set up tool rooms all across 
the country.  The figures available in the Background Note on Demands for Grants 2012-
13, reveal the fact that out of Rs.57 crores  earmarked for the financial year 2010-11 for 
the Tool Room & Technical Institutions only Rs.54.85 crores were spent.  It is 
understood that the allocation for the year  2012-13 for the Tool Room & Technical 
Institutions was fixed at Rs.58 crores which is Rs. 1 crore more than that of 2010-11.   
18. The Committee is impressed with the perf ormance of the Tool Rooms established 
by the MSME Ministry.  These  enable th e youth to improve their skills and get 
employment opportunities.  The success of such  Tool Rooms inspires confidence that 
establishment of more such institutions will equip our  young people with necessary 
ability which would be useful in the expandi ng market and manufactur ing sector.  It is 
worthwhile to note that the youth from the SC/ST community are ge tting trained free of 
cost in such Tool Rooms as per the instruc tions of the Government.  The expenditure for 
training the SC/ST youth is met from SC sub-plan and Tribal sub-plan. 

  
19. The Committee strongly recommends that more money must be allocated for 
establishment of tool rooms across the country.  It is understood that the MSME 
Ministry is also approaching the concerned  organizations within the Government to 
get loans from the International Financial Institutions.  If the Planning Commission 
and the Finance Ministry cannot alloca te more funds for this purpose, then 
necessary permission to the MSME Ministry to get access to bo rrowings from other 
International Banks may be given without any delay.  However, it is strongly 
recommended that we must use our own res ources for this cause which is good for 
the youth of our country and the MSME sector.   
20. The Prime Minister’s Employment Generation Programme (PMEGP) is a 
significant programme to generate employ ment for our educat ed youth for their 
livelihood and economic development.  It has been a very successful programme 
enlisting the participation of youth from a ll parts of the country.  The demand for 
implementation of this programme in all part s of our country for the benefit of our youth 
testifies to its popularity and effectiveness.  The Committee notes that the Ministry of 
Finance has allocated Rs.1276 crores in response to the projected demand of the Ministry 
for Rs.1900 crores.     
21. The programme has a target to creat e 32 lakhs employment opportunities by 
setting up 4 lakh micro enterprises during 12
th Plan.   
22. Regarding the targets under PMEGP, it was informed to the Committee that in 
2011-12, against RE of Rs.1215.95 crore, Rs .1010.24   crore is for margin money 
subsidy.  Of the latter, Rs.979.37 crore has been re leased to States till 29 February 2012, 
against which Rs. 753.05 crore has been reported to be utilised. The Committee was also 
informed that 38,449 units have been assisted, creating employment for an estimated 3.57 
lakh persons.   
 
 People are queuing up to get facilities under PMEGP ,but the Committee 
finds that the money allocated to subsidiz ed the margin money has not been fully 
utilized.  The Ministry of MSME must expl ain the reasons behind non-utilisation of 
the money. 

  
23. For 2012-13, the proposed BE is Rs.1278.28 crore of which Rs.1238 crore has 
been tentatively kept for margin money subsidy under PMEGP.  This will assist about 
53,826 units, creating employment for an estimated 4.31 lakh persons.  
 
24.    The Ministry of MSME made a SWOT (Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities 
and Threats) analysis of the PMEGP and informed the Committee as follows:-  
Strengths       
- the scheme has been able to catch the imagination of the people, especially the 
unemployed youth 
- attractive level of subsi dy; subsidy is given in advance, which makes it 
attractive for the banks also  
- provision for EDP  
 
Weaknesses 
- no subsidy is provided for expansion/growth of existing units 
- the size of the project does not support very high dose of technology  
- the project cost ceiling of Rs. 25 lakh in manufacturing sector and Rs. 10 lakh 
in service sector is not sufficient to allow higher production capacity projects 
 
Opportunities 
- PMEGP units can take advantage of the procurement policy announced by the 
Government 
- better sustainability as ancillaries to large industries  
- provides scope for shifting of surplus labour from agricultural sector 
 
Threats 
- instances of undue insistence by some  banks on collaterals (this is being 
taken up with RBI/banks from time to time) 
- instances of lack of transparency a nd objective selection of beneficiaries 
(detailed instructions to make the selection of beneficiaries more objective and 
transparent are under formulation)  
- lack of state-of- the-art MIS (this will form part of the proposed concurrent 
monitoring and evaluation (CME) system) 
- high interest rates for PMEGP beneficiaries. 
 
25. The Committee is happy to note that the allocation for this programme is 
increasing on a year to year basis.  However, it notes that this increase is not in 
proportion to the demand from the youth of our country for setting up of  projects 
under PMEGP.  Taking into account th e increase in budgetary allocation, the 
Committee strongly recommends that the ce iling limits for the projects which are 

  
being set up under this programme must be  enhanced.  In this context, it 
recommends that while ceiling limit for the manufacturing sector must be increased 
from Rs.25 to Rs.50 lakhs, such limits in case  of service sector may be increase from 
Rs.10 to Rs.15 lakhs.  The Co mmittee is satisfied to note  that projects under the 
PMEGP are being electronically monitored right from the application stage to the 
establishment of the unit.  This online tracking system has enabled the 
implementing agency to ensure transparen cy and accountability.  The Committee 
also observes with satisfaction that th ose beneficiaries under the PMEGP who have 
been trained and passed out from National  Small Industries Corporation, National 
Institute for Entrepreneurs and Small Business Development and MSME 
Development Institute would be exempt ed from undergoing entrepreneur 
development programme under PMEGP.   
 
26. The micro sector in the entire gamut of MSME cons titutes the base of our 
economy.  There is a feeling across the MSME sector, particularly among the 
Associations representing the MSMEs, that fina nce flow to this small and micro sector is 
not adequate and, therefore, needs to be mon itored on a quarterly basis.  It is submitted 
before the Committee by the Associations that  small, micro and corporate sectors are 
treated alike when it comes to  the rate of interest and the various costs involved for 
establishing units.  It is understood that  Prime Minister’s Task Force on the MSME 
recommended that 60 per cent of the bank cred it must go to the micro sector.  While 
credit for the micro and small enterprises is  going up, the share of the micro sector is 
coming down.  The Committee was informed  by the representa tive of a MSME 
Association that there is a RBI guideline that unutilized funds for the micro sector may be 
given to be SIDBI as a deposit.  It is importa nt that credit to the micro sector must be 
monitored at the highest level.  The Committee was informed that many scheduled 
commercial banks have fallen short of meeting the targets for giving adequate credit to 
the micro sector.  Based on the statistics of the Reserve Bank of I ndia it has been found 
that some banks had a year to  year negative growth in terms of providing loans to the 
micro sector.  The Committee regrets that even the public sector banks have failed to 
reach out to the micro sector by providing adequate credit to it.  This is an alarming 

  
phenomenon which would lead to stunted  and arrested growth of the micro 
enterprises.  The Committee strongly recomm ends that the Reserve Bank of India 
and the Ministry of MSME must monitor th e credit being issued to the micro sector 
and take measures to increase the volume of credit to this sector.   
 
27. The Committee was informed by the represen tative of the MSME association that 
if the MSME units are working satisfactorily consecutively for two years or more, paying 
interest, showing profit and registering good turnover, their credit limits should 
automatically grow up.  It was also subm itted before the Committee that the MSMEs 
even after registering good performance cons istently, are subjected to scrutiny for 
enhancement of credit.  The suggestion plac ed before the Committee was that the credit 
limit for the better performing MSMEs shou ld be automatically  enhanced without 
subjecting it to further examination of its papers.  When the opinion of the MSME 
Ministry on this suggestion  was asked for, the concerned official told the Committee that 
it constituted an excellent suggestion.  The Committee strongly recommends that 
policies must be  adopted whereby the MSMEs showing good performance would 
get  enhanced credit automatically.   
 
28. One of the important factors behind the growth, expansion and sustainability of 
the MSME sector is synergy between the large industries a nd MSMEs.  To prove this 
point, one of the representative s of the association of the MS ME put forth the idea that 
those large industries, be it the private or pub lic sector, must get tax benefit of certain 
percentage if they buy certain minimum percentage of goods and services of the MSMEs 
sector and complete the payment.  It was al so suggested that percentage of tax benefit 
would be decided by the Government.  If such  a suggestion is accep ted, it is presumed 
that the large industry would approach th e small industry for buying their products and 
services and extend facilities to them to set up manufacturing units.  The Committee 
appreciated this suggestion which would promote the synergy between the large and 
small scale industries and feels that  such  synergy would actually promote research 
and development capabilities of the MSMEs and encourage innovation. The 

  
Committee strongly recommends for measures  for establishing synergy between the 
large industries and MSME sector. 
 
29. The KVIC has been allocated Rs.1565.54 cr ore out of the total budget allocation 
of Rs.2835 crore for the Ministry of MSME for its ongoing, new/modified Schemes. 
 
30. The Committee has noticed that during  the year 2005-06 KVIC was allocated 
total plan budget of Rs.400-500 crores.  Now keeping in view the need as well 
requirement and potential of  the KVIC  the plan budg et allocation has been 
increased by the Government to the tune of 1565.54 crores in the year 2012-13.  The 
Committee feels that sufficient and sk illed manpower is key to successful 
implementation of the Schemes and Program mes. KVIC has accepted the challenge 
with its present manpower but the work ha s also increased manifold and KVIC has 
to come to the expectation of the Government .  In view of this it seems difficult to 
cope up the work pressure with existing staff strength.  It therefore, recommends 
that the number of officers and staff should also be increased in KVIC in proportion 
to the  budget allocated to achieve the targets and utilize the budget to the full 
extent. 
 
31. The Committee is of the view that in  changing Indian scenario of high 
growth of the economy and stiff competition from the corporate giants, training 
system in KVIC needs impr ovement through development of appropriate courses, 
introduction of new courses, improveme nt in infrastructure equipment and 
adoption of improved technology and training of trainers.  
  
32. The Committee notes that budgetary allocatio n in respect of Khadi grant has been 
declining.  The following table clearly proves the point that the funds available for this 
has been going down except for the year 2010-11.. 
              ( I n  c r o r e s )  
 BE 2010-
11 
RE 2010-11 BE 2011-12 RE 2011-12 Plan 
Budget 
2012-13 
 

  
Khadi Grant 290.00  396.60 227.48 183.52 118.90 
  
33. The Committee notes that the reduction of  the funds for the Khadi sector is a 
matter of serious concern.  In the aforem entioned paras, the Committee has taken 
note of the fact that the banks have not been issuing adequate credit to the micro 
sector.  As per the above table, the funds coming from the Government to the Khadi 
sector which is part of the small and micro enterprises are also declining.  The 
Committee demands an explanation from the Ministry in this regard.  It is well 
known that some of the poorest of the p oor weavers and artisans  are associated 
with this sector.  The Khadi & Village Indus tries embody the vision of the Father of 
our Nation Mahatma Gandhi.  Any neglect show n to this sector is a neglect of that 
lofty vision.  The Committee finds it unaccept able that the Khadi sector is getting 
such treatment from both the Ministry of Finance and the Planning Commission.   
The Committee strongly recommends that re medial measures must be taken to 
ensure fair allocation of funds to the Khadi componenet of the Khadi & Village 
Industries.  
 
34. To a question of the Committee as to  how many people have been provided 
training under different categories in different skill development programmes for the 
KVIC, the Ministry of MSME gave the following table:  
 
SI. No. Particulars 2009-10 2010-11 
1.  SC 7553 11466 
2.  ST 9978 10268 
3.  OBC 16819 19020 
4.  Minorities 4061 5702 
5.  General 24660 21551 
 Total 63071 68007 
 Women 31355 34784 
 P.H. 137 138 
  
35. It was also informed to the Committ ee that 56, 027 persons have been trained 
upto 29th February, 2012 against the target of 68, 700 persons to  be trained during the 
current year 2011-12.  For 2012-13, the target of persons to be trained is 109, 500.   
 

  
36. The Committee is of the opinion that the MSME Ministry has fallen short of 
the target.  At a time when skill de velopment is being emphasized by the 
Government and the Ministry is one of th e key nodal Ministries for developing the 
skill of the youth, it is sad to note that it  has not been able to meet the target.  The 
Committee strongly recommends for measures to achieve the target in this respect.   
 
37. The Annual Report of the MSME Ministry  for the year 2011-12 states that Khadi 
programmes of KVIC are being implemented by Khadi Institutions and State KVI Boards 
by providing 25 per cent working capital for obta ining raw material.  It also reveals that 
there are only six Central Sliver Plants at Kuttur, Chitradurga, Sehori, Raibareilly, Etah 
and Hazipur to supply quality raw material to the khadi sector.  The Committee feels 
that the establishment of six Central Sliver Plants are not adequate.  It recommends 
that the Government should consider for  opening of new godowns in each state for 
ensuring uninterrupted supply of raw material.       
 
38. The Committee in its Report on C redit Facility to MSME Sector had 
recommended that SIDBI should function under the jurisdiction of the MSME 
Ministry.  The Committee reiterates this rec ommendation for better flow of credit 
to the MSME sector.  Accordingly steps must be taken by the Government (Ministry 
of Finance) to bring the SIDBI within the jurisdiction of the MSME Minstry. 
39. The Committee takes into account the suggestions of some of the 
representatives of the MSME associatio n for opening up a window or a cell for 
MSME to avail of the Extern al Commercial Borrowing.  It recommends that this 
suggestion may be actively considered for its final implementation.   
40. The Committee feels that  Marketing of KVIC product is an important area to be 
considered for sustainability of KVI units in present competitive market.  It is surprising 
to note that for the first time in the budget 2012-13 a very meager amount of Rs.3 lakh 
have been provided under Market Prom otion & Publicity and Modified MDA.    T h e  
Committee therefore recommends the Gov ernment to consider enhancing the 

  
allocation for providing assistance fo r setting up of marketing complexes, 
exclusively for KVIC products not only in metro cities but also in state capitals. 
 
41. As far as the North Eastern part of our country is concerned, there is a 
persistent feeling that implementation of the programmes as per the industrial 
policy formulated for that area are not at all satisfactory.  Even the incentives in 
terms of income tax exemption, excise exem ption, etc., have been greatly diluted.  
The Committee urges the Ministry of MSME to take stock of the situation and chalk 
out a programme to address the problem.  
 
42. The Committee agrees with idea of th e some representatives of the MSME 
association that those special economic zo nes which are not being utilized may be 
declared a MSME zone and MSME units may be established on a PPP mode. .   
 
43. The Committee has taken note of the fact that the MSMEs do not have a 
level playing field with the other larg e corporate sectors.  Even the common 
complaint is that the tax rates are skewed in favour of the imported items.  As a 
result, they find it difficult to compete with the industries which import goods from 
the foreign countries.  This is a suggestion which deserves serious and focused 
attention.  The Committee would like to get a detailed explanation on this issue.   
  
44. The Committee takes note of  the fact that the Coir Board has been allocated 
Rs.7.00 crore under Plan (Science & Technology) .   It feels that the amount is 
insufficient in the context of  the vast area of operation of the Board covering the 
coastal belt of the Country which incl udes Lakshadweep and A&N Islands.  The 
Committee feels that appropri ate technology needs to be transferred to the Coir 
Industry.   It entails incubator training  programmes and provision of one time 
assistance upto 50% of the funds needed to establish pilot units.   
 
45. The Committee noted the fi gures of financial assistan ce given to the units under 
Development of Production Infrastructure Scheme for the under-mentioned period:-  
 

  
Year Amount (Rs. Lakh) Number of Units 
2008-09 66.31 82 
2009-10 20.74 26 
2010-11 30.46 22 
2011-12* 11.43 5 
* upto 15th February, 2012 
 
46. It is understood from the above table published in the Annual Report of the 
MS&ME for the year 2011-12 pertaining to th e assistance towards Development of 
Production Infrastructure that under this Scheme  the financial assistance as well the units 
assisted are gradually decreasing every year.   The Committee therefore recommends 
that it should be modified to provide better financial as sistance keeping in view the 
cost of Plant and Machinery.  It also recommends that the limit may be extended to 
Rs.10 lakh from Rs.6 lakhs to benefit the coir industry. 
 
47. The Committee also understood from the Annual Report, 2011-12 that there is 
decline of sale through showrooms and depots of the Coir Board. The figures in this 
respect which stood at Rs.14.06 crore for  the year 2009-10 have  came down to Rs.10.43 
crore for  the year 2011-12 (upto January, 2012).  The Committee feels that to increase 
the sale of the coir products, it is im portant to expand the sales network all over 
India.  
 
48. The Committee appreciates the overall wo rking of the Coir Board in export 
promotion and recommends timely and hass le free approval of the Government to 
the participants in Trade Fair/Exhibitions.   
The Coir Board has been allocated Rs.61.93 cr ore out of the total budget allocation of 
Rs.2835 crore for its ongoing Schemes. 
 
49. The Committee has noted  that the Coir Board is running a beneficial scheme 
Mahila Coir Yojna for self employment of  women.  The Committee during its study 
visit at Lakshadweep visited one of the centres under this Scheme and interacted 
with few spinners and was dismayed over th e stipend given to the women spinners 
which was very insufficient and recommends that the present limit of stipend should 
be raised in view of the increased cost of living and inflation. 

  
 
  Placed below is a catalogue of points which emerged during the 
interactions of the Committee with the representatives of the MSME association:   
(i) Provision for the rehabilitation of sick units as  large number of units are 
becoming sick;  
 
(ii) Appellate Authority where the proble ms of individual sick industry may 
be heard or targets should be fixed for banks that they will have to 
rehabilitate about 20% sick industries; 
  
(iii)  Discrimination between Small and larg e industries as the large industries 
get protection from the Government under BIFR after erosion of 50% or 
more of their net-worth but such protection is not available to sick MSEs; 
 
(iv) Venture Fund of Rs.5000 crore should also be available to Micro 
Enterprises and not only to Medium and Small Enterprise; 
  
(v) Enhancement of  the limit for MSME s for Plant and Machinery from 10 
crore to 25 crore so as to enable the MSMEs to modernize themselves; 
  
(vi) Limit of tax audit should be increased from Rs.60 lakh to Rs.1 crore; 
 
(vii) Increasing  the limit of  excise duty and service tax; 
 
(viii) Enhancement of Marketing sup port under Marketing Development 
Assistance Programme and creation of Export Development Fund; 
 
(ix) Common Application Form for credit/ loan; 
 
(x) Requirement of collateral security; 
 
(xi) Tax exemption  to SMEs which have separate funds for R&D ; 
 
(xii) Enhancement of the limit from 90 days to 6 months for NPA; 
 
(xiii) Enhancement of term loan from 7 years to 15 years at par with the housing 
sector; 
  
50. The Committee draws the attention of the MSME Ministry to the 
aforementioned suggestions and recommends appropriate measures to take up these 
points.  The Committee also would  like to get a detailed note in this regard.   
   
********** 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE-AT A GLANCE 
 
 
 
  The Committee strongly feels that a critical and strategic sector like the 
MSME  deserves higher allocation of f unds from the Planning Commission.  The 
Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh while presenting the National Awards to 
Micro, Small and Medium Ent erprises on 28 August 2009,  reiterated Governments' 
commitment to “support, nurse and encour age this very important segment and 
sector of our economy".  The sharp curt ailment of the proposals of the MSME 
Ministry by the Planning Commission is no t in consonance with the vision of the 
Prime Minister to “support, nurse and enco urage this very important segment and 
sector of our economy”.  When the country glowingly acknowledges the vital role of 
MSME sector to increase productivit y, enhance exports, create employment 
opportunities, develop skills of our youth  and promote inclusive growth, it is 
important to give substantially higher allocation to the MSME Ministry.  
(Para No. 9)     
  The Committee feels that allocation of inadequate funds for the MSME 
Ministry is an indication of the mind set of the conc erned organizations of the 
Government which is more aligned to the co rporate sector than the MSME sector.  
Given the importance of the MSME sector for our economy, the Committee strongly 
recommends for the change of such mind set on the part of the   Planning 
Commission and the Ministry of Finance for strengthening the MSME Ministry and 
the MSME sector.   
(Para No. 10) 

  
   
 
The Committee demands an explanation fr om the Ministry to enable it to 
understand the real reasons behind such shortfall.                                   (Para No. 12) 
   The Committee fails to understand the reasons behind non-utilisation of 
funds.  It is important that the Ministry  must use the money allocated to it for 
meeting its targets.  The Committee woul d like to get an explanation from the 
Ministry in this regard.                                                                                (Para No. 14) 
 16. The Committee feels that the scheme s discontinued could have been 
implemented initially on a pilot basis. It is rather deplorable that adequate planning 
was not made to start such schemes which sounded quite good.  The Committee feels 
that the plans must be devised by the Minist ry by taking into account its Vision and 
Mission which have been so eloquently ou tlined by the Ministry.                              
(Para No. 16) 
  The Committee strongly recommends that more money must be allocated for 
establishment of tool rooms across the country.  It is understood that the MSME 
Ministry is also approaching the concerned  organizations within the Government to 
get loans from the International Financial Institutions.  If the Planning Commission 
and the Finance Ministry cannot alloca te more funds for this purpose, then 
necessary permission to the MSME Ministry to get access to bo rrowings from other 
International Banks may be given without any delay.  However, it is strongly 
recommended that we must use our own res ources for this cause which is good for 
the youth of our country and the MSME sector.                                       (Para No. 19)   
 People are queuing up to get facilities under PMEGP ,but the Committee 
finds that the money allocated to subsidiz ed the margin money has not been fully 
utilized.  The Ministry of MSME must expl ain the reasons behind non-utilisation of 
the money.  
(Para No. 22) 

  
  The Committee is happy to note that the allocation for this programme is 
increasing on a year to year basis.  However, it notes that this increase is not in 
proportion to the demand from the youth of our country for setting up of  projects 
under PMEGP.  Taking into account th e increase in budgetary allocation, the 
Committee strongly recommends that the cei ling limits for the projects which are 
beings set up under this programme must be enhanced.  In this context, it 
recommends that while ceiling limit for the manufacturing sector must be increased 
from Rs.25 to Rs.50 lakhs, such limits in case  of service sector may be increase from 
Rs.10 to Rs.15 lakhs.  The Co mmittee is satisfied to note  that projects under the 
PMEGP are being electronically monitored right from the application stage to the 
establishment of the unit.  This online tracking system has enabled the 
implementing agency to ensure transparen cy and accountability.  The Committee 
also observes with satisfaction that th ose beneficiaries under the PMEGP who have 
been trained and passed out from National  Small Industries Corporation, National 
Institute for Entrepreneurs and Small Business Development and MSME 
Development Institute would be exempt ed from undergoing entrepreneur 
development programme under PMEGP.                                                 
 (Para No. 25) 
 
  The Committee regrets that even the public sector banks have failed to reach 
out to the micro sector by providing adequa te credit to it.  Th is is an alarming 
phenomenon which would lead to stunted  and arrested growth of the micro 
enterprises.  The Committee strongly recomm ends that the Reserve Bank of India 
and the Ministry of MSME must monitor th e credit being issued to the micro sector 
and take measures to increase the volume of credit to this sector.          
 (Para No. 26) 
 
  The Committee strongly recommends that policies must be  adopted whereby 
the MSMEs showing good performance would get  enhanced credit automatically.   
(Para No. 27) 
  The Committee appreciated this su ggestion which would promote the 
synergy between the large and small scale industries and feels that  such synergy 

  
would actually promote research and deve lopment capabilities of the MSMEs and 
encourage innovation. The Committee strongly recommends for measures for 
establishing synergy between the large industries and MSME sector. 
(Para No. 28) 
  
  The Committee has noticed that during  the year 2005-06 KVIC was allocated 
total plan budget of Rs.400-500 crores.  Now keeping in view the need as well 
requirement and potential the KVIC  the pl an budget allocation has been increased 
by the Government to the tune of  1565.54 crores in the year 2012-13.  The 
Committee feels that sufficient and sk illed manpower is key to successful 
implementation of the Schemes and Program mes. KVIC has accepted the challenge 
with its present manpower but the work ha s also increased manifold and KVIC has 
to come to the expectation of the Government .  In view of this it seems difficult to 
cope up the work pressure with existing staff strength.  It therefore, recommends 
that the number of officers and staff should also be increased in KVIC in proportion 
to the  budget allocated to achieve the targets and utilize the budget to the full 
extent. 
(Para No. 30) 
  The Committee is of the view that in  changing Indian scenario of high 
growth of the economy and stiff competition from the corporate giants, training 
system in KVIC needs impr ovement through development of appropriate courses, 
introduction of new courses, improveme nt in infrastructure equipment and 
adoption of improved technology and training of trainers.  
 (Para No. 31) 
 
   
  The Committee notes that the reduction of the funds for the Khadi sector is a 
matter of serious concern.  In the aforem entioned paras, the Committee has taken 
note of the fact that the banks have not been issuing adequate credit to the micro 
sector.  As per the above table, the funds coming from the Government to the Khadi 
sector which is part of the small and micro enterprises are also declining.  The 
Committee demands an explanation from the Ministry in this regard.  It is well 

  
known that some of the poorest of the poor weavers and artisans are associated with 
this sector.  The Khadi & Village Industrie s embody the vision of the Father of our 
Nation Mahatma Gandhi.  Any neglect shown to this sector is a neglect of that lofty 
vision.  The Committee finds it unacceptabl e that the Khadi sector is getting such 
treatment from both the Ministry of Fina nce and the Planning Commission.   The 
Committee strongly recommends that remedia l measures must be taken to ensure 
fair allocation of funds to the Khadi componenet of the Khadi & Village Industries.  
(Para No. 33) 
 
  The Committee is of the opinion that the MSME Ministry has fallen short of 
the target.  At a time when skill de velopment is being emphasized by the 
Government and the Ministry is one of th e key nodal Ministries for developing the 
skill of the youth, it is sad to note that it  has not been able to meet the target.  The 
Committee strongly recommends for measures to achieve the target in this respect.   
(Para No. 36) 
   The Committee feels that the establishmen t of six Central Sliver Plants are not 
adequate.  It recommends that the Governme nt should consider for  opening of new 
godowns in each state for ensuring uninterrupted supply of raw material.     
(Para No. 37)   
 
  The Committee in its Report on C redit Facility to MSME Sector had 
recommended that SIDBI should function under the jurisdiction of the MSME 
Ministry.  The Committee reiterates this rec ommendation for better flow of credit 
to the MSME sector.  Accordingly steps must be taken by the Government (Ministry 
of Finance) to bring the SIDBI within the jurisdiction of the MSME Minstry.  
(Para No. 38) 
  The Committee takes into account  the suggestions of some of the 
representatives of the MSME associatio n for opening up a window or a cell for 
MSME to avail of the Extern al Commercial Borrowing.  It recommends that this 
suggestion may be actively considered for its final implementation.   
 (Para No. 39) 

  
    The Committee therefore recommends the Government to consider enhancing the 
allocation for providing assistance fo r setting up of marketing complexes, 
exclusively for KVIC products not only in metro cities but also in state capitals. 
(Para No. 40) 
  As far as the north eastern part of our country is concerned, there is a 
persistent feeling that implementation of the programmes as per the industrial 
policy formulated for that area are not at all satisfactory.  Even the incentives in 
terms of income tax exemption, excise exem ption, etc., have been greatly diluted.  
The Committee urges the Ministry of MSME to take stock of the situation and chalk 
out a programme to address the problem.  
(Para No. 41) 
 
 The Committee agrees with idea of th e some representatives of the MSME 
association that those special economic zo nes which are not being utilized may be 
declared a MSME zone and MSME units may be established on a PPP mode.  
 (Para No. 42)  
 
  The Committee has taken note of the fact that the MSMEs do not have a 
level playing field with the other larg e corporate sectors.  Even the common 
complaint is that the tax rates are skewed in favour of the imported items.  As a 
result, they find it difficult to compete with the industries which import goods from 
the foreign countries.  This is a suggestion which deserves serious and focused 
attention.  The Committee would like to get a detailed explanation on this issue.   
 (Para No. 43) 
 
  The Committee takes note of the fact that the Coir Board has been allocated 
Rs.7.00 crore under Plan (Science & Technology) .   It feels that the amount is 
insufficient in the context of  the vast area of operation of the Board covering the 
coastal belt of the Country which incl udes Lakshadweep and A&N Islands.  The 
Committee feels that appropri ate technology needs to be transferred to the Coir 
Industry.   It entails incubator training  programmes and provision of one time 
assistance upto 50% of the funds needed to establish pilot units.   
(Para No. 44) 

  
  
 
       The Committee therefore rec ommends that it should be modified to provide 
better financial assistance keeping in view the cost of Plant and Machinery.  It also 
recommends that the limit may be extended to Rs.10 lakh from Rs.6 lakhs to benefit 
the coir industry.  
(Para No. 46) 
  The Committee feels that to increase the sale of the coir products, it is 
important to expand the sales network all over India.  
(Para No. 47) 
  The Committee appreciates the overall working of the Coir Board in export 
promotion and recommends timely and hass le free approval of the Government to 
the participants in Trade Fair/Exhibitions.   
(Para No. 48) 
 
  The Committee has noted  that the Coir  Board is running a beneficial scheme 
Mahila Coir Yojna for self employment of  women.  The Committee during its study 
visit at Lakshadweep visited one of the centres under this Scheme and interacted 
with few spinners and was dismayed over th e stipend given to the women spinners 
which was very insufficient and recommends that the present limit of stipend should 
be raised in view of the increased cost of living and inflation. 
(Para No. 49) 
.  
 
  The Committee draws the attentio n of the MSME Ministry to the 
aforementioned suggestions and recommends appropriate measures to take up these 
points.  The Committee also would  like to get a detailed note in this regard.   
  (Para No. 50) 
 
 
********** 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 