PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
         RAJYA SABHA                  
                        
                                       
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
THE REVIVAL AND RESTRUCTURING 
Of 
CEMENT CORPORATION OF INDIA LIMITED 
 
PERTAINING TO 
 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
(DEPARTMENT OF HEAVY INDUSTRY)  
____________________________________________________________________________  
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON   23rd  February, 2011) 
   (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 23rd  February, 2011) 
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  
 23rd FEBRUARY, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 
219 

                      PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
  
  
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
ON 
THE REVIVAL AND RESTRUCTURING 
Of 
CEMENT CORPORATION OF INDIA LIMITED 
 
PERTAINING TO 
 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
(DEPARTMENT OF HEAVY INDUSTRY)  
 
 (PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON   23rd  February, 2011) 
   (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 23rd  February, 2011) 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
23
rd  FEBRUARY, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932 (SAKA) 

CONTENTS 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………………(i)  
 
 
2. INTRODUCTION………………………………………………..  (ii) 
 
 
3. REPORT   ……………………………………………………….  1 - 18 
 
 
 
4. MINUTES…………………………………………………………    ----- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Date of Constitution 31st August , 2010) 
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
   1.   Shri Tiruchi Siva                —                Chairman 
2. Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy 
3. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4. Shri Ashk Ali tak 
5. Shri K.B. Shanappa 
6. Shri Natuji H. Thakor 
7. Shri S.P. Singh Baghel 
8. Shri K.V. Ramalingam 
9. Shri  Nandamuri Harikrishna 
       10. Dr. Vijay Mallya  
 
LOK SABHA 
11.   Shri Suvendu Adhikari 
12.   Shri Badruddin Ajmal 
13.   Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
14.   Shri Bansagopal Chowdhury 
15.   Shri Sabbam Hari 
16.   Smt. Poonam Veljibhai Jat 
17.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
18.   Shri M. Krishnaswamy 
19.   Shri Pakauri Lal 
20.   Smt. Ingrid Mcleod 
21.   Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal 
22.   Shri Devendra Nagpal 
23.   Shri Gorakhnath Pandey 
24.   Shri Kishanbhai V. Patel 
25.   Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
26.   Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
27.   Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
28.   Shri Raju Shetti  
29.   Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware 
30.   Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
31.   Smt. Putul Kumari 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary 
Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Director 
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Assistant Director 
 
 (i) 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
  
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Industry, having been aut horized by the Committee, hereby 
present this Two Hundred and Nine teenth Report on the Revival and 
Restructuring of C ement Corporation of India Limited pertaining to the 
Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public  Enterprises (Department of Heavy 
Industry)  
 
2. The Committee held de tailed discussion with C ement Corporation of 
India Limited at Guwahati on 25 th October, 2010.  The representative of the 
Department of Heavy Industry (Minis try of Heavy Industry and Public 
Enterprises) was also present there. 
 
3. I thank the Ministry of Heavy I ndustries and Public Enterprises 
(Department of Heavy Industry) and C ement Corporation of India 
Limited for furnishing the valuable inputs during the meetings.  
 
4.  The Committee in its meeting held on 15 th February, 2011 
considered and adopted the report. 
  
Tiruchi Siva 
Chairman                          
Department related Parliamentary 
                                         Standing Committee   on   Industry 
 
New Delhi 
15 February, 2011 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 

REPORT 
 
OVERVIEW 
 
One of the defining features of modern civilisation is the 
foundation of durable and concrete structures by extensively employing 
cement. As the construction activit y occupies central place in the 
expanding economic domain, the manufacture and use of cement assumes 
greater and critical importance. In fact it is well said that fifty per cent of 
all investment takes place in the cons truction sector which is nothing but 
steel and cement. Our accelerated constructio n activities and the 
expanding work in the infrastructur e projects are critically dependent on 
the quality and quantity of  cement used.  The i ndispensability of cement 
to further the modernisation process has been well documented.  Cement 
is, therefore, a critical ingredient for augmenting growth and development 
of our economy and advancem ent of the country as a whole. That is why 
our national leadership accorded due importance to the manufacture of 
adequate cement right since our independence. Within  the scheme of 
mixed economy conceived to rebuild  and modernise India the public 
sector was assigned crucial responsib ility to provide leadership in the 
sphere of cement production. A few y ears before the Cement Corporation 
of India was set up the se cond five year plan docum ent justly stated that 
“The output of cement ...is an im portant indicator of the volume of 
investment in the econo my...” and observed, “C ement ranks next in 
importance to iron and steel as a de velopmental commodity and hence a 
high place has to be given to it in the scheme of priorities.” The 
incorporation of the Cement Corpor ation of India (CCI) as a wholly 
Government of India Enterprise in 196 5, when the third five year plan 
was being implemented was a step to achieve that grand objective.  Later 
during 1970 and 1990 eleven cement plants were set up by the CCI in 
socially and economically backward regions of our country to produce  
 

2 
enough cement for meeting the growing demand in the market for this 
“developmental commodity”.  
 
2. It is important to note that as  part of a well formulated national 
plan for industrialisation of our co untry particularly of the backward 
regions’ a conscious decisi on was taken to locate i ndustrial units in areas 
which had no industry worth the name. Dispersal of industry was 
accorded importance for balanced regi onal development. In fact the third 
five year plan document observed, “P reference... has al ways been given 
to the location of the public sector pr ojects in relatively backward areas 
whenever this could be done without  significant prejudice to technical 
and economic considerations; and this  will be the guiding principle for 
the future also. Similarly in the li censing of private sector projects the 
claims of underdeveloped regions have generally been kept in view to the 
extent possible”.   
 
3. The eleven cement plants established in the remote and 
economically backward areas were to be  the nucleus of development of 
those regions. It was expected that  those units would spur economic 
activities and help remove their back wardness. Therefore, the decision to 
set up these units were taken not so lely on the basis of economic 
considerations but also on the basis of the larger objective of promoting 
development and growth of areas untouched by industrial development.  
 
4. The units of the Cement Corpor ation of India were established in 8 
States/Union Territories of India. Th e details of the locations of each 
plant are given below.  
 
 
  

3 
1.Bokajan                                    Assam 
2.Rajban                                Himachal Pradesh 
3.Tandur                                Andhra Pradesh 
4.Mandhar                              Chhattisgarh 
5.Kurkunta                              Karnataka 
6.Nayagaon                            Madhya Pradesh 
7.Akaltara                               Chhattisgarh 
8.Charkhi Dadri                       Haryana 
9.Adilabad                             Andhra Pradesh 
10.Delhi                                        Delhi 
11.Yerraguntla                       Andhra Pradesh 
 
5. It is extremely significant to note that out of th e abovementioned                     
11 plants only three plants at serial numbers 1 to 3 ar e operational. The 
Yerraguntla plant at serial number 11 was sold out to M/s India Cements 
Ltd. on 21 January 1998 for R s. 200.70 crore to meet  the demand of 
creditors as per the directions of Ho n’ble BIFR. Therefore, as of now,   
seven units are non-operating plants. The total installed capacity of all the 
plants was 42.48 lakh MT which is less than 2% of total installed capacity 
of India.  However, the installed cement capacity of three operating plants 
is 14.46 LMT and in contrast the in stalled capacity of 7 non-operating 
plants stands at 24.52LMT. The authorised share capital of the CCI is Rs. 
900 crore, whereas its net wo rth as on 31 March 2010 is (-) Rs.213.61 
crore and its net profit during 2009-10 is Rs. 52.75 crore. In spite of 
incurring heavy losses for several ye ars it could genera te profit during 
2006 and 2010 which is a positive sign. Its manpower as per the 
presentation made before the Committe e in Guwahati stands at 1037 as 
on 30 September 2010 with 117 Exec utives, 174 supervisiors and 746 
workers.  The figures for productivity per  employee  are going  up  from  

4 
600 MT during 2005-06 to  898 during 2009-10.  A ll the above facts have 
to be seen in the context of the vi sion and mission of the Corporation.  
While its vision is “To emerge as one  of the leading cement companies 
committed to contribute to the eco nomy and to enhance value for the 
stakeholders” its mission is “To a ugment the wealth creation for the 
company, deliver superior product and sustain market value.” 
 
6. The vision and mission sound audaci ous in the face of the installed 
capacity of only three operating plants and many other complex 
challenges confronting the Corporati on. However, its performance has to 
be seen against India’s position as th e second largest cement producing 
country in the world after China.  The per capita consumption of cement 
in our country is 156 kg which is quite low as compared to Thailand, 
Vietnam, USA and Dubai. While in case of Thailand and Vietnam, per 
capita consumption of cement is 400 kg, in case of  the USA and Dubai it 
is 800 kg and 4000 kg, respectively.  The Eleventh Five year Plan 
document noted that “Cement consum ption has generally grown at 2%-
3% higher than growth of GDP. Ke eping the past trends in view and 
taking into consideration the rene wed emphasis on infrastructure, the 
cement industry can be e xpected to grow at a bout 11% corresponding to 
the GDP growth of 9%”. With the accelerated growth  of construction 
work the requirement for cement will also get multiplied.  Therefore, the 
prospect for cement indu stry is very bright. In  the context of growing 
demand for cement, the Cement Corporat ion of India has to take the best 
foot forward for taking advantage of the situation and for becoming a key 
player for supplying quality cement to the expanding market. 
 
7. The Committee painfully notes that the Cement Corporation of 
India suffered huge losses right since the inception of the operation of  
 

5 
its plants.  The Corporation cited ho st of reasons for incurring such 
losses.  One of the key reasons, ac cording to the Corporation, was the 
very location of the cement fact ories in areas which did not have 
ample infrastructural facilities.  Th ose areas where these plants were 
set up did not have minimum ameniti es and conveniences in the form 
of township, communit y centres and health centres, etc. The 
investment made by the Corporation for the availability of such basic 
facilities added extra cost to its primary responsibility for producing 
cement. Over and above the cost required for the manufacture of 
cement, these facilities escalated its expenditure and, therefore, 
contributed to the over-capitalisat ion of the project. The Committee 
was informed by the officials of the Corporation that such extra 
burden in building up bare minimum facilities constituted a major 
factor behind the higher cost of production of cement. The 
background note supplied to th e Committee noted “Almost every 
plant of CCI has been over-capitali sed due to time and cost overrun 
resulting in very high interest an d depreciation costs. This has 
resulted in very high fixed costs of these plants as compared to the 
industry standards”.   
8. It is rather sad to note that some of the plants had to bear 
enormous expenditure for the purpo se of getting access to quarry 
which is located in a very difficult  and rough terrain .  For instance, 
the topography of the quarry for the Bokajan and Rajban Plants was 
such that it required extra cost  for mining the raw material and 
transporting it by employing ropeways. It seems that these plants had 
to face a hurdles race for producing  cement and at the same time 
develop the region by their manufactur ing activities.  It is distressing 
that owing to such factors the company could never register profit up 
to the year 2004-05 barring insignificant profits on few occasions.   
 

6 
9. The Corporation continued to incur loss which subsequently 
assumed proportion of a crisis.  Earlier in 2006 the Committee expressed 
its serious concern on the recurring lo sses of the CCI when it presented 
192nd Report after examining The Dalmia Dadri Cement Limited 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undert aking) Amendment Bill, 2006. Over 
the years the mounting losses sharply eroded its net worth.  By the middle 
of 1990s the Committee wa s informed that the CCI suffered accumulated 
losses to the tune of Rs. 527.16 crore.   That staggering amount was more 
than it’s paid up capital of Rs.  406.74 crore and reserves worth Rs. 0.99 
crore.  The collapse of the net wort h sounded alarm bell to safeguard the 
very survival and commercial viability  of the Corporation.  It graduated 
from a loss making Corporation to a sick industrial undertaking. It, 
therefore, resulted in its reference to the BIFR under section 15(1) of 
CISA and was declared sick in August 1996.   
 
10. The crisis was further aggravated  when the accumulated loss of the 
Corporation by 31 Marc h 2005 mounted up to Rs. 2152.86 crore which 
sharply stood in contrast to its paid up capital of Rs. 429.28 crore.  Its net 
worth went to the sub-zero level and became nega tive.  It was worth               
Rs. 1723.58 crore.  All those catastr ophic developments took place even 
before the rehabilitation scheme was approved by the BIFR.  
 
11. In face of such gathering crisis of negative net worth, the 
Corporation had absolutely no mean s of modernising its units or 
upgrading technology and production and operation process.  At a time, 
when the cement industry in Indi a was looking up due to accelerated 
economic, industrial and construction activities, the Cement Corporation 
of India was in dire straits. Its difficult conditions were further 
compounded  by  its  inability to  have  its  captive  power  plants  and  its  
 

7 
reliance on the power s upplied by the electricity  boards of different 
States.  Erratic supply of power a nd even frequent breakdown of power 
made available to the plants  becam e one of the important factors behind 
its reduced output which over a period of  time led to the closure of some 
of its plants. 
 
12. In 1990, the Government of India came out with a slew of 
measures in favour of the cement i ndustry in the form of transport 
subsidy and capital subsidy and waiver of excise duty  and sales tax.  The 
new plants commissioned in remote and backward regions or the old ones 
already functioning there and expa nding their capacity for producing 
more cement were eligible for those benefits. While the  private players 
could avail of those incentives the Cement Corporation of India, however, 
lagged behind as it hardly could take any step for capacity addition.   
 
13. The Committee was also  told that the Corporation could not at all 
match up to the cut throat compe tition in the relatively open market 
which witnessed more supply of cement  much in excess of the demand.  
It was further accentuated by the r ecession which affected very badly the 
cement industry till 2004-05.  
  
14. The escalating loss of the Corpora tion remained at the root of its 
multiple problems.  It went from one cris is to another.  Even its working 
capital declined to an alarming leve l and eventually got depleted. There 
was no option for the Corpor ation to overcome it other than resorting to 
short term borrowings at  very high interest rate. The Committee was 
informed that the taking over of the sick Charkhi Dadri Unit of the 
erstwhile Dalmia Dadri Cement Ltd. and the failure of the management in  
 
 

8 
making available functional Directors to carry out key responsibilities 
such as Marketing, Finance and Oper ations also constituted major factors 
behind the sickness of the Corpora tion. Absence of clear guidelines to 
deal with non-operating un its which have been cl osed down for almost a 
decade and thereby imposing a heavy burden on the functioning units and 
draining their working capital further compounded the financial crisis. As 
a result employees had to go without salaries and arrear s in this respect 
went up to a very high level. The loss of morale of the employees hit hard 
the operations of the Corporation and contributed to its decline.   
 
15. The Committee notes with concern that the Cement 
Corporation of India which was est ablished to be a leading player in 
manufacturing cement and pr omoting balanced regional 
development had to go through such tr agic state of affairs.  It also 
notes with concern that no attempt was made for renovation, 
replacement and modernisation of its plants .  In the background note 
supplied to the Committee, it has been  stated under the heading ‘Future 
Strategy for Sustainable Revival’ that  “The company learning from past 
mistakes plans to continue to invest  a part of its pr ofit for renovation, 
replacement, modernisation of its plan ts so as to keep them updated and 
avoid occurrence of obsolescence  of technology in future”. The 
Committee feels that the Corporation committed a costly mistake.  It 
is heartening to note that the Corporation has adopted a future 
strategy for sustainable revival one of the key components of which is 
to use part of its profit fo r modernisation and renovation.  In fact, the 
Eleventh Five Year Plan dealing w ith the cement i ndustry has observed 
that “The industry has been modernising and some units can now boast of 
having the state of the art technol ogy plants with energy consumption 
comparable  with  the  best in  the  world”.  The  Committee is happy to  
 

9 
note that the officials of the Corporation are hopeful to not only 
register profit but also compete wi th the key players in the market.  
In fact, in its presentation befo re the Committee, the Corporation 
outlined the measures taken to turn around the company. The 
Committee sincerely feels that the stress given on expansion and 
modernisation of the operating plants would result in its revival and 
progress.   
16. The Committee also takes note of  the fact that the Corporation 
is introducing new product range su ch as 53-S Grade, special cement 
for manufacturing Railw ay sleepers and also introducing cement 
brand names Maha shakti (43 Gr ade), Param shakti (53 Grade), 
Poorna shakti (33 Grade) and Jal shakti (33 Grade PPC) for better 
brand image.   
17. The Committee was informed of the follow ing additional 
measures taken by the Corpor ation to make it buoyant and 
profitable.    
(1) Adopting aggressive marketing by entering into 
marketing alliance with reputed industrial houses. 
(2) Advertising campaign, TV hoardings, glow signs, wall 
paintings, etc., by allocating a budget of Rs.0.50 per bag. 
(3) Reducing employees’ strength  by introducing Voluntary 
Retirement Scheme with the assistance of Government of 
India. 
(4) Boosting of employee’s morale by clearing their dues and 
cultivating confidence amongst them. 
(5) Employees’ participation in decision making process. 
 

10 
(6) Cost reduction in all areas of activities, i.e., controlling of 
operational and non-operational costs. 
(7) Revenue generation by utilising idle infrastructure.   
18.  The rehabilitation scheme sanc tioned by the Hon’ble BIFR on 3 
May 2006 suggested closure of seven unviable plants located in Mandhar, 
Kurkunta, Akaltara, Charkhi Dadri , Delhi Grinding  Unit/Bhatinda 
Grinding unit, Nayagaon and Adilabad and sale of assets of those plants 
through Asset Sale Committee. Th e employees working in those units 
were kept under the category of Volunt ary Separation Scheme to get rid 
of unproductive fixed expenses. Th e liabilities of the company were 
further reduced due to the waiver of interests, penalties and surcharge on 
the Government dues.  The revival pa ckage also consisted of concessions 
from the Government, financial institutions, banks and creditors. 
 
19. The other three operating plan ts such as Rajban, Tandur and 
Bokajan are to be continued as these ar e viable.  The scheme stressed on 
expansion, technological upgradati on and modernisation of these three 
units to make them competitive and enhance the margin of profit. 
 
20. The Committee notes that the host of measures adopted to 
support the CCI has helpe d it to transform th is ailing Corporation 
and bring it to a level of profitable company at present. This is a 
noteworthy success.  It has to be  carried forward and the momentum 
of its revival has to be sustained.   
 
21. The Committee finds that the BIFR recommended for infusion 
of funds. While Rs. 153.62 crore have  been  given   as   non-plan  
loan  for  repayment  to  secured  and   unsecured  creditors  and  for  
 

-11- 
meeting the VRS/VSS expenses, the plan assistance involving Rs. 
30.67 crore for expansion of Ra jban and Bokajan plants and 
upgradation of Tandur plant have been provided for. It is also 
envisaged that the CCI would pay to the Government of India the 
existing plan loan of Rs. 150.90 cro re and fresh non-plan loan of Rs. 
153.62 crore out of sale proceeds of seven non-operating plants.   
 
22. The Committee while taking note of the measures of the 
Government of India for revival and r estructuring of the CCI, would like 
to know the outcome of the money spent. It recommends that the 
Department of Heavy Industry (DHI ) must closely monitor the way 
in which money is being spent fo r achieving the targeted goal and 
submit a detailed report in this regard to the Committee.   
 
23. On the basis of the information supplied to the Committee it is 
evident that the recommendation of  the BIFR to close down the 
aforementioned seven unviable units  (at para 18) was revisited.  
Based on the revised assessment it was found that it would be 
possible to revive the five non-op erating units (Adilabad, Kurkunta, 
Nayagaon, Akaltara and Mandhar Plants) and other three remaining 
non-operating units such as Char khi Dadri, Delhi Cement Grinding 
Unit and Bhatinda Cement Grinding Unit would be sold out after the 
re-evaluation of their assets. 
 
24. The Committee felt that it is a worthwhile effort as the 
aforementioned five non-operating units  have access to vast reservoir of 
limestone which is essential for manufacture of cement. The Techno 
Economic Feasibility Report for revi val of these units have been 
prepared and such repor ts indicate the possibility  of their revival to 
address the rising demand for cement in our country. The feasibility  
 

12 
report outlines the plan for next ten years which would enhance the 
capacity of the cement plants and increase its economic operations.    
 
25. It is worthwhile to refer to the Eleventh Five Year Plan document.  
Under the heading ‘Issues and Challe nges for the Cement Industry’ it 
observed that “Achievement of gr owth and targets for the cement 
industry is crucially dependent on vari ous inputs such as limestone, coal, 
power, and last but not the least, on transportation of limestone. Coal 
continues to be the main fuel for th e cement industry and will remain so 
in the near future”. Since the revival packag e for the above-mentioned 
five non-operating units, factor th e availability of limestone as a key 
issue, it is important that the CCI ta ke inspiration from the observation of 
the Eleventh Five Year Plan which also  lays emphasis on the inputs such 
as limestone for producing more cement.   
 
26. The CMD of the CCI informed the Committee vide letter 
No.Ref.CMD/CCI/12 (13)/2011, dated February 01, 2011 that the revival 
of non-operating plants was reviewed  in the Asset Sale Committee 
meeting held on 07 December 2010 wher ein it was decide d that the sale 
process for the disposal of non-operating  plants has been restarted. This 
would mean that the three plants which are functioning would be allowed 
to manufacture cement an d the other non-operating plants would be sold 
out.   
27. The Committee strongly recommen ds that due attention must 
be paid to the Techno Economic Feasibility Reports for the revival of 
non-operating plants either by starting production process there 
through joint ventures or by le asing them to the other cement 
manufacturing  bodies.   The Committee would like to get a detailed  
 
 

13 
report in this regard, both from the Cement Corporation of India 
and the Department of Heavy Industries.  
  
28. One of the reasons cited by the Ce ment Corporation of India for its 
uninterrupted loss is the absence of captive power and critical dependence 
on the electricity boards of the resp ective States which quite often could 
not supply adequate power for th e operation of the cement plants 
functioning under the CCI. The point advanced by the CCI in the meeting 
of the Committee is well taken.  The Eleventh Five Year Plan document 
also takes note of the point and obser ves “The producti on of cement is a 
continuous process requiring unint errupted power supply. Since the 
availability and quality of grid power  supply continue to be a problem, 
the use of captive power has been increasing.  Most of the cement units 
have installed captive power generation capacities to the extent of 60% to 
100% of their requirement. The cap tive power generation capacity of 
cement industry is estimated to be  1825 MW at present, of which 61% is 
based on diesel and the rest 39% on co al.  With growing uncertainties of 
grid power availability, it is estim ated that 2000 MW captive power 
would be required during Eleventh Plan”. 
 
29. The Committee strongly recomm ends both to the Planning 
Commission and the DHI to pay h eed to the above observations of 
the Eleventh Five Year Plan document and seriously undertake 
efforts for establishing captive power plants in the plants of the CCI.   
 
30. Human resource management is ke y to the revival and success of a 
company. It is noteworthy that the Cement Corporation of India has taken 
measures to improve the morale of its employees as part of its strategy for 
improving  its  performance. However,  the  Committee  notes  with  
 

14 
concern that due to si ckness of the company and the adoption of 
successive Voluntary Retirement Scheme the strength of executives of 
the CCI operated plants got reduced from 531 to 206 during 2000-04.  
The ban on recruitment and the absence of induction of new 
employees since 1998 has further added to the problem. The shortage 
of manpower has thus ba dly affected the operati onal function of the 
units.  It is sad to note that many employe es have left the CCI to join the 
private sector cement plants which have been doing well due to the 
upsurge of demand for cement.  There is another concern arising out of 
age profile and career stagnation of  executives which has resulted in 
serious lack of executive strength at  middle and senior management level 
which is key to the success of many ar eas such as operations, finance and 
human resource.  In te rms of manpower strength the CCI as of now has 
1037 employees consisti ng of 117 executives, 174 supervisors and 746 
workers.  The depletion of expert ha nd has been caused due to retirement 
age which is fixed at 58 years. During the presentation before the 
Committee it was strongly pu t forth by the CCI that the retirement age of 
the CCI employees should be raised to 60 years for retaining the ‘existing 
experienced, qualified and skilled ma npower at all the levels’. The CCI 
has already submitted a proposal for enhancement of retirement age to the 
administrative Ministry for seeki ng Cabinet approval. The Committee 
was informed by the Chairman and Managing Director Shri R.P. Tak vide 
his letter No.Ref.CMD/CCI/12(13)/ 2011 dated Februa ry 01, 2011 that 
“Due to upsurge in the cement i ndustry, experienced and technical 
manpower are likely to be or being attracted by the competitors as well as 
prospective entrepreneurs at very lucrative remuneration packages.  
Lateral entry from PSUs and private ceme nt industry is also not feasible 
since all the major PUSs and private companies are having retirement age 
of 60 years.   
 

15 
Even the existing employees who are retiring or have retired are being 
engaged by private sector cement companies on a handsome 
remuneration package. Even if the Corporation resorts to new recruitment 
for middle and senior level executives,  it is apprehended that it may not 
be able to attract expe rienced and qualified candi dates due to existing 
retirement age of 58 years as in most of the public sector and private 
sector companies, th e retirement age is 60 years and above. The 
employees working in such companies at  this level may not like to shift 
such organisations where retirement ag e is 58 years.  Therefore, the age 
limit should be immediately enhanced to 60 years to overcome the acute 
problem of manpower”.   
 
31. The Committee stro ngly approves the demand of the CCI 
seeking enhancement of retirem ent age from 58 to 60. The 
Committee also strongly supports  the stand of CCI for immediate 
posting of board level executive in  the key area of operations and 
marketing.  It is understood th at the public enterprises selection 
board is considering a proposal in this regard for creation of such 
posts. The Committee strongly recommends that the public 
enterprises selection board must clea r such proposals immediately.  
The Committee also would like to have a report from  the PESB in 
this connection.   
 
32. The Prime Minister of our country Dr. Manmohan Singh while 
giving away the MoU Excellence Awards and Scope Awards for the year 
2008-09 said that “It is no small measure due to th e robustness and 
resilience of our public sector ente rprise, and in particular, our public 
sector banks, that we did better  than most  other countries  in  weathering  
 
 

16 
the global economic crisis which s uddenly erupted in September 2008”.  
While underlining the vitality and inhere nt strength of our public sector 
enterprises he made a very signi ficant observation concerning quality 
human resources for making public s ector enterprises more competitive 
and viable.  He said “We must ensure that a vibrant private sector does 
not deprive our PSEs of our  best talent”.  He fu rther added, “But, the 
overall working environment in the company has now become an equally 
important factor for attracting and re taining employees. We must ensure 
proper succession planning in our compan ies. We must therefore ensure 
that we are able to recruit bright young men and women into public sector 
jobs, and must have the ability to re tain them there. I would urge the 
ministries and the public sector leader ship to give serious attention to 
human resource development issues at all levels”. 
 
33. The Committee feels that the demands and concerns of the CCI 
for posting of board level executives in the key area of operation and 
marketing and the immediate enha ncement of retirement age from 
58 years to 60 years to retain the qualified and experienced 
manpower are valid in the context of  the articulation of the Prime 
Minister of our country who has stro ng faith on the ability of our 
public sector to face the taste of market scrutiny.   
 
34. In fact, manifold measures ta ken by the CCI and the consultative 
and participative working culture it has fostered have contributed to boost 
up its productivity.  The Committee notes with satisfaction that the 
manpower productivity (MT per em ployee) has gone up from 672 in 
the year 2006-07 to 897 in the year 2009-10.   
 
 
 

17 
35. In the increasingly competitive atmosphere the public sector 
enterprises have to function with th eir own strength.  Many of the public 
sector enterprises which were referred to the Board of Reconstruction of 
public sector enterprises have success fully revived showing profits.  The 
Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh stated that the “The mantra of 
success for the success ful companies has been empowerment and 
enablement rather than mere financial assistance”.  
 
36. The Committee feels that the gradual revival of the Cement 
Corporation of India augurs well for its future.  Its confidence in 
itself that it can diversify its products, improve the capacity of its 
exiting operating plants to bring it at par with the competitors 
capacity, to replace its old equipment with energy efficient equipment 
constitutes its forward looking atti tude.  The Committee hopes that 
with its increasing profit, it can positively emerge as a major player 
in the cement industry of our country. 
 
37. The Eleventh Five Year Plan document dealing with ‘Demand 
Forecast and Investment Requirement for the Cement Industry’ observed, 
“Realization of capacity  projection of 298 mil lion tonnes would imply a 
capacity addition of 118 Million MT during the Eleventh Plan period.  Of 
the total capacity addition required  for the Eleventh Plan, 86 Million MT 
would come from new Greenfie ld units requiring an investment of         
Rs. 34400 crore and 32 Million tonnes through brown field 
expansions/de-bottlenecking requiring  investment of Rs. 6400 crore.  
Thus the total investment requirement during the Eleventh Plan works out 
to Rs. 52400 crore t ogether with Rs. 1100 crore and  Rs. 500 crore 
required for conversion of existing wet  process plants to dry process 
technology and setting up of coal washeries”.    

18 
38. There are bright prospects for th e cement industry in our country.  
This has to be taken advantage of by the Cement Corporation of India.  
Its gradual revival is a good sign.  It  can build on its achievements and 
contribute to the gigantic task of  nation-building and take forward our 
economic growth which would be dete rmined to a great extent by the 
quality and quantity of cement made  available for meeting our growing 
requirements.  
 
39. The Committee takes note of the fact that company’s Board in 
its 298th meeting held on 22nd July, 2010 has authorized C&MD of the 
company to take necessary action  for filling up of  vacant posts 
arising out of normal retirement, resignation, death, etc., at 
Operating Units and Corporate Office with effect from the year 2010 
as per Recruitment Rules and guide lines issued from time to time 
and the process of recruitment to fill up these posts is under progress.  
The Committee would like to have th e status of progress made in this 
regard.     
 
******* 
 