107th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/107threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:58]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
ONE HUNDRED-SEVENTH REPORT
ON
LIQUIDATED DAMAGES AND RELATED ISSUES
(MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND
PUBLIC ENTERPRISES)
 
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2002)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2002)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2002/AGRAHAYANA, 1924 (SAKA)
E-mail : rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in
            Website: http://parliamentofindia.nic.in
CONTENTS
1.   COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2.   INTRODUCTION
3.   REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
4.   OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE
5.   MINUTES
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Date of Constitution - 1st January 2002)
   *1.  Dr. P.C. Alexander  — Chairman
          RAJYA SABHA

107th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/107threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:58]
     2.  Prof. M.M. Agarwal
     3.  Dr. Abrar Ahmed
     4.  Shri Jayantilal Barot
     5.  Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
     6.  Shrimati Saroj Dubey
     7.  Dr. Faguni Ram
     8.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
     9.  Shri P.K. Maheshwari
   10.  Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
   11.  Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
   12.  Shri S. Sivasubramanian
   13.  Shrimati Sushree Devi
   14.  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
   15.  Vacant
          LOK  SABHA
   16.  Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
   17.  Kumari Mamata Banerjee
   18.  Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
   19.  Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
   20.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das
   21.  Shri Deepak Kumar
   22.  Shri Thomas Hansda
   23.  Dr. S. Jagathrakshakan
   24.  Shri A.C. Jose
   25.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
   26.  Shri Brijlal Khabri
   27.  Shri Sunil Khan
   28.  Shri Manjay Lal
   29.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
   30.  Shri A. Narendra
   31.  Shri Ananta Nayak
   32.  Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
   33.  Shri Dharam Raj Singh Patel
 
* Appointed Chairman and Member of the Committee w.e.f. 12th November, 2002 vice Shri T.N. Chaturvedi who
ceased to be the Member of the Committee and Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 20th August, 2002.
   34.  Shri Uttamrao Patil
   35.  Shri Malyala Rajaiah
   36.  Shri P. Rajendran
   37.  Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
   38.  Shri Tarachand Sahu
   39.  Shri Ramanand Singh
   40.  Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
   41.  Chowdhary Talib Hussain
   42.  Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
   43.  Shrimati D.M. Vijaya Kumari
   44.  Shri Beni Prasad Verma

107th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/107threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:58]
   45.  Vacant
          SECRETARIAT
          Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
          Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
          Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
          Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
          Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
  INTRODUCTION
          I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having been authorised
by the Committee, hereby present this One Hundred Seventh Report on the Liquidated Damages and Related Issues
(Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises).
2.       The Committee, in this context, held meetings with representatives of various Ministries of BYNL Group of
Companies on 17th April, 13th August and 9th December, 2002.
3.       The Committee at its meeting held on 17th December, 2002 considered and adopted the Report.
NEW DELHI; 
17th December, 2002
DR. P. C. ALEXANDER
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
CHAPTER–I
LIQUIDATED DAMAGES – THE CONCEPT
            In a supply contract if there is a delay beyond the contractual delivery period in execution of supply, services,
erection and commissioning, the consignee may end up suffering actual or potential losses. Direct losses arising out of
the delay actual in nature that can be directly quantified like debt servicing etc. Potential losses are indirect losses like
opportunity costs, cost overrun of the project, time overrun of the project leading to inflation of project cost etc. The
losses tantamount to the damages suffered by the consignee and quantified unit of these damages are known as
Liquidated Damages.
2.         As per the standard terms of conditions of contracts internationally acclaimed the amount of liquidated damages
is generally ½% of the total value of the contract for every week of delay in supplies or other performance of the
contract plus any cost escalation that has taken place on account of any increase in taxes or imposition of fresh taxes, or
cost escalation of any raw material on account of this during the period of delay, cost escalation of labour due to any
new wage agreement, or imposition of any statutory conditions. However, the supplier will be entitled to any decrease in
cost on the above account of remission of taxes or withdrawal of taxes during the said period between stipulated
delivery period and the actual date of delivery.
3.         As per standard terms of conditions of supply contract generally also provide for force majeure clause meaning
unforeseen circumstances like legal injunctions, natural calamities, industrial action by workers etc. are reasons
attributable to the delay in supply or performance, the same is exempt from imposition of liquidated damages.
4.         The Sub-Committee-III for Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises of Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry came to know about the effect of Liquidated Damages on the supplier
when it visited Bharat Heavy Plates and Vessels at Visakhapatnam (a subsidiary of BYNL) on 11th July, 2000. The
workers union as well as management of BHPV informed the Committee that due to delay in deliveries, Rs. 41 crores
had been held up with different units of the company which had created cash flow problems. Later on, after visiting

107th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/107threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:58]
other units of Bharat Yantra Nigam it was revealed that all the subsidiaries of the holding company had problems on
account LDs imposed on them by their client companies. The matter came up before the Sub-Committee at its meeting
held on 9th November, 2000. The Convenor, after hearing the Secretaries, Department of Heavy Industry, and Ministry
of Petroleum and Natural Gas, about the present status of the outstanding issues of amounts of BYNL group of
companies withheld by various oil sector PSUS on account of LD and other disputed matters, directed the Secretary,
Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises to suitably take up the issue with the Ministry of Petroleum and
Natural Gas for advising the Oil PSUs to consider these cases favourably. The Committee also directed to follow it up
by personal visits by representatives of BYNL and their respective subsidiaries to the concerned Oil PSUs.
5.         Thereafter,  the Committee on Industry in its 44th Report present/laid on 21st December, 2000 recommended as
follows :
5.1       The Committee also came to know during its interaction with the workers and management of some PSUs that
due to non-delivery of final goods in schedule time, penalties have been imposed on them in the form of Liquidity
Damages (LD) which are proving a death knell for some of them.
5.2       The Department of Heavy Industry should take up the matter with the client PSUs for release of outstanding
amount locked-up on account of Liquidity Damages (LD) to such a possible extent, which can be released by the client
PSUs. This will be a helpful gesture to the PSUs who are having working capitalproblem.
5.3       The Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprise in their Action Taken Note informed that Government had
been taking up the matter with the concerned Ministries/Departments for release of withheld amount on account of LDs.
6.         This was reported to the House vide Committee's 60th report presented/laid on the 19th December, 2001. Since
the persuasive efforts of Department of Heavy Industry could not bear much fruit, 
Sub-Committee-III observed that these issues needed to be approached through a coordinated effort. The Committee
also felt that there was a lack of appreciation of concerns expressed by DHI in respect of the said issue by the other
Ministry. The Committee, therefore, decided to hear both the Department of Heavy Industry and the Ministry of
Petroleum and Natural Gas to find out a probable solution.
CHAPTER–II
MEETINGS HELD WITH THE MINISTRIES AND PSUS THEREUNDER
7.         The Committee held meetings on 17th April, 13th August and 4th December, 2002 on the issue. The
deliberations of the Committee are given below :
Meeting held on 17th April, 2002
7.1       At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the Secretaries of the Ministries of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises and Petroleum and Natural Gas, and representatives of various Central PSUs. The Convenor apprised the
Committee that the Committee had been pursuing the case of liquidated damages, which had been imposed by the client
PSUs on the supplier PSUs for non-adherence to the delivery schedule. There had been some problems among the
PSUs. These Liduidated Damages were imposed due to delay and as a result the money had been held up and the
supplier PSUs, specially the BYNL group of companies, had been facing working capital problem.
7.2       Secretary,  Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises, informed the Committee that the engineering
industries were facing some problems as there had been no fresh investment in the economy. One of the main problems
had been the lack of working capital because the working capital limits had become irregular. The banks were not
willing to give further advance and the Government was also reluctant to issue fresh funds for the working capital. The
BYNL group of companies had a large measure of support from oil sector and the oil sector was one sector in the
economy where there had been some investment. About 50% of the turnover of these companies came from the oil
PSUs and generally oil sector PSUs also gave benefit of purchase preference to these companies. There had been delay
in execution of projects but in the recent past, these companies had assured that things had improved and some of those
delays or level of delays or the extent of delays that took place earlier, were not taking place now. The process of
disinvestments in all these companies was under way and in order to optimise the return to the Government, the

107th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/107threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:58]
Ministry was trying to do everything that would add value to these companies and if these companies were running well
or better, the chances were that it would get Expression of Interest and also a better price. He further informed that in
some of the major cases wherever there were some delays, the delays were sometimes due to involvement of various
parties or changes in specifications. But he had been assured that delay on the part of BYNL group of companies did not
contribute to the additional delay. He requested that in such cases at least the Boards of oil PSUs could take lenient
view. If some of the major cases could be disposed of in such a way, the working capital problem could be solved and
most other problems could be taken care of.
7.3       Secretary, Ministry of Petroleum, informed that on the recommendation of the Committee, the agreement
between Department of Heavy Industries and Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas for placing of orders on these
companies, which expired on January, 2002, had been extended upto 2003. As far as liquidated damages were
concerned, the Ministry had written to the companies to take up the matter with the Boards.
7.4       He further stated that some progress had been made, but it was slow. He requested the Committee that if the
Department of Heavy Industries considered this issue as an issue applicable to all PSUs across the board and issue
policy guidelines, it would be much easier for them to take action in the matter. He further informed that all the
guidelines which were given and which were under contemplation of the Department of Programme Implementation
envisaged that liquidated damages may be imposed upto a certain value. That was their real problem. However, BYNL
group of companies could now bid without any bank guarantee. They did not require Original Manufacturer's
Certification and oil PSUs would continue to give them existing purchase preference.
7.5       The Convenor at that point said that BYNL group of companies should improve their delivery schedule as a
small delay on their part resulted in a great loss for the oil PSUs.
7.5.1    Secretary, Petroleum and Natural Gas, thereupon, suggested that Liquidated Damages upto March, 2001 should
be taken up for discussion to see how they could be settled. Thereupon, the Convenor requested both the Secretaries to
prepare a joint report on the subject for consideration of the Committee. The Sub-Committee strongly recommended
that all liquidated damages, as outstanding on 31.3.2001 should be resolved through this joint exercise, which was
agreed upon by both the Secretaries.
7.6       On the basis of the discussion held on 17th April, the Committee on Industry in its 72nd report observed that :
7.6.1    The Sub-Committee-III had a meeting with the Ministries of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises and
Petroleum and Natural Gas where the question of Liquidity Damages (LD) came up. The Liquidity Damages is a form
of penalty, which is imposed by the client PSEs on the supplier PSEs for non-adhering to schedule delivery within the
stipulated time. Since BYNL consists of small companies, the imposition of this penalty proved a setback for these
companies. The Secretary, DHI, stated, "the reason for delay in supplying items was due to the shortage of working
capital. If suitable advances are given to the supplier PSEs then this problem can be sorted out". He further suggested,
"The Liquidity Damages pertaining to the last millennium should be waived". The Sub-Committee agreed with the
proposal.
7.7       The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should assist the companies wherever and
whenever the companies under the DHI are facing working capital problem and are not able to execute the orders in
hand. The Government should assist the companies under the DHI to meet the shortage of working capital in the form of
Bank Guarantee, non-plan loans, etc. The Committee further recommends that the DHI should help these companies by
getting advances from the client PSEs for the execution of the work orders. The Committee also suggests that under One
Time Settlement, all the cases of Liquidity Damages upto March, 2001 may be considered and settled. The Committee
recommends that both the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises and the Ministry of Petroleum and
Natural Gas should make joint efforts to resolve the issue relating to the Liquidity Damages for placement of work
orders on the BYNL group of companies.
7.8       The Department of Heavy Industries in their Action Taken Note informed that :
            As far as the issue of release of withheld payments by the oil PSUs on account of LDs, it is stated that this issue
has also been raised in the 44th report on the Parliamentary Standing Committee as well as in the oral evidence held on
17.4.2002 before the Parliamentary Standing Committee. The Committee has already been informed about the efforts
being made by the Department of Heavy Industries to resolve the issue. However, the Parliamentary Standing

107th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/107threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:58]
Committee during the oral evidence meeting held on 17.4.2002 has suggested that the Secretaries of the Department of
Heavy Industries and the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas should prepare a joint report on the subject for
consideration of the Committee so that the issue of all the LDs (as on 31.3.2001) should be resolved through this joint
exercise. A joint meeting between the two ministries to resolve the issue was held on 8th August 2002. The Committee
was apprised of the outcome of the exercise in the meeting held on 13.8.2002.
8.         Meeting held on 13th August 2002
8.1       The Convenor welcomed the Members of the Sub-Committee and the representatives of Ministries of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises and Petroleum and Natural Gas and also representatives of the ONGC, HPCL, IOCL,
GAIL, OIL and BPCL.
8.2       The Convenor apprised the Sub-Committee that at its last meeting held on the 17th April, 2002 the issue relating
to liquidated damages imposed on the Bharat Yantra Nigam Ltd. (BYNL) Group of Companies by the Oil Companies
came up for discussion and the Committee opined that liquidated damages upto March, 2002 should be settled.
However, Secretary, Petroleum and Natural Gas suggested that Liquidated Damages upto March, 2001 would be taken
up as a special case and after having interaction with the various Oil Boards, a solution would be found.
8.3       Secretary, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas informed the Committee that the matter was discussed with
the various Boards of the oil companies and the following proposals had been mooted for consideration :–
8.3.1    Whichever future project would be taken up by BYNL Group of Companies, 50% of the project cost would be
paid to them in advance as soft loan. BYNL would put forth remaining 50% to complete the project.
8.3.2    As stated by the BYNL, there had been an element of contributory negligence on the part of organizations also.
The details of the contributory negligence may be given to Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas for onward
transmission to the respective Boards for review.
8.3.3    The cases where losses occurred due to delay in supply of equipment were to be seen separately.
8.3.4    The cases where supply of equipment did not result in any delay in completion of projects would be considered
sympathetically.
8.4       The Secretary added that this was a broad approach and as asked by Department of Heavy Industries, one time
dispensation or half-a-time dispensation might not be possible.
8.5       Department of Heavy Industries informed the Committee that Department of Heavy Industries agreed with all
points made by Secretary, Petroleum and Natural Gas except that there was one major point of disagreement.
Department of Heavy Industries suggested that an ad hoc amount of 50 per cent be released from the Liquidated
Damages and that would augment the ways and means position of BYNL companies and Department of Heavy
Industries would give some kind of guarantee on that amount. Rest of the amounts can be settled as and when a view
was taken by the respective Boards. The second point the Department of Heavy Industry made was on capacity building
keeping in view the country was opening up and it would have a different kind of import regime. Companies would be
coming to Petroleum and construction sector and user sector and capital goods sector should help each other in building
a certain capacity to reap benefit of the new situation.
8.6       After hearing both the Ministers, the Convenor observed that both the Secretaries should meet and sort out the
matter. He stressed that it was one time help that was being sought. He desired that Ministry of Petroleum & Natural
Gas and Department of Heavy Industries should come out with certain suggestions before the Committee for its
consideration within ten days.
8.7       The Committee also expressed its satisfaction as the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas agreed to pay Rs. 20
crores as advance to Bharat Heavy Plate and Vessels (BHPV) for completing the projects in Assam and Bihar.
9.         Meeting held on 4th December, 2002
9.1       The Convenor welcomed the Secretaries of the Ministries of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises, and
Petroleum and Natural Gas and representatives of the PSUs thereunder. The Convenor recalled that in the last meeting
both the Secretaries were directed to consider the matter relating to LD. He wanted to know the present status.

107th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/107threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:58]
9.2       Secretary, Department of Heavy Industry, informed that they had promised that they would try to liquidate the
LDs etc. Over a period of time information had been supplied to the Committee that about 3 crores have already been
liquidated. Rs. 62 crores was still pending and one of the reasons for pendency was that the petroleum companies as
well as their companies were not able to reconcile the figures. That did not indicate a very good health of negotiations.
Secretary, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas informed that (1) there were problem on both sides. In a number of
cases there had been delays by the companies for supplying equipments. In some cases ONGC were at fault because of
which they had difficulty in supplying. It had been decided that he and Secretary, Heavy Industry would meet once a
month to consider these questions of coordination. (2) As far as the question of liquidated damages was concerned, it
had been decided that they would give an opportunity to BYNL companies to make a presentation before the Board of
these oil companies where they would give an entire point of view and then the Board would take a view.
            Representatives of IOC informed that they had teamed up with BYNL. Two projects were in motion—one at
Barauni and other at Digboi — and these would be completed soon. CMD, GAIL, informed that they had been in touch
with BYNL. There were issues of reconciliation because BYNL's records and their records were not tallying. The first
exercise would be that they had a mutually agreed number of what had been recovered. CMD, ONGC, informed that
there had been slippages in the matter of supplying and commissioning equipments. From April this year, they had
reduced their gas flaring by 35% in Gandhar. If they get additional compressors from BYNL, they would be able to
reduce it to 80% in the current financial year.
9.3       The Convenor observed that ONGC's loss was country's loss. He asked the BYNL to state what had gone wrong.
CMD, BYNL, informed that after the LC was opened the main bottleneck had been the imported engines. They had
promised 10th November and 15th December for 6th and 7th compressor. 6th was despatched on 30th November and
7th would be despatched on 30th December. That was the final date. Their team was already there at the site and they
had to do 72-hour mechanical test. So there had been initial delays, which they have not been able to catch up, but they
would catch up with that so that there was no further delay.
9.4       Thereafter, the Convenor observed that their progress was not up to the mark. The Committee was trying to do
three things (1) if the company was not a fit venture, it should be wound up; (2) if it otherwise was good for profit the
Committee would recommend it for help; (3) if it was good then the Committee would assist in amalgamation, mergers
etc. The Committee did not want other companies to suffer. Inefficiency of one should not reflect on the other.
9.5       The representative of Bharat Petroleum informed that with BYNL 18 orders for Rs. 170 crores were currently in
execution. They did help them financially. Till current date the progress was in order.
9.6       Representative of Hindustan Petroleum informed that they had been helping BYNL in general. Time delay was
an issue. In their Bombay refinery they placed an order on BHPV for a 50 tonne boiler. However, it was not delivering
what was it supposed to do and even after commissioning BHPV was rectifying that.
9.7       Secretary, Petroleum and Natural Gas, informed that the problem arose because there was lack of coordination
between their ministry and BYNL companies. Now this would be sorted out in the monthly meeting of the two
secretaries. He further informed that the problems of finance, delays and Liquidated Damages will be brought before the
independent bodies of the Board which would be consisted of independent and non-official directors. The independent
bodies would look at it with an open mind and come out with a recommendation. It was hoped that something would
come out of that exercise.
9.8       The Convenor enquired as to whether a One Time Settlement could be had to help the BYNL companies.
Secretary, Petroleum and Natural Gas, informed that it was possible for the Government to write off its dues. It was not
possible for the Government to wave dues of a corporation. The objective was that BYNL should continue to get orders.
The second is that they should continue to do well and they should not face difficulty in executing work because of lack
of finances. They were already getting the orders. In case there were any difficulties because of the lack of finances,
when both secretaries meet in the monthly meetings, they would have a discussion and see that there were no difficulties
in executing the orders. Thirdly, the Liquidating Damages question should be seen by an independent director. If this
mechanism was allowed to work for a year, it was hoped that the objective of BYNL would be achieved and time gap
reduced. When Convenor enquired whether they could do something about waiving off LDs upto March 2001,
Secretary, Petroleum and Natural Gas, informed that they had taken up matter to the Boards but the Boards had not
agreed to waive the Liquidated Damages. Although ONGC had argued the case in a fair manner but since ONGC had

107th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/107threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:58]
suffered losses so they could not compound their losses by waiving the penalty on an organisation that had caused the
loss.
9.9       The Convenor observed that in the interest of the industry and country, both the secretaries should spend a lot of
time to resolve the issue. He opined that as a One Time Settlement, substantial amount of LDs should be waived upto
March 31, 2001 taking a cue from Government decision that have been done in the case of UTI and IDBI. The
Committee's decision was to be taken to Board and they may be conveyed the concern of the Committee in this matter.
The Convenor strongly felt that in case the Committee's recommendation was accepted by the Boards, the Committee
would not call meetings time and again to review the issue and everything would be left to the Secretaries of Heavy
Industry and Petroleum & Natural Gas.
CHAPTER–III
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
10.       The Committee noted that both the Secretaries of Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises and
Petroleum and Natural Gas would have monthly meetings to sort out the problems of finance and delays and Liquidated
Damages would be brought before the independent bodies of the Boards (consisting of independent and non-official
Directors) and those independent bodies would look at it with an open mind. The Committee also observed during the
course of the meetings with various PSUs that delays were sometimes due to involvement of various parties like the
projects of Gandhar where ONGC, Engineering Project India Ltd., Bharat Pumps and Compressors Ltd. and holding
company BYNL had to sort out the problem arising due to supply and testing of compressors. Delays also occurred due
to change in specifications. The Committee also noted that sometimes delays occurred due to labour problem
particularly in the State of Bihar and insurgency problems in Assam. Delays also took place due to delay in importing
engines from abroad due to difficulty in opening Letter of Credit by the supplier company. The Committee feels the Oil
Boards should go into all these aspects and consider the cases where delays on part of the supplier did not contribute to
additional delay before imposing LDs. The Committee recommends that both the Secretaries should look into the details
in their monthly meetings keeping in view the feelings of the Committee. The Committee also recommends that a
quarterly report may be submitted to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry about the
finance, delays and LDs.
11.       The Committee noted during the deliberation that delay in fabrication, supply and commissioning of equipments
contributed to the overall delay in timely completion of the projects. The Committee observes that now delays should be
avoided at all costs. The Committee recommends that a mechanism should be found out by the Department of Heavy
Industry to monitor the work chart of the supplier company and corrective measure should be taken in case delay
occurred at the incipient stage before the delay has any damaging effect on the ongoing project.
12.       Keeping in view the overall industrial scenario, the Committee supports the viewpoint of DHI made by them at
its meeting held on 13th August, 2002 on capacity building in the country itself as the country is opening up and it
would have a different kind of import regime. Companies would be coming to Petroleum sector and construction sector,
and therefore, user sector and capital goods sector should help each other in building a certain capacity to reap benefit of
the new situation.
13.       The Committee strongly feels that in the national interest, a One Time Settlement should be worked out and
substantial amount of LDs may be waived upto 31 March, 2001 to improve the ways and means of Indian companies
taking a cue from the Government decision that has been taken in the case of UTI and IDBI. The Committee strongly
recommends that its concern may be conveyed to the Oil Boards and they may be impressed upon to have a
sympathetic look at the matter. The Committee further observes that in case problems relating to LDs upto 31st
March, 2001 are settled amicably, the Committee would not dilate the matter further and leave it to the
Secretaries of both the Ministries.
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE

107th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/107threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:58]
            The Committee also came to know during its interaction with the workers and management of some PSUs that
due to non-delivery of final goods in schedule time, penalties have been imposed on them in the form of Liquidity
Damages (LD) which are proving a death knell for some of them.                                                              (Para 5.1)
            The Department of Heavy Industry should take up the matter with the client PSUs for release of outstanding
amount locked-up on account of Liquidity Damages (LD) to such a possible extent which can be released by the client
PSUs. This will be a helpful gesture to the PSUs who are having working capital problem.                    (Para 5.2)
            The Sub-Committee-III had a meeting with the Ministries of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises and
Petroleum and Natural Gas where the question of Liquidity Damages (LD) came up. The Liquidity Damages is a form
of penalty, which is imposed by the client PSEs on the supplier PSEs for non-adhering to schedule delivery within the
stipulated time. Since BYNL consists of small companies, the imposition of this penalty proved a setback for these
companies. The Secretary, DHI, stated, "the reason for delay in supplying items was due to the shortage of working
capital. If suitable advances are given to the supplier PSEs then this problem can be sorted out." He further suggested,
"The Liquidity Damages pertaining to the last millennium should be waived". The Sub-Committee agreed with the
proposal.      (Para 7.6.1)
            The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should assist the companies wherever and
whenever the companies under the DHI are facing working capital problem and are not able to execute the orders in
hand. The Government should assist the companies under the DHI to meet the shortage of working capital in the form of
Bank Guarantee, non-plan loans, etc. The Committee further recommends that the DHI should help these companies by
getting advances from the client PSEs for the execution of the work orders. The Committee also suggests that under One
Time Settlement, all the cases of Liquidity Damages upto March, 2001 may be considered and settled. The Committee
recommends that both the Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises and the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural
Gas should make joint efforts to resolve the issue relating to the Liquidity Damages and placement of work orders on
the BYNL group of companies.                                                                                                          (Para 7.7)
            The Committee observes that now delays should be avoided at all costs. The Committee recommends that a
mechanism should be found out by the Department of Heavy Industry to monitor the work chart of the supplier
company and corrective measure should be taken in case delay occurred at the incipient stage before the delay has any
damaging effect on the ongoing project.                                                                                              (Para 11)
            The Committee strongly recommends that its concern may be conveyed to the Oil Boards and they may be
impressed upon to have a sympathetic look at the matter. The Committee further observes that in case problems relating
to LDs upto 31st March, 2001 are settled amicably, the Committee would not be dilate the matter further and leave it to
the Secretaries of both the Ministries.                                  (Para 13)
MINUTES
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
          The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 17th December, 2002 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
          PRESENT
     1.  Dr. P.C. Alexander  — Chairman
          RAJYA  SABHA
     2.  Prof. M.M. Agarwal
     3.  Shrimati Saroj Dubey
     4.  Dr. Faguni Ram

107th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/107threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:58]
     5.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
     6.  Shri P.K. Maheshwari
     7.  Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
     8.  Shri S. Sivasubramanian
     9.  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
          LOK  SABHA
   10.  Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
   11.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das
   12.  Shri Thomas Hansda
   13.  Shri A.C. Jose
   14.  Shri Sunil Khan
   15.  Shri Manjay Lal
   16.  Shri A. Narendra
   17.  Shri Ananta Nayak
   18.  Shri P. Rajendran
   19.  Dr. B.B. Ramaiah
   20.  Chowdhary Talib Hussain
   21.  Shrimati D.M. Vijaya Kumari
          SECRETARIAT
          Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
          Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
          Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
          Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
2.       At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them of agenda for the
meeting of the day.
3.       *                              *                              *
3.1     *                              *                              *
3.2     *                              *                              *
3.3     *                              *                              *
3.4     *                              *                              *
3.5     *                              *                              *
4.       The Committee, thereafter, took up Auto Policy for discussion. The Chairman suggested, after its reconstitution
on 1st January, 2003, could have a meeting in Chennai with all Tyre Manufacturers. Thereafter, the Chairman discussed
with the Members the scope of Auto Policy which aimed at to promote integrated, phased, enduring and self-sustained
growth of the Indian Automobile Industry. Some suggestions like use of dippers at night, higher ground clearance for
car, investment of R&D, excise duty on vehicles at the reasonable level, concessions to manufacturer of multi utility
vehicles were discussed for incorporation in the report.
5.       The Committee then adjourned at 5.45 P.M.
 
*** Relates to other matters.