PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/207threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:18:22]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
                                               
                                                                                                                      
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
ON
 
ACTION TAKEN NOTE ON THE 199TH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANT (2007-08) PERTAINING TO THE
MINISTRY OF AGRO AND RURAL INDUSTRIES
                                        
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON         29.04.2008 )
   (LAID ON THE TABLE  OF THE  LOK SABHA ON    29.04.2008)
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
 APRIL, 2008/VAISAKHA, 1930 (SAKA)
                 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
 
 
         
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
 
ON
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-09)
PERTAINING TO
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL & MEDIUM ENTERPRISES
                                        
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29.04.2008 )
   (LAID ON THE TABLE  OF THE  LOK SABHA ON 29.04.2008 )
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
 
 
                
TWO HUNDRED AND  SEVENTH  REPORT
TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTH  REPORT

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/207threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:18:22]
 APRIL, 2008/VAISAKHA, 1930 (SAKA)
 
                                                                                                                                PAGES
       
 1.       COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                ( i
)                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
 2.        INTRODUCTION                                                                                                 (
ii)                                                                                                                                                        
4         MINUTES                   
          
 
 
 
 
 
(Date of constitution 5th August, 2007)
 
                  Shri V. Hanumantha Rao                       —        Chairman
   
     RAJYA SABHA
2.       Shri  G. Sanjeeva Reddy
3.       Shri Kalraj Mishra       
4.       Smt. Hema Malini       
5.       Dr. K. Malaisamy       
6.       Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
7.       Shri O.T.Lepcha
8.       Shri Rahul Bajaj
9.       Vacant
10.   Vacant
                   
                           LOK SABHA
 
11.   Shri Guharam Ajgalle
12.   Shri Rajnarayan Budholiya
13.   Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary        
14.   Shri Ajoy Chakraborty 
15.   Shri Swadesh Chakraborty                  
16.   Shri Mohan S. Delkar
17.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan          
18.   Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria          
19.   Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani                                     
20.   Shri Kishanbhai V.  Patel
21.   Shri P.Rajendran         
22.   Shri Badiga  Ramakrishna
23.   Shri  Gurjeet Singh Rana
24.   Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
25.   Shri K.C. Pallanisamy
26.   Shri Ganesh Singh                   
27.    Kunwar  Manvendra Singh                 
28.   Shri V.K. Thummar                
29.   Shri Girdhari Yadav
30.   Shri Umakant Yadav
31.   Shri Subhash  S. Deshmukh     
            SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Director
Shri Girija Shanker Prasad,  Assistant  Director
Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Research Officer
                          Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Committee Officer
 
(i)
 
C O N T E N T S
 3.            REPORT    OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                                       2-32
         
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/207threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:18:22]
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having   been  authorized  by the Committee to present on its
behalf, do hereby present this Two Hundred Seventh Report of the Committee on Action taken notes furnished by Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries on the
recommendations contained in One Hundred Ninety Ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08).
 
2.         I also thank Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries for furnishing the Action Taken Note on the recommendations contained in One Hundred Ninety
Ninth report.
 
3.         The Committee at its meeting held on 28
th April , 2008 considered and adopted the Report.
 
 
                                                                                                                                                            V. HANUMANTHA RAO
NEW DELHI;                                                                                                                                                      Chairman                            
 April 29, 2008                                                                                                               Department -related Parliamentary
                                                                                                                                             Standing Committee on Industry
 
 
Chapter – I    
The recommendations/observations, which  have been
 accepted by the Ministry
 
1.         The Committee was informed that the Ministry of ARI has proposed an amount of Rs. 4.0 crore for village industries (S&T) for the year 2007-
08. After detailed discussions, the Planning Commission agreed to Rs. 2.00 crore only under this head.  Thus, 10 per cent of the total budget allocation
i.e. Rs. 0.20 crore has been kept from the functional head. The Committee observes that sufficient funds need to be made available at RE stage.
(Para 6.13)
Action Taken
 
2.         The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for necessary action before RE Stage.
 
3.         The Committee is very much concerned about the plight of traditional artisans and desires that they should be given a preferential treatment
for establishing units under REGP and a special interest rate should be provided to them.  It will help in encouraging the traditional village industries.
 
(Para 12.15)
 
4.         The recommendation of the Committee has been appreciated. However, it is to inform that the Ministry of MSME has proposed to introduce a new
scheme called “Prime Minister’s Employment Generation Programme (PMEGP)” by merging REGP into PMRY in XI Plan. The main objectives of the
PMEGP also include to bring together widely dispersed traditional artisans/ rural unemployed youth and give them self-employment opportunities at their
place, develop a feeling of self-reliance, self-dependence and to increase their social and economical status, provide continuous and sustainable employment to
a large segment of traditional and prospective artisans and rural and urban unemployed youth, facilitate participation of banks in the village industries sector so
as ensure higher credit flow to these industries, associate reputed non-government organization/reputed autonomous institutions/ bodies in the implementation
of PMEGP Scheme especially in the area of training, identification of area specific viable projects, etc. A higher level of subsidy (40 per cent for ceiling 30 per
cent to SC/ST, etc.) is being proposed which is more advantageous than lowering the interest rate on banks loans through interest subsidy.
 
 
5.         The Committee is of the opinion that REGP may be extended to urban areas as well to larger its base.  The Committee feels that this may be
considered while preparing the comprehensive proposal seeking  merger of employment  generation schemes like REGP and PMRY as envisaged in
XI five  year  plan.
(Para 12.16)
 
 
6.         As replied in paragraph No. 12.15, the Ministry of MSME proposed to introduce a new scheme called “Prime Minister’s Employment Generation
Programme (PMEGP)” by merging REGP into PMRY in XI Plan. The proposed scheme will be extended for the beneficiaries of urban areas also which
component will have to be handled by State Governments through District Industry Centres.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation
 
Recommendation
Action Taken
Recommendation
Action Taken

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/207threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:18:22]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter – II   
The recommendation/observations which the Committee does not desire to
pursue in view of the  Government’s replies
 
 
1.         The Committee notes the performance of VI’s, but feels still much remains to be achieved keeping in view of size of population that lives in
rural India and also the scope of VI have to grow.  The Committee,   therefore,   feels that the  contribution of VI can be  further strengthened and
streamlined by  ensuring timely and adequate delivery of credit by the banks, technology upgradation and  marketing support in the form  of 
financial support  for exhibitions, product design intervention and packaging etc.
(Para 1.4)
(Rs. crore)
Year
Estimated
Bank loan to REGP units
2002-03 440.69
2003-04 604.56
2004-05 665.19
2005-06 730.18
2006-07 795.77
 
 
Government through KVIC provides financial support to the REGP units in the form of backward and forward linkages which also includes marketing activity.
Besides, 107 domestic exhibitions were conducted by the KVIC in various places inside the country and KVIC/REGP units participated in 6 international fairs
during 2006-07.  In 2007-08, it is proposed to organize 139 domestic exhibitions besides participating in 9 exhibitions/fairs abroad to promote VI products, as
well.
 
3.         Further, KVIC makes effort to develop suitable interfaces with other reputed R&D/S&T institutions and to develop new/modified technology/processes/
methods which can be adopted and absorbed by the rural artisans and village industry workers, to increase the productivity of the rural industries sector. So far,
KVIC has undertaken certain activities in various outsourcing interfaces at Engineering and Technological Institutes of repute like, Vishweshwarayya National
Institute of Technology (VNIT), Nagpur, National Institute of Technology (NIT) Rourkela, Birla Institute of Technology (BIT), Ranchi, North Eastern Region
Institute of Science and Technology (NERIST), College of Technology and Engineering (CTAE), Udaipur. Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bangalore, Indian
Institute of Technology (IIT) of Roorkee, Kanpur, Mumbai, Guwahati, Calicut, etc., to meet perceived needs to make the products more marketable either
through design interventions or quality assurance.
 
4.         Recently Government has approved the setting up of Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Rural Industrialisation (MGIRI) at Wardha, Maharashtra  at an
estimated cost of Rs. 16.33 crore in XI Plan which is in operational ‘project’ mode.  MGIRI will be a National Level Institute for Rural Industrialisation and
would undertake R&D activities in association with IIT, Delhi.
 
5.         KVIC also launched Product Development, Design Intervention and Packaging (PRODIP) Programme for improved design and packaging of products
and Rural Industries Service Centres (RISC) Scheme for setting up of common facility centres to provide infrastructural support and services to VI industries.
 
Recommendation
 
6.         The Committee takes note of the situation and observes that if  the  agro and rural industries has to face the competition, Ministry should
intensify several initiatives viz Rural Employment Generation Programme (REGP) with concerted efforts for employment generation through setting
up of village industries;   Common Facility Centres (CFCs) should  be strengthened. Rural Industries Service Centre (RISC) Scheme to provide
Recommendation
Action Taken
2.             The recommendation of the Committee has been gratefully noted. However, keeping in view the vast scope and the need to improve the economic and social conditions of the
underprivileged sections of the rural population, the Government of India launched Rural Employment Generation Programme (REGP) – a credit linked capital subsidy scheme for setting up of
projects costing up to Rs. 25 lakh for the development of village industries based on local raw materials and skills and for creating more employment opportunities in the rural non-farm sector. The
institutional credit flow to the VI sector under REGP during last five years are as under:   

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/207threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:18:22]
infrastructural support and services to such industries needs strengthening;   gear up the design and packaging of village industry Product
Development, Design Intervention and Packaging (PRODIP) Scheme; Enhance financial assistance to village industry units for participation in
national and international level exhibitions for market development.
(Para 1.13)
Action Taken
 
 7.        To enhance the performance in VI sector, KVIC has already launched Product Development, Design Intervention and Packaging (PRODIP) Programme
for improved design and packaging of KVI products and Rural Industries Service Centres (RISC) Scheme for setting up of common facility centres to provide
infrastructural support and services to VI by extending financial support. Further to increase the marketability of KVI products, KVIC organizes various
National/Sub-national level exhibitions and also provide financial assistance to the units for organizing/participating in domestic as well as international
exhibitions/fairs to the tune of Rs.2.5 lakh to Rs.40 lakh depending on the nature and scale of the participation. In international exhibitions, implementing
agencies are motivated with financial  assistance for their to and fro air journey, publicity material etc. During 2006-07, 107 domestic exhibitions were
conducted in addition to participation of 5 international fairs.  For 2007-08 it is proposed to organize 139 domestic exhibitions besides, participation in 9
international fairs.
 
 
8.             The Committee notes that the allocations in all the schemes have been reduced by almost 20% and this would certainly affect the   employment opportunities and production. 
The Committee feels that schemes are premier employment generators and hence should be funded adequately. The Committee advises the Ministry to approach the Ministry of Finance
and the Planning Commission and impress upon them to provide adequate funds. While allocating funds Planning Commission should take into account the present state of employment
generation and production potential this sector possesses. Curtailment of funds asked for the various schemes by the Ministry may hamper the progress of the schemes.  The Committee
does not want that budgetary constraints be a problem in achieving the targets.
(Para 3.3)
 
Action Taken
 
9.         We gratefully note the recommendation of the Committee.   In fact, the Ministry has already included three presentations on the need for augmentation
of funding for XI Plan, to the Planning Commission.  We are seeking enhancement of outlay from Rs. 3763 crore in the X Plan to Rs. 19829 crore for XI Plan
which is more than five times increase so as to be able to generate 100 lakh additional employment   opportunities through merger and restructuring of PMRY
and REGP, 1,76,000 additional employment opportunities through rejuvenation of coir industry which will also lead to estimated increase in domestic
production from Rs. 1300 crore to Rs. 2625 crore and export from Rs. 600 crore to Rs. 1600 crore, and large scale replacement of obsolete charkhas/looms,
renovation of sales outlets, rejuvenation of weak khadi institutions, promoting weak khadi institutions managed by SC/ST artisans, providing worksheds to
weavers and focused marketing strategies with increased emphasis on design improvements and exports. Incidentally, the allocations made to KVIC, Coir
Board and PMRY for 2007-08 is higher (except khadi grant head) than the previous year 2006-07. Funds released during 2006-07 and funds earmarked for
2007-08 are as under:
S.No. Schemes/Programmes Annual Plan
2006-07 (RE)
Annual Plan
2007-08 (BE)
A Central Sector Schemes   
KVIC
 Khadi   
1
 
Khadi Grant including MDA for Khadi (Rs. 10.00
crore)
138.30
 
110.00
 
2. Khadi (S&T) 1.50 2.00
3. Interest Subsidy (Khadi) 19.00 22.004. Khadi Loan 0.49
 Village Industries   
5. VI Grant 52.00 64.006. VI Grant (S&T) 4.00
 
 
S.No. Schemes/Programmes Annual Plan
2006-07 (RE)
Annual Plan
2007-08 (BE)
7. VI Loan 0.01  
8. Interest Subsidy (VI) 5.00
 Proposed new schemes   
9. REGP (to be restructured) 372.63 445.00
13. Setting up of Mahatma Gandhi Institute for Rural
Industrialisation (MGIRI), Wardha. (New Scheme)
- 3.00
14. Restructuring of REGP . (New Scheme) - 50.00
15. Workshed cum Housing Scheme for Khadi Weavers.
(New Scheme)
- 5.00
16. Scheme for enhancing productivity &
competitiveness of Khadi Industries and artisans
(New Scheme)
- 5.00
17. Package for developing infrastructure  for Khadi
Institutions and including nursing fund for weak
institutions (New Scheme)
- 5.00
 Sub-Total (KVIC) 592.93 711.00
COIR BORAD
1 Plan (S&T) 5.50 7.00
2 Plan  (General) Training Extension, Quality
Improvement, Mahila Coir Yojana* & Welfare
Measures
17.40 23.00
3. Rejuvenation, Modernisation  and Technology
upgradation  of Coir Industry (New Scheme)
- 25.00
 
 
Recommendation
Rs.in crores

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/207threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:18:22]
 Sub-Total (Coir Board) 22.90 55.00
PMRY
1 PMRY Subsidy 228.82 320.00
2 Subsidy EDP 23.78  
3 NPRI 0.00  
 Sub Total (PMRY Division) 252.60 320.00
SFURTI Scheme of Fund for Regeneration of Traditional
Industries
25.97 26.00
 Total A 894.40 1112.00
B Centrally Sponsored   
1 Co-operativisation of Coir Industries 0.10 0.00
 Total Central Plan Outlay  for existing schemes
(A+B)
894.50 1112.00
 
10.       The main reasons for reduction in khadi grant head is due to the emphasis being given by the Planning Commission to gradually reduce and replace
rebate on sales with Market Development Assistance. Further, funds allocated for 2007-08 to KVIC, Coir Board and PMRY for implementations of their
schemes will be further considered to increase/decrease based on their performances/demand at RE Stage. Incidentally, khadi sector has an additional/separate
allotment of Rs. 5 crore for workshed scheme, package for infrastructure (Rs. 5 crore) and Rs. 5 crore for enhancing productivity of khadi artisans which would
effectively increase ‘Khadi Grant’ to Rs. 125 crore in BE 2007-08.
 
 
11.            The Committee is also very concerned about the growth of Khadi institutions in the States which are doing well in this sector.  The Committee feels that these institutions have
to grow in these States too in order to achieve the better targets. The Committee, therefore, directs the Ministry and KVIC to work out a strategy in a time frame manner and apprise
the Committee of the progress made.
(Para 5.11)
 
Action taken
 
12.         The recommendation of the Committee is noted. However, it is to inform that to improve the growth in khadi sectors in the country including the States
which are doing well, KVIC implements various schemes, like Interest Subsidy Eligibility Certificate scheme (ISEC) providing subsidized rates of interest on
bank loans, Product Development, Design Intervention and Packaging (PRODIP) Scheme for improving designs and packaging of khadi products and Rebate
Scheme for providing rebate on sales of khadi through KVIC. Assistance is also provided to khadi institutions by KVIC to participate in exhibitions at the
national, sub-national levels to assist marketing of khadi products.  Further, the Government has launched the Scheme of Fund for Regeneration of Traditional
Industries (SFURTI) to develop traditional KVI clusters (25 khadi, 50 village industries and 25 coir clusters) whcih envisages assistance for setting up of
common facility centres, quality improvement, training and capacity building, development of new products, improved packaging, new design, market
promotion, etc.
13.       Further to improve the khadi activities, six Zonal   Level Committees under the Chairmanship of respective Member, KVIC, (as per the KVIC
(amended) Act, 1956) has been constituted to review and monitor the implementation of schemes/programme and to provide feedback to the Commission on
the problems and difficulties faced and suggestions made by banks, voluntary agencies, artisans and others engaged in the operation of the programmes of
KVIC. Representatives of each State KVIBs of the States, Zonal Dy. Chief Executive Officer, State Directors of the Zone, Zonal or Regional manager of the
lead banks operating in the zone and representative of an institution of repute working for at least ten years in KVI sector are the members of the Committee.
 
14.       Besides, the Ministry of MSME proposed to introduce three schemes for growth in khadi sector. These are (i) Scheme for Enhancing Competitiveness
and Productivity of Khadi Industries and Artisans with a view to provide financial assistance to khadi institutions in a Public Private partnership mode to
realize increased value addition to khadi products, readymade garments, muslin khadi, setting up common facility centres, need based dyeing and printing
facilities besides ensuring better wages to artisans along with skill upgradation (ii) Workshed-cum-Housing Scheme for Khadi Artisans and Weavers. This
scheme is a replication of the already existing and popular scheme in the Ministry of Textiles and seeks to provide assistance for construction of workshed or
House-cum-workshed for khadi weavers and artisans for better work environment, more space, etc. and (iii) Package for Developing Infrastructure of Khadi
Institutions including Nursing Fund for Weak Institutions  which envisages replacement of looms and charkhas for increasing production of khadi and to
expand employment base.  This scheme also involves renovation of sales outlets as well as rejuvenation of selected weak institutions besides providing higher
levels of wages to the artisans.
 
15.       The Committee also desires to know the background behind the revamping of Jamnalal Bajaj Central Research Institute (JBCRI) (now known
as Mahatma Gandhi Institute For Rural Industrialization).
(Para 6.5)
16.       The JBCRI had its roots in the All India Village Industries Association set up by Mahatma Gandhi in 1934 in the same campus, where he stayed for two
years before shifting to Sewagram. It was re-christened as JBCRI in 1955 with the objectives of conducting research, extension, training programme, etc., for
village industries units such as oil, pottery, handmade paper, etc., and to solve their problems relating to technology, productivity, etc. The JBCRI was expected
to serve as a link between national laboratories and small research institutes in the KVI sector. No major R&D project was undertaken at the institute after 1976
and, therefore, KVIC in 1976 decided to close the activities of JBCRI.  Some staff were also retrenched and the remaining activities were taken up by the
relevant Industry Directorates of KVIC under its S&T schemes. Some of the staff also left in between when they got better options in other organisations. 
However, some training activities were continued at JBCRI, Wardha to utilise the available infrastructure. Several Committees were constituted to look into the
working of the JBCRI. The Bhagwat Saboo Committee (1994) recommended the setting up of an independent autonomous body with the Minister-in-charge of
Village Industries of Government of India as Chairman of the body.
Recommendation
Recommendation
Action Taken
 
17.            Accordingly, in 1999, the KVIC decided to revamp the JBCRI, convert it into a society (autonomous body) registered under the Societies Act, 1860 and re-name it as the National
Institute for Rural Industrialization (NIRI).  The proposal for creation of autonomous body could not be pursued further at that point of time (September 2000) due to ban on creation of any new
autonomous body in that financial year.  However, the Standing Finance Committee (SFC) under the Chairmanship of Secretary (SSI&ARI), at its meeting held on 30 October, 2000, approved the
revamping of JBCRI with professional back-up of the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), New Delhi at a cost of Rs. 8.35 crore on 29 March 2001.  The IIT, Delhi was engaged for this purpose on
a turn-key basis for a period of 3 years, starting May 2001.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/207threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:18:22]
 
18.              Further, the then Finance Minister had announced in his Budget Speech for the year
2002-03 vide paragraph 24 that:
 
“The promotion of rural industrialization would be helped greatly through capacity building and technology up gradation in khadi and village
industries.  To help in this effort, I propose to upgrade the Wardha Institute started by Mahatma Gandhi in 1935 as a national institute to be called
'Mahatma Gandhi Institute for Rural Industrialization'". 
19.       Keeping in view above, the approval of the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) for setting up Mahatma Gandhi Institute for Rural
Industrialization (MGIRI), Wardha by revamping the Jamnalal Bajaj Central Research Institute (JBCRI) has been obtained on 28 December 2006. MGIRI has
been established as a National Level Institute under the Ministry of MSME with the mandate to function as a National Institute (as an autonomous body under
this Ministry) with necessary infrastructure of building, equipment and machinery for providing S&T inputs and R&D support to the KVI sector with
professional support of IIT Delhi. Presently, MGIRI is functioning in project mode and provides necessary S&T inputs to KVI sector with the assistance of IIT,
Delhi. As on date, MGIRI has completed 84 projects related to various activities and 20 projects pertaining to research, R&D extension, training and
dissemination of technological information, etc., are in progress.
 
Recommendation
 
20.       The Committee is also not sure whether the Coir Relations Committee  constituted to   assess   and  review the   ground realities did  something
to address the problems.  The Committee may be apprised of the measures taken by this Committee alongwith the  outcome thereof.
 (Para 8.5)
 
 21.      The Coir Relations Committee was constituted as per the request of the coir trade associations representing various sectors of the traditional export
oriented coir product manufacturers.   On the implementation of liberalisation policies by Govt. of India, the Minimum Export Price and Purchase Price
Enforcement scheme that had been in operation in the coir industry was withdrawn.  The exporters engaged in the export of coir and coir products had been
sourcing their requirements for export from the small scale producers at the Purchase Price fixed by Coir Board.  On the suspension of the Purchase Price, the
procurement prices were slashed by the exporters to such a level that it became no longer remunerative for the small scale producers.  This led to the creation of
a non congenial atmosphere in the sector leading to frequent agitations. In this juncture, as per the request of the small scale producers and exporters, Coir
Board constituted a Coir Relations Committee with the representatives from Exporters' Associations and Small Scale Producers and Trade Unions to negotiate
and fix a fair price for the materials procured by the exporters from the small scale producers.  The meetings of the Coir Relations Committee were convened at
regular intervals for resolving the problems related to the traditional export oriented coir sector. The problems were discussed across the table in the presence of
the Chairman, Coir Board and decisions were taken which were binding on both the parties.   Prices are being revised in accordance with the production cost,
raw material price etc. and the last revision was made during the month of July, 2006.  The Committee acted as a forum to discuss and resolve the problems
faced by all the stake holders engaged in the export oriented production sector and this resulted in the creation of a harmonious atmosphere in the Industry. The
frequent agitations by the small scale producers and coir workers in the sector could be averted as a result of the involvement of this Committee and
consequently the export sector were be made free from any threat for meeting their commitments.   The handloom mats, being the largest item of export, both in
terms of quantity and value have been increasing during the last five years only due to this intervention promoted by the Coir Board. 
 
22.            The Committee notes that this year the targets for export has been raised by more than 20% in terms of value.  The Committee desires to know to what extent it would benefit
the coir producers.
(Para 8.7)
23.       During the year 2006-07, the actual export of coir and coir goods was 1,68,755 tones  valued at Rs.605.17 crore against a target of Rs.572 crore. This
represented an increase of 24 per cent in quantity and 19 per cent in terms of value over the exports achieved during 2005-06. Export of more coir and coir
products result in demand of the products to go up and lead to in small scale manufacturers getting more orders from exporters. Exporters' turnover and profit
will also go up.  Ultimately, the workers get more employment. At present, the employment available in the coir sector is only around 100 to 150 days
annually.  As a result of increase in the export, the workers would be getting more days of work besides enabling more workers getting absorbed by the
industry. More than 80 per cent of the workforce in the industry are women. Added profit to exporters and manufactures lead to reinvestment of the same in the
coir industry and this in turn leads to additional utilisation of the basic raw material - coconut husk. 
 
 
24.       The Committee notes that an outlay of Rs. 6.00 crore has been earmarked for domestic market promotion and to expand the domestic market
60 exhibitions are to be organized.  The Committee recommends that the exhibitions should be organized on rotational basis covering larger areas of
the country so as to make the coir products popular throughout the country.
 
(Para 9.3)
Action Taken
 
25.    The recommendation of the Committee for organization   of exhibitions on rotational basis  covering larger areas  of the country for getting   more
popularity  for coir and coir product has been noted and  action has already been initiated. The board has 30 show rooms in different parts  of the country. A
calendar for  conducting  exhibitions  has been prepared in which at least two  numbers of  exhibitions  per showroom is  specified. As these show rooms are
spread out in almost all parts of the country, it is hoped  that the action  will improve the popularity  of coir  and coir products in the country.
 
 
26.       The Committee is constrained to note that the  sales of coir products in domestic market through coir boards show rooms is much lower than
the desired level and   it needs to be increased.  Conditions of showrooms need to be improved.  Alternatively coir board can play pivotal role in
arranging tie ups /franchise with other showrooms/malls, etc.  to popularize the coir products and boost  the sale in domestic market.  The Committee
is very keen to know the outcome of the activities undertaken by board under Marketing Development Assistance Programme.
 
Action Taken
 
Recommendation
Action Taken
 
Recommendation
Recommendation

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/207threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:18:22]
(Para 9.4)
Action Taken
 
27.       The Board has been introducing several measures to improve the sales through its showrooms on an experimental basis. Introduction of mobile sales
units, appointment of   canvassing agents etc are some of them. There are also proposals to make available quality coir products all over the country by opening
new sales outlets. Engaging commission agents and introduction of authorized retail outlets on private- public partner ship basis are planned under the new
strategy. It is also proposed to introduce and market innovative coir products like coir pith in various forms and coir composite products through Coir Board
show rooms.
 
28.            During 2000-01 to 2006-07, a total amount of Rs.23.81 crore has been provided as Government of India's share in 10% MDA granted on sales turn over of co-operative societies and
public sector undertakings on 1:1 basis between the concerned State Government and the Central Government. The implementation of the scheme resulted in the promotion of sales of coir and coir
products manufactured by co- operative and public sector enterprises. The scheme  aims at enabling beneficiaries to open up sales outlets,   undertake  publicity measures, renovation of  existing
sales  outlets,  undertaking market studies , setting   up of  marketing  intelligence networks,  computerization etc. The scheme has played an important role in generating income for manufactures
and workers in the industry in the recent years.
 
 
29.       The Committee feels that the Bankers may be impressed upon to have more credit flow under the scheme and RBI may be advised by the
Government to impress upon all Banks to comply with their  guidelines strictly particularly about the Banks insisting for  collateral security for loans
being provided by Banks under REGP.   The Committee feels that the Coordination with Nehru Yuvak Kendra Sagathan, Ministry of Women and
Child Development, Army Wives Welfare Association, SC/ST/Finance and Development Corporations and other Government organisations may also
be sought for further expansion of the scheme. Further Women, Ex-Servicemen, War Widows may also be involved to improve the performance of the
scheme.
(Para 12.12)
 
 
30.       Zonal Committees (in which Zonal or Regional manager of the lead banks operating in the zone is also a member) have been constituted in each zone
who will  provide feedback to the Commission on the problems and difficulties faced and suggestions made by banks, voluntary agencies, artisans and others
engaged in the operation of the schemes including credit availability.  Besides, all bankers are invited in each Zonal Review meeting of REGP called by KVIC
and impressed upon them for more credit flow under the scheme.   Top level Bankers meeting with Corporate Offices are also being conducted regularly.   The
Scheme of Credit Guarantee Trust Fund for Small Industries (CGTSI) has also been extended for the beneficiaries of REGP to avail the benefit of collateral
guarantee for the loans up to Rs. 25 lakh.  Secretary (MSME) has written to RBI to impress upon the participating banks to provide loans to beneficiaries upto
Rs. 5 lakh without insisting of collateral security.
 
31.       Further to make popular among the beneficiaries, an MoU has been signed between the Ministry of Women and Child Development (MoWCD) and
KVIC. The MoWCD will be the Nodal Agency to play an active role to create awareness about REGP amongst its Self Help Groups, conduct EDPs and
workshops and also to run Rural Industries Consultancy Services (RICS) for project formulation of SHGs.   Another MoU is being processed for execution
between KVIC and Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS). NYKS will be the nodal agency for organising awareness camps and entrepreneur’s workshops
under REGP through Youth Clubs amongst the rural youth.
 
32.       KVIC has also established tie-up with Army Wives Welfare Association (AWWA) for extending REGP to the war widows, ex-servicemen, etc., in the
AWWA fold and to encourage convergence of marketing activities of AWWA and KVIC through their respective outlets.
 
 
33.            The Committee observes that the disbursement under the scheme normally spills over the next years and this has been going on perhaps since the inception of the scheme.   It
certainly does not clearly indicate whether targets were achieved or not.  The Committee advises the Ministry to take up the matter with concerned agencies mainly the RBI and bankers
to avoid such a situation. The practice needs to be avoided.
(Para 14.5)
 
Action Taken
 
34.       While communicating the annual targets to the States/UTs and RBI, a quarterly schedule is also circulated for sanctions and disbursements under
PMRY.  In a few cases, the disbursement spills over the next programme year and the cut off date is extended on the request of certain States/UTs
Governments. The reasons for spill over are non completion of full disbursements for formalities by the applicant, change of activity by the applicant after
recommendation by the Task Force and lack of infrastructural facilities, etc. In a recent communiqué to all State/UT Governments, Secretary (MSME) has
instructed that all the members of the Task Force Committee would collectively be responsible for selection of beneficiaries. This would ensure that the Bank
Manager alone shall not be responsible for the Non Performing Assets (NPAs) if any and thus it is expected that disbursements would be done timely.
 
35.            The assessment of progress of the end of the extended cut off date indicating that targets fixed are generally achieved. For example, report from RBI for April 2007 indicated that as
against the target of generation of 3,825 lakh estimated additional employment opportunities in 2006-07, the achievement was 3.278 lakh.  Ministry has separately advised the State Governments
and RBI to avoid spill over of disbursements by planning and monitoring the implementation process more diligently and sufficiently in advance from 2007-08.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation
Action Taken
Recommendation

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/207threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:18:22]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter - III
The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee
has either not accepted replies of the Ministry or has asked the
Ministry to review its reply
 
 
1.             The Committee appreciates the comprehensive proposals  envisaging more than 100% increase in employment generation through REGP  and PMRY but wonders how it would be
achieved just by allocating merely Rs. 50 crore for 2007-08 as against Rs.3172.18 crore for the whole plan. The Committee strongly feels that allocation should have been almost equal for each
year and suggests that at RE stage sufficient funds be made available and targets for the year if need be revised
(Para 2.2)
 
Action taken
 
 2.        In order to generate 100 lakh additional employment opportunities in XI Plan (more than 100% of X Plan) in this sector, the Ministry of MSME
proposed to restructure the existing REGP by merging PMRY into REGP as the nature of activities covered under these schemes are more or less identical  and
the objectives, parameters and the agency for administration of REGP and PMRY at the Apex level are the same. Towards this, it is only a token provision of
Rs. 50 crore that has been made for the said proposed scheme. Separate provision under REGP and PMRY has already been sought/made in the Annual Plan
2007-08 and Proposed XI Plan.  After the New Scheme PMEGP is approved, the total Outlay for the restructured REGP will need to be around Rs. 15083.98
crore which will accommodate PMRY too so that there is no underfunding.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.         The Committee notes that it is highly appreciative on the part of Ministry of MSME to make efforts for 100 lakh employment opportunities but
it would like to know the status of merger of PMRY into REGP because with mere token provision of Rs.50 crore it appears almost impossible task for
the Ministry.  Out of required 15083-98 crores how much fund is likely to be allocated by Planning Commission after due approval by Cabinet and the
proposed schemes/plans to make optimum utilization with more than 100% employment opportunities of Xth  Plan.
4.         The Committee recommends that the benefit of funds after merger should preferably be utilized in the areas/zones where the number of
beneficiaries is very less under both these schemes.
Recommendation
5.         The Committee notes the proposals for 11
th five year plan and recommends   that Ministry  should in order to increase efficiency and productivity   of
khadi industries  endeavour to  increase the number and improve livelihood of  khadi artisans,   make  efforts to strengthen the  khadi  institutions  and thereby
increasing the employment as a whole;  Outdated  Charkhas and looms  should  be replaced on priority by taking the help of public/ private partnership and
facilities for packaging and designs should be  given the required thrust which would lead to more sale and thus increase the wages and livelihood of artisans.
(Para: 2.3)
 
6.         In order to increase the efficiency and productivity of khadi industries as well as improve the livelihood of  khadi artisans, the Ministry of MSME
proposed to start some new schemes during XI Plan. These are (i) Scheme for Enhancing Competitiveness and Productivity of Khadi Industries and
Recommendation
Action Taken

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/207threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:18:22]
Artisans with a view to provide financial assistance to khadi institutions in a Public Private partnership mode to realize increased value addition to khadi
products, readymade garments, muslin khadi, setting up common facility centres, need based dyeing and printing facilities besides ensuring better wages to
artisans along with skill upgradation. This scheme is being strengthened to  include provision for assisting new SC/ST institutions, backward areas and also
some weak institutions following the discussions with Planning Commission (ii) Workshed-cum-Housing Scheme for Khadi Artisans and Weavers. This
scheme is a replication of the already existing and popular scheme in the Ministry of Textiles and seeks to provide assistance for construction of Workshed or
House-cum-workshed for khadi weavers and artisans for better work environment, more space, etc. and (iii)     Package for Developing Infrastructure of
Khadi Institutions including Nursing Fund for Weak Institutions which envisages replacement of looms and charkhas for increasing production of khadi
and to expand employment base.  This scheme also involves renovation of sales outlets as well as rejuvenation of selected weak institutions besides providing
higher levels of wages to the artisans.
 
Further Recommendation
 
7.         The Committee expresses its concern over the reply of the Ministry.  It would like to know the current status of development for improving the
livelihood of khadi artisans, efforts made to strengthen Khadi Institutions in 2007-08 so far ways and means to provide better wages and number of
artisans benefited so far from the efforts made, zone wise, including SC/ST/Backward areas institutions together with the outcome of the discussion
with Planning Commission.
 
8.         The Committee is keen to know the number of worksheds constructed so far and the utilization of fund for weak institutions.  It would also like
to know the number of weak institutions  provided financial help and their locations, sales outlet rejuvenated zone wise so far.
9.         The Committee desires to know the ways and methods adopted to decide the minimum/maximum wages to artisans and what is the minimum
wage paid to KVI artisans.
 
 
 
Recommendation
 
10.       The Committee observes that with the funds allocated for 2007-08 the new schemes for productivity enhancement, production infrastructure and
workshed housing schemes should be approved  on priority and assistance to khadi artisans be routed through the nodal NGO,s (Khadi Institutions) so that   the
target of about 8-9 % growth in employment generation alonghwith reasonable enhancement in khadi production could be easily achieved leading to higher
production (525.00 crore) and sales (745.00 crore) consequently giving employment to 9.30 lakh persons including 0.50 lakh employment for 2007-08.
(Para 5.2)
 
11.       The Committee further recommends that there should be no curtailment of funds in any scheme and plan so that it does not effect the employment
generation and production.   The out come of the discussions with Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission should be brought to the notice of the
Committee so that the Committee could also take up the issue.  The allocations made for 2007-08 should be fully and properly utilized to generate employment
and proliferate KVI Sector.
 
12.       Efforts are made by the Ministry along with KVIC for formulation and implementation of the Schemes for Enhancing Competitiveness and Productivity
of Khadi Industries and Artisans of Enhancing Competitiveness and Workshed Scheme for Khadi Artisans/Weavers. So far, draft EFC note and DPR of the
Scheme for Enhancing Competitiveness and Productivity of Khadi Industries and Artisans of Enhancing Competitiveness has been prepared and circulated to
the Ministry of Finance, Planning Commission and other Ministries/Departments concerned for their comments. We are revising the note to increase the
coverage of weak institutions, institutions in backward areas and also bring in the recently registered khadi institutions managed by SC/ST artisans in
consultation with the Planning Commission. With regard to Workshed Scheme, draft EFC note and DPR are under preparation in consultation with the KVIC
and IF Wing of this Ministry. A letter has been issued to Planning Commission for their ‘in principle’ approval. It is hoped that the above schemes will be
implemented before the end of this year.
 
Further Recommendation
 
13.       The Committee is of the view that the outcome of the revised EFC note and DPR sent to Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission and other
Ministries/Departments should be brought before it.  It would also like to know whether the Planning Commission has approved the workshed
schemes and other schemes in principle as informed in ATN by the Ministry.
 
14.       The Committee expresses its concern over the inadequate institutional infrastructure particularly in the North Eastern States.  The Committee notes that
the presence of Khadi institutions in States other than Assam and Manipur is insignificant. The Committee is keen to know what steps have been taken to
strengthen Khadi Institutions in these States and why the numbers have not increased.  The Committee accordingly, desires the Ministry and KVIC to furnish a
progress report in this regard while furnishing ATR on this report.
(Para 5.10)
Action Taken
 
15.       As on 31 March 2007, there are 65 khadi institutions registered with KVIC and State KVIBs in the NE Region. Out of them, 43 are located in Assam,
12 in Manipur, 06 in Arunachal Pradesh, 01 in Meghalaya, 03 in Nagaland.   In the case of Tripura and Sikkim, there are no khadi institutions.
 
16.       The presence of khadi institutions in N.E. Region except in Assam and Manipur is insignificant. The reasons behind such situation is lack of sufficient
khadi implementing institutions, lack of adequate grass root level organisational capacity in the field of khadi, problems in executing mortgage of properties
due to special provisions of N.E. States, etc. 
 
17.       To improve the khadi activities in the NER, a   Zonal   Level Committee under the Chairmanship of Member, KVIC, North Eastern Zone (as per the
KVIC (amended) Act, 1956) has been constituted to review and monitor the implementation of schemes/programme and to provide feedback to the
Action Taken
 
Recommendation

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/207threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:18:22]
Commission on the problems and difficulties faced and suggestions made by banks, voluntary agencies, artisans and others engaged in the operation of the
programmes of KVIC. Representatives of each State KVIBs of the States, Zonal Dy. Chief Executive Officer, State Directors of the Zone, Zonal or Regional
manager of the lead banks operating in the zone and representative of an institution of repute working for at least ten years in KVI sector are the members of the
Committee. In addition, relaxation on ban of registration of new khadi institutions has been given for the khadi institutions situated in NE Region. Chairperson
and Chief Executive Officer, KVIC have visited Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, Meghalaya and Assam recently when the programmes were reviewed with a
view to stimulating the activities further.
 
 
18.       The Committee views the lack of development and proliferation of KVI Industries  in NER seriously and recommends that grass root level
organisatinal capacity in the field of Khadi and Village Industries should be given a proper boost.  The hindrance in executing the mortgage  of
properties should be removed by making a Unanimous   Consensus of Zonal Committees, voluntary agencies including NGOs, artisans and others
engaged in operation of the programmes of KVIC.  The Committee also desires that more Khadi Institutions should be registered as the ban of
registration has already been lifted and information in this regard be furnished to the Committee.  It also recommends Chairperson and CEO, KVIC
should visit NRE more often and take specific interest in stimulating the activities of KVIC.
 
19.       The Committee is constrained to note the negligible presence of Khadi Institutions in NE region and recommends that the sufficient number of
khadi implementing  institutions should be given boost.  Grass root level Organisational Capacity in the field of Khadi  should  be enhanced  at all
cost.  As far the problem of executing mortgage of properties due to special provisions of NE States are concerned it should be sorted out with the
State Government.
20.       The Committee is constrained to note that inadequate R& D activities, lack of proper monitoring   mechanism and standardization of products is
hampering the growth and development of village industries.  The tie ups with reputed institutes  may help KVIC in this field. The Committee, therefore,
desires that Government should make sincere efforts to remove these difficulties. The Committee would also like to know the details of R & D activities
undertaken by KVIC through in house research and also about the projects sponsored to R & D organizations together with the outcome.  The Committee may
also be apprised of the action plan prepared by the KVIC in this regard.
(Para 6.4)
21.  The industries in the village industries sector are largely decentralised in nature of operation, have inadequate Research & Development activity and lack
quality control and standardisation of products. As far as Research & Development is concerned, KVIC has undertaken several R&D activities through in-house
research and also by sponsoring projects to other R&D orgainsations. So far 52 such laboratories are working under various parts of the country to provide
testing facilities to KVI units for ensuring the quality and established standard of the products. 
 
22.       In this regard, the Mahatama Gandhi Institute for Rural Industrialisation (MGIRI) at Wardha is tasked with the mandate to function as a National
Institute as an autonomous body under this Ministry for providing S&T inputs and R&D support to the KVI sector with professional support of IIT Delhi.
Presently, MGIRI is functioning in project mode and provides necessary S&T inputs to KVI sector with the assistance of IIT, Delhi. As on date, MGIRI has
completed 84 projects related to various activities and 20 projects pertaining to research, R&D extension, training and dissemination of technological
information, etc., are on progress. Some of the successful R&D projects of MGIRI are biomanure diagnostic kit, herbal products, vermi-compost production,
improved pottery kiln, tamarind and Amla based products, low cost gasifier engine system, saw dust combustor, etc.
 
23.       Besides, KVIC has built up a large network of rural cottage industrial units producing a wide range of goods and articles catering to the rural and partly
urban markets.  KVIC has also undertaken certain activities in various outsourcing interfaces at Engineering and Technological institutes of repute to meet
perceived needs to make the products more marketable either through design interventions or quality assurance system.  These are: Vishweshwarayya National
Institute of Technology (VNIT), Nagpur, Birla Institute of Technology (BIT), Ranchi, North Eastern Region Institute of Science and Technology (NERIST),
College of Technology and Engineering (CTAE) Udaipur, Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bangalore, Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Roorkee, National
Institute of Technology(NIT) Rourkela, Indian Institute of Technolgoy (IIT), Delhi, Indian Institute of Technology(IIT), Kanpur, Indian Institute of Technology
(IIT), Mumbai, Indian Institute of Technology(IIT), Guwahati, National Institute of Technology (NIT), Calicut and Quality Implementation programme.
 
24.       In addition, KVIC also implements the programme of PRODIP for new design development and better packaging and RISC for setting up of common
facilities centres to overcome the weakness of the village industries.
 
25.       KVIC has also formulated a plan to more effectively disseminate the outcome of the R&D activities to the field during 2007-08. 
 
 
26.       The Committee would like to know the plan formulated by KVIC for dissemination of outcome of R&D activities and whether the same has
been executed so far or is still in the offing.
 
27.       The Committee observes that the village industries under institutional sector are declining in the North Eastern Region including Sikkim since the
introduction of REGP. The individual units have virtually replaced the institutional village industry units.  No furtherance of activities by the village industries
institutions has taken place. The Committee therefore impresses upon the Ministry to ensure that VIs under institutional sector should also grow. 
(Para 6.12)
 
 28.      The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. KVIC has been asked to critically review the present status and come up with an appropriate
strategy to promote and encourage the institutional sector in village industry.  This will be followed up in the Ministry.
 
Further Recommendation
 
29.       The Committee has taken note of the action taken but it would like to have a first hand information on strategy to promote and encourage
Further Recommendation
Recommendation
Action Taken
Further Recommendation
Recommendation
Action Taken

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/207threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:18:22]
institutional sector in VI.  It would also like to know the follow up of the Ministry.
 
30.            In reply to a query about the infrastructure it was informed by the Government   that the infrastructure  created in the form of in-house Test Laboratory will be utilized to test the raw
material as well as finished products produced in KVI sector in NER.   Besides R&D activities undertaken by the IIT Guwahati are quite relevant to the problems faced by the entrepreneurs and
artisans in khadi and village industries. The Committee endorses the  R&D activities under taken in the KVI  sector but feels that such arrangements have to be increased   if Government really
wishes to address the problems as   outcome of these activities will be beneficial to the entrepreneurs working under KVI sector in NER.
(Para 6.14)
 
 
31.       The infrastructure created in the form of In-House Test Laboratory will be utilized to test the raw-material as well as the product produced in KVI
Sector, in the North-Eastern region.  Looking to the need, IIT, Guwahati has been requested to undertake R&D activities to increase the R&D activities in
North-Eastern region.  The National Institute of Technology (NIT), Silchar were also assigned the new Technical Interfaces for R&D activities and the Institute
is in the process of formulation of detailed project report.  The North-East Regional Institute of Science & Technology (NERIST), Itanagar (Arunachal Pradesh)
is new Technical Interface working in the North-Eastern region and conducting R&D activities for the benefit of artisans, entrepreneurs working in the North-
Eastern region of the country.  These are being closely monitored by KVIC.
 
Further Recommendation
 
32.       The Committee would like to have a detailed  status  report on Technical Interfaces for R&D in NER which is closely monitored by KVIC in
respect of NERIST, NIT and IIT Guwahati.
 
 
33.       The  Committee is constrained to note that the targets, set for distribution of  ratts,  training and development of production infrastructure are not likely
to be achieved. The Committee desires that problems, if any, in this regard have to sorted out and the Committee may be  apprised of the progress while
submitting the ATR.
(Para 8.4)
 
Action Taken
 
34.            Under Mahila Coir Yojana, Coir Board distributes ratts at 75% subsidised cost to the women artisans who complete successfully training in spinning
coir yarn on motorised and motorised traditional ratts.  In some rural areas, women workers find it difficult to proivde 25% of the cost of ratt by themselves. 
This is reported to be the reason for the target set forth for distribution of ratts being not fully achieved.  Efforts will be made to ensure the involvement of Self
Help Groups and other Voluntary Organisations as also the concerned State intervention in organising programmes under Mahila Coir Yojana so that the 25%
cost to be borne by the beneficiary would be provided by the sponsoring organisations.
 
35.            At present, under the Development of Production Infrastructure Scheme, assistance is provided @ 25% of the cost of equipment and infrastructural facilities subject to a maximum of
Rs.1.5 lakh. On account of cost escalation this is pursuing to be quite inadequate as the actual investment required on building and coir machineries is substantially very high.  Therefore, there is
slackening in the entrepreneurs forthcoming for availing of the assistance under Development of Production Infrastructure. Financial assistance under this scheme is being proposed to be revised
during XI Plan, to make it more attractive.
 
Further Recommendation
 
36.       The Committee recommends that the involvement of SHG and other voluntary organization together with the concerned State intervention in
organizing programmes should be enhanced so that beneficiary can bear the 25% cost.
 
37.       The Committee also recommends that the financial assistance under the scheme be revised on priority to make it more attractive.
 
 
38.            The Committee also feels that the targets set should be realistic and achievable.   The Committee is not sure whether low performance is because of higher targets. If   it is so the targets
may be reallocated and may be increased for those States, which are doing well. The Committee further suggests that awareness campaign on large scale has to be undertaken for popularization of
the Scheme.  The Committee feels this could be a major reason of low performance in these States.
       (Para 12.11)      
 
39.         Targets under REGP are being allocated among the States based on rural population and past performance. Further, KVIC at various level reviews and
monitors the performances of the States and in last quarter of the year targets are being reallocated by diverting targets from low performing States to those
States who can take-up additional target.  Further, awareness camps, workshops, exhibitions & buyer seller meet are also being arranged by the KVIC in all the
States to popularise the advantage of the programme among the entrepreneurs.   Special emphasis will be given in increasing such interventions in low
performing States in accordance with the recommendation of the Committee.
 
Further Recommendation
 
40.       The Committee further recommends that the targets under REGP may be achieved by providing better working atmosphere to rural artisans,
i.e. production training, management, quality and sufficient financial and marketing help.
 
41.       It would also like to know the reasons in respect of low performing States.
 
Recommendation
Action Taken
Recommendation
Recommendation
Action Taken
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/207threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:18:22]
 
42.            The Committee also favours the demand of uniform rate of interest in all the Banks and desires that Ministry of ARI may take up the matter with Ministry of Finance, RBI to ensure the
same. 
(Para 12.14)
 
 
43.       A letter has been issued to Secretary (Banking) and Dy. Governor, RBI on the lines recommended by the Committee.
 
Further Recommendation
 
44.       The Committee would like to be informed about the progress made in the matter.
 
 
45.            The Committee is constrained to note that the scheme (PMRY and REGP) is not properly monitored or coordinated at district level for shortage of manpower in KVIC.  This is a matter
of concern for both Ministry of ARI and KVIC who are responsible for the successful implementation of this scheme. The Committee desires the Ministry and KVIC to take necessary steps in this
regard and inform the Committee about   results achieved.
(Para 12.19)
 
Action Taken
 
46.       The recommendation of the Committee is noted. However, it is to inform that KVIC in consultation with State KVIBs are regularly monitoring the
schemes being implemented by them at State level as well as district level. At district level, regular review meetings of the Consultative Committee of lead
banks under the Chairmanship of District Collector, are held to review the performances of the schemes including REGP implemented in that District. At State
level there is a Task Force Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Industries) of respective States is closely monitoring the scheme and reviewing its
performance on quarterly basis. In the said Task Force Committee, the State Director, KVIC, Secretary, KVIB and Senior Bank Officers of lead banks, State
Level Bankers are the members. 
 
47.       Chief Executive Officer, KVIC has been asked to monitor the progress and review the performance of the existing monitoring mechanism so that
coordination at the district level is improved. Chief Executive Officer, KVIC has been requested to forward a report by 30 September 2007.
 
48.       The Committee desires that the outcome of report by CEO, KVIC be furnished to it.
49.       The Committee   looks forward for a successful  beginning of SFURTI  in current year  as the Ministry has  targeted 30% of the approved 104 clusters to
become operational by March, 2008 and hopes the targets would be met.
(Para 13.7)
 
50.         The recommendation of the Committee is noted for further compliance.
 
Further Recommendation
 
51.       The Committee would like to have detailed zone wise information on targeted 30% of approved clusters.  (Khadi, VI and Coir Sectors) which
were to be operationalised by March 2008 as assured by the Ministry.  It would also like to know the status of clusters in NE region.
 
 
52.       The Committee gathers an impression that the clusters approved under the scheme are existing cluster.  No new cluster has been planned to be taken up. 
Considering that cluster approach is really effective the Committee desires that industrial areas may be developed on the lines of cluster.
(Para 13.8)
 
Action Taken
 
53.         The Ministry gratefully notes the recommendation of the Committee. Further, it is to be informed that the Scheme of Fund for Regeneration of
Traditional Industries (SFURTI) has been launched by the Government in the Ministry of MSME to regenerate 100 traditional industries clusters (from khadi,
village industry and coir sectors) by making more competitive with more market-driven, productive, profitable and sustained employment for traditional
industry artisans and rural entrepreneurs. The clusters approved under the Scheme are by and large natural clusters developed based on either due to the
concentration of industrial activities or group of artisans.  The selection of cluster has been made based on their geographical concentration which is around 500
beneficiary families of artisans/micro enterprises, suppliers of raw materials, traders, service providers, etc., located within one or two revenue sub-divisions in
a District (or in contiguous Districts).
 
54.       As all the approved clusters under SFURTI are expected to become fully operational commencing from 2007-08, the experience of their operation will
need to be studied and improvements as required would also be considered before embarking on development of industrial areas, especially as the clusters are
in khadi, village industries and coir sectors and there are no model successful modernised full fledged clusters, so far.
 
 
 
 
Recommendation
Action Taken
Recommendation
Further Recommendation
 
Recommendation
Action Taken
Recommendation
Further Recommendation

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/207threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:18:22]
55.       The Committee is constrained to note the absence of model successful modernized full fledged  cluster so far.  Whereas the Ministry has
informed to regenerate 100 traditional industries cluster from Khadi, VI and Coir Sectors.  The Committee would like to know the reasons for poor
performance in SFURTI so far.
 
56.       The Committee recommends that new Charkhas and looms should replace the old ones under SFURTI scheme so that the production and
wages may increase.
 
 
 
57.       The Committee takes note of the last three years’ achievements of the total applicants only 59% are sanctioned cases and the disbursement is further
reduced to 46% of applicants.  It is a reflection on the fact that the number of applications might have been rejected for not submitting the viable projects and/or
for not meeting the procedural requirements.  The Committee recommends that applicants be properly educated and trained by the sponsoring agencies
including banks so that percentage of rejection goes down.  Further more than 23% of sanctioned projects, do not get disbursement. The Committee fails to
understand the reason   whether it is due to spill over effect of funds to the next year or for any other reasons.   
(Para 14.12)
 
 
58.       The PMRY guidelines have been revised. To give more impetus to the training of applicants, each entrepreneur whose loan is sanctioned is provided
training as per details given below:
 
i)          For industry sector:
Duration:15-20 working days.
Stipend: Rs.750/-
Training expenditure: Rs.1750/-
ii)         For service and business sector:     
Duration:7-10 working days.
Stipend: Rs.375/-
Training expenditure: Rs.875/-
 
59.       Certain operational guidelines have also been communicated to all States/UTs for better performance of the Yojana. These are:
 
(i)
                  State/UT Governments are to conduct seminars in each district for creating awareness of PMRY in the area in the form of pre-selection motivational
campaigns. To improve the success rate of eligible applicants, States/UTs will be allowed reimbursement of cost of counseling and guiding the
applicants @ Rs.200/- per applicant, for 125 per cent of the allocated target of cases.
 
(ii)
                All the members of the Task Force Committee would collectively be responsible for selection of beneficiaries. This would ensure that the Bank
Manager alone shall not be responsible for the Non Performing Assets (NPAs) if any.
 
(iii)
               No collateral shall be insisted for PMRY loans up to Rs. 5 lakh.
 
(iv)
              Assistance to SC/ST and Minority beneficiaries should be targeted in such a manner that they are benefited at least in proportion to their population in
each District/State. All State/UT Governments may make arrangements for special training programmes according to the needs of SC/ST/OBC and
Minority beneficiaries.
 
(v)
                Of the total target for each State/UT, women beneficiaries should constitute at least 30 per cent.
 
(vi)
              Preference may be given to develop clusters specializing in specific products at the time of selection of PMRY beneficiaries. It is desired that if a
cluster consisting of 5 to 11 boys/girls are given loan for the same product/business/service, it may pave the way for proper development.
 
(vii)      For vetting of the project profiles of the PMRY applicants belonging to SC/ST/OBC applying for loan under such clusters, utilization of the services of
a Chartered Accountant (CA) may be considered. A remuneration to the CAs not exceeding Rs.100/- may be paid out of the available Contingency
funds under PMRY.
 
 
60.            With these measures and the review meeting taken by Secretary (MSME) with State Governments and Banks including RBI in July 2007, it is expected that the performance will improve
in 2007-08. Ministry will also monitor the progress more closely.
 
Further Recommendation
 
61.       The Committee has taken note of the guidelines and it would like to be further informed about the number of Seminars conducted in each
district in State/UT, number of SC/ST/OBC/ Minority and Women beneficiaries.
 
62.       The Committee is of the view that Ministry should closely monitor the entire process of implementation besides State Government and RBI and
Committee may be informed periodically of the progress made.
 
 
63.       The Committee feels the basic problem being faced in implementation of PMRY is the cold shoulders being shown by the bankers thus affecting
employment in rural areas.  Even in urban areas the problem persists relating to the interest rate charged by the banks.  The Committee accordingly, directs the
Government to convince the banks for rationalization of  rate of interest to make the scheme successful.
(Para 15.10)
 
64.       The Committee expresses its concern   over the poor performance  of PMRY in N.E. Region due to high level of NPA, misutilisation and poor
Recommendation
Action Taken
Recommendation

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/207threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:18:22]
recovery.    Moreover it also   suffers from poor education and training facilities, remoteness of branches and deficiencies on account of roads, power and
market etc.  There is a need for making concerted   efforts by all agencies to improve its performance in the region. 
(Para 15.11)
 
Action Taken
 
65.       Out of the reasons given by Banks for their inhibition to extend loans and under finance is high rate of default of repayment of PMRY loans by
beneficiaries. In a review meeting of PMRY taken by the Secretary (MSME) on 16 th July, 2007, RBI and participating banks were requested to extend benefits
to PMRY applicants and to desist from under financing of projects. Normal rate of interest shall be charged. As per the revised PMRY guidelines, all the
members of the Task Force Committee are to be collectively responsible for selection of beneficiaries. This would ensure that the Bank Manager alone shall not
be responsible for the Non Performing Assets (NPAs) if any. No collateral is to be insisted for PMRY loans up to Rs. 5 lakh.
 
66.       Seminars are to be conducted in each district for creating awareness of PMRY in the area in the form of pre-selection motivational campaigns. A
resolution may be adopted by each Gram Panchayat for giving wide publicity and awareness about PMRY in their respective jurisdictions.
 
67.       To reduce the level of sickness/closure of PMRY units, the District Level Selection Committee/Task Force Committee has been made responsible for
the proper scrutiny of applications and selection of viable projects, by associating a Chartered Accountant member.  The progress will be reviewed closely.
 
68.       The Committee is in agreement with the Ministry of MSME but it desires to have a detailed information, zone-wise and state-wise on ISEC,
PRODIP and SFURTI to assess the results and efforts made  by the Ministry of MSME.  It would also like to know the performance of each state
KVIB which are important vehicle for implementing KVI programmes together with inputs on constraints being faced by them in getting support
from respective State Government and the action taken on it by the Ministry.
 
69.       The Committee also desires to know the action taken by the Ministry and KVIC to cover the remote villages for the expansion of KVI
programmes.
 
70.       The Committee is of the view that still there is a vast scope to enhance the activities of the KVIC in NER.  The share of production by other
North Eastern States except Assam should be given boost.  Institutional network of sale and marketing infrastructure should be given due and timely
attention by KVIC and Ministry.  Number of directly aided institutions and departmental units of KVIC should be enhanced at all cost so that the
contribution in production of Khadi in North Eastern states could be brought up which is at present mere 1%
 
Chapter –IV
The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the
 
Recommendation
 
1.         The Committee strongly feels that in the North-East khadi activities needs to be given special dispensation. At present, there are only 34 KVI
institutions working in the North-Eastern Zone, which is less than 2% of the total number of all India institutions in the khadi field. Therefore, there is
an imminent need to establish new KVI institutions in the North-Eastern region. The Committee accordingly, recommends for a special drive for
developing new KVI institutions in the North-Eastern region. Secondly in order to bring effective management and organization in the khadi field in
the North East region, reputed khadi institutions from other parts of the country like Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh etc., requires to be
encouraged to bring in their managerial cadre/Khadi Karyakartas, who will train the local artisans in khadi work and also provide help in marketing
of khadi etc., if require, some special grants can be earmarked for this purpose.
 
(Para 5.14)
 
2.          As stated in paragraph No. 5.10 above, there are 65 khadi institutions registered with KVIC and State KVIBs in the NE Region. To improve the khadi
activities in the NER, a   Zonal   Level Committee under the Chairmanship of Member, KVIC, North Eastern Zone (as per the KVIC (amended) Act, 1956) has
been constituted to review and monitor the implementation of schemes/programme and to provide feedback to the Commission on the problems and difficulties
faced and suggestions made by banks, voluntary agencies, artisans and others engaged in the operation of the programmes of KVIC. Representatives of each
State KVIBs of the States, Zonal Dy. Chief Executive Officer, State Directors of the Zone, Zonal or Regional manager of the lead banks operating in the zone
and representative of an institution of repute working for at least ten years in KVI sector are the members of the Committee.
 
3.         In addition, relaxation on ban of registration of new khadi institutions has been given for the khadi institutions situated in NE Region.
 
4.         Efforts have also been initiated by the KVIC to motivate khadi institutions/ khadi workers from other parts of the country, especially from Bihar, Uttar
Pradesh and West Bengal to depute their expertise for development of khadi activities in NE Region. These will be pursued seriously.
 
 
5.         The Committee welcomes the proposals for the development and promotion of mega clusters in the States of Kerala,Tamil Nadu, Andhra
Pradesh, Karnataka and Orissa.  The Committee desires that similar clusters should also be promoted in other States which are growing coconut like
Gujarat, Tripura and Goa etc. in a time  bound manner.  The Committee impresses upon the Coir Board to ensure that these clusters prove to be
booster  in not only in increasing the production but also improve the quality of products.
 
(Para 10.3)
 
 
Further Recommendation
71.            The Committee further recommends that KVIC should play a key role by pooling the resources of developmental agencies through its vast network of NGO’s by convergence
activities which would definitely give tremendous confidence and better life to the people in N.E. region.
Ministry have not been received
Action Taken
Recommendation
Action Taken

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/207threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:18:22]
 
6.         The Board has proposed a new scheme viz. Rejuvenation, Modernisation & Upgradation of Technology in Coir Industry with an outlay of Rs.1654
crores during the 11th Plan period.  Under the Technology Upgradation programmes, six mega clusters are proposed to be implemented in the major coir
producing States of the country inclusive of one in the North-East region.  The Board is also the Nodal Agency for implementing the cluster development
programme "Scheme for Fund for Regeneration of Traditional Industries (SFURTI)" with an outlay of about Rs.1 crore for each cluster. So far 26 coir clusters
(covering the States of Gujarat, Tripura, Goa, West Bangal, Andaman & Nicobar, Lakshdweep, Pondicherry and Assam) have been approved by the Scheme
Steering Committee of SFURTI for their development. Out of these, 01 coir cluster from Gujarat , 01 from Tripura, 01 from Goa.   The scheme is under
implementation.  The cluster development programme includes Development of Production Infrastructure, Common Facility Centres, Market Linkage
interventions etc.  The Common Facility Centres envisaged under the Cluster Development Programme are exclusively for improving the quality of the
products produced by the units functioning in the cluster area.   The market linkage intervention will facilitate exploration of new market avenues for the
products produced by the units which inter-alia improves the production.   Therefore, the mega clusters as well as the clusters under SFURTI are for improving
the production as well as improving the quality of the products produced by the units. 
 
 
7.         As regards the Science & Technology Programme which is a continuing plan programme of the Coir Board, the Committee feels that  
consistent efforts are to be made towards technology upradation, product diversification, introduction of pollution free processing technologies etc. 
The Committee feels Board’s extension service programmes are needed by the Industry.  The Committee therefore, desires the Coir Board  to take the
necessary steps.
(Para 10.4.)
 
 
8.         The Coir Board has got an Extension Service Wing at Central Coir Research Institute (CCRI) and there are three Extension Service Officers positioned.
The 4 Regional Offices of the Board at Bangalore, Pollachi, Rajamundry and Bhubaneswar are also carrying out extension work on the technologies developed
by the CCRI. Laboratories have been set up in the Regional Offices for testing "coirpith" and preparation of "pith plus" to cater to the requirements of the
industry and to demonstrate the process of composting. A programme  is being undertaken  in collaboration  with the Department of Rural Development, Govt.
of  Kerala,   for construction of village  roads using coir geo-textiles in the  State of  Kerala  during  the extension  service  programme in the CCRI.  The CCRI
will also  provide  necessary  assistance   in terms  of technical  advise  for selecting  the  proper  geotextiles for unpaved roads. Collaborative  projects  have
been undertaken  with the Indian  Institute   of Technology,  New Delhi to work on construction of unpaved  roads in the village  of Andhra Pradesh  so as to
popularize  the use of coir geotextiles   in the construction  of village roads. Two more projects   will be undertaken  to construct  such village roads  in Tamil
Nadu and Orissa  in collaboration  with   reputed  institutions.
 
9.         The  demonstration   of composting  of coir pith will be  undertaken in various  parts of the  country  through Regional Offices  and the ‘oil-in-water 
technology’  is being  popularized  in all the coir  producing  states in the country  through the Extension   Service staff  and the Chemistry   Department of
CCRI. A  programme  is being undertaken in collaboration  with National  Research  Development  Corporation, New Delhi to  distribute  necessary equipment 
to 50 Co-operative societies in Kerala so as to popularize  the  Zero Effluent Process preparation of coir fibre for spinning.
    
Recommendation
 
10.       The Committee hopes that measures initiated by Ministry of Agro & Rural Industry and Coir Board to assess the potentialities of Coir
industry in the North East will help coir industry in the region.  The Committee feels that efforts should be made to set up atleast one cluster in a
North Eastern State on lines of those set up under Rejuvenation, Modernization and Technology Upgradation programme.  This will prove to be a
booster in the power of coir products in the region. 
 
(Para No. 11.5)
 
11.       The Board under the scheme "Rejuvenation, Modernization and Technology Upgradation" has envisaged a special component for the north eastern
region with a total outlay of Rs. 151.5 crore to be implemented during the 11th Five year plan period.  A mega cluster with a total outlay of Rs.10 crore will be
implemented in the North Eastern region for promoting               Common Facility Centres, for improving the quality of the products produced by the units, a
Market Linkage intervention, for marketing the coir products etc.  North eastern region is one of the major consumers of coir and coir products produced in the
major coir producing States of the country.  The proposed scheme envisages development of the production infrastructure for producing more value added coir
products that can be marketed in these states.  This also will generate more employment in the north eastern region.  Certainly, this will boost the coir industry
in the NE region as a whole and especially in the coconut producing states viz Assam and Tripura.
 
 
12.       The Committee expresses its concern over the poor performance of REGP particularly in the States of Jharkhand, Orissa, Manipur,
Meghalaya, Tripura and Maharashtra.  The Government has to make concerted efforts for improvement in these States.  As the State KVI Boards are
major agencies in implementation, the Ministry and KVIC should take up the matter with these State Governments and KVI Boards & ensure that
the performance does improve.
(Para 12.10)
 
Action Taken
 
13.         To improve the performance of REGP in the country including the States of Jharkhand, Orissa, Manipur, Meghalaya, Tripura and Maharashtra,
continuous efforts are made by the Government along with KVIC. Besides organizing awareness camps among the entrepreneurs to take advantages of REGP,
KVIC has launched a Scheme namely  Rural Industries Consultancy Service  (RICS) to provide consultancy service for  preparation of bankable projects under
this programme.
 
14.       Further, KVIC monitors the programme by organising frequent reviews with Bankers and State Boards officials and also with its field level agencies.  
All the schemes of KVIC including REGP is also monitored regularly in the Ministry under the Chairmanship of Secretary (MSME). In Jharkhand, the newly
established State KVI Board has started its functioning recently and it is expected that the KVI activities in the State must be improved. A Zonal Office has also
been established by the KVIC in Guwahati for better implementation of the schemes/programmes including REGP in the North Eastern States including
Recommendation
Action Taken
Action Taken
Recommendation

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/207threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:18:22]
Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura. In addition, as per Khadi and Village Industries Commission (Amendment) Act, 1956, Zonal Committees have been
constituted in the six zones. These Zonal Committees will review and monitor the implementation of schemes/programme and to provide feedback to the
Commission on the problems and difficulties faced and suggestions made by banks, voluntary agencies, artisans and others engaged in the operation of the
schemes of KVIC. Representatives of each State KVIBs of the States, Zonal Dy. Chief Executive Officer, State Directors of the Zone, Zonal or Regional
manager of the lead banks operating in the zone and representative of an institution of repute working for at least ten years in KVI sector are the members of the
Committee.
 
15.       Chairperson and Chief Executive Officer, KVIC have visited Jharkhand, Orissa, and Guwahati recently and review meetings were held with all
concerned to improve the programme. KVIC has been asked to draw up a specific action plan taking into account the recommendation of the Committee which
will be followed up with KVIC by the Ministry.
 
 