RAJYA SABHA 
Ind. 20/ 96 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
ON 
THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF MINISTRY OF. 
INDUSTRY FOR 1996-97 
(Presented on the 30th August , 1996) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 1996/Bhadra, 191H (Saka) 

CONTENTS 
I. CoMPOSmos oF THE CoMMrrrEE 
ll. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
III. ANNt;XURE (MlNu ·•llS oF n1c MtcllNOS) 
PAGES 
(i)·(ii) 
1-9 
13-22 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITIEE 
I. Shri Ashok Mitra-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri MaLLTice Kujur 
3. Sycd Sibtcy Razi 
4. Shri Gov i ndr;~o Adik 
5. Shri Rajubhai A. Parmar 
6. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
7. Shr i m;~ti Anandiben Jethabhrd Patel 
8. Shri Kanak Mal Kawra 
9. Shri Ram Deo Bh;mdari 
10. Shri Anil Kumar 
11. Shri T . M . Venkatachalam 
12. Shrimati Jayaprada Nahata 
13. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
LOK SABHA 
14. Shrimati Jayawamiben Mehta 
15. Shri Ritlul Pd. Verma 
16. Shr i Ratlha Mohan Singh 
17. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
18. Shri Nitish Bharadwaj 
19. Shri Numdevnto Diwathe 
20. Shri Ananth Kunwr 
21. Shri M.K. Patil 
22. Shri Shyaml;d Bansiwal 
23. Shri Nawal Kishore Sharma 
24. Ktumori Frida Topno 
25. Shri Sana! Mehw 
26. Shri Udaysinghrao Gaikwad 
27. Shri Chinuri Ruvindra 
28. Shri K.H. Muniy<tppa 
29. Shri l'radeep Bhuttucharya 
30. Dr. N. Subramanyam 
31. Shrima ti Usha Mcena 
32. Shri B.L. Shank<tr 
33. Sltri ~htval Ki;J·tort: Rai 
34. Slui Sunil Khan 
35. Shri L. Aduikalaraj 
36. Shri !VI. R<tmananthan 
37. Shri An<tndnto Adsul 
38. Shri Y. Alagirisamy 
39. Shri l3hakta Charan Das 
40. Shri Chandru Sekhar 
(i) 

41. Shri Darbaru Singh 
42. Shri P.C. Thoma~ 
43. Shri Xavier Aiukkal 
SECRET ARIA 1' 
Shri Sutish Kumur, Joint Secretary 
Shri Om Parkash, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Dcepak Goyal, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Commlnee Officer 
(ii) 

TWENTIETH REPORT OF TilE COMMITTEE 
ln my capacity as Chairman of the Dep:lrtmcnt-Related Parliamentury Standing 
Committee on Industry, l, Ashok Mitra, having been authorised by the Committee, hereby 
pre,ent it:. Report on the Demands for Grants of the Minisuy of Industry for the year 
1996-97 
2. While finalising this Report, the Committee met and held discu~:.ions on the 
Mimstry's demands on 8th, 9th, 13th, 14th, 19th, 21st and 23rd August, 1996 11 heard 
officers of the Ministry and also had exchange of views with representatives of Trade Unions 
:1nd Industry Associations. The Names of individual> and organisations who met the 
Commiuee are given in Annexure. 
3. The Committee is, ut th~ very outset, constrained to offer some obscrvutions on the 
fate or moM reports submitted by Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committees. 
It " th~: gener.tl expectation that suggestions and recommendations by such Commlltees 
would receive careful attention from the Government and action taken on the ba:.i:. of such 
r~:commendations be duly communicated to th~: Committees concerned No such healthy 
convention. the Commiuee i~ afraid, has been allowed to develop. While Demand~ for 
Gr~onts of individu:~l Ministries ure considered in Parliament, recommendations made by the 
overwhelming majority of the Standing Comm illees fall by the way~idc. This happens 
bccau~c the appropr iations of most Ministries are guillotined; since no opportunity arises to 
diSCO'S 111 detail on the noor of either House the Demunds for Grants of the Ministries, 
ob,crvations made by the respective Committee> tend to b<: ignored. That is. however, not 
the ~>nly matter of regret. Even dunng the sub:.uqucnt part of the year, the Ministries are 
not generally in the habit of responding to the concern~ expressed and issued raised by the 
Commiuees. If tbe hope 1s cmtcrtuined that perhap' 111 the departmental budget for the 
following fiscal year. suggc,tions and proposals cmamlling from the Commiuees would be 
taken into account, that hope too 1s by and largt! belied. The experiment with the Standing 
Committ~e:. is now almost four years old. 11 is, in thr vi~w of the present Commillee, 
importa nt that the entire range of issues in regard to U1e functioning of the Standing 
Committee is thorough ly reviewed. U l11e objective Is to render the Standing Committees into 
effective instruments for raising the level of per rormnnce of parliamentary democracy, the 
Stunding Commillees deserve to be offered adequote respect; they should, in addition be 
properly housed and serviced. If, on the other hand, the absent-minded treatment as at 
pre>~nt continues. il should be for serious con>iderulion -.hether the experiment wilb tbe 
Committ~e ~ystem \\Ork ought not to be dispensed \\ilh. 
4. This appraisal of the Dcmartd> for Grants of the Ministry or Industry allows the 
Committee the opportunity to offer some comment> on the problems llf industrial growth 
confronting the country und, i1t that context. on the functioning of the Ministry. The 
Committee has taken note of the emerg ing developments. in the indusrriol landscape in the 
recent period. There is app;uent ~<Hisfaction in both industry and Governmem circles over 
the rate of growth of more tlwn 12 per cent achieved m the organi>ed induMrial sector 
during 1995-96. In some individual industries. the rate of growth has been reported to be 
even higher; automobile production, for example. wa> higher by almost 40 per cent 
compared to the preceding year. On the assumption thut these trend~ will continue and 
inve;tible fund; will be forthcoming without hitch from different source~. ~ rate of industrial 
l 

2 
growth of around 12 to 14 per cent per annum is being confidently predicted for the rest of 
the 1990s. The influx of direct foreign investment of a substantial order i~ one of the 
postulates on which this optimism is ba;cd. 
5. It is n ot ve ry profitab le at thb >tage to eng<tgc m any disputation ove J the forecasts 
made on beh alf o f the Gov ernm ent and industry associations; their prognosis may well turn 
out to be true. At the same time. the Committee considers it imponant to draw attention of 
both Parliament 3nd the Government to the problems and difficulties likely to be 
encountered in the next few yean in c<tse the endeavour is to sustain the tempo of growth 
reached during the past year. 
6. In !he view of the Committee, <l number c1f points are worth >tressmg. First. the 
k1tcs1 official datu ~ugges ts tha t the r,1tc of growth h<ts declined perceptibly in the first 
quane r of 1996-\17 compa red to whot it was in the correspond ing period in 1995-96. There 
hus also been a nwrkcd decline in sanction< of fund~ from financial institutiom.. us well as in 
the rate of growth in the import of indu,triul input> during this quarter. Second, if the five­
ye .. r penod ,;nee the beginning or libcr .. lis~tion ;, con\tdered togeth<!r the overall rate of 
indu>trial growth in thh quinquenmun s11ll lags behtnd tile rate of industrial growth allained 
during the immediately preceding five years, or what it wus throughout the 1980s. Third, the 
r;Hc of growth of employment too in the organ i,ed induw ial sec tor, aga in going by offici;tl 
Llata. lms been genen 1lly disappo inting in th<' post J!)\11 phuse: job opportunities in the 
private sector have actually decl ined, <~nd have been onl} partially compensated by a small 
increase in employment 111 the public sector. Finally. even 1f the official clatm with respect to 
the inflow of direct foreign investment in 1995-06 rcachmg the level ol 2 billion dollars is 
wken at its face value, v.hcth~r th" .;an he mad<.! tu dimb to the level of 10 billion dollars 
;mnually in the cuursc of the next few year.; remains :m open question; prOJections of 
iudustria l growth by the Government as well as indu~ll) cirdcs arc based 011 the assumption 
of 111 fusion of extern( •l ca pi ttl I or Ill i> magnit ud c. 
7. Tht: implications of another <hilum should not be missed either. The pttllern of 
mO\ement of Jircct foreign capiwl inro the producti•c 'ectors of the economy i,; still heavily 
biased in favour of ~ervice industries and for such relatively insignificant, low employment 
creating activities as bouling plant\ for soft drink', dt'tilleries for hard drink,, fast food 
establishments. clothier•. carticr.. und so on The major lhi'USI of industrial growth has been 
provided in the 1110>1 re..:ent pe riod t>y one or two i ndustric~ like assemb ling and manufacture 
of pu~~cngcr curs. Th<! latter not only have a restricted murket; they un: :tho intensely 
c:1pital intensive For a huge country like India. \\ith dose to 40 per cent of the people 
subsisting bt!low the line of poverty whether industri:d growth could be triggered on a wide 
domestic front dcspitc the present narrownes> of the market for consumer durables 1S an 
issue that is yet to b~ resolved All that the Committee 11ill hereby suggest that the points 
rnised in the paragraphs immediately preceding need not be stra ightaway excluded from 
official considera tion. 
M. The Mini>try of Industry in any event is f<llcd to play o cutalyti<.. role in the country\ 
Industrial growth. Whether this rule b to be constw:tcd or wide b perhaps a matter on 
which opinion will continue to be di\IJcd for some whtlc The budgetar) :tllocation for the 
Mini,try however suggc~t~ a dccL,ion in thiS maner ha~ already been arrived at from now on. 
the \linistrr's direct participation in tht! indu~t rial ~lcvclopment pmce\\ i> going to be 
increasingly curtailed; most of the onus for indu~tri<• l !)IOWih is to be paS$Cd 10 the private 
sector. As happened in 1995·96, fund> ea rmarked for the Minis try of Industry in the Budget 
Es timates for 1996-97 too full short of even l per cent of the Govcmmcnt's ov<!rall 
budgewry outlay . Of the allocation of a lillie more than Rupee\ 2.000 crorc for the Ministry 

3 
as a whole, dose to 45 per cent is set apart for the Department of Small Scale Industrie s. 
The Departments of Industria l Development and Heavy Industry mostly share out the 
bal:tnce of the proposed outlay. The distribution of work between these two departments 
and between them and the newly established Department of Industri al Policy appears to be 
marked by a certai n degree of arbitrariness. The other Department under the Mini stry's 
umbrella, Ute Department of Public Enterpr ises, has. to oil appearance s, already been 
divested of operatio nal rc,ponsibilities; the notional budgetary allocation suggested for it 
reflects this reality. 
9. A not insignificant part of the outlays proposed for the Departments of Industrial 
Development and Heavy Industry goes to provide budgetary support to sick industrial 
undcrwkings. 1 he accepted poltcy i> to continue with ipdustrial deregulation; a further 
number of indu~tries are proposed to be set beyond the pale of licensing arrangements in the 
current fiscal ye:tr. In the circumstances, lite usset creating role of the Governm en t can be 
exp~c t c d to ~ h rin k in the co urse of the next few yeurs. Thut would none theless lcttve a large 
segment of the mdustrial sector as a whole >till under direct state ownership and control. 
Some of the" public !.ector units have been rendered ~ick over the years. The authoritte' 
ha1e ;tdopted a re latively simplhttc :tpproach in the case of such stck undertakings. An 
attempt is first 111:1de to revive the units through injectio n of budgetary funds. As u 
>Ub>cqucnt >t:tgc. groups of worker~ are pur~uadcd to accept the Voluntary Retirement 
Scheme through av:silment of resources from the National Renewal tund In the final round. 
the case of the industry referred to the quasi-judicial authority, the 13oard for Industrial and 
Financial Reconstruction. in t he hope thut the OIFR's intervention will ~peed up revival. or. 
in the ultern;~ttvc private units will enter the picture and bring up the unit>. Thi~ pattern has 
yielded little fruit. but h:t~ been pcrsi,ted with The objective of a gradual wtthdrawal of 
Government from the tndu~trial scene has abo influenced the policy :•pproach towurd profit­
making public e nt erp ri se~. While the Governmcn! will con tinue to hold on to a majo rity of 
th ... ~quity, a certain number of shares will be uffered for s:•lc in th~ open market; the sale 
proceeds will be merged into the al'COunt~ of the general hudgct. According to the statement 
by the Finance Minister ut tlw time of the prcsentution llf this year's budget. receipts from 
disinvcstnwnt opera tions ;trc to be used in the curren t yc;tr for prov iding relief to the poor 
tiel ;t number of wdfare activities. In effect, though . it still boils down to ~e the resources 
raised through dtsmvestmcnt tor clusmg the rc' cnue gap m the budget. 
10. Even if it is to be ~ss ttm ed that disinvestme nt will be an integral part of policy from 
now on, questsons may >till he raised nn the moi.lttlit)' to he followed for the purpose. The 
Government h:•s thts year set up a Disinvc\lment Commission avowedly to oversee 
disinvestment operations. Decisions of this Commtssion are however slated to be effective 
only from the third tranche of the disinvestment programme proposed for 1'.1\16-97. A so 
culled 'tore group' of officials, it has been indicated, will decide upon the details of the 
di\tnVC\tmenb to be undertaken dunng the fir,t two tranches. The Disinvestment Commts 
ston will reportedly have the prcrogati\·C of drawing up comprehensive long term 
tlistnvesunent programmes only wtth respect tO such undertaking' as ;tre referred to it. 
II. lu the Committee'> view, the d~ferment of the jurisdiction or the Commission lill the 
third trunche of disimestment proposed for the current )·eor is un,..urranted. Moreover, to 
suggest that the Conunission will prepare long-term plans of disinvestment onl} for public 
sector undert:sl<ings thnt ure referred to it will severely limit its authority. The Committ ct 
11ould urg~ thut the Disht•estment Commission be permitted to commence ft.nrtlonin_g ••ith 
immediate effect and be fully authorised to decide on its o" n the undertakil !(S for 11 hich 
dbisl\es tment prog ramm es nrc to be drawn up- ln order to remo• ·e ambiguit ) :tnd ensure 

4 
that lhe disinvestment process follows a rational and transparent course, the so-called 'core 
group' should be disbanded fo.-lhwlth and responsibility for the ru-st two !ranches of 
disinvest ment in the current year be also delegated to the Commission. The latter should have 
the freedom to decide the ambit of its activities; the only djrection to it each year should be 
conrwed to the approximate order of resources to be rabed through dislnvestments 
undertnken during the yea r. 
12. The other side of the picture is provided by the long list of sick industrial 
undertakings routinely referred to the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction. 
Going by official data, in the overwhelm ing majority of cases industrial sickness arises from 
managerial deficienc• and financial and administrative malpractices; 11 is somewhat an 
irony tha t it is nontheless the worker~ who have to ~uffe~ on account of the collapse of the 
units. The Ministry representatives, while muking their an nual uppcurances before the 
Conunittee, ritually narra te the number of cases sent to the BIFR and offer tentative 
rem~rh on the likely (;He uwa1tmg the units. ln the c>pinion of the Committee , sufficient 
experience, mostly of a negative nJturc, bas alrc:Jd)' been Jcquired with respect to the BIFR 
experiment. The bull does not lie with the quasi-judic1al body. but with the reluctance on 
the part of the Government to make up tts m1 nd on the recommcnt.l:tt ions of the agem:y. In 
several instam:es, even after the BlFR hns forwarded it> recommendation~. a Committee of 
Ministers as fim1l arbiters. has offered view~ which me at variance with those of the BIFR: a 
stage of impasse wa' thereby reached. Meanwhile the Mtnistry continued to dole out funds 
for meeting contractU~! obligations. The Committee would suggeM a change In official 
thinking in this muller; either the BIFR b provided with the final authority to decide issues 
which fall within its jurl.sdktioo, or the Government proceeds to an allcrnative modality to 
meet the chall~nge or industrinl sickness. 
13. The Committee considers it e!»ential to d~>ell on the desirability of Ute Ministry not 
"a'hi11~ its hands from effortl> to rehabilitate the three public ~ctor unib, the Ilea>)' 
Engutcerinl! Corpuration, the Minutg and Allied Mal'11in~ry Corporation nud Hind~tun 
l\luchiut Tools. The social ~tnk~, in the case or th~se three unit~ arc high, and it would ht 
mu~t um~is~ to ullo•• to go to seed the capital \lock once il1>e~tcd in lh<>e units. The 
Committee will makt tht S>lllle observation with respect to the mini·cemcnt plnnt at Sawul 
Mudhopur. 
14. Be that ~s 11 ma)·. tile cl•untry\ induslnal 5~ctor henceforth is to be cof\.tltutcd nl 
two scp.tr~tc un1vcr,c>: vn the one httnd is the likely emergence of a st>phi,ucated , f:•st· 
cxpand1ng muJ.:rn ;ector leaning on the very latest tet·hnol<>gy and aucmpting to maximisr 
etlllrl> .11 Hlt:llntng 1ntcmation~lly ctunpctitivcness: it will have its eye '" much on tr,c 
de '"' .: ''hcdulc of th.: uppc: da"e' in lndiJn ~ociety ;ts on th~ export market for sutv 1val 
and gwwth. Thts sc~:tor of industry \HIJ :1bsorb cunsiJerable capital. but will be unable to 
pru\luc muth t>t cx:rJ-<:mrlu) ment 1 his " a harsh cold JUdgement but there i' not rnw:h 
swpc for <li':l~rceiug wtth th1s dep1d1on of the pro,pcctivc rcaltty . 
15. At the other end. though there: willl>e "C<>n'tdcral>le t<>rpu' ot upll.•l stock locked 
up 10 siCk unJ do>nl lmlustrtJI unit>, some ln the public 'C<:tor Jlld some m priv!tte hands . 
The mJcltincr) .mJ .:qu prncnt mst4llcJ in the'< units \\ill be ub,olcte tn vanou~ degr~cs; the 
untt w>t ol productiOn will "lsv renuer their product' unfit for catering to the c:~:c:m ll 
market But sn1.e the) c:mbod) c;.pital stod: still capable of produc 1ng a not negligible 
quantrty of mdu.,tri;ll output of vuri<>us dcscnption,, .1p;ut from providing employment to 
hundred> of thousand> of workers, the question of giving them the short shrift will need to 
be <k;llt with some: care. Should the't units be: allowed to go to th" wall, upart from the 
potl'lltiill forfctturc of prod uctiOn. the worker' di,placcd would be unlikely to find 

5 
employment in the sophisticated modem sector. Were they to remain without jobs, there 
would be the prospect of widespread social unre;t which is bound to affect the foundations 
or the entire economy, including the brightest and healthier segments of the industrial 
sector. Against this background, the constraints of a parliamentary democracy, which is both 
uliv() and kicking, can be easily surmised. 
J6. In such u situation. the Government will have little choice but to have a reappraisal 
of Its policy concerning the sick industrial undertakings in the country. Banks and rtnancial 
institutions will have to be involved in this exercise. Budgetary s'Upport too may need to be 
augmented, conceivably by drawals from realisations from disinvestment operations. The total 
pool of funds made available to the sick units, there is no question, should be offered at a 
fn•ourable rate of interest. The infusion or fresh funds, should ho,.e•u be accompanied by a 
thorough overhaul of the equity structure "ilh emphasis on liquidating as far as possible, of 
p:t>l liabilities to the government; in any enol, as matters stand at present, such liabilities are 
not easily recoverable. New capital funds offered to the units should be utilised to finance the 
purchase of balancing equipment which may emure a minimum order of modernisation. What 
Is equally relevant, munugerl3l personnel or t11e highest calibre must be inducted during this 
phase. 
17. The Committee will here place on record it~ views on a closely related issue. The 
Government must havo: spent l}lore than Rs. 2.000 crore in the course of the past few years 
10 superannuate worker; under the Voluntary Retirement Scheme by drawing down 
resources from the NatiOn31 Renewal Fund. It is indeed conceivable that were this sum 
made available for C<tpiwl rcl·onstruciion of the unit~. scveraJ of them might have already 
been nursed back to hc<tlth. TI1e Committee will recommend that from now on no hindrance 
should be pluced to proposals for transfer or NRF resources direl·lly for industrial revh·al, 
such as for purchase of new equipment or for puq>oses of working capital. The Committee 
"ill further suggest that the present arrangement whereby resources of the NRF are available 
only for puhlic undertakin~:s under lhe aegis of the Union Government is Indefensible. The 
n.ttion includes th~ Stutes as "ell; therefore resources belonging to "hot is described as a 
National Renewal Fund should be 3\allabl~ for ser> Icing sick uudertakinJ:s under the punie" 
of the State Co' t!nun~nts too. 
18. B~for~ pro,ccdmg further. the Committee would like to mention a number of other 
mJtter~ which hav~ rdev"nce for the survival :md prosperity of the organhed industrial 
sc"or. Fir>t is the issue of import turi(fs. Once economic libcrali>ation is fo1 the present 
ucccptcd as an integral pun of official policy. import restrictions will have to be given the 
go-bye und import duue~ ure 'opposed to come down overtime . But 11 is only proper that 
the clement of ~u,pen)e 1., taken off from the entire cxcr,ise . Tbt Government, it can be 
\uggested '>e persuod~d to unnounce, SB), a r.~e )ear schedule of import duty reductions from 
now on, and [on,ard Ibis schedule ever) )ear. The u\ailabilil) of such a schedule "ill help 
the Industrial units to dovetoil their production ond murket planrung in a for more efTecth·e 
manner than at present. 
19. As for the duty chunge> announced in this year\ budget. the Committee would 
recommend Uwt Ute rates of Imparl duty proposed for paper and newsprint be carefully 
re,·iewed. Paper and m:wsprint constitute a very :.en,Jilve sector of the c:conomy. affecting a> 
they do both cdm:ution and public informution. There is also the pos;ibility of a se,·erc 
contraction in ernplo}ntcnt if production in lh~ industry. particularl} in the small scale 
'ector. falb off bccau~c of the imp:tct of :m unfavourable impon dot) regime:. Whether some: 
adJu~tment> arc abo called for in the announc~d cuts in impor: dut} in the ca'e of item" that 

6 
impinge on the textile sector may also be looked into. The case of the harmful impact oJ' 
lowered import-duties on ball bearings and flint bullon, affecting a large group or small scale 
producers in the Maharashtra, Gujarat region and a public sector ophthalmic glass plant in 
West Bnngal deserved to be looked into too. 
20. Periodic downward adjust ments m the external value of the rupee is inte nded to 
maintain the competitiw edge of the country's exports, including exports of industrial 
products. It is however for consideration whether the rising rupee cost which such 
devaluation entails does not neutralise the advantages reduction in import duty rates are 
supposed to confer. Such Issues deserve to be continuously reviewed; this can be done best by 
an inter-ministerial committee with representation from the Mjnistrie s of Industry, 
Agriculture, Commerce, Finance and the Planning Commission. 
21. This inter-ministerial Committee may also oversee the setting up or a mechanism 
which could monitor nod report whether taking ad••nntage of econontic liberalisotion and the 
gradual demolition or tbe tariff structure, foreign parties are trying to sell some or their wares 
in ·our markets by undeJ'Cutting domeslic producers. Information systems are nvuilnble here as 
well ns abroad about such mntcers, from whkh we can adopt concrete steps to prevent 
unconscionable dumping activities on our soil. 
22. The Committee's auention has been dr""" to the acute necessity or n re-structuring 
or our educational system so that skilled scientin c manpower is continuously available to 
service the fast emerging sophisticated segment or our industr y. The matter shou ld be 
examined in depth by the Ministry in association with the University Grants Commission and 
the National Council for Industrial 3Ild Technicul Education. 
23. The major challenges however lie elsewhere. The principal activities of the Ministry 
of Industry are now directed tow~rds small scale and coltuge industries: the bulk of the loans 
und \ubs i d ie ~ organised by the Ministry ~re inte nded for th is sector . From whutcvcr data are 
avail:lble with rhe Cornmiltec, it does not seem that the rate of expansion in cottage and 
sm~ll scale operatiom ha) been able even to match the rate of gro,Hh in the organised 
indu~trial sector. The point or view frequently professed that while employment is 
con,tricted in the organbcd industries, it ha~ taken off in a spectacular manner in 
unorganbed ~mall·sc;tle operations has also therefore to be taken wuh a pinch of salt. The 
other outstanding reality i) that in the ca;e of small scale industrial activities too. the 
pcrsi:.tcnt phcnomcnou is of lop·sidcd regiQnal growth: it is again the econom ically advanced 
States which have attracted investment in ~mall-~calc opera tions, wheth er by, privute enti ties 
or by the coopcmtivc agcncic~. The Grow th Ct.:ntrcs sponso red by the Union Government 
have been ;, ~low starter and their achievements have lagged way behind the assigned 
toorgcc-. Mor.;over. even when fully implemented, thc>c Centre;, can at bc>t only make a 
dent on the outst:mding problem of infrastructur:tl deficiency The Tran;port Subsidy 
S<:hcmc has helped. but only to a limited extent. The '"" holiday scheme\ announced from 
time to time. such a,, for in,t;mce, for the North-Eastern States, have had a negligible 
rcspOn\e because of their fadurc to resolve the basic i»ue, namely. the bck of indu\trial and 
economic infrastructure. few priv;ue p<lrties are interested in risking their capital in such 
cap ital-intensive activiti~s which guar;1!l1Ce on ly ''" extreme ly modest return in Lhe 
forc~ccuble perio d. 
2-1. The problem concern~ a> much the badw:trd Stutes us the backward areas of even 
rel .. tively developed State:~ A Report prepared by the prcdcces;;or uf thi' Comm ittee in 
1995·96 had reviewed the range of issues involved; the conclusions derived therefrom ~hould 
p~rhap' be taken note of by the Mimstry lt i\ obviou' th:~t neither the 'pusmodi application 

7 
of conventional instruments such as tax relief> and subsidies nor a narrow compartmental 
approach will succeed in unleashing any massive development activity in areas where it is 
desired that industry should move. This conclu>ion upplies equally for small scale operations. 
The infrastructure has to be built ahead of industria l growth. The nature of the 
infrastructure may be different for small-scale industries, but this supply side problem will 
still have several common features. The alternative lines of action that can be suggested are 
as follows: (a) Public ~ector outlays on an immense scale. most of which are to be 
channelled to backward areas and small scale industrial operations: (b) foreign as well as 
domesti c invcMors to be invited to move in the areas of economic retardation on the 
:tssurance of massive concessions and reliefs in taxation. Debate will continue on the 
prospects of either ultemutive attaining any measure of success in the immediate period. It 
~>ould, in the view of the Committee, be hamrdous to leave the initiative in this matter 
entirely Into private hands because the results may turn out to be disappointing. What cannot 
however be denied is that in the obsession over industrial liberalisation, some crucial matters 
affecting small-scnle industrial operations and employment creation have tended to be placed 
on the back-burner. This cannot be allowed becau~e of the serious repercussions which could 
ensue. New forces have been released all over the polity "hich will increasingly demand that 
the aggregate resources available with the government are deployed in such n manner that 
small-scale activities are accorded incentive and the foundations of industrial infrastructure 
are spread e'•enly so as to reach hitherto retarded areas. 
25. Cerwin obvious steps, the Committee feels, can be taken which do nm involve any 
great deployment of resources For example, the government must resist U1e pressure to open 
up area s, currently resen·ed for the small scale sector, for intrusion by multinational 
companies. Where the latter units have made their entry into the small-scale sector through 
irregular and surreptitious means, penal measures should be straightaway enforced, including 
their summary expulsion. 
26. Any pusill;utimity her~ will be disastrOllS. It is also necessary to maintain the regime 
of ra,·ourable excise rates both for the products of smaJI and cottage-scale industrial units and 
also for their inputs. It should be seriously debated whether where incentives fail to persuade 
oq;uniseo industry to moH to backward areas, the case for punitive measures must not be 
examined. 
27. What is not often re;tlised b that the country's recent efforts at export promotion 
have depended to an inordinate extent on the ex:pon of farm products on the one hand and 
the product s of small-scale and couage mdustrie~ on the other. Till as long as the major 
industrial sectors do not reach an adequate level of international competitiveness, this 
dependence will not go awuy. At the same ttme, some danger exist~ in pushing too far with 
the export of fann products . Uninhibited agricultural exports can lead to a spiralling in 
domest ic prices with m(lst deleterious consequence~ including even on the export front A 
large responsibility therefore devolves on the export effo rt on behalf of the cottage and 
sm~lll ·scale ~ector, which alrc;td)' ;1ccounts for a~ much as 35 per cent of our aggregate 
export>. 
28. The necessity to enlarge the scale of output in ~mull and cottage industries to effect 
uuprovcments 10 product quality a\ well as to lower the cost of produ~tion ~annot be over­
cmph<lsiscd. Unscr upulous elem~nt~ from the lmge-scale sector. will occa,ionall) try to take 
advantage of the various concessions and protection;, available to cottage and smaU scale 
operations; this can not be avuided . lt is however essential thnl excise duties (~viable on the 
sector are kept as low as po~ible and as long as possible, and the rate of import dutle~ on 
essential inputs nul available in the countr y, or available onl~· in meagre quantities are 

8 
pegged to zero. Stress should also be laid on the induction of new technological processes 
again with lhe h~lp of a govcrnmenl subsidy, continous r esearch and experimentalion should 
go on \1 itb respecl to designs too. All this should be accompanied by markel research covering 
both home nnd oversens. Kllsdi und hnndloont operations must receive special attention in Ibis 
connection und efforts musl concentrale on bolb prolecting the equipment and earnings of 
hundreds and thousands of Khadi weavers and spinners and at the same lime, lower the price 
of KlulCJi texWes. 
29. All this impl ies tha t, in lhe course of the next few years, the annual outlay of lbe 
Department of Cuttage and Small-Scale lndustri~s musl increase sever al-fold. The Oeparlmeot 
must at the same time maint:1in the closL>st liaison with the State governments. Such 
coordination, the Committee expects, would proceed . furlber below and pancbayat's 
Institutions too would be full participants in the endeavour to speed up the rate of growth as 
well as of di.ersificulion in the small-scale industrial sector. Redefining the criteria or 
bnck\\ardness, and dcli ning it in lerms of blocks and taluka.s are worth considering in thC. 
connection . 
30. As already noted, the significance of 'uch mc:tsure~ for enlarging and mlen\ifying 
activities in the small scale sector are related to the judgement that in the foreseeable period 
employmeDI can rise in a spe<:tacular manner only if productive force~ are unleashed in the 
unorgan iset.l sector. Progress with l:trge -scule modernisation of industry will hinge upon 
either improvements in the govcrnmcnt·s budgetary positi~m or in a 'harp rise in external 
capitul innow. If the pro spects :1re less tha n brjght for ei ther. the country would be unable to 
generate much of additional employment in the organ"ed 'ector. The only hope would then 
rest on labour-usi ng productive ;tctivities in t11c smull-scalc sphere. The major prospect or 
employment creation in the retarded areas IS again likely to be linked to the scale of outlay 
tn smull -scule activities, in the absence of which ordinarv men and women in town and 
country would continue to languish in poverty and joblcssn~ss. This is where the State has to 
step in and mi~e the magnitude of subsidy to a very subst antial order. It would be equally 
necessary to re-derme aud re-fix legal stipulations concerning small-scale uctivities so as to 
both encourage n larger now of entrepreneurs nnd minimise avoidable irritations in coping 
with organisational and administrative arrangements. For instance, the Ministr) may consider 
whether it is possible to rnise the legal ceiliug of investmenl for the smnll scale seclor from Rs. 
60 lakhs to Rs. 2 crore or thereabouts, and raise the allon:~ble lurno' er from Rs. 3 crore to, 
say, Rs. 6 crore und exempt the limit from duty p:•ymenl up to a lurnover of Rs. 75 lakhs 
instead of existing limit or Rs. 30 lakhs. 
31. Reilching cr~<.lil at low rates of interest from banks and financial institutions will be 
a major headache. For whatever reason . the scheme of dtffercntial interest rates has been 
allowed to go to seeds in the course of the pa&t decade. Nor can it be claimed that priority 
>ector advance> by the banks have ulways favoured the "nail artis:tn or the unemployed 
youth. A broader is~ue arises: can the country·s economic and industrial progress be 
furthered by adherence 10 n conven1ional view of crcdtt policy und the rate of interest'! The 
hypothesi~ has been that in :t poor country such as India. where capit;tl is sc01rce, the price ol 
capital, that i~ the rate of intere>l. must be pitched high: thi' will both help to attract be llcr 
SH\'ing> and discourage investments in less profiwblc Hreas. A contrary view c;m however 
also be taken: a high rate of intere>t will inhibit investment and therefor will inhibit growth 
;md thereby further retard S(tVing~; in consequence, the country will be unable to get out or 
the vicious circle of low saving-low t:<lpital av-Jihtbility-iow growth-low savings . For 
agriculture und industry, !urge as well ns small sc:1le. the rational of cheap credit appears to 
be obvious. In the view of the Commillee, Parliament may consider whelher the government 

9 
should not be invited to undertake a total revie" of monetary policy, including of the interest 
rote ~lructure, since it crucially affects economic and industrial growth. The tardy progress of 
the Prime Minister's kozgnr Vojana, there is no question, is largely on account of the 
lugubious manner and banks have moved in ad,•ancing the loans they were expected to 
distribute with speed and imagination . 
32. A suggestion has been moote d that in view of the importance of the underlying 
i~suc,, Parliament may establish a Standing Committee on SmaJJ.scale Industry and 
Emplo) ment Generution whkh will function round the year in the manner of the Estimates 
Committee, the Public Accounts Committee and the Committee on Public Undertakings. This 
Committee "ill recommend the suggt.>stioo for con~ideration by Parlillment. 
Nbw D~:u1J; 
23 /111/11/S/, 1996 
ASIIOK MITRA, 
Chairman, 
Depamrreut·Rdated l'arltamentary 
Standing Commillee on lndtmry. 

ANNEXURE 

ANNEXURE 
MINUTeS OP THE MEETINGS OP THE COMMITTEE 
II 
SECO!\'D MEETING 
The Comminee mel al 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, lhe 8th August, 1996 in Comminee 
Room 'A', Ground Floor. Parliament House Annexe. New Delhi. 
I'RESE!'iT 
I. Slui Ashok Milm - Chairman 
MD1llERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Rajubhai A Parmar 
3. Mis; Saroj Kh<~parde 
4. Shn R"mde o BhandMi 
5. Shri T. M. Venkalachnlam 
6. Shri JaymH Kum:tr Mulhoutra 
LOK SAlliiA 
7. Sluimati Jayawantiben Meht:o 
8 Shri Rtllal Pd. Verma 
9 Shri RaJha .\loh:111 Singh 
Ill Shri Ptabhu D:tyal Katheria 
1. Shn :--litish DharadwaJ 
12. Shri Namdcvr;oo Diw.,the 
13. Shri Sl1yaml:tl BatNwal 
14 Shri l"awal Ki>hore Sharma 
15 Shri Udaysiu!:hrao ();ukwad 
lt1 Shn K. !1 ~luni)appa 
! 7 Shn PraJccp l3hall:ll'harya 
tS Shn !3 L Shankur 
19 S!m St:nil Khan 
2\J. Shri ,\1 R:tman.m:lwn 
2l. Shri Anandnto A.hul 
22. Shri V Alagiris<~my 
23. Shri D.uhura Siuglt 
24. Shri Xa,ier •\rakka l 
SECRETARIAT 
Shn Om Park:t~h , Deputy Secrcl:!l) 
Shu Deepuk Goyal, Under Sccrct:•r~ 
Shri Mom Raj Singh. Commmcc Ofllc~r 

WITNESSSES 
I. 
J[ 
14 
• • 
• • 
[[!. Repres~nlalives or Federa tion of Indian Chamber of Commerce and Indu stry 
(FICCI) 
1. Shri A. S. Ka~liwal, Senior Vice-l'resident 
2. Shri Prashant Kumar Bi~wal. Senior A~>"lant Secretary 
2. The Comm ittee heard oral evidence of the above mcmioned witnesses in respect of 
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of the Minbuies of lndu>try·, Steel and Mines. The Chairman 
directed the witnesses to consider the points raised by the Members during the meeting ond 
send 3n updated -note on the same at the earliest and late'! by the 16th Augu~t, 1996 for 
Commillee\ pcru>al. 
A vcrbatun record of the evidence wa.-, kept. 
3. The Commiuec then adjourned at .t. lll I' .M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Friday. 
the 9th Augu,t. 1996 
------ - - - -- --

Ill 
THIIm MEETING 
The Commmce met at 11.00 "·"· on Friday. the 9th August, 1996 in Committee Room 
'A', Ground f-loor. Parliament House Anncxe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
I. Shri Ashok Mitra - Chairman 
RAJYA SAUHA 
2. Sycd Sibtcy Razi 
1 Miss Saroj Khapitrdc 
4. Shri !l."mdeo Bha ndmi 
5. Shn T . .\1. Venktllachalam 
6. Shri Jity~nt Kumar Malhoutra 
LOK SABIIA 
7. Shrimati Javawantibcn Mehl<l 
8. Slu i Ritlal ·Pd Verma 
9 Shri Radh<l Mohan Singh 
10. Shri Prabhu Doyal Kathena 
I l. Shri Nitish Bhara~;lwaj 
12. Shr i Nawal Kishorc Sharmn 
13. Shri Utlaysinghwo Gaikw<~d 
1-1 Shn K.l I. ll!uniyappa 
15. Shri 13. L. Shankar 
16. Slui Sunil Kh~1 1 1 
17. Shri Anandrao Atlsul 
18. Shri \' A!agin,,1my 
19. Shri 13hukta C'haran Da, 
20. Shri Dnrb:tra Singh 
21. Shri 1'. C. Thon1ils 
22. Shri Xuvier Arakkal 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Om Parkash, Deputy Secreta ry 
Shri Deepak Goyul, Under Secre tary 
Shri Mom RaJ Singh. Committee Orric:er 
\\' !~ESSES 
I. • 
II. Representatives of Plaunlng Conuni£sion 
I. Shri Ashuk I3<~su , Advbcr (I & M) 
2. Shn P.:--1. Shali. Joint Adv,.er 
3. Shn R.Mand:sl, Joint Atlviser 
4. Dr. R:n naku r Gcdmn. Depu ty Advi:.cr 
• 
2. The Commincc hcctrd oml evidence or the above mentioned witm:~ses 111 respect of 
Demands for Gr~nh ( !9!16-97) of the Ministries of lmlumy. Steel :tnd Mines. The Chairn13n 
directed the wttncs~es to consider the point> rai,cd by the Member' during the meeting and 
send an updated note 011 the same at the earliest and latest by tl1e 16th August. 1996 for the 
Commiuee's pcrusul. 
A verbatim record of the evidence wus kept. 
3. The Commiilee then adjourned at 4.15 l'.M. to meet again ;rt 11.30 ,,.M. on Tuesday, 
the 13th August, 1996. 
• • • Rcl~llC$ w otlh:r maucno. 
IS 

IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M . on Tuesday, the 13th August, 1996 m 'Main' 
Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliamem House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ashok Mitra - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Syed Sibtey Razi 
3. Shri Rajubhai A. Parmar 
4. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
5. Shr imati Anandiben Jethabh<ti Patel 
6. Shri Ani! Kumar 
7. Shri Jayant Kumar MalhoU[ra 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shrimati Jayuwantiben Mc~ta 
9, Shri Ritlal Pd. Verma 
10. Shri Prabhu Daya l ~<.~theria 
11. Shri Anunt Kumar 
12. Shri Nawa l Kishore Sharma 
13. Shri Sana t Mehta 
14. Shri Pradeep Bhattacharya 
15. Dr. N. Subramanyam 
16. Shri B.L. Shankar 
17. Shri Sunil Khan 
18. Shri L Adaikalaraj 
19. Shri M. Ramananthan 
20. Shri Bhakta Charan Das 
21. Shri Durbaru Singh 
SECRETARiAT 
Shri Om Parkash. Deputy Secretary 
Shri Decpak Goyal , Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh , Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
I. Representatives of Ministry of Industry (Department of Industrial Development) 
1. Shri N. Mohanty, Secretary 
2. Shri P.G. Mankad, Director General, National Productivity Coun cil 
3. Dr. E.A.S. Sarma , AddiLionul Secretary & Financial Advisor 
II. Representatives of Trade Unions 
1. Shri B.D. Joshi, Gen.:ml Sccr.:tary, All India Trade Union Congress 
2. Shri K.L. Mahendra, Secretary. All India Trade Union Congress 
16 

17 
3. Dr. M.K Pandhe, General Secretury. Centre for Indian Trade Union 
4. Shri Gopeshwar, General Secretary, Indian National Trade Union Congress 
5. Shri Rajiv Ranjan, Advisor, Indian National Trade Union Congress 
6. Shri Kc~havbhai Thakkar, Member, National Executive, Bhartiya Mazdoor Sangh 
7. Shri Mukund Gore, All India Secretary, Dhartiya Mazdoor Sangh 
8. Dr. Shanti Putel, President, Hind Mazdoor Sangh 
9 Shri A D. Nagpal. National Secretary. Hind Mazdoor Sangh 
2. The Committee heard oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses in respect of 
Demands for Grant~ (1996-97) of the Ministries of Industry, Steel and Mines. The Chairman 
directed the wimes~es to consider the points raised by the Members durmg the meeting and 
send nn updated note on the same :tt the earliest and latest by the 20th August, 1996 for the 
Committee's perusal. 
II. verba tim record of the evidence was kept. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 6.45 P.M . to meet again at 11.30 A.M . on 
Wednesday. the 14th August, 1996. 

y 
FIFTH MEETING 
The Com mince met at 11.30 A.M. on We dnesd~y. the 14th August, 1996 in Room 
No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ashok Mitra -Chairman 
RAJY A SABHA 
2. Syed Sibtey Razi 
3. Shri Govindrao Adik 
4. Shri Rajubhai A. Parmar 
5. Miss Saroj Khapard e 
6. Shrimat1 Anandiben Jetbabhai Patel 
7. Slui Rmndeo Bhandari 
8. Shri Anil Kumar 
9. Shri Jayant Kum;~r Malhoutra 
LOK SABHA 
10. Shrimati Jayawantiben Mehta 
11. Shri Ritlal Pd. Ycnna 
12. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
13. Shri Namdevrao Diwathe 
14. Kumari Frida Topno 
15. Shri Sanat Mehta 
16. Sllri Pr:•decp B hntta ~h;~rya 
17. Dr. N. Subramanyam 
18. Shri B. L. Shanlwr 
19. Shri Sunil Khan 
20. Shri Y. Alagirbamy 
21. Sh ri Dhakta Chamn Das 
22. Shri Darbara Singh 
23. Shri P. C. Thomas 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Om Parka~h . Deputy Secretary 
Shri Detpak Goyal. Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Commlllee Officer 
WITNESSES 
!. Representatives of Ministry of lndu~>lry (Departm~nt or Small Scale Indust ries and 
Agro & l{urnl lndusll'ics) 
Shri P. P. Prabhu. Secretary 
Shrl S. A. T. Rizvi, Additional Se•-rctary & Develop ment Commis~ioner 
Dr. E. A . S. Sarma, Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor 
Shr i Brahma Dutw, Join! St'cretary 
18 

19 
II. Representatives or Departme nt of Heavy Industry 
I. Shri T. R. Prasnd. Secretary 
2. Dr. E. A. S. Sarma. Additional Secretary ~ Financial Advisor 
3. Shri Anoop Mukherjee, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri D. C. Samant, Joint Secretary 
5. Shri A. K. Mohnpatra, Joint Secretary 
2. The Committee heard oral evidence of 1he above mentioned witnesses in respect of 
Demands for Grants (1996·97) of the Ministry of Industry. The Chairman directed the 
witne~ses to consider the points raised by the Members during the meeting and send an 
updated note on the same at the earliest within the next few days for Committee's perusal. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept . 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M. 

VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
·n1e Committee met al 11.00 A.M. on Monday. the 19th AuguM, 1996 in Committee 
Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Arme::e, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ashok Mitra - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Rajubhai A. Parmar 
3. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
4. Shri Anil Kumar 
5. Shri Jay am Kumar Malhoutra 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Ritlal J>d. Venna 
7. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
8. Shri Namdevrao Diwathe 
9 Shri M K. Patil 
10. Shri Nawul Ki,hore Sharma 
11. Kumari Frida Topno 
12. Shri B. L. Shankar 
13. Shri Sunil Kh nn 
14. Shri M. Rarnananlhan 
L.S. Shri Bhakta Charan Dns 
16. Shri Darbara Singh 
17 Shri Xavier Arakkal 
SECRETARIA T 
Shri Onr Parkll•h. Deputy Secretary 
Shri Deepak Goyal, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh. Commiuee Officer 
WITNESSES 
I. Representatives of ASSOCHAM 
1. Dr. B. K Modi. Chuirman, Direct Taxc~ Comm iuee 
2. Shn M. H. Dalmia, Deputy Secretary General 
3. Dr S R. Bharuch:r. Chief Economic Advbor 
ll. Representathes of C.I.I. 
1. Shri Subodh Bharga,·a, Charrman, ~ational Task Force: on Adrnini,trali\ 'C Reforms 
2 Shri Vijay Kupur. 01airman. Telecom Comminee 
3. Shri Ranjit Puri, Chairman, Customer Focus & Marketrng Committee 
2. The Committee considered the contents of the Draft Report relating to the: Demands 
for Grants (1996-97) of the Mimstry of Steel. 
3. The Comm illc<.:, thcrcallcr, heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned 
witncsS<o!S on the performance of industr ial sector in general and the irnpucl of recent budget 
proposals relatrng 10 the Miniwies of lndu>try, Steel and Mine> on indu,triul and economic 
growth in particular . 
A verbatim record of the evid~nce was kept. 
4. TI1e Comrniuec then adJourned at 6.30 P.M . to meet ;og:•in :rt 11.00 ,\ .M. on the 20th 
AugU\l, 1996. 
20 

vm 
EIGHTH MEETING 
The Commi ttee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 21st August, 1996 in Committee 
Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parli amen t House Annexe , New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
l. Shri Ashok Mitra - Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Syed Sibtey Razi 
3. Shri Rajubhai A. Parmar 
4. Shri Anil Kumar 
5. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
LOK SABIIA 
6. Shr im;tti Jayuwantiben Meht a 
7. Shri Prabhu Dayal Kath eria 
8. Shr i N:unde vrao Diwathe 
9. Shr i M. K. Patil 
10. Shr i Shyamlal Bansiwal 
II. Kumari Frida Topno 
12. Shn Udaysinghrao Gaikwad 
13. Shri K. H. Muniyappa 
14. Shri Pr.1deep Bhattacharya 
15. Shn B. L. Shankar 
16. Shn Sunil Khan 
17. Shri Anandrao Adsul 
18 Shn V. Alagirisamy 
19. Shri Dhukta Charan Das 
20. Shri Darban1 Singh 
2 t. Shri Xavier Atakkal 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Om Parkash, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Deepak Goyal, Under Secretary 
2. The Committee considered the content:. of the Dr<~ft Report relating to the Demand~ 
for Grants (1996-97) of the Ministry of lnduwy . 
3. The Commillee then <tdjourncd :11 1.3() ~ . M. to meet ag<~in at 11.00 " ·"· on the 22nd 
August, 1996. 
2l 

X 
TENTH MEETING 
The Commiuce met at 11.00 1\.M. on Friday, the 23rd August, 1996 in Commillee 
Room ' A' , Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ashok Mitra - Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Maurice Kujur 
3. Syed Sibtcy Razi 
4. Shri G ovindrao Adik 
5. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
6. Shrimati Anandiben Jethabhat Patel 
7. Shri T. M. Venkotuchulam 
8. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri Ritlul Pd. Verma 
10. Shn Radha Mohan Singh 
11. Shri Prubhu Dayal K;ttheria 
12. Shri Namdevrao Diwathe 
13. Shri M. K. Patil 
14. Shri Nawal Kishore Sharma 
15. Kumari Frida Topno 
16. Shri Udaysinghrao Gatkwad 
17 Shrl Pradeep Bhuttach;lfya 
18. Shn Sunil Khan 
19. Shti Anandrao Adsul 
20. Sbri V. AI:Jgtris:uny 
21. Shri Darburu Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
Shr i Om Parka~h, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Dcepak Goyal. Under Secrctury 
2. The Committee considered and app roved the Draft Report on the Demand~ for 
Grant~ of the Minbtry of lndu;try for (1996·97). ChHirman was au thorised to finalise the 
Report for pre~en tation tO Parliament in the light of 'ugge,tion' offered by Mcmbe~. 
3. The Chutr man was authorised to nonunate Mt:mhcr' who ;~rc tu pre.cnt the Report~ 
of the Commillee on the Demands for Grants of the Ministrie• of Mme•. Stee l and industry 
in the Lok Sabha as well as in the Rajya Subh;t . 
4. It was decided th~t the Commiuee will mee t <~gain in two se~s i ons. morning and 
afternoon. on October 9. 1996 to discuss it~ future programme of work. 
S. The Com tnittee then adjourned ut 12.45 ~ "· 
22 