PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY

NINETY-EIGHTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN COMMITTEE'S 70™

REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2002-03) PERTAINING TO
MINISTRY OF STEEL

(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 19™ DECEMBER, 2002)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 1978 DECEMBER, 2002)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

DECEMBER, 2002/AGRAHAYANA, 1924 (SAKA)


eye N

CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
INTRODUCTION
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE

OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE

MINUTES

PAGES
(iii)
(iii)
1-35
36-37

41-42


BE

COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
(Date of Constitution - |* January, 2002 )

Dr. P.C Alexander — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Prof. M.M. Aggarwal
Dr. Abrar Ahmad

Shri Jayantilal Barot
Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
Smt. Saroj Dubey

Shri Faguni Ram

Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
Shri P.K, Maheshwari

. Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil

+ Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
. Shri S. Sivasubramanian

- Smt. Sushree Devi

- Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi

- Vacant

LOK SABHA

. Smt. Jayashree Banerjee

- Kumari Mamata Banerjee

~ Shri Ajoy Chakraborty

. Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
. Shri Nepal Chandra Das

- Shri Deepak Kumar

Shri Thomas Hansda

. Dr. S. Jagathrakshakan

- Shri A.C. Jose

. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan

. Shri Brijlal Khabri

+ Shri Sunil Khan

- Shri Manjay Lal

. Dr. K, Malaisamy

. Shri A. Narendra

31.
32.
ढ अर Charmer पवन पतकरककपत9 175

Shri Ananta Nayak
Shri Dayabhai V. Pate!

Shri Dharam Raj Sin Patel

Appointed Chairman and Member of the Committee wef 12" November, 2002 vice Shri T.N. Chaturvedi
who ceased to be the Member of Rajya Sabha wef,

(i)

20" August, 2002,


- Shri Uttamrao 7

. Shri Malyala Rajaiah

. Shri-P, Rajendran

. Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah

. Shri Tarachand Sahu

. Shri Ramanand Singh

|. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh

+ Chowdhary Talib Hussain
- Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
- Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari
- Shri Beni Prasad Verma

- Vacant

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
Shri 4.6. Singh, Deputy Secretary

Shri D.P, Ahuja ,Under Secretary

Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer

Gi)



INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Industry, having been authorised by the Committee, hereby present this Ninety-eighth Report
on the Action Taken by the Government on the tecommendations contained in the Committee's
70% Report on Demands for Grants (2002-03) pertaining to Ministry of Steel .

2. The Committee examined and considered the Action Taken Note on recommendations
contained in the Committee's 70% Report on Demands for Grants (2002-03) pertaining to
Ministry of Steel .

3 The Committee at its meeting held on 177 December , 2002 considered and adopted
the Report.

NEW DELHI; DR. P.C. ALEXANDER
December 17, 2002 Chairman

Department -related Parliamentary

Standing Committee on Industry


REPORT

The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Steel )on
the Recommendations contained in the 70” Report (of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry) on the Demands for Grants (2002-2003) pertaining to the
Ministry of Steel. The Report was presented /laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha
on the 14" May, 2002.

2; Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Steel in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as follows:

Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry of Steel

(Chapter - 1).

Recommendations:- 1.5 , 3.3, 4.8, 5:4, 6.1.4, 7.2.3, 7.3.2, 9.7, 10.3, 11.3, 11.9, 12.3.4, 12.7.6,
12.10.2, 12.12.4, 13.5,17.2.5 and 17.8.5,

Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of
the government's replies ; (Chapter - II)

Recommendations:- 2.4, and 17.6.2

Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies
of the Ministry of Steel :. (Chapter - गा),

Recommendations:- 6.2.7, 7.4.9, 7.5.5, 7.5.6, 12.1.14 and 12.1,18,

Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry of Steel
have not been received. (Chapter - IV).

Recommendations:- 4.1.6, 4.7.2, 6.1.2, 7.1.5, 7.1.6, 8.3, 11.6, 12.1.21, 121,23, 12.2.4, 12.2.6,
12.2.10, 12.2.12, 12.2,14, 12.4.3, 12.5.2, 12.6.5, 12.6.6, 12.7.2, 12.8.6, 12.9.8, 12.11.5, 14.10,
15.4, 16,3, 17.1.6 and 17.7.3.

3, The Committee is pleased to observe that the Ministry of Steel has accepted its
recommendation as mentioned in Chapter —I of the Report.

am In respect of the recommendations made in Para 2.4 and 17.6.2 in Chapter-II_ the
Committee is convinced with the logic and explanation advocated by the Ministry of Steel and
therefore does not want to pursue further ,

ऊँ The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementations of recommendation
contained in Chapter-III and desires that the Ministry of Steel should furnish logical
explanation in respect of these recommendation.

6. In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV, the Ministry of Steel has either
furnished the interim replies or couched its language in vague terms like noted for
compliance/guidance, therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry shouls furnish Action
Taken Notes in respects of recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to the
Point, as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee.

b The Details of the ATR is being discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.



=|

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT

Recommendations (Para 1.5 )

STRUCTURAL AND FUNCTIONAL ASPECTS OF THE MINISTRY OF STEEL

The Committee notes the structural and functional aspects of the Ministry of Steel and
PSUs under its administrative contro] and hopes that all wings of the whole structure would fulfill
their respective/allocated duties and responsibilities with due co-ordination and inter PSU
cooperation in such a manner that steel sector in general may contribute to economic growth and
national development.

Action Taken

The recommendations of the Hon'ble Committee have been noted. Ministry of Steel and
its PSUs have been performing their respective and allocated duties and responsibilities with due
coordination and encouraging inter PSU cooperation in such a manner that steel sector continues
to contribute to economic growth and national development.

Recommendations ( Para 3.3 )
TENTH FIVE YEAR PLAN : TARGETS

The Committee hopes that the SAIL and other steel PSUs would make endeavor to
achieve its target as set in the Xth Five Year Plan and as approved by the Planning Commission
and avoid emergence of any gap as occurred in IX Five Year Plan so that all the envisaged
projects and schemes could be executed in time and without cost overrun.
Action Taken

The recommendations of the Hon'ble Committee have been noted. All out efforts will be
made to achieve the targets set in the Xth Five Year Plan so that all the envisaged projects and
schemes could be executed in time without cost overrun.
Recommendations ( Para 4.8)
Expenditure under Revenue Section

The Committee while noting the reasons for increase in revised estimates of non-plan
expenditure of Rs.62.41 crores in BE 2001-02 to Rs.101.84 crores under Revenue Section,

expresses its satisfaction over the positive attitude of Ministry of Finance and efforts made by the
Ministry of Steel.



Action Taken

The observations of the Hon'ble Committee is noted.
= (Para 5.4 )
SECRETARIAT ECONOMIC SERVICES

The Committee while noting the details of expenditure over non-plan and non-salary for
the year2001-02 and the Projected non-plan expenditure for the year 2002-03, expresses its
pleasure over the savings of Rs.20.00 lakhs during the year 2001-02 as a result of measures
undertaken by the Ministry of Steel, The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Steel would
continue to observe the guidelines of Ministry of Finance for 10% mandatory economisation in
non-plan expenditure.

Action Taken

The observations of the Hon’ble Committee is noted for compliance.
Recommendations ( Para 6.1.4 )
COMPREHENSIVE REVIVAL PACKAGE TO HSCL

The Committee, however, recommends that the Government should provide complete
and comprehensive revival package to HSCL at one go so that all envisaged strategy come true in
the scheduled time frame.

Action Taken

Implementation of envisaged strategy for revival has already been initiated by the
Company with the Non-Plan loan of Rs, 89.44 crore (as against Rs. 182.28 crore Proposed in the
second revival package) from the Government of India and loan secured from commercial banks
in accordance with the provision of the second revival Proposal, which as pointed out above, have
been partially accepted by the Government. Ministry of Steel will continue to pursue with
Ministry of Finance for approval of the remaining provisions of the revival package of HSCL.

Recommendations ( Para 6.2.7 7
BIRD GROUP OF COMPANIES

The Committee is of the opinion that Bird Group of companies are in deep trouble,
therefore, immediate action on the part of Government and the management of Bird Group of

Companies in the following manner are essential for the possible sustenance and survival of
potentially viable units of Bird Group of companies:

(6) The Ministry of Steel and the management of Bird Group of companies should identify
the sick but potentially viable unit and chalk out turnaround strategy and submit the same
to the Government for early consideration,



Gi) The Ministry of Steel and the =| Group of Companies management should identify the
sick and potentially non-viable units and take the final decision without delay.

(iii) Government should provide funds as tequired by the units of Bird Group of Companies
for clearing of statutory dues at the carliest and rationalisation of manpower within a
fixed time frame.

(iv) The Ministry of Steel should be Prompt in supervising the functioning of Bird Group of
Companies in the execution of envisaged projects and scheme.

Action Taken

(i) The Orissa Mineral Development Company Ltd. (OMDC), one of the Company under the
Bird Group has been identified as potentially viable unit. The Company has submitted a
Restructuring proposal and the same is under consideration of the Government;

(ii) The other operating Companies, viz., Bisra Stone Lime Co. Ltd. (BSLC), The Karanpura
Development Co, Ltd. (KDCL) and Scott & Saxby Ltd, (SSL) have been identified as
financially sick Companies. Turnaround strategy in respect of these Companies has not
yet been formulated. With a little improvement in the demand position of their products,
restructuring proposal is contemplated to be submitted in respect of these Companies.
However, steps are being taken to improve the financial position of the of manpower; and

(iii) The Government is providing fund in the form of non-plan loan to BSCL for liquidation
of the statutory dues. The Company has out-standing statutory dues towards royalty and
penal damage for delayed payment of provident fund. An amount of Rs. 2 crore has been
earmarked as non-plan support for this purpose. The Company has requested for
expeditious release of Rs. 1 crore out of the budgetary provision and the same is under
consideration of the Government.

The Government has released Rs. 35.55 crore as Grant-in-aid till 313.2002, With this
support, the four operating Companies under the Group have rationalized manpower as per break-
up given below:

From 1992-93 till 31.3.2002

BSLC [3003 _ |
2०» आओ
|KDCL |
SSL

[32]
SSL

The operating Companies have identified 395 numbers as surplus workers to be
separated within the 10th Five Year Plan, The total requirement for separation is Rs. 5
crore. The targeted figures for 2002-03 for separation of surplus manpower is 110 and the
requirement of fund for the same is Rs. 1.30 crore.

(iv) The Ministry keeps a close watch on the functioning of the operating Companies under
the Bird Group as also in the matter of execution of the envisaged project and schemes.
The performance of the Companies is monitored through the monthly Performance
Reports and the Performance Review Meetings held under the Chairmanship of the
Hon'ble Minister of Steel,



EEE S=SSYSSSSSFF ee

Recommendations ( Para 7.2.3 )

SUBSIDY TO HINDUSTAN STEELWORKS CONSTRUCTION LIMITED FOR
WAIVER OF GUARANTEE FEE

The Committee understands the reason for continuation of Rs.92.00 crore as subsidy to
Hindustan Steelwork Construction Ltd. for waiver of guarantee fee during the year 2002-03. The
Committee recommends that the Ministry of Steel should continue to plead with the Ministry of
Finance for long term & comprehensive financial package for HSCL as it is the only construction
Company in steel Sector.

Action Taken

The amount required under the Head ‘Waiver of Guarantee Fee’ is only Rs. 0.92 crore
and not Rs.92 crore as noted in the 70" Report of the Committee, The Ministry of Steel will
¢ continue to pursue with the Ministry of Finance for approval of the balance provisions of the
| revival package of HSCL. The Company has also been instructed by the Government to engage a
suitable consultant for conducting a strategic study of the Company.

Recommendations (Para 7.3.2 )

INTEREST SUBSIDY TO SPONGE IRON INDIA LTD. (SIL) FOR WAIVER OF
INTEREST

While the Committee agrees to the Provision of interest subsidy to SIL for the waiver of
interest on the loan of principal amount (Rs.36.78-13,22 = Rs,23.56 crore) for various projects,
the Committee expresses strong concern over penal interest amount of Rs.13.22 crore which had
to be paid because SIL could not generate enough resources for payment of principle interest due
to Government of India. This is the criminal wastages of Government's limited resources and the
same should be avoided in future.

= Taken

It is a fact that Government of India had waived penal interest of Rs.13.22 crore
consequent on Company’s inability to generate enough resources to pay back Government of
India loan and interest because of slump in Steel market and fall in demand world over and
increasing competitiveness with the liberalization of economy. However, the position changed in
December, 2000 and the demand picked up. This alongwith internal improvement in operation of
the Company helped to make up losses during 2001-02 and to generate net profit to the extent of
Rs.1.85 crore (provisionally) and Cash Profit of Rs.5.00 crore as planned for. However, the
observations of the Committee would be taken as guidance and the Company would repay the
instalments of Government of India Loans and Interest regularly without falling into arrears from
now on.

Recommendations (Para9.7 )
Investment In Public Enterprises

The Committee understands the necessity of expenditure under the capital section for
AMR schemes for helping the PSUs for continuation of improved financial performance. The



Committee hopes that provision made major head 4852 and 6852 are in accordance with
actual needs of the steel PSUs.”

Action Taken

The observations/recommendations made by the Hon'ble Committee in regard to the
above Para has been noted, However, the provisions made in the Major Head 4852 and 6852 were
done on the basis of proposals received from Tespective PSUs,

Recommendations ( Para 10.3 )

ACCOUNTING ADJUSTMENT IN RESPECT OF REVIVAL PLAN OF SPONGE IRON
INDIA LIMITED (SIL)

The Committee understands that the token provision made at the RE stage 2001-02 to the
tune of Rs.0.01 crore is merely accounting adjustment in respect of revival plan of SIL. The
Committee is pleased to note that SIL is expected to reach net profit of Rs.1.85 crore in the
current financial year.

Action Taken

The profit of Rs, 1.85 crore as projected for 2001-02 has been achieved with cash profit of
Rs.5.00 crore and the Company has been Progressing well on the same lines even during 2002-03
(Upto May, 2002).

Recommendations ( Para 11.3 )
OTHER PROGRAMMES

The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry of Steel adopted the mandatory cut of
10% in non-plan non-salary expenditure and its effect would continue in the forthcoming years.
The economy measures were applied for expenditure on items like Wages, Domestic Travel
Expenses, Rents, Rates and Taxes, Departmental Canteen, Professional Services, etc.
Action Taken

The observations/recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee is noted for compliance.
Recommendations ( Para 11.9 )

NATIONAL METALLURGIST AWARD

The Committee appreciates and Tecognises the efforts of the Ministry of Steel by having
the provision of National Metallurgist Award given to an outstanding practicising metallurgist in
reorganization of specific original contribution in the field of production, research, education
design, development and environment made in the last 10 years,



Action Taken

The comments are noted,
Recommendations ( Para 12.3.4 )
SPONGE IRON INDIA LIMITED (SIL)

The Committee is pleased to note the positive sign on the financial performance of शा,
during the year 2000-01 and hopes that the Company would further improve upon its financial
performance during the current year and SIL would be able to raise TEBR to the tune of Rs.5.00
crore for expenditure on intended Projects during 2002-03.

Action Taken

SIL has already achieved what was targeted during 2001-02 and is in the process of
maintaining end of year Profits during 2002-03 also as per the indications of market at the end of
May, 2002. SIIL generated internal Tesources in 2002-03 and would continue to do so in future,
This is the reason that the Company has not asked for any budgetary support from the current
year onwards.

Recommendations (Para 12.7.6 )
PERIPHERAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS

The Committee while noting the mode of appropriation 1887 to the tune of Rs.138.00
crore during the year 2002-03, hopes the KIOCL would be benefited with the Projects to be

Action Taken

The plan outlay approved by the Planning Commission in respect of KIOCL, Bangalore
for the year 2002-03 is Rs.138 crore. This is mainly towards setting up of a Ductile Iron Spun
Pipe Project, Primary Ore development, tecovery of Iron Ore from Tailings, additions,

its profitability, However, a Portion of this capital expenditure is dependent on availability of long
term Mining Lease to the Company.

The Company contributed immensely towards community development in and around the
Project area. Some such developmental works are in the following areas:

Pure drinking water facilities
Play grounds, buildings, books and other financial assistance to the Educational
Institutions.
Development of social, cultural and recreation facilities,
Health and Medical facilities,
* Assistance to the poor, disabled and downtrodden,


= of Bridges.
Development of coastal region.
Rehabilitation
Supply of water for irrigation purposes.

eeee

Recommendations (Para 12.10.2)

METALLURGICAL & ENGINEERING CONSULTANTS INDIA LIMITED (MECON
LTD.) है

The Committee notes that MECON failed to raise IEBR to the tune of Rs.5.00 crore
during 2001-02 due to adverse financial situation and further target to raise IEBR to the tune of
Rs.2.00 crore would depend on its ability to generate IEBR during the year 2002-03. The
Committee is planned to note that appropriation of budgetary support to the amount of Rs.2.00
crore for I T equipment led to improving in information technology infrastructure of the
Company during 2001-02. The Committee hopes that appropriation of budgetary support of
amount Rs.2.00 crore on R&D schemes would further improve the quality of Company's
consultancy services.

Action Taken

The Plan expenditure fixed for MECON Ltd. for the 9" Five Year Plan was Rs, 25 crore.
The year-wise break up of Approved Outlay and Actual expenditure made during 9" Plan are as
follows:

Rs. in crores
Actual Plan expenditure

Internal Total Plan
) | Si diture.

There was a total shortfall of Rs, 5.75 crore (ie. Rs. 25 crore — Rs, 19.25 crore) in the 9”
Five Year Plan. The shortfall in actual plan expenditure from 1999-2000 was mainly due to the
fact that the Company started making cash loss from 1998-99 and there is acute liquidity crunch
in the Company. During 2001-02 the Ministry gave MECON Budgetary Support of Rs.2 crore for
Computer (Hardware & Software) which could only be spent/ committed during 2001-02.

Recommendations ( Para 2.12.4)
FERRO SCRAP NIGAM LIMITED (FSNL)
The Committee observes that the expected actual amount of IEBR taised by FSNL would

be to the tune of Rs.15.00 crore for appropriation on working capital and capital expenditure
during the year 2001-02 and the projected IEBR to the tune of Rs.12,00 crore to be raised only



a

through internal resource generation from the business activity of the Company during the year
2002-2003 is to be appropriated on AMR schemes, The Committee is happy to note the
increasing profits of Company year after year and hopes that the track record of making profit of
the Company would continue in coming years,

E Taken

The observations made by the Committee have been noted. FSNL is trying hard to
Sustain its profits in coming years.

Recommendations (Para 13.5)
RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY (R&T) MISSION

The Committee is happy to note that the decision arrived at from the Completed R&D
projects have benefited the stee] industry in general and led to energy efficiency improvement in
Secondary sectors, improvement in the continuous casting system and development of civil
engineering.

Action Taken

The scheme of financial support from Steel Development Fund (SDF) for Research &
Development activities is being continued,

Recommendations (Para 17.2.5)

COMPARATIVE COST AND COMPETITIVENESS OF STEEL INDUSTRY
ALONGWITH CONSUMPTION PROFILE OF STEEL PRODUCTS

The Committee is of the view that steel PSUs should take concrete steps towards
reduction in the cost of production as the measures undertaken would help in maximising the
Profit and would give competitive advantages vis-a-vis international steel Producing players.

Action Taken
Steel PSUs are already taking steps for reduction in the cost of production, which is a
constant and ongoing process, Some Specific steps taken in this regard are as follows:

1. Reduction in consumption of raw materials, lower expenditure on stores/spares and
savings in power and fuel consumptions.

Purchase cost reduction in areas like ferro alloys, refractories, rolls etc,
Improvement in techno-economic factors.

Rightsizing of manpower, VRS and labour productivity,

Control on capital expenditure,

See wp

Increased labour productivity.

However, the suggestion of the Committee has been noted and is being brought to the
notice of all PSUs for more strict compliance,



Recommendations (Para 7

FUTURE
GLOBAL STEEL SCENARIO

There are tentative signals that the global Steel scenario has Witnessed a welcome change,
Positive signals Sustain, the prices firm up and the Bap between Supply and demand
fink ¥e

10



NN ASS A ACL

9
CHAPTER -ा

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE

Recommendations (Para 2.4)-

FIVE YEAR PLAN : TARGET (ORIGINAL AND REVISED) AND ACTUAL
ACHIEVEMENT

The Committee observes that there is a marked shortfall in the eneration of ILEBR by

“ some steel PSUs against the target set for 9th Five Year Plan. The Committee feels that financial

it of steel PSUs should have been estimated on realistic ground and accordingly targets

should have been fixed and an all efforts out should have been made to achieve the targets. The

Action Taken

Efforts are made to estimate the financial Tequirement of steel PSUs on most realistic
basis and targets are fixed accordingly, All out efforts are made to achieve the targets. However,
it may please be appreciated that it is impossible to accurately predict the market conditions for

the next five years, At times, because of changes in market conditions, in many cases the targets
themselves need to be Suitably modified,

Recommendations (Para 17.6.2)
CONSUMPTION PROFILE OF STEEL PRODUCTS

The Committee recommends that Indian stee] PSUs, while keeping an eye to the world
Price index of steel Products, should keep on revising the Price of Indian steel Products under a
definite marketing strategy.
Action Taken

After liberalisation of the Steel sector in January, 1992, Government have no control over

the prices of steel Products, Prices are fixed by the producers themselves and are based on the
interplay of market forces, both in the domestic and international arena,

ll


=

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE (MINISTRY Of STEEL)
OR FURTHER RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMITTEE IS REQUIRED.

Recommendations (Para 6.2.7)
BIRD GROUP OF COMPANIES

The Committee is of the opinion that Bird Group of Companies are in deep trouble,
therefore, immediate action on the part of Government and the management of Bird Group of
Companies in the following manner essential for the possible sustenance and survival of
potentially viable units of Bird Group of Companies:

(i) The Ministry of Steel and the management of Bird Group of Companies should
identify the sick but Potentially viable unit and chalk out tumaround strategy and
submit the same to the Government for early consideration.

(ii) = The Ministry of Steel and the Bird Group of Companies management should identify
the sick and Potentially non-viable units and take the final decision without delay,

(iii) | Government should provide funds as required by the units of Bird Group of
Companies for clearing of Statutory dues at the earliest and rationalisation of
manpower within a fixed time frame.

(iv) The Ministry of Steel should be prompt in supervising the functioning of Bird Group
of Companies in the execution of envisaged Projects and scheme,

Action Taken

(i) The Orissa Mineral Development Company Ltd, (OMDC), one of the Company
under the Bird Group has been identified as potentially viable unit. The Company
has submitted a Testructuring proposal and the same is under consideration of the
Government,

(1). The other operating companies, viz., Bisra Stone Lime Co. Ltd. (BSLC), The

with betterment of the demand Position of the products of the Companies and
installation of cost reduction measures, including rationalization of manpower.

(iii) The Government is Providing fund in the form of non-plan loan to BSCL for

Company has requested for expeditious release of Rs. 1 crore out of the budgetary
provision and the same is under consideration of the Government,

12



The Government has released Rs, 35.55 crore as Grant-in-aid til] 313.2002. With this
Support, the four operating Companies under the Group have rationalized manpower as per break-
Ww?

The operating Companies have identified 395 numbers as surplus workers to be
Separated within the 10th Five Year Plan. The total requirement for Separation is Rs. 5
crore. The targeted figures for 2002-03 for separation of surplus manpower ig 1 10 and the
Tequirement of fund for the same is Rs, 1.30 crore.

Hon’ble Minister of Steel.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION

While the Committee 18 Pleased to note that the Ministry of Steel is Supervising the
functioning of Bird Group of Companies but at the same time the Committee is of the opinion

hanging as the Testructuring Proposal of the Company (i.e. Orissa Mineral Development
Company Ltd. » (OMDC) is still under the consideration of Government . The Committee feels
that Govemment should come forward with concrete policy decision in regard to fate of Bird
Group of Companies without further delay. These Companies, located in tribal areas cannot
Sustain and survive for long without Proper strategy/ support or Grant ~in-aids,

Recommendations (Para 7.4,9)

Interest Subsidy To Steel Authority Of India Limited (SAIL) For Loans Raised From
Bank For Implementation of VRS.


Action Taken

There is a shortfall in manpower reduction against the MoU targets. The shortfall in the
last two years (2000-01 and 2001-02) and the reasons for the same are given below:

Year Actual | Shortfall Remarks
wert,
2000-01 156719 | 9719 1

VRS (based on Government Guarantee)
planned during 2000-01 could not be introduced
due to wage revision which was under
negotiation.

Delay in introduction of 1* VRS
Only 6510 nos. of employees could be covered in
Rs.500 crore as against 10,000 envisaged in
MOU due to revision in wages

Delay in divestment of SSP/VI: ISL/ASP/REP,

SAIL has been advised to strictly adhere to the MoU target for rationalisation of
manpower to reach the target of 1 lakh employees by 2005.

| 147610 Tas

Voluntary Retirement Scheme in SAIL covers both the executives and non-executives. It

may be mentioned that out of the total 6510 employees seParated through VRS 2000-01, 1189
were executives and 5321 were non-executives,

FURTHER RECOMMENDATION

The Committee strongly recommends that SAIL should strictly adhere to the MOU target
for rationalisation of manpower as the same would not only enhance the labour productivity but
would also have a positive bearing on SAIL’s efforts to reduce the labour cost which is as high
as 18% in comparison to 4-6% labour Cost in steel units in international arena.

Recommendations (Para 7.5.5)
INTEREST SUBSIDY TO MECON LIMITED FOR LOANS RAISED FROM BANKS
FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF VRS

The Committee is surprised that MECON management has planned for giving VR to
1030 of its employees and raised Rs.25.00 crore from banks for the Purpose during 2001-02 but

MECON management still has to identify category-wise surplus manpower. To whom the
MECON management intends to cover under VRS ! The Committee observes there is a lack of

14


Proper strategy, concerted approach on the part of MECON management. The Committee
recommends that MECON management should first chalk Out 8 proper programme for VRS,
immediate identification of category-wise surplus non-power before the RE Stage for financial
year 2002-03 and thereafter make effort for raising remaining required amount to the tune of
Rs.25.00 crore and adhere to the envisaged programme of VRS.

Recommendations (Para 7.5.6)

The Committee notes the steps undertaken by MECON management for revival of the
Company. The Committee is pleased to note that while divesting of 51% equity in MECON in
favour of a Strategic partner a Provision has been made for divestment of 10% equity from out of
the equity held by the Government of India in favour of employees. This is a praiseworthy
Provision and other stee! PSUs on the card of divestment should follow suit.

Action Taken

A reputed international consultancy organisation, M/s KPMG Was assigned in July, 1998
to carry out an organisation diagnostic study of MECON, The consultant submitted its final report

Population size of employees in each of these categories,
The amount of 65 crore was to be mobilized as follows:

(a) Rs. 50 crore loan from banks (to be received in two tranches of Rs. 25 crore
each)

(b) Rs. 7.5 crore from National Renewal Fund (NRF)

(c) Rs. 7.5 crores from Company’s internal generation

In view of the current recession and lack of Job orders, it is further Proposed to prune the
manpower to achieve a level of 1500. Details are still being worked out with Tespect to the time
frame and sourcing of funds for giving VRS to additional persons.

15


FURTHER =

The Committee feels that MECON management lacks proper planning and there is total
lack of coordination between MECON Management and the Ministry of Steel. M/s KPMG had
recommended in its report in March, 1999, for implementation of an appropriate Voluntary
Retirement Scheme (VRS) to make MECON a leaner and highly productive organization but the
recommendation of the M/s KPMG has not been implemented yet due to lack of fund for the
purpose , MECON management is yet to identify in clear cut terms the level of optimum
manpower and chalk out realistic strategy for VRS. MECON management lacks the required
fund for VRS purpose and is at bay to find out the ways and means to raise the same. Under the
circumstances, the Committee feels that the Ministry of Steel should come forward for rescuing
MECON in time,

The Committee desires that Ministry of Steel should furnish details of
recommendations made by M/s KPMG and action taken thereon .

Recommendations (Para 12.1.14)

INVESTMENT IN PUBLIC ENTERPRISES STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LIMITED
(SAIL)

The Committee is of the opinion that SAIL is suffering losses and is in deep trouble.
SAIL is failing in generating extra budgetary internal resources as per the set target as a result of
which capital projects/schemes get either scuttled or delayed. The Committee is constrained to
express its concern over the financial performance of SAIL, as SAIL suffered a loss of whopping
Rs.1290 crore in the first nine months of financial year 2001-02. Among SAIL, PSUs only BSP is
doing well and DSP is trying to catch up with the stabilisation of modernisation programmes,
Performance of RSP is miserable. Investors’ mood is shaking as SAIL issue price is coming
down. The debt instrument of SAIL has already been rated by CRISIL as inadequate safety for
fixed deposit programme and Bond programme. The debt-equity ratio stands at 5.52:1 as on
31.12.2001 and SAIL cannot raise resources on “stand alone” basis. The Committee feels that the
status of “Nay-Ratna” is at stake if the proposed business and financial restructuring of SAIL
does not fructify in time, the Committee fears against the possibility of sinking of SAIL and
wants to call the immediate attention of Government,

Action Taken

Financia! performance of SAIL for the last 5 years is as under:

(Rs. in crore)
Particulars | 97-98 | 98-99 99-00 2000-01 | 2001-02
77 काश | 14624 13994 16233 15502
Gross Margin | 2607 | 1011 |
Interest 1752 1562
CashyProfit/Loss 415 -551
| | Depreciation =i | 1144 | [ 1156 |
[Net Profit/Loss ()(PB -729__| -1707

16



Plant wise profit & loss:

° General slow down in the Sconomy resulting in stagnation in steel consumption. Average
consumption growth which used to be about 14% in earlier years has declined to about 4% in
the last 5-6 years,

© Fall in international Price due to global recession has adversely affected decline in net sales
realization (NSR) of saleable steel by 8%,

° Besides there have been increase in prices of major inputs like coal, power and also expenses
on salaries which could partly be neutralized due to cost control measures,

modernisation and technological upgradation of its plants, which were set up about 4 decades
back. Expenditure of about Rs. 12,500 crore has been incurred on modemisation of DSP,
RSP and BSL. To fund the modernisation Programmes, SAIL had to resort to large scale
market borrowing which resulted in higher interest and depreciation burden as under:

Rs. in crore

eS __| 96-97 [97-98 [98-99 [99-00 | 20000, [2001-02 |
Increase in interest and depreciation [477 956 1729 | 1529 11502 1325
over 1995-96

° Higher manpower cost: As the steel plants were set up about 4 decades back in areas where
infrastructure facilities were hardly ayailable, and regional development & employment
generation being major objectives, large number of persons were provided employment.
Though, the number has reduced from 1,89,506 (March, 1995) to 1,47.601 (March, 2002),

17


® Social cost/township — हट steel Plants were green field projects, the townships were set up,
which are by any standard well kept and provided good amenities to its residents. The annual
expenditure on providing social amenities in the townships is about Rs. 529 crs/annum.

Initiatives taken to put it back on the path of profitability

A number of steps were initiated to combat the declining profitability. The Government
of India also approved a financial and business restructuring package to improve the cost
competitiveness of steel industry. While, the financial restructuring measures are aimed at
mitigating the financial risk by improving the Company's debt servicing capability, the business
Testructuring measures will provide a long term competitiveness in its core business of carbon
steel.

The financial restructuring of SAIL comprises of:

¢ Waiver of loans advanced to it from Steel Development Fund (SDF) to a value of Rs. 5073
crore and Rs. 381 crore from the Government of India.

* Provision of Government Guarantee with 50% interest subsidy for loan and interest thereon
of Rs. 1500 crore to be raised by SAIL from the market to finance reduction in manpower
through Voluntary Retirement Scheme (VRS).

* Government guarantee for loan and interest thereon of Rs. 1500 crore to be raised by SAIL
from the market primarily for meeting Tepayment obligations on past loans during 1999-2000.

Business Restructuring envisages:
* Divestment of non-core assets while Protecting jobs of existing employees.
¢ Captive Power Plants at BSL, DSP, RSP and BSP

>» 2x60 MW Captive Power Plant-II at RSP and the Central Power Training Institute at
Rourkela.

> 2x60 MW Captive Power Plant-II at DSP.

> 122 MW (2x55 MW + 12 MW back pressure turbine) Captive Power Plant-I, 3x60 MW
Captive Power Plant-II and steam generating capacity of 660 MT/hour at BSL.

> 74 MW captive power plant (CPP Il) at BSL Bhilai.

Oxygen Plant-Il of BSP.

Salem Steel Plant (SSP), Salem.

Alloy Steels Plant (ASP), Durgapur.

Visvesvaraya Iron & Steel Plant (VISL), Bhadravati.
Fertiliser Plant at Rourkela.

० ०००७

Conversion of IISCO into a joint venture with SAIL holding minority share holding.

During 2000-01, power plants at DSP and RSP have been transferred and assigned to the
then subsidiary Company “SAIL Power Supply Co. Ltd. later converted into joint venture

18



[= with National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd. for generation and sale of entire power
to the Company,

During current year (2001-02) power plant (including steam generation facilities) of
Bokaro has been divested to subsidiary of “ SAIL - Bokaro Power Supply Co. Ltd “ in joint
venture with DVC (Capital Gain Rs. 391 cr.). Power Plant at BSP has been divested to a joint
venture Company with NTPC (capital gain Rs. 99 crs.).

Sale/lease of houses and land to employees/ex-employees in the steel townships resuited
in capital gain of Rs. 172 crore during 2001-02.

Intensive Cost Control

To improve the financial position of the Company in short and long term, a number of
initiatives have been taken to combat the present market scenario, cost control measures being
one of them. The cost control savings have been achieved in almost all the major areas of
operation:

* Reduction in consumption of coking coal & other raw materials, lower expenditure on stores
& spares/contractual maintenance and savings in power & fuel consumptions.

¢ Improvement in techno-economic factors viz, blast furnace productivity, energy
consumption, mill yields.

* Purchase cost reduction in areas like ferro-alloys, refractories, rolls etc.

¢ Austerity measures have also been adopted which include trimming/closure of Liaison
Offices, judicious use of telecommunication facilities instead of other administrative
expenses.

Cost Control Savings
‘Rs. in crore’

[ PLANT | 1997-98 1998-99 1999-00 | 2000-01 | 2001-02
[TOTAL Cost Redn. [731 902 713 525 452
The major impact of cost control measures that inspite of substantial increase in almost

all the major inputs like indigenous coal price, imported coal price, power rate etc. in the last five
years, variable cost of production during 2001-02 has been contained at 1996-97 level.

Control on capital expenditure

¢ Fresh investment proposals are virtually on hold except ongoing schemes and schemes
relating to customer needs, pollution control/safety. The cash expenditure during the year
2001-02 was restricted to about Rs. 326 crore. The expenditure during last two years was
restricted to Rs. 426 crore (2000-01) and Rs. 777 crore (1999-00) as against about Rs. 2000
crore/year in earlier years when the modernisation was in full swing.

© Based on availability of resources, some important capital schemes like long rails at BSP,
Pipe Plant at Rourkela are being taken up to improve competitive strength of the Company.

19



= oriented product-mix, reinforcing sales and marketing efforts, greater focus on customer
satisfaction.

Rightsizing of Manpower

e

SAIL introduced Voluntary Retirement Schemes (VRS) in 1998 and 1999 on deferred
payment basis which resulted in seParation of about 19600 employees.

New VR Scheme based on DPE pattem envisaging lump-sum payment was opened for
employees in 2001. Under this scheme about 6500 persons have opted for VR. SAIL has
launched another VR Scheme on similar pattern in 2002 based on DPE pattern envisaging
lump-sum payment and expects that 6,500 employees would further seParate,

Rourkela Steel Plant

The trend financial position of RSP is as under:

Rs, in crore
Items [95-96 97-98 99-00 | 2000-01 [2001-02 |
2420 [2298 | 2701 - 2565
Gross Margin 238 | s6 | 5 33 | 281 ‘| -367
1514 | 405 | 444 | 390
Cash Profit 438 | -163 -757

Depreciation | 265 | 282

Major reasons for losses

The major reasons of the loss is the steep fall in the flat product prices which was as high as
17% during the year 2001-02,

Tough competition in the market share of PET products — Pipes, Tin Plates and CRNO.

The market shares of the PET products which are the main contributory items are affected by
large scale import of defectives particularly in the category of tin plates and defectives.

RSP is facing quality problems in API grade ERW pipe for which there is a shift in the
market demand due to technology obsolesce in the pipe plant which is being upgraded
depending upon availability of funds.

Higher interest and depreciation cost on moderisation/capital schemes of RSP while the
benefit of modernisation would materialise in phases. Since the modernisation investment
were funded from borrowings, it resulted in higher interest and depreciation burden as under:

INCREASE IN CAPITALISATION CHARGES (DEPRECIATION & INTEREST) W.R.T.
1995-96

Total Int.&Dep 770

(Rs. in crores

1995-96 1 19 1998-99 | 1999-00 | 2000-01 | 2001-02

475 [375 [481 |



न ‘Rs. in crores
Total Borrowing [Networh 7 worth Debt-Equity (Ratio
[31.03.99 _/_ (21017, 6886 [305 7४] ४ के
[31.03.00 7 1.03.00 582. _ऋ॑ [4765 __ _ [3.17 ../ _ै 17

[31.03.01 _ै_ [14251 __ [4165S [342 SCS
(31.03.02 [14012 ___ -_-ै-] [22722 SCS [6200

There is reduction of Rs, 239 crore in the borrowing level during 2001-02. However, due to

reduction in the net worth due to decline in profitability the debut-equity ratio has increased
to 6.2.

All the loans Tepayment obligations falling due during 2001-02 were met as per schedule,

Outlook for 2002-03

Assumptions
Production ( 4 plants) MT [10.2
Sales (Mild Steel) MT 110.0 .____ै_777_ररखेे i ++++++_
% Improv. In avg. NRS during 2002-03 9%

Cost Control Savings (Rs/ers. S20 तल
Capital gain from Sale of houses/lands/hospitals [400 _ ____/| _}

obligations of about Rs. 1870 crore. With improved market scenario and
production/productivity measures, we hope to meet the same. In the past also we have met
all loan repayment obligation in time.

Support of Govemment guarantee may be needed,

In the first quarter of the current year (2002-03) the market is showing signs of

improvement with improvement in sales volumes and Price realization. SAIL's share price has
picked up in the recent past and is being quoted in the stock exchange above par in the range of
Rs. 11-12 as against about Rs, 5/- during March’ 02,

SAIL's financial performance/liquidity Position for the year 2002-03 is dependent upon

the economic growth and prevailing domestic/global steel market scenario. With vigorous efforts

business restructuring, cost cutting, reduction in manpower, and higher

roduction/ productivity, financial performance of SAIL is expected to improve,
Pi pr

FURTHER RECOMMENDATION: Ss

The Committee notes the teasons for poor performance of SAIL in the recent past and

Initiatives taken to put SAIL back on the path of profitability. The Committee is constrained
to express its concern over the dwindling performance of SAIL, and Teasonably so, because
SAIL which was the pride of the nation at one time, has now become an adjective in the

21


=| world for pathetic performance of the Company. The need of the hour is to improve
the performance of SAIL and save its status of ~Nav Ratna’.

The steel market in general is looking up and the financial and business restructuring
package of SAIL ison the verge of its completion. Further with modernisation of plants, the
Committee feels that performance of SAIL should improve. Close-monitoring and managerial
will and skill is required to be put at work. Result would follow automatically, the Committee
expects .

Recommendations (Para 12.1.18)

PROGRESS IN IMPLEMENTATION OF BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL
RESTRUCTURING OF SAIL

The Committee is of the view that while the business and financial restructuring package
for SAIL as approved and sanctioned by the Government contains the element for substantial
sustenance and survival of SAIL PSUs but the progress made in the implementation is not at a
satisfactory pace as a result of which SAIL is failing in sailing through the rough weather.
Although the financial restructuring of SAIL has been completed alongwith the organisational
task i.¢, redesigning incentive structure, re-designing key corporate process, strategic and tactical
marketing as and so forth, however all these efforts seems merely 8 “Paper-work” in the absence
of measures undertaken for posting a marked impact on the performances of SAIL in general. The
Committee gets some solace with the performance of SAIL in the field of operation management
where Rs.55.00 crore was saved through cost reduction measures and a further saving of
Rs.400,00 crore is expected on this count during the year 2001-02. The Committee hopes that,
with the implementation of restructuring 1.2. the change from an officialdom to business unit
structure whose basic blue print is ready and its implementation plan is under preParation, the fate
of SAIL may move in the right direction. The Committee hopes that organisational restructure
would be completed in two phases and the first phase being going to be completed by May, 02
the Committee expects that the Ministry of Steel, while furnishing Action Taken Note on the
present report, would also furnish the details of actual impact on the physical and financial
performance of SAIL as a results of implementation of first phase of organisation restructuring.

Action Taken

SAIL’s Restructuring Plan has basically focused on the following:
« Restoring the financial foundation

Restructuring the organisation

Reinforcing the marketing initiatives

Regaining cost leadership

Redefining business performance

The Financial Restructuring and most of the organisation restructuring has been
completed. While the results of Financial Restructuring may be measured, it is the benefits of
Organisation Restructuring which cannot be quantified in monetary terms. The actions taken in
Organisation Restructuring are the essential management interventions which have to be taken for
sustaining the improvements accrued through other initiatives.

It was also envisaged to reorganise the Company on product-based SBU structure.
Considering the huge scope of such restructuring in a vast Company with multi locations and



))

Organizational changes,
The Ministry ०



= -IV

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY OF STEEL HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED.

Recommendations (Para 4.1.6)

REVENUE EXPENDITURE (VRS)
NON-PLAN PROPOSAL

Action Taken

The Tecommendations/observations of the Hon’ble Committee is noted.
Necessary action will be taken, on the basis of Proposals to be received from respective
PSUs, at RE stage, with the concemed Department/agencies,

Recommendations (Para 4.7.2 )
MINIMUM AND NEED BASED BUDGETARY SUPPORT

The Committee, although appreciates the financial constraints of the Government and in
this regard the limitation of the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance, however, the
Committee maintains that the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance should have
given kind consideration to the financial Tequirement of steel PSUs as steel sector contributes to
the nation’s infrastructure on which all round development of the country is dependent. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Steel would continue to take up the
matter with the Planning Commission/the Ministry of Finance so that Some fruitful result would
come out at the RE stage,”

Action Taken

The Tecommendations/observations of the Hon'ble Committee is noted, Necessary action
will be taken up with the concerned Department at RE stage,

Recommendations (Para 6.1.2)
NON-PLAN LOANS TO PUBLIC ENTERPRISES



vernment took a Proper decision to Accept the Proposal of Ministry of
Second revival Package for HSCL which would take care of clearing of arrear of
tory dues,

Outstanding Salaries and Wages and Other Statutory dues to the SeParated employees and

the employees on Toll stand at Rs. 217.4] crore an on 31४ May, -2002, Non-Plan loan of Rs, 89.44

Crore towards the dues to SeParated employees has alréady been Sranted by the Government of

India, Grant of the balance amount as per the second revival Proposal is under Sonsideration of
Government,

Recommendations ( Para 7.1.5)

SUBSIDIES
‘Ommittee notes Status of the Manpower in HSCL an, 1s Of the pinion that that

second reviyaj Package for HSCL Would hel, @ great extent for the Tationalisation of its

Manpower.

Action Taken

Further rationalisation of Manpower by Separation of another 5000 employees through
Voluntary Separation Scheme has been initiated W.e.f, 1.7,2002,

Recommendations (Para 7.1.6 )
INTEREST SUBSIDY on LOANS

u ds the
Minimizing the expenditure on subsidy, jt feels that interest Subsidy to a Weak PSUs Should be
given as 8 Package if the PSU, so Selected for Tevival ig Teally to be Tevived, Otherwise the
Committee feels that ८ i i

At present Rs. 35 crore has been Provided as interest Subsidy on loans raised by the
Company for VRS, The Ministry Of Steel is aware that this amount is not Sufficient to Cover the
entire liability of the Company towards interest on the loan taken by it for funding VRS. Further,
the Ministry is also aware that additional amount would be Tequired ag interest Subsidy on the
fresh loan of Rs. 250 crore that the Company is Seeking to tie-up. The Ministry wil] Seek the
entire Tequirement of funds for interest Subsidy in the Tevised estimates,


Recommendations =| 8.3)
GRANTS IN AID TO PUBLIC ENTERPRISES FOR VRS
Bharat Refractories Limited (BRL)

The Committee recommends that BRL management should carry out the programme of
rationalisation of manpower covering all categories of employees. The Committee approves the
contention of the BRL management and the Ministry of Steel that once the aim of optimal
manpower in the Company is achieved the Company would improve its financial performance.

Action Taken हु

The Company has been carrying out the programme of rationalisation of manpower
covering all categories of employees. Due to non-availability of sufficient fund, the Company
could not effect Voluntary Retirement of employees upto its expectation. However, with the
limited fund available, the Company could effect Voluntary Retirement of 773 nos. of employees
comprising of 47 Executives and 666 Non-executive of different categories, during the year 2000-
2001 & 2001-2002. The Company is quite hopeful to motivate another 1300 employees approx.
to opt for VR since Government of India have decided to provide necessary fund for payment to
such employees, as part of revival package of BRL.

Recommendations (Para 11.6 )
OFFICE OF DC I&s

The Committee in its 34th Report on Problems Being Faced by Steel Industry (both in
public and private sector) had made recommendation that if the existence of the office of DCI&S,
has any justification for its continuation, especially in view of the Government's general policy of
downsizing its departments, the office has really to play pivotal role for development and growth
of Steel Industry in general. However, it has no special role to play in the present situation. Now
that the recommendation of the internal Committee set up under the Ministry of Steel to review
the organisational structure of DCI&S has been taken up and recommendation of the Expenditure
Reforms Commission (ERC) for the closure of the DCI&S the Committee recommends that the
Government should take practical decision in the matter.

Action Taken

The recommendations of an internal committee named the Mallick Committee have been
accepted by the Ministry which has suggested that the staff strength of the office of DCI&S
should be reduced from the present 262 to 111 abolishing 151 posts. The decision is under
implementation. Further the recommendations of the ERC are under consideration of the Ministry
of Steel for a final view.

Recommendations ( Para 12.1.21)
ASSET RESTRUCTURING/DIVESTMENTS
The Committee observes that the pace of asset restructuring as envisaged in the business

and financial restructuring of SAIL is quite tardy and the asset restructuring programme gets
unduly delayed on the one or another ground as a result of which, it is but natural that, gap

26



emerged between the planned cash flow for the year 2001-02 (Rs.1520.00 crore) and anticipated
cash flow for the year 2001-02 (i.e. Rs.570.00 crore). That’s why the Committee find SAIL
between the devil and the deep sea. To come out of financial crunch and to make up for the
shortfall in the proceeds of asset restructuring i.e. planned and anticipated cash flow, SAIL has
Started to sell/lease houses and lands and an amount of Rs.1 19.00 crore has already been collected
and it is expected that Rs.200.00 crore would be collected during the year 2001-02. The
Committee notes that the target of Rs,300 to Rs.400.00 crore has been set through sale/lease of
land/house during the year 2002-03. The Committee hopes that the target set would be achieved.

Action Taken

¢ Cash inflow of Rs,1520 crore for the year 2001-02 was based on the assumptions that
divestment of power plant at Bokaro and Bhilai, Salem Steel Plant, Oxygen Plant-2 at BSP
will be completed during the year. The details are as under:

Planned Cash Flow in 2001-02 | (Rs. in crore) _|
Power Plant at Bokaro & Bhilai [551i

Salem Steel Plant 695
Plant-2 BSP 7
[te | [1220 /]| 520

¢ However, due to some resistance by Unions/Associations/State Governments to the
divestment process at some locations, divestment Process got affected. Further, in some
cases, there were inadequate responses from bidders as steel industry is passing through
tecession. In view of these external environmental factors, the realisations out of business
proposals were affected and only divestment of power plant at Bokaro (Rs.476 cr.) and Bhilai
(Rs.94 cr.) could materialise which resulted in cash realisation of Rs.570 crore.

° The above shortfall in cash inflow planned through divestment of assets was partly met by
sale/lease of surplus houses and land in SAIL township and an amount of Rs.190 crore was
realised,

© During the year 2002-03 850 realisation of cash through sale/lease of houses and land would
be the thrust area and it is estimated that amount of Rs.500 crore would be realised through
this source. As the cash balance for the year 2002-03 is dependent on the cash inflow of
sale/lease of houses a detailed action plan has been formulated to achieve the target.

SAIL is taking aggressive steps for the divestment of non-core assets as part of its Asset
Restructuring Plan. SAIL successfully divested the Power Plants at Rourkela, Durgapur and
Bokaro. Later, the Power Plant at Bhilai was also included and successfully divested.

Taking the innumerable hurdles and the adverse environment, the progress of SAIL’s Asset
Restructuring Plan is on the right course.

Recommendations (Para 12.1.23
CAPITAL OUTLAY OF SAIL

| Committee has been given to understand that SAIL has planned capital outlay of
Rs.500 crore during 2002-03 to be funded from proceeds of asset restructuring of SSP Salem,

ASP/VISL/Fertiliser Plant at RSP and sale and lease of house and the fund so raised would be
utilised on on-going schemes such as SP-3 at BSP, reconstruction of BF-III at DSP and other



AMR schemes. The Committee hopes that SAIL = would make all out efforts not
only for achieving the target of asset restructuring and its proceeds but also the target of
completion of on-going schemes and AMR projects within time and without cost overrun. Any
lapse on the part of SAIL management in achieving the target to raise the fund and its actual
appropriation during the year 2002-03, would only deepen the problems of SAIL, which is
already in critical situation.

Action Taken

* SAIL has planned a capital outlay of Rs.500 crore in 2002-03 (BE) which covers sanctioned
schemes and also few new schemes. The actual capital expenditure during the year would
depend upon the financial position of the Company and availability of resources. However,
Priority would be given on completion of ongoing projects.

¢ Vigorous efforts would be made to raise resources through assets restructuring and sale/lease
of houses,

Recommendations (Para 12.2.4 )

RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LIMITED (RINL)

The Committee understands the reasons for variation in the target set for raising IEBR (to
the tune of Rs.92.00 crore in RE 2001-02) and anticipated actual (i.e. Rs.60.00 crore) and hopes
that RINL would be able to raise Rs.55.00 crore on the target set for the financial year 2002-03
and the projects intended to be completed during 2000-03 funded through the proceeds of IEBR
should be taken on priority basis.

Recommendations (Para 12.2.6)
Waste Management

The Committee is pleased to note that RINL management is giving due importance to
waste management and appreciable amount of proceeds is coming out of waste management i.e,
Rs.40.00 crore worth from recycling steel iron scrap etc. and Rs.11.00 crore worth on leftover of
metallurgical waste and Rs.17,00 crore for steel scrap left in dump. The committee hopes that the
efforts on RINL management would continue for further waste management.

Recommendations (Para 12.2.10 )
INCENTIVE SCHEMES AND ITS IMPLEMENTATION

The Committee appreciates the RINL management for introducing incentive scheme in
RINL which worked successfully with co-operation and collaborative attitude of management
workers/trade union resulting into production volumes beyond the steel capacity i.e. hot metal
101.2%, liquid steel 100.9% and saleable steel 101.4%.

Recommendations ( Para 12.2.12)
LONG-TERM TURNAROUND PACKAGE OF RINL

The Committee observes that the proposal of long-term turnaround package has long
been under the active consideration of Government. The Committee is of the view that without
any further delay efforts should be made to a arrive at consensus on the revival package between

28



Government of Andhra Pradesh and the concerned

Governmen

Push from the Government and once the revival plan is cleared by the
i i S,

1 r Departm
it, 15 Catching up and is on g k, on)

Fecommendations/observations Of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted,

Recommendations (Para 12.4.3 )

ermmi
which will enable it to return Positive margins, which it expects, will enable

the Compan
to return Positive Margins, If this expectation Materialises that the Company would be in
4 position to raise TEBR of Rs,5 crore.
Action Taken

The j

2006-07 and

Xth Plan Projection indicates that the Company will return Positive Margin during
will be in a Position to raise I&EBR,

Recommendations ( Para 12.5.2)

BHARAT REFRACTORIES LIMITED (BRL)

The
BRL as app)

Action Tak.

Committee understands that the implementation of the revival Package for
roved by Government wot

uld go a long way in the Tevival of BRL,

en

Revival Package Primarily based on recommendation of the Techno-Economic
Cleared bi

The
Viability Study have since been y Government of India and the Company 15 quite
hopeful to Perform Satisfactorily after about six months from Teceipt of fund, as Provided in the
Revival Package.

Recommend

lations (Para 12.6.5)

NATIONAL MINERALS DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION LIMITED (NMDC)

The Committee observes that timely forest clearance of deposit 10/1 14, acquisition of

land for NISp and other clearances for uniflow system would haye enabled

Utilisation of

for optimum
fund earmarked to the tune of Rs,300.00 at BE 2001-02 and appropriation of fund

29


=a have actually been invested as per envisaged plan that would have probably improve the
physical and financial performance of NMDC.

Recommendations (Para 12.6.6)

The Committee notes the mode of raising IEBR to the tune of Rs.537.51 crore at BE
2002-03 and their appropriation on various schemes/projects to be implemented during the year

2002-03 and hopes that projects so envisaged would be implemented without time and cost
overrun.

Recommendations (Para 12.6.7)

The Committee appreciates the tourist and peripheral development projects being carried
out by NMDC and hopes that NMDC would continue to meet its social obligation during the year
2002-03.

Action Taken

The recommendations/observations of the Hon'ble Committee have been noted and also
communicated to CMD, NMDC.

Recommendations (Para 12.7.2)
KUDREMUKH IRON ORE COMPANY LTD. (KIOCL)

The Committee is of the view that had the long term mining lease of KIOCL would have
given for full capital expenditure as envisaged to the tune of Rs.282.00 crore in BE 2001-02, In
the long term mining lease KIOCL had to restrict its capital expenditure to the tune of Rs.60.00
crore, Therefore, the Committee recommends that KIOCL management should take concrete step
towards clearance of long term mining lease without further delay.

Action Taken

KIOCL's Management has been pursuing the State Government of Karnataka and the
Ministry of Environment and Forests for grant of long term renewal of mining lease. The validity
period of the current Work Permit is due to expire on 24.10.2002. Initially, the Karnataka
Government had recommended renewal of the Mining Lease for a period of 20 years. However,
subsequently, the State Government has revised its stand and has now recommended renewal of
the Mining Lease for a period of 5 years only. The Government of India has agreed for grant of
renewal for a period of 20 years. In the meantime, in May, 2001, an NGO filed an Interlocutory
Application [A No670/2001 in Writ Petition (Civil) No.202 of 1995 in the Supreme Court of
India. The matter is thus before the Supreme Court now. KIOCL Management is taking necessary
steps to present its case effectively in the Supreme Court.

KIOCL has been continuing its efforts towards preservation and upgradation of ecology
and environment in the project area. The efforts in this regard include massive afforestation,
improvement of Town park, bio-technological approach to sustain the balance of fragile
ecosystem of mined area, eco-restoration, monitoring of Air and Water quality, implementation
of anti-pollution control measures, ctc. The Company’s Environment Management System is



Recommendations (Para 12.8.6 )
MANGANESE ORE INDIA LIMITED (MOIL)

The Committee is Pleased to note that MOIL's actual Taising of IEBR to the tune of
Rs,21.00 crore Boes beyond the estimated amount (Rs. 11.00 crore) and revised amount (Rs.14.00
crore) during the year 2001-02 and their appropriation on the development and technical
upgradation of open cast and underground mines led towards achievement of Production plan and

Recommendations ( Para 12.9.8)

BIRD GROUP OF COMPANIES

Action Taken

With the support from the Government in the form of Plan loan, the operating Companies
have implemented AMR Schemes for improving operational efficiency of the worn out plant and
machinery. For the year 2002-03, the lay out for capital expenditure has been envisaged as Rs,

2.45 crore with budgetary support of Rs. 1 crore for BSLC and SSL. It is expected that with the

31



condition, it is expected that this Company न be able to improve upon the position further
with diversified schemes,

The Re-structuring Proposal of OMDC is under consideration of the Government.
Recommendations (Para 12.11.5 )
MSTC LIMITED

The Committee understands that MSTC is a trading Company and a profit making
concem in search of quity-participation with smal] investment in a Company preferably having
the marketing right of the Product of the said Company. Having total intemal resources available
as on 1" April, 2002 to the tune of Rs.55.52 crore, the Company should continue on its search for
an early strategic partner for €quity participation.

Act‘on Taken

As steel market has not been doing well for the last 5 years, MSTC could not invest or
identify any project where it could invest in equity. However, MSTC is continuing its search for a
Suitable partner for equity participation,

Recommendations (Para 14.10 )

INDIAN IRON & STEEL COMPANY (IISCO)

the Government. Under the circumstances the Committee is of the view that in case the TPE’s
offer does not materialise within three months, Government should clear the SAIL’s Proposal for

32



Action Taken

The Indian Iron and Steel Company (1500), a wholly owned subsidiary of Steel
Authority of India Limited (SAIL) has continued to make losses over the years due to
technological obsolescence, ageing of plant and equipment, lack of Necessary capital inputs etc.

In June, 2002, Government has approved a revival package for ISCO which inter alia
includes grants for financing VRS in Kulti Works, which is to be closed down, besides provision
of Government guarantees to Taise money for financing VRS in Bumpur Works and mines &
collieries, as well as for Capital investments in these units. In addition, SDF loan of Rs.44.68
crore advanced to 1800 and JPC dues of Rs.18.49 crore have been waived,

The aforesaid decision was subject to the Government of West Bengal (GOWB)
Conveying its approval to provide waivers on past dues and exemption from payment of sales tax
(without any monetary ceiling), electricity duty, royalty & cess and municipal tax for five years,
Government of West Bengal has conveyed its inprinciple approval. However, the modalities for
implementing the decision are yet to be finalised by the GOWB, At the same time efforts for joint
venture participation for revival of ISCO are being intensified.

Recommendations ( Para 15.4)
GALVANISING COMPLEX IN NORTH-EASTERN REGION

The Committee is pleased to note that M/s North-East Steels (NES) has come forward as
a joint venture partner for SAIL for setting up of a Hot Dip Galvanising Line (HDGL) project in
North East. The Committee hopes that the Project would be completed in one year time after the
finalisation of joint venture,
Action Taken

M/s. North East Steels (NES), Guwahati, was selected as a Joint venture partner on
preliminary basis for (HDGL) project in July, 2001 and the required security deposit was received
from them in December, 2001.

Subsequently, a draft MOU has been approved by SAIL Board in its 280 meeting held
on 28% May, 20.02 for formation of Joint Venture Company (JVC) with NES for execution and
operation of the HDGL Project.

Presently, the modalities for formation of JVC with NES are being examined, It is
expected that after formation of JVC for HDGL project, the project work would be completed in

33


z| ( Para 16.3 )
RATIONALISATION OF TAX STRUCTURE

The existing tax structure needs to be partially amended for it to become a source of
support for the steel sector. The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Ministry of Steel
for taking up the matter of rationalisation of tax-structure with the Ministry of Finance, which
proved beneficial to the steel industry in general. As some of the Suggestion of the Ministry of
Steel for reform yet Tequires the kind attention of the Ministry of Finance, the Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Steel should prepare comprehensive tax-proposals
which benefits the steel sector vis-a-vis the national economy and forward the same to the
Ministry of Finance for their consideration. The Committee further recommends that the issue of
rationalising the custom duty on import of stainless steel slab from 25% to 10% and stainless steel
hot rolled coils from 25% to 20% be re-examined.

Action Taken

A Comprehensive Note containing the following tax-proposals has been sent to
Department of Revenue for consideration.

(i) Exemption of ferro alloy industries under the purview of ADD on import of low
ash met coke from China.

(ii) Alternate export incentive scheme for steel industry in place of existing DEPB
Scheme.

(iii) Making the export obligation period, under the EBCG Scheme, effective from
the date of commissioning of major iron and steel plants having a capacity of 5 lacs tpa
per annum.

(iv) Retention of 50% of the excise duty collected on HR coils by main producers.
(v) Reduction in custom duty on fused silica from 35% to 25%.

(vi) Reduction in custom duty on coking coal (to nil) and withdrawal of SAD.

(vii) Reduction in import duty on met coke from 15% to 5% for ferro alloys
producers.

The issue of rationalizing the custom duty on import of stainless steel slab from 25% to
20% and stainless stee! hot rolled coils from 25% to 20% is being re-examined.

GENERAL AND CURRENT ISSUES AFFECTING STEEL INDUSTRY

Recommendations ( Para 17.1.6)
Impact of The Imposition Of Tariffs By USA

The Committee appreciates the efforts of Ministry of Steel for taking up the matter of
imposition of US tariff on steel industry and offsetting its adverse impact on Indian domestic steel
Industry. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Commerce should consider speedily
the suggestion of the Ministry of Steel seriously with a view to help the steel industry of the
country which is alternatively passing through a rough phase,

Action Taken

The recommendations of the Committee have been conveyed to Department of
Commerce.


__—= (Para 17.7,3 )

Action Taken

The recommendations of th

¢ Committee have been not
ion are being Te-considered, in

legislati

35


Ea AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT
A GLANCE

Para 6.2.7 BIRD GROUP OF COMPANIES

While the Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry of Steel is supervising the
functioning of Bird Group of Companies but at then same time the Committee is of the opinion
that the Ministry of Steel should not act as a mute spectator when the performance of the
financially sick companies of Bird Group of Companies i.e. Bisra Stone lime Co, Ltd, (BSLC),
Karampura Development Company Ltd. (KDCL) and Scott” & Saxby Ltd.(SSL) is going from
bad to worse. Neither the turn around strategy in respect of these companies has been
formulated nor any final decision is being taken. Things have been left to move on its own
course. Sometimes the Ministry takes the plea that these companies, take the case of (BSLC),
has declined due to improvement _ in the steel making technology but at the sametime the
Ministry waits for improvement in the market conditions and thus allowing the Company to
dwindle further. This is sorry state of affairs. Out of a group of eight companies only four are
operative and even out of four three are financially sick for which turnaround strategy is yet to
be formulated while the rest one’s fate is also hanging as the restructuring proposal of the
Company (i.¢. Orissa Mineral Development Company Ltd. , (OMDC) is still under the
consideration of Government. The Committee feels that Government should come forward
with concrete policy decision in regard to fate of Bird Group of Companies without further
delay. These Companies, located in tribal areas can not sustain and survive for long without
proper strategy/ support or Grant —in-aids.

Para 7.4.9 INTEREST SUBSIDY TO STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA
LIMITED (SAIL) FOR LOANS RAISED FROM BANK FOR
IMPLEMENTATION OF VRS

The Committee strongly recommenas that SAIL should strictly adhere to the MOU target
for rationalisation of manpower as the same would not only enhance the labour productivity but
would also have a positive bearing on SAIL’s efforts to reduce the labour cost which is as high
as 18% in comparison to 4-6% labour cost in steel units in international arena.

Para 7.5.5 INTEREST SUBSIDY TO MECON LIMITED FOR LOANS
RAISED FROM BANKS FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF VRS

The Committee feels that MECON management lacks the proper planning and there is
further lack of coordination between MECON management and the Ministry of Steel because
M/s KPMG _ had recommended in its Report in March, 1999 for implementation of an
appropriate Voluntary Retirement Scheme (VRS) to make MECON a leaner and highly
productive organization. But ‘the recommendation of the M/s KPMG has not been implemented
yet due to lack of fund for the purpose . MECON management is yet to identified in clear cut
terms the level of optimum manpower and chalkout realistic strategy for VRS, MECON
management lacks the required fund for VRS purpose and is at bay to find out the ways and
means to raise the same. Under the circumstances, the Committee feels that the Ministry of Steel
should come forward for rescuing MECON in time.



= Committee desires that Ministry of Steel should furnish the details of
recommendations made by M/s KPMG and action taken thereon .

Para 12.1.14- INVESTMENT IN PUBLIC ENTERPRISES UNDER STEEL
AUTHORITY OF INDIA LIMITED (SAIL)

The Committee notes the reasons for poor performance of SAIL in the recent past and
initiatives taken to put SAIL back on the path of Profitability. The Committee is constrained
to express its concern over the dwindling performance of SAIL, and reasonably so, because
SAIL which was the pride of the nation at one time, has now become an adjective in the
business world for pathetic performance of the Company. The need of the hour is to improve
the performance of SAIL and save its status of ~Nav Ratna’.

The Steel market in general is catching up and the financial and business restructuring
package of SAIL ison the verge of its completion. Further with modemisation of plants, the
Committee feels that performance of SAIL should improve. Close-monitoring and managerial
will and skill is required to be put up at work. Result would follow automatically, the Committee
expects .

Para 12.1.18- ROGRESS IN IMPLEMENTATION OF BUSINESS AND
FINANCIAL RESTRUCTURING OF SAIL

The Committee understands that the benefit of organization restructuring can not be
quantified in monetary terms but the benefits of the action taken for organization restructuring
in the form of management intervention can be measured and felt in the form of the
organizational changes, efficiency and effectiveness in working as a result of action so taken,
The Ministry of Steel should have apprised the Committee in this respect ,

37


MINUTES


=
THIRTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 11% December, 2002 in Room
No.62, First Floor Parliament House, New Delhi.

1, Dr. P.C. Alexander —Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Prof. M.M. Aggarwal
| 3. Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
। 4. Shri P.K. Maheshwari

LOK SABHA

5. Shri Nepal Chandra Das
6. Shri A.C, Jose

7. Shri Ram Singh kaswan
8. Shri A. Narendra

9. Shri Ananta Nayak

10. Shri Malyala Rajaiah

11. Shri 7. Rajendran

12. Dr. B.B. Ramaiah

13, Shri Tarachand sahu

14. Chowdhary Talib Hussain

SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary

Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer

2: At the out set the Chairman welcomed the Members and apprised them of agenda for
4 the meeting of the day.
| 2. * * *
7 31 * *

3.2 > * *

33 + * *

20 Related 0 other mates Related to other matters


4. E| Committee, thereafter, took up the following Draft Reports for consideration:-

(i)

(iii)

(iv)

(vy)

(vi)

92™ Draft Report on the Action Taken on recommendations contained in
Committee's 73 Report on Demands for Grants (2002-03) pertaining to
rtment of Public enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public

93" Draft Report on the Action Taken on recommendations contained in
Committee's 75% Report on Demands for Grants (2002-03) Pertaining to
Ministry of Small Scale Industries: =

94" Draft Report on MoU system in the Chemical Sectors PSEs of the
Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises),

96% Draft Report on Inter PSU Cooperation in Engineering & Construction
Sectors, the Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries
and Public enterprises);

97% Draft Report on the Action Taken on Recommendations contained in
Committee’s 74 Report on Demands for Grants (2002-03) Pertaining to
Ministry of Agro & Rural Industries;

98% छ Report on the Action Taken on recommendations contained in
Committee’s 70 on Demands for Grants (2002-03) Pertaining to Ministry of
Steel;

(vii) 99" Draft Report on Tecommendations contained in Committee's 71% Report

on Demands for Grants (2002-03) Pertaining to Department of Mines (Ministry
of Coal and Mines);

(viii) 101" Draft Report on recommendations contained in Committee’s 72™ Report

(ix)

4.1
modification

on Demands for Grants (2002-03) pertaining to the Department of Heavy
Industry (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);

102™ Draft Report on MoU system in the Fertilizers Sectors PSEs on the
Department of Public enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises)

After a brief discussion all Reports were adopted unanimously without any

5. The Committee then adjourned at 5.10 PM.

42