       
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2021/ Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
300 
 
 
THREE HUNDREDTH REPORT 
 
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the 297th Report of the Committee on 
Demands for Grants (2020-21)  
pertaining to 
the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
 
(Presented to the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 15th December, 2020) 
(Forwarded to the Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 15th December, 2020) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 3rd February, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 3rd February, 2021) 
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2021/ Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY FIRST REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON  247TH  REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
ON 
 IMPLEMENTATION OF  INTEREST SUBSIDY 
ELEGIBILITY CERTIFICATE (ISEC) SCHEME  
 
PERTAINING TO 
THREE HUNDREDTH REPORT 
 
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the 297th Report of the Committee on 
Demands for Grants (2020-21)  
pertaining to 
the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
 
(Presented to the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 15th December, 2020) 
(Forwarded to the Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 15th December, 2020) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 3rd February, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 3rd February, 2021) 
 
 
 

 
CONTENTS 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ...........................................  (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION..................................................................................... (ii) 
3. ACRONYMS ............................................................................................ (iii)-(v) 
4. REPORT.................................................................................................... 1-44 
   
 Chapter I      
 
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted 
by the Ministry................................................ 
 
2-11 
 Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
does not desire to pursue further in view of the 
Government’s replies......................................................  
  
12-26 
 Chapter III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
the Committee has not accepted replies of the Ministry 
and desires the Ministry to review their 
replies………………..................................................... 
 
27-39 
 Chapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
the Committee desires further comments of the 
Ministry..........…............................................................ 
 
40-44 
5. MINUTES ...............................................................................................                45-47 
6. ANNEXURES...........................................................................................  
 
48-58  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

DEPARTMENT- RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
(Constituted  w.e.f.  13th September, 2020) 
 
      1.  Dr. K. Keshava Rao         -       Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
  2.  Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya    
 3. Shri Subhasish Chakraborty 
 4. Shri Shwait Malik 
 5. Shri Jose K. Mani 
 6. Shrimati Ranee Narah 
 7. Shri Subhas Chandra Bose Pilli 
 8. Shri K.C. Ramamurthy 
 9. Shri Sanjay Seth 
 10. Dr. Amee Yajnik    
     LOK SABHA 
 
 11.   Shri Hanuman Beniwal 
 12.   Ms. Mimi Chakraborty 
 13.   Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
 14.   Shrimati Annpurna Devi  
 15.   Shri Hemant Godse  
 16.   Dr. S. T. Hasan 
 17.   Ms. S. Jothimani 
 18.   Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanjibhai Kundariya 
 19.   Shri Ravindra Kushawaha 
 20.   Shrimati Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
 21.   Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
 22.   Shri Rampreet Mandal 
 23.   Shri Vincent H. Pala 
 24.   Shri Chirag Paswan 
 25.   Shri T. R. V. S. Ramesh 
 26.   Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy 
 27.   Shrimati Gomati Sai 
 28.   Shri Ravindra Shyamnarayan Shukla alias Ravi Kishan 
 29.   Shri Sunil Soren 
 30.   Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare 
 31.   Shri Su Thirunavukkarasar 
   SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Jagdish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Secretary 
3.  Smt. M. Sasilekha Nair, Director 
4.  Shri J.K. Mallick, Additional Director 
5.  Smt. Sreeja. V., Deputy Secretary 
6.  Shri. Ajin J. R., Under Secretary 
7.  Shri Anuj Verma, Assistant Research Officer 
(i) 

INTRODUCTION 
  
  I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Three Hundredth 
Report on Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises on the recommendations/observations contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred 
Ninety Seventh Report on Demands for Grants (2020-21).  
 
2. I thank the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises for furnishing the Action 
Taken Notes on the recommendat ions contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred Ninety 
Seventh Report. 
  
3. The Committee in its meeting held on 16th October, 2020 considered and adopted the 
report. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
October 16, 2020____ 
Asvina 24, 1942 (Saka) 
 
Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

ACRONYMS 
 
Acronym    Full form 
 
AABY     Aam Admi Bima Yojana 
 
 
AI     Artificial Intelligence 
 
AR     Augmented Reality 
 
ASPIRE                                       A Scheme for Promoting Innovation, Rural Industry   
and Entrepreneurship   
 
B.E.     Budget Estimate 
 
 
CGTMSE Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small 
Enterprises  
 
CLCSS    Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme 
 
CLCS-TUS Credit Linked Capi tal Subsidy & Technology 
Upgradation Scheme 
 
CO-HANDS     Council of Handicrafts Development Corporations  
 
CPSEs     Central Public Sector Enterprises  
 
 
 
CTTC      Central Tool Room & Training Centre, Bhubaneswar  
DC-MSME Development Commission - Micro, Small & Medium 
Enterprises 
DFG     Demands for Grants 
DIC     District Industries Center 
EDP     Entrepreneurship Development Programme  
 
EFC      Expenditure Finance Committee  
FMC      Foundation of MSME Clusters  
GST     Goods and Services Tax 
 
IIE      Indian Institute of Entrepreneurship, Guwahati  
IMEDF    Indian Micro Enterprise Development Foundation, Delhi  
IEDO      Institute of Entrepreneurship Development, Odisha  
IGTR      Indo German Tool Room, Indore  
ISEC     Interest Subsidy Eligibility Certificate 
J&K KVIB     Jammu & Kashmir Khadi& Village Industries Board  
(iii) 
 
 

LBIs     Livelihood Business Incubators  
LIC     Life Insurance Corporation 
KIs     Khadi Institutions 
KVIs     Khadi and Village Industries 
KVIB     Khadi & Village Industries Board 
KVIC     Khadi and Village Industries Commission  
MSMEs    Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises   
MSEs      Micro and Small Enterprises  
 
MSMED Act                 Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act  
 
MSE-CDP Micro and Small Enterprises-Cluster Development 
Programme 
 
MGIRI Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Rural Industrialization  
MSEFCs     Micro, Small Enterprises Facilitation Councils  
MUDRA    Micro Units Development and Refinance Agency  
NER     North Eastern Region 
NIESBUD  National Institute for Entrepreneurship and Small 
Business Development.  
 
NI-MSME National Institute for Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises  
 
 
NSSHO National SC-ST Hub Offices 
 
NSIC     National Small Industries Corporation  
NSQF      National Skills Qualifications Framework  
 
PMEGP Prime Minister’s Employment Generation Programme  
 
PMJJBY     Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyothi Bima Yojana  
 
PMSBY     Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana  
 
PPDC      Process & Product Development Centre, Agra  
 
PPP     Public-Private Partnership 
 
PSU     Public Sector Undertaking 
 
R&D     Research & Development 
 
R.E.     Revised Estimate  
 
 
 
SCLCSS     Special Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme  
 
 
SSC      Scheme Screening Committee  
 
(iv) 

 
 
 
S&T      Science & Technology  
 
 
 
SME      Small & Medium Enterprises  
 
 
SFURTI Scheme of Fund for Regeneration of Traditional 
Industries  
 
TBIs Technology Business Incubators 
 
TReDS    Trade Receivables Discounting System 
 
VDP     Vendor Development Programme 
 
VR     Virtual Reality 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 
 

REPORT 
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the 
Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises on the recommendations contained in 
the Committee’s Two Hundred Ninety Seventh Report on Demands for Grants (20 20-
21) pertaining to the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. 
2.  Action Taken Notes received from the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises in respect of the recommendations contained in  the 297th Report have been 
categorized as follows:- 
 
Chapter –I  The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the 
Ministry. The Committee is pleased to observe that the Ministry has 
accepted its recommendations as mentioned in the Chapter -I of the 
Report. 
 
Chapter -II The recommendations/observations , which the Committee does not 
desire to pursue  further in view of the Government’s replies. In respect 
of these recommendations, the Committee is convinced with the logic 
and explanations adva nced by the Ministry and therefore does not want 
to pursue them further for the present. 
 
Chapter -III The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee 
has not accepted the replies of the Ministry and desires the Ministry to 
review their reply. The Committee is not convinced with the replies of 
the Ministry in respect of recommendations contained in Chapter -III and 
desires that the Ministry, in the light of further 
recommendations/observations of the Committee, furnish explanations 
thereof. 
 
Chapter -IV   The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee 
desire further comments of the Ministry . In respect of recommendations 
placed in Chapter -IV, the Ministry has either furnished the interim 
replies, therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry may furnish 
Action Taken Notes in respect of recommendations categorized in 
Chapter-IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention and spirit of the 
recommendations of the Committee. 
 
The details of the ATR of the Ministry and recommendations/observations of the  
Committee thereon are given in the succeeding pages. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 

CHAPTER-I 
 
Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1. The present classification of MSMEs based on investment in plant and machinery has 
been effective since the adoption of the MSMED Act, 2006.  However, the extant financial 
limits fixed in 2006 for MSMEs are no longer relevant given the impact of inflation.  Most of 
the Industry Associations and stakeholders have, therefore, expressed the need for changing 
the present criteria of investment in plant and machinery to annual turnover as criterion for 
classification of MSMEs. 
 (Para 8) 
 
Action Taken 
 
Definition of MSMEs has changed vide S.O. 1702  dated 01/06/2020 (Annexure-I) and 
then vide S.O. 2119 dated 26/06/2020 (Annexure -II), by superseding the one dated 
01/06/2020. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2. The Committee is of the view that the present classification based on investment in 
plant and ma chinery also has a number of disadvantages as it prevents MSMEs to become 
competitive in the market, inhibits investment to modernize, upscale, improve productivity and 
technology upgradation due to rigor of investment thresholds. On the other hand, taking  
turnover as a criteria shall overcome the said shortcomings as it can be pegged with reliable 
data available in GST Network and other methods of ascertaining, which will help in having a 
non discretionary, transparent and objective criteria and will elimi nate the need for 
inspections and make the classification system progressive and evolutionary. 
           (Para 9) 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
Definition of MSMEs has changed vide S.O. 1702 dated 01/06/2020 and then vide 
S.O. 2119 dated 26/06/2020, by superseding the one dated 01/06/2020. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3. Artificial Intelligence is a rapidly emerging concept in the market across the globe 
which has great potential for enterprises. Most of the entrepreneurs are making use of this 
concept for their benefit  and to increase their outreach. The Committee recommends that 
Ministry of MSME should also explore the concept of AI for strengthening and betterment of 
MSME Sector in the country. 
       (Para 26) 
 
2 

Action Taken 
 
Looking at the importance of Artificial Intelligence (AI)/Augmented Reality (AR) and 
Virtual Reality (VR) in the era of Industry 4.0, these technologies have already been 
included/will be included as one of the essential feature in all Technology Centres/Extension 
Centres. The Ministry is active ly working in this direction to ensure utilization of the AI 
framework to enhance the outreach. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
4. Market Intelligence plays a crucial role in strengthening and improving the 
enterprises. A dedicated market intelligence cell is  very essential to gather information about 
latest trends, taste and other aspects of the market. It is imperative to keep an eye on 
International markets and MSMEs of developed countries for knowledge of latest technology 
and developments and to adopt goo d practices prevailing in the developed markets across the 
globe for benefit of indigenous MSMEs. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a Market 
Intelligence Cell for MSMEs should be set up that would regularly map specific markets, 
foreign as well as domestic, for meeting the requirement of specific MSME clusters and 
accordingly provide information and training to them about consumer preferences, product 
specifications, technological developments and trade agreements. 
         (Para 27) 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
The Ministry will take all necessary steps to ensure access to Market Intelligence to 
gather all requisite information from the international markets. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
5. Taking into consideration the views expressed by some of MSME Associatio ns during 
the course of examination of DFG (2020 -21), the Committee also perceives that a lot of 
reforms on the Tax front too need to be taken to promote and encourage the MSMEs. The 
Committee accordingly, is of the view that tax rates for proprietary and partnership firms 
should be reduced from 30% to at least 22% on the lines of reduction in Corporate Tax. 
Likewise, exemption and relief under Capital Gain should be accorded to MSMEs for 
investment in expansion of the existing MSME or for fulfilling their working capital 
requirements. The Committee accordingly, desires that Ministry of MSME may take up these 
issues with the Ministry of Finance and apprise the Committee of the outcome thereof. 
     (Para 28) 
Action Taken 
 
Ministry of MSME has already taken u p the issue of reduction in tax rates with M/o 
Finance vide letter dated 21.11.2019 from Secretary (MSME) to Secretary (Revenue). 
 
 
 
3 
 

After obtaining information from CBDT, reply will be furnished by the Department of 
Revenue MoF directly to the Committee. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
6. The Committee observes that there have been instances of inadequate credit 
disbursement by banks to MSMEs vis -à-vis large industries whereas the case should have 
been opposite. In Economic Survey 2018 -19, it has been stated that MSME sector has vast 
potential and it should be nurtured fully to convert dwarfs into the giants. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance and RBI 
to ensure that there is no inadequacy of funds to MSMEs. 
         
(Para 32) 
 
Action Taken 
 
The suggestion has been noted. Matter will be taken up with Ministry of Finance and 
Reserve Bank of India. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
7. The Committee notes that the constraints faced by KVIC/KVIB are ma inly due to 
procedural delays, inadequate technology up -gradation, under utilization of funds etc. 
Despite providing technical guidance to the units in KVI, the problems of the units remain 
inadequately addressed as a result there is sub optimal functionin g of institutions/units and 
high drop outs among new entrants and low employment generation. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that KVIC, in view of the expansion of its area of operation in every 
nook and corner of the country, should come forward with  a more holistic and unified policy 
in co-ordination with all the stakeholders. Proper planning, monitoring and implementation 
in each scheme are required to meet the primary objective of employment generation.  
       (Para 37) 
 
Action Taken 
 
The observations of the Committee are noted for further compliance. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
8. The Committee feels that in face of stiff competition in the market from organized 
industries, KVIs should concentrate more on adoption of newer technology and upgradation 
of existing technology for products upgradation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
regular training by efficient staff having experience and expertise should be imparted to the 
artisans through its network of training institutions.   
(Para 38) 
 
 
4 
 

Action Taken 
 
KVIC is organizing skill development training programmes through its departmental 
and non-departmental training centers for organizing Khadi training programme for Artisans. 
Under the Khadi Reform and Development Programme (KRDP), spinners are provided 
training for a period of 10 days through master trainers and similarly weavers are also 
provided training. The suggestion of the Committee is noted and appropriate training shall be 
organized for all artisans through the training centers.  
  
Further, it has also identified Institute of repute to impart the advance training 
programme for the artisans who are engaged in the process of garment manufacturing, 
designing, pattern making, etc. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
9. The Committee was apprised about the availability of Khadi Fabrics in private retail 
stores at competitive price. The Committee observes that opening up of Khadi retailing to 
private players is a good initiative in this regard for enhancing and expanding the market  of 
Khadi fabrics among the customers. Further, the recent innovative step to bring in fashion 
designers of repute to design Khadi fabrics is a welcome move and it needs to be continued by 
bringing in more such steps. The Committee therefore, recommends th at good market 
techniques like frequent awareness campaigns among the youth and introduction of Khadi in 
Schools, Hospitals, Railways and other Government Organizations could be good recourse 
which will surely increase the demand for Khadi products. Beside s, premier showrooms 
known as Khadi Lounge should be opened in all the State capitals and Airports to market 
designer Khadi products and attract the younger generations towards Khadi products. In this 
direction opening up of Designer Houses in each state capitals would be a welcome step. 
 
(Para 39) 
 
Action Taken 
 
The suggestion of DRPSC is well taken, it has been decided to set up Centre of 
Excellence for Khadi (CoEK) in association with NIFT with the objective to supply Khadi 
Institutions (KIs) with new de signs of fabric as well as readymade garments, colour & trend 
forecast to have proper marketability of khadi products. 
  
These CoEK shall be owned by NIFT Delhi and support Khadi and Village Industries 
Commission (KVIC) in its endeavour to develop and promote Khadi. These CoEK shall be set 
up in Hub & Spoke Model, the main center will be in NIFT Delhi (North), that will act as a 
hub with four Spokes located in South, East, West, & North East regions of the country viz. 
Kolkata, Shillong, Bengaluru and Gandhi Nagar NIFT. 
  
 
 
5 
 

KVIC is also extending financial support for establishing Common Facility Centers 
(CFCs), Readymade Garment Units etc. under various schemes like Scheme of Fund for 
Regeneration of Traditional Industries (SFURTI), Khadi Reform and Development 
Programme (KRDP) etc. for design development programmes.    
 
KVIC will make necessary arrangements for good market techniques like frequent 
awareness campaigns among the youth and introduction of Khadi in Schools, Hospitals, 
Railways and other Government Organizations in order to identify good recourse for 
identifying new potential marketing avenues to increase the demand for Khadi products. 
  
KVIC has already opened premier departmental showrooms/exclusive Khadi Lounges 
in New Delhi, Mumbai, Ja ipur, Bhopal, Goa and Kevadia and will explore possibilities to 
open new departmental showrooms in the State capitals. 
   
KVIC has already opened showrooms in the Airports at Vishakhapatnam, Ahmedabad, 
Varanasi, etc. to market designer Khadi products and a ttract the younger generations towards 
Khadi products. KVIC will explore possibilities to open new showrooms in other major 
Airports. 
  
As recommended by the Committee, KVIC has made tentative action plan/initiatives 
for the year 2020-21 to promote Khadi in every nook and corner &its branding though tagline 
of “KHADI INDIA” logo.   It is also planned to celebrate “Khadi Day” on 25th of Sept. 2020 
to felicitate/ give awards to Khadi Veterans, Khadi and Village Industries Institutions/units, 
organize some social activities and B2B meet, one to one discussion with buyers etc. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
10. The Committee observes that the rural as well as urban youths are not inclined to 
work in KVI sector due to low wages and the hardships involved in it. Ther efore, the 
Committee is of the view that the economic empowerment of the poor artisans can be 
enhanced by allowing the potential spinners and weavers to work with the private designers 
of national and international reputation without the approval of KVIC s o that they could earn 
more wages from them directly.  Further, the issue of low wages of unskilled and semi -skilled 
artisans needs to be addressed properly so that more willing workers will bring in more 
quality output in Khadi sector. 
(Para 40) 
Action Taken 
 
KVIC has revised the spinning wages to Rs. 7.50 per hank and the weaving wages is 
also revised at the State Level depending on the prevailing wage structure in the respective 
states. In addition to the spinning wages, 12% Artisan Welfare Fund (AWF) an d 10% 
Incentive are provided to all the spinners and weavers. 
  
Further, 30% and 10% of Modified Market Development Assistance (MMDA) 
component is also disbursed by KVIC using online MMDA Portal through Direct Benefit 
Transfer (DBT) to the artisans and other karyakartas. 
 
6 

In view of the revision of wages and other incentives the Khadi artisans working are 
getting the minimum wages and hence new artisans are expected to join the Khadiprogramme. 
  
KVIC does not restrict any Khadi Institution or their artisans to work with reputed 
designers and they are free to do so, on their own. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
11. The Committee observes that the number of ISEC issued under Khadi and Polyvastra 
is almost negligible in North Eastern Region except in Assam  and Manipur. The Committee 
desires that appropriate steps should be taken to address the issue. 
(Para 60) 
Action Taken 
 
ISEC is being issued on the basis of requirement of Working Capital as per the level of 
performance by the KIs. KVIC is taking steps to  increase the availment of Bank Finance 
under ISEC in all States.  However, appropriate steps will be initiated to improve the quantum 
of Khadi and Polyvastra performance in other States of North Eastern Region. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
12. The Committee is of the firm opinion that in order to have a better co -ordination for 
export promotion of coir and its by -products for aiding in multifarious activities such as soil 
erosion control, landscaping, river embankment etc., tie ups with Indian Missions abroad may 
be explored. 
(Para 103) 
Action Taken 
 
Coir Board has been facilitating participation of potential exporters of coir products in 
various exhibitions/fairs held abroad.  While participating in the international fairs, efforts are 
made by Coir Board to contact the Indian Missions in the respective country and make 
available to them the samples of coir products with brochures on its application.    Coir Board 
has also been participating in the Annual Meetings of the International Erosion Control 
Association and making presentations for dissemination of information on application of coir 
products for landscaping, protection of river embankment, etc. to promote Indian Coir. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
13. The Committee is of the view that Micro & Small Enterprises - Cluster Development 
Programme is quite important for the growth and development of Micro and Small 
Enterprises in the country for employment generation and economic development. The 
Scheme, therefore, should never ever suffer due to paucity o f funds. The Committee 
recommends that more budgetary provisions should be made under the scheme so that its 
objectives are achieved. Further, for development of Clusters, state governments should be 
sensitized for timely clearance of procedural matters so that target is achieved. 
 (Para 109) 
7 
 

Action Taken 
 
In line with the DRPSC recommendations, the budgetary provision for MSE-CDP has 
been enhanced from Rs. 227.90 crore in BE 2019-20 to Rs. 390.69 crore in BE 2020-21. 
For development of more clusters, St ate Governments has also been requested vide 
D.O. letters from Hon’ble Minister of MSME to Chief Ministers of States/UTs and from 
secretary, MSME to Chief Secretary of all States/UTs. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
14. For a successful business, a successful marketing strategy  from market research is 
required for making profit  and achieving the overall objectives of the organization  in the 
present scenario. However, the Committee observes that the budgetary allocations made 
under the Marketing Promotion Scheme for the FY 2020 -21 is Rs. 103.63 crores which is less 
than what was allocated for the previous year. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
more funds be allocated for the purpose at the Revised Estimates stage so that marketing 
promotion aspect does not suffer due to lack of funds.  
 (Para 113) 
Action Taken 
 
The Budget allocation to PMS Scheme (Formerly MATU) in the last three years along 
with RE is tabulated below: 
S.No. Year BE (Rs. in crores) RE (Rs. in crores) 
1 2017-18 15.0 12.32 
2 2018-19 65.0 54.4 
3 2019-20 87.6 87.6 
 
The Budget allocation under Procurement and Marketing Support Scheme for the 
current financial year 2020 -21 is Rs. 83.59 crores. However, the recommendation by the 
Committee is noted. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
15. R&D is an important aspect of any enterprise. In developed countries, proper and 
dedicated R&D is undertaken to improve the quality of products and performance of the 
enterprises. However, for 2020 -21, a meager amount of Rs. 2.00 crore has been earmarked 
for R&D purposes. The Committee recommends that more funds should be allocated for R&D 
and Technology related support facilities in order to match the quality of international 
products. 
 
(Para 118) 
 
 
8 
 

Action Taken 
 
MGIRI, Wardha, Maharashtra, a constituent unit of the Ministry of MSME, undertakes 
many R&D projects related to Khadi and Village industries Sector. In 2020 -21, Ministry has 
made provision of 11.00 crore to MGIRI for R&D and technology dissemination related 
activities. 
  
Coir Board  has proposed  an amount of Rs.10 crore under its relevant head ie. Coir 
VikasYojana - Science & Technology for the year, 2020 -21 for undertaking various R&D 
activities. 
  
KVIC - During the year 2020-21, allocation of funds has been increased from Rs.2.00 
crore to Rs.4.00 crore (BE) i.e. Rs.1.00 crore under S&T (Khadi) & Rs.3.00 crore under S&T 
(V.I) to undertake proper and dedicated R&D to improve the quality of products and 
performance of the enterprises. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
16. The Committee recommends that more technical institutes, academic institutes, R&D 
laboratories, Universities, both in  government as well private sectors, should be roped in to set 
up new L ivelihood Business Incubators/Technology Business Incubators for promotion of 
innovative technology-based entrepreneurs in the agro-rural areas. 
 
(Para 153) 
Action Taken 
 
Efforts are being made to rope in more technical institutions, academic institutions, 
Universities, etc. All Central Universities, State Governments, AICTE, etc. have been 
requested to direct their technical agencies to come up with proposals for setting up 
LBIs/TBIs. Besides, all efforts will be made to get technically equipped proposals from 
private sector institutes as well, with focus on areas with cluster prospects. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
17. The Committee recommends that a robust procurement system should be evolved 
which could ensure unhindered supply of raw materials to NSIC and monitor that allocation 
order is released by the respective Ministries timely so that there is no scarcity of raw 
material supply to MSME sector. The Committee is also of the view that the Ministry should 
also explore other available options for raw material supply to MSMEs instead of becoming 
solely dependent on NSIC in coordination with o ther concerned Ministries/Departments to 
meet the requirement of MSMEs. 
 
(Para 161) 
 
 
 
9 
 

Action Taken 
 
The matter will be taken up with other concerned Ministries/Department to ensure 
unhindered supply of raw materials to NSIC and explore the other availa ble options for raw 
material supply to MSMEs instead of becoming solely dependent on NSIC. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
18. The underutilization of Budget Allocations and lack of performance of various 
important MSME Schemes viz. PMEGP, CLCS -TUS, etc. in North Eastern  has been a 
recurring concern for the Committee which was communicated to the Ministry from time to 
time in its earlier Reports. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should make 
concerted efforts for industrialization in NER region, be i t in the field of traditional art, craft 
and artisan work.  
(Para 174) 
Action Taken 
 
The committee has observed that “The underutilization of Budget allocations and lack 
of performance of various important schemes viz. PMEGP, CLCS -TUS etc. in NER has 
been  a recurring concern for the   Committee.   In this regard, as far as Scheme component 
“Promotion of MSMEs in North Eastern Region & Sikkim” is concerned, the scheme was 
launched in 2016 and has got very good response from the NER State Governments and has 
undertaken  about 37 projects in different states of NER till March 2020. The budget 
utilization for last three years is as under; 
 
                                                                   Rs. in Crores. 
FY BE RE Exp. 
2017-18 5.00 5.00 5.97 
2018-19 13.00 20.99 20.60 
2019-20 58.93 58.93 53.9525 
 
It is to note that the budget has been raised to more than 11 times within three years and 
progress of the scheme is quite satisfactory.                                        
 
 
Coir Board is making maximum efforts for promotion of its schemes and services in the 
NE Region. The training programmes of the Board are being implemented very effectively in 
various parts of the NE Region through its Sub -Regional Office in Guwahati, Assam. 
Regarding PMEGP, w hich is being implemented by the Board for the last two years, some 
technical objections have been raised by the Banks for release of the loans.   These issues are 
being sorted out. Concerted efforts will be made by Coir Board for effective implementation 
of its schemes and services in the NE Region subject to the raw material availability in States 
like Assam, Tripura, etc. 
 
 
10 

KVIC - 8 SFURTI clusters have been sanctioned in the NER during the period from 
2015-16 to 2019 -20 out of which 3 clusters have been sanctioned during the year 2019 -20.  
KVIC is making all efforts to bring more clusters in the region under Agro-based, forest based 
and other potential village industries activities. 
 
Utilization of funds under Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Component has always been 
nearly cent percent. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 

CHAPTER-II 
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view 
of the Government’s replies 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
19. The Committee was informed by the representatives of MSME Associations that many 
of the MSMEs were unable to meet the fixed deadline of 90 days in repaying their loan 
installments, due to the unique system of their working cycle, which is much longer, due to 
their inability  to meet the stipulated timeline for repayment, the MSME units are declared 
NPAs. To avoid such difficulties being faced by MSMEs, the Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should endeavour to see to it that time limit for declaring a MSME as NPA due to 
non-payment of loan amount should be enhanced from the current 90 days to 180 days. 
         (Para 22) 
Action Taken 
 
 
 
 
In this regard, Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has stated that banks are free to take credit 
decisions, including designing of appropriate repayment schedules of the MSME borrowers 
based on the expected cash flows. Once the repayment schedule has been arrived at, any 
default risk on account of delay in repayment has to be suitably recognized. Accordingly, the 
classification of assets has to b e done on the basis of objective criteria of record of recovery, 
which in turn ensures a uniform and consistent application of the norms. 
 
In this context, 90 days delinquency norm was brought in through a calibrated manner 
to benchmark the prudential regu lation to the international standards after extensive 
consultations and was based on the report of the Committee on Banking Sector Reforms 
chaired by Shri M Narasimhan. It may also be mentioned here that default in payment is a 
lagging, not leading, indica tor of financial stress of a borrower and the 90 days delinquency 
norm is considered appropriate as it will facilitate the implementation of a resolution plan by 
lenders in respect of stressed borrowers. As such, increasing the delinquency norm for NPA 
classification for MSMEs may not be desirable. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
20. The Committee welcomes the Government’s goal of making India a $5 trillion 
economy by 2024 -25. The Committee is however of the considered view that the target of 
becoming $5 trillion economy by 2024 can be achieved by exponential growth of MSME 
sector. Thi s sector has the capacity of building up at a low cost and utilizing the modern 
innovative technology can be made commercially productive at lower cost. This sector has 
also the capacity to generate employment and multiplication of production is far easy than the 
big industries. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government need to play a 
proactive and constructive role in promoting MSME Sector. More than ease of doing 
business, there is need of creating ease of running business. More information dis semination 
regarding the export requirements should be taken care of. Financial institutions should be 
proactive, friendly and forthcoming. Government regulators should do handholding and play 
the role of mentors. Besides, change in the attitude of the Gov ernment regulators will 
immensely help the MSME Sector.  
12 

Together with the industry, skilled manpower and the support of government authorities, the 
desired target can be achieved.   
 
         (Para 25) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
 
 
The Micro, Small & Medium Enterp rises (MSMEs) have been contributing 
significantly to the expansion of entrepreneurial endeavors through business innovations. The 
MSMEs are widening their domain across sectors of the economy, producing diverse range of 
products and services to meet deman ds of domestic as well as global markets. MSMEs are 
contributing approximately 30 per cent of the Gross Domestic Products (GDP) and their high 
growth potential may significantly help in achieving $5 trillion economy. In recent years, 
Government has taken v arious proactive policy measures to create an enabling business 
environment in India to boost MSMES on all the dimensions of MSME Ecosystem viz. 
Access to Finance, Market Access, Technology upgradation etc. Field Offices of the Ministry 
of MSME with the support of  District Industrial Centres and Industry Associations have been 
organizing Workshops/Webinars etc. to disseminate the information regarding schemes of 
MSMEs. This information is also disseminated through the websites of MSME Ministry, its 
field o ffices and attached offices. SIDBI and other Commercial Banks are also playing a 
crucial role in disseminating this information through online and off line mode.  
 
Along with these measures, Government has also taken steps to improve Ease of 
Doing Business  including simplification and rationalization of existing processes to 
strengthen the growth prospects of MSMEs sector. As a result of the measures taken to 
improve the country’s investment climate, India jumped to 63rd place in World Bank’s Ease 
of Doing Business ranking as per World Bank’s Doing Business Report (DBR) 2020. This is 
driven by reforms in the areas of Starting a Business, Paying Taxes, Trading Across Borders, 
and Resolving Insolvency. Government is promoting various incubation centres across India 
under the Skill India Mission to bridge the gap between demand for and supply of skilled 
manpower. There are also many other incubation centres which are being run by National 
Small Industry Corporation (NSIC), Coir Board and Khadi and Village Indust ries 
Commission(KVIC), and the National Institute for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises(NI -
MSME) that offer latest courses relevant to industry's rapidly evolving requirements 
 
Government is also working on the Ease of Running Business, as would be evide nt 
from various simplification measures announced in the Atmanirbhar Bharat package, in 
various sectors. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
21. The Committee recommends that Ministry should play a proactive role in promoting 
MSMEs abroad and the foreign entrepre neurs should have profiles of Indian MSMEs so that 
they could promote them at appropriate level amongst companies of their respective country. 
There should be an exclusive ‘Export Facilitation Centre’ for MSMEs in PPP mode in each 
State to promote exports of products and services from MSME sector. 
         (Para 31) 
 
 
13 

Action Taken 
 
It is to mention that total 50 Export Facilitation Centre (28 at MSME -DIs, 18 at 
Technology Center) are established in the States. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
22. It was observed by the Committee that opportunities of export of products of Khadi 
and Village Industries are not yet exploited optimally and the government has to lay emphasis 
upon the exports of KVI products . The Committee recommends that ample facilitation, 
incentives, less compliances, easy and cheaper funds, etc. should be adopted by the 
Government to encourage KVIs/MSMEs to go for exports. Besides, seminars and workshops 
in clusters should be organised to educate KVIs/MSMEs about opportunities of their produ cts 
in global market and benefits of exports. Besides an e -portal can be designed where the 
MSME exporters can post their applications for clearance or for export facilitation like 
stuffing/de-stuffing and the exporter should also post the date when the ac tual work will be 
undertaken. 
 
(Para 41) 
Action taken  
 
Ministry of Commerce & Industry, Govt. of India has extended Deemed EPC Status to 
KVIC during 2006 for promotion of KVI products in the global market. The membership of 
KVI-EPC will facilitate provision of participation in International Trade Fairs/ Awareness 
program etc. 
  
Around 1088 KVI Institutions and PMEGP/REGP Units have taken its membership to 
enter the field of Export. Export of Eco -friendly KVI products like Handmade paper and its 
products, Furniture, Herbal care products, Honey, Papad, Cane & Bamboo fancy articles and 
Khadi fabrics & Readymade designer wear etc. may also be other area of cooperation. 
  
In fact, KVIC does not involve directly in the export activities. Though, under the 
various marketing activities, KVIC play vital role for promotion of sales/export support to 
KVI institutions/units working under KVI sector. KVI institutions/units export their products 
directly or through Merchant/Agencies 
  
Government has issued HS codes  to Khadi and Villages Industries Commission 
(KVIC) for eleven Khadi items on 4.11.2019. The HS code detail is given below. This is 
expected to facilitate the tracking of export of Khadi products, which were otherwise being 
exported as textiles without the categorization. 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
 
 

 HS Code Khadi Item Description 
62032911 Khadi ensembles of silk for men’s and boy’s 
62033110 Khadi jackets and blazers of wool or fine animal hair for men’s and boy’s 
62033911 Khadi jacket and blazers of silk for men’s and boy’s 
62042912 Khadi ensembles of silk for women’s and girl’s 
62043110 Khadi jackets and blazers of silk for women’s and girl’s 
62043912 Khadi jacket and blazers of wool or fine animal hair for women’s and girl’s 
62059011 Khadi shirts of silk for men’s and boy’s 
62114921 Other garments of silk for women’s and girl’s 
62142021 Khadi scarves 
62142031 Khadi mufflers 
62151010 Ties, bow ties and cravats of silk or silk waste 
  
KVIC proposes to promote export of KVI products through KVI institutions/units  and the 
following initiatives are being taken for the year 2020-21: 
 An Export Promotion Cell has been created to work on  current export policies, incentives, 
international trends and market study. 
 The Ministry of Commerce shall be approached for allocation of  separate HS codes to  all 
other Khadi  Products. As Khadi fabric is handspun and hand -woven and its products are 
unique in its own way which will give boost to this sector which is having ancient and 
historical background and represents India in its true spirit. 
 Awareness Workshops/Seminars will  be conducted to train the artisans, weavers,  KI and VI 
export houses in latest techniques of production provide Design intervention, training sessions 
for Exporters for exposure of International Market. 
 Opening of outlets abroad in consultation with Embassies of India through  Grant in aid 
support to generate further demand and open new avenues to supply bulk quantities in future. 
 Participate in International Exhibitions. 
 An e -portal for MSME exporters to post their applications for clearance or for export 
facilitation like stuffing/de-stuffing etc. shall be initiated in consultation with the Ministry. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
23. The Committee is of the view that because of complicated pattern of proje ct reports, 
PMEGP could not be implemented successfully. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the long-drawn process of selection of beneficiaries and banks should be further reduced and 
evaluation of Entrepreneur Development training programme before  issue of certificate and 
cost reducing process should be adopted. 
(Para 51) 
Action Taken 
 
Ministry of MSME vide letter dated 28.4.2020 has simplified the PMEGP guidelines. 
In order to streamline the process of selection and to expedite the flow of applica tions under 
PMEGP, the role of District Level task Force Committee (DLTFC) has been discontinued for 
recommendation of proposal/applications to financing banks. The role of DLTFC would be 
limited to monitor the performance of PMEGP Scheme on quarterly basi s in their respective 
districts. 
15 

  Thus, implementing agencies, after receiving the applications, will scrutinize and 
examine the personal and factual details and forward directly to the Banks as soon as possible 
and in no case later than three weeks of receipt of application. Further, a scoring sheet is being 
developed to be uploaded on the PMEGP -e-Portal to enable the implementing agencies to 
send viable and quality proposals. 
  
Entrepreneur Development Programme (EDP) is mandatory before the release o f 1st 
installment of loan. From October, 2019, online EDP portal has also been launched by the 
KVIC.  To speed up the setting up of units under PMEGP, short -term EDP Exemption has 
also been given to facilitate immediate release of loan and claim subsidy. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
24. The Committee observes that only half of the targeted projects set up by KVIC have 
been approved/disbursed by the Banks, which does not portray a rosy scenario.  The 
Committee desires that the Ministry may step in to resolve  the problems in consultation with 
KVIC and financial institutions so that targets set forth are achieved. 
(Para 52) 
 
Action Taken  
 
During the year 2018 -19, Rs 2070.00 crore Margin Money was disbursed and 73427 
numbers of projects established against the target of Rs. 2068.80 crore and target of 72381 
numbers of projects respectively, indicating an achievement of 100.06 %. 
  
It is informed that 66653 Projects have been set up involving Margin Money of Rs. 
1950.82 crore (86.82%) against the target of Rs.224 7.10 crore and target of 74276 units. The 
reasons behind the shortfall in the performance were code of conduct imposed during Lok 
Sabha& State Legislative Assembly Elections and COVID -19 from February, 2020 onwards 
during the year 2019-20. 
 
The details are given below: 
 
Details Target Achievement 
  No. of 
projects 
Margin 
Money        
(Rs. in 
Crore) 
Empl. 
(Nos.) 
No. of 
projects 
Margin 
Money 
(Rs. in 
Crore) 
Empl. 
(Nos.) 
%  against 
the target of  
MM 
PMEGP 73241 2147.10 585928 66514 1941.06 532112 90.40 
2nd loan for up-
gradation to 
PMEGP/ REGP/   
MUDRA units 
1035 100.00 8280 139 9.76 1112 9.76 
Total 2019-20 74276 2247.10 594208 66653 1950.82 533224 86.82 
 
 
16 
 
 

Recommendation/Observation  
25. The Committee observes that PMEGP mainly focuses on generating self-employment 
opportunities through Micro enterprises in the non -farm sector by helping unemployed youth 
and traditional artisans. However, there are a few hiccups in the guidelines such as minimum 
educational qualifications, negative list etc. that hamp ers the efficacy of the programme. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should look into the matter and revise the 
negative list in order to bring in more new industries/projects like floriculture etc. under the 
ambit of PMEGP to make it more employment oriented. 
(Para 53) 
 
Action Taken  
 
It is a fact that PMEGP mainly focuses on generating self -employment opportunities 
through micro enterprises in the non-farm sector by helping unemployed youth and traditional 
artisans. 
  
Regarding minimu m educational qualification, it is to clarify that the minimum 
educational qualification requirement is only 8th pass to set up project cost of Rs.5.00 lakh 
and above under service sector and Rs.10.00 lakh under manufacturing sector, no educational 
qualification is prescribed for the project cost below Rs 5.00 lakhs  for service sector and 
Rs.10 lakh for manufacturing sector. 
  
Further, industries such as Coir Industry, Khadi and handloom, trading units, 
establishment of sales outlets and value addition unde r sericulture (cocoon rearing), 
Horticulture, and Floriculture have been allowed under PMEGP to bring more new 
Industries/projects and make it more employment oriented.  Transportation activities and 
trading activities have also been allowed in specific areas. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
26. In its recent study visit to Kolkata, Hyderabad and Mumbai in January, 2020, the 
Committee was apprised that subsidies under the PMEGP are not claimed by the lending 
institutions/banks from the KVIC timely as a result o f which the Micro enterprises face 
financial crunch and shortage of working capital. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
necessary steps should be taken in this regard so that the subsidy money is claimed /released 
timely by the Banks to the beneficiaries. 
(Para 54) 
Action Taken 
 
As per the scheme guidelines, the subsidy money can be released to the beneficiary 
only after the completion of three years. KVIC disburses the Margin Money claim to the 
financing bank within 24 hours of the receipt of the cl aim from the bank.  This margin money 
subsidy is kept in the financing bank branch in the form of TDR (fixed deposit) for three years 
in the name of the entrepreneur and is adjusted in the loan account on successful result of 
physical verification of the units. 
 
17 

Recommendation/Observation 
 
27. Since ancient times, honey has been used as both a food and medicine. It is very high 
in beneficial compounds and offers several health benefits. In order to popularize use of 
honey, the Committee recommends that, like sugar pouches, initiatives should be taken to 
encourage production of honey pouches for ready consumption especially in organizations 
like Indian Railways, Air India, Hospitals, Hotels and other organizations in view of its health 
benefits. Besides, p roduction of honey pouches would encourage the Village Industries 
artisans and generate employment in the urban areas under the Honey Bee Mission in the 
country. 
(Para 82) 
Action Taken 
 
In the present scenario of beekeeping industry under KVI sector, the b eekeepers are 
more inclined to immediately sell the Raw Honey extracted by them to the Honey Traders. 
The Honey Traders are either engaged in carrying out its further processing and selling it or 
they are even supplying the procured honey to other needy pa rties. There are also a lot of 
registered Khadi Institutions/REGP Units/PMEGP Units, which procure the Raw Honey on 
reasonable price from the beekeepers. 
  
After the launching of Honey Mission during 2017 -18, the KVIC has extended 
assistance to 13466 Nos. of beneficiaries (till 31.03.2020) in setting up beekeeping units. 
Under the Awareness Programmes conducted as the part of implementation of Honey 
Mission, all the prospective beneficiaries have been also apprised of the marketing potential 
of "Honey" and thereby the beneficiaries under Honey Mission can earn more income by way 
of developing market linkages with big firms like Indian Railways, Air India, Hospitals, 
Hotels and other organizations in view of its health benefits. As the part of various strateg ies 
for increasing the Honey consumption, all the Zonal/State/Divisional offices of KVIC had 
been also requested to take further necessary actions on the following areas: 
 
  
i. Honey as "Panchamrit" in Temples 
ii. Honey as "Prasad" in Temples 
iii. Honey sale in Bakeries 
iv. Honey in Meals in High end Hotels/ Restaurants 
v. Honey in Mid-Day Meal Programme 
vi. Honey as Sugar Substitute in Cafes 
vii. Bundling of Honey with other Khadi products 
viii. Corporate Gifting of Honey 
ix. Honey Kiosk in Malls 
x. Exclusive Honey Exhibition 
xi. Geo Tagging of Geographically specific Honey in India 
 
18 
 

Recommendation/Observation 
28. During the last couple of years, the Village Industries have witnessed a growth 
parameter in respect of production, sales and employment generation due to various strategic 
initiatives undertaken by the KVIC/Ministry of MSME. However, there remains much more to 
be done in this regard. The Committee is of the view that concentration of pottery families 
may be identified in the States and training to them may be imparted in modern tech niques of 
pottery for employment generation and creation of market linkages through Village Industries 
even in the remotest of locations in the country with the support of state governments. Besides, 
cheap loan facility may be provided for expanding busine ss using technology so that they can 
sustain because the art of pottery is also on the verge of extinction. Moreover, now there is a 
rising demand for pottery items. 
(Para 84) 
Action Taken 
 
 KVIC had organized a National meeting of State KVI Boards at NIMS ME, 
Yousufguda, Hyderabad by involving all the Chairman/CEOs of the Khadi and Village 
Industries Boards of the Country in which Kumhar Sashaktikaran Programme (empowering 
potters) was discussed for implementation of skill -upgradation pottery training progr amme 
with the modern equipments to the pottery artisans lives including enhancing of their quality 
production levels etc. with the coordination of State/Divisional Directors of KVIC. 
  
Further, under PMEGP programme of KVIC, potters are availing the benefits and 
establishing the pottery units and doing their business in the country through 
KVIC/KVIBs/DIC at State level. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
29. The Committee is aware that there are various schemes implemented by the 
Government under which technology developed is transferred to the beneficiaries without any 
charges. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that the technology developed by the Coir 
Board should be transferred to entrepreneurs, traders, clusters etc. free of cost to encourage 
potential entrepreneurs to get into the coir sector business.  Besides, steps should also be 
taken to explore the potential overseas markets for export of coir products particularly 
innovative coir products. The Committee is also of the opinion that Buyer -Seller meets and 
Vendor Development Programmes may be organized overseas to popularize Indian coir 
products and to tap the virgin overseas markets. 
(Para 104) 
Action Taken 
 
Coir Board has been transferring technologies developed by its research institutes by 
levying nominal charges with the aim of contributing to its internal resources.    The 
recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee to transfer the technologies to entrepreneu rs, 
traders, clusters etc. free of cost for facilitating the growth of the industry will be taken up at 
appropriate level immediately.  
 
19 
 

In order to develop the export market, Coir Board has been facilitating the participation of 
potential coir exporters in exhibitions/fairs abroad by extending flight charges, space rent, etc. 
under the International Co -operation Scheme of the Ministry of MSME.   The exporters are 
availing of these opportunities and canvassing orders for their innovative coir products.   Coir 
Board has also been arranging Buyer -Seller Meets as part of these exhibitions abroad.   
Proposals for participation in exhibitions in virgin overseas markets are already under 
consideration. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
30. Today’s age is the age of Sci ence & Technology.  Science & Technology has become 
an integral part of our life and life without it is unimaginable now.The Committee 
recommends that with changing time and scenario, the Science & Technology aspect should 
be focused upon more in order to benefit the Khadi and Village Industries Sector.  The 
Ministry may ensure that suitable technology and research being practiced in the other 
developed MSME Sectors across the world be incorporated suitably for indigenous MSMEs. 
(Para 115) 
Action Taken 
 
Mahatma Gandhi Institute for Rural Industrialization (MGIRI), Wardha, Maharashtra, 
which is a constituent unit of the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME 
Ministry), undertakes many R&D projects related to Khadi and Village industries Sect or. To 
create a Science & Technology (S&T) Hub for Khadi Village Industries (KVI) Sector MGIRI 
also  developing strong linkages and interface with other institution in the field of rural 
industrialization. 
  
KVIC-In order to ensure quality of Products, red uction of human drudgery, increase 
the productivity, earning of artisans, product diversification as per market demand efficient 
use of raw -material etc., the Directorate of Science & Technology of KVIC has been 
implementing the R&D Scheme. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
31. The Committee recommends that Ministry must encourage MSMEs for innovation and 
R&D, provide adequate institutional support for encouraging innovation, provide special 
support, both technical & financial, to innovators to set up enterprises  for scientific & 
technological R&D purposes to make indigenous MSMEs more competitive in the world 
market vis -a-vis MSMEs of the developed countries. The Ministry must also ensure that 
budgetary allocations are fully utilized for the intended purposes. 
(Para 116) 
Action Taken 
 
 Coir Board is undertaking research and development activities in coir sector through 
its two research centres located in Alleppey, Kerala and Bangalore in Karnataka.   The R&D 
activities of these Institutes have led to the developmen t of new machinery, more efficient 
production methods, new end-use applications, new products, etc.   
20 

The results of these R&D activities are promptly transferred to the industry through extension 
service wings of the institutes.   Coir Board has always welcomed the innovations of private 
entrepreneurs and all sorts of encouragement was provided to them whenever innovations are 
reported.  The budgetary allocations for research and development have been utilized more or 
less completely by Coir Board in the previous years. 
  
MGIRI - To undertake and sponsor projects capable of giving substantial fillip to 
larger and increased market penetration to selected products of KVI Industries, MGIRI 
undertakes many R&D projects related to Khadi and Village industries.  To promote 
innovation MGIRI is conducting pilot studies and field trials through research, extension, 
education and training projects. 
 
KVIC- For encouraging innovation, provide special support, both technical & 
financial, to innovators to set up enterprises for scientific & technological R&D purposes to 
make indigenous MSMEs more competitive in the world market vis-a-vis MSMEs of the 
developed countries the Committee on S&T has recommended for revision of S&T 
Guidelines i.e. increasing the ceiling limit of R&D Project cost etc., which is under pipeline. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
32. The Committee recommends that Ministry may tie up with diff erent research 
organizations, both in government as well as private sector, for R&D of scientific & 
technological activities of KVIC and Coir Board. Besides, exhibitions, Seminars, Workshops, 
Awareness programmes/road shows all over India may be organized.  Incubation & intensive 
training on the latest technologies developed should be imparted to the industry/beneficiaries 
free of cost or on nominal fee. The Committee desires that the Ministry may pursue with right 
earnest to put in place a network of incubators in the entire length & breadth of the country to 
enhance the competitiveness of the MSMEs. 
(Para 117) 
Action Taken 
 
 Coir Board  has been collaborating with reputed Organisations, Institutions, 
Universities, etc. for research and development activities .  Several collaborative projects are 
still under progress and many of the earlier collaborative projects have yielded remarkable 
results.  The results of these collaborative projects are disseminated to the industry through 
exhibitions, seminars, workshops, etc. regularly.  In-house display of the developments is also 
arranged in the R & D Institutes of Coir Board for the benefit of major stake -holders of the 
Industry like, exporters, manufacturers, etc.   The technologies developed by Coir Board are 
also imparted through its training institutes and field training centres.   Coir Board has already 
set up Livelihood Business Incubation Centres in the states of Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh 
and Odisha under ASPIRE for encouraging potential entrepreneurs to set up coir units.  Coir 
Board proposes to establish a Centre of Excellence with IITM, Chennai, Indian Plywood 
Research and Training Institute, etc. to facilitate research and development and transfer of 
technology for industry. 
 
 
21 

MGIRI is conducting number of awareness programmes across the country every year 
to bring awareness on various technologies developed for KVI sector. Technology 
dissemination workshops are also conducted for needy KVI institutes. MGIRI participates in 
all major exhibitions like IITF, Agro Vision, State Level Exhibitions to showcase the products 
& technologies developed.  Recently MGIRI has initiated  Interface Institutes of KVIC (Phase 
2) programme  which is basically a network of premier technical institutions that agree to 
collaborate with MGIRI in the process of providing S&T intervention to the rural industries 
sector. 
  
KVIC- To tie up with different research organizations, both in government as well as 
private sector, for R&D of scientific & technological activities of KVIC the Direc torate of 
S&T has organized on day workshop at Nagpur through MGIRI, Wardha with the help of 
VNIT, Nagpur on Technical Interface Phase II. The Technical Interface Institutions from the 
various parts of the country have been invited in the said workshop.  Tie up arrangements for 
bringing out innovative export quality product designs with NIFT, etc. KVIC engaged fashion 
designer of national and international repute for Fashion Designing to make Khadi products 
more competitive and appealing in the domestic as well as overseas market segment. 
  
The KVIC invites project proposal for publicity of different developed technologies on 
different head like - Publicity of improve implements, establishment of experimental process 
houses, establishment of technology demons tration center like technology park, Vigyan 
Kendra, quality control / linkages with other laboratories, training of quality marketing system 
in KVI sector, Field trial / extension, etc. 
  
Incubation Facilities have already been included as essential requir ement in the 
Technology Centres being set up by office of DCMSME in various parts of the country. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
33. The Committee notes with satisfaction that an amount of Rs. 973.16 crores was 
provided in 2018-19 towards subsidy claims settlement. However, the Committee recommends 
that the Ministry of MSME should strive to get sufficient allocation from the Ministry of 
Finance for clearance of subsidy claims and liquidate all pending subsidy claims. 
(Para 131) 
Action Taken 
 
Ministry of MSME cleared all the pending subsidy claims under Credit Linked Capital 
Subsidy Scheme by releasing an amount of Rs. 973.16 crore in FY 2018-19. 
 
  In FY 2019 -20, Ministry has released Rs. 554.54 crore and made a provision of 
Rs.503.28 crore in the Budget Estimate of current Financial Year i.e 2020-2021. 
 
Ministry of MSME has already requested Ministry of Finance to allocate additional 
funds for Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme. 
 
 
 
22 
 

Recommendation/Observation 
 
34. Presently, benefits under CLCS-TUS are extended to the beneficiaries only through 11 
Banks. The Committee recommends that more Banks should be added to the list of banks.  
Moreover, the list of 51 subsectors should be increased in consultation with Industry 
Associations so as to bring more and more activities under CLCS-TUS. 
(Para 132) 
Action Taken 
 
At present 8 Public Sector Banks, viz, SIDBI, NABARD and Tamil Nadu Industrial 
Investment Corporation Limited are the Nodal Banks/Agencies for this scheme. However, the 
scheme is actually implemented through Primary Lending Institutions (PLIs) which are 
attached to the Nodal Agencies viz NABARD and SIDBI. 
  
All the Scheduled Commercial Banks including Regional Rural Banks, District 
Central Cooperative Banks and Urban Cooperative Banks (Sche duled as well as Non 
Scheduled) are eligible to become PLIs under this scheme. At present there are more than 100 
PLIs through which Capital Subsidy can be availed under CLCSS. 
  
So far as Sectors are concerned, the list of sectors is dynamic and it is reg ularly 
updated in consultation with Industry Associations, our Technological Partners, 
Academicians, Bankers etc. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
35. The Committee notes that despite hindrances, NSIC is trying hard to fulfil the 
objective to promote and facili tate small scale industries, NSIC is, however, facing problems 
such as uncertainty in timely availability of raw material; no allocation/preference of Raw 
Materials; no additional rebate/concession; and no financial assistance being provided by the 
government to NSIC etc.  
(Para 160) 
Action Taken 
 
The observations of the Committee have been noted. It is submitted that NSIC is 
providing Marketing, Technology, Credit and other Support services to enhance the 
competitiveness of MSMEs. 
  
 NSIC facilitates raw m aterial supply to MSMEs by making tie -up arrangements with 
bulk manufacturers for procuring the materials and supplying the same to MSMEs. NSIC also 
provides short -term finance by making payments directly to raw material suppliers.  During 
FY 2019 -20, the v alue of Raw Material Distribution under Raw Material Assistance 
scheme of the corporation was Rs.1455.19 crore. Ministry, on its part, also takes up the matter 
with various CPSEs for ensuring continuous availability of raw material to NSIC. 
  
 
23 

  Further, in order to build the capacities of MSEs for participation in Government 
tenders and contribute in Government Public Procurement processes, NSIC supports MSEs 
through Single Point Registration for Government purchase.   The units registered under i t are 
eligible for the benefits available under Public Procurement Policy for Micro & Small 
Enterprises (MSEs) Order, 2012.  
  
NSIC also forms consortia of small units manufacturing the same products, thereby 
pooling in their capacity which provides comfor t level to MSEs as suppliers and also to 
buyers. The Corporation applies for tenders on behalf of consortia of MSEs and secures orders 
for bulk quantities. These orders are then distributed amongst MSEs in line with their 
production capacity. Besides, NSIC  is also providing E -Marketing Services to MSMEs 
through MSME Global Mart Web Portal (www.msmemart.com) to enhance their business. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
36. The Committee also recommends that the Hub should create an All India Database of 
SC/ST entrepreneurs’ locations and vocations and share the same with PSEs so that PSEs can 
locate SC/ST units easily. Also, the SC/ST Hub should run NSQF compliant skill development 
programmes for SC/ST technicians who could take contract jobs and services that PSEs  
outsource. 
(Para 168) 
Action Taken 
 
The Ministry of MSME, GoI has launched MSME Sambandh portal 
(https://sambandh.msme.gov.in/) to capture the procurements made by the CPSEs from MSEs 
and SC/ST MSEs. In order to increase the vendor base of CPSEs by reaching out to the 
potential suppliers, provision has been created on this portal for the CPSEs to have access to 
details of SC-ST and Women MSEs from UAM portal with certain filters.  
 
127 types of Skill / Entrepre neurship Development Capacity Building Training 
Programs are being conducted through 36 different institutions like EDII, RSETIs, NIMSME, 
Tool Rooms/ Technology Centers of O/o DC -MSME, NTSCs, CIPET etc. These courses 
include NSQF compliant courses, NSQF ex empted courses and Entrepreneurship 
Development Programs (EDPs). 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
37. The Committee observes that many schemes of the Ministry are not working 
satisfactorily in North Eastern Region and has a very negligible presence in these areas.  The 
number of ISEC issued under Khadi and Polyvastra are almost negligible except in the 
previous financial years. The Committee recommends that serious efforts should be made by 
the Government/Ministry to benefit the populace of NER through variou s schemes run by 
them with the help of State Governments. Particularly potential women and SC/ST 
entrepreneurs be encouraged to participate in the growth process. 
(Para 175) 
 
24 
 

Action Taken 
 
ISEC is being issued on the basis of requirement of Working Capital as per the level of 
performance by the KIs. The number of Khadi Institutions in North East Region is few hence 
ISEC issued under Khadi and Polyvastra is also less as compared to States which have more 
Khadi Institutions. 
  
SFURTI - During the curre nt financial year 03 SFURTI clusters under Shitake 
Mushroom and Food Processing with the technical collaboration of Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research - Institute of Himalayan Bio resource Technology (CSIR -IHBT), 
Palampur, Himachal Pradesh have been sanctioned in the State of Sikkim. All the field offices 
of KVIC in the NER have already been requested to identify and mobilize more number of 
clusters from the various parts of NER. In the sanctioned clusters majority of the artisans hail 
from SC/ST community. 
  
In respect of  PMEGP scheme in NER, the state -wise target and performance for the 
year is given as follows: 
  
NER States 
TARGET ACHIEVEMENT %  
against 
the target 
No. of 
unit 
%  against 
the target 
of MM 
No. of 
projects 
Margin 
Money        
(Rs. in Cr.) 
Employment 
(Nos.) 
No. of 
projects 
Margin 
Money 
(Rs. in Cr.) 
Employment 
(Nos.) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
Aru. 
Pradesh 194 500.00 1552 211 363.79 1688 108.76 72.76 
Assam 4333 11207.80 34664 2603 3589.39 20824 60.07 32.03 
Manipur 1088 2815.73 8704 1173 2036.30 9384 107.81 72.32 
Meghalaya 1149 2971.70 9192 377 569.17 3016 32.81 19.15 
Mizoram 813 2101.59 6504 760 1083.78 6080 93.48 51.57 
Nagaland 1319 3412.08 10552 1109 2650.24 8872 84.08 77.67 
Tripura 973 2517.10 7784 962 1833.64 7696 98.87 72.85 
Sikkim 78 200.00 624 79 174.56 632 101.28 87.28 
Total 9947 25726.00 79576 7274 12300.8
7 58192 73.13 47.81 
  
The above table depicts that the NER performance in terms of Projects set up is 
73.13% (in column No.8) and in terms of MM utilization, it is 47.81% (in column No.9 ) 
against the target sets. 
  
The main reasons behind the shortfall in MM utilization in NER are given below: 
 Small size (range-wise) projects were sanctioned in NER. It is analyzed that 58% 
projects financed in the range of upto Rs.5.00 lakhs, 33% projects from Rs.5.00 lakh to 
Rs.10.00 lakh and only 9% projects from Rs.10.00 lakh to Rs.15.00 lakhs. 
25 

 Assam and Meghalaya achieved very low performance i.e. less than 50% and that 
affect the % of total achievement of region. 
 Code of conduct imposed during LokSabha& State Legislative Assembly Elections 
and COVID-19 during the year 2019-20. 
  Though, KVIC has been/ are being initiated various steps to achieve the performance 
in NER, mentioned in the reply Para 52 above. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
38. The Committee notes the initiative taken by the Ministry for honoring MSMEs for 
quality production, exports, innovation, product development etc. for the economic growth of 
the country. However, the Committee is of the view that the award distribution functions 
should be organised in and around areas where the award winning MSMEs are located or in 
areas where concentration of MSMEs is less like the North Eastern Region so as to generate 
awareness and to encourage the potential entrepreneurs to set up new MSMEs in those areas.  
(Para 178) 
Action Taken 
 
In this regard, it is informed that the National MSME Award Scheme gives away 
awards to the eligible and qualifying MSMEs among the online applications received from the 
MSMEs on all India basis in various categories of awards. Generally, the winners of MSME 
awards in various categories come from different parts of the country including the North 
Eastern Region. Therefore, it is practically difficult to organize this function in a ll those 
places and regions. However, during 2017 this function was organized in Ludhiana. It is also 
submitted that during National Award function of 2020, arrangement for life streaming of the 
event was made to enable the industries associations across t he country to watch this function. 
However, the comments of the Committee have been noted and all possible efforts would be 
made to organize such events in remote areas and any region. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 

CHAPTER-III 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has either not 
accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its replies 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
39. It is observed by the Committee that the growth of MSMEs is concentrated mostly in a 
few States only which induces the people to migrate to those areas in search of employment 
and livelihood. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should work in the 
direction of removing all the existing geographical imbalances and ensuring that eq uitable 
presence of MSMEs is there in all the States so that there is industrialization and employment 
generation in all the States. 
         (Para 10) 
Action Taken 
 
 
Ministry of MSME implements its programmes and schemes across the country in the 
direction of removing all the existing geographical imbalances and ensuring that a more 
equitable distribution of MSMEs is there in all the States. It is also to ensure that there is 
sufficient industrialization and employment generation in all the States,  especially those in the 
North Eastern Region, separate funding is earmarked to remove such imbalances as per 
Government directions. The schemes of the Ministry are primarily demand - driven but the 
policies and programmes like Public Procurement Policy, me asures to tackle the menace of 
Delayed Payments, etc., are aimed at striking a balance in regional development, inter-alia. 
 
Ministry launched a new scheme,” Establishment of new Technology 
Centres/Extension Centres” on 02.11.18 to establish 20 new Technology Centres(TCs) and 
100 Extension Centres (ECs) at an approximate cost of Rs 6000/ - Cr to increase the outreach 
of MSME Technology Centres and thus remove the geographical imbalance in r/o presence of 
Technology Centres of the Ministry in various parts of the Country. 
 
These TCs provide technology / advisory support to existing MSMEs and skilling support to 
unemployed youth/employees of the industry resulting in creation and promotion of MSMEs 
and enhanced employability / enhanced employment opportunities in the catchment area of 
the TC/EC. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee may be informed about the impact of the new Scheme, 
“Establishment of New Technology Centres/Extension Centres”, launched by the M/o 
MSME in 2018 to increase the outreach of MSME Technology Centres in the country.  
Also, the Committee would like to know about the increase in employment generation in 
the catchment areas of TCs/ECs after introduction of the said Scheme. 
 
 
27 
 

 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
40. The Committee observes that the actual ISEC issued and funds released by Banks is 
not very encouraging and creates gap in working capital requirement and actual fund 
availability as a result of which the KIs fails to achieve the desired level performance.  It also  
feels that norms for turnover formula on one working cycle differs both at KVIC and Bank 
level, which appears to be one of the lacunas for the gap existing between ISEC issued and 
Bank finance which needs to be addressed at the appropriate level.   
(Para 59) 
Action Taken 
 
The existing Working Capital formula for Khadi and Polyvastra is formulated on the 
basis of actual requirement of Working Capital cycle. 
  
The Working Capital formula has been studied by various Committees like Kalia 
Committee etc. The norms for turnover formula for Khadi differs from bank norms mainly 
due to the reason that the KVIC is assessing the Working Capital based on the target fixed on 
Production, Retail Sales, Wholesales, Vastragar, Raw Material and processing as inventory is 
maintained at each level which require working capital. 
  
Whereas, the banks are considering available opening inventory level of finished 
goods and credit facilities being extended by the trade creditors also, which is not correct for 
Khadi sector as the Khadi activity is a composite activity carried out at decentralized stages. 
Hence the norms adopted by Banks are not suitable for Khadi activities.   The issue will be 
again taken up by the KVIC with the Banks. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Commi ttee notes that the issue of non -availability of sufficient amount of 
working capital due to difference in assessment norms being followed by KVIC and 
Banks is a longstanding one.  The Committee, therefore, desires that the issue may be 
sorted out by KVIC in consultation with Banks expeditiously, so that KVI Sector can 
flourish thereby creating more employment opportunities for the economically weaker 
sections of the society. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
41. The KVIC, as a social security measure to artisans  engaged in the Khadi activity, 
introduced the Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyothi Bima Yojana (PMJJBY) / Pradhan Mantri 
Suraksha Bima Yojana (PMSBY) and Modified Aam Admi Bima Yojana(AABY) Schemes for 
the Khadi artisans, mostly workers. The Committee, however, o bserves that less number of 
artisans are covered and the benefits provided under these schemes are very meager. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that more artisans should be covered under these schemes 
and the monetary benefits may be revised for the b enefit of Khadi artisans. Awareness 
generation programmes may also be organised in rural areas regarding the benefits of 
insurance schemes among Khadi artisans. 
(Para 63) 
28 

Action Taken 
 
The PMJJBY/PMSBY and Modified AABY schemes were introduced by LIC of  
India. The scheme covers the Khadi artisans in the age group of 18 to 50 years and 51 to 59 
years respectively and the benefits are already prescribed by LIC of India. 
  
All the eligible Khadi Artisans working with the registered Khadi Institutions (KIs) of 
all the States with the age group of 18 to 59 years are being covered under the scheme. The 
Khadi Artisans with age of more than 59 years are not eligible under the scheme. However, 
KVIC would ensure that all the eligible Khadi Artisans will be covered under the scheme and 
recommendations of the Committee to revise monetary benefits shall be taken up with LIC. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The whole Nation is now suffering from Covid -19 pandemic and during this 
unprecedented critical situation som e form of social security measure is mandatory for 
the marginalized groups of the society including the Khadi Artisans. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that more and more artisans engaged in Khadi activities should 
be covered under the various Bima Yo jana Schemes including life schemes run by the 
Government as a social security measure. Besides, a study may also be conducted to 
assess the adverse effects of Covid-19 pandemic on Khadi artisans  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
42. The SFURTI Scheme, which wa s introduced with an objective to encourage 
Traditional Industries and Artisan clusters of the country, is about to complete 10 years of 
operation and by now every district of the country should have had at least one project. 
However, the Committee notes w ith dismay that the scheme could not make its presence felt 
even in 10 per cent districts of the country. The Ministry of MSME as well as KVIC and Coir 
Board appear to have not made much headway on this front. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry should come out with the specific targets so that each district of the country will 
have at least one SFURTI project. 
(Para 73) 
Action Taken 
 
During 2008-14, the scheme was implemented through KVIC and Coir Board wherein 
101 SFURTI Cluster proposals were approved. 
  
During 2014-18, the scheme was implemented through 8(eight) Nodal Agencies viz. 
KVIC, Coir Board, IIE, NIMSME, NIESBUD, IMEDF, J&K KVIB and IEDO. During 2019 -
20, 20 (Twenty) new Nodal Agencies have been appointed viz. 18 (Eighteen) Tool Rooms & 
Technology Centres under O/o DC (MSME), Foundation of MSME Clusters (FMC) and 
Council of Handicrafts Development Corporations (CO-HANDS). 
  
 
29 

From 2014 till 31.03.2020, 298 SFURTI cluster proposals have been approved. 54 out 
of these 298 SFURTI Clusters are operational/ functional. 158 of these have been approved 
during FY 2019-20. Nodal Agency wise spread of number of approved clusters is as under:- 
  
Nodal Agency                                                                         Number of clusters 
approved 
Khadi& Village Industries Commission (KVIC), Mumbai                             78 
Coir Board, Cochin                                                                                          41 
Institute of Entrepreneurship Development, Odisha (IEDO)                          31 
Indian Institute of Entrepreneurship, Guwahati (IIE)                                     43 
National Institute of MSME (NIMSME), Hyderabad                                    19 
Jammu & Kashmir Khadi& Village Industries Board (J&K KVIB)              10 
Foundation of MSME Clusters (FMC), Delhi                                                 20 
Central Tool Room & Training Centre, Bhubaneswar (CTTC)                       2 
Council for Handicraft Development Corporation (CO-HANDS)                 12 
Process & Product Development Centre, Agra (PPDC)                                  20 
Indo German Tool Room, Indore (IGTR)                                                       5 
Indian Micro Enterprise Development Foundation, Delhi (IMEDF)              17 
  
Total 298 
  
These 298 clusters have been approved in 233 districts across 29 states. So far, about 
32.36% of districts have been covered across the country. 
  
Budget for the scheme for the year 2019 -20 was Rs.125 crore which was revised to 
Rs.185 crore at RE stage. An amount of Rs.181.82 crore was released during 2019 -20. As 
vigorous efforts were made by Ministry and Nodal Agencies to bring up more and more 
proposals under the scheme during last two ye ars, these efforts yielded results in the form of 
228 proposals being approved against the target of 100 during two year 2018 -20 with funds 
worth Rs.458.22 crore. 
  
Ministry has set a target of setting up of 1250 clusters during 2020 -24 across the 
country. Since 2008 till 31.3.2020, 399 SFURTI clusters have been approved which are 
spread across different districts of the country. As mentioned above, the target is to set up 
1250 SFURTI cluster till 2024, which is likely to cover all rural districts of the country. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
Due to Covid-19 pandemic, industries have shut down , production has decreased 
significantly, workers have been rendered jobless etc. particularly the MSME Sector.   
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the whole process of seeking approval and 
setting up of SFURTI projects should be expedited , especially in view of the hardships 
being faced by the populace in rural areas after their migration from urban areas to 
their native places.  Mor e budgetary provisions should also be made for these SFURTI 
projects and t he target of setting up of 1250 SFURTI clusters proposed till 2024 may 
also be expedited.  
30 

Recommendation/Observation 
 
43. The Committee is of the view that the Mission Solar Char kha has huge potential to 
provide employment to a large number of potential professionals like stitchers, weavers, 
tailors and other skilled artisans in rural areas along with generation of Green energy for 
controlling pollution in the country. Also, the S cheme further aims to provide employment to 
youths, including at least 50 women artisans, will go in long way to boost rural economy. 
Moreover, Solar Charkha Mission is proposed to be set up with a corpus of Rs. 951.43 crores 
to set up 500 exclusive solar charka based clusters (250 during 2018 -19 and 250 during 
2019-20) by the end of 2020. The Committee, therefore, recommends that setting up of more 
solar charkha clusters under the Mission Solar Charkha should be given priority in areas of 
high solar insola tion across the country. Besides, the Committee also recommends that the 
Ministry should provide timely interventions so that the Solar Charkha Clusters so set up, are 
operationalized in an expeditious manner. 
(Para 79) 
Action Taken 
 
Mission Solar Charkha is a project-based scheme to set up 500 exclusive solar charkha 
based clusters across the country to help promote industrial growth, employment generation 
and technology up -gradation. Ministry of Finance approved the scheme with an outlay of 
Rs.550 crore t o set up 50 solar charkha clusters for the period 2018 -19 and 2019 -20. The 
scheme is to be implemented by Khadi& Village Industries Commission (KVIC), Mumbai. 
Scheme Screening Committee (SSC) has approved 10 Solar Charkha Clusters with the 
financial sancti on of Rs. 6431.86 lakhs as grant; it is expected that, out of this grant, 
employment opportunities to more than 13,000 persons (spinners, weavers and other artisans) 
will be generated. 
 
The target is to setting up of 20 more cluster proposals from KVIC during 2020-21, for 
this an allocation of Rs. 100.00 crore has been made in the BE 2020-21. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 The Committee is of the view that the M/o MSME may impress upon the KVIC 
to expedite the setting up of 20 Solar Charkha cluste rs as proposed during the Financial 
Year 2020 -21 as the Solar Charkha Project has the potential to generate large -scale 
employment in rural areas for the artisans besides promoting industrial growth & 
technology upgradation.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation to set 
up more number of Solar Charkha projects so that the problem of unemployment in 
rural areas can be mitigated to some extent particularly in the present economic 
scenario.  Enhancement in budgetary provisions may also be con sidered to make the 
Solar power project efficacious.  
 
 
 
 
 
31 

Recommendation/Observation 
 
44. The Committee notes that organizations like Coir Board are providing training on 
various aspects of production and development of new/innovative products. One of the most 
important objectives of the implementation of various Schemes under Coir Board is the 
employment generation, especially in rural areas. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
Ministry of MSME should give a consideration for recognition of such training 
courses/training institutions so that younger generation will be attracted to such training for 
gainful employment. 
(Para 101) 
Action Taken 
 
Coir Industry has the potential to provide employment and income to a large number 
of people in the coconu t producing states of the country.   Coir Board has been conducting 
various training programmes for imparting training on the production process and 
manufacturing techniques of products of the industry.   The regular training programmes of 
Coir Board are conducted through its training institutes located at Alleppey in Kerala, Tanjore 
in Tamil Nadu, Bhubaneswar in Odisha and Rajahmundry in Andhra Pradesh.  The Certificate 
and Diploma Courses on Coir Technology are for a duration of one year and six months 
respectively.  These training programmes are aligned to the National Skill Qualification 
Framework (NSQF) under the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship, 
Government of India.   The trainees are issued with certificates by Coir Board on successful 
completion of the courses. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
Since Coir Industry has huge potential to generate large -scale employment, the 
Ministry of MSME and Coir Board needs to capitalize this potential for the benefit of 
artisans / potential artisans in coconut producing states.  The various training 
programmes provided by the Coir Board should be made more attractive and lucrative 
in order to attract more and more potential artisans to become a part of Coir Industry.  
However, due to outbreak of Covid -19 pandemic, the Coir Industry has been adversely 
affected and the employment generated position in the Coir Sector has been drastically 
reduced.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry/Coir Board should 
take concrete steps in right earnest for revival of the Coir Industry including exempting 
fees for various training courses conducted by Coir Board.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
45. Deforestation is one of the major threats for the maintenance of ecological balance. 
The Committee, in order to avoid grave threats which are endangering the climatic conditions 
and human life, recommends that the production of substitutes for wood, such as coir wood, 
has to be encouraged and more coir clusters under SFURTI have to be established to meet the 
demands of coir based furnishings and building materials from the  domestic as well as 
international market. To achieve this, more funds should be allocated by the Ministry of 
MSME to the Coir Board. 
(Para 102) 
32 

Action Taken 
 
As observed by the Hon’ble Committee, the products of coir industry can contribute 
immensely for maintaining ecological balance.    ‘Coir-wood’ deserves special consideration 
as it is a substitute for wood and saves rain forest which in turn keeps reversing global 
warming. The coir wood has immense market potential both in the domestic and internati onal 
market.  A total number of three units for production of ‘coir -wood’ have been sanctioned 
under SFURTI so far.   Out of this, one unit is ready for operation and two units are under 
various stages of establishment. The Board proposes to establish more units to manufacture 
coir-wood under SFURTI in the current phase. Coir Board made efforts through Ministry of 
MSME to declare coir products under mandatory procurement by government sector and 
declare coir products as agricultural products. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
Ecological balance is essential for sustenance of various forms of life and the Coir 
Board is doing an excellent job by giving a substitute for wood in the form of coir wood.  
The coir wood can be a very good substitute for wood, prov ided that the production of 
coir wood is encouraged and a favourable environment is created for its production.  
Coir wood has also a huge potential for overseas market, which can contribute 
significantly for the growth of national economy. In order to enc ourage the Coir 
Industry, the Committee recommends that more SFURTI clusters should be set up in 
the Coir Producing areas to provide gainful employment to the youth; latest technology 
should be adopted for creating innovative and durable coir products; and  adequate 
budgetary provisions should also be made for the development, promotion and 
marketing of coir products.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
46. During its study visit to Kolkata, Hyderabad and Mumbai during January 2020, the 
Committee was informed by t he MSME Associations that the subsidy limit under the CLCS -
TUS may be enhanced to 25% as provided under other Schemes under the Ministry to SC/ST 
entrepreneurs. Thus, in order to increase the participation of SC/ST/Women entrepreneurs 
under the CLCS -TU Scheme, the percentage of subsidy may be increased under the scheme. 
The Committee recommends that the subsidy amount should be raised to 25% for  
SC/ST/Women entrepreneurs as provided under the Special Credit Linked Subsidy Schemes to 
attract more SC/ST/Wome n entrepreneurs for making it a meaningful scheme for these 
categories. 
(Para 135) 
Action Taken 
 
Ministry of MSME is also implementing a scheme similar to Credit Linked Capital 
Subsidy scheme specifically for SC -ST Entrepreneurs.   This scheme is known as Special 
CLCSS Scheme and it is being implemented through NSIC. The subsidy component under 
this scheme is 25%. 
 
 
33 

Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 An unprecedented situation is prevailing because of Covid -19 pandemic, which 
has adversely affected every aspect of human life.  Industries are shutting down, 
production has decreased, jobs are lost.  To meet this situation, Hon’ble Prime Minister 
has given a vision of making India ‘Atmanirbhar’ and this vision can be achiev ed by 
promoting entrepreneurship among the citizens , which is possible by giving them right 
opportunities in the form of favourable entrepreneurial environment so that they may 
be encouraged to set up their ventures by taking advantage of various schemes r un by 
Government.  The Committee recommends that suitable modifications be made in the 
various schemes run by Ministry so as to attract more and more potential entrepreneurs 
to make the nation ‘Atmanirbhar’.   
  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
47. The Committee observes that there is constant decline in the number of beneficiaries 
benefitted in the last three years i.e. year 2016 -17, 2017-18 and 2018-19 Work-shed Scheme 
for Khadi Artisans. Even in the year 2018-19, the figure is less than half of the figure that was 
in 2016-17. The Committee desires to know the reason behind this decline. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that necessary steps should be taken to construct sufficient number of 
Workshed for improving the working conditions of Khadi Artisans of t he BPL Group. 
Moreover, the disbursements for the construction of Work -sheds should be made in a very 
transparent and time-bound manner. 
(Para 139) 
 
Action Taken 
 
KVIC is sanctioning funds for construction of Individual Worksheds and Group 
Worksheds to the Khadi Artisans every year, on the basis of funds sanctioned by the Ministry 
and the demand received from the KIs through respective State/Divisional Offices. 
  
An evaluation study on the implementation of Workshed Scheme has been conducted 
and the study report reveals that amount for construction of workshed is low in comparison to 
other prevailing schemes. Various State Governments are also providing housing benefits 
under their schemes. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
Workshed scheme was introduced for providing better work ing conditions to 
Khadi artisans and it seems that now the scheme has lost its purpose because of various 
other schemes run by the State Governments. The Committee , therefore, recommends 
that suitable modifications be made to make the Workshed Scheme more attractive vis a 
vis other schemes run by State Governments  and more benefits may be added to the 
scheme to make it popular among the artisans. The financial benefits provided under the 
construction of Workshed may be enhanced for  making the scheme more beneficial and 
attractive.  
 
34 

Recommendation/Observation 
 
48. In a visit of the Committee to Kolkata, Hyderabad and Mumbai in January, 2020, it 
came to the notice that although the CPSEs have made payments to the MSEs but still the 
portal showed pendency against the concerned CPSEs due to lack of updation of information 
on the Portal. The Committee recommends that a proper monitoring mechanism should be put 
in place to check such type of information on the SAMADHAAN portal and da ta about the 
payments made should be regularly updated and errors must be rectified immediately. 
 
(Para 143) 
Action Taken 
 
The updation of portal is being taken up by the respective MSEFCs. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee does not feel satisfied with the reply given by the Ministry.  The 
Committee re-iterates its recommendation that a proper monitoring mechanism be put 
in place to monitor and update the data in the Samadhaan Portal.  This would facilitate 
in mitigating avoidable stress a nd embarrassment to those CPSEs who have cleared 
their pending dues to the MSEs, besides giving a crystal clear picture of the information 
contained in the portal, which was the aim for creating it. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
49. The Committee is very co ncerned about this underutilization of budget repeatedly. 
Also, the BE of Rs. 30.00 crore seems significantly reduced against BE of Rs. 232.00 crore in 
year 2018 -19. To consider ASPIRE, an important and crucial scheme, for innovative 
entrepreneurship in ag ro-industry, the Committee is, however disappointed to note that only 
an amount of Rs. 30 crore has been proposed for 2020 -21. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that more budgetary provisions should be made for such an important scheme. 
Apart from this steps may be taken to restructure the Scheme to make it more attractive for 
potential entrepreneurs with proper assessment and planning to implement the scheme 
successfully and meaningfully. 
(Para 148) 
Action Taken 
 
 As suggested steps to restructure the s cheme shall be initiated based on the third party 
evaluation of the scheme which is to be undertaken during the current year. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 

Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
ASPIRE is one of the major and important Schemes of the Ministry, which 
promotes innovation and entrepreneurship development in rural areas of the country 
for the benefit of potential entrepreneurs.  The Committee, therefore, desires that the 
Report on the third party evaluation of the Scheme may be furnished to the Committee 
for consideration. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
50. The Committee is of the opinion that Ministry needs to improve employability of 
incubates if the schemes are to succeed. The Committ ee is also of the opinion that it would be 
better if ASPIRE is closely linked up with MUDRA, Stand Up and Start Up schemes to provide 
financial assistance to the entrepreneurs. Further, the LBIs should tie up with Self Help 
Groups and women organizations, ITIs and skill development institutions. 
(Para 149) 
 
Action taken 
 
LBIs setup under the scheme are expected to handhold the incubatees/trainees in 
setting up own enterprises. A mechanism will be devised to follow up with the successful 
incubatees and train ees post their training and to connect them with the various schemes of 
financial assistance offered by Government of India/State Governments in order to assist in 
setting up own enterprises and other productive means of employment. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The aim of any training programme is to benefit its trainee in all aspects related 
to the Training.  But it is also a fact that lack of financial assistance becomes a big 
hurdle for an aspiring trainee to set up an enterprise of his own.  The  Committee, 
therefore, recommends that ASPIRE should be connected to various financial assistance 
schemes such as MUDRA Scheme so that incubates can avail financial assistance and 
become successful entrepreneurs.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
51. The Committee recommends that more LBIs/TBIs should be set up by the Ministry to 
overcome the problems of unemployment, poverty, drudgery and migration which are still 
rampant in rural areas of the country.  The Committee also recommends that Ministry of 
MSME shoul d expedite the sanctioning and setting up of the targeted number of LBIs and 
TBIs across the country and also simplify the technical and procedural formalities which are 
hindering the whole process. 
 
(Para 150) 
 
36 
 

 
Action Taken 
 
A review of the scheme will be taken up at the Ministry in consultation with functional 
LBIs and other institutions/Govt. Departments and necessary modifications in the scheme will 
be done to set up the targeted LBIs/TBIs. 
 
In order to make the scheme of setting up of LBI attrac tive for institutions across the 
Country, budgetary provision, for meeting out recurring expenditure, including training fee 
for initial few years (say five years), may be made in the ASPIRE Scheme. Further it is 
informed that NSIC would be interested in s etting up more number of LBIs at appropriate 
locations on case to case basis, in case built up space is provided free of cost by the respective 
State Governments and budgetary provision for meeting out the recurring expenditure for 
initial few years are made available to NSIC under ASPIRE. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
Unemployment is one of the major problems the youth is facing now -a-days and 
the Covid -19 pandemic has worsened the situation to a large extent.  The Committee 
reiterates its earlier r ecommendation that more LBIs/TBIs should be set up by the 
Ministry to overcome the problems of unemployment and migration of workforce from 
the rural areas of the country. More budgetary provisions should be made to set up 
more and more LBIs and TBIs acros s the country along with simplifying the technical 
and procedural formalities so that more rural youth can take benefit of these LBIs/TBIs, 
which can be helpful in solving the problem of unemployment to certain extent in rural 
areas. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
52. The Committee recommends that awareness camps should also be 
organized/undertaken by the Ministry in rural areas to create awareness among rural 
population in general and among potential artisans in particular regarding these LBIs/TBIs 
and other useful schemes implemented by the Ministry. 
(Para 151) 
 
Action Taken 
 
Awareness campaigns are being organsied at different parts of the country to 
encourage SC/ST entrepreneurs to avail the benefits provided under National SC/ST Hub. In 
FY 2019-20, 71 awareness campaigns were organized under National SC/ST Hub. Moreover, 
National SC -ST Hub Offices (NSSHOs) shall be advised to organize more awareness 
campaigns, particularly in rural areas and Aspirational Districts.        
 
Field offices of Ministry viz. KVIC, Coir Board, Technology Centers and Tool Rooms 
under O/o DC (MSME) will be entrusted with the task to organize awareness camps, etc., 
with focus in rural areas.  
 
37 

The various clusters approved and being operationalized under SFURTI, PMEGP units be ing 
set up and other such beneficiaries, artisans, general public will be informed of the role of 
LBIs/TBIs in promoting the growth of rural entrepreneurship and economy, in particular. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Ministry of MSME runs various schemes for benefit of the people.  However, 
due to lack of awareness, the people are not able to take benefit out of the Schemes.  The 
Committee is of the opinion that campaigns should be organized in order to generate 
awareness about the Schemes in the rural area for benefit of the people and their gainful 
employment.  Smart phones may be considered as a medium of generating awareness 
among the youth in rural areas, particularly in respective mother tongue. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
53. The Committee observes that under National SC/ST Hub, the Actual Expenditure has 
always been less than the BE. The Committee is concerned about the under -utilization of 
allocated funds for the marginalized communities. The Committee recommends that special  
efforts need to be made to improve the situation diligently and the Ministry should set up a 
dedicated monitoring cell for this purpose under the supervision of a Monitoring Committee. 
The Committee would also like to know the reasons for continuously pro jecting inflated 
demands and thereafter underutilization of funds every year and why the SC/ST entrepreneurs 
are not able to reap the benefits of the scheme specifically designed for them.   
(Para 165) 
 
Action Taken  
 
Under National SC -ST Hub, a number of initiatives have been introduced for 
providing support to the SC/ST entrepreneurs for capacity building and making them 
competitive. One of the important interventions is Special Credit Linked Capital Subsidy 
(SCLCSS) @ 25% to the SC/ST MSEs. It is aimed to enhance entrepreneurship among SC/ST 
community and also capacity building of existing entrepreneurs so that they may become part 
of the supply chain of CPSEs. It is being implemented by the O/o DC -MSME. Though this 
intervention was introduced in May 2017 , it could become operational only w.e.f December 
2019 onward after the revision of guidelines of CLCSS issued by Office of DC -MSME 
containing the provisions relating to SCLCSS. 
 
The implementation of National SC/ST Hub is being reviewed at various levels from 
time to time. It is expected that the entire funds allocated under National SC/ST Hub in BE 
2020-21 will be utilized. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
National SC/ST Hub is a scheme which was introduced by the Government as a 
welfare measure for the marginalized groups of the society.  
38 
 

But scarcity/underutilization of funds ; lack of awareness among the SC/ST candidates 
about the scheme ; and  technical & procedural difficulties etc.  often act as stumbling 
blocks in the proper implementation of the Scheme.   
 
The Committee , therefore,  recommends that efforts should be made by the 
Ministry/NSIC for creating awareness among SC/ST candidates about the National 
SC/ST Hub scheme, proper budget utilization is ensured and all the technical and 
procedural difficulties should be removed, which are hindering the progress of the 
scheme. The Committee may be apprised of the outcome and progress of the Scheme. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39 
 

CHAPTER-IV 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee desire further 
comments of the Ministry 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
54. The Committee recommends that MSMEs should be allowed to have only one unified 
GST registration which is applicable in all states. With respect to the sharing of Taxes 
between Central and State Governments, it should be done at the back end as the Government 
already has all the information in this regard. 
         (Para 29) 
 
Action Taken 
 
The issue is being examined. This issue has to be taken up with the Department of 
Revenue for placing the same before the GST Council. 
 
Provision of requirement of registration in different states where the MSME is 
located/liable to pay GST has been recommended by the GST Council, which is a 
Constitutional body and comprises of Central G overnment, State Governments and 
Governments of UT with legislature. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
55. The Committee recommends that multiple registrations with multiple government 
agencies for various purposes should be done away with for MSMEs. Inter -Ministries 
coordination should be improved to bring out one registration to carry out all business 
activities including exports, tax and day -to-day business activities to improve ease of doing 
business for MSMEs. 
         (Para 30) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
The recommen dation needs to be examined with inputs from all other Ministries/ 
Departments. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
56. The Committee further recommends that steps should be taken so that the MSEs could 
obtain collateral free loans from designated Banks under the  CLCS-TU Scheme in the same 
lines as given under CGTMSE Scheme to encourage more and more entrepreneurs to avail 
the benefits of the scheme and upgrade their technology for quality products. 
 
(Para 133) 
 
 
40 

 
Action Taken 
 
Ministry of MSME will consult the  Ministry of Finance and Reserve Bank of India to 
explore the possibility in this regard. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
57. During examination of DFG 2020 -21, the Committee was apprised of the fact that 
partial collateral had been introduced under CGTMSE Sc heme and that a portal is likely to 
be developed by April 2020 which would appraise loan proposal upfront, and give a rating. 
This rating would bring down the risk perception level of the lending Bank Branch Manager. 
The Committee recommends that the Minis try may launch the proposed Portal expeditiously 
and also apprise the Committee of the enhancement in the off -take in the Scheme, if any, post 
the launch of the Portal. 
 
(Para 134) 
Action Taken 
 
Such a portal was being developed by SIDBI and it is independ ent of the Credit 
Guarantee Scheme of this Ministry implemented through CGTMSE. Ministry will take up this 
issue with SIDBI. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
58. The Committee also observes that the procurements by the CPSEs from the SC/ST and 
Women entrepreneurs, as mandated under the Public Procurement Policy, are much below 
than the sub -quota of 4% and 3% respectively. Even many of the CPSEs have not organised 
Vendor Development Programmes (VDPs) to sensitize the SC/ST entrepreneurs. The 
Committee recommends that sufficient number of VDPs be organised along with buyer -seller 
meets for the benefit of SC/ST and Women entrepreneurs. 
(Para 144) 
Action Taken 
 
Noted. The Ministry will communicate the observation of the committee to all the 
CPSEs and also to the MSME-Development Institutes under Ministry of MSME, located in 
States. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
59. Since delayed payments to MSEs have been a longstanding issue, the Committee also 
recommends that more MSEFC should be constituted in all the states to r esolve the problem 
of delayed payments expeditiously. Besides, the MSEs should be made aware of the benefits of 
the newly introduced TReDS Platform, wherein bills are paid on a fast track basis. 
(Para 145) 
 
 
41 
 

Action Taken 
 
 The Ministry of MSME has alre ady furnished its suggestions to the Chief Secretary of 
all States/UTs to create MSEFCs at Divisional Level. The States like Maharashtra, Karnataka, 
Telangana, Tamil Nadu, Punjab and Odisha already have more than one MSEFCs in the 
respective States. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
60. The Committee is of the view that the Government Purchase scheme may be amended 
so as to reduce the P erformance Bank Guarantee/security deposit requirement to 10% for 
Micro Enterprises, 20% for Small Enterprises and 30% for Mediu m Enterprises compared to 
the P erformance Bank Guarantee required from non -MSMEs. It is also suggested that 
Medium Industry should also be granted the preferential procurement facility and to pay 25% 
of the Earnest Money Deposit/Bid Bond & tender charges as specified in the tenders. Besides, 
priority sector lending target for micro enterprises from current 7.5% of Adjusted Net Bank 
Credit may be enhanced to at least 12%. 
(Para 146) 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
Noted. An appropriate suggestion would be sent to the Department of Expenditure, 
Ministry of Finance, Government of India, for further necessary action. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
61. LBIs under NSIC serving single window system for new enterprises and has been a 
source of employment. Further, NSIC through its Incubation Centres provides training to the 
prospective entrepreneurs in the manufacturing as well as service sector for skill development 
and employment purposes. The Committee recommends that more Incubation Centres should 
be established in cooperation with State Governments so that training on conventional as well 
as hi -tech trades are imparted to entrepreneurs for their skill development in areas of 
business operation for gainful employment. 
(Para 159) 
Action Taken 
 
In order to make the scheme of se tting up of LBI attractive for institutions across the 
Country, budgetary provision, for meeting out recurring expenditure, including training fee 
for initial few years (say five years), may be made in the ASPIRE Scheme. Further, it is 
informed that NSIC w ould be interested in setting up more number of LBIs at appropriate 
locations on case to case basis, in case built up space is provided free of cost by the respective 
State Governments and budgetary provision for meeting out the recurring expenditure for 
initial few years are made available to NSIC under ASPIRE. 
 
 
42 
 

Recommendation/Observation 
 
62. The Committee observes that NSIC through its Vendor Development Programmes 
sensitize and facilitate MSEs, including SC/ST enterprises, to become qualified vendors to 
public sector enterprises and other Government Departments as per the provision of 25% 
mandatory procurement under Public Procurement Policy. Of this, 4% should be from SC/ST 
MSEs. Also, during its visit to Kolkata, Hyderabad and Mumbai in Janua ry, 2020, the 
Committee found that while the PSUs and Government procurement from MSEs has been 
gradually improving, procurement from SC/ST units is negligible. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that there should be more Vendor Development Programmes org anised to 
popularize Public Procurement Policy among MSEs including SC/ST and Women 
entrepreneurs. 
(Para 167) 
 
Action Taken  
 
National Schedule Caste and Schedule Tribe Hub was launched to provide 
professional support to SC/ST entrepreneurs to fulfill the obligations under the Central 
Government Public Procurement Policy for Micro and Small Enterprises Order 2012, adopt 
applicable business practices and leverage the Stand up India initiatives.   
 
In order to fulfill Public Procurement Policy mandate & to expedite and encourage the 
SC/ST enterprises to be part of public procurement process, NSIC has been organizing 
Vendor Development Programmes (VDPs) for SC/ST entrepreneurs under National SC/ST 
Hub in coordination with CPSEs/Central Ministries and local in dustry associations. These 
VDPs are aimed to provide a common platform for potential vendors from SC -ST MSEs and 
buyer CPSEs where participating MSEs get to know about vendor registration procedures, 
documentation, items being procured and expectation with  respect to the Qualifying 
Requirements. CPSEs get the opportunity to explore new vendors to increase their vendor 
base. More number of such VDPs would be conducted in future. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
63. During 2019-20 (till December, 2019), 4548 unit s have availed testing services from 
these centers. However, the Committee was informed by the representatives of Associations 
during consideration of DFG 2020 -21 that exorbitant rates are charged from MSMEs for 
testing their products for quality certifica tion etc. which is difficult for them to pay as most of 
them face the problem of working capital shortage. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that Testing & Certifications should be made convenient and cheaper for MSMEs. It is 
required that a mechanism/t ie-up should be developed that testing can be done at Indian 
Centres whereas certificates for the same test could be issued from various global testing 
centres, which are acceptable in respective countries/regions. Alternatively, Indian Testing 
Certificates should have global acceptance. Besides, MSMEs should be given subsidies for 
testing facilities in the country. The Committee further recommends that the setting up of Tool 
Rooms and Technology Centres can be explored under the Public -Private Partnership (PPP) 
model. 
(Para 170) 
43 

Action Taken 
 
Information in respect of Hub & Spoke Division on Para 170 of the report mentions 
that: 
 
"The Committee further recommends that the setting up of Tool Rooms and 
Technology Centres can be explored under the Public-Private Partnership (PPP) model." 
 
In this regard it is mentioned that: 
 
(i) In the year 2008 , a new scheme was launched for setting up of mini tool rooms under PPP 
mode. The scheme did not take off and was discontinued. 
(ii) Exploring the PPP model was also approved in the EFC of new scheme for "Setting up of 
20 technology centres and 100 extension centres" at an estimated cost of Rs 6000 crore. A 
team of NITI Aayog experts visited various tool rooms and later on it was deduced that setting 
up of tool rooms (Technology Centers) under PPP model may not be feasible. The reasons can 
be that ROI (return on investment) is not as much as expected by private sector because of the 
non-repetitive work. 
(iii) NITI Aayog concurred to the view that technology centres be set up as government of 
India institutions. 
 
It is to submit that office of DCMSME had recently invited Expression of interest in 
March 2020 from various organizations / Industry Association for submitting proposals to 
establish new Technology Centres in PPP mode. The received proposals are being analysed 
for possible way forward in establishing Technology Centres in PPP mode. 
 
******** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________________________ 
MINUTES 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 

I 
 
First Meeting 
 
The Committee met at 2:30 p.m. on Friday, the 16th October, 2020 in Committee 
Room- ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
 
Dr. K. Keshava Rao -   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
3.     Shri Shwait Malik 
4.    Shri K. C. Ramamurthy 
5.   Dr Amee Yajnik 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
6. Shri Hanuman Beniwal 
7.   Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse 
8.   Dr. S. T. Hasan 
9.     Ms. S. Jothimani 
10.  Shri Ravinder Kushwaha 
11.  Shri Vincent H. Pala 
12. Shri T. R. V. S. Ramesh 
13.   Shrimati Gomati Sai 
14.   Shri Ravindra Shyamnarayan Shukla alias Ravi Kishan 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Jagdish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
2.     Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Secretary 
3. Smt. M. Sasilekha Nair, Director 
4. Smt. Sreeja V., Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Ajin J. R., Under Secretary 
 
Department of Heavy Industry: 
 
1.   Shri. Arun Goel, Secretary 
2.   Smt. Sukriti Likhi, Joint Secretary 
3.   Shri. Amit Varadan, Joint Secretary 
4.  Shri Amit Mehta, Joint Secretary 
 
 
 
46 

BHEL: 
Shri Nalin Shinghal, CMD 
 
HMT: 
Shri S. Girish Kumar, CMD 
 
At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welcomed all the Members to the 
first meeting of the Committee after its reconstitution . As per the agenda, the 
Committee firstly took up the 300 th, 301 st ,302nd  and 303 rd draft Reports for 
consideration and ad option. Draft 300 th, 301 st & 302 nd Action Taken Reports of the 
Committee were prepared based on the replies furnished by the Government on the 
recommendations/ observations contained in the 297 th, 298 th and 299 th Reports of the 
Committee on Demands for Gra nts, 2020 -21 pertaining to the Ministry of MSME, 
Department of Public Enterprises and Department of Heavy Industry respectively. 
Draft 303rd Report was on the subject “Downturn in Automobile Sector - Its Impact & 
Measures for Revival”. After a brief discuss ion, the Committee adopted all the above 
four draft Reports unanimously without any change. As both the Houses of the 
Parliament are not in Session and the recommendations made in the 303 rd Reports 
require immediate attention of the Government, the Committ ee decided to present the 
Report to the Hon’ble Chairman of Rajya Sabha at an early date. 
  
2. *     *     * 
   
3. *     *     * 
   
4. *     *     * 
  
 
5. *     *     * 
  
6. *     *     * 
  
 
7. *     *     * 
   
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
 
9. The Committee adjourned at 4.22 p.m. 
 
______________________________________________________________________________________ 
***Pertains to other matter. 
 
 
47 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________________________ 
ANNEXURES 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
48 

49 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
 
2 (v). A Statement indicating the Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates and Actual for 2018-19, 2019-20, and Demanded and Budget 
Estimate (2020-21) in respect of various Demands, along with the reasons for variations, if any; 
(Rs. in Crore) 
S.N Name of Schemes BE  
2018-19 
RE  
2018-19 
Actual BE  
2019-20 
RE  
2019-20 
Exp.  
(As on 
31.01.20) 
BE  
2020-21 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
AI  SME               
1 Performance Credit Rating Scheme 5.00 8.45 8.07 0.04 0.04 0.00 0.00 
2 Marketing Assistance Scheme 15.00 8.00 3.31 10.03 0.04 0.00 0.04 
3 National Scheduled Caste/ Scheduled Tribe Hub 93.96 78.30 77.57 121.69 80.00 53.77 150.00 
4 International Cooperation Scheme (IC Scheme) 5.00 5.02 4.80 30.00 7.00 4.00 20.00 
5 ATI  30.00 23.44 22.27 30.00 30.00 14.36 30.00 
6 SS&PR Scheme 1.00 0.30 0.28 1.57 1.57 0.00 1.26 
7 Rajiv Gandhi Udyami Mitra Yojana 0.00 0.19 0.19         
AII Secretariat Establishment  20.33 19.33 19.13 20.66 22.66 16.90 22.42 
  SUB-TOTAL (SME) (AI+AII) 170.29 143.03 135.61 213.99 141.31 89.03 223.72 
                  
AIII ARI                
I KVIC               
1 Khadi Grant 415.00 413.12 660.52 308.51 370.51 259.93 383.60 
2 Village Industries (VI)  Grant 110.00 75.00 56.81         
3 Khadi, VI and Coir (S&T) 5.00 2.50 1.68         
4 Solar Charkha Mission 50.00 20.00 2.50 143.50 46.07 46.05 100.00 
5 KRDP (ADB Assistance) 80.03 146.03 146.03 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 
6 Prime Minister's Employment Generation 
Programme (PMEGP) 
1800.64 2118.80 2118.80 2327.10 2464.44 2173.53 2500.00 

50 
 
7 MPDA 340.00 269.10 164.00 103.33 103.33 103.33 0.00 
  B-1 to B-5        TOTAL (KVIC) 2800.67 3044.5
5 
3150.34 2882.45 2984.35 2582.84 2983.6 
8 ISEC for Khadi & Polyvastra 50.00 37.20 30.89         
9 ASPIRE 232.00 224.00 219.34 50.00 10.00 1.36 30.00 
10 MGIRI 10.00 10.00 8.88 12.00 10.00 5.87 11.00 
  COIR BOARD               
11 Coir Vikas Yojana   80.00 75.93 75.93 70.50 73.50 66.19 103.87 
12 Coir Udami Yojana  10.00 10.00 6.00 2.00 2.00 1.96 0.00 
13 Loans & Advances    0.57 0.57 0.57 0.42 0.20 0.00 0.70 
14 B-11 to B-13            TOTAL (Coir Board) 90.57 86.50 82.50 72.92 75.70 68.15 104.57 
  SFURTI  125.00 86.15 86.03 125.00 185.00 64.75 464.85 
15 Khadi Vikas Yojana 0.00 0.00 0.00 396.46 366.46 301.39 370.00 
16 Gramodyog Vikas Yojana 0.00 0.00 0.00 102.92 82.92 67.30 102.92 
     TOTAL - ARI Schemes (AIII) 3308.24 3488.4
0 
3577.98 3641.75 3714.43 3091.65 4066.94 
  Total AI+AII+AIII) 3478.53 3631.4
3 
3713.59 3855.74 3855.74 3180.68 4290.66 
                  
III O/o DC(MSME)               
BI Establishment  O/o DC (MSME) (H. Qtr)  26.04 31.87 31.18 32.87 35.23 29.36 34.43 
BII Technology Upgradation and Quality Certification                
  Credit Linked Capital Subsidy and Technology  
Up-gradation Scheme (CLCS-TUS) 
              
1 Lean Manufacturing Scheme 46.00 13.85 13.86 18.97 18.97 13.82 50.00 
2 Design Clinics Scheme for MSME Sector  28.75 0.01 0.00 11.00 11.00 6.34 50.71 
3 Zero Defect Zero Effect (ZED) 200.00 0.06 0.01 13.29 13.29 10.00 51.75 
4 Support for Entrepreneurial  and Managerial 
Development of MSMEs through Incubators  
17.25 0.76 0.00 22.91 22.91 11.10 50.09 

51 
 
5 Intellectual Property Facilitation Centre (IPFC)  23.00 4.50 1.22 36.02 36.02 5.60 39.35 
6 Digital MSME Scheme 280.50 0.06 0.00 40.00 40.00 19.00 59.29 
7 Credit Linked Capital Subsidy 326.85 973.31 973.16 466.49 549.66 454.16 503.28 
8 Credit Linked Capital Subsidy (Technology 
Upgradation and Quality Certification (TEQUP)) 
80.00 17.75 17.75 96.10 113.01 89.94 0.56 
9 Credit Linked Capital Subsidies (Technology 
Acquisition and Development Fund (TADF)) 
3.65 3.26 1.09 1.00 0.72 0.00 0.32 
  Total (BII) 1006.00 1013.5
6 
1007.09 705.78 805.58 609.96 805.35 
BIII PMEGP and other Credit Support Programme               
1 Credit Support Programme                     700.00 715.00 744.95 597.00 555.16 555.15 100.00 
2 Interest Subvention Scheme for Incremental Credit to 
MSMEs 
0.00 275.00 275.00 350.00 350.00 350.00 200.00 
   Total BIII 700.00 990.00 1019.95 947.00 905.16 905.15 300.00 
BIV Marketing Promotion Scheme               
  Procurement and Marketing Support (PMS) (formerly 
MDA) 
65.00 53.95 8.56 87.60 87.60 14.54 83.59 
  Total BIV 65.00 53.95 8.56 87.60 87.60 14.54 83.59 
BV Promotional Services Institutions and Programme                
1 Training/ Capacity Building Programme Scheme for 
DC(MSME) Officers/Officials (Formerly  "DC 
(MSME) Officers’ Training Programme") 
5.00 8.00 7.54 10.00 5.92 5.07 9.40 
2 SENET Project 7.00 7.00 6.54 8.25 7.00 4.58 3.15 
3 DC(MSME) Library 0.25 0.25 0.20 0.50 0.35 0.03 0.35 
4 Entrepreneurship and Skill Development Programme 
(ESDP) 
49.30 15.13 7.76 136.97 136.97 30.90 136.96 
5 Tread (Women MSEs) 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.02 0.00 0.02 

52 
 
6 MSME-DIs (Establishment) + TC/TS  138.15 144.16 134.02 169.98 163.97 112.09 163.92 
  Development of Enterprises Eco System               
7 Development of Rural and Urban Micro Enterprises 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.55 0.05 0.00 0.05 
8 Support to Service Sector Enterprises 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.55 0.05 0.00 0.05 
9 Support to Women Enterprises 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.55 0.05 0.00 0.05 
  Scheme on Knowledge Services for MSMEs               
10 Knowledge Services 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.05 0.05 0.00 0.05 
11 Impact Assessment of Ongoing Schemes 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.05 0.05 0.00 0.05 
12 Studies and Consultancies services 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.05 0.05 0.00 0.05 
13 Strengthening Social Enterprises for growth and 
development of MSMEs 
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.05 0.05 0.00 0.05 
14 Viability Gap Funding 0.30 0.30 0.00 0.30 0.30 0.00 0.18 
15 Mega Events for National, State and District Level for 
MSMEs Awareness  
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.04 0.04 0.00 0.04 
16 Information, Education and Communication  0.00 0.00 0.00 10.00 6.30 0.23 6.55 
17 MSME Fund 100.01 20.00 0.00 100.00 0.01 0.00 50.00 
18 Fund of Funds 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 100.00 0.00 200.00 
  Total BV 300.01 194.84 156.07 437.91 421.23 152.98 570.92 
BVI INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT 
PROGRAMME  (INFRASTRUCTURE 
DEVELOPMENT) 
              
  Infrastructure Development and Capacity Building                
1 Cluster Development Programme 279.00 173.40 172.81 227.90 227.90 199.21 390.69 
2 Tool Rooms & Tech. Institutions 100.00 110.00 116.66 118.10 169.28 104.04 310.00 
3 Establishment of New Technology Centres/ 
Extensions Centres Hub & Spoke  
0.00 0.00 0.00 125.12 135.12 99.30 200.00 

53 
 
4 Infrastructure Support to MSME-TCs/TSs/ DIs 
/Workshops 
8.00 7.35 6.36 14.64 14.64 1.12 26.01 
5 Infrastructure Development and Capacity Building  - 
Promotion of MSME in NER & Sikkim 
13.00 25.00 12.79 58.93 58.93 31.29 75.00 
6 Technology Centre Systems Programme (TCSP) EAP 550.00 299.95 257.43 350.00 250.00 195.55 400.00 
  Total BVI  950.00 615.70 566.05 894.69 855.87 630.51 1401.7 
BVII CAPITAL OUTLAY ON PUBLIC WORKS               
1 Construction of Office Accommodation  12.00 12.60 6.66 26.60 26.00 0.22 58.30 
BVIII Research and Evaluation Studies               
  Database, Research, Evaluation and Other Office 
Support Services 
              
1 MSME Data Base and other Support Service  3.29 3.22 1.87 6.05 1.83 1.53 6.05 
2 National Award and National Board for MSME 5.27 1.06 0.64 9.14 9.14 0.00 9.14 
3 Advertising & Publicity 6.47 4.38 1.46 7.91 7.91 5.29 12.06 
  Total BVIII 15.03 8.66 3.97 23.10 18.88 6.82 27.25 
  Total O/o DC (MSME) (BI to BVIII) 3074.08 2921.1
8 
2799.53 3155.55 3155.55 2349.54 3281.54 
  Total of SME and ARI Division (AI+AII+AIII) 3478.53 3631.4
3 
3713.59 3855.74 3855.74 3180.68 4290.66 
  Grand Total M/o MSME 6552.61 6552.6
1 
6513.12 7011.29 7011.29 5530.22 7572.20 
 

54 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
 
 
 

55 
 
 
 
 
 

56 
 
 
 
 
 
 

57 
 
 

58 
 
 
 