 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
November, 2016/ Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY -SEVENTH REPORT 
ON 
 
 ACTION TAKEN ON THE 273 rd  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
 ON  
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2016-17) 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
 (DEPARTMENT OF HEAVY INDUSTRY) 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22 nd  November, 2016) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  22 nd  November, 2016 ) 
 REPORT NO.  
252 
 
 REPORT NO.  
252 
 
 REPORT NO.  
277 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
November, 2016/ Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
ON 
 
 ACTION TAKEN ON THE 273 rd  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
 ON  
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2016-17) 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES  
(DEPARTMENT OF HEAVY INDUSTRY) 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22 nd  November, 2016) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  22 nd  November, 2016 ) 

 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ……………………………………………….. (i) 
 
2. INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………………………..  (ii) 
 
3. REPORT ………………………………………………………………………………….. ..1 
 
(i)  CHAPTER – I 
 Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the              
Ministry ………………………………………………………………………… ……. 
2 
 
(ii)  CHAPTER–II 
  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
  view of the Government's replies……………………………………………………3-4 
 
(iii)  CHAPTER–III 
   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has either not                        
accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its                
replies…………………………………………………… …………………………5-10 
 
(iv)  CHAPTER – IV 
  Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry 
  have not been  received……………………………………………………………..11-30 
 
4. * Minutes……………………………………………………………………………..     ……   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
* to be appended at printing stage. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Date of Constitution 1 st  September, 2016)  
 
RAJYA SABHA  
     
1.   Shri Sharad Yadav  _  Chairman  
2. Shri Narendra Budania  
3. Shri Ram Narain Dudi 
4. Shri Vivek Gupta  
5. Shri Shwait Malik   
6. Shri K. K. Ragesh 
7. Shri Vivek K. Tankha  
8. Shri Pramod Tiwari    
9.   Shri T. G. Venkatesh  
10. Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav 
 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
11. Smt. Ranjanben Bhatt 
12. Shri Birendra Kumar Choudhary 
13. Shri S. P. Muddahanume Gowda    
14. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque 
15. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
16. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
17. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
18. Dr. (Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
19. Shri. Tapas Paul 
20. Shri Mutthamsetti Srinivasa Rao 
21. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
22. Shri Konda Vishweshwar Reddy 
23. Shri Raj Kumar Saini 
24. Shri B. Senguttuvan  
25. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
26. Shri Y. V. Subbareddy 
27. Shri Rameshwar Teli 
28. Smt. Savitri Thakur 
29. Smt. Dev Varma (Moon Moon Sen) 
30. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
31. Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena 
 
Secretariat  
 
1.      Shri A.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
2.      Smt. Sasilekha Nair, Director 
3.      Shri J.K. Mallick, Joint Director 
4.      Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Deputy Director 
5.      Smt. Renu Sreekanth, Committee Officer 
6.      Shri Divender Singh Bisht, Committee Officer 
 (i) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamen tary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred 
and Seventy-Seventh Report on Action Taken Notes fu rnished by the Department of 
Heavy Industry (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Pu blic Enterprises) on the 
recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred and Seventy- Third Report 
on the Demands For Grants (2016-17) pertaining to Department of Heavy Industry. 
 
2.  I, thank the Department of Heavy Industry (Mini stry of Heavy Industries and 
Public Enterprises) for furnishing the Action Taken  Notes on the recommendations 
contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred and Seventy- Third Report. 
 
3.  The Committee in its meeting held on the 24 
th  October, 2016 considered and 
adopted the report. 
 
 
 
 
 
Sharad Yadav 
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
New Delhi 
October, 2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
1 
 
 
 
 
REPORT 
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with  the Action Taken by the 
Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises  (Department of Heavy Industry) on 
the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Tw o hundred and Seventy- Third 
Report on the Demands For Grants (2016-17) pertaini ng to Department of Heavy 
Industry. 
 
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Heavy Industries 
and Public Enterprises (Department of Heavy Industr y) in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as follows: 
 
Chapter I -  The recommendations/observations, which have bee n accepted by the 
Ministry. 
 
 The Committee is pleased to observe that the Minis try has accepted its 
recommendations as mentioned in the Chapter – I of the Report. 
 
Chapter -II -  The recommendations/observations which the Commi ttee does not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government's replies. 
 
 In respect of these recommendations the Committee is convinced with the logic 
and explanations advanced by the Ministry and there fore do not want to pursue them for 
the present. 
 
Chapter -III -  The recommendations/observations in respect of w hich the Committee has 
not accepted replies of the Ministry and has asked the Ministry to review its reply. 
 
 The Committee expresses its concern over the non-i mplementation of 
recommendations contained in Chapter – III and desi res that the Ministry should furnish 
logical explanations thereof. 
 
Chapter -IV - The recommendations/observations in respect of wh ich final replies of the 
Ministry have not been received. 
 
 In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either 
furnished the interim replies or couched its langua ge in vague terms therefore; the 
Committee desires that the Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in respects of 
recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention 
and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee. 
 
3. The details of the ATR are being discussed in the succeeding pages. 
 
 
 
 

 
2 
 
 
 CHAPTER – I 
 
The Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee notes that the Demands for Grants (2 016-17) for DHI has 
followed a new pattern of depiction of allocation o f funds when compared to the last 
year. On a quick reference of Demands No. 44, the n ew pattern may appear difficult to 
comprehend due to the absence of comparative details upfront. But, in reply to a query on 
this, the Department has preferred to an explanatio n of bunching of smaller schemes 
under larger umbrella schemes for the purpose of im parting more flexibility in the 
execution of schemes and to guard against spending the resources too thin. The 
Committee finds reason in the rational provided by DHI and appreciates the new 
initiative of the MoF.  It is expected that the new  system of Umbrella Schemes will result 
in timely implementation of schemes by reallocating  funds between sub schemes as per 
operational expediencies which should in turn curb underutilization of funds as well. 
 
  Para No 10 
Action Taken Replies                                                                                                                               
 Observations of the Committee have been noted . 
 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee notes that during 2015-16 money allo cated as BE to NATRiP, 
Scheme of R&D Project Development of Advanced Ultra  Super- Critical (Adv-USC) 
Technology for Thermal Power Plants and Heavy Engin eering Corporation Limited 
(HEC) had to be completely withdrawn at RE stage. A s informed by the Department, 
such surrender of funds had to be effected as the r equisite approval from the final 
competent authority was not received in time to sus tain the funds for the year. The 
Committee feels that amounts which have not been ap proved by the final competent 
authority should not be reflected in full as BE.  I nstead, reflection of a token allocation 
will give a much realistic picture to the Demands a s funds can be sought at the RE stage 
when the final approval materializes during the course of time.                  
Para No.21 
 
Action Taken Replies  
 
 The observations of the Committee have been noted.  However, the provisions for 
NATRIP and R&D Project –Ultra Super Critical were k ept as the approval of both the 
schemes/projects by the competent authority were an ticipated in the beginning of 
financial year 2015-16, which however, could not be materialized.      
                                                                         

 
3 
 
 
 
CHAPTER–II 
The Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government's replies 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 Regarding the allocation of funds to schemes under  Development of Automobile 
Industry, the Committee observes that funds for the  same purpose has been allocated 
under two different Heads, with one Head witnessing  only a miniscule allocation and the 
other reflecting majority of the funds. The Departm ent’s explanation for differential 
allocation is that token allocations in two Heads h ave been made to cater to the 
possibility of funds being allocated to NATRiP in the form of Grants–in-Aid as well as in 
the form of Loan, even though the loan possibility is low. The Committee would have 
found it more appropriate if the Government would h ave at least by now decided the 
manner in which funds to NATRiP are to be provided,  i.e. either as Loan or as Grants. 
Such uncertainties can affect the lucidity of the D emand and the transparency with which 
allocations are made. 
Para No 14 
                                                                                                                             
Action Taken Replies                                                                                                                               
 Under the Umbrella Scheme namely Development of Au tomobile Industry, in 
SBE- 2016-17 Funds have been allocated under the Ma jor Head 2852 (Revenue Section) 
for Grant in aid, while a token amount has been all ocated under Major Head 6858 
(Capital Section) for Granting loan to NATRIP. The provision has been made under both 
the Major Heads (Revenue Section and Capital Sectio n) because by the time of finalizing 
SBE 2016-17, the Revised Cost Estimate-II (RCE-II) could not be approved by the 
Cabinet. The draft Cabinet Note contained the mode of allocation of funds to NATRIP in 
the form of both loan as well as Grant in aid. Ther efore, while allocating the Funds to 
NATRIP for 2016-17, the mode of payment as well as amount could not be ascertained as 
the fund allocation was to be finalized December, 2 015/ January, 2016. Now, RCE-II for 
NATRIP has been approved by the Cabinet in its meet ing dated 29.07.2016. The RCE-II 
contains provision for loan as well as Grant in aid  and funds may be released as per the 
decision of the Cabinet. The bifurcations of loan a nd Grant in aid to NATRIP as Cabinet 
decision is as follows:-   
 
Particulars 2016-17 2017-18 
Grant-in-Aid 873.88 0.00 
Loan 300.00 
 
480.35 
 
 In view of the above, there is now no uncertainty towards allocation of Fund to 
NATRIP. 

 
4 
 
 
 Keeping token provision under the Major Head 6858 ( loan) is due to technical 
reason as funds are released through online portal – PFMS, which requires at least token 
provision for releasing the funds if required under any accounting head.  
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee takes note that under the Head, Gran ts to CPSEs, funds have been 
reflected under two different Heads – on Depiction Head and on Operational Head. On 
this duality of funds, it has been informed that fu nds under the Depiction Head will be 
transferred to the Operational head for executing expenditure.  This arrangement has been 
done under the directives of Government of India (GoI). Further, it is encouraging to take 
into cognizance that DHI is one of the few Departme nts of the GoI where all fund 
transfers are being made on-line through PFMS and u nder this system funds can be 
transferred only to those Heads which atleast have some token allocation. The Committee 
observes that the PFMS will hasten up the release o f funds and eliminate avoidable 
delays and mismanagement. 
Para No.18 
 
Action Taken Replies  
 
 The observations of the Committee have been noted.  Online portal-Public 
Financial Management System (PFMS) has been launche d by the Government of India 
for making the payment in a more transparent manner  as well as reducing the delay for 
receiving payment by the stake holders. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER–III 
The Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted 
the replies of the Ministry and has asked the Ministry to review its replies 
 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee notes with concern that none of the CPSEs under DHI have been 
found to be operating in a healthy manner.  The sta tus of CPSEs has been classified as 
weak, incipient sick or sick.  In the case of DHI, even the prestigious Maharatna BHEL 
has been termed as a ‘Weak’ CPSE. The Committee con siders this as an extremely 
alarming situation which calls for decisive interve ntion by DHI, the administrative 
department.  As per the New Guidelines of DPE, the primary responsibility for ensuring 
profitable functioning of CPSEs lies with the respe ctive administrative ministries.  In this 
regard, the Committee is aware that the Government has come up with a lot of new 
initiatives to reshape the avenues for revival /res tructure of CPSEs.  This includes the 
winding up of Board for Industrial and Financial Re construction (BRPSE), constitution 
of National Council of Law Tribunal (NCLT) and othe r similar measures.  The subject of 
revival /restructuring of CPSEs have repeatedly att racted the attention of the Committee 
and every time the Department comes up with some ge neralized reasons and solutions to 
the entire problem.  However, the Committee has fou nd that the lack of foresight and 
timely action can be termed as one of the main caus es for the poor plight of the CPSEs. 
In this scenario, the Committee would like to stron gly recommend that DHI desperately 
needs some workable roadmap on the performance of e ach of its 31 CPSEs regardless of 
their current classification.  It is also recommend ed that some appropriate mechanism for 
fixing responsibility with the management of the CP SEs for the distress of CPSE 
concerned has to be drawn up. 
Para No.54 
Action Taken Replies  
 
 The Department of Heavy Industry has started the p rocess of undertaking a fresh 
appraisal of the status of each CPSE with a view to  assessing the prospects of revival on 
case to case basis. As a part of this exercise, whi le profit making CPSEs require further 
strengthening, the loss making CPSEs having the pot ential of being turned around need 
to be revived.  Those CPSEs which have been chronic ally sick and are not found 
revivable on sustainable basis are to be disinveste d or closed after payment of due 
compensation to employees.  
 

 
6 
 
 As regards categorization of  BHEL as a “weak” CPS Es alongwith BHEL EML 
(Subsidiary of BHEL) the following background and factual position is placed before the 
Hon’ble Committee:- 
           
 (i) The reasons for decline in performance of CPSE s vary from enterprise to 
enterprise. The causes can be broadly classified in to two categories viz. (a) Internal 
causes, and (b) External causes. While ‘Internal ca uses’ are those which can be attributed 
to the management, the ‘External causes’ are those which are attributed to factors outside 
the purview / control of the management. The pace i s based on both internal and external 
factors. Some common issues associated with the dec line in performance and losses of 
CPSEs include old and obsolete plant and machinery,  outdated technology, low capacity 
utilization, excess manpower, weak marketing strate gies, stiff competition, dependence 
on Government orders, heavy interest burden, high i nput cost, resource crunch, change in 
Government policy, general economic conditions etc. As such, performance improvement 
of CPSEs with suitable interventions by the Governm ent is a continuous process, 
including facilitated by the Government Nominees an d Independent Directors on the 
Board of such CPSEs. Enterprise specific measures f or their turn around are taken and 
inter-alia include business restructuring, such as, formation of joint ventures, merger with 
another PSE, modernization and improved marketing s trategies, etc. Moreover, financial 
and non-financial targets for the CPSEs are fixed k eeping in view the prevailing business 
scenario through the mechanism of Memorandum of Und erstanding (MoU), which is a 
negotiated agreement signed between the Administrat ive Department/Ministry of the 
Government and the Management of the CPSEs. Achieve ment of targets is inter-alia 
dependent on sectoral business environment. Moreover, the performance of CPSEs under 
the administrative control of DHI is reviewed by the Department. 
 
 (ii) As regards BHEL being categorised as a “Weak”  CPSE as per the DPE 
Guidelines for “Streamlining the mechanism for revi val and restructuring of sick / 
incipient sick and weak Central Public Sector Enter prises: General principles and 
mechanism of restructuring” dated 29-10-2015, the y ard-sticks/criteria’s formulated do 
not factor the operating business environment and t he severe competitive intensity faced 
by the Company from both domestic and international  players. Moreover, the DPE 
criteria on the matter are made applicable for all CPSEs irrespective of their type of 
operations/ category/ sector. BHEL businesses being  a part of Capital Goods Industry 
have close linkages with growth of infrastructure i n the Country and is driven by 
investments in the economy. These investments are c yclic in nature and is currently 
subdued. This has been mainly due to slowdown in th e Indian power sector as well as 
quietude industrial activity influenced by a combin ation of factors prevailing since last 3 
- 4 years, such as factors associated with fuel lin kages/ environment clearances/ land and 
water availability, funding constraints from lendin g institutions, existing orders being put 
on hold etc., which places additional strain on cap acity utilization. Consequently, there is 
decrease in fresh executable orders maturing in the  market due to which there has been a 

 
7 
 
reduction in level of operations and hence decline in the financial performance of BHEL 
in the recent past. Further, the Company has to incur certain fixed costs also eg. personnel 
payments, expenditure towards running of establishm ent etc. which do not decrease with 
decline in turnover. 
 
 (iii) The fundamental, inherent and core capabilit ies of BHEL have not decreased 
over the years. The Company has adequate manufactur ing and managerial prowess and 
this aspect is not a constraint. The current status  of BHEL is only a transient period. 
Certain new policy initiatives have been taken by t he Government such as launching of 
UDAY (Ujjwal DISCOM Assurance Yojana scheme on 20-1 1-2015), holistic 
amendments in the Power Tariff Policy of 2006, work  for preparation of State specific 
Action Plans for providing 24X7 Power For All (PFA)  in partnership with respective 
States etc., which are expected to facilitate inves tment climate in the domestic power 
sector. Further, with the intervention of DHI and a s a follow up action to decisions taken 
during a meeting in DHI, the Central Electricity Au thority (CEA) has issued new 
domestic procurement norm vide its advisory dated 1 9 th  May 2016 ref. No. 
CEA/PSETD/205/218-296 and clarification dated 30 th  June 2016 ref. No. 
CEA/PSETD/205/378-459 inter-alia according to which , procurement of equipment or 
material for power transmission & distribution / sw itchyard for domestically funded 
power projects [of MoP or CPSUs or projects funded by PFC and REC or by State power 
Utilities] should be made from domestic / local man ufacturers through domestic 
competitive bidding. With these initiatives, the pe rformance of domestic electrical 
equipment manufacturing industry including BHEL is expected to improve in the 
medium term.  
 
 (iv) As BHEL is a “Maharatna” CPSE w.e.f. 01-02-20 13 (earlier it was a 
“Navratna” CPSE) having certain degree of autonomy as per guidelines issued by the 
DPE, the DHI issues advisories/ suggestions which m ay be policy related or specific 
issue related as and when required depending on the  nature of the case and exigency. The 
Government has also appointed 02 Directors [Governm ent Nominees] on the Board of 
BHEL who actively contribute in overseeing the Comp any’s strategic direction, 
reviewing and monitoring corporate performance, ens uring regulatory compliance and 
Corporate Governance, and safeguarding the interest s of the shareholders. Further, the 
performance of BHEL is reviewed by DHI on a regular  basis. DHI also assists the 
Company in the achievement of growth plan through p olicy initiatives, suitable inter-
ministerial interventions, and taking up specific issues from time to time.  
 
 05 Independent Directors have also been appointed on the Board of BHEL. 
Independent Directors besides the Government Nominee Directors play an important role 
in deliberations at the Board and Committee meeting s and bring to the Company varied, 
rich and independent external perspective. 
 

 
8 
 
 (v) BHEL EML has been categorized as ‘Incipient’ C PSE as per the latest 
guidelines of DPE. Board of BHEL EML is continuousl y monitoring the financial status 
of the company. In order to improve the performance  of the company, a Five Year 
Rolling Plan along with a Revival Plan for the company was placed in the Board meeting, 
held on 10.05.2015. Board deliberated on existing a s well as proposed products for 
diversification of the company and approved the Rev ival Plan along with Road Map and 
the same is being implemented by the company. 
 
 (vi)  Recently, NITI Aayog recommended the followi ng in respect of BHEL 
EML: 
 “The Committee is of the view that the company is a non-priority for the 
government and it recommends that the Government of  India’s stake be handed over to 
the State Government. In case the State Government refuses, a strategic sale of the 
Government of India’s stake could be considered giv en that the company still has a 
positive net worth and is incipient sick, not sick”. 
 
 (vii) BHEL has been asked to send a formal proposa l with the approval of its 
Board, on the recommendation of NITI Aayog. 
 
Further Recommendations 
 
 
 The recommendation of the Committee had pointed to the need of a 
workable roadmap to be prepared by DHI for dealing with the performance of 
CPSEs under it, most of which are not operating in a healthy manner.  The reply of 
the Government does not address this and instead fu rnishes only a general policy 
statement mentioning that the CPSEs are to be dealt  based on their individual 
performance.  
 
 The Committee has noted that in Budget speech the NITI Aayog was given 
the responsibility to identify the CPSEs whose asse ts could be leveraged for better 
investment returns. Accordingly, the NITI Aayog has  identified several such PSEs 
under DHI.  However, as per the DPE guidelines on “ Streamling the mechanism for 
revival/restructuring of sick/incipient sick/weak CPSEs” the administrative ministry 
has to identify such PSUs based on the criteria set  by DPE. The Committee has 
observed difference between NITI Aayog and the DHI in respect of prospects of its 
CPSEs which may further complicate the future of PSUs.  
 
 Further, regarding the portion of the reply where classification of BHEL as a 
‘weak’ CPSE, the Committee has been given the impre ssion that the flaws in the 
extant guidelines of Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) has a considerable role 
to play in BHEL getting classified as ‘weak’.  Acco rdingly, the Committee wants to 
be informed if DHI has taken up the issue with DPE and if so, the outcome of the 
said interaction.  If the matter has not been taken  up with DPE, the reasons for the 
same shall also be submitted to the Committee.   
 
 The Committee also wants to be updated of the cour se of action proposed by 
DHI on the recommendations of NITI Aayog in respect of BHEL, EML.   

 
9 
 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 Regarding NPM, the Committee is aghast the way in which revival/restructuring 
of CPSEs can be dealt with in this country.  It too k long 25 years from 1990 to 2015 for 
NPM to finally get its revival plan approved from B IFR.  Expectedly, the outlay made in 
2013 of Rs. 489 crore will now grossly fall short o f the current costing of Rs. 861 crore. 
The Committee wants to be apprised regarding the sp ecific reasons which lead to this 
delay of 25 years. Despite such grim background, th e management of NPM nurturers the 
hope of producing some quantity of paper by Decembe r, 2016 and start generating some 
funds. The Committee sincerely hopes that this beli eve bears fruits through the earnest 
efforts of DHI & HPC and observes that the approval for the revised cost shall be pursued 
vigorously as NPM is important to NER in terms of employment and other developments.  
 Para No.76 
 
Action Taken Replies  
 
 The reference to NPM appears to be incorrect. This  matter pertains to NPPC. As 
regards delay of 25 years in implementation of revi val scheme, it is stated that the first 
revival scheme was sanctioned in 1994. However, the production could not be carried out 
due to lack of captive power generation at NPPC and  as such the company was again 
referred to BIFR in 1998. BIFR had recommended wind ing up of the company in 2002 
but (against the winding up orders of BIFR) the Gov t.of Nagaland and NPPC filed an 
appeal before AAIFR which set aside the impugned order and remanded back to BIFR on 
20/04/2006. Meanwhile, GoI has released an amount o f Rs.100 crore in the year 2013 for 
implementation of part revival of NPPC and the revival is in progress.  
 
Further Recommendations  
 
The recommendation refers to the affairs of NPM its elf, as submitted to the 
Committee in the form of oral evidence by the Chair man, NPM. Accordingly, the 
Committee reiterates that the information regarding  the general performance of 
NPM over the years, the steps taken for revival/mod ernization of the mill alongwith 
the requirement and allocation of funds for the purpose should be submitted.  
 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee notes that in the Demands for Grants , the IEBR figures of CPSEs 
portray a very unrealistic picture.  In most instan ces, the BE IEBR is greatly reduced or 
even comes to naught at the RE stage. The explanati on for such reductions provided by 
the Government/ CPSEs range from deferred investmen ts, decrease in profit, incurring of 
loss by the companies, the companies being or becom ing sick, reductions in tune with 
business requirements, delay in securing loans, etc .  The Committee feels that though 
each variation in IEBR figures are backed up with r easons by Government /CPSEs, it 
remains a fact that the overall picture drawn while  going through the Demands as such is 

 
10 
 
confusing and borders on misleading information as a considerable portion of the amount 
is disappearing at RE stage. This is also because I EBR of a company comprises of 
resources generated by Company concerned through pr ofit, loans, equity and other funds 
to be secured by the company, etc and in most cases  these figures are assumptive. 
Accordingly, the Committee observes that the Demand  should contain an explanation to 
IEBR figures of each of the CPSEs indicating the nature of the funds projected as IEBR. 
 
Para No.97 
Action Taken Replies  
 
 The Budget allocation to various schemes/CPSEs und er Department of Heavy 
(Demand No-44) Industry alongwith the figures of IE BR in respect of CPSEs are 
reflected in “B” part of Statement of Budget Estima te (SBE), Expenditure Volume-II. 
The proforma of Statement of Budget Estimate (SBE),  Expenditure Volume-II, is as 
prescribed by Ministry of Finance, which does not h ave the provision for explanatory 
notes on IEBR of CPSEs. This Statement of Budget Es timate (SBE), Expenditure 
Volume-II is a document reflecting in brief Budget allocations of a financial year 
alongwith Budget Estimate and Revised Estimate of t he previous financial year, giving a 
glimpses of major thrust of GoI on various schemes, policies, projects etc. 
 
Further Recommendations  
 
 The Committee does not find the reply of the Govern ment to be convincing 
enough as IEBR figures seem to camouflage the real picture of the state of affairs in 
the CPSEs. If there’s no provision to provide expla natory notes in the Statement of 
Budget Estimate (SBE), Expenditure Volume-II, the D epartment while submitting 
the background documents to the Committee for exami nation should provide an 
explanatory note. This should be complied with from  the ensuing General Budget 
onwards. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry 
have not been  received              
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 However, the Committee also wonders whether it is not ironical that while on the 
one hand the Government is moving towards integrati on of small schemes under larger 
umbrella schemes for the benefit of simplification of procedure and facilitating financial 
flexibility, on the other hand it is complicating m atters by adding more Heads for 
allocations and expenditure of funds under a single umbrella scheme. 
Para No.19 
 
Action Taken Replies  
 
 As per the instructions of the Government of India , all Ministries/Departments, 
unless specifically exempted from doing, so, are to make a lump sum provision of 10% of 
their central plan allocation for projects/schemes in North Eastern Region and Sikkim. 
 
 Lumpsum provision for NER may be kept under three Major Heads-2552 (Grant 
in aid/Subsidy etc.), 4552 (Investment) and 6552 (L oan) depending on the nature of 
allocation. Due to provision of separate Heads for NER (for depiction purpose), the total 
allocation for NER can be known at a glance and if there is a saving/surrender of funds 
under NER, it is transferred to a Non-lapsable pool . In case, provision for NER is 
reflected directly under the functional Head, it wo uld not be practically feasible to know 
the lumpsum allocation for NER. 
  
Further Recommendations  
 
 The observation of the Committee was regarding the  rationale of keeping one     
Depiction Head and one Operational Head for the sam e allocation. However, it is 
not clear from the reply how the allocation for NER  alone has been cited as an 

 
12 
 
explanation by the Department for the same.  The Co mmittee, accordingly, wants to 
have a more cogent reply with regard to its recomme ndation with explanation on 
other allocations as well.  
 
 Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee takes into account the status of com pletion of various components 
of NATRiP as submitted by the Department. It also n otes the explanation given by the 
Department on how it is to utilize the plan loan of  Rs. 300 crore allocated to the project 
during 2015-16 over a period of 3 years ending in 2 017-18. In this regard, the Committee 
recognizes that this spread of expenditure warrants  yet another extension of NATRiP, 
beyond currently extended period upto December, 201 7.  The Committee express 
concerned over the fact that a project which has al ready seen three extensions is looking 
for further extension.  In the view of the Committe e, this unending continuation of the 
flagship project of DHI, which was originally inten ded to be time bound, is a pointer to 
mismanagement along with lack of foresight and acco rdingly, recommends that a 
performance audit of NATRiP with specific focus on lapses in project management shall 
be conducted.  
Para No.28 
Action Taken Replies  
 
 The recommendations of Hon’ble Committee for Perfo rmance Audit of NATRIP 
with specific focus on lapses in project management  have been noted and hence a 
Committee has been constituted for the same in compliance thereof. 
 
Further Recommendations 
 
 
 The progress made towards the performance audit of  NATRIP shall be 
submitted to the Committee and eventually, the obse rvation of the said audit along 
with the remedial steps proposed. What is the purpo se of constituting a committee 
instead of requesting the CAG to conduct Performance Audit?  
 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee considers FAME – India as one of the  most forward looking 
schemes of the Government in the face of heightened  environmental concerns and 
depleting fossil fuel reserves. Though the scheme i s picking up, the Committee, while 
examining the submissions of the Department, finds that in respect to R&D and creation 
of Charging Infrastructure there has already been c omplaints of shortage of funds 
extending up to Rs. 25.63 crore and Rs. 87.00 crore , respectively. The Committee would 
want the Department to submit the reasons for the s aid shortages and the curative action 
taken, if any. It is imperative that such teething problems are to be eliminated at early 
stages itself to preclude them from developing into systematic deficiencies. 
Para No.32 
 

 
13 
 
Action Taken Replies  
 
 In the Financial Year 2015-16, there was allocatio n of Rs. 75 Crore only for the 
FAME India Scheme. However, the allocation for the current year i.e. Financial Year 
2016-17 has been increased to Rs.122.90 Crore for this scheme by the Government. 
 
 The Department of Heavy Industry, however, will se ek additional allocation for 
this scheme, as per requirement, at Revised Estimat e Stage of the Budget Allocation to 
avoid any systematic deficiency as observed by the Hon’ble Committee. 
 
Further Recommendations 
 
 
 
The reply of the Department fails to furnish the re asons behind the  shortage 
of funds in respect to R&D and creation of charging  Infrastructure. Instead of this, 
it has just stated that the Department has sought e xtra allocations under the scheme 
to avoid any systematic deficiency as observed by t he Committee. Therefore, the 
Committee expects a more comprehensive and direct reply for its recommendation.  
 
 Since FAME is an initiative that can take the coun try to the future of clean 
energy driven vehicles, the Committee accords prime  importance to it. Accordingly, 
the Committee wants to know the details of the acti on taken /proposed to impart 
procedural manoeuvrability to the scheme and for ma king adequate funds available 
for it.  
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 Further, during it examination of the Demands of D HI 2016-17, the Committee 
felt that there was a need for more impetus on R&D,  specifically related to the 
development of original technology in the field of electrical vehicles, probably in the 
development of electrical motors, which will have direct application in the manufacturing 
of indigenous electrical vehicles. The Committee al so feel that DHI should draw a road 
map with the help of industry experts in the filed of electrical vehicles with a definite 
time frame so that the objectives set up by the DHI  are achieved to justify the money 
spent and also to reduce the emission of carbon in the environment. 
Para No.33 
Action Taken Replies  
 
 The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted for compliance. 
 
Further Recommendations 
 
 
 The Department should get back to the Committee wi th details of the 
measures taken towards the implementation of its recommendation. 
 
Recommendation/ observation 

 
14 
 
 The Committee is pleased to observe that the schem e launched in November, 
2014, has made reasonable progress.  However, the N CGP exhorts a growth of the India 
Capital Goods Sector from Rs. 2, 30,000 crore in 20 15 to Rs. 7, 50,000 crore by 2025.  
According to the Committee, India in 68 years could  muster only a Rs. 2, 30,000 crore 
Capital Goods Sector. For an ambitious aim of tripl ing the size of the sector in a decade, 
there is a need for a clear cut road map and commen surate funds. Further, in this venture, 
equal participation of the Private Industry along w ith the Government will be a foregone 
conclusion. In view of this, the Committee recommen ds that in tune with the objectives 
of NCGP, required managerial and financial support ought to be provided to the sector 
through the Scheme for Enhancement of Competitivene ss in the Indian Capital Goods 
Sector and the components of the scheme should be k ept organic and continuously 
updated as per policy priorities and industrial needs and developments.  
Para No.40  
Action Taken Replies  
 
 The Capital Goods Policy, inter alia, recommends i ncreasing the budgetary 
allocation and scope of the   Scheme for Enhancemen t of competitiveness in the Indian 
Capital Goods Sector currently under implementation  in DHI. The components proposed 
to be included in the Scheme include technology, sk ill, capacity building, green 
engineering and energy, advanced manufacturing and cluster development. At present the 
Scheme is under implementation and the budget alloc ation for the Scheme has been 
modest so far to increase scope of the Scheme. Acti on has already been initiated in the 
Department for implementation of the CG Policy. Fur ther an Inter-Ministerial Standing 
Committee has been constituted for the development of Capital Goods Industry and 
resolution of issues impacting the growth of Indust ry. Another High Level Committee on 
Technology Development of various Capital Goods Sub  Sectors is under constitution. 
Any modifications of the scope of the Capital Goods  Scheme will take into account the 
observations/ recommendations of the above Committe e to make the CG Scheme aligned 
with the Policy objectives. Advice of the DRPSC on the Scheme will also be kept in view 
while deliberating on increasing scope of operation and financial provision for the Capital 
Goods Scheme.   
 
Further Recommendations  
 
 
Considering that the reply of the Government suggests action being proposed 
on many fronts, the Committee wants to be informed of the details of the action 
taken/ being taken for the implementation of the Ca pital Goods Policy and the 
specific roles to be played by the Inter-Ministeria l Standing Committee as well as 
the High Level Committee on Technology Development of various Capital Goods 
Sub Sectors, in bringing on the facilitative measur es for the Capital Goods Sector in 
the Country. What are the tangible deliverables und er various strands of the NCCP 
and what is the status of achievements against such deliverables? 
 
 

 
15 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee finds it extremely disappointing tha t the scheme originally 
conceived in 2014-15 is yet to be operationalized, for want of requisite approvals. It is 
understood that the latest impediment in the approv al of the scheme has been 
disagreement on the funding pattern. It is also und erstood that there was an initial 
agreement on the financial contribution of the part icipants and the disagreement emerged 
after the direction from the PMO to upscale their i ndividual contributions. However, the 
participating entities BHEL, NTPC, IGCAR have found it not possible to further increase 
their contribution to the scheme. In this scenario,  the Committee observes that the 
finalization of the funding patterns has to be take n up on a top priority by DHI.  
Advanced Ultra Super Critical Technology for Therma l Power Plants is a technology of 
future as it provides cleaner and more efficient av enues of thermal power. Hence, the 
development of the same getting delayed because of indecision of funding pattern is 
disappointing. The Committee is of the opinion that  the onus of taking initiative to find a 
solution to this imbroglio lies with DHI and recomm ends that the matter should be taken 
up at all reconciliatory fora including the Cabinet , if needed.  The Committee wants DHI 
to come back to it with the progress made in this regard. 
Para No.46 
 
Action Taken Replies  
 
 
Various meetings were held for sorting out the issu e of funding issue of the 
project. A meeting was held on 10.03.2016 on the fu nding issue of the project under the 
Chairmanship of Principal Scientific Adviser to the  Government of India. Based on the 
decisions taken in this meeting and comments receiv ed from various stakeholders viz. 
Ministry of Power, Department of Science& Technolog y (DST), IGCAR, NTPC and 
BHEL, a Note for Cabinet Committee on Economic Affa irs was sent to Cabinet 
Secretariat for obtaining approval of CCEA. CCEA ha s now approved the proposal on 
10.08.2016. Further action is being taken with fina ncial contribution by various 
stakeholders for the R&D project (Phase I) following:- 
 
DST- Rs. 100 crore 
IGCAR- Rs.234 crore 
BHEL- Rs. 270 crore 
NTPC- Rs. 50 crore 
 
 Balance amount of Rs. 900 crore will be provided b y DHI as grant. 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 In this matter, the Committee is unanimous in its opinion and is in full support of 
the view of the Department regarding disposal of as sets of sick/loss incurring CPSEs that 

 
16 
 
the immovable assets, i.e., land and/or buildings o f such CPSEs would be transferred 
only to Central/State Government or Central /State Government entities/PSUs. 
Accordingly, the Committee strongly recommends that  the Government should retain the 
above stand as this would avoid sell out of landed property of CPSEs to private persons. 
The Committee feels that land/building of such CPSEs can be utilised to start ITI or other 
technical institutions under the scheme “Skill India”. 
Para No.56 
Action Taken Replies  
 
 Noted for compliance. However, as the disposal of Immovable Assets i.e. land 
and/or buildings of sick/loss incurring CPSEs would  be transferred only to Central/State 
Government or Central /State Government entities/PS Us, the decision on utilisation of 
these immovable assets would be taken as per the requirement of these agencies. 
 
Further Recommendations 
 
 
 The Committee notes that the recommendation has be en earmarked for 
compliance by the Department.  Meanwhile, the Commi ttee is given to understand 
that recently the NITI Aayog has identified some CP SEs for strategic sale and some 
for closure/winding up and wants to know, if any CP SE under the administrative 
control of DHI is part of the said group and if yes, the details thereof. Whether there 
have been differences of opinion between NITI AAyog and the Ministry in respect of 
CPSEs. 
 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee notes that the performance of BHEL h as slackened over the last 
two to three years owing to a slew of reasons given  by the Company viz. retarded 
demand, delayed environmental clearances, stranded orders, etc. In the view of the 
Committee, the reasons put forward by BHEL portrays  an impression that these have 
been ‘beyond the control’ of the company. Even whil e considering that BHEL might 
have taken steps to check the slide in its performa nce, the fact remains that their 
performance seems to have dipped despite these effo rts. Accordingly, the Committee 
finds it difficult to isolate the reasons for the l acklustre performance of BHEL to those 
quoted by the company alone. Therefore, the Committ ee’s conclusion is that there has 
been a delay on the part of BHEL in responding to t he challenges thrown to them by the 
market and other factors.  Though, the Committee do es not completely discount the 
reasons put forth by BHEL, it is the Committee’s fi rm belief that BHEL’s current 
situation is the outcome of their poor performance in the area of risk analysis and 
business foresight, both of which would have allowe d the Company to anticipate rough 
business weather and for effective and commensurate course correction.   
                          Para No.60 
Recommendation/ observation 

 
17 
 
 In the area of diversification of business also th e Committee finds that the efforts 
taken by BHEL does not seem to be of the quality of  the top most companies in India to 
which BHEL belongs. Efficient and timely diversific ation could have acted as a buffer to 
absorb the shocks in the core business. Since this has not happened it will not be out of 
place to presume that the diversification initiativ es of BHEL do not bring in the desired 
results. And for DHI, the Committee opines that DHI  should have pressed BHEL firmly 
for implementation of timely corrective measures. U nder these circumstances, the 
Committee cannot but recommend strict measures to e nsure accountability for lapses in 
business decisions to the extent possible.  Accordi ngly, it is further recommended that a 
forensic audit for BHEL shall be ordered with a vie w to identify instances of deficiencies 
in business decisions and take suitable measures so that those are not repeated. 
                        Para No.61 
 
Action Taken Replies  
 
 BHEL has been very proactive towards meeting the em erging requirements in its 
areas of businesses and has the requisite professio nal managerial capability. The 
Company has a sound mechanism to continuously scan the environment and taking 
appropriate actions. In this regard, BHEL is driven  by its strategic consideration – 
whether navigating new markets, adapting, localizin g or fortifying. Proposals are taken 
up internally for implementation only after due diligence. Besides, the company has taken 
various capacity and capability building initiative s so as to be in readiness to meet 
challenges of the market. Diversification efforts o f the Company inter-alia have linkage 
with user segment and their requirements. However, the Company is going through a 
turbulent period due to sluggish progress and long- drawn process for finalisation of 
requirements by the customer(s) / user Ministries. This has affected the progress of 
diversification efforts which has been protracted b y externalities and beyond the control 
of the Company. Moreover, the actual realisation of  diversification efforts depends on 
availability of suitable technology, readiness of O EMs to partner with BHEL, acceptance 
of in-house developed products by customer till suc h products are supplied & 
commissioned and operate for time specified in Qual ification Requirements of the 
tenders, area specific progress by the respective c ustomers, floating of enquiries/tenders 
& their finalisation etc. Some of the examples include: 
 
a) Solar : 
i)  BHEL has been in the field of solar photo-volta ics (PV) since early 1980s. 
A manufacturing Unit of BHEL in Bengaluru viz. Elec tronics Division, 
inter-alia has established manufacturing capacity of 26 MW per annum for 
solar PV modules and 8 MW per annum for solar cells . The Government 
has recently revised the National Solar Mission target from 20,000 MW by 
2022 to 1,00,000 MW by 2022 in June 2015. Further, the Government of 
India in its submission to the United Nations Frame  Work convention on 
climate change on Intended Nationally Determined Co ntribution (INDC) 

 
18 
 
has stated that India will achieve 40% cumulative E lectric power capacity 
from non-fossil fuel based energy resources by 2030 . This is expected to 
increase the installations of solar PV systems. Also, the solar PV market is 
seeing requirement of larger size of units (eg. 50/ 65/125 MW). BHEL has 
geared itself to take up EPC of large size solar PV  projects to address the 
recent market trend. Further, the Company is in the  process of expanding 
manufacturing capacity of (i) solar photo-voltaic (PV) cells from 8 MW to 
105 MW, and (ii) solar PV modules from 26 MW to 226  MW, at its 
existing facilities in Bengaluru during 2016-17. Th is expansion in SPV 
manufacturing capacity is being taken up only after  due diligence by the 
Company inter-alia keeping in view the business potential. 
 
ii)  Furthermore, BHEL had signed a Memorandum of U nderstanding (MoU) 
with M/s Abengoa, Spain in January 2011 for jointly  targeting and 
implementation of Concentrating Solar Power (CSP) p rojects in India 
through Engineering, Procurement and Construction ( EPC) contracts 
against customer enquiries/orders. In this context,  Solar Energy 
Corporation of India (SECI) had conceived two demon stration projects of 
50 MW capacity each to ascertain technology type (v iz. parabolic trough 
or power tower) suiting Indian conditions, but they  have not been 
announced yet. Moreover, latest MNRE plan of 100 GW by 2022 does not 
contain any project based on CSP technology. As suc h, BHEL has the 
requisite capability to manufacture Steam Turbine, Heat Exchanger etc. 
besides offering electricals (switchyard etc.) required for CSP plants. 
 
b) Water business: 
BHEL offers turnkey solutions from concept to commi ssioning for various feed 
water characteristics ranging from pre-treatment to  tertiary treatment, including 
pretreatment - sedimentation, filtration, RO based sea water desalination plant, 
UF-RO-EDI based DM Plant, Effluent Treatment Plant,  Membrane based 
Sewage Treatment Plants (STP), Zero Liquid Discharg e (ZLD) for industries, 
and complete plant water system for power plant(s).  Further, BHEL and GE 
India Industrial Private Limited (GEIIPL) have a Ma nufacturing Associate 
Agreement (MAA) to jointly engineer and supply wate r treatment solutions for 
the Indian market. This initiative is intended for use in addressing water 
business opportunities eg. Namami Gange and other u pcoming river cleaning 
programmes. However, such market requirements are still in the nascent stage. 
 
c) Defence : 
i) The tenders in defence segment take a long time to reach to the level of 
ordering due to the time required for technical eva luation of tenders, No 
Cost No Commitment (NCNC) trials to establish perfo rmance etc. BHEL 

 
19 
 
has however, shortened the delivery cycle of the pr oducts in its scope and 
is also participating as the Indian Agency to indig enize the emerging 
requirements of various weapon systems by entering into suitable 
technical tie-ups with Global majors wherever required. 
 
ii) BHEL got itself nominated as the production agency for major gun 
systems for Indian Navy - 127mm MCG naval guns in J an.’2012 and 30 
mm NSG in Aug.’2012 but MoD is yet to finalise the technology partner.  
 
iii) BHEL has also leveraged its expertise in Industrial  GT manufacture for 
getting nominated as the indigenization agency for marine GT. BHEL has 
submitted its offers to various weapon systems to I ndian Navy, and also 
has taken steps to develop and manufacture strategi c equipment required 
for various platforms of Indian Navy. Defence procu rement policy has 
been finalised only during March 2016. 
 
iv) BHEL has entered into MoU with M/s Midhani and Hind ustan Shipyard 
Limited in Dec.’2014 for making submarines for Indi an Navy. But the 
requirement from MoD has been slow to firm up and p roject is still under 
technical evaluation.  
 
d) Transportation: 
i) Indian Railways’ projected growth in the passenger and freight traffic 
segment as envisaged in its Vision 2020 document bu t it did not take 
place. Therefore, the demand growth for equipment a s well as propulsion 
systems too did not take place which in turn affect ed the business of 
BHEL.  
 
ii) Track expansion & electrification which was envisag ed to commence 
from 2012-13 onwards was sluggish. Electrification has only gathered 
pace from the last financial year.  
 
iii) PPP Projects for Dedicated Freight Corridor such as  setting up of factory 
for High Horse Power Electric & Diesel Electric Loc omotives at 
Madhepura & Marhowra were envisaged to come into op eration by 2014-
15 originally. The said projects got finalized only  by November 2015. As 
per tender documents, the factory operations are sc heduled to commence 
in a time span of 3 years from the date of finaliza tion of contract. Tender 
for Kancharapara coach factory is yet to take off.  
 
iv) Railways have technologically started shifting towa rds energy efficient 
technologies. In keeping with this technological sh ift, BHEL too 

 
20 
 
developed energy efficient technologies for Electri c Locomotives, Diesel 
Electric Locomotives, Air Conditioned EMU’s etc. Su itable technological 
tie-ups have been entered into with technology deve lopers. BHEL has 
proactively tied up with Global majors for these an d catering to the 
demand of high horse power Locomotives and metro sy stems. BHEL is in 
talks with global OEMs to enter into strategic arra ngements to cater to the 
growing demand of high speed Rail travel too.  
e) Industry: 
i)  BHEL has manufactured, tested and supplied new generation AC-AC 
VFD 2000 HP rig in association with a foreign techn ology partner. During 
the period 2012-15, it was anticipated that domesti c oil companies would 
be coming out with their requirement for R&M and ne w Oil rigs. 
However, low crude prices has put pressure on the d omestic oil majors 
leading to deferment of procurement of equipment su ch as oil rigs by 
them. In this regard, BHEL had given budgetary quot ation for 2000 HP 
drilling rigs in December 2014 against ONGC request  letter, but floating 
of an enquiry by ONGC has been delayed (status as in mid-June 2016). 
 
ii)  BHEL had pursued for getting business from two  major fertilizer projects 
(RCF, Thal & Indogulf), however, due to late notifi cation of amendment 
to Fertilizer policy, these projects were deferred.  Further, two IOCL 
projects at Haldia and Baroda were anticipated, whi ch also were deferred 
by the customer.  
 
iii)  With increased availability of grid power thr ough open access at cheaper 
rate vis-à-vis captive power generation, the Indian  refineries are exploring 
option for getting power from the grid to reduce th eir operating cost. This 
has resulted in diminishing demand for Captive Powe r Plants. As such, 
BPCL has cancelled a captive power plant tender for  their Mumbai 
refinery in January 2016 citing this reason. Furthe r, BORL Bina, IOCL 
Vadodra & IOCL Haldia are contemplating grid tie-up from MPPGENCO, 
GSECL & WBSEDCL respectively for power requirement for their 
planned expansion. 
 
f) Transmission: 
i) In the area of Transmission Products the concerned units’ manufacturing 
capacities have always been optimally loaded. In th e high growth 765 kV 
Transformers and Reactors segment, BHEL has acquire d the technology 
and have even indigenously engineered, supplied and  commissioned 765 
kV Transformers and Reactors for private sector the rmal and transmission 
projects. However, major demand in 765 kV Transform ers and Reactors 

 
21 
 
comes from Powergrid, where due to insistence of 2 years successful 
operation as part of qualifying requirements, BHEL is unable to qualify.  
 
ii) BHEL has secured orders in Power Distribution syste m strengthening 
works for supply of 33 kV GIS panels by forging con sortiums. The area 
has good business prospects and such credentials wi ll go a long way in 
furthering BHEL’s prospects.  
 
iii) Further BHEL has indigenously developed 400 KV GIS in India for which 
one order has been received from NHPC.  
 
iv) The key developments for products/systems in Transm ission segment is 
being summarized below:  
 
a. 1200 kV: Successfully developed 1200 kV Transformer  and 1200 
kV CVT and commissioned at Bina.  
b. 765kV Transformer and 765kV Shunt Reactor manufactu red and 
commissioned. 
c. 145kV GIS Manufactured and supplied.  
d. BHEL has remained the only Indian company having su ccessfully 
developed and commissioned 400 kV class Phase Shift ing 
Transformer (PST) for TSGENCO.  
e. BHEL has remained successful in enhancing market sh are 
significantly in 765 kV substation segment during past 2-3 years.  
f. BHEL has taken steps for diversification in Transmi ssion areas 
including Energy Storage system (ESS), Flexible AC Transmission 
systems (FACTS), Smart Grid and EHV GIS. 
 
 
g) Nuclear: 
Nuclear power forms the integral part of Government ’s strategy for clean and 
green energy. The Government’s effort to bring clar ity in Civil Liability for 
Nuclear Damages Act, 2010 and Civil Liability for N uclear Damages Rules, 
2011, apart from making available the necessary ins urance product to cover the 
associated risks, is expected to bring growth of nuclear power in near future. 
 
To harness emerging opportunities in Nuclear power,  Company is working 
towards increasing its offering in Nuclear Plant wi th focus on indigenization and 
entry into core-nuclear area. With the signing of t he MoU for development of 
secondary cycle system for 300 MW Advanced Heavy Wa ter Reactor (AHWR) 
with BARC, BHEL has taken the lead to usher in the nation’s third stage of 
Nuclear Power Plan. 

 
22 
 
 
 Insofar as the Committee observation that BHEL’s c urrent situation is the 
outcome of their poor performance in the area of risk analysis and business foresight, it is 
submitted that in pursuance with Clause 49(IV)(C) o f the Listing Agreement and Clause 
7.3 of the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) G uidelines on Corporate Governance 
for CPSEs, BHEL has in place a Risk Management Char ter & Policy (RMCP) which was 
approved by the Board of Directors on 14 
th  November, 2011. Further, a Board Level Risk 
Management Committee (BLRMC) was constituted in Nov ember 2014 with assigned 
responsibility of reviewing, monitoring, guiding & approving risk policy and Risk 
Management System/Plan. Besides this, the Company h as a Risk Management Steering 
Committee (RMSC) in place, having Executive Directo rs/ Functional Heads from 
Corporate Functions and Business Sectors as members . The RMSC is responsible for 
adopting and getting implemented the RM framework a cross the organization. Further, 
Risk Management Committees (RMCs) have been formed at the Business Sectors/ 
Regions/ Plants/ Corporate Functions level, in the RM Organization structure comprising 
key decision makers within the respective areas. Th e RMC is responsible for adopting 
and implementing the RM framework at the respective  Units/ Regions and Plants. The 
top risks faced and corresponding strategies undert aken for their mitigation by the 
Company are reported in the Annual Report. It is su bmitted that risk management is 
intrinsically addressed in the business operations of the Company. Further, the Company 
has been taking steps to cater to the emerging requ irements as enumerated in various 
examples above based on its business foresight, and  there has been no lacuna in this 
regard. 
 
 BHEL is subject to audit by Statutory Auditors and  CAG audit under section 139 
of the Companies Act, 2013. In this regard, all the  Units of BHEL are being audited by 
the C&AG regularly throughout the year. From 2011-1 2 till 2015-16, 22 Audit paras 
were Printed, their replies reviewed by C&AG on reg ular basis and 16 Printed paras of 
them have got settled till date (mid-June 2016). As  such, DHI also undertakes follow up 
action in respect of applicable Audit paras contained in the reports of the C&AG. Further, 
the office of C&AG has recently initiated steps for  Performance Audit on “Operational 
Performance of BHEL”. 
 
 The performance of the Company has been weak on th e back of slowdown in the 
investment in the economy. However, BHEL is well po sitioned to take the benefits of the 
cyclical upturn. Apart from this, the company’s con stant endeavour to come up with 
innovative products, lower costs and greater thrust  in further diversifying / expansion of 
its business in solar, transportation (i.e. railway s) and power transmission space is likely 
to yield benefit over the medium to longer term. Al so, with hurdles on coal block 
auctions/mining, environmental clearances for proje cts getting eased, the order flow 
prospects for the company are starting to look up. Department of Heavy Industry (DHI) 
as the Administrative Ministry of BHEL undertakes r eview meetings with BHEL on a 

 
23 
 
regular basis and through suitable interventions provides required support in taking up the 
issues with other Government Agencies / Departments / Ministries / customers etc. 
 
Further Recommendations  
 
 The Committee is cognisant of aspects regarding pr otracted delays in 
clearing the project that has eventually affected t he performance of BHEL. The 
Committee would like to know if Government nominees  Directors have pursued the 
issues pertaining clearance with concerned Ministri es/State Governments. Also, 
impact of Government’s recent policy initiatives in improving the financial health of 
State utilities on BHEL’s performance.  
 
             The Committee notes that BHEL as part of diversification had signed the 
MoU with M/s Abengoa, Spain  regarding Concentrating Solar Power (CSP) 
projects in India.  However, the latest MNRE Plan o f 100 GW by 2022 excludes the 
CSP technology. As such what happens to the MoU? Wh ether the Nominee 
Government Directors and the Ministry have taken up the issue the MNRE?  
                                                                                                                                   
 BHEL may consider its competitors, may consider of  entering into 
agreement for the utilization of Offsets of defence  procurements from foreign 
vendors.  
 
 The Company should take into account the perils of  costly diversification 
into sectors like petroleum refining and exploratio n which are facing volatility such 
drawbacks may drain the Company of its resources.  
 
 It is further noted that most of the diversificatio n efforts of the Company, 
which have been detailed in the reply, are affected  by sluggish industry conditions 
and other customer related reasons. But, the reply does not mention any 
diversification efforts aimed at tapping the export  markets to countervail the 
sluggish domestic market. The Committee wants to ha ve the response of the 
Department in this regard also.  
 
 The Committee takes note that recommendations/obser vation contained in 
CAG Reports 26 of 2013 on BHEL have not been includ ed in the Annual Report of 
the Ministry. Also, the Committee may be intimated about the findings of the 
Performance Audit on “Operational Performance of BHEL” by C&AG. 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee is aware that HEC had once set an ex ample how a sick company 
can revive and turn around to generate profits agai n with efficient managerial approach 
and Government support. Therefore, the Committee in  its reports on DFG of DHI 2013-
14 and 2015-16 had recommended the Modernization of  HEC, so that the Company 
could sustain the gains made through the revival pa ckage. In its 2015-16 report the 
Committee even suggested that DHI should consider e nhancing the budgetary assistance 
of Rs. 500 crores, appropriately.             
Para No.68 

 
24 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 It is evident from HEC’s submission before the Com mittee that the modernization 
of HEC is getting stalled due to shortage of funds.  The Committee has in the past 
repeatedly asked the Government to help and hasten HEC’s plan for modernization, but it 
seemed to have brought in little results.  Accordin gly, the Committee again strongly 
recommends DHI to provide all requisite support to HEC in their search for funds and 
consider providing proposed guarantee for bank loan  or enhancement of budgetary 
supports beyond Rs. 500 crores. It is the firm opin ion of the Committee that, the 
management will be equally responsible to help them selves to make available the 
required funds for its modernization and utilize the same efficiently.  
Para No.69 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 However, the worrisome factor for the Committee is  the lethargic approach of the 
parties involved which is the typical cause for del ay in respect of revival of CPSEs.  The 
Committee apprehends that this factor may creep int o the case of HEC as well.  
Therefore, the Committee warns both the administrat ive ministry and HEC from falling 
prey to this cliché situation.  
Para No.70 
Recommendation/ observation 
 As the Committee reads, the only silver lining in the cloud will be the MoU, HEC 
has signed with Russian Government Company for tech nology transfer in the areas of 
manufacturing clean steel technologies and heavy ca sting/forgings for different clientele. 
It is indeed good news that because of this move it ems under ‘Make in India’ initiative 
could be manufactured at HEC. 
Para No.71 
Action Taken Replies  
 
 HEC has submitted a revised proposal for funding o f the modernisation Plan of 
HEC in consultation with SBI Caps, involving outlay  of Rs.956.48 Cr to be funded 
through monetisation of land through sale/transfer of land to Government of Jharkhand / 
Government agencies, and financial assistance from the Government.   
 
 The revised proposal received from HEC is under co nsideration of the 
Department. 
 
Further Recommendations 
 
 
 While replying the Government has failed to mentio n the date of the receipt 
of the revised proposal for funding of the Moderniz ation Plan of HEC and has 
stated monetisation of land  as a source of fund which has been an avenue under 

 
25 
 
consideration for quite some time now. Further, the  reply does not address the 
issues leading to delays in modernisation of HEC an d steps being contemplated to 
avoid further delay in this endeavour. 
 
 As the administrative Department of HEC, DHI has t o make clear to the 
Committee their approach regarding provision of fin ancial assistance to HEC, 
considering that the Company has already once displayed their ability to turn things 
around for the better.  
 
 The Committee may also be informed if NITI Aayog h as given any 
recommendation regarding HEC. Give details thereon and the views of Department.  
 
   
Recommendation/ observation 
 As far as CPM is concerned, the Committee notes th at the Ministry of DoNER 
has given a sanction of Rs.20 crore for laying of a  railway line and for conversion of 
metre-gauge to broad-gauge for six kilometres, whic h would help CPM to being a 
profitable unit of HPC. Also, that DHI enhanced BE 2015-16 of Rs 50.00 crore to Rs 
83.50 crore for meeting the additional requirement of CPM as Grant-in-aid General for 
NER as transport subsidy as per CCEA approval dated  28.02.2014. But the presentation 
also suggests that the Company has requested the Go vernment to give a working capital 
support for Rs.400 crore, which is under consideration.    
Para No.77                                                                                                      
Action Taken Replies  
 
 A proposal for providing working capital support t o HPC of Rs.723 crore is under 
active consideration of DHI. 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 Accordingly, the Committee is pleased to observe t hat different Ministries of the 
Government are coming together for reviving a sick unit back to its capacity. At the same 
time, it hopes that DHI could get timely working ca pital support that HPC require, with 
the apprehension that unexpected delay, as in the c ase of NPM, may lead to dampening 
of all the good efforts made so far. 
         Para No.78 
Action Taken Replies  
 
 A proposal for providing working capital support t o HPC of Rs.723 crore is under 
active consideration of DHI. 
 
Further Recommendations  
 
 The Committee wants to be updated of progress made  in this regard and the 
time lines stipulated, if any, in providing support  to HPC. Whether NITI Aayog has 

 
26 
 
given any recommendation regarding HPC, if yes, giv e details and the views of the 
Department thereon. 
 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee note that though a revival package a mounting to Rs. 489 crore 
was sanctioned to NPPC in 2013, the approval of BIF R was obtained only by the end of 
January, 2015. The Committee observes that it is th is sought of delay in the final 
clearance of revival/restructuring package of sick PSUs that defeat the very purpose of its 
revival. Such delays lead to cost escalation result ing in revised costs which in turn again 
requires approval of competent authority and the pa inful vicious cycle of delays is set 
forth. Under such circumstance, the Committee since rely hopes that the new 
revival/restructuring mechanism being put in place by the Government will address such 
teething problems of the previous system.   
            Para No.82     
Action Taken Replies  
 
 The delay has occurred in BIFR, therefore no comme nts could be offered. 
However, it is stated that NPPC has already started  its revival scheme by way of 
tendering for all the 14 major packages completed. Work order of 7 major packages 
issued and work of 5 major packages was started but  the activities are in standstill from 
August 2015 due non-availability of project fund.  
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 Further, the Committee also notes that during 2013 -14, Rs. 100 crore was released 
for RMDP project work to NPPC. However, this could not be utilized completely by the 
Company.  Accordingly, during 2014-15 the BE Rs. 25 crore for that year was withdrawn 
at RE stage.  The same story was repeated during 20 15-16, wherein the BE of Rs. 54 
crore was reduced to zero at RE due to absence of U tilization Certificate in respect of the 
funds released in the penultimate year i.e. 2013-14.  
Para No.83 
 
Action Taken Replies  
 
 With the funds made available to NPPC, it is state d that NPPC has already started 
its revival scheme by way of tendering for all the 14 major packages completed. Work 
order of 7 major packages issued and work of 5 majo r packages was started but the 
activities are in standstill from August 2015 due n on-availability of project fund. Since 
NPPC could not submit the Utilization Certificate a nd in the absence of BIFR approval 
further funds could not be released.  
 
Recommendation/ observation 

 
27 
 
 The Committee while taking into account the undue delay on the part of the 
Government/ BIFR, is equally disappointed that NPPC  could not utilize the funds 
allocated in 2013-14 timely and also could not prod uce the Utilization Certificate for the 
same which curtailed allocation of funds thereafter . Here, the Committee observes that 
the funds for revival of CPSEs are provided by the Government after a long fought 
approval process.  In this individual case, after a  long drawn process of approval and 
sanctioning of fund, the management of NPPC has failed squarely to make best use of the 
funds.  As per the new guidelines of DPE for reviva l/restructuring of CPSEs, the 
administrative ministry has the primary responsibil ity regarding the health of its CPSEs. 
Accordingly, it is recommended that DHI should take  measures to properly guide the 
management of NPPC in the implementation of the rev ival plan and see to that they steer 
clear of such lapses in the times ahead. 
Para No.84 
Action Taken Replies  
 In addition to the facts mentioned above in point no.23. It is also stated that NPPC 
has now submitted a profitability statement with ad ditional Rs.372 crore of Revised Cost 
Estimate. 
 
Further Recommendations 
 
 
 
The Committee takes note of the replies of the Gove rnment with regard to 
the revival/restructuring of NPPC. Foremost, the De partment states that the long 
drawn delay in the implementation of the revival of  NPPC has been largely due to 
the delay caused by BIFR, the approval having been received only in January, 2015. 
However, the Committee finds that the delay has con tinued to plague NPPC even 
after that. The amount of Rs 100 crore released for  the purpose of revival of NPPC 
could not be utilised completely and non-production  of utilization certificates 
precluded further allocation of funds. However, the  Department has failed to 
mention why the company has not been able to produce Utilisation Certificate. Since 
non –submission of Utilisation Certificate is the o nly valid reason stated to the 
Committee for this situation, it is felt that NPPC is solely responsible for the stalling 
of revival activities since August, 2015.  
 
 Further, the Department in their reply has made a one line statement that a 
profitability statement has been submitted by NPPC with a Revised Cost Estimate. 
The Committee finds such one liners without any exp lanation on such important 
issues as most unacceptable and would like to remin d the Department that any 
submission made before a Parliamentary Committee sh ould be cogent and well 
explained. Accordingly, the Committee strongly reco mmends that the Government, 
atleast at this stage, should adopt a serious appro ach to the revival/restructuring of 
NPPC and submit a comprehensive reply to its recomm endations and further 
observations of the Committee. 
 

 
28 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee notes that HNL has taken efficient a nd practical steps aimed at 
revival of the Company. These proactive steps are e xpected to bring down the production 
cost of newsprint and provide HNL a comparative adv antage in the market.  The 
Committee observes that the steps adopted by Govern ment of Kerala are highly 
supportive of the cause of HNL and the management o f HNL would do well to make 
efficient use of it.  Further, it is recommended th at alongwith cost cutting measures HNL 
should also revisit its marketing strategies to be able to fully translate the benefits brought 
by the expected cost advantage to tangible financial gains for the company.  
Para No.87 
Action Taken Replies  
 
 HNL has been advised accordingly. 
 
Further Recommendations 
 
 
 The Committee notes that DHI has advised HNL regard ing the 
recommendation of the Committee. However, the Commi ttee also wants to be 
updated about the specific measures adopted by HNL in this regard. Whether NITI 
Aayog has given any recommendation on HNL and the v iews of the Ministry 
thereon?  
 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 As informed by DHI the Company is expected to turn  around after a three-year 
streak of losses.  In this regard, it is expected t hat DHI will monitor and guide HNL step 
by step towards the turn around and provide all nec essary support as expected from an 
administrative ministry. The Committee further takes into cognizance the hardships faced 
by HNL due to customs and excise duty liabilities. HNL claims that restoration of 10 % 
customs duty on imported prints would help the Comp any immensely and they would be 
in a position to substitute imported material. In v iew of this, the Committee recommends 
that DHI should proactively take up the duty ration alizations requested by HNL with the 
appropriate agencies. 
        Para No.88 
Action Taken Replies  
 
 This would be considered separately. 
 
 
Further Recommendations 
 
 
 The reply of the Government does not specify wheth er rationalisation of 
customs duty as requested by HNL has been taken up by the Department 

 
29 
 
appropriately.  The Committee wants to have a more complete reply regarding the 
steps taken/proposed to be taken in this direction since this aspect, as per the facts 
submitted to the Committee, can have a bearing on t he sustenance of the 
turnaround expected to be achieved by HNL.   
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 As per the facts placed before the Committee it is  noted that the RMDP of NEPA 
is progressing reasonably well. The total Budgetary  support of Rs. 157 crore approved to 
the Company and as per DHI, an amount of Rs. 109.09  crore is purported to be utilized 
by March, 2016 in the form of 3 instalments during the years, 2014-15. However, it is 
also noted that NEPA has to secure a bank loan of R s. 128 crore to complete the funds 
required for RMDP.  The Committee is made to unders tand that request for Bank 
guarantee has been pending with MoF since September , 2015.  The Committee feels that 
it is high time a decision is taken on the request,  as the same is already badly delayed. It 
is therefore, recommended that the execution of RMD P shall be expedited and all further 
delays are prevented. DHI shall come back to the Committee on the progress made on the 
issue and efforts taken to pursue the MoF for a dec ision on the above request. The 
Committee also wants DHI to consider continuing the  working capital support to NEPA 
Ltd as the company is so close to standing on its o wn feet and might lose its way if 
support is withdrawn at this stage. As already reco mmended in other similar cases, it will 
not be out of place to mention that DHI should also  ensure the responsibility of the 
management of NEPA in the timely execution of RMDP and also in the follow up with 
the MoF. 
           Para No.95                 
Action Taken Replies  
 As regards RMDP of Nepa, it is likely to be comple ted by March 2017. DHI is 
closely monitoring the project to ensure timely completion of the project. 
 
Further Recommendations 
 
 
 The Committee considers the reply of the Government  regarding NEPA to 
be half-baked with only the aspect regarding expedi ting the RMDP being touched 
upon. Action taken regarding the Bank Guarantee for  securing bank loan and 
Working Capital support to NEPA have not been repli ed to by the Department. The 
Committee expresses its displeasure regarding the s eemingly careless attitude of the 
Department towards its recommendations and wants to  have a proper reply 
covering every aspect of the recommendation.  Wheth er NITI Aayog has given any 
recommendation in respect of NEPA and the views of the Department thereon?  
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee’s observation after hearing the repr esentatives of Auto & Capital 
Goods Sector associations is that the need of the h our is to focus more on urban & rural 
infrastructure, road & highways, satellite cities, etc to generate demands at home in both 

 
30 
 
these sectors. For auto industry, the Committee is of the opinion that they should start 
looking for export markets in the face of saturatin g domestic arena while formulating 
business expansion plans. Also, they should earnest ly try and develop indigenous 
technology in the field of electric vehicles. CG as sociations should come up with a 
concrete plan in tune with the NCGP, 2016 objective s of the Government to triple the 
size of Indian CGS in a decade.   
Para No.100 
Action Taken Replies  
 
 The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted for compliance. 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee takes into account through the submi ssion of DHI that they have 
already taken into cognizance the areas put forth b y the industry associations seeking 
attention of the Government. Nevertheless, the Comm ittee recommends that the 
Government should look into the issues submitted by  these associations before the 
Committee and act upon them in best possible manner . This will encourage the private 
sector to be more participative in the broader initiatives of nation building. 
Para No.101 
 
Action Taken Replies 
                                        Capital Sector 
 
 As far as Capital Goods sector is concerned, the d epartment has undertaken 
extensive consultation with the industry chambers namely, CII and FICCI and core sector 
industry associations of capital goods industry in the last one year.  The National Capital 
Goods Policy has been drawn up on the basis of view s, suggestions, recommendations 
and   regular interaction with the industry, indust ry associations and chambers.  The draft 
recommendations were   also examined in consultatio n with all stakeholders Ministries 
and Departments. Capital Goods Policy was submitted  for approval of the Cabinet.   
National Capital Goods Policy has been approved by the Cabinet in its meeting held on 
25.05.2016.  The Policy envisages increasing produc tion of capital goods from ~Rs. 
230,000 Cr in 2014-15 to Rs. 750,000 Cr in 2025 and  raising direct and indirect 
employment from the current 8.4 million to ~30 mill ion. It envisages increasing exports 
from the current 27% to 40% of production while inc reasing share of domestic 
production in India's demand from 60% to 80%, thus making India a net exporter of 
capital goods. The Policy also aims to facilitate i mprovement in technology depth across 
sub-sectors, increase skill availability, ensure ma ndatory standards and promote growth 
and capacity building of MSMEs. 
 
 The Department is already taking steps to formulat e schemes for obtaining 
approval as per the roadmap of the policy intervent ions in a time bound manner. The 
schemes being framed are based on the PPP model and  are directed towards the 
development and growth of the Capital Goods sector for both private as well as public 

 
31 
 
sector.  The different schemes will help in realizi ng the vision of “Building India as a 
World Class Hub for Capital Goods”. 
 
Auto Sector 
 
 The Department has already included the Industry R epresentatives from Society   
of   Indian  Automobile  Manufacturers  (SIAM) , Automotive Component Manufacturers 
Association (ACMA) and Society  of  Manufacturing  of  Electric  Vehicles  (SMEV)  in 
the Committees of the Department concerning Auto Se ctor. Further there are 
representatives from various Automotive Industries in the Development Council of 
Automobile & Allied Industries (DCAAI) of the Depar tment. Hence it is evident that the 
Department of Heavy  Industry is taking care of Private Sector involvement in the Policy 
Formulations / Implementation etc. 
 
 The recommendations of Hon’ble Committee has, howe ver, been noted for 
compliance. 
 
Further Recommendations 
 
 
 In 2014, the Government announced “Scheme on Enhan cement of 
Competitiveness of Capital Goods”. What were the ob jectives/target set under this 
scheme and what follow up action was taken on the S cheme?  What was the Plan 
Outlay for the Scheme and what has been the utiliza tion so far?  What were the 
shortcomings in the scheme to warrant another Capit al Goods Manufacturing 
Policy, 2016? Provide details of difference between the two.  
 
 As regards Auto Sector, the Committee may be infor med of the 
Plans/Schemes for the earth moving/mining and agric ulture equipments under the 
Automotive Mission, 2026. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*********** 
 
 
 
 
 