45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
FORTY-FIFTH  REPORT
 
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY  GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  CONTAINED
IN THE 36TH REPORT ON PSUs OF HEAVY INDUSTRY – DISINVESTMENT, SICKNESS AND REVIAL
 
(LAID  ON THE TABLE OF RAJYA SABHA ON 24TH MAY, 2001)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 24TH MAY, 2001)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2001/JYAISTHA, 1922  (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
                                                  
1COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                      
2 PREFACE 
3.REPORT                                            
(i)                  CHAPTER – I                                                                                              
Recommendations/Observations that have been                                      
accepted by the Government                      
 
(ii)
                CHAPTER-II 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s Replies
 
(iii)
               CHAPTER – III                                                                                         
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee
 
(iv)
              CHAPTER – IV                                                                                              
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
Government has not given reply
 
(v)        CHAPTER – V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE                                           
 

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
4.         ANNEXURES                                                                                              
5.         MINUTES                                                                                                     
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
1.   Shri  Ramdas Agarwal   -   Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.      Shri Khan Gufran Zahidi
3.      Dr. Faguni Ram
4.      Shri P.K. Maheshwari
5.      Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharama
6.      Shri Jibon Roy
7.      Shri Somappa R. Bommai
8.      Smt. Saroj Dubey
9.      Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhundar
10.  Shri S. Sivasubramanian
11.  Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha
12.  Prof. M.M. Aggarwal
13.  Shri Shibu Soren
 
LOK SABHA
 
14.  Shri A. Narendra
15.  Shri Ramdas Athawale
16.  Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
17.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das
18.  Shri K.P. Singh Deo
19.  Shri Anant Mahadeoappa Gudhe
20.  Shri Thomas Hansda
21.  Shri G.J. Javiya
22.  Shri A.C. Jose
23.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
24.  Shri Sunil Khan
25.  Shri Deepak Kumar
26.  Shri Manjay Lal
27.  Shri K. Malaisamy
28.  Shri G. Mallikajunappa
29.  Shri K.H. Muniyappa
30.  Shri Nagmani
31.  Shri Anant Nayak
32.  Shri R. Basanagouda Patil
33.  Shri Uttamrao  Deorao Patil
34.  Shri M. Rajaiah
35.  Shri P. Rajendran
36.  Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
37.  Shri Tarachand Sahu
38.  Shri Ram Sajivan
39.Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
40.
  Shri Ramanand Singh
41.  Shri Chunnilal Thakur

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
42.  Shri Rizwan Zaheer
                
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu , Deputy Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani,  Committee Officer
P R E F A C E
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Forty Fifth Report of the
Committee on the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 36
th Report of the
Committee on “PSUs of the Department of Heavy Industry – Disinvestment, Sickness and Revival”.
 
2.         The 36
th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry was presented to
Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  the 2 nd may, 2000.   Sub-Committee (of  the Department Related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry) on  Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises  under the convenorship of
Dr. B.B. Ramaiah considered replies of the Government on the recommendations contained in the Report, alongwith
further replies received from the Department of Heavy Industry, Ministry of Heavy Industries  and Public Enterprises at
its meetings held  on the 27
th February, 2001 and the 12th March, 2001 respectively. The Sub-Committee then  finalised
and approved the Draft report at its meeting held on the 9 th April, 2001  and authorised Dr. B.B. Ramaiah,  Convenor, 
to place it before the main Committee.  
 
3.         The Committee then considered the Draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on  14th May, 2001.
 NEW DELHI;                                                                                                      RAMDAS AGARWAL
 14
thMay, 2001                                                                                                                           Chairman
                                                                                                           Department-related Parliamentary         
                                                                                                            Standing Committee on Industry
REPORT
 
1.         The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations
contained in its Thirty Sixth Report on PSEs of the Department of Heavy Industry – Disinvestment, Sickness
and Revival which was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  the 2
nd May, 2000.
 
2.         Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the recommendations
contained in the Report.  They have been categorized as follows:
     
  (i)         Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government :- 
3,4,5,6,7,9,10,11,13,22,23,25,28, 30. (Chapter - I).
 
(ii)
                Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
government’s replies :2,16,18,20,29  (Chapter - II)
 
(iii)
               Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee :1,8,12,14,15,17,19,21,24,26, 27, 31. (Chapter - III).
 
 

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
(iv)              Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the     Government have not been
received. (Chapter – IV).
           
CHAPTER – I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ACCEPTED BY THE  GOVERNMENT
 
 
3.
 
RECOMMENDATION
 
                        Closely linked with it is the disturbing fact of which the Sub-Committee has taken a serious note,
is the inexplicable dithering on the part of the Department of Heavy Industry when it comes to supporting the
revival package of a sick company. The Sub-Committee came across a number of cases wherein the Department
backed out at the eleventh hour in the proceedings of the BIFR by expressing its inability to support the revival
plan of a PSU referred to the BIFR.  This ambivalence in the approach of the    Department leads the Sub-
Committee to conclude that  it has acted like a fair weather friend with an ulterior motive to ultimately wash its
hands off those PSUs who are  in the moribund state.
               The Sub-Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department of  Heavy  Industry  to  take the revival
packages of the sick PSUs to their logical  conclusion  by  assuring  the  BIFR  of providing full financial
backing to any such revival plan.
 
COMMENTS
 
               Govt. is committed to the revival of sick PSUs, if a credible and viable revival plan emerges. 27 sick
PSEs under DHI have been referred to BIFR. Rehabilitation schemes have     been sanctioned by BIFR in the
case of 12 PSEs which are under implementation for which Govt. have provided fresh infusion of funds to the
extent of Rs.637 crores and financial restructuring of Rs.2063 crores. No time is lost in release of funds and
issue of necessary sanctions for conversion of loans into equity etc. once a BIFR revival package is sanctioned.
 
FURTHER COMMENTS
 
         A list indicating the name of PSUs and their date of reference to BIFR is given at Annexure-I.
 
         In the case of 8 PSUs, the revival plans are awaiting recommendations of BIFR.  Govt. has been
extending financial assistance for meeting working capital requirements including  payment of salary and wages
and for Voluntary Retirement Scheme (VRS)  to these PSUs besides funds for investments under plan..  Details
of  assistance provided by the Govt. during  the years 1998-99, 1999-2000 & 2000-01 (upto 31.1.2001) in case
of these 8 PSUs, and their  present status are given at Annexure - II.
 
4.
RECOMMENDATION
 
               The  issue of non-payment of arrears and statutory dues of the  employees  of  these  PSUs  merits  this 
Sub-Committee's serious  consideration  as  it  has  a  direct  bearing on the well-being of thousands of
employees.  For  years  altogether, there has  been  no wage revision in some of these PSUs.  As a result, the
morale of the employees has touched its nadir with a clear reflection on their productivity and motivation. This
apart, a majority of these PSUs have  also  defaulted  in  the payment  of statutory dues like gratuity, provident
fund, etc. of the employees.  In some cases where the wage  revision  has been  effected, employees have not
been paid arrears for long.                
               The whole issue is a sensitive one as it affects the employees in different  ways.    Hence,  the  Sub-
Committee  has taken a sympathetic note of it. Accordingly, the Sub-Committee recommends that arrears and
statutory dues of the employees should be  paid  forthwith  by earmarking separate  funds  for the purpose.  A

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
step like this would not only raise the motivational level of  the  employees but  also improve the industrial
relations to the advantage of these PSUs.
 
COMMENTS
 
               A Group of Ministers was constituted by the Govt. to work out a strategy for liquidation of statutory
dues owed to workers employed in Central PSEs. It was recommended by the members of the GOM in its
meeting held on 10.4.2000 to work out a PSU-wise strategy for liquidation of workers dues according to the
following three categories (i) PSUs which need  to be closed down after exploring all possibilities of revival; (ii)
PSUs that can be revived through restructuring and (iii) PSUs that are operating and can meet statutory dues of
workers from internal resources.
 
               Strategies for liquidation of statutory dues in respect of PSUs under DHI are as under :-
                                i.      In the case of sick units where revival plans have been sanctioned, the statutory dues are being
liquidated as per the recommendations and the time frame indicated in the revival plan. These PSUs
are Braithwaite, BPCL, Jessop, BSCL, BBVL, RBL, R&C, TSL, HEC, ILK, SIL and NIL.
                              ii.      There are other loss-making PSUs for which revival plans are under formulation. Liabilities on
account of statutory dues are being considered in their revival packages. These are HMT, TCIL,
NEPA & HPF.
                             iii.      In respect of unviable sick PSUs, Govt. has decided clear the statutory dues alongwith benefits
under voluntary Separation Scheme (VSS).
 
 
FURTHER COMMENTS
 
               35 out of 48 PSUs under the Deptt. had outstanding statutory dues of Rs. 562 Crs.  As  on 30.9.2000.  
PSU-wise/category-wise  details  are  given  in the Annexure III. 
Strategies for liquidation of these statutory dues are :
 
(i)     PSUs facing winding up/closure      
Provision has  been made in the budget for liquidating statutory dues of Rs.        63 cr. to PSUs facing
winding up / closure  under Voluntary Separation Scheme (VSS) which was introduced in these PSUs
in September, 2000.  The dues are being cleared in phases to the employees availing VSS.
 
       (ii)      PSUs having revival plan sanctioned by BIFR.  
Out of the 12 PSUs having revival plan sanctioned by BIFR, 3 PSUs  namely Burn Standard Co. Ltd.
(BSCL), National Instruments Ltd. (NIL) and Braithwaite and Co. are expected to clear their statutory
dues out of their own internal generation.  The cases of remaining PSUs will be considered on merits
for providing financial support out of the budgetary provision of Rs. 150 cr. made in RE 2000-2001
and Rs. 150 cr. in BE 2001-2002.
 
(iii)      PSUs awaiting sanction of revival plans                    
7 PSUs falling in this category have statutory dues of Rs. 104 cr. as on       30.9.2000.  The dues of
these PSUs will be included in the revival plans and also be considered for liquidation out of the
budgetary provision made for the purpose referred in para above.
 
(iv)      Other   loss Making PSUs.
Statutory dues of HMT and HCL, whose restructuring plan have been recently approved by the Govt.,
are envisaged to be cleared out of their internal resources.  The proposals for liquidating dues of the
remaining 3 loss making PSUs shall be included in their plans for revival/JV formation.
 
 (v)       Profit making PSUs
The total statutory dues of Rs. 11.10 cr. are envisaged to be cleared out of internal resources in respect
of 4 profit-making PSUs.

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
 
5.
RECOMMENDATION
 
              As described elsewhere in this Report, these  PSUs  have  long been nurtured  in the shadow of state
protectionism.  With the change in the overall industrial economic scenario, they  have become the  victims  of
circumstances.  There was a time, when they did not have to toil hard to  get  work  orders  to  keep their
workshops running as they were assured of regular orders from their  customer  PSUs/Departments.   Things  
are no  longer   the   same  as   they  once  used to be.  Hence, the present critical order book position. Now,
these PSUs are not only facing stiff  challenge  from the  indigenous  private  sector  companies  but also from
the multinationals.    The   change-over   from   the   days    of `no-competition' to an era of `fierce competition'
is the bane of all the woes of these PSUs. That is why, this Sub-Committee strongly feels that these PSUs
deserve a  thoughtful  consideration.  Any attempt to downplay their importance could  have  serious 
ramifications  for  all concerned.   In  the  opinion of the Sub-Committee, these PSUs should be given enough 
elbow  room  to  adapt  themselves  in accordance with  the  new realities.  For this, they need some degree of
protection by way of reserving a fixed percentage of work orders of the  customer  PSUs/Departments  for  at 
least another  four  to  five  years  so  that they are able to grow enough teeth to take on their rivals.
 
               Therefore,   the   Sub-Committee   recommends   that   the Department  of  Heavy  Industry  should 
prepare  a   detailed PSU-wise  note  giving  each  company's order book requirement from the customer PSUs
and the Departments of the  Government. Any  such  note,  then  be placed before the Union Cabinet for  
having   necessary instructions issued for  all  those  customer  PSUs and Departments for placing adequate
orders on these PSUs of the  Department of Heavy Industry.  The Sub-Committee hopes that Department of
Heavy Industry would not be  found  wanting in its endeavour to pursue this line of action vigorously.
 
COMMENTS
 
               48 PSUs under Department of Heavy Industry are having different product profile with varied set of
customers. The product profile ranges from sophisticated engineering goods like electrical generators, turbines,
boilers, machine tools to Cement, paper, bicycle, shoes, salt etc. Some of the companies are operating in
consultancy/construction activities. In case of turnkey and services. The order book of these PSUs as on 1.10.99
stood at Rs.12,337 crs. This Deptt. has been concerned with the low order book of PSUs like BSCL, Jessops,
BPCL, ILK, HEC, HMT etc. On the specific recommendation  on reservation of orders, Thos Deptt. is of the 
view that it will be more prudent to seek approval or the Govt. for reservation of orders sector-wise/PSUwise
due to varying nature of product profile and customers. In line with this, some of the efforts made and
achievements are as under:-
 
                     i.                 This Deptt. has been maintaining a constant liaison with the user Ministries/Deptt. and making
efforts both formal and informal to assist the PSUs in getting orders from them/other sister PSUs
including reservation or orders.
                   ii.                 Efforts were made at the level of M(HI&PE) for exploring the possibility of placement of
adequate orders on HEC, in a meeting convened for this purpose, attended by
                  iii.                  Secretaries/Senior Officers of      M/o Steel, Coal, Mines, Power, Railways and Defence.
                 iv.                 Cabinet has already approved reservation of orders for Hindustan Cables Ltd. (HCL) for annual
requirement of telecom cables of DOT/MTNL. The quantity has been 30% in the first year and 25%
in the second year.
                   v.                 In the case of Wagon Building PSUs, the matter was taken up with M/o Railways, who have
placed an order for 9575 FWUs for 2000-2001 on BBUNL group of companies which is around
45% of the total requirement of 20,250 FWUs. A proposal for reservation of orders for Wagon
Building PSUs under DHI is also likely to be placed before the Cabinet for future requirement of
Railways.
                 vi.                 Persuasion with M/o Petroleum for placement of orders of Bharat Heavy Plates and Vessels
(BHVP) has resulted in enhanced order book of the company to a level of Rs.410 cr. As on 1.4.2000
as against an order average order book of the company of Rs.200  crs. in last 2-3 years.

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
                vii.                 This Department has already proposed extention of the policy of purchase preference to Central
PSUs beyond 31.3.2000 to the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE). DPE  is  considering this
issue for further extension of purchase preference for Central PSUs.  
 
                                         
                                                                                                                                                 
FURTHER COMMENTS
 
               In case of HCL, Cabinet in its meeting held on 27.1.99 approved reservation of orders for annual
requirement of telecom Cables of DOT/MTNL,   30% in the first year and 25% in the second year. As a result,
the turnover of the company has gone up substantially from 217.43 crore  in 1998-99 to 803.57 crore in 1999-
2000. Subsequently, the Cabinet Committee on Disinvestment in its meeting held on 1.2.2001  approved grant of
reserved orders in favour of HCL (along with advance) till disinvestment takes place in HCL. Further after
disinvestment also reservation of orders will be available for a period of two years from the date of transfer of
management to the strategic partner.
 
               In the Meeting held on 29.12.98 with Secretary (PNG) it was decided that :-
 
a)
            Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas would issue instructions to its PSUs not to disqualify
BPCL and other PSUs of holding Company Bharat Yantra Nigam Ltd. (BYNL).
 
b)            PSUs under BYNL would hence forth ensure deliveries on time with guaranteed performance for
the contracted period.
 
c)            Oil Sector PSUs would not insist or Original Equipment Manufacturers' endorsement in case
similar equipment/machinery has already been successfully supplied by BYNL in past and the
technology has already been  absorbed by BYN-PSUs and where BYNL assures to provide all
necessary back up technical support.
 
d)
            Technical clarification and disputes should be resolved through dialogue between the
Managements of BYNL and Oil Sector PSUs instead of taking recourse to imposing restrictions
on BYNL by denying the opportunities to supply/compete in future contracts.
e)
            BYNL would examine in consultation with Oil PSUs the possibility of providing spare parts for
Oil Sector PSUs to garner more business for their financially weak PSUs.
 
               In the Meeting held on 10.9.1999 it was agreed by Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas that, in future,
Oil & Gas Sector PSUs would try to procure spare parts for BPCL/its collaborators make equipment from
BPCIL as an OEM (Original Equipment Manufacturers endorsement) and BPCL assured for timely deliveries of
spare parts.
 
               As a result of the efforts made, the order book position has gone up to Rs. 410 crores as on 1.4.2000 in
case of Bharat Heavy Plates & Vessels (BHPV) as against an average order book  of Rs. 200 crores in the last 2-
3 years.
 
               Department of Heavy Industry (DHI) had forwarded a note containing  proposal for reservation of
11,000 Four Wheeler Units (FWUs) of 60% of Wagon orders on the wagon manufacturing public sector
Undertakings of the Department of Heavy Industry to the Cabinet Secretariat on 7
th  July, 2000 for placing it
before the CCEA for their consideration.  The CCEA in its meeting held on 18.7.2000 had deferred
consideration of the note of this Department and the note was returned by the Cabinet Sectt..  The matter was
reconsidered in this Department and it was decided that the matter  need not be pursued further as the Ministry
of Railway had given sufficient wagon orders to the Wagon manufacturing PSUs of DHI for production during
the financial year 2000-01.
 

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
               Railway Minister took a meeting with the Secretary, Department of Heavy Industry and Chief
Executives of wagon manufacturing PSUs on 1.8.2000 to discuss issues relating to supply of wagons.
              
               Government on 14.9.2000 have decided to extend the purchase preference policy for products and
services of Central PSEs for two years i.e. upto  31.3.2002.  This policy provides purchase preference in supply
of goods and services to the Govt. Departments and other PSEs if the price quoted by the supplying PSEs was
within  10% of the lowest valid bid price, other things being equal.   However, PSEs have to match the lowest
bid price for supply of goods.  The minimum value of purchase has now been reduced to Rs.1 crore from Rs.5
crore.  Under this policy  the public enterprises which avail benefit of the purchase preference should be
subjected to adequate penalties for cost over-runs etc.
 
6.
RECOMMENDATION
 
               During the course of its study, the Sub-Committee had a close look at the managerial aspect of these
PSUs and the need for granting functional  autonomy  to  them.  It was informed that lack of  professionalism 
amongst  the  Management  is  mainly responsible for  the  sickness  of  these  companies.    Inept handling of
the affairs has brought these PSUs to such a pass. Lack of functional  autonomy  also  aggravated  the  state  of
affairs. Therefore,  in  the  opinion of  the Sub-Committee, the need of the hour is to appoint full-time and
seasoned professionals to run the affairs of these companies and  give  them  greater functional  autonomy  to
enable them to deal with new emerging challenges with boldness and in a professional manner. At the same
time, Government should also find out, apart from the extraneous reasons, the administrative and managerial
failure in respect of these PSUs and fix accountability and responsibility.
 
 
COMMENTS
 
               Govt. has been giving more and more functional autonomy to PSUs to enable them work on
commercial lines and improve their viability. In the past 696 Govt. guidelines which were applicable for Central
PSUs have been scrapped. Greater autonomy is being given for MOU signing companies. Some of the
companies have been identified as Navratnas  (BHEL) and Mini-ratnas (HNL, HMT (I) and REIL) which entitle
them to additional autonomy in the area of investments, personnel policies, raising capital from domestic and
international markets and entering into joint ventures etc. So far as accountability is concerned, the Chief
Executives are being appraised with reference to objective parameters of performance and efficiency that takes
into account achievements of various targets, control over the organization etc.
 
 
FURTHER COMMENTS
 
               During the last three years no additional autonomy has been given to the MOU signing companies in
the area of capital investments, personnel policies, raising capital from domestic and international market and
entering into joint venture, etc.
 
7.
 
RECOMMENDATION
 
               Rationalisation of  excessive  manpower  is  another  area  of concern for these PSUs.  As stated earlier,
one of the motives behind  these  companies,  being  in the public sector as they are,  was  to   generate  
adequate   number   of   employment opportunities   for  the  growing  populace  of  the  country. Accordingly, it
was in  the  fitness  of  things  to  adopt  a liberal recruitment  policy.   However, the negative result of  this
liberal policy began to be felt with the onset of economic liberalisation which caused depletion of  profit as it
was now beyond the reach of these PSUs to sustain their large workforce.  In case of a number of these PSUs,
the presence of excessive manpower is proving  to  be  a major  stumbling  block  in their attempt to regain their

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
lost viability.  Although, planned rationalisation of  manpower  by offering  attractive  VRS package could prove
to be a panacea, the allocation of  funds  from  National  Renewal  Fund  still remains far below the required
mark. The Sub-Committee recommends that wherever planned VRS can facilitate  a turnaround, the
Government should make requisite financial support available to that  PSU  without  any  delay.  Because
dillydallying   defeats   the   very  purpose  of implementation of a scheme.
 
 
COMMENTS
 
               Voluntary retirement Scheme (VRS) has already been introduced in a number of PSEs of this
Department to shed surplus manpower without causing undue hardship to the workers. About 37,000 employees
opted for VRS during the last seven years from 1992-93 to 1998-99 involving an expenditure of about Rs.700
crores. Due to insufficient provision of funds under NRF, in case of revival plans sanctioned by the Govt./BIFR,
 full funding is being arranged separately through non-plan budgetary support, for rationalization of manpower.
In 1999-2000, Rs.87.90 crores was released as non-plan grant from the non-plan budget of the Department for
sanctioned revival schemes of PSUs besides Rs.49.55 crores from the NRF as grant. In an effort to further
mobilize funds for VRS, Government-Guarantee is being provided for seeking loans from Financial
Institutions/Banks for which interest subsidy is provided by the Govt. Government Guarantee has been given for
an amount of Rs.11 crs. to Richardson & Cruddas for raising funds from the Bankers/ Financial Institutions for
offering VRS to the employees.
 
 
FURTHER COMMENTS
 
               A statement indicating the Government Grants given to the PSUs under DHI during the last three years
is given at Annexure IV.
 
 
9.
 
RECOMMENDATION
 
               A major issue having its impact on all these PSUs, is the lack of  work orders from Government
departments and customer PSUs. Although, there are informal  bilateral  arrangements  between these  PSUs 
and  their  customer  PSUs/Departments for mutual transaction of business, there is  a  need  for  giving  these
bilateral  arrangements  a  formal  shape  so that issues like   placement of adequate  orders,  timely  execution 
of  orders, disputes regarding  payment  of  outstanding  dues,  etc.  are discussed and sorted out amicably for
the  mutual  benefit  of both the parties.
 
               In  the  opinion  of  this  Sub-Committee, these bilateral arrangements should be given a concrete shape
to facilitate  a constant dialogue between PSUs of Department of Heavy Industry and  their  customer
Departments/PSUs  for  effecting greater transaction of business between them.
 
 
COMMENTS
 
               Please refer to reply given under Recommendation No.5.  Further the Department of Heavy Industries
is always ready to intervene to sort out any problem a PSU may have with other Departments and PSUs under
other Departments.
 
 
FURTHER COMMENTS
 
               The PSUs under Department of Heavy Industry are having different product profiles with varied set of

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
customers.  The product profile ranges from sophisticated engineering goods like electrical generators, turbine,
boilers, machine tools to Cement, Paper, Shoes etc.  This Department has been maintaining  constant inter-action
with the user Ministries/Deptt. and making efforts, both formal and informal, to assist the PSUs in getting orders
from them/other sister PSU.  Some of the steps taken in this direction are enumerated in the reply to
recommendation No. 5.
              
               In addition, the performance of PSUs is being reviewed at the level of Secretary and concerned Joint
Secretaries on quarterly and half yearly basis.  Besides, Minister (HI&PE) also reviews the performance of 
select PSUs.
 
 
10.
 
 
RECOMMENDATION
 
               Since all these PSUs are facing a severe financial crisis,  it is quite logical that they explore all possible
avenues to get sufficient  finances  for their pressing requirements from the market.  For getting commercial
borrowings  from  the  market, they  need  to  have  the guarantee of the Government for this purpose.   For 
want  of   Government   guarantee,   financial institutions  refuse  to  lend  any  money to these companies. Their
problem further gets  aggravated  as  they  neither  get   money from the Government nor from the financial
institutions. In  view of the difficulties being faced by the Government   in the allocation of required funds to
these companies, it  is incumbent upon  the   Government   to   help   them  mobilise funds from the market.  
 
               The  Sub-Committee urges upon the Government to stand guarantee to the market borrowings of all
those PSUs who are looking towards the capital  market  for  their  financial requirements.
 
 
COMMENTS
 
               Govt. has been extending guarantees to PSUs on a case to basis. In case of revival plans sanctioned by
BIFR for 12 PSUs  under DHI, Govt. has agreed to provide guarantee to the extent of Rs.625 crs. Even in non-
BIFR cases where turnaround plans are sanctioned by Govt., guarantees are being provided as per the plan.
PSUs which are incapable of generating enough internal resources for funding VRS are also being provided
guarantee for seeking loans from FIs/Banks for which interest subsidy is also provided by the Govt. Some such
cases under process are BHPV & TSPL. As on 31.3.99, Govt. guarantee  has been provided to 23 PSUs
amounting to Rs.1366 crs. (Ann-V).
              
 
FURTHER COMMENTS
 
               A statement showing the guarantees given by the Govt. and outstanding as on 31.12.2000, PSU-wise is
enclosed (Annexure-V)
 
HMT -  HMT has been able to raise approximately Rs.252 crore against the target of Rs.310 crore for VRS and
Rs.40.40 crore against the target of Rs.40.43 crore for working capital for Watch Business Group.
 
HCL - Based on Govt. Guarantee, HCL raised ks.35 crore through bonds. Further, Govt. Guarantee was
provided for Rs.112 crore, in favour of consortium of banks covering over drawal of cash credit. This helped in
resuming banking operations.
 
SHPV, BPCL, R&C AND TSPL
 
The status of Govt. guarantee in respect of BHPV, BPCL, R,&C and TSPL is as under:-

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
(Rs. in crore)
Name of the PSU Amount for which Government guarantee
given.
Amount raised by P-SU
 
BHPV 15.00 (for VRS) Under Negotiation with
Banker
BPCL 20.00 (for working capital ) Approved recently
R&C 11.00 (for VRS) 8.00
TSPL 5.00 (For VRS)
5.00 (for working capital)
5.00
 
11.
 
RECOMMENDATION
 
              The Sub-Committee recommends that the Ministry of Heavy Industry should pursue the matter
vigorously with the Ministries of Railways, Defence and Mines and Minerals to procure work order for Heavy
Engineering Corporation Ltd. so that the Company may be revived.
 
 
COMMENTS
 
               The matter for giving the orders to HEC has been taken up with the user Ministries recently at the level
of the Minister (HI&PE).
 
 
FURTHER COMMENTS
 
               The details of orders received by the HEC  from the railways, defence, mines and minerals as a result
of DHI’s efforts during the last two years.
 
               Orders received by HEC are as under :-
 
SECTOR 1998-99 99-00 00-01(upto
Dec.2000)
RAILWAYS 13.45 32.06 28.80
DEFENCE 47.83 1.50 13.95
MINING 133.90 39.02 32.65
 
 
13.
 
RECOMMENDATION
 
                        On the issue of purchase of  components  by  the  Railways  on behalf of the  Bharat  Wagon  and 
Engineering  Co.   Ltd.,  to enable it to compete with its rivals, the Sub-Committee  feels that  Railways should
resume this old practice for the benefit of Bharat Wagon and Engineering Co.  Ltd.
 
 
COMMENTS
               The concern of the Committee has been communicated to the Ministry of Railways.
FURTHER COMMENTS
 
               As regards placement of wagon orders of BWEL, it is stated that Ministry of Railways provided
sufficient wagon orders to BWEL i.e. 2175 Four Wheeler Units (FWUs) for production during the financial year

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
2000-2001 as compared to 1372.50 FWUs in 1999-2000.
 
22.
 
RECOMMENDATION
 
               Bharat  Heavy  Plate  &  Vessels Limited is in a comparatively better position vis-a-vis other PSUs of 
Department  of  Heavy Industry.   The  company  has  an  impressive track record and holds promising prospects
for the future.  It  could  overcome its  immediate  hardships  provided  right  kind of support is extended to it by
the Government. Given the company's present performance, the Sub-Committee feels  that  it  deserves  to  be
extended whatever support it needs at  this  juncture.
 
               The Committee was informed that M/s S.B. Billimoria & Company were engaged as consultant on
12.1.99 for locating a joint venture partner. The First Stage Report and the draft information memorandum
submitted by the consultant envisaged financial restructuring by conversion of 58% of outstanding amount into
equity and the balance amount of 42% to be repaid in equal installments over the last three years of the
projection period at a commercial rate of 14%. The information memorandum has since been approved by the
Competent Authority and send to the consultant on 13
th January, 2000. The consultant will now issue
advertisement for inviting offers.
 
               The Sub-Committee recommends that government should expedite action in this regard so that a fresh
lease of life could be infused into the company.
 
COMMENTS
              
               Further action to strengthen BHPV is being taken.
 
 
FURTHER COMMENTS
 
               BHPV is one of the PSUs which is slated for formation of Joint Venture.  It is expected that the
prospective joint venture partner will bring in latest technology, necessary funds, market skills for ensuring long
term sustainability of the company.  The Govt. has also given assistance by way of financial relieves to the
company for sustaining its operations such as :-
 
(a)
    Counter guarantee along with 50 per cent interest subsidy for enabling BHPV to raise funds to the
tune of Rs.15 crore through issue of bonds so that the company is able to implement VRS for 300
persons;
 
(b)
   Govt. has provided funds to the tune of Rs.10.11 crore to BHPV for implementation of VRS in
respect of 200 persons.
 
(c)    Plan funds to the tune of Rs.9 crore have been released for construction of heavy fabrication bay in
BHPV so that the company is able to procure bigger orders involving fabrication and handling of
large size equipments;
 
(d)
   Govt. has also provided counter guarantee of Rs.15 crore for enabling BHPV to obtain project
finance in respect of two LSTK projects which they have secured from IOCL, Barauni and Digboi
from their bankers.
 
23.
 
RECOMMENDATION

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
 
                        Facility of purchase preference for orders of value above Rs.5 crore  and  criterion for being
qualified as Lump Sum Turn Key  (LSTK) contractor are two major factors which militate against the interests
of Bharat Heavy Plate & Vessels Ltd..   On  both these  counts,  the customer PSUs of the company especially in
the petroleum, fertilizer and space research  fields  need  to  offer little concessions to it.
 
              The Sub-Committee feels that offering these concessions by customer  PSUs/Departments  to their
sister PSU would not harm the interests of anyone.  Hence, the Sub-Committee urges  upon the  customer
PSUs/Departments of Bharat Heavy Plate & Vessels Ltd.  to offer these concessions to this company  to  help  it
consolidate its gains.
 
COMMENTS
 
               Government from time to time has taken up their case with the concerned Ministries from award of
orders, recovery of dues, pre-qualification for tender. etc. at appropriate level.
FURTHER COMMENTS
 
               BHPV procure orders worth Rs.134 crore during the year 1998-99, Rs.410 crores during 1999-2000.
 
25.
 
RECOMMENDATION
 
                        Hindustan Machine Tools (HMT) Ltd.   has,  for  long,  been  a premier  public sector company
with an enormous brand loyalty   in the market.  Unfortunately, the strengths  of  the  company have  eroded 
over  the  years and today, despite having a constant increase in its turnover, it finds  itself  amidst  a grim
situation.    To  come  out  of  this,  the  company  has categorised its various units into (i) viable units  (ii) units
which can be made  viable and (iii) unviable units.  Accordingly, it  has  prepared  a  comprehensive 
turnaround   plan   which envisages organisational,     manpower    and    financial restructuring.   This  plan  is 
being  evaluated  by  various financial institutions  namely.    IDBI,  UTI,  FCI and Canara Bank.  The Sub-
Committee was informed  that  Canara  Bank  has already  agreed  to provide support for debt restructuring and
the approval of other financial institutions is awaited.  With these approvals, the ball will be in the Government's
court. The Sub-Committee recommends that not only  the  financial   institutions  but  the Government also,
should speedily accord approval to the turnaround plan  in  order  to  stem  the  rot afflicting the HMT Ltd.
 
 
COMMENTS
 
               A turnaround plan of HMT has been approved by the Cabinet on 18.7.2000.
 
28.
 
RECOMMENDATION
 
              Another problem causing considerable damage to  the  Hindustan Photo  Films Manufacturing
Company Limited is the customs duty exemption to the photo goods being imported from  Nepal  under the
provisions  of  the  Indo-Nepal Treaty.  These imports are detrimental to the well being of HPF, Ltd. The  Sub-
Committee  is  of  the  view  that  the  relevant provision of the treaty should be reviewed so that its adverse
impact on the HPF Ltd.  could be minimised.
 
 
COMMENTS
 
               The Deptt. of Heavy Industry has requested Ministry of Commerce not to allow import of photo goods

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
from Nepal to India under the provisions of Indo-Nepal Tready and  as per the information available with this
Department no such import has taken place.
 
 
FURTHER COMMENTS
 
A Note for the Cabinet has been submitted to the Cabinet Secretariat on 10.1.2001 to revive the
company through support and financial restructuring.
 
30.
 
RECOMMENDATION
 
               Richardson & Cruddas Ltd.  is one  of  those  PSUs  which  has successfully  come  out of red after the
implementation of its   revival package.  But one of its units is still incurring losses due  to  excess  manpower.  
The company needs funds to implement planned VRS in this unit located at Bycula, Mumbai. The   Sub-
Committee,   therefore,   recommends    immediate sanction  of  requisite  funds  for  this purpose as any delay
would not be  in  the  interest  of  this  company  which  has recovered tremendously.
 
 
COMMENTS
 
               In order to enable the company to reduce excess manpower in its Unit located at Byculla, Mumbai, the
Government of India has already provided counter guarantee to the company for raising Rs.11 crore by issue of
bonds to retire 200 employees.
 
 
FURTHER COMMENTS
 
               In order to help R&C to reduce its manpower at Byculla Unit in particular and also in other units such
as at Nagpur, Chennai and Mulund, Govt. has provided budgetary support to the tune of Rs.21.02 crore during
2000-2001.  As a result the company has been able to reduce its manpower by 404 persons.  Earlier during 1999-
2000 Govt. given counter guarantee along with interest subsidy of 50 per cent to R&C for raising funds through
issue of bonds to the tune of Rs.11 crore.  As a result of this the company has already reduced its manpower by
145 persons.
 
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENTS’ REPLIES
 
2.
 
RECOMMENDATION
 
               Another  major  problem  which  warrants the attention of this Sub-Committee  is  the  delay  in  the 
approval  of   revival packages.  It is understood that the Department of Heavy Industry  seems  to  have a very
lackadaisical and indifferent approach towards the preparation, approval and  implementation of revival
packages.
        
               The  Sub-Committee  feels  that  any  delay  in  the whole process involving the revival of  a  company 
is  almost  like putting the  cart  before  the horse.  Apparently, it reflects the lack of commitment and a sense of
purpose on the  part  of the Department  of Heavy Industry.  It also smacks of a hidden approach to let these
giants die their natural death. It is the considered view of this Sub-Committee  that  the endeavour  of  the 

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
Government should not be to bulldoze these PSUs and raze their huge  assets  to  the  ground,  rather  it should 
help  them  to  regain  their viability. Therefore, the Sub-Committee recommends that the Department of Heavy
Industry should make  conscious  efforts  and  should  leave  no  stone unturned  to  help  these  PSUs  in  the 
timely  preparation, approval and implementation of their revival packages.
 
 
COMMENTS
 
               A Committee of Secretaries has been constituted in the Deptt. of Heavy Industry under the
Chairmanship of Secretary (HI) with Secretary (Expenditure), Secretary (Planning Commission), Secretary
(Labour) and Secretary (PE)  as its members, to reduce delays in making recommendations about the stand to be
taken by the Govt. on the draft revival scheme circulated  by BIFR in respect of sick PSEs under DHI for the
consideration of the Cabinet.
 
 
FURTHER COMMENTS
 
               After the Constitution of the Committee of Secretaries, no new draft revival scheme has been circulated
by BIFR for consideration of Govt. and hence no deliberations have been made by Committee of Secretaries .
 
18.
 
RECOMMENDATION
 
              Mandya National Paper Mills, a subsidiary of Hindustan Paper Corporation Ltd.  is in the state of
hibernation and its needs to be revived.  The process for converting  it  into  a  joint venture  is on but the delay
in giving a concrete shape to the proposal of a private party is not at all helping the cause of this unit. The Sub-
Committee recommends that the process of finding a suitable joint venture partner for Mandya National Paper
Mills.
 
COMMENTS
 
               Efforts of DHI for privatization/JVC of MNPM could not meterialise. While formulating the
Government stand on future of MNPM, Cabinet had opined that the Company is not capable of being revived
and the opinion of BIFR that the sick company be would up, is acceptable to GOI. Pending winding up
proceedings, the Government proposed to close down MNPM and offered a Voluntary Separation Scheme
(VSS) to the employees for a period of three months, as a safety net. VSS was implemented in MNPM for a
period of three months w.e.f. 1.4.2000. Out of 651 employees, 639 opted for VSS upto 30.06.2000.
 
 
FURTHER COMMENTS
 
The Competent Authority accorded approval for  winding of Mandya National Paper Mills on 5.9.2000.
Prior to closure Voluntary Separation Scheme [VSS] was introduced in the mill from 1.4.2000 to 30.6.2000. Out
of 651 employees, 639 opted for VSS and were relieved after payment of due and admissible compensation
under the scheme. Remaining 12 employees were relieved on closure of the Company after payment of
retrenchment benefit under ID Act. High Court of Karnataka issued winding up orders on 20.10.2000 and
appointed an Official Liquidator.
 
20.
 
RECOMMENDATION
 
              The Sub-Committee recommends that all out efforts should be made to revive Mining and Allied

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
Machinery Corporation Ltd. Requisite funds of Rs.142 crore apart from Rs.40 crores for VRS should be made
available to the company. Apart from this, Government should also arrange placement of work orders from Coal
India Ltd. to the company which is vital for its revival. 
 
 
COMMENTS
 
               MAMC is under reference to BIFR since 1992. BIFR had appointed IFCI as the Operating Agency. 
IFCI engaged a consultant M/s Raiji & Co. to prepare a Techno-Economic Feasibility Report. As per the report
of M/s Raiji & Co. Govt. of India was to inject Rs.142 crore in cash and Rs.40 crore for VRS apart from other
financial restructuring. The Govt. felt that there was little justification for large scale infusion of funds by the
Govt. On 3.1.1995 BIFR after hearing all concerned came to the conclusion that it will be difficult to make net
worth of the company positive within a reasonable time. It, therefore, issued show cause notice on 11.1.95 for
winding up. Further, hearings of BIFR have been stayed by the Calcutta High Court.
               It has been decided to take action for closure of MAMC which has been considered unviable after
considering the recommendations of the Expert Group set up to explore the possibilities of revival. Govt. have
also decided to reintroduce voluntary Separation Scheme (VSS) for a period of two months. The payments under
VSS to the remaining employees of MAMC  would be substantially higher than the compensation available
under ID Act.
 
 
FURTHER COMMENTS
 
               Statement indicating the outstanding statutory dues in respect of MAMC as on 31.12.2000 is enclosed
(Annexure-VI). Efforts are being made to liquidate the statutory dues as far as possible within the budgetary
constraints.
 
29.
RECOMMENDATION
 
            Since  the  Government has already cleared the VRS package for National Bicycle Corporation of India
Ltd., the  Sub-Committee would like the Department of Heavy Industry to ponder over the suggestion  to  make 
one  more  bid to resurrect this company after the rationalisation of its manpower.
 
 
COMMENTS
 
            Govt. had constituted an Expert Group to explore the possibilities of revival of sick PSUs of DHI
including NBCIL.  It has been decided to take action for closure of NBCIL which has been considered unviable
after considering the recommendations of the Expert Group set up to explore the possibilities of revival. Govt.
have also decided to reintroduce voluntary Separation Scheme (VSS) for a period of two months. The payments
under VSS to the remaining employees of NBCIL would be substantially higher than the compensation available
under ID Act.
 
 
FURTHER COMMENTS
 
There are no current outstanding statutory dues of the employees.  However, the company has outstanding
statutory dues of Rs.84.71 lakhs pertaining to pre-nationalization period and Rs.36.47 lakhs of ESI dues
pertaining to earlier years for which matter has been taken up with the concerned authorities for waiver.
 
 
CHAPTER -  III

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 
 
1.
RECOMMENDATION
 
Of these problems, one major problem whose tentacles are spread over just about every PSU, is the loans
given to them by the Government.  Conversion of these loans into equity would not only  reduce  the  burden of
debt and the interest  accrued on it but would also enable these beleaguered PSUs  to embark on  a  major 
financial  restructuring.  Besides, these companies will be in a position to get commercial borrowings to meet
their immediate requirement for working capital. It  is,   therefore,   the   considered   view   of  this Sub-
Committee that the Department  of  Heavy  Industry  should prepare a comprehensive  financial restructuring
package for all these PSUs so that they  are  able  to  bounce  back  with vigour and  vitality.  This package
should also address itself to the interest accrued on the loans, as  mere  conversion  of loan into equity would not
serve any meaningful purpose in the absence of waiver of interest.
 
 
COMMENTS
 
The financial restructuring proposals include write-off by the Govt. for interest/loan, fresh infusion of
funds, Govt. guarantees apart from conversion of loan into equity/debenture. These proposals are formulated and
approved after careful consideration by various agencies. Amongst the BIFR referred companies, revival plans
have been sanctioned by BIFR in case of 12 PSUs. In these cases write off of interest/loan is to Rs.1616 crs. And
conversion of loan into equity/debenture amounts to Rs.447 cr. In addition revival plans include fresh infusion of
funds of Rs.637 crs. and Govt. guarantees for Rs.625 crs. Details are attached at Annexure-VII.
              
               Apart from BIFR referred cases, in an effort to improve the viability of the companies Govt. has taken
the initiative on its own and approved restructuring proposals in the following PSUs: 
 
(a)
          Hindustan Cables Ltd. (HCL)
(b)         Andrew Yule & Co. Ltd. (AYCL)
(c)          Nepa Ltd. (NEPA)
(d)         Hindustan Paper Corporation Ltd. (HPC)
(e)          Praga Tools Ltd. (PTL)
 
               The board objectives of restructuring in these cases have been as under :-
 
Financial restructuring was carried out in case of HCL to reduce the burden of repayment of principal
and interest liability. In addition, orders have been reserved for HCL by MTNL/DOT for 2 years (30% in the
first year and 25% in the second year). In the case of AYCL, restructuring was done as a turnaround strategy
involving business and financial restructuring. Additional funds were provided as equity in PTL towards
reimbursement of cash losses and payment of statutory dues. Financial restructuring was done for HPC to
improve the company’s viability and to off-set locational disadvantages.
 
 
FURTHER COMMENTS
 
Govt. have provided an amount of Rs.637 crore as fresh infusion of funds besides sanction of financial
restructuring to the tune of Rs.2063 crore as per revival plans sanctioned by BIFR in case of 12 sick PSUs.  The
unit wise details are given at Annexure-VII. The performance of these 12 PSUs during 1998-99 and 1999-2000
in terms of production and profitability and also their present status is given at Annexure – VIII.
 
               Govt. have released an amount of Rs. 224.44 crore besides financial restructuring to the tune of Rs.

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
489.54 crore for the 5 PSUs where Govt. on its own, have sanctioned restructuring plans. The performance of
these 5 PSUs is  given at Annexure IX.
 
 
COMMITTEE’S OBSERVATION
 
            The Committee noted that the BIFR has sanctioned the revival plan in the case of  12 PSUs and the
Government of India has initiated action.  The Committee does not find considerable change in the performance
of these 12 units in  1999-2000 as compared to 1998-99.    Except   2 or 3 companies, implementation of the
revival package  is in the stage of midway only in respect of most of the remaining companies.  In some of the
companies, revival plans are not yielding desired fruits.   The Committee is constrained to note that revival plans
in the case of Bharat Pumps & Compressors Ltd; Triveni Structurals Ltd. And Burn Standard Co. Ltd. are being
reviewed.  The Committee feels that wherever the plans are not working well, a more holistic and realistic
approach needs to be adopted.  The Committee’s  considered view  is that the pace of  implementation of revival
package needs to be increased  so that these companies may not face any further loss  of time.  As regards the
companies where Government have on their own sanctioned restructuring plan, the Committee recommends that
a regular monitoring may be kept on the implementation of restructuring plan. These companies may not be
allowed to further deteriorate from the present condition. 
 
 
8.
 
RECOMMENDATION
 
                        During its interaction with the officials  of  customer  PSUs/ Departments of these PSUs, the Sub-
Committee was informed that the delivery   record  of  these  PSUs  is  very  poor.    The  Sub-Committee
recognises the  need  for  timely  execution  of orders    in    order   to   avoid   the    subsequent   delay    in    the
completion of the projects of the customer PSUs departments as it, in turn, helps them to avoid cost and time
over-runs. The Sub-Committee has  come  to the   conclusion that delivery track record  of  these  PSUs  is  not 
very satisfactory and requires a major improvement.   Therefore,  the  Sub-Committee recommends that all these
PSUs should evolve a proper workable mechanism  to  meet  the  deadlines  for  the supply of orders placed on 
them.    Accountability   should   be   fixed   for non-adherence to the delivery schedules.          
 
 
COMMENTS
 
               All the PSUs under DHI are being advised to evolve a proper workable mechanism to meet the
deadlines for the supply of orders placed on them and fix accountability for non-adherence to the delivery
schedules. This seems to be showing results in a few cases like HEC where the delay percentage has been
brought down from 55% to 20% during the year 1999-2000.
 
 
FURTHER COMMENTS
 
PSUs under the Department of Heavy Industry are engaged in manufacture of large number of products
ranging from heavy machinery, with manufacturing cycle of 2-3 years, to manufacture of consumer goods like
paper, cement etc which have a small manufacturing cycle and are mostly supplied off the shelf. Collection of
data for delivery schedules for all the products will be voluminous and time consuming. In-order to appreciate
the problem of delays in delivery schedules the PSUs are being asked to furnish information on contractual and
actual deliveries for equipment / services with a value of Rs.5 Cr. and above. Information on these lines is being
collected and will be placed before the committee shortly.
 
 
COMMITTEE’S OBSERVATION

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
 
            The Committee is happy to note the delay percentage in a few cases such as HEC has been brought down
from 55% to 20% during the 1999-2000.  The Committee is of the opinion that this trend should be maintained
in majority of the companies.  They should be made fully professional and ability to meet the dead lines should
be strengthened in all the companies.  Once this is improved, companies will automatically get good orders and
the performance will  improve.
 
 
12.
 
RECOMMENDATION
 
               Bharat  Wagon  & Engineering Company Limited has the prospects of performing much better than its
present  performance. It requires  a  little  financial  support  which  could  help it overcome its immediate
financial hurdles. The Sub-Committee recommends that the  company  should  be provided  with  Rs.25  crore
by the Government to enable it to meet its various financial requirements.
 
 
COMMENTS
 
               In so far as release of Rs.25 crore by Government to BWEL to meet its immediate financial hurdles is
concerned, it would be pertinent to mention that M/s. Mecon were appointed on 8.4.1998 as consultants to
prepare a feasibility report on the M/s. Mecon submitted its report to the management of the BWEL on
25.6.1999 which was considered by its Board of Directors on 29.7.1999. The report of M/s. MECON is now
being considered by BBUNL, the Holding Company of BWEL. The comments of BBUNL on the report of M/s.
Mecon are yet to be received. Any proposal regarding release of financial assistance to BWEL would be
considered by the Government only when the same is found based on realistic assumptions.
 
 
FURTHER COMMENTS
 
               As regards consideration of the report of MECON by BBUNL relating to the financial restructuring
and diversification plan of BWEL, it is stated that the matter has been considered by BBUNL who have come to
the conclusion that the report need not be pursued further as it contains over-optimistic picture for BWEL. 
According to them the report contains recommendations for BWEL, to expand its activities into areas like
execution of transmission line towers and production of EMU Passenger Coaches.  As there are already a
number of players in the transmission line business especially in the small scale sectors, PSUs like BWEL can
never be competitive in the market.  As regards production of EMU Passenger Coaches, BBUNL have stated
that as the Ministry of Railways because of the resource constraints themselves are not in a position to provide
sufficient work load to the existing public sector enterprises like Jessop & BEML(Ministry of Defence and their
own workshops, BWEL will never be able to successfully venture into the area with huge capital investments. 
BBUNL on their own have prepared a turnaround package of BWEL envisaging financial and business
restructuring.  The package has been submitted to the Government of India on 19.1.2001 for consideration.
 
 
COMMITTEE’S OBSERVATION
 
            The Committee hopes that the turn around package prepared by  BUNL would come out to be a rescuer
for BWEL and BWEL would be able to  revive.   The Committee recommends that the Government should take
an immediate decision on the implementation  of the package prepared by BUNL. 
 
 
14.
RECOMMENDATION

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
 
               The Sub-Committee therefore, suggests that expeditious decision be taken by the Government on the
proposed Joint Venture proposal for Cycle Corporation of India Ltd. pending before it. In case the Joint Venture
proposal does not fructify within a reasonable period of time, the Government should consider appropriate
measures as the situation warrants.
COMMENTS
 
               In the last hearing held on 10.4.2000, BIFR directed Department of Heavy Industry to hold discussions
with the private promoters, who have expressed interest in reviving CCIL, get the proposals from them, if any,
and finalise the stand of Government regarding relieves and concessions expected from it. In pursuance of
BIFR’s directions, a meeting has been held on 15.5.2000. The three parties namely, M/s Avon Cycles, M/s
Dejco India Ltd. and Shri Manish Poddar who expressed interest were invited. However, only M/s Avon Cycles,
attended the meeting. They too did not give any concrete proposal and asked for more time to frame the
proposal. They have been requested to submit their proposal, if any, within three weeks. No proposal has been
received so far. BIFR  have passed an order of its winding up in its meeting held on 10.7.2000.
 
 
FURTHER COMMENTS
 
               Statement indicating the outstanding statutory dues as on 31.12.2000 is enclosed (Annexure-X).Efforts
are being made to liquidate the statutory dues as far as possible within the budgetary constraints.
 
 
COMMITTEE’S OBSERVATION
 
It is very unfortunate that the Government could not find any joint venture for Cycle Corporation of India
and BIFR  has ordered for its winding up.   The Government should immediately pay statutory dues to the
employees so that  the  employees may not suffer any more. 
 
 
15.
RECOMMENDATION
 
               Hindustan Cable Limited is a major Public Sector company engaged in the manufacture of telecom
cables. The Sub-Committee was given to understand that the Company was, in fact, set up to meet the
requirements of cables of telecommunication in the country. Subsequently, it also supplied cables to the Ministry
of Railways. However, in the last few years, due to slackening of orders from the Department of
Telecommunications, the Company started incurring losses. The Sub-Committee was given to understand that it
has prepared a revival package.
 
               The Ministry of Heavy Industry have informed that a revival package has already been approved for
the company.
 
               The Sub-Committee recommends that there should not be any delay on the part of Government in
timely and effective implementation   of  the   revival   package. The Sub-Committee suggests that the
Government should, on priority, direct the  Government Departments to place large orders on this Company, so
as  to   bring it back to its old glory. The Sub-Committee  would also  suggest that the Government should fairly
consider of bringing the Company under the administrative fold of the Department of Telecommunications.
Immediate action in this regard would save the company of any further losses and it would obviate the need of, if
any, non-plan assistance from the Government.
 
 
COMMENTS
 

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
               The Government approved a package of assistance together with capital restructuring which, inter-alia,
included reservation of orders. While granting the revival package, Government decided to retain the
administrative control of Hindustan Cables Limited with the Department of Heavy Industry.
 
 
FURTHER COMMENTS
 
               The package of assistance together with financial restructuring for Hindustan Cables Limited was
approved by the Cabinet on 27.1.99.  With the availability of orders under the package of assistance, the
company achieved production of 85.43 LCKM of Jelly Filled Cables and 46860 FKM of Optical Fibre Cables
during the year 1999-2000.  The Turnkey Project Division achieved a turnover of Rs. 218 crore.  Overall the
Company achieved turnover of Rs. 803.51 crore during 1999-2000 registering 350% growth over the actual of
Rs. 222.31 crore during 1998-99.
 
               After providing for interest and depreciation, the net loss came down to Rs. 39.32 crore from a level of
Rs. 138.73 crore during the previous year 1998-99, also the net loss for the year 1999-2000 could be contained at
a level of Rs. 39.32 crore as against Rs. 50.51 crore projected at the end of the first year of implementation of the
package.  In the current year 2000-01 the company has achieved a turnover of Rs. 592.18 crore as against
Rs.501.43 crore in the corresponding period previous year thereby registering a growth of 18%.  The estimated
net loss from April, 2000 to December, 2000 is Rs. 49.97 crore.  
 
 
COMMITTEE’S OBSERVATION
 
            The Committee is happy to note that Hindustan Cables Ltd.  achieved a turnover  of Rs.803.51 crore
rupees during the 1999-2000 registering a 350% growth over the previous year.  The net loss could also be
contained at around 39.32 crore which was the same previous year.  But the loss during 2000-2001 is likely to be
more than Rs.50 crore.  The growth rate also is likely to be around 18 %. The Committee feels that 
implementation of the revival package needs to be regularly monitored.
 
16.
RECOMMENDATION
 
                        Although,  the  Government  has  approved  the  financial  and business  restructuring  of  the
company, the company is faced with  acute  shortage  of  working  capital   for  its  various manufacturing
divisions.   This in turn is adversely affecting the performance of the Company. The Sub-Committee, therefore,
is of the view  that   Andrew Yule &  Company Ltd.  should be provided with requisite amount of funds to help
extricate itself from the difficult situation it is in.
 
 
COMMENTS
 
               On the basis of the recommendations of SBICAP for financial and business restructuring of the
company, a detailed proposal was considered and approved by Government during 1d997-98 which , inter-alia,
envisaged :-
 
(i)
         Government shall provide Rs.19.00 crores to AYCL as advance to be adjusted against the
recommended Rights Issue for Rs.39.49 crores at par in 1997-98. In addition, the Plan budgetary
support of Rs.8.00 crores to AYCL already provided for in 1997-98 budget, is to be treated a Equity.
 
(ii)
       Government shall provide non-plan budgetary support of Rs.17 crores to AYCL at normal rate of
interest with interest holiday upto the year 2003-04 and repayment of loan shall be in five equal annual
installments starting from the year 2004-05.
 

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
(iii)      The total amount of loans of Rs.12.49 crores disbursed to AYCL during 1995-96 and 1996-97
including accrued interest of Rs.0.71 crores as on 31.3.1997 shall be treated as equity and adjusted
against the proposed Rights Issue.
 
(iv)     In order to achieve spinning off of the Engineering and Belting Divisions by 1997-98, more then 51%
shares of proposed new companies are allowed to be ceded in favour of JV  Partners. The spinning of
may extend to out right sale of these Divisions.
 
(v)
       In principle approval for exploring possibilities of converting Electrical and Tea Divisions of the
Company into Joint Venture companies with suitable partner(s) ceding 51% Shares or more of
proposed J.V. Companies in favour of the JV partners or even completely privatizing the Divisions.
 
               Plan and Non-Plan Loan of Rs.44.00 crores as above were provided to the Company in March, 1998 in
addition to conversion of outstanding loan along with interest amounting to Rs.12.49 crore into Equity.
Consequently the paid up Capital of the Company went up to Rs.50.06 crores. The Company utilized the entire
sum of Rs.44.00 crores for repayment of loans to Fis etc. and obtained a one time settlement benefit of Rs.6.15
crores. The Company have continued to face working capital shortage due to the losses incurred by both the
Engineering and Belting Divisions.
 
               The Belting Division was finally spun off to a separate Joint Venture Company viz. Phoenix Yule
Limited with effect from 1.2.1999. This not only enabled the company to pay off the Bank and other loans of the
Company from out of the purchase consideration received by way of cash from Phoenix AG,  Germany, but also
stopped erosion of capital arising out of losses of Belting Division and improved the working capital position of
the Company.
 
               ICICI suggested financial restructuring and improving the performance of Engineering Division for
attracting a suitable partner for formation of JVC.
              
               In the meantime, the Company raised Rs.20 crores of Bonds from the market and initiated steps for
reviving the aforesaid Bonds issue. During 2000-01, the Company expects substantial improvement in the
performance of the Engineering Division and Electrical Division.
 
               The Company is hopeful that without further financial assistance from the Government, it may be able
to sustain profitable operations in future.
 
 
FURTHER COMMENTS
 
               The performance of AYCL during the last two years after the financial and business restructuring of the
company is as follows:
                                                                                     (Rs. In crores)
 1998-1999 1999-2000
Sales 264.34 212.23
Profit after tax (PAT) 2.20 1.56
 
               The lower turn over in 1999-2000 was due to hiving off of the Belting Division of the company w.e.f.
1.2.99.
 
 
 COMMITTEE’S OBSERVATION
 
            The Committee  understands  that  the Department of Heavy  Industry is presently considering  a Group
Re-structuring Plan for the Company. The Committee recommends that  the same Plan should be implemented at
the  earliest.

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
            The Committee  also observes that the Government  had earlier approved a programme to locate a
suitable  joint - venture  Partner for the Engineering Division of the Company. But so far, no  joint -venture
Partner  could be located . The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department  of Heavy Industry
should make efforts  to find a  suitable joint-venture  Partner for the Engineering Division of the Company
keeping in view   the success  achieved after  converting the  Belting Division  of the Company into a joint-
venture Company.
 
             The Committee further  notes that the Company’s performance has been adversely affected owing to
huge arrears of payments not received from the  State Governments Agencies.  In this context, the Committee
notes that BHEL had requested that funds may be allocated directly to BHEL out of the Central Plan Assistance
(CPA) to States against the outstanding dues from SEBs and power projects. The Cabinet Committee on
Economic Affairs (CCEA) also agreed to the proposal.  The Committee recommends that Department of Heavy
Industry should moot a proposal to CCEA for allocation of funds directly to AYCL out of Central Plan
Assistance to States against outstanding dues from SEBs on the same analogy that is being done in the case of
BHEL. The Committee feels such course of action will be of immense help to AYCL  which is  in dire need  of
cash resources to carry- out its various activities.         
 
17.
 
RECOMMENDATION
 
               The absence of transport subsidy facility to the North-Eastern units of Hindustan Paper Corporation
Ltd.  has severely affected the company's performance.    The  produce  of  these units  have  lost their
competitiveness owing to the high cost of transportation in the absence of transport subsidy. The Sub-Committee
recommends that transport subsidy to the North-Eastern Units of the Hindustan  Paper  Corporation  Ltd. must
be provided.
 
 
COMMENTS
 
               Proposal for extending transport subsidy facility to both the units viz. Nagaon Paper Mills and Cachar
Paper Mills of HPC  in NE  Region has been taken up with Ministry of Home Affairs.
 
 
FURTHER COMMENTS
 
The matter was taken with Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion, Ministry of Commerce &
Industry who have informed that under the New Industrial Policy and Other Concessions announced by the
Government in December 1997 for accelerating the industrial development in the North East Region, the
Transport Subsidy Scheme, 1971 has been extended further for a period of seven years i.e. 31.3.2007, on
existing terms, for the States located in the region. For other regions also, the Scheme is valid upto 31.3.2007.
 
The Scheme was modified/ amended vide notification dated 28.7.1993 restricting the eligibility of a
unit with effect from 1.9.1993 for a period of five years from the date of commencement of commercial
production. This date was subsequently substituted to 1.4.1995 vide notification dated 29.9.1995 when the
scheme was extended upto 31.3.2000. In other words all those units which have completed 5 years of the
production as on 31.3.1995 will cease to be eligible for further benefit under the Scheme and the units which
have commenced commercial production within a period of 5 years prior or after 1.4.1995 will cease to be
eligible once 5 year period is over or the expiry of the Scheme, whichever is earlier.
 
In view of above, Deptt. of IPP have informed that no exception can be made in the case of Nagaon
Paper Mills and Cachar Paper Mills - the units of M/s Hindustan Paper Corporation Limited located in the
North-East Region as the Corporation has already availed the subsidy benefits for the aforesaid units for the
maximum period as permissible under the Scheme.

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
 
 
COMMITTEE’S  OBSERVATION
 
               The Committee does not agree with the contention of the government that no exception can be made in
the case of Nagaon Paper Mills and Cachar Paper Mills for extension of transport subsidy.The Committee feels
that an exception can be made in the case of the North Eastern units of Hindustan Paper Corporation Limited for 
extending transport subsidy.  Government may seriously consider the issue, particularly in the interest of the
development of North-East Region. The Department of Heavy Industry may submit a note for consideration of
Union Cabinet.
 
 
19.
 
RECOMMENDATION
 
                        Hindustan  Newsprint  Limited  has  been  bearing the brunt of import of cheaper  newsprint.   
This  imported  newsprint  is eating  into  the market base of indigenous newsprint units in general. In the view
of the Sub-Committee, there is an urgent  need for  imposition  of anti-dumping duty on the imported newsprint
to save the domestic newsprint manufacturing units.
 
 
COMMENTS
 
               The issue regarding imposition of Anti-Dumping on the imported newsprint was taken up by
Department of IPP who have informed that Ministry of Commerce (DGFT) have not agreed stating that it is not
possible to change the Import Policy of Newsprint in view of GOI’s international commitments.
 
 
FURTHER COMMENTS
 
Observing that overseas suppliers are offering their all size newsprint at throw away prices which
clandestinely find their way into writing & printing paper market, this Ministry has sent suggestions to the
Ministry of Finance for proposed modifications in the Custom - Excise Duty structure for the year 2001-02
which include that newsprint import may be allowed in the reel sizes of 60" x 32" and 64" only which is the
specific size for printing of newspapers. Import of odd size reels may be either restricted or Custom Duty at the
rate applicable to "Paper" be imposed. Also Custom Duty on waste paper may be based "on actual user"
condition as applicable in the case of wood pulp.
 
 
RECOMMENDATION
              
               The Committee recommends that  the Department of Heavy Industry should pursue with the Ministry
of  Finance the proposed modifications.
 
21.
 
RECOMMENDATION
 
               Bharat Ophthalmic Glass Ltd.  is the only company of its  kind in  the country engaged in the
production of flint buttons for correction of eyesights and some products of strategic import. Despite this fact,
today the company finds itself  amidst  the threats of  complete  liquidation.
 
               The Sub-Committee has come to know that an Expert Committee has prepared its report on viability of

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
the company which is at present under consideration of Government. The Sub-Committee hopes that something
positive will come out in favour of BOGL.
              
               The Sub-Committee recommends that Government should give right support to optimise production to
bring down average cost. Other cost reduction methods including VRS may be evolved and loans etc. should be
written off to give BOGL a chance to survive.
 
 
COMMENTS
 
               Under the Voluntary Separation Scheme, 214 employees of BOGL were granted Voluntary Retirement.
Based on the recommendations of an Expert Group, the revival of BOGL is under consideration of the
Government.
 
 
FURTHER COMMENTS
 
               BOGL was referred to BIFR in 1992.  An Expert Group appointed by the Govt. to assess the viability
of BOGL has recommended revival of BOGL.  The revival scheme recommended as by the Expert Group has
been forwarded to the BIFR and the operating agency for preparation of a draft rehabilitation package.
 
               In the meeting of the BIFR on 11.1.2001, the Board has given time up to 25.2.2001 for submission of
the revised draft rehabilitation package by the Operating Agency to the BIFR.
 
 
COMMITTEE’S OBSERVATION
 
            In spite of the special nature of Bharat Opthalmic Glass Ltd., a lot of  delay is being caused in finalizing
the rehabilitation package.  The Committee recommends that immediate steps should be taken for submission,
approval and implementation of the rehabilitation package.  Government in the meanwhile should infuse funds
into the company so that the company keeps going in the right direction.
 
 
24.
 
RECOMMENDATION
 
               Praga Tools Ltd., a subsidiary of HMT Ltd.   is  a  victim  of liberalisaton and  disintegration  of  the
erstwhile USSR.  It has had to simultaneously fight on two fronts.  As  a  result, it has  not  been able to hold on
to itself.  The revival plan prepared by the State Bank of Hyderabad holds the  promise  to retrieve the company
from the morass of sickness. The Committee was informed that a turn around plan for PTL was partially
approved on 4.5.1999. It was decided to provide funds to the extent of Rs.20.44 crore, Rs.10.49 crore for
reimbursement of cash losses for restoring the net worth of PTL to satisfactory level and Rs.9.95 crore for
payment of outstanding statutory dues. In addition, it was decided to provide Rs.8.55 crore for manpower
rationalisation out of which Rs.5.09 crore have already been released. Government guarantee to cover the entire
exposure of Rs.36.47 crore was also provided. Restructuring part of the proposal i.e. conversion of existing loan
into equity and waiver of unpaid accumulated interest were referred to BIFR. BIFRs recommendations are still
awaited.
 
 
COMMENTS
 
               M/s S.B. Billimoria & Co. were appointed as consultants to examine the reports of OA and give their
recommendations to draw a revival package of PTL as directed by BIFR. The report has been submitted by the

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
consultant on 3.7.2000 is under consideration.
 
 
COMMITTEE’S OBSERVATION
           
Much time is being spent on revising and considering revival packages.  The Committee hopes that at
least now the operating agency would submit the revised draft rehabilitation package and the BIFR would taken
an early decision thereon.
 
The Committee understands that  the Government have decided to find a joint-venture for the  Praga
Tools Ltd.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should continue to support the
Company till a joint-venture partner is  found for the  Company
 
 
26 & 27
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
             Hindustan Photo  Films Manufacturing Company Ltd.  is the only company  in  the  country   engaged  
in   the   photo   films manufacturing   and  is  one  of  the  world's  six  photo film manufacturers.   Before 
liberalisation,  it   enjoyed   total monopoly, but with the onset of liberalisation it began to lose its  grip  over 
the  market   because   of   the availability  of imported cheap photo goods of multinationals in  the  country.
Presently,  the  company  is in dire straits and struggling to weather the vagaries of liberalisation.  For a reversal
in its fortunes, the company needs a major financial restructuring. In the opinion of the Sub-Committee, the
Government should provide  requisite  support for financial restructuring of the company in order to enable it to 
come  out  of  the  trap  of sickness.
 
             The interests of Hindustan Photo Films  Manufacturing  Company Limited are being hit hard by the
existing duty structure. Although,  the customs duty on the polyester sub-base which is used for manufacturing
films by HPF  Ltd.,  has  been  brought down  to  nil, there is need for enhancing customs duty on the imported
semi-finished and finished photo goods. Therefore,  the  Sub-Committee recommends a steep increase in the
customs duty levied on the import of semi-finished  and finished photo goods to protect HPF Ltd.
 
 
COMMENTS
 
               HPF was referred to BIFR on 14.10.95 and was declared sick on 23.01.96. Revival of the Company is
under consideration of GOI/BIFR. Based on the reports of OA (IDBI), Consultant (PWC)  & the management of
HPF, a draft note for the Cabinet seeking financial and fiscal relieves to HPF is under finalisation.
 
               The Deptt. of Heavy Industry have been requesting Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Revenue to increase
customs duty on import of semi-finished and finished photo goods to protect the interests of HPF and to allow it
a level playing field. This is again proposed to be included in the proposed draft note for the Cabinet to revive
HPF, as one of the incentives to be provided to HPF.
 
 
FURTHER COMMENTS
 
A Note for the Cabinet has been submitted to the Cabinet Sectt. on 10.1.2001 to revive the company
through support and financial restructuring.
 
 
COMMITTEE’S OBSERVATION
           

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
The Committee feels that Government needs to take an early decision on approving the revival of package of
Hindustan  Photo Film Ltd.   This is the right time for the Government to help the company to enable it to face
the tough competition  ahead.
 
 
31.
 
RECOMMENDATION
 
               One such company which has successfully withstood the changes brought about by the liberalisation of
Indian economy. The impressive track record of it calls for a special mention of its achievements. As a matter of
fact, BHEL is a role model for other PSUs of Ministry of Heavy Industry. For, it has managed to stay in the race
despite the odds faced by it as a result of stiff competition unleashed by the multinational giants operating in its
field of  specialisation namely, manufacture of power plants. Though, BHEL has managed to sustain its viability
yet it is facing some unfair challenges. The absence of a level playing field vis-à-vis its multinational
competitors has been posing stiff challenges to the company. This is leading to an ever increasing pressure on
the profitability of  it. Despite this, the company has been constantly upgrading its technology and has also been
successful in acquiring state of the art technology used in HVDC power projects. This reflects the commitment
of the company as a whole to serve the nation even when the odds are stacked against it. Therefore, what this
company requires is little help from the Government in the form of suitable policy measures. In this regard, the
Sub-Committee draws the attention of the Government to the issues of price and purchase preference to BHEL,
and import duty concessions to the foreign companies. Though, in some cases price and purchase preference is
granted to the PSUs, the positive results of this measure are negated by the import duty concessions extended to
the foreign companies by the Government. These concessions and exemptions are precisely the reasons for the
playing field not being level for domestic companies or for that matter PSUs as the bids offered by foreign
players are much lower in comparison to the ones offered by PSUs. In other words, the competition is killed well
before it begins. The Sub-Committee believes that the need of the hour is not to go back to the days of
protectionism rather to provide a level playing field to all the players for the sake of  healthy competition.
 
               In view of the above, the Sub-Committee has come to the conclusion that the Government should take
necessary policy measures to extend 15%  price and purchase preference to BHEL vis-à-vis its bids for domestic
power projects. It also recommends that the Government should review its policy of giving duty concessions to
the foreign companies inasmuch as it leads to disadvantages to the domestic companies especially the PSUs. It is
the considered view of the Sub-Committee that foreign companies should not be shown favour at the expense of
domestic companies.
 
 
COMMENTS
 
This Ministry has taken up the following issues with the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of
Commerce:-
 
(i)
                  Restoration of refund of terminal excise duty as available to domestic bidders in the Exim Policy
1999-2000;
 
(ii)
                Continuance of the Price Preference of 15% to domestic bidders in case of World Bank/ADB
funded projects irrespective of the rate of customs duty;
 
Alternatively…
      Equipment  imports in the case of projects funded by UN/World Bank/ADB should attract customs duty
of at least 15%.
 
 
FURTHER COMMENTS

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
 
Ministry of Commerce declined the proposal of this ministry to restore refund of Terminal Excise
Duty(TED) in EXIM Policy 1999- 2000, as these benefits are directly related to the incidence of Custom
Duty(CD) and Counter-veiling Duty(CVD) on the imports for the project, i.e. whenever the imports are
exempted from the incidence of CVD, the domestic supplier is given the benefit of refund of TED. In die budget
2000-2001, in respect of power projects other than mega- power projects. fertilizer projects and refineries, CVD
has been increased to 16% and therefore the benefit of refund of TED is withdrawn for such projects.
 
A meeting was held by the Finance Secretary on 26.7.2000 to discuss the issue regarding the
competitiveness of Domestic Industries. As a follow up of this meeting, a note highlighting the following three
issues which are adversely affecting the domestic Industries was circulated to the concerned Ministries/
Departments by the Department of Revenue:-
 
(i)
                  Restoration of refund of TED in EXIN4 Policy 2000-01
 Applicability of withdrawal of refund of TED for contracts finalised before31.03.2000
 
(iii)        Rescindment of Customs Notification No. 85/99-CUS dated  06.07.99    permitting imports at
zero duty by projects funded by International organisations.
 
After analysing the views expressed by the various concerned Departments, Department of Revenue
summarised the position and recommended to this Ministry to take up the issues with TRU and DGFT.
 
Accordingly, the issue regarding restoration of TED for contracts finalised before 31.3.2000 was taken
up with DGFT. DGFT have since replied that the changes effected in the policy will be applicable in respect of
supplies effected from 1.4.2000 irrespective of whether LOI was opened prior to 31.3.2000 or after 31.3.2000.
 
The other issues mentioned in SI No. (i) and (iii) above have been taken up with the TRU. This is still
under the consideration of TRU.
 
 
COMMITTEE’S OBSERVATION
 
            Keeping in view the special role played by BHEL to the economy of the country and to enable it to face
the on-slaught of the foreign companies , the Committee recommended earlier that the Government should take
necessary policy measures to extend 15 % Purchase   Preference to BHEL  for International competitive  bids 
funded by multilateral funding agencies for domestic power projects.  The Committee also felt that foreign
companies should not  be shown favour at the expense of domestic companies.  The Committee now
recommends that the Ministry of Finance should take early dicision in respect of rescindment  of Custom
Notification No.85/9/CUS  dated 6-7-99  which allows import at  zero duty and DGFT should consider, as
special case, to issue notification for refund of terminal excise duty for projects ordered/bids under International 
Competitive  Bidding  prior to 1.4.2000.
 
The Committee is given  to understand that prior to 31.3.2000, domestic manufactures had secured
orders for projects and bids under International Competitive Bidding by passing on to the customer the benefit of
Refund of Terminal Excise Duty as applicable in the extant EXIM Policy. In the EXIM Policy announced on
31.3.2000, this benefit has been withdrawn. This may not impact short  duration projects,  but in case of long
duration power projects, where the cycle time for completion is normally 3-4 years, the schedule for supply of
capital goods is invariably 2-3 years. In all such contracts, Excise Duty (ED) is charged extra over and  above
the basic price of the equipment. Since this ED was refundable to the manufacturer, it was not indicated in the
price settled with customers. However, with the withdrawal of this refund, the 16% ED being quite substantial,
cannot be expected to be absorbed by the manufacturer. However, since the customers have frozen their project
cost and the financing structure based on the settled price and obtained approvals of competent/statutory
authorities, they are also not prepared to re-open their books    and accept  this additional duty burden.   In  such
a situation,  where customers are neither agreeable   to  re-negotiate the prices   to  compensate  the

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
manufacturers , nor are they ready  to pay the  applicable excise duty, it has adversely  affected   the domestic
manufacturers.
 
The Committee, therefore recommends   that  as an  IMMEDIATE  MEASURE,  for all projects 
finalised/bids (under International competitive bidding)  before 31.3.2000,  the refund of  Terminal Excise Duty
may be notified  as a special measure for  prior period projects/bids (before 31.3.2000)  for maintaining the
continuity of extant  Exim Policy for products thus affected.
 
 
CHAPTER – IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been received
are as follows :-
 
 
NIL
 
CHAPTER - V
           OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
 
The Committee noted that the BIFR has sanctioned the revival plan in the case of  12 PSUs and the
Government of India has initiated action.  The Committee does not find considerable change in the performance
of these 12 units in  1999-2000 as compared to 1998-99.    Except   2 or 3 companies, implementation of the
revival package  is in the stage of midway only in respect of most of the remaining companies.  In some of the
companies, revival plans are not yielding desired fruits.   The Committee is constrained to note that revival plans
in the case of Bharat Pumps & Compressors Ltd; Triveni Structurals Ltd. And Burn Standard Co. Ltd. are being
reviewed.  The Committee feels that wherever the plans are not working well, a more holistic and realistic
approach needs to be adopted.  The Committee’s  considered view  is that the pace of  implementation of revival
package needs to be increased  so that these companies may not face any further loss  of time.  As regards the
companies where Government have on their own sanctioned restructuring plan, the Committee recommends that
a regular monitoring may be kept on the implementation of restructuring plan. These companies may not be
allowed to further deteriorate from the present condition. 
 
                                                                                                (  Page 20  )
 
 
The Committee is happy to note the delay percentage in a few cases such as HEC has been brought down
from 55% to 20% during the 1999-2000.  The Committee is of the opinion that this trend should be maintained
in majority of the companies.  They should be made fully professional and ability to meet the dead lines should
be strengthened in all the companies.  Once this is improved, companies will automatically get good orders and
the performance will  improve.
 
                                                                                                ( Page 21  )
 
The Committee hopes that the turn around package prepared by  BUNL would come out to be a rescuer
for BWEL and BWEL would be able to  revive.   The Committee recommends that the Government should take
an immediate decision on the implementation  of the package prepared by BUNL. 
                                                            ( Page 22  )

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
 
 
It is very unfortunate that the Government could not find any joint venture for Cycle Corporation of India
and BIFR  has ordered for its winding up.  The Government should immediately pay statutory dues to the
employees so that  the  employees may not suffer any more. 
( Page 23  )
 
 
The Committee is happy to note that Hindustan Cables Ltd.  achieved a turnover  of Rs.803.51 crore
rupees during the 1999-2000 registering a 350% growth over the previous year.  The net loss could also be
contained at around 39.32 crore which was the same previous year.  But the loss during 2000-2001 is likely to be
more than Rs.50 crore.  The growth rate also is likely to be around 18 %. The Committee feels that 
implementation of the revival package needs to be regularly monitored.
 
                                                                                                       ( Page 24  )
 
 
The Committee  understands  that  the Department of Heavy  Industry is presently considering  a Group
Re-structuring Plan for the Company. The Committee recommends that  the same Plan should be implemented at
the  earliest.
 
            The Committee  also observes that the Government  had earlier approved a programme to locate a
suitable  joint - venture  Partner for the Engineering Division of the Company. But so far, no  joint -venture
Partner  could be located . The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department  of Heavy Industry
should make efforts  to find a  suitable joint-venture  Partner for the Engineering Division of the Company
keeping in view   the success  achieved after  converting the  Belting Division  of the Company into a joint-
venture Company.
 
             The Committee further  notes that the Company’s performance has been adversely affected owing to
huge arrears of payments not received from the  State Governments Agencies.  In this context, the Committee
notes that BHEL had requested that funds may be allocated directly to BHEL out of the Central Plan Assistance
(CPA) to States against the outstanding dues from SEBs and power projects. The Cabinet Committee on
Economic Affairs (CCEA) also agreed  to the proposal.  The Committee recommends that Department of Heavy
Industry should moot a proposal to CCEA for allocation of funds directly to AYCL out of Central Plan
Assistance to States against outstanding dues from SEBs on the same analogy that is being done in the case of
BHEL. The Committee feels such course of action will be of immense help to AYCL  which is  in dire need  of
cash resources to carry- out its various activities.         
 
( Page 26  )
 
 
               The Committee does not agree with the contention of the government that no exception can be made in
the case of Nagaon Paper Mills and Cachar Paper Mills for extension of transport subsidy.The Committee feels
that an exception can be made in the case of the North Eastern units of Hindustan Paper Corporation Limited for 
extending transport subsidy.  Government may seriously consider the issue, particularly in the interest of the
development of North-East Region. The Department of Heavy Industry may submit a note for consideration of
Union Cabinet.
                                                                                                                             ( Page 27  )
 
 
               The Committee recommends that  the Department of Heavy Industry should pursue with the Ministry
of  Finance the proposed modifications.
 
( Page 28  )

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
 
 
In spite of the special nature of Bharat Opthalmic Glass Ltd., a lot of  delay is being caused in finalizing
the rehabilitation package.  The Committee recommends that immediate steps should be taken for submission,
approval and implementation of the rehabilitation package.  Government in the meanwhile should infuse funds
into the company so that the company keeps going in the right direction.
 
                                                                                                             ( Page 29  )
 
 
Much time is being spent on revising and considering revival packages.  The Committee hopes that at
least now the operating agency would submit the revised draft rehabilitation package and the BIFR would taken
an early decision thereon.
 
The Committee understands that  the Government have decided to find a joint-venture for the  Praga
Tools Ltd.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should continue to support the
Company till a joint-venture partner is  found for the  Company
 
                                                                                                              ( Page 30  )
 
 
The Committee feels that Government needs to take an early decision on approving the revival of
package of Hindustan  Photo Film Ltd.   This is the right time for the Government to help the company to enable
it to face the tough competition  ahead.
 
                                                                                                              ( Page 31  )
 
 
Keeping in view the special role played by BHEL to the economy of the country and to enable it to face
the on-slaught of the foreign companies , the Committee recommended earlier that the Government should take
necessary policy measures to extend 15 % Purchase   Preference to BHEL  for International competitive  bids 
funded by multilateral funding agencies for domestic power projects.  The Committee also felt that foreign
companies should not  be shown favour at the expense of domestic companies.  The Committee now
recommends that the Ministry of Finance should take early dicision in respect of rescindment  of Custom
Notification No.85/9/CUS  dated 6-7-99  which allows import at  zero duty and DGFT should consider, as
special case, to issue notification for refund of terminal excise duty for projects ordered/bids under International 
Competitive  Bidding  prior to 1.4.2000.
 
The Committee is given  to understand that prior to 31.3.2000, domestic manufactures had secured
orders for projects and bids under International Competitive Bidding by passing on to the customer the benefit of
Refund of Terminal Excise Duty as applicable in the extant EXIM Policy. In the EXIM Policy announced on
31.3.2000, this benefit has been withdrawn. This may not impact short  duration projects,  but in case of long
duration power projects, where the cycle time for completion is normally 3-4 years, the schedule for supply of
capital goods is invariably 2-3 years. In all such contracts, Excise Duty (ED) is charged extra over and  above
the basic price of the equipment. Since this ED was refundable to the manufacturer, it was not indicated in the
price settled with customers. However, with the withdrawal of this refund, the 16% ED being quite substantial,
cannot be expected to be absorbed by the manufacturer. However, since the customers have frozen their project
cost and the financing structure based on the settled price and obtained approvals of competent/statutory
authorities, they are also not prepared to re-open their books    and accept  this additional duty burden.   In  such
a situation,  where customers are neither agreeable   to  re-negotiate the prices   to  compensate  the
manufacturers , nor are they ready  to pay the  applicable excise duty, it has adversely  affected   the domestic
manufacturers.
 
The Committee, therefore recommends   that  as an  IMMEDIATE  MEASURE,  for all projects 

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
finalised/bids (under International competitive bidding)  before 31.3.2000,  the refund of  Terminal Excise Duty
may be notified  as a special measure for  prior period projects/bids (before 31.3.2000)  for maintaining the
continuity of extant  Exim Policy for products thus affected.
 
                                                                                                      ( Page 33-34  )
 
ANNEXURES
ANNEXURE –I
 
               Statement showing the name of PSUs and their date of reference to BIFR
 
Sl. No. PSUs Date of Reference to BIFR
 
1. Scooter India Ltd. (SIL) May’ 92
2. Bharat Pumps & Compressors Ltd. (BPCL) Feb’ 92
3. Triveni Structurals Ltd. Feb’ 92
4. Richardson & Cruddas Ltd. (R&C) Feb’ 92
5. National Instruments Ltd. (NIL) June’ 92
6. Heavy Engineering Corp. (HEC) Feb’ 92
7. Burn Standard Co. Ltd. (BSCL) Nov’ 94
8. Jessop & Co. Ltd. Feb’ 95
9. Braithwaite & Co. Ltd. June’ 92
10. Bharat Brakes & Valves Ltd. (BBVL) June’ 92
11. RBL Ltd. (RBL) June’92
12. Instrumentation Ltd. (ILK) Oct’ 93
13. National Bicycle Corporn. of India Ltd. (NBCIL) Feb’ 92
14. Tannery & Footwear Corporation of India Ltd. (TAFCO) Feb’ 92
15. Bharat Process and Mechanical Engineers Ltd. (BPMEL) May’ 92
16. Weighbird India Ltd. (WIL) May’ 92
17. Mining & Allied Machinery Corpn. Ltd. (MAMC) Feb’ 92
18. Cycle Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIL) Feb’ 92
19. Mandya National Papers Mills Ltd. (MNPM) May’ 92
20. Hindustan Photo Films Mfg. Co. (HPF) Oct’ 95
21. Tyre Corporation of India Ltd. (TCIL) May’ 92
22. Cement Corpn. of India Ltd. (CCI) April’ 96
23. Nepa Ltd. (NEPA) May’ 98
24. Praga Tools Ltd. (PTL) Dec’ 98
25. Nagaland Pulp & Paper Co. Ltd. (NPPC) April’ 92
26. Hindustan Salts Ltd. (HSL) Dec’ 99
27. Bharat Opthalmic Glass Ltd. May’ 92
 
 
ANNEXURE –II
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE AND GRANTS EXTENDED BY GOVERNMENT TO 8 PSUs
WHERE REVIVAL PLANS ARE AWAITING RECOMMENDATIONS OF BIFR
 
Sl.
No.
Name of the
PSU
1998-99 1999-2000 2000-01 (Upto
31.1.2001)
Action taken/proposed to be taken
and the present status
Non-
plan
VRS Non-
plan
VRS Non-
plan
VRS
1. Hindustan
Photo Films
5.10 1.10 5.00 4.35 12.35 8.10 A proposal for the revival of the
company has been submitted to the

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
Ltd. (HPF) Cab. Sectt. on 10.1.2000 for
consideration of the Cabinet.
2. Tyre
Corpn. of
India Ltd.
(TCIL)
16.61 0.46 1.93 -- 0.32 0.00 BIFR directed Operating Agency
(OA) (IDBI) to issue an
advertisement for change in
management of the company
inviting offers for take
ove/leasing/amlgamation/merger
for rehabilitation with or without
one time settlement of dues of
Fis/Banks. OA issued is awaited.
3. Praga Tools
Ltd. (PTL)
4.00 --  10.02 6.16 4.82 0.00 BIFR recommendations are
awaited. PTL has simultaneously
for seeking strategic JV partner.
4. Bharat
Ophthalmic
Glass Ltd.
(BOGL)
2.25 -- 15.94 -- 0.34 -- As per cabinet decision, possibility
of revival of the company is to be
explored. The revival scheme
recommended by the Expert Group
has been forwarded to the BIFR
and the operating agency for
preparation of Draft Rehabilitation
Scheme (DRS) yet to be finalized
by BIFR.
5. NEPA 10.00 -- 9.54 3.10 0.65 0.00 NEPA has been referred to DOD
for undertaking the exercise of JV
formation. Draft shareholders
agreement, purchase agreement
have been finalized by IMG (Inter-
Ministerial Group) on 12.1.2001.
In addition, capital restructuring is
also under finalisation.
 
Sl.
No.
Name of the
PSU
1998-99 1999-2000 2000-01 (Upto
31.1.2001)
Action taken/proposed to be taken
and the present status
Non-
plan
VRS Non-
plan
VRS Non-
plan
VRS
6. Cement
Corporation
of India Ltd.
(CCI)
 8.31 -- 36.77 4.57 33.28 0.00 DRS not yet finalized by BIFR.
OA has been directed on
28.7.2000 by BIFR to engage a
Merchant Banker for sale of CCI
units individually or collectively.
Advertisement  for sale like to be
issued shortly.
7. Hindustan
Salt Ltd.
(HSL)
 0.95 0.50 2.85 2.53 2.22 0.92 BIFR has asked OA to prepare
revival plan.
8. Nagaland
Pulp and
Paper
Corporation
(NPPC)
3.80 0.13 4.27 -- -- -- Operating Agency (OA) appointed
by BIFR has submitted the revival
plan in Nov. 2000. GOI are not in
a position to commit themselves
to the fresh cash infusion as equity
and other reliefs and concessions
desired by OA and would like to
reiterate their earlier view that any

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
consequential decision of the
BIFR, including winding up of
NPPC, would be acceptable to
GOI. BIFR in its hearing on the
OA to issue advt. For seeking
change of Management in NPPC
within 30 days and further 60 days
for receiving and considering the
offers. If the OA does not receive
any offer within the given time,
BIFR  would issue show cause for
winding up of NPPC. 
TOTAL 51.02 2.19 84.32 20.71 53.98 9.02  
 
 
ANNEXURE-III
DEPARTMENT OF HEAVY INDUSTRY
COORDINATION DESK
 
Category wise statement of PSUs showing their total outstanding liabilities as on 30.9.2000.
 
I.            PSUs facing winding up/closure where statutory dues to be cleared alongwith VSS.
 
Rs. In lakhs
Sl. No. Name of the PSU Total liabilities as on 30.9.2000
1. National Bicycle Corpn. of India Ltd. (NBCIL) 121.57
2. Tannery & Footwear Corpn. Ltd. (TAFCO) 1111.82
3. Cycle Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIL) 269.00
4. Weighbird India Ltd. (WIL) 92.46
5. Bharat Process & Mechanical Engineers Ltd. (BPMEL) 46.57
6. Mining and Allied Machinery Corporation (MAMC) 3948.00
7. Rehabilitation Industries Corporation Ltd. (RIC) 704.57
 TOTAL 6293.99
Say Rs.63 crore
 
 
II.           Dues to be cleared as per Revival Plan for 12 PSUs
Rs. In lakh
Sl. No. Name of the PSU Total liabilities as on 30.9.2000
1. Bharat Pumps and Compressors Ltd. (BPCL) 663.58
2. Richardson and Cruddass (R&C) 727.38
3. Triveni  Structural Ltd. (TSL) 2889.49
4. Burn Standard Co. Ltd. (BSCL) 4084.36
5.  Jessop 7848.28
6. Braithwaite 435.96
7. Bharat Brakes and Valves Ltd. (BBVL) 289.46
8. Heavy Engineering Corporation Ltd. (HEC) 8132.82
9. Scooters India Ltd. (SIL) 16.08
10. RBL 59.73
11. Instrumentation India Ltd. Kota (ILK) 2726.82
12. National Instruments Ltd. (NIL) 688.04
 TOTAL 28562.00
Say Rs.286 cr.

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
 
 
III           7 PSUs where dues are to be cleared as per revival plan awaiting Sanction of BIFR
 
Rs. In lakhs
Sl. No. Name of the PSU Total liabilities as on 30.9.2000
1. Praga Tools Ltd. (PTL) 885.00
2. NEPA Ltd. (NEPA) 1497.65
3. Hindustan Photo Films Ltd. (HPF) 2558.83
4. Bharat Ophthalmic Glass Ltd. (BOGL) 231.55
5. Cement Corporation of India Ltd. (CCI) 3473.35
6. Tyre Corporation of India Ltd. (TCIL) 1509.43
7. Hindustan Salt Ltd. (HSL) 233.35
 TOTAL 10389.16
Say Rs.104 Cr.
 
IV           4 Other loss making PSUs :-
 
Rs. In lakhs
Sl. No. Name of the PSU Total liabilities as on 30.9.2000
1. National Industrial Development Corpn. (NIDC) 633.50
2. Bharat Leather corporation (BLC) 98.86
3. Hindustan Cable Ltd. (HCL) 3772.14
4. Sambhar Salts Ltd. (SSL) 237.25
5. HMT 5058.00
 TOTAL 9799.45
Say Rs.98 crores
 
 
V            4 PSUs that are operating and can meet statutory dues from internal resources :-
 
Rs. In lakhs
Sl. No. Name of the PSU Total liabilities as on 30.9.2000
1. Bharat Heavy Plate and Vessles Ltd. (BHPV) 479.42
2. Tungabhadra Steel Products Ltd. (TSPL) 434.00
3. Bharat Heavy Electrical Ltd. (BHEL) 175.08
4. Andrew Yule and Co. Ltd. (AYCL) 22.03
 TOTAL 1110.53
Say Rs.11 crores
ANNEXURE-IV
GOVERNMENT GRANTS GIVEN TO PSEs FOR THE
LAST 3 YEARS FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF VRS
 
____________________________________________________________________ 
S.No.     Name of PSE                         1997-98           1998-99           1999-2000
                                                            Actuals             Actuals             Actuals
____________________________________________________________________ 
 
1.            Andrew Yule                         0.00                 2.25                 0.00    
2.            BBUNL                                 6.75                 8.75                 0.00    
3.            BYNL                                   3.41                 7.00                 1.97
4.            BOGL                                   0.00                 0.00                 0.00
5.            CCIL                                     0.00                 0.00                 0.00

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
6.            EPI                                        0.00                 0.80                 0.00
7.            HEC                                      20.00               11.50               7.50
8.            HCL                                      20.75               20.00               35.00
9.            HMT (inc. PTL)                     25.50               37.25               31.69
10.          ILK                                       4.15                 5.00                 21.00
11.          MAMC                                 0.00                 0.00                 0.00
12.          NBCIL                                  0.00                 0.00                 0.00
13.          NIL                                       0.00                 0.00                 4.01
14.          RIC                                       0.50                 0.00                 0.00
15.          SIL                                        0.00                 0.00                 1.00
16.          CCI                                       1.60                 0.00                 4.57
17.          HPC                                      0.00                 0.50                 0.00
18.          NEPA                                               1.50                 7.00                 3.10
19.          BLC                                      0.15                 0.00                 0.68
20.          HSL                                      0.00                 0.50                 2.53
21.          HPF                                      3.35                 1.10                 4.35
22.          TAFCO                                 0.00                 0.00                 0.00
23.          TCIL                                     1.75                 0.46                 0.00
24.          NIDC                                                0.00                 4.68                 2.42
25.          BSCL                                                0.00                 0.00                 26.65
__________________________________________________________________
               TOTAL                                89.41             106.79               146.47
__________________________________________________________________
ANNEXURE-VI
                      STATEMENT SHOWING OUTSTANDING DUES IN RESPECT
OF MAMC AS ON 31.12.2000
____________________________________________________________________________
1.            Name of the PSU                   :           Mining & Allied Machinery Corporation
                                                                        Ltd., Durgapur – 713210.
2.            Amount of Arears of
               workers on account of
               non-payment of dues.
                                                                                                                                (Rs. In Crores)
                                                           
                                                Past                              Current             Total
                                                Liabilities                      Libilities                        Libilities
                                                Upto 31.3.2K              upto 31.12.2K             (A+B)
                                                       (A)                                         (B)             
                                                ___________________________________________________
a)            Salaries & Wages      :           -                            8.64                                       8.64
 
b)           Other employee
               related statutory
               dues.
               (i)      P.F.                  :           -                           2.03                           2.03
               (ii)      E.S.I.               :           -                             -                                 -
               (iii)     Pension            :           -                             -                                 -
               (iv)     OTHERS         :          
                        - L.I.C.                        :         4.01                      0.42                          4.43
                        - Credit Co-opt:         2.96                      0.14                          3.10
- Diff. Exgratia,
  Leave Salary,
  Notice Pay.    :         1.11                       -                               1.11

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
- D.A. Arrear   :         3.50                       -                               3.50
- Gratuity          :         3.66                     0.02                           3.68
- L.T.C.           :         2.22                       -                               2.22
- Impact of HPCC
  Pay Revision   :         2.90                       -                               2.90
 
3.         Total number of
            workers employed        :                                   1503                            1503
            (At present)
 
4.         (i)  Total number of
                  workers currently
                  employed who have
                  not been paid          :      1503                     1503                            1503
                  statutory dues.       
 
5.            Quartarly Actual
               expenditure for           :       3.23                     3.23
               Salaries against
               these allocations.
ANNEXURE-IX
PERFORMANCE OF 5 PSUs WHERE GOVT. ON ITS OWN
SANCTIONED RESTRUCTURING PLANS
 
 
(Rs. Cr.)
S.NO. PSU 1998-99 (Actual) 1999-2000 (As per
Flash Results)
  Production Profit/Loss Production Profit/Loss
1. Andrew Yule  & Co.
(AYCL)
241.61 4.10 196.57 1.56
2. Hindustan Paper 347.01 9.32 396.80 10.60
3. Hindustan Cables 217.43 -145.80 803.51 -39.32
4. Nepa Ltd. 98.65 -0.12 97.77 -21.29
5. Praga Tools Ltd. 12.02 -28.84 14.06 -29.11
ANNEXURE-X
                            STATEMENT SHOWING OUTSTANDING  STATUTORY
DUES  ON 31.12.2000                __________________________________________________________________
 
1.            Name of the PSU.      CYCLE CORPORATION OF INDIA LTD.
               Ministry of Industry, Dept. of Heavy Industry
 
2.            Amount of Arears of Workers on account
               on non-payment of dues as on 31.12.2000.                                      Rs. in lakhs.
                                                           
                                                                        Current                         Past                  Total
                                                                        Liabilities                      Liabilities          Liabili-
                                                                        (2000-2001)                upto 31.3.00    ties.
                                                                        as on 31.12.00
                                                                              (A)                               (B)               (A+B)
                                                                        ------------------                     ----------------            ----------
(A)         Salaries & Wages                         189                                --                   189

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
                                 
(B)         Other Employee related
Statutory Dues       :
                        (i)         P.F.                                   20                                 --                     20
                        (ii)        ESI                                   --                                  --                     --  
                        (iii)       Pension                             --                                  --                     --
                        (iv)       Bonus                                --                              *  24                    24
                        (v)        Gratuity                             --                                 --                     --
                        (vi)       Medical                              4                                  41                    45
                        (vii)      L.T.A.                                1                                    8                      9
                                                                        -------------                 ------------      ----------                                
                                       214                                 73                  287
                                                                        -------------                 ------------      ----------
3.            Total Number of Worker employed
 
4.                     (i)         Total Number of workers
                                    currently employed who have
                                    not been paid statutory dues.                                                        403
                        (ii)        Number of retired workers
                                    who have not been paid
                                    statutory dues.
 
5.                     (i)         Budgetary allocation during 2000-2001
                                    for payment of statutory dues of
                                    workers (Rs. Lakhs)                                         NIL
                        (ii)        Quarterly Actual expenditure against
                                    these allocation e.g. 5 (i)
                                    (Rs. lakhs)                                                      does not arise.
 
                        *          Bonus for 98-99           -           22.25
                                    Bonus for 99-00           -             1.31    
                                      Still unpaid.
              
                        
MINUTES
  I
FIRST MEETING
 
The Sub-Committee–III (of Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry) on  Heavy Industries
and Public Enterprises met at 4.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 27
th February, 2001 in Room No.63, First Floor, Parliament
House, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1.         Dr. B.B. Ramaiah    -    Convenor
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2          Shri P.K. Maheshwari
 
           LOK SABHA
3          Shri Ram Singh Kaswan

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
4          Shri Sunil Khan
5          Shri Manjay Lal
6          Shri Annant Mahadeoappa Gudhe
7.         Shri Uttamrao Deorao Patil
8.         Shri Deepak Kumar
 
SECRETARIAT
            
             Shri  Tapas Das Gupta, Director
      Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
 
2.         At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the Members of the Sub-Committee and apprised them about the Action
Taken Note (ATN) received from the  Ministry  of  Heavy  Industries and Public Enterprises on the recommendations
of the 36
th Report on PSUs of  Heavy Industry – Disinvestment, Sickness and  Revival  to be taken up in the meeting.
 
3.         The Convenor stated that the pathetic conditions of some of the Public Sector undertakings can be improved
with the mutual cooperation and collaboration with various Government Departments. The Convenor requested the
members present in the meeting to express their views on the subject. Shri Sunil Khan inquired about the fate of the
revised draft rehabilitation package of  Bharat Ophthalmic Glass Ltd. (BOGL)  submitted  by the Operating Agency to
the BIFR.  He asserted that arrangements for VRS and  financial package  should be made to the company
immediately.
 
4.         Since most of the members were unable to offer their comments on the ATN  due to the paucity of time and
pre-occupation of members, the Convenor decided to hold another meeting of the Sub-Committee on Monday, the 12
th
March, 2001 to review the Action Taken Note. He further requested the member to send their comments on ATN for
further deliberation in this regard.
 
 
5.         The Convenor, thereafter, thanked the members for their presence in the meeting.
 
6.         The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 4.30 P.M.
 
II
SECOND MEETING
 
The Sub-Committee–III (of Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry) on  Heavy Industries
and Public Enterprises met at 4.00 P.M. on Monday, the 12
th March, 2001 in Room No.63, First Floor, Parliament
House, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1.         Dr. B.B. Ramaiah    -    Convenor
 
LOK SABHA
 
2          Shri Sunil Khan
3.         Shri Ram Sajiwan
4.         Shri Manjay Lal
5.         Shri Deepak Kumar
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri  Tapas Das Gupta, Director

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Dy. Secretary
      Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
 
2.         At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the Members of the Sub-Committee and apprised them about the Action
Taken Note (ATN) received from the  Ministry  of  Heavy  Industries and Public Enterprises on the recommendations 
of the 36th Report on PSUs of  Heavy Industry – Disinvestment, Sickness and  Revival  to be taken up in the meeting.
 
3.         The Convenor requested the members present in the meeting to express their views on the Action Taken Note
and the pathetic condition of some of the Public Sector Enterprises  under the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises.   One member  inquired about the fate of the revival plan  of  Bharat Ophthalmic Glass Ltd. (BOGL) 
submitted  by the Operating Agency to BIFR.   He asserted that  some of the arrangements should be made to infuse
funds in BOGL  and implement  VRS in the company so as to enable the company to come out of the financial crisis.
In this regard,  The  Director, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, stated that as per the latest information received from the
Ministry  the revival scheme recommended by the expert group has been forwarded to  the BIFR  and the operating
agency for the preparation of Draft Rehabilitation Scheme which was yet to be finalized by BIFR.
 
4.         The Member  further inquired about the Burn Standard Co. Ltd.,   Mining & Allied Machinery Corp. Ltd.
(MAMC)  and  Andrew Yule & Company  (AYCL).  He asked   whether   the funds   sanctioned  for the revival plans  
were   really being  used for  the purpose ?     He further asked  whether  there was  any provision   in the   Central 
Budget  for  2001-2002,  for  VRS  being introduced in  MAMC  and   AYCL. The  Director of the Secretariat  stated
that in the budget  there was no provision of grants for VRS  in respect of   MAMC and  Burn  Standard
 
Co. Ltd.  He stated that as per the latest information available from the Ministry it has been decided   to  close  
MAMC     which     has     been    considered    unviable   after    considering 
recommendations of the Expert Group  set up to explore the possibilities of revival. Regarding  Andrew Yule &
Company, he disclosed that it was making  profits after the implementation of the  revival plan. The Balance Sheet of  
the company indicates that in the coming days it would be one of the blue chip  companies. He further revealed that
whether revival plans are implemented in accordance with the guidelines was a responsibility of the Ministry.  He,
however, promised to write to the ministry requesting them to furnish the latest status of these companies.
 
5.         Another Member sought to know  the budgetary provision for Scooter India Ltd. The Director of the
Secretariat  giving  details of the budgetary provision stated that there was  no provision for VRS for the company.
Further, he revealed that an amount of Rs.8.00 crore have been allocated for the plan investment for the company. Shri 
Manjay Lal inquired about the status of Hindustan Engineering Corporation  (HEC) and the budgetary provisions
therefor. In this connection  it was explained  that the company had been referred to BIFR which, in turn, has directed
for the appointment of consultants for preparing feasibility study for revival of the company. He further added that
Rs.36.74 crores and Rs.22.92 crores have been allocated to the company as interest subsidy and non-plan loans
respectively in BE 2001-02  to enable  the company come out of financial crisis.
 
6.         The Convenor of the Sub-Committee informed  the members present that the Department of
Telecommunications (DoT) had promised to give atleast 10% work orders to Hindustan Cables Ltd. (HCL). Regarding
Bridge & Roof Company Ltd. (B&R) he said that the company had started earning profits after the implementation of
revival plan.
 
7.         The Convenor then requested the Members to send their suggestions, if any, on the Action Taken Note in two-
three days so that the Action Taken Report could be finalized. The Sub-Committee, thereafter, authorized the
Convenor to finalise the Action Taken Report and forward the same  to the Main Committee for consideration and
adoption.
 
8.         The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M.
 
 
III

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
THIRD MEETING
 
The Sub-Committee–III (of Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry) on  Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the    9 th April, 2001  in Room No.67, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
           
1.         Shri B.B. Ramaiah - Convenor
 
RAJYA  SABHA
 
2.            Shri P.K. Maheshwari
 
LOK SABHA
 
3.      Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
4.      Shri Ram Sajivan
5.      Shri Anant Mahadeoppa Gudhe
6.      Shri Deepak Kumar
 
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
 
2.         The Sub-Committee, in the first instance,  considered the draft    45
th Report on the action taken by the
Government on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 36 th  report on PSUs of Heavy Industry
– Disinvestment, Sickness and Revival. After some discussion, the Sub-Committee approved the draft Report.
 
3.         Thereafter, the Convenor  elaborating  the present status of the MoU  system under the Department of
Public Enterprises (DPE),  informed the Sub-Committee as under:-
“The Minister of Finance in his Budget Speech has referred to the recommendations of the Expenditure
Reforms Commission concerning downsizing in six Ministries and Departments including Department of Public
Enterprises. On the basis of the statement made by the Finance Minister, a questionnaire has been sent to the
Department of Public Enterprises, Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises, seeking their comments
on the issue of downsizing  the  Department of
 
 
Public Enterprises. The Department, while giving their comments on various issues, has stated that the
Commission has recommended that it would be sufficient if the Department of Public Enterprises is vested with
the task of monitoring, compliance with guidelines, etc. It was also stated that the preparation of MoU may be
transferred to the concerned Administrative Ministries. On the basis of the Replies furnished by the Department
of Public Enterprises, a background note has been prepared.”
 
4.         The Sub-Committee, then, decided that the  background note may be placed before the
Committee on Industry at its meeting  to be held on 10.4.2001 when the Secretary, Department of Public
Enterprise, will be heard on the Demands for Grants.
 
5.         The Sub-Committee  then adjourned at 4.00 P.M.
 

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
 
VI
SIXTH   MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 11.00 A.M.  on  Monday,  the 14th May, 2001 in Committee Room `A`, Ground Floor, 
Parliament House  Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1.         Shri Ramdas Agarwal - Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.          Dr.  Faguni Ram
3.          Shri P.K. Maheshwari
4.         Shri Jibon Roy
6.         Smt. Saroj Dubey
7.         Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhundar
8.         Prof. M.M. Aggarwal
 
LOK SABHA
 
9.         Shri A. Narendra
10.       Shri Ramdas Athawale
11.       Shri Ram  Raghunath Chaudhary
12.       Shri Anant Mahadeoappa Gudhe
13.       Shri G.J. Javiya
14.       Shri  A.C. Jose
15.       Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
16.       Shri Sunil Khan
17.       Shri Deepak Kumar
18.       Shri Manjay Lal
19.       Shri K.H. Muniyappa
20.       Shri Nagmani
21.       Shri Uttamarao Deorao Patil
22.       Shri M. Rajaiah
23.       Shri P. Rajendran
24.       Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
25.       Shri Ram Sajivan
26.       Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri  Satish Kumar, Addl. Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta,  Director
Shri  P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
 
2.         At the outset  the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee. Members then  discussed  the tour
programme of the Committee.  In this connection,  it was felt that   the Committee may  visit Mumbai in the  second
week of June  to discuss with  the officials of some PSUs on MoU system.  
 
3.                     *                                  *                                  *

45th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/45threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:12:22]
 
4.         Thereafter,  the Committee  took up  the following Reports for consideration  :-
i.                     45th Draft  ATR on 36th Report on Disinvestment, Sickness and Revival  of  PSU of            Department of 
Heavy Industry (DHI);
ii.                   46th  Draft  Report on MoU  system on Telecom Sector ;
iii.                  47th  Draft  Report on Demands for Grants  (2001-2002) pertaining to  Department of         Heavy
Industries (DHI) ;
iv.                 48th Draft  Report on  Demands for Grants  (2001-2002) pertaining to    Department          of         Public
Enterprises (DPE),
v.                                     *                                  *                                 *
vi.                       *                                  *                                 *
vii.                      *                                  *                                 *                                 
After  some  discussion, the Reports ware  adopted with some changes.
 
5.                     *                                  *                                  *
 
6.         The Committee,  thereafter .  adjourned at  1.30 P.M.   to meet again  on  24
th May, 2001.
 
____________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matters.