PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY

FIFTEENTH REPORT
ON
THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF MINISTRY OF MINES FOR 1995-96

(Presented on the 8th May, 1995)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

May, 1995/Vaisakha, 1917 (Saka)


} हि
{ CONTENTS

PaGes

I. Composrmon oF THE COMMITTEE (i) Hii)
Tl. i
5-14



COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

1. Shri Ashok Mitra — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal

3. Shri Sanatan Bisi

4. Smt. Chandrika Abhinandan Jain
5. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita

6. Shri Anil Kumar

7. Shri Govind Ram Miri

8. Shri Rajendra Prashad Mody

9. Shri V. Rajeshwar Rao

10. Shri Raj Nath Singh

11. Shri K.K. Veerappan

12. Shri Nyodek Yonggam

13. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav

14. Shri Shivajirao Giridhar Patil

15. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

16. Shri K.H. Muniyappa

17, Shri Gurudas Kamat

18. Smt. Kesharbai Sonajirao Kshirsagar
19. Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil
20. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala
21. Shri K. Ramamurthy

- Shri Balin Kuli

. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta

Shri Vishveshwar Bhagat

Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma

Shri Mullappally Ramachandran
Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad

Shri M. Baga Reddy

Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye
Smt. Sumitra Mahajan

- Shri Rajendra Agnihotri

. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar

. Shri S.N. Vekaria

. Shri Ramdew Ram

. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria

. Shri Satyanarayan Jatiya

BREESE SBRSRRPRR


FIFTEENTH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE

I, the Chairman, Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry,
having been authorised by the Committee, present this Fifteenth Report of the Committee
on the Demands for Grants for 1995-96 of the Ministry of Mines.

2. The Committee, while examining the Ministry's demands for 1995-96, considered it
important to seek views of the representatives of Chambers of Commerce such as the FICCI
and the CCI on the performance of the mines sector and the impact of recent budget
proposals relating to the Ministry of Mines. At its subsequent meetings, the Committee
heard the views of representatives of Central Trade Unions in the same context.

3. The Committee had also an opportunity to hear oral evidence of the Secretary, Ministry
of Mines on the Performance Budget in the context of Demands for Grants of the Ministry.

4. The Committee considered and adopted the present report at its sitting held on the 28th
April, 1995.

5. Unlike in the case of a number of other Ministries, the budgetary allocation for the
Ministry of Mines has been showing a decline in recent years. Keeping to this trend, the
overall provision of Rs. 195.15 crore proposed for the Ministry for 1995-96 is lower than the
revised estimate of Rs. 197.55 crore for 1994-95. The Committee would like to have the
underlying issues related to such progressively shrinking allocations discussed afresh.
According to assumptions in official circles, the country is poised for an industrial
breakthough and an annual rate of industrial growth of 10 to 12 per cent is being confidently
predicted. An industrial expansion of this order, expected to sustain itself over a decade or
thereabouts, is bound to be variegated in nature. In such circumstances, there would be a
steadily rising demand for minerals of all descriptions, including those which are under the
administrative charge of the Ministry of Mines. This demand would need to be met. There
can be a point of view that the required additional supply of basic minerals which could
support an industrial explosion of this magnitude is to be ensured either through imports or
through the initiative of the private sector. In the current stage of economic development in
the country, and despite the strides the policy of liberalisation have made, it will be
hazardous to fall back on these two alternative sources of supply in entirety. Should the
private sector not be forthcoming or should open-ended imports not be possible, bottlenecks
might develop in crucial areas, frustrating expectations of high industrial growth, It is true
that the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1957 and the Mineral
Concession Rules, 1960 have been amended two years ago with the overt purpose of
attracting private investment, including foreign private investment, in the exploration of
minerals, especially those that are of high value. The experience of the past four years
should however convey a warning: while sizable foreign capital has flown into the country,
the bulk of it has been portfolio investments in the share markets. Actual investment in
industry and manufacturing proper, or in the core sectors such as mineral development, has
been only to a modest extent. Private domestic capital has been equally shy. To assume that
a reversal of. this trend will take place in the near future is not really warranted, Certainly
the global environment is such as not to encourage ४ hypothesis of this nature. It is therefore
imperative, in the committee’s view, that the authorities do not slacken their efforts to
intensify the exploration and exploitation of basic minerals necessary for sustaining the
country’s rapid industrial advance. The budgetary allocation for the Department of Mines
should move upwards rather than be allowed to taper away year after year.

5.1 The Committee would in this connection stress particularly the role the Geological

1


Survey of India could play in the emerging phase of industrialisation in the country. Within
the limited resources made available to it, the GSI has some major achievements to its credit
in the recent period, such as the exploration of new gold provinces in Rajasthan and Kerala
and striking rich new reserves of coal, lignite, zinc, lead and maganese. The nagging paucity
of funds has however affected the GSI’s programme of modernisation and has also
compelled it to narrow down its arena of activities to within a narrow groove and abstain
from initiatives which would be of immense long-term consequence for the nation’s industrial
growth. Such activities could cover the exploration of new vistas for enlarging the output of
minerals such as coal, bauxite, lignite, copper, zinc, manganese etc., with emphasis on
continuous improvement in the quality of the raisings. It is in fact possible to conceive a
certain division of responsibility between the GSI and the Mineral Exploration Corporation
Limited, also under the administrative jurisdiction” of the Ministry of Mines. Once the
reserves,are found by the GSI, it should be the task of the MECL to take charge of the
actual development of the mines. Unfortunately, perhaps because of the static nature of
budgetary allocations in recent years, the Corporation, there is ground for suspicion, is
marking time. In the opinion of the Committee, the authorities should make up their mind
to enlarge the scope of activities of the Corporation, intensifying its organic link with the
GSI. In case however the Government has no such intention, it would be preferable to fold
up the Corporation and save the annual allocations routinely made for it; the minor chores it
performs can be transferred to another public sector organisation such as the Indian Bureau
of Mines or the National Mineral Development Corporation. The Committee would take a
similar view with respect to the allocations for the Indian Bureau of Mines and
developmental grants to scientific institutions specialising in exploring the latest frontiers of
science and technology in the relevant fields. These allocations cannot but be described as
token and would hardly succeed iin equipping the nation with state-of-the-art knowledge and
information in regard to mining technology. The Committee strongly feels the need for 8
review, at the highest level, of the issue of relative allocations of budgetary funds for
scientific, industrial and technological research and investigations keeping in view the
country’s overall requirements in the short as well as the long run.

5.02 The attention of the Committee has been drawn to the likely impact of the downward
adjustment in the rates of import duty on copper and zinc in the budget for 1995-96. The
management of the Hindustan Copper Limited, for instance, apprehend a major decline in
their sales because of external competition, and the gross revenue of the unit, it is claimed,
would be reduced by Rs 42 crore on an annual basis. The price disadvantage vis-a-vis.
imported copper is also likely to widen because ‘of the increase in railway freight. The
overall affect would be to turn the estimated net profit of Rs. 5.35 crore registered in 1994
95 to a net loss of around Rs, 40 crore in 1995-96.

5.03 A similar predicament confronts the Hindustan Zinc Limited. The reduction in the
rate of import duty on zinc and its wastes and scraps from the level of 50 per cent to that of
35 per cent and on zinc-based finished products from 50 per cent to 40 per cent is likely to
affect the competitiveness of the Hindustan Zine extractions; the increase in rail freight has
to be considered in this case too. The Hindustan Zinc Limited was expected to make a profit
of around Rs. 4.23 crore in 1994-95. The lowering of import duty is now estimated to reduce
the earnings of the unit by close to Rs. 70 crore. The reduction in the rates of import duty
of lead too would, it has been suggested, lead to a decline in the profitablity of the unit to
the tune of Rs. 10 crore.

The Committee has reasons to believe that this alarmist picture painted by the public
sector units by way of the impact of intrusion of more liberal imports following the


3

downward adjustments in rates of import duty on minerals such as copper and zinc should
not be dismissed out of hand. The issues involved are of crucial relevance for the nation’s
long-range goals. Whether globalisation must proceed at such a breakneck speed that
indigenous units, installed over the years and involving enormous capital expenditure, must
go to the wall is a moot question. A great deal can be said in favour of stretching the
process of phasing out the burden of coping, with a situation arising out of the reduction in
rates of import duty even where such reduction of duty was generally expected. The
Committee would therefore suggest that the Ministry of Mines makes due representation so
that some of the adjustments in the rates of import duty announced through this year’s
budget are reconsidered. .

5.04 There are two other matters the Committee would specifically like to mention. It had
occasion in the past to refer to uncertainties shrouding the operations of Bharat Gold Mines.
An impression, howsoever unjustified, appears to be gaining ground that having referred the
case of the unit to the Board of Industrial and Financial Reconstruction, the authorities are
assuming their duty to have been accomplished. The BIFR as an institution has a very wide
ambit of responsibility. Its procedure for decision-making is, in the circumstances, somewhat
time-consuming. In the interim, the workers of the unit have been kept on the payroll and
their wage bill has been met by the Government by periodic release of funds; the production
of gold is however on the lower side in the mines. This arrangement is hardly satisfactory,
Receiving wages while not called upon to contribute any labour to the extent they are
capable of can be demoralising in the extreme to the working class and erode their sense of
dignity. The Committee still hope that its recommendations made in its Seventh report
would receive the Government’s acceptance and necessary funds would be made available so
that the rehabilitation of the unit could be undertaken expeditiously. In this connection, the
Committee has a suggestion to offer. Despite the commitment to use the resources made
available from the National Renewal Fund for retraining and redeployment of workers
engaged in units that are shut down as a consequence of liberalisation, the outlay
undertaken till now from the NRF has been almost exclusively for the purpose of meeting
the requirements of the Voluntary Retirement Scheme. This has been the general pattern in
all the Ministries availing of NRF resources, including the Ministry of Mines. It is for
consideration whether a part of the allocation under the NRF to the Ministry could not be
utilised for the rehabilitation and modernisation of Bharat Gold Mines.

5.05 A part of the NFR allocations, the Committee would suggest, be used to put into
shipshape the activities of the Sikkim Mining Corporation. One reason for the difficulties
faced by the Corporation is the reluctance of the Hindustan Zinc Limited to accept the lead
concentrates supplied by the former on the ground of presence of high impurities. Since both
units are under the administrative charge of the Ministry of Mines, it should not be beyond
the realm of possibility for it to hammer out a compromise which would serve both well. For
example, a washery could be set up to eliminate the impurities. within a definite time
interval. It is also for consideration whether the activities of the Sikkim Mining Corporation
could not be diversified, and the unit made the epicentre for processing @ number of basic
metals with a view to meeting the requirements of the north-eastern region. The Committee
hopes the necessary budgetary allocations for the purpose would be met.

5.06 The Committee considers it important to append a few comments on the state of the
aluminium industry which is under the operational jurisdiction of the Ministry of Mines.
India has rich bauxite resources and the installed capacity for the production of aluminum is
close to 650,000 tons per annum. Unfortunately, the actual production has languished at

॥२52050


4

around 450,000 tons in recent years. The main hurdle standing in the way of the realisation
of larger output, the Committee understands, is the lack of availability of power for
Processing bauxite. This issue needs to be sorted out as expeditiously as possible; it makes
little sense to import aluminium while domestic capacity remains unutilised because of
uncertainties of power supply. In case necessary discussions may be arranged by the Ministry

5.07 The Committee has taken note of the recent initiatives to encourage the. entry of
foreign capital in the area of mining. While it is yet too early to gauge the response of
foreign investors to the changes introduced in the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and
Development) Act, it is desirable that terms and conditions set for foreign participation in
mining activities are formulated in dequate detail and tabled in the two Houses of
Parliament. Since the administrative responsibility for mining operations taking place in the
country is shared by at least three Ministries—the Ministry of Mines, the Ministry of Coal
and the Ministry of Steel—it is exceedingly impotant that, on all vital policy issues, the
Ministries maintain the closest coperation with one another. In any event, the Committee
would stress the importance of the deployment of domestically evolved technology and skills
for mining development receiving due priority in official Programmes and projections.

ASHOK MITRA
New Deu; CHAIRMAN,
28th April, 1995 DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY

STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY.



Present
1. Shri Ashok Mitra—Chairman
Members

RAJYA SABHA

2.
3. Shri
4. Shri
5. Shri
6,
7
8

Shri

Shri

- Shri

ANNEXURE
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE

XXXII

THIRTY-THIRD MEETING

The Committee met at 10.30 a.m, on Wednesday, the Sth April, 1995 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

Sanatan Bisi

Govind Ram Miri
Rajendra Prasad Mody
Raj Nath Singh

K.K. Veerappan

Ish Dutt Yaday

LOK SABHA

छः
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15,
16.
17.
18.

19

“Shri

Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri

K.H. Muniyappa
Gurudas Kamat

Balin Kuli

Chiranji Lal Sharma
Mullappally Ramachandran
Udaysingrao Gaikwad
Prabhu Dayal Katheria
Mohan Singh (Deoria)
Manjay Lal

Tej Narayan Singh
Bolla Bulli Ramaiah

SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

Shri G.K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary

Shri 5.5. Rana, Under Secretary

Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer

. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

§


WITNESSES

1. Representatives of Federation of Indian Chumbers of Commerce and Industry
1. Shri A.K. Rungta, President

2. Shri Y.P. Srivastava, Secretary

H. Representatives of Confederation of Indian Industry

1, Shri Deepak Singh, Chairman (NR)

2. Shri Rajive Kaul, Vice-President

3. Shri Dilip Chenoy, Director

4. Shrimati M. Roy, Sr. Director

5. Shri S. Sen. Sr, Director

2 * s e कर * .

3. * * . * * .

4. The Committee, thereafter, heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned
witnesses on the performance of industrial sector in general and Steel and Mines sectors in
particular and the impact of recent budget’ proposals relating to Ministries of Industry, Steel
and Mines on industrial and economic growth. The Committee directed the witnesses to
send an updated note on the various issues raised during the course of discussion.

A verbatim record of the evidence was kept.

5. The Committee then adjourned at 1.30 p.m. to meet again at 10,30 a.m. on 6th
April, 1995.


XXXIV
THIRTY-FOURTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.30 A.m. on Thursday, the 6th April, 1995 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

Present
1, Shri Ashok Mitra—Chairman हि
Members

RAJYA SABHA

2. Shri Sanatan Bisi

3. Shri Govind Ram Miri

4. Shri Raj Nath Singh

5. Shri Ish Dutt Yaday

LOK SABHA

6,

7.

8.

9;
10.
11.
12.
13.
14,
15.
16.
17,
18.
19,
20.
21,
22.

Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri

Gurudas Kamat

Rama Krishna Konathala
Balin Kuli

Manoranjan Bhakta
Vishveshwar Bhagat
Chiranji Lal Sharma
Mullappally Ramachandran
Udaysingrao Gaikwad
Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye
VY. Dhananjaya Kumar
Ramdew Ram

Prabhu Dayal Katheria
Satyanarayan Jatiya
Mohan Singh (Deoria)
Manjay Lal

Tej Narayan Singh

P. G. Narayanan

SECRETARIAT

Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri

Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

G. K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary

S. S, Rana, Under Secretary
Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer

7


WITNESSES

Representatives of All India Trade Union Congress
1. Shri A. B. Bardhan, General Secretary

2. Shri 8. D. Joshi, Secretary

2. The Committee, heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses on the
performance of industrial sector in general and Steel and Mines sectors in particular and the
impact of recent budget Proposals relating to Ministries of Industry, Steel and Mines on
industrial and economic growth. ४

A verbatim record of the evidence was kept.

3. The Committee then adjourned at 11.45 a.m. to meet again at 2.30 p.m. on 7th April,
1995.


XXXV
THIRTY-FIFTH MEETING

The Committee met at 2.30 p.m. on Friday, the 7th April, 1995 in Committee Room
‘A’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

Present
1. Shri Ashok Mitra—Chairman
Members
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Sanatan Bisi
3. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
4. Shri Govind Ram Miri
5. Shri Raj Nath Singh
6. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav
7. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala
9. Shri Balin Kuli
10. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta
11, Shri Vishveshwar Bhagat
12. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma
13. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran
14. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad
15. Shri M. Baga Reddy
16. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye
17. Shri ५, Dhananjaya Kumar
18. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria
19. Shri Satyanarayan Jatiya
20. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria)
at. Shri Naval Kishore Rai
22. Shri Manjay Lal
23. Shri Purna Chandra Malik
24. Shri Tej Narayan Singh
25. Shri P.G. Narayanan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

9


10

e
Shri G.K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary

Shri S.S. Rana,- Under Secretary
Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer
WITNESSES

Zz . * °
I. Representatives of Ministry of Mines
(1) Shri A.C. Sen, Secretary
(2) Shri $. Narashimhan, Additional Secretary
(3) Shri B.P. Mathur, Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser
(4) Shri Divakar Dev, Joint Secretary
65) Shri 5.0. Sharma, Joint Secretary
(6) Shri Rama Kant, Director (Finance)
(7) Shri Ved Leekha, C.M.D., Hindustan Copper Limited
(8) Shri ७.८2. Wadhawan, C.M.D., Hindustan Zinc Limited
(9) Shri P.A.K, Shettigar, M.D., Bharat Gold Mines Limited
(10) Shri M. Kumar, C.M.D., Mineral Exploration Corporation Limited
(11) Dr. S. K. Tamotia, C.M.D., National Aluminium Company Ltd.
(12) Shri D.B. Dimri, Director General, Geological Survey of India
(13) Shri S.H. Azad, C.M.D., Bharat Aluminium Company Limited.
2. * . .

3. The Committee, thereafter, heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned
witnesses by way of an overview on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) in respect of Ministry
of Mines.

A verbatim record of the evidence was kept.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 p.m.

°° Ro thee mene प7फफ््ें्ज--+- Relates to other matters.



Iv
FOURTH MEETING

The Committee met at 5.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 27th April, 1995 in Room No. 63,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

Present

1. Shri Ashok Mitra—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

2. Shri Sanatan Bisi

3. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita

4. Shri Govind Ram Miri

5. Shri Nyodek Yonggam

6. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

7. Shri K.H. Muniyappa

8. Shri Gurudas Kamat

9. Smt. Kesharbai Sonajirao Kshirsagar

10. Smt. Pratibha Devising Patil

11. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala

12. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta

13. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma

14, Shri Mullappally Ramachandran

15. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad

16. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye

17, Smt. Sumitra Mahajan

18. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri

19. Shri S.N. Vekaria

20. Shri Ramdew Ram

21. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria)

22. Shri Manjay Lal

23. Smt. Suseela Gopalan

24, Shri Purna Chandra Malik

25. Shri Tej Narayan Singh

SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri S.S. Rana, Under Secretary

i



12

Shri Jagmohah Sundriyal, Committee Officer

| 2. On the suggestions of some members, the Committee decided to adjourn till next
day.

3. The Committee adjourned at 5.20 p.m. to meet again at 10.15 a.m. on Friday, the
28th April, 1995.


v
FIFTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.15 A.M. on Friday, the 28th April, 1995 in Room No. 63,
First Floor, Perliament House, New Delhi.

Present

1. Shri Ashok Mitra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Shri Sanatan Bisi

. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita

. Shri Govind Ram Miri

. Shri Nyodek Yonggam

we ७ 3

an

. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani
LOK SABHA

7. Shri K.H, Muniyappa

8. Shri Gurudas Kamat

9. Smt. Kesharbai Sonajirao Kshirsagar
10. Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil

11, Shri Rama Krishna Konathala

12. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta

43. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma*

14, Shri Mullappally Ramachandran

15. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad

16. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye
17. Smt. Sumitra Mahajan

18. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri

19. Shri S.N. Vekaria

20. Shri Ramdew Ram

21. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria)

22. Shri Manjay Lal

23. Smt. Suseela Gopalan

24. Shri Purna Chandra Malik

25. Shri Tej Narayan Singh
SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri G.K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary

13



14

Shri $.S. Rana, Under Secretary
mmittee Officer

2. The Committee considered the draft Fourteenth and Fifteenth Reports relati
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Ministries of Steel and Mines respectively and
some discussion adopted both the reports unanimously.

3, The Committee decided to present both the reports on 8th May, 1995 to Parlia
The Committee authorised the Chairman of the Committee and Shri Bhubaneswar |
M.P. to present the reports in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Mullappally Ramachandra

Smt. Suseela Gopalan, M.Ps. to lay a copy each of the reports on the Table of th

Sabha.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 10.45 A.M.

Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, (०