eel A
४ ॥#70ड२1 NO.

DE i

>

(ee
z

le

g

ete

अल्यमैय जयते

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE,
J ON INDUSTRY

Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
ae 2016/.... Vor sek 1938 (Saka)


PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPAREMENT-RELAPED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMEPTER
RY

ON INDUS’

सत्यमेव जयते

Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
leat, 2016/ ... Moa Goklaac, 1938 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PAGES

1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ...

DEIN ERODUG GION pistes woe | ५ eh on Spe pune tnmeciete S04 +» « "यो Sate suai paren eaidilebeed (ii)
3. 888२08प४12170............ . . . . ««२७७३७७<हूल्‍ूूूलूूलवूवूवहव ७००० २५-०+%«>ल्‍क्‍्ल्लटल्ननल्ल्ल्‍्नन ०३० «०८5 «+ ०ह«० (iii)
4, REPORT

5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A
GLANCE

है." TES cj.cc¢s veerFeuneens रस री ary nilevedtionguettiouedial ० ००“ ब्क+ केले क>न के: कक ३» वह ५२० in vie

7. ANNEXURE/APPENDICESG..........::ccceeseeeseeseseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaeeesenes 23-31

*To be appended in printing stage


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Date of Constitution 1“ September, 2015)

RAJYA SABHA

hri K.C. Tyagi Chairman
hri Ramdas Athawale
ri Narendra Budania
shri Vivek Gupta
hri Shamsher Singh Manhas
hri T. K. Rangarajan
hri Ashk Ali Tak
hri Pramod Tiwari
. Shri Bhupender Yadav
0. Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav

CONIDARWYNHE
८ ८ ८९ ८९ ८९ ८९ ०८९ ८2 ५९

LOK SABHA

. Shri Deepak (Dev) Adhikari

. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer

. Shri Birendra Kumar Chaudhary

. Shri S. P. Muddahanume Gowda

. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque

. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh

hri Rabindra Kumar Jena

. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam
19. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato

20. Dr. (Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patasani
21. Shri Mutthamsetti Srinivasa Rao
22. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa

23. Shri Konda Vishweshwar Reddy
24. Shri Raj Kumar Saini

25. Shri B. Senguttuvan

26. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya)
27. Shri Y. V. Subbareddy

28. Shri Rameshwar Teli

29. Smt. Savitri Thakur

30. Smt. Dev Varma (Moon Moon Sen)
31. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare

AIDAWRWNE

n

SECRETARIAT

Shri A.K. Singh, Joint Secretary

Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director

Shri Jayanta Kumar Mallick Joint Director
Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Deputy Director

Smt Renu Sreekanth, Committee Officer

Shri Divender Singh Bisht, Committee Officer

6)


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, to hereby present this Two Hundred
and Seventy- Second Report on the Review of the Provisions of Corporate Social
Responsibility under the Companies Act, 2013 pertaining to Ministry of Heavy Industries
and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises).

2. I, thank the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of
Public Enterprises), the Ministry of Corporate Affairs and various CPSEs for furnishing
valuable inputs during the meetings.

3. The Committee in its meeting held on the Aa a considered and adopted
the report. हु

hd
K.C Tyagi
Chairman
Department -related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry
New Delhi

only , 2016

(ii)


ABBREV.

Bharat Dynamics Ltd.

Bharat Earth Movers Ltd.

Bharat Heavy Electrical Ltd

Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd.
Central Public Sector Enterprises
Central Warehousing Corporation Ltd
Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd

Coal India Ltd

Companies (Corporate Social Responsibility Policy)

Rules, 2014

Corporate Social Responsibility
Department of Public Enterprises
Engineers India Ltd

Gas Authority of India Ltd.

Indian Oil Corporation Ltd

Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Memorandum of Understanding

Ministry of Corporate Affairs

Mineral Exploration Corporation Ltd, |

National Hydro Power Corporation

National Mineral Development Corporation Ltd.

Neyveli Lignite Corporation
Non-Governmental Organizations
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation
Public Sector Enterprises

Rural Electrification Corporation
Steel Authority of India Ltd.
Shipping Corporation of India Ltd

Standing Committee of Public Enterprises

United Nations Industrial Development Organizations

(iii)

BDL
BEML
BHEL
BPCL
CPSEs
CWC

CPCL
CIL

CSR Rules, 2014
CSR
DPE
EIL
GAIL
IOCL
ICAI
MoU
MCA
MECL
NHPC
NMDC
NLC
NGOs
ONGC _
PSEs
REC
SAIL
SCI
SCOPE
UNIDO


REPORT

After independence, India adopted a developmental model wherein socio-
economic development was largely reserved as the responsibility of the Government.
This was mirrored in the concept of socialism which envisaged Government as the
provider rather than being the facilitator. In the early 90’s, when India opened its markets
to the world through the New Economic Policy, the role of the Government gradually
began to shift to that of the facilitator and regulator. Further, the distribution of fruits of
the economic development in an equitable fashion became imperative. This, evidently,
would not have been possible without the contribution of the corporate sector. The Public
Sector Enterprises (PSEs) were incorporated by converging the concepts of profit with

social development.

2. The concept of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) can be considered as an
answer to the challenges of equitable development. According to the United Nations

Industrial Development Organizations (UNIDO)-

“CSR is a management concept whereby companies integrate social and
environmental concerns in their business operations and interactions with their
stakeholders. CSR is generally understood as being the way through which a company
achieves a balance of economic, environmental and social imperatives (Triple Bottom
Line Approach), while at the same time addressing, the expectations of shareholders and

stake holders.

3, The Government has given statutory support to CSR by including it in the
Companies Act, 2013. India is the first country in the world to provide legal mandate to
CSR. Section 135 of the Companies Act, 2013 contains CSR provisions of the Act and
Schedule VII of the said Act enumerates the activities that can be undertaken under CSR.
Section 135, amended Schedule VII to the Companies Act 2013, and the Companies
(Corporate Social Responsibility Policy) Rules, 2014 were notified on 27" February,
2014, and came into force from 01.04.2014 (Annexure-I). Thereafter, on the completion
of a year of implementation of the CSR Rules, 2014, the Government appointed a High
Level Committee to suggest measures for Improved Monitoring of the Implementation of

CSR policies.


4 In this regard, it was submitted by Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs
(MCA) to the Committee in the meeting held on 6" October, 2015 that there have been
issues as to whether the monitoring of these companies should be done, and, if so, at what
level. Some of these issues were required to be discussed in greater detail. So, the
Ministry had constituted a High-Level Committee (HLC) with clear Terms of Reference
such as - i) to recommend suitable methodologies for monitoring compliance of
provisions of Section 135 of the Companies Act; ii) to suggest measures to be
recommended by the Government for adoption by the Companies for systematic
monitoring and evaluation of their own CSR initiatives; iii) to identify strategies for
monitoring and evaluation of CSR initiatives through expert agencies and institutions; iv)
to facilitate adequate feedback to the Government with regard to the efficacy of CSR
expenditure and v) to examine the different monitoring mechanisms required. The
Ministry has received a preliminary copy of the High-Level Committee Report, which is

on the website of the Ministry.

CSR and Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs)

5. One of the inherent objectives of setting up the CPSEs in India has been to deliver
equitable economic and social development. The Government underlined the importance
of CSR by incorporating it in the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) as a parameter
to judge performance of Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs). Department of Public
Enterprises (DPE), being the nodal department for all the CPSEs in India, have been
coming out with CSR guidelines for CPSEs, which act as guiding force in the sphere of
CSR. The first set of Guidelines on CSR by DPE was issued in April, 2010.
Subsequently, this was upgraded with DPE’s revised Guidelines on “CSR and
Sustainability, 2013’, which became effective from 1* April, 2013. Guidelines of 2013
focused on inclusive growth and sustainable development specific to the Indian context
and retained the mandatory budgetary spend on CSR activities similar to the stipulation
of DPE Guidelines on CSR issued in 2010.

6. Companies (Corporate Social Responsibility Policy) Rules, 2014 (CSR Rules,
2014) framed under the Act and notified by MCA on 27" February, 2014 became
applicable to all companies, including CPSEs, w.e.f. 11 April, 2014. Section 135 of the
Companies Act, 2013 contains CSR provisions of the Act is reproduced as under-

2


135. (1) Every company having net worth of rupees five hundred crore or more,
or turnover of rupees one thousand crore or more or net profit of rupees five crore or
more during any financial year shall constitute a Corporaté Social Responsibility
Committee of the Board consisting of three or more directors, out of which at least one
director shall be an independent director.

(2) The Board's report under sub-section (3) of section 134 shall disclose the
composition of the Corporate Social Responsibility Committee.

(3) ९ Corporate Social responsibility Committee shall :-

(a) formulate and recommend to the Board, a Corporate Social
Responsibility Policy which shall indicate the activities to be undertaken by the company
as specified in Schedule VII

(b) recommend the amount of expenditure to be incurred on the
activities referred to in clause (a); and

(c) monitor the Corporate Social responsibility Policy of the company
from time to time.

4, The Board of every company referred to in sub-section (1) shall: -

(a) after taking into account the recommendations made by the
Corporate Social Responsibility Committee, approve the Corporate Social Responsibility
Policy for the company and disclose contents of such Policy in its report and also place it
on the company's website, if any, in such manner as may be prescribed; and

(b) ensure that the activities as are included in Corporate Social

responsibility Policy of the company are undertaken by the company.
3. The Board of every company referred to in sub-section (1), shall ensure
that the company spends, in every financial year, at least two per cent, of the average net
profits of the company made during the three immediately preceding financial years, in
pursuance of its Corporate Social Responsibility Policy:

Provided that the company shall give preference to the local area and
areas around it where it operates, for spending the amount earmarked for Corporate
Social responsibility activities:

Provided further that if the company fails to spend such amount, the
Board shall, in its report made under clause (0) of sub-section (3) of Section 134, specify
the reasons for not spending the amount.

Explanation - For the purposes of this section "average net profit" shall be calculated in

accordance with the provisions of section 198.

w


Considering that CSR had been included in the new Companies Act, 2013, the
DPE reviewed its guidelines in tune with provisions of the Act. After extensive
consultations with key stakeholders including MCA, DPE again issued the guidelines in
October, 2014 on ‘CSR and Sustainability’ to supplement the CSR Rules issued by MCA

and became effective from 1% April, 2014.

7. DPE Guidelines on CSR and Sustainability- 2014 do not supersede or override
any provision of the Act, or Schedule VII of the Act, or the CSR Rules, but only

supplement them.

8. The following Guidelines issued by DPE on October, 2014 is applicable to all
CPSEs are generally in the nature of guiding principles.
«

i) It is mandatory for all profit making CPSEs to undertake CSR activities
as per the provisions of the Act and the CSR Rules. Even the CPSEs which are not
covered under the eligibility criteria based on threshold limits of net-worth,
turnover, or net profit as specified by Section 135 (1) of the Act, but which made
profit in the preceding year, would also be required to take up CSR activities as
specified in the Act and the CSR Rules, and such CPSEs would be expected to
spend at least 2% of the profit made in the preceding year on CSR activities.

ii) All CPSEs must adopt a CSR and Sustainability Policy specific to their
company with the approval of the Board of Directors. The philosophy and spirit
of CSR and Sustainability must be firmly ingrained in the policy and it must be
consistent with the CSR provisions of the Act, Schedule VII of the Act, CSR Rules,
the Guidelines, and the policy directions issued by the Government from time to
time. The CSR and Sustainability policy of a CPSE should serve as the referral
document for planning its CSR activities in accordance with Schedule VII of the
Act and give a road map for formulation of actionable plans.

iii) If the CPSEs feel the necessity of taking up new CSR activities / projects
during the course of a year, which are in addition to the CSR activities already
incorporated in the CSR policy of the company, the Board’s approval of such
additional CSR activities would be treated as amendment to the policy.

iv) It would be mandatory for all CPSEs which meet the criteria as laid down
in Section 135(1) of the Act, to spend at least 2% of the average net profits of the
three immediately preceding financial years in pursuance of their CSR activities
as stipulated in the Act and the CSR Rules. This stipulated percentage of average
net profits is to be spent every year in a manner specified in the Act and CSR
Rules. In case a company fails to spend such amount, it shall have to specify the
reasons for not spending it. However, in case of CPSEs mere reporting and
explaining the reasons for not spending this amount in a particular year would
not suffice and the unspent CSR amount in a particular year would not lapse. It

4


would instead be carried forward to the next year for utilisation for the purpose
Jor which it was allocated.

v) While selecting CSR activities / projects from the activities listed in
Schedule VII of the Act, CPSEs should give priority to the issues which are of
foremost concern in the national development agenda, like safe drinking water for
all, provision of toilets especially for girls, health and sanitation, education, etc.
The main focus of CSR and Sustainability policy of CPSEs should be on
sustainable development and inclusive growth, and to address the basic needs of
the deprived, under privileged, neglected and weaker sections of the society which
comprise of SC, ST, OBCs, minorities, BPL families, old and aged, women / girl
child, physically challenged, etc.

vi) For CPSEs to fully exploit their core competence and mobilize their
resource capabilities in the implementation of CSR activities / projects, they are
advised to align their CSR and Sustainability policy with their business policies
and strategies to the extent possible, and select such CSR activities / projects
which can be better monitored through in-house expertise.

vii) All CPSEs are expected to act in a socially, economically and
environmentally sustainable manner at all times. Even in their normal business
activities, public sector companies should try to promote sustainable development
through sustainability initiatives by conducting business in a manner that is
beneficial to both, business and society. They are advised not to lose sight of their
social and environmental responsibility and commitment to sustainable
development even in activities undertaken in pursuance of their normal course of
business. National and global sustainability standards which promote ethical
practices, transparency and accountability in business may be referred to as
guiding frameworks to plan, implement, monitor and report sustainability
initiatives. But the amount spent on sustainability initiatives in the pursuit of
sustainable development while conducting normal business activities would not
constitute a part of the CSR spend from 2% of profits as stipulated in the Act and
the CSR Rules. se

viii) As a part of their sustainability initiatives CPSEs are expected to give
importance to environmental sustainability even in their normal mainstream
activities by ensuring that their internal operations and processes promote
renewable sources of energy, reduce / re-use / recycle waste material, replenish
ground water supply, protect / conserve / restore the ecosystem, reduce carbon
emissions and help in greening the supply chain. CPSEs are expected to behave in
a responsible manner by producing goods and services which are safe and
healthy for the consumers and the environment, resource efficient, consumer
friendly, and environmentally sustainable throughout their life cycles i.e. from the
stage of raw material extraction to production, use / consumption, and final
disposal. However, such sustainability initiatives will not be considered as CSR
activities as specified in the CSR Rules, and the expenditure incurred thereon
would also not constitute a part of the CSR spend. Nevertheless, CPSEs are
encouraged to take up such sustainability initiatives from their normal budgetary
expenditure as it would demonstrate their commitment to sustainable
development.


ix) Sustainability initiatives would also include steps taken by CPSEs to
promote welfare of employees, especially women, physically challenged, SC / ST /
OBC categories, by addressing their concerns of safety, security, professional
enrichment and healthy working conditions beyond what is mandated by law.
However, expenditure on such sustainability initiatives would not qualify as CSR
spend.

x) The philosophy and spirit of CSR and Sustainability should be understood
and imbibed by the employees at all levels and get embedded in the core values of
the company.

xi) CPSEs should extend their reach and oversight to the entire supply chain
network to ensure that as far as possible suppliers, vendors, service providers,
clients, and partners are also committed to the same principles and standards of
corporate social responsibility and sustainability as the company itself. CPSEs
are encouraged to initiate and implement measures aimed at ‘greening’ the
supply chain.

xii) As mentioned in the Act, CPSEs should give preference to the ‘local area’
in selecting the location of their CSR activities. It is desirable that the Board of
Directors of CPSEs define the scope of the ‘local area’ of their commercial units /
plants / projects, keeping in view the nature of their commercial operations, the
extent of the impact of their operations on society and environment, and the
suggestions / demands of the key stakeholders, especially those who are directly
impacted by the company’s commercial operations / activities. The definition of
‘local area’ may form part of the CSR policy of the CPSE.

xiii) After giving due preference to the local area, CPSEs may also undertake
CSR activities anywhere in the country. The Board of Directors of each CPSE
may also decide on an indicative ratio of CSR spend between the local area and
outside it, and this may be mentioned in the CSR policy of the CPSE. CPSEs,
which by the very nature of their business have no specific geographical area of
commercial operations, may take up CSR activities / projects at any location of
their choice within the country.

xiv) As far as possible, CPSEs should take up the CSR activities in project,
which entails planning the stages of execution in advance by fixing targets at
different milestones, with pre-estimation of quantum of resources required within
the allocated budget, and having a definite time span for achieving desired
outcomes.

xv) CPSEs should devise a communication strategy for regular dialogue and
consultation with key stakeholders to ascertain their views and suggestions
regarding the CSR activities and sustainability initiatives undertaken by the
company. However, the ultimate decision in the selection and implementation of
CSR activities would be that of the Board of the CPSE.

xvi) As per the CSR Rules, all companies are required to include an annual
report on CSR in their Board’s Report. The template / format for reporting CSR
activities as provided by CSR Rules should be strictly adhered to. However,
CPSEs shall also have to include in the Board’s Report a brief narrative on the
action taken for the implementation of the Guidelines so that the stakeholders are

6


informed of not only the CSR activities but also of the sustainability initiatives
taken by the CPSEs. CPSEs are further advised to prepare an Annual
Sustainability Report, which would go a long way in imparting greater
transparency and accountability to the company’s operations, apart from
improving the brand image.

xvii) It is desirable that CPSEs get a baseline/ need assessment survey done
prior to the selection of any CSR activity. It is also desirable that CPSEs should
get an impact assessment study done by external agencies of the CSR activities /
projects undertaken by them. Impact assessment is mandatory for mega projects,
the threshold value of which can be determined by the Board of a CPSE and
specified in its CSR and Sustainability policy. However, the expenditure incurred
on baseline survey and impact assessment study should be within the overall limit
of 5% of administrative overheads of CSR spend as provided for under the CSR
Rules.

xviii) Within the provisions of the Act, Schedule VII of the Act, and the CSR
Rules, CPSEs are encouraged to take up CSR activities / projects in collaboration
with other CPSEs for greater social, economic and environmental impact of their
CSR activities / projects.

xix) CSR projects taken up by CPSEs in 2013-14 under DPE guidelines on
CSR & Sustainability which were effective from Ist April 2013, may be continued
till their completion. However, CPSEs to ensure that all new CSR activities /
projects are in accordance with the CSR Rules.

xx)  CPSEs which are statutory corporations should also comply with the
provisions of the Act, CSR Rules and the Guidelines.

xxi) These guidelines will supersede the guidelines / circulars / instructions

issued earlier by DPE on the subject of CSR and Sustainability.
9. DPE should issue directions or guidelines, as to how can the CPSEs extend
their CSR oversight to entire supply chain network to ensure vendors comply with
principles of CSR as per DPE guidelines. The DPE should also allow the CPSEs to
join in the Central and State Government’s Schemes like Mid-day meal, Sarva
Siksha Abhiyan as per Schedule VII. For this DPE should evolve a model
arrangements framework between the CPSEs and the nodal Government Agency
which should ensure timely release of Utilization Certificate to the CPSEs so that it
can reflect the CSR expenditure in its annual accounts. Similarly, the Company or
NGO, through which CSR projects are to be implemented, too should furnish the
Utilization Certificates in time. It must be ensured that such NGOs and Companies

should actually use the funds in time.

10. The Committee recognizes that the Act gives rule making powers to Central
Government. Considering that the DPE is the nodal Department to provide non-
7


financial guidelines to PSEs, the Committee acknowledges that DPE guidelines have
given greater force to the CSR related provisions of the Act by introducing negative
marking in MoU for non- CSR compiled CPSEs. The DPE may assess the
performance of a PSE, against each of its CSR guidelines before rating the PSE.

11. Taking cognizance of the importance and potential of CSR activities of CPSEs,
the Department- Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry selected the
provisions of CSR as provided under the Companies Act, 2013 as a subject of
examination. The Committee took note of the fact that much before CSR was made
legally mandatory by the Government, DPE had identified its importance and had been
issuing guidelines to streamline CSR activities of CPSEs. The Committee began the
examination of the subject by interacting with CPSEs viz Coal India Ltd (CIL), National
Hydro Power Corporation (NHPC), Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd (CPCL), Rural
Electrification Corporation (REC), Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC), Bharat Dynamics
Ltd. (BDL), Central Warehousing Corporation Ltd. (CWC), National Mineral
Development Corporation Ltd. (NMDC), Shipping Corporation of India Ltd. (SCI),
Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (BPCL), Engineers India Ltd (EIL), ), Oil and Natural
Gas Corporation (ONGC), Indian Oil Corporation Ltd (IOCL), FCI Aravali Gypsum &
Minerals India Ltd., Mineral Exploration Corporation Ltd (MECL), Bharat Earth Movers
Ltd. (BEML), BHEL, Gas Authority of India Ltd. (GAIL) and Steel Authority of India
Ltd. (SAIL) on the implementation of their CSR activities along with the representatives
of their respective administrative ministries and DPE. The Companies (Corporate Social
Responsibility Policy) Rules, 2014 notified in February, 2014 also formed part of these

discussions.

12. During its interaction with the CPSEs, the Committee drew the following
inferences which needed greater clarity. DPE may include these issues in the
guidelines: :
6) Lack of provisioning for cost of maintaining a durable social asset
created under CSR.

(ii) Clarifications regarding CSR obligations of Holding companies, like
Coal India Ltd. considering that earning in form of dividend were not
to be included while computing Net income.



(iii) There is confusion whether PSUs can set up_professional/skill
development institutions as per Schedule VII in their respective area
of usual business and core competence.

(iv) Exclusion of para military veterans and widows from the definition of
armed forces.

13. In continuation of these interactions, the Committee on 24" March, 2014 held a
meeting with the representatives of MCA and DPE. The Committee acknowledges that
subsequent to their taking up the matter regarding the need for the inclusion of
health care in Schedule VII of the Act, in the above meeting, the Ministry came out
with its first amendment to the Schedule VII on 31% March, 2014. Vide this
amendment “promoting health care including preventive health care” was added in

the Schedule VII (i) of the Act in the place of “..

-promoting preventive

health care”.( Annexure II) &

Preference to local Area in CSR

14... Section 135 (v) of the Companies Act, 2013 provides that the local area of the
company’s and the areas around it where it operates shall be given preference to pursue
CSR activities. The Committee, during its interaction with the Ministry, wanted to know
if this section prevented the companies altogether from carrying out CSR activities in
area other than their locality. In response to this, it was submitted that the proviso under
Section 135 of Company Act, 2013 only required “preference” to be given to local areas.
However, there was no compulsion in this behalf and, certainly, there was no bar to

undertake CSR activities in any part of the country.

15. The Committee is of the considered opinion that as provided by the
Companies Act, 2013 it is an obligation of a Company to be concerned with the well
being of its local populace and environment, the resources of which are being
directly utilized by them. However, the Committee also holds the view that CPSEs
should take into account the development of remote backward areas of the country.
These are areas where the pace of industrial development has been slow due to their
geographic isolation. While neighborhood community and local area with reference

to company’s works have first claim over CSR projects, Schedule VII should also

9


provide for development by individual company or jointly with other companies, in
backward areas like North East, Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep,
which do not have much of industrialisation and are in need of development. The
Committee therefore, recommends that some percentage of CSR be allowed to
spend in such backward areas other than local area. Similarly, the Committee is of
the opinion that in case company contributes its CSR fund to the corpus for
National Schemes like Swachh Bharat Mission, a certain percentage of CSR fund
must mandatorily be assigned to local area around Company’s works/ projects so
that the basic ideology to start CSR policy for local area population is not defeated
and local population do not suffer because they are the first people who are socially

and environmentally affected whenever any plant of PSUs is established.

Skill Development Institutions as part of CSR agenda.

16. While examining the CSR Rules, 2014, the Committee noted that the Rule 4(1)
states “the CSR activities shall be undertaken by the company, as per its stated CSR
Policy, as projects or programs or activities (either new or ongoing), excluding activities
undertaken in pursuance of its normal course of business”. In this connection, the
Committee wanted to know if this condition prevented CPSEs from setting up or
facilitating the functioning of collages or training institutions in any specific/ specialized
field related to its core business. The MCA responded in writing, dated 187 November,
2014, that “setting up or facilitating schools and collages providing training in any
specific field have implications/returns to the direct ine of business of the company
concerned. Therefore, it would be in the interest of the company to continue with it, for
its own long term sustaibinility. Such expenditure, however, cannot be said to be different
from the normal course of business of that company, if the focus of the institutions
provding training relates to the normal business of the company”. However, the
guidleines issued by the DPE encourage CPSEs to exploite their core competence in
CSR. Moreover, the Committee also took cognisance of reply given to Rajya Sabha
Unstarred Question regarding companies setting up their domain specific technology
instutions. It was stated that ‘setting up of professional and training institutions by

companies can be considered as CSR activities under the Act’.

5


17. _ As per the UNIDO definition CSR should be an integral part of a Company’s
business operation. This approach makes CSR more sustainable instead of the
approach taken by Companies (CSR Policy) Rules, 2014 that exclude activities
undertaken in presence of normal course of business. This approach will help
companies to align their operations with sustainable development objectives, instead
of taking up unsustainable one off projects and tendency to make financial
contribution for CSR. The DPE guidelines too require the PSUs to exploit their core
competence and mobilize their resource capacities in implementation of CSR. PSUs
have been advised to align their CSR with their business policies and strategies. This
position is concurrent with the UNIDO but contrary to Rule 4(2) of Companies
(CSR Policy) Rules, 2014. The Committee finds this approach to be more effective

and practicable.

18. The Committee while interacting with” the representatives of HPCL,
acknowledged that Public Sector Oil Marketing Companies (OMC) collectively
contributed in setting up a national level petroleum technology institute at Rae Bareilly
and that HPCL and other companies were again collaborating in setting up another
technical institute at Vishakhapatnam with the help of the State Government. The
Committee feels such initiatives should become a model for CPSEs and companies
in other Sectors as well to come together to set up industry specific technology
institutes to cater to the demand of skilled manpower for the sectors like defence,
petroleum, etc. In this regard, the Committee also acknowledged the
pronouncement made in Budget speech (2016-17) regarding setting up of Higher
Education Financing Agency (HEFA) - ‘We have decided to set up a Higher
Education Financing Agency (HEFA) with an initial capital base of Rs 1,000 crore.
The HEFA will be a not-for-profit organization that will leverage funds from the
market and supplement them with donations and CSR funds. These funds will be
used to finance improvement in infrastructure in our top institutions and will be

serviced through internal accruals.’

19. The Committee while keeping in mind and considering the essence of CSR,

observes that setting up of training institutions in specialized areas by companies

can be allowed regardless of its relations to its core business. This is even more

imperative considering that our country is facing an acute problem of skill deficit in
11


specialized fields like defence, power, petroleum, mining technologies, etc. Such
training institutions would be social assets whose pass-outs may or may not join the
Company. These institutions may be run on the terms of financial sustainability.
The senior management and engineers may join the faculty or take up research

assignments thereby evolving into scholars and professionals.

Participation of NGOs in CSR activities.

20. The Committee noted that most of the CPSEs engaged Non-Governmental
Organizations (NGOs) to implement their CSR projects. The Committee felt satisfied
with the manner in which the CSR activities of the said PSUs were being conducted
through reputed NGOs. However, in case of NMDC, the Company was directly
implementing their CSR activities. It was even more encouraging to note that most of
NMDC's activities were being carried out in areas disturbed by naxalism. The Company
was developing social infrastructure like schools, hospitals, etc in close consultation with

local bodies and administration.

21 In course of its meeting on the issue of CSR, the Committee sought to know how
many candidates have registered for Indian Institute of Corporate Affairs (IICA)
certificate programme in CSR, whether PSUs are encouraging their existing officials to
undertake this programme or they will hire those who have done this programme and also
whether PSUs sponsoring candidates for this programme. While, responding to these
queries of the Committee, MCA submitted that the total number of candidates who
registered for the IICA certificate programme in CSR for 2014-2015 was 187. Out of

these, 32 were PSUs sponsored candidates and the break-up is provided below:

[ 81. No. | Name of PSUs No. of Candidates
1. NTPC 20
2. BHEL 3
Be ONGC 7
4. IOCL 1
5. HAL 1
Total 82

22. Regarding the involvement of NGOs in the execution of CSR projects of CPSEs,
the Committee wanted clarifications on the conditions for NGOs being given CSR funds,

the definition of the term “ reputed NGOs with proven record” as mentioned in Rules.


safeguards incorporated to avoid possible conflict of interest with families of Board of

Directors/District Administration/ Administrative Ministry.

23. While replying to these queries, the MCA submitted that as per rule 4 (2) the
Board of a company may decide to undertake its CSR activities through Trust / Society /
Section 8 companies etc. If such Trust / Society / Section 8 companies etc. are not
established by the company itself then it shall have an established track record of 3 years
in undertaking similar programme or projects. It is for the Board of the Company and its
CSR Committee to apply due diligence while selecting the implementing agency for
undertaking CSR.

24. The Committee while analyzing the provision that allows companies to
engage trust/society/NGO with ‘established track record’ to execute their CSR
activities, feels that the term as mentioned in the Rules, ‘established track record’
needs further specifications to avoid any possible abuse. The,Committee also feels
that it is required to exclude those trusts/societies/NGOs wherein relatives of Board

members of the CPSE, State/Central Ministries or local administration are involved
in undertaking CSR activities. DPE should issue general guidelines in this regard
and not leave it to Board alone. DPE should also advise CPSEs to blacklist deviant
trust/society/NGO to prevent them from engaging in such activities in future. The
Committee also recognized that the Rules have been amended to provide only 5% of
the CSR budget for such overhead expenditure towards salary, ete to NGOs. Also,
rules must specify that such trusts/ NGOs must utilize the funds in time and give

Utilization Certificate to the Company for inclusion in the annual account.

Activities covered under Schedule VII of the Act.

25. The Committee acknowledged the inclusion of new areas of CSR activities under
Schedule VII of the Act through subsequent notifications, wherein contributions to
Swachh Bharat Kosh and Clean Ganga Fund were added, alongwith the provisions
already existed. The Committee enquired about the likelihood of companies picking up
the tendency to merely transfer the entire amount or larger share to such funds. To
discount such trend, the Committee recommends that a certain percentage of CSR
budget must be assigned to CSR projects in the neighboring community around the

Company’s project. The Committee also emphasis that Board of Directors of all

13


PSUs while framing their CSR Policy should define the local areas as mentioned in

DPE Guidelines (point xii).

26. Thereafter, the Committee wanted to know if either the MCA or DPE has framed
guidelines or model agreement between CPSEs or Government Department in case
CPSEs propose to contribute to Government schemes or funds. In reply to this it was
submitted by both MCA and DPE that they had not formed any such agreement or

guidelines.

27. Further with regard to the contribution of CSR fund by CPSEs to various
Government sponsored programmes, the Committee sought clarifications on (i) the ratio
of such contribution to the total CSR fund of the CPSEs (ii) the possibility of CPSEs
contributing the corpus directly to implementing department or agencies (iii) agencies
responsible for issuing utilization certificate to funds contributed to Government
sponsored programmes and (iv) whether mere contribution to such a Government fund

was sufficient to qualify as CSR expenditure.

28. The Ministry submitted that CSR fund of a company can be spent on
activities/programme/project either directly by Corporates or the Trust/Society/Section 8
companies etc. The Act / Rules do not provide for contribution of CSR fund by
Corporates to any Government Department. However, item (viii) of Schedule VII
provides for contribution to any fund created by Central Government for social-egonomic
development to qualify as CSR expenditure. Mere Contribution to Swachh Bharat Kosh
& Clean Ganga Fund, under Schedule VII, will be sufficient to qualify as CSR

expenditure and no Utilization Certificate would be required.

29. The Committee believes that the concept of CSR would be defeated in case
CPSEs resort to mere transfer of CSR money to any fund created by Central
Government for social-economic development. Instead they should directly involve
in building community assets and maintaining them in partnership with community.
However, in cases where CPSEs contribute CSR money to Central Government
sponsored funds/schemes/programmes mentioned under Schedule VII of the
Companies Act. 2013, the Committee recommends that such contributions should be
limited to a specified percentage of the entire CSR fund of the CPSE and certain
percentage of CSR must be mandatorily assigned to neighboring communities work.

14


Such a specification will ensure that the CPSEs would imbibe the essence of CSR by

directly engaging themselves in such activities.

30. Recently supporting incubation centres at any institution of repute, has been
included under CSR. The Committee recognises that Government is laying stress over
innovation, entrepreneurship and their incubation till they become commercially viable.
The Committee recommends that the Companies should be allowed to identify the
technologies developed by research institutions like CSIR, Universities or start ups,
incubate and commercially develop them for some years as part of CSR and then
may be allowed to market it under mutually agreed terms between Company and

the research institution.

Sustainability and Maintenance of social assets/activities under CSR

31. An important aspect that caught the attention of the Committee Was PSUs
carrying out CSR activities going into the red and thereby their ongoing CSR activities
getting hampered. The Committee also noted that though the Companies Act, 2013
envisaged that CSR activities should be self sustaining projects, most activities under

Schedule VII were revenue neutral and could not generate revenue to sustain themselves.

32. In this backdrop, the Committee, perceiving the need for sustainability of CSR
activities/ assets undertaken/ created by CPSEs, wanted to know how these would be
maintained and whether any. corpus was set aside from the CSR funds to maintain or
sustain to assists/activities under CSR. Moreover, the Committee also wanted to know if
the CSR Rules, 2014 allowed expenditure incurred towards maintenance of social assets

or recurrent expenditure on CSR activities as expenditure under CSR.

33. While responding to these queries the MCA submitted in their written reply dated
5.12.15 in affirmation that any expenditure incurred towards maintenance of such assets
should be counted as CSR expenditure and further clarified that expenditure towards
maintenance of social assets can be met with funds under certain conditions. However,
clarification needs to be issued in this direction. Further, MCA also submitted that “Rule
4 (1) of CSR, Rules, 2014 requires corporates to undertake CSR activities in a project or
programme mode. A project by definition would have finite time frame. Sustainability of
the same is required to be factored into the project design itself at the very beginning.
15


Board of the Corporate is responsible for taking this into account and design project
accordingly. This is some kind of corporate innovation one would look forward to. No

specific clarification has been issued by Ministry of Corporate Affairs in this regard.”

34. The Committee takes note of the responses of MCA and appreciates the fact
that sustainability is expected to be factored into the design of CSR projects at its
beginning. However, the Committee also takes cognizance of the fact that a good
share of CSR activities are purely welfare oriented and may not strictly fit into a
project/programme mode where sustainability can be built in. This aspect of
sustainability of CSR initiatives will be even more accentuated in the case of CPSEs
who are prone to fluctuating earnings/profits. Further, the CSR, Rules, 2014 include
‘ongoing’ activities under CSR activities. While emphasis is on the self sustaining
CSR projects, the activities listed in Schedule VII are one off activities that do not
generate revenue even to maintain these assets and are therefore non-self sustaining.
Provisions should be made for maintenance of CSR assets in successive years.
Therefore, the Committee is of the considered opinion that DPE should mention in
their guidelines for maintenance of CSR assets created under CSR budget. So that

the assets are maintained otherwise the whole funds would go waste.

Financial Audit of CSR activities.

35. The Committee at its meeting held on 18" November, 2014 raised the issue of
audit of CSR fund. MCA in their written reply submitted that Section 143 of the
Companies Act, 2013 prescribes Auditing Standard for auditing the Annual Financial
Statements of the companies, which would also include expenditure incurred on CSR by
eligible companies. Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) is developing a
“Guidance Note for the Auditors for Expenditure of CSR activities’ that will provide

guidance to auditors and it is at an advanced stage of finalization.

36. The Ministry repeated the same reply in their written communication to the
Committee again on 3" February, 2015. Thereafter, during the examination of the
Demand for Grants (2015-16), the Committee again sought to know the latest
development regarding the finalization of the ‘Guidance Note for the Auditors’ by the
ICAI. |It was informed by DPE that after ascertaining from the MCA that the “Guidance

Note for the Auditors” was still under preparation.

16


37. Considering that there was no finite answer regarding the finalization of Guidance
Note for the auditors and the fact that the mandatory disclosures of CSR expenditure
were to be made by the companies after September, 2015, the Committee again sought to
know the progress made towards the issue of the Guidance Note. To which MCA
responded by submitting that the ICAI had issued a Guidance Note on accounting for

expenditure on CSR activities that comes into effect from 1 May, 2015.

38. On the issue of auditing, the Committee further enquired that as per the Section
143(2), auditor shall have to make the report on all the financial statements required
under the Act. However, reporting CSR is not specified. Whether this includes the
reporting on the provision made in Section 135 pertaining CSR and whether the auditors
have reported on Section 135? Also, whether the National Financial Reporting Authority
constituted under Companies Act has presented auditing standards with regard to Section
35?

39. For which, the MCA has responded in writing that Section 143 of the Companies
Act, 2013 prescribes Auditing Standards for auditing the Annual Financial Statements of
the companies. This would also include auditing of expenditure incurred on CSR by

eligible companies. It was also informed that National Financial Reporting Authority

(NFRA) under the Companies Act, 2013, is yet to be constituted.

40. The Committee is of the firm opinion that since it will be the first audit of
CSR activities after CSR has been wtiade legally mandatory, auditing of expenditure
made under these activities, along a guided path, would be important for
streamlining of expenditure and ensuring transparency. The Guidance Note of
ICAI is expected to be the tool for the purpose. In view of this, the Committee
wants to be apprised of the details relating to the salient features of the Guidance
Note and compliance by CPSEs in the first audit since the coming into force the

Companies (CSR policy) Rules, 2014.

Publicizing successful CSR stories

41. During the course of the examination of the CSR activities of various PSUs, the
Committee came across certain excellent emulatable conduct of CSR activities like that

of NDMC as already mentioned. The Committee is of opinion that such success stories
17


should be published on the website of DPE and other visual and print media and
also be included in the documents like Public Enterprises Survey and Annual report
of DPE as a token of appreciation to these earnest efforts. The Committee
recognizes the efforts made by Standing Committee of Public Enterprises (SCOPE)
by compiling such success stories. This needs to be updated and be given wide

publicity.

FRI ICR IK

18


RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE-AT A
GLANCE

1. DPE should issue directions or guidelines, as to how can the CPSEs extend
their CSR oversight to entire supply chain network to ensure vendors comply with
principles of CSR as per DPE guidelines. The DPE should also allow the CPSEs to
join in the Central and State Government’s Schemes like Mid-day meal, Sarva
Siksha Abhiyan as per Schedule VII. For this DPE should evolve a model
arrangements framework between the CPSEs and the nodal Government Agency
which should ensure timely release of Utilization Certificate to the CPSEs so that it
can reflect the CSR expenditure in its annual accounts. Similarly, the Company or
NGO, through which CSR projects are to be implemented, too should furnish the
Utilization Certificates in time. It must be ensured that such NGOs and Companies
should actually use the funds in time.

(Para 9)

2. The Committee recognizes that the Act gives rule making powers to Central
Government. Considering that the DPE is the nodal Department to provide non-
financial guidelines to PSEs, the Committee acknowledges that DPE guidelines have
given greater force to the CSR related provisions of the Act by introducing negative
marking in MoU for non- CSR compiled CPSEs. The DPE may assess the
performance of a PSE, against each of its CSR guidelines before rating the PSE.
(Para 10)

3. During its interaction with the CPSEs, the Committee drew the following
inferences which needed greater clarity. DPE may include these issues in the
guidelines: हु हे

(i) Lack of provisioning for cost of maintaining a durable social asset
created under CSR. we

(ii) Clarifications regarding CSR obligations of Holding companies, like
Coal India Ltd. considering that earning in form of dividend were not
to be included while computing Net income.

(iii) There is confusion whether PSUs can set up_professional/skill
development institutions as per Schedule VII in their respective area
of usual business and core competence.

(iv) Exclusion of para military veterans and widows from the definition of
armed forces.

(Para 12)

4, The Committee acknowledges that subsequent to their taking up the matter
regarding the need for the inclusion of health care in Schedule VII of the Act, in the
above meeting, the Ministry came out with its first amendment to the Schedule VII
on 31 March, 2014. Vide this amendment “promoting health care including
preventive health care” was added in the Schedule VII (i) of the Act in the place of
७०००००००००००००० promoting preventive health care”.( Annexure IT)

29

(Para 13)


oF The Committee is of the considered opinion that as provided by the
Companies Act, 2013 it is an obligation of a Company to be concerned with the well
being of its local populace and environment, the resources of which are being
directly utilized by them. However, the Committee also holds the view that CPSEs
should take into account the development of remote backward areas of the country.
These are areas where the pace of industrial development has been slow due to their
geographic isolation. While neighborhood community and local area with reference
to company’s works have first claim over CSR projects, Schedule VII should also
provide for development by individual company or jointly with other companies, in
backward areas like North East, Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep,
which do not have much of industrialisation and are in need of development. The
Committee therefore, recommends that some percentage of CSR be allowed to
spend in such backward areas other than local area. Similarly, the Committee is of
the opinion that in case company contributes its CSR fund to the corpus for
National Schemes like Swachh Bharat Mission, a certain percentage of CSR fund
must mandatorily be assigned to local area around Company’s works/ projects so
that the basic ideology to start CSR policy for local area population is not defeated
and local population do not suffer because they are the first people who are socially
and environmentally affected whenever any plant of PSUs is established.

(Para 15)

6. As per the UNIDO definition CSR should be an integral part of a Company’s
business operation. This approach makes CSR more sustainable instead of the
approach taken by Companies (CSR Policy) Rules, 2014 that exclude activities
undertaken in presence of normal course of business. This approach will help
companies to align their operations with sustainable development objectives, instead
of taking up unsustainable one off projects and tendency to make financial
contribution for CSR. The DPE guidelines too require the PSUs to exploit their core
competence and mobilize their resource capacities in implementation of CSR. PSUs
have been advised to align their CSR with their business policies and strategies. This
position is concurrent with the UNIDO but contrary to Rule 4(2) of Companies
(CSR Policy) Rules, 2014. The Committee finds this approach to be more effective
and practicable.

(Para 17)

i The Committee feels such initiatives should become a model for CPSEs and
companies in other Sectors as well to come together to set up industry specific
technology institutes to cater to the demand of skilled manpower for the sectors like
defence, petroleum, etc. In this regard, the Committee also acknowledged the
pronouncement made in Budget speech (2016-17) regarding setting up of Higher
Education Financing Agency (HEFA) - ‘We have decided to set up a Higher
Education Financing Agency (HEFA) with an initial capital base of Rs 1,000 crore.
The HEFA will be a not-for-profit organization that will leverage funds from the
market and supplement them with donations and CSR funds. These funds will be
used to finance improvement in infrastructure in our top institutions and will be
serviced through internal accruals.’

(Para 18)

6


8. The Committee while keeping in mind and considering the essence of CSR,
observes that setting up of training institutions in specialized areas by companies
can be allowed regardless of its relations to its core business. This is even more
imperative considering that our country is facing an acute problem of skill deficit in
specialized fields like defence, power, petroleum, mining technologies, etc. Such
training institutions would be social assets whose pass-outs may or may not join the
Company. These institutions may be run on the terms of financial sustainability.
The senior management and engineers may join the faculty or take up research
assignments thereby evolving into scholars and professionals.

(Para 19)

9, The Committee while analyzing the provision that allows companies to
engage trust/society/NGO with ‘established track record’ to execute their CSR
activities, feels that the term as mentioned in the Rules, 'established track record'
needs further specifications to avoid any possible abuse. The Committee also feels
that it is required to exclude those trusts/societies/NGOs wherein relatives of Board
members of the CPSE, State/Central Ministries or local administration are involved
in undertaking CSR activities. DPE should issue general guidelines in this regard
amd not leave it to Board alone. DPE should also advise CPSEs to blacklist deviant
trust/society/NGO to prevent them from engaging in such activities in future. The
Committee also recognized that the Rules have been amended to provide only 5% of
the CSR budget for such overhead expenditure towards salary, etc to NGOs. Also,
rules must specify that such trusts/ NGOs must utilize the funds in time and give’
Utilization Certificate to the Company for inclusion in the annual account.

(Para 24)

10. To discount such trend, the Committee recommends that a certain
percentage of CSR budget must be assigned to CSR projects in the neighboring
community around the Company’s project. The Committee also emphasis that
Board of Directors of all PSUs while framing their CSR Policy should define the
local areas as mentioned in DPE Guidelines (point xii).

(Para 25)

11, The Committee believes that the concept of CSR would be defeated in case
CPSEs resort to mere transfer of CSR money to any fund created by Central
Government for social-economic development. Instead they should directly involve
in building community assets and maintaining them in partnership with community.
However, in cases where CPSEs contribute CSR money to Central Government
sponsored funds/schemes/programmes mentioned under Schedule VII of the
Companies Act. 2013, the Committee recommends that such contributions should be
limited to a specified percentage of the entire CSR fund of the CPSE and certain
percentage of CSR must be mandatorily assigned to neighboring communities work.
Such a specification will ensure that the CPSEs would imbibe the essence of CSR by
directly engaging themselves in such activities.

(Para 29)

ae


12. The Committee recommends that the Companies should be allowed to
identify the technologies developed by research institutions like CSIR, Universities
or start ups, incubate and commercially develop them for some years as part of CSR
and then may be allowed to market it under mutually agreed terms between
Company and the research institution.
(Para 30)

13. The Committee takes note of the responses of MCA and appreciates the fact
that sustainability is expected to be factored into the design of CSR projects at its
beginning. However, the Committee also takes cognizance of the fact that a good
share of CSR activities are purely welfare oriented and may not strictly fit into a
project/programme mode where sustainability can be built in. This aspect of
sustainability of CSR initiatives will be even more accentuated in the case of CPSEs
who are prone to fluctuating earnings/profits. Further, the CSR, Rules, 2014 include
‘ongoing’ activities under CSR activities. While emphasis is on the self sustaining
CSR projects, the activities listed in Schedule VII are one off activities that do not
generate revenue even to maintain these assets and are therefore non-self sustaining.
Provisions should be made for maintenance of CSR assets in successive years.
Therefore, the Committee is of the considered opinion that DPE should mention in
their guidelines for maintenance of CSR assets created under CSR budget. So that
the assets are maintained otherwise the whole funds would go waste.

(Para 34)

14. | The Committee is of the firm opinion that since it will be the first audit of
CSR activities after CSR has been made legally mandatory, auditing of expenditure
made under these activities, along a guided path, would be important for
streamlining of expenditure and ensuring transparency. The Guidance Note of
ICAI is expected to be the tool for the purpose. In view of this, the Committee
wants to be apprised of the details relating to the salient features of the Guidance
Note and compliance by CPSEs in the first audit since the coming into force the
Companies (CSR policy) Rules, 2014.

(Petra 40)

15. Committee is of opinion that such success stories should be published on the
website of DPE and other visual and print media and also be included in the
documents like Public Enterprises Survey and Annual report of DPE as a token of
appreciation to these earnest efforts. The Committee recognizes the efforts made by
Standing Committee of Public Enterprises (SCOPE) by compiling such success
stories. This needs to be updated and be given wide publicity.

(Para 41)

FOR AC RICK A A aK

Ba


Corporate
Social
Responsibility.

Right of
member to
copies of
audited
financial
sla Cement

80 [Parl

111: OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

135. (7) Every company having net worth of rupees five hundred crore or more, oF
turnover of rupees one thousand crore or more or a net profit of rupees five crore or more
during any financial year shall constitute a Corporate Social Responsibility Committee of the
Board consisting of three or more directors, out of which at least one director shall be an
independent director.

(2) The Board's report under sub-section (3) of section 134 shall disclose the
composition of the Corporate Social Responsibility Committee,

(3) The Corporate Social Responsibility Committee shall,—

(०) formulate and recommend to the Board, a Corporate Social Responsibility

Policy which shall indicate the activities to be undertaken by the company as

specified in Schedule VII;

(6) recommend the amount of expenditure to be incurred on the activities referred

to in clause (a); and

(c) monitor the Corporate Social Responsibility Policy of the company from time
to time.

(4) The Board of every company referred to in sub-section (/) shall, —

(a) after taking into account the recommendations made by the Corporate Social
Responsibility Committee, approve the Corporate Social Responsibility Policy for the
company and disclose contents of such Policy in its report and also place it on the
company's website, if any, in such manner as may be prescribed; and

(8) ensure that the activities as are included in Corporate Social Responsibility
Policy of the company are undertaken by the company.

(5) The Board of every company referred to in sub-section (/), shall ensure that the
company spends, in every financial year, at least two per cent. of the average net profits of
the company made during the three immediately preceding financial years, in pursuance of
its Corporate Social Responsibility Policy:

Provided that the company shall give preference to the local area and areas around it
where it operates, for spending the amount earmarked for Corporate Social Responsibility
activities:

Provided further that if the company fails to spend such amount, the Board shall, in its
report made under clause (०) of sub-section (3) of section 134, specify the reasons for not
spending the amount.

Explanation—For the purposes of this section “average net profit” shall be calculated
in accordance with the provisions of section 198

136. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 101, a copy of the financial
statements, including consolidated financial statements, if any, auditor's report and every
other document required by law to be annexed or attached to the financial statements,
which are to be laid before a company in its general meeting, shall be sent to every member
of the company, to every trustee for the debenture-holder of any debentures issued by the
company, and to all persons other than such member or trustee, being the person so
entitled, not less than twenty-one days before the date of the meeting:

Provided that in the case of a listed company, the provisions of this sub-section shall
be deemed to be complied with, if the copies of the documents are made available for inspection
at its registered office during working hours for a period of twenty-one days before the date
of the meeting and a statement containing the salient features of such documents in the
prescribed form or copies of the documents, as the company may deem fit, is sent to every
member of the company and to every trustee for the holders of any debentures issued by the
company not less than twenty-one days before the date of the meeting unless the sharcholders
ask for full financial statements:

Provided further that the Central Government may pre:
financial statements of companies having such net worth and turnover as may be prescribed:

cribe the manner of circulation of

XRF

117 |



SCHEDUL
(See sections 135)

Aclivities which may be included by companies in their Corporate Social
Responsibility Policies

Activities relating to:—
(i) eradicating extreme hunger and poverty;
(ii) promotion of education;
(iii) promoting gender equality and empowering women;
(iv) reducing child mortlity and improving maternal health;

(0) combating human immunodeficiency virus, acquired immune deficiency
syndrome, malaria and other diseases;

(vi) ensuring environmental sustainability;
(vii) employment enhancing vocational skills;
(viii) social business projects; sa

(ix) contribution to the Prime Minister's National Relief Fund or any other
fund set up by the Central Government or the State Governments for
socio-economic development and relief and funds for the welfare of the Scheduled
Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, other backward classes, minorities and women; and

(x) such other matters as may be prescribed.

13 MALHOTRA,
Secretary to the Govt. of India.

PRINTED BY DIRECTORATE OF PRINTING AT GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD,
NEW DELHI AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI, 2013.

GMGIPMRND—2434GI(S3)-~-30-08-2013,

24


= Bae nde

MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS
| NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 27th February, 2014
G.S.R. 129(B).— In exercise of the powers conferred under section 135.and sub-sections (1) and

(2) of section 469 of the Companies. Act, 2013 (18 of 2013), the Central’ Government hereby makes the
followingaulés, namély;

L. Short title and commencement. - (1) These rules may be called the Companies (Corporate Social
Responsibility Policy) Rules, : :

(2) They shall come into force on the 1" day of April, 2014

2 Definitions.- (1) In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires, -
(a) “Act” means the Companies Act; 2013
(9) “Anriexure” means the Anhexure appended to these rules:

(०) “Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)” means and includes but is not limited to = -
(i) Projects or pro; s relating to activities specified in Schedule VII to the Act; or

, (0) Projects or programs relating to activities undertaken’ by the board of directors of a
y company (Board) jn pursuance of recommendations: of the CSR Committee of the Board .as
per detlared CSR Policy of the compariy subject to the coridition that such policy will cover

subjects enumerated: in Schedule VIU of the:Act.
(d) “CSR Conimittée” means |the/Corporate Social Responsibility Committee of the Board referred to in
section 135 of the Act.

(०) “CSR Policy” relates to the activities to be undertaken by the ०ण्राएभाए as specified in Schedule VII to 1
“the'Acl and the expenditure. thereon, excluding activities undertaken in pursuance of normal course of
business of a'gompany; . |’.

(f) “Net: profit” means the net profit of.a company as per its: financial statement prepared in accordance
with the applicable Provisjons ofthe.Act, but'shall not include the following, namely :

. 0)... any profit arising from any overseas branch or branchés of the company, whether operated’ as
A separate comparty or otherwise; and r क
4 i

29



1S ER

on ii i ‘
porcini dS aa aS दर

(ii) any dividend received from other companies in India, which are covered under and

Providod that net profit in respect of a financial year for which the relevant financial
statements were preparod in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956, (1
of 1956) shall not bo required to be re-calculated in accordance with tho provisions ©f the

Provided further (hat ih case of a foreign company covered under these cules} net profit nneans
the net profit of such company as per profit und loss account prepared in terms of clause (a) of sub-

(2) Words and expressions used aid not defined in these rules but defined in the Act shall have the same
(1) Every company. including its holding or subsidiary, arid a foreign company defined under clause (42) of

section 2 of the Act having its branch office or project.office in India, which fulfills the criteria specified in
sub-section (1) of section 135 of the Act shall comply with the provisions of section 135 of the Act and Cheso

$
bcs
a ( complying with the provisions of section 135 of the Act
)
)
)
, Act
»
i
) 3.
) section (1) of section 381 read with section 198 of the Act.
!
) mean ings respectively assigned to thent in the Act.
J Cc . y
| 3. ‘orporate Social Responsibility, -
J
)
।
tules: !
] |

Provided ‘that net worth, : over or net profit of a foreign company of the Act shall be computed in
accordance with balance sheet and profit and loss account of such company prepared in accordance with the

provisions of clause (8) of sub-section (1) of section 381 20 section 198 of the Act

(2) Every. company which ceases to be a company covered under sub-section (1) of section 135 of the
Act for three consecutive financial ygars shall not be required to -

(a) constitute a CSR Committee

and

(b) comply with the provisions dontained in sub-section (2) to (5) of the said section,

till such time it meets the criteria spetified in sub-section (1) of section: 135

4. CSR Activities.

(1) The CSR activities shall be undertaken by the company, a

programs or activities (either new
course of business.

(2) The Board of.a company
Committee, through a registered trus'
, ‘holding or subsidiary or associate ००1

Provided that—
(l) “if suéh trust, society or compai

programs or projects;
(il) the corhpany -has specified ‘th

moohanigm

858801866 company, it shall have

per its stated CSR Policy, as projects or
ongoing), excluding activities undertaken in pursuance of its normal

may decide’ to undertake its CSR activities approved by the CSR
or a registered society or a company established by the company or ifs
pany under section 8 of the Act or otherwise:

५ is not established. by. thie company or its, holding or subsidiary or
anlestablished track recdrd of 1166 years. in undertaking ‘similar

project or programs: to.be undertaken through these entities, the

modilities of utilization of funds onisuch projects and progtams and the monitoring, and reporting

activities in such a matiner that the

ae (3) . Acompany niay also collaborate with other companies for undertaking ‘projects or programs.or CSR

SR Commitices of respective companies are'in a position to report

‘4 scparatoly on auch projects or program in accordance with these rules.
(4) Subject to provisions of sub-section (5) of section 135 of the Act, the CSR projects or programs or

‘activities undertaken in India only shall amount to CSR Expenditure

» (5) The CSR projects of programs, or activities that ben¢fit-only the employees of the company and their
{uimilies still not be considered as CSR activities in accordance with section 135 of the Act

892 42//८-३

,

|

| _
|



BS
3,
2:
>
>
2)
रे
>
=)
>
Si
3
5
$
१
|
|

‘which fall within the purview of

sre ॥(॥)|

VE GAZIEPTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY

srgonnel as well as (hose of their Implomonting,

(4) Companics may build CSR capacities of their own
|

agencies through Institutions with estublished (rack records of at least three fi
expenditure shall not exceod five percent. of total CSR expenditure of the company in or

but such

cial year

(7) Contribution of any amount directly or indirectly to any political party under section 182 of the Act,
shall not be considered as CSR activity.

om CSR Committces,-

(1) The companies mentioned in {he rule 3 shall constitute CSR Committee as under-

|
() an unlisted public company ot a private company covered under sub-section (1) of section 1 35 which
is not required to appoint an independent director pursuant to sub-section (4) of section 149 of the -Act, shall
have its CSR Committee without such| director ;
Gi) a private company having only two directors जो its Board shall constitute its CSR Committce with
two such directors;

(iii) गीत respect to a foreign company covered under these rules, the CSR Committee shall cornprise of
at least two: persons of which one person shall be as specified under clause (0) of sub-section (1) of
section 380 of the Act.and another person shall be nominated by the foreign company.

(2) The CSR Committee shall institute a transparent monitoring. mechanism for implementation of the
CSR projects or progeams or activities undertaken by the company.

6. .- ESR Policy.
(L) . The CSR Policy of the 3 shall, iater-alia, include the following, namely :-
(a) a fist of CSR projects of programs which a company plans to undertake falling within the purviow
of the Schedule शा of the|Act, specifying modalities of execution of such project or programs and
implemeritation schedules for the same; and है है
(b) monitoring process of such projects or programs: ,

Provided that the. CSR activities does not include the activities undertaken in pursuance ‘of normal
course of business of a company. : हु

Provided further that the Board of, Directors shall ensure that activities included by a company int its

Corporate Social Responsibility Policy are/related to the activities included in Schedule VII of the Act:
(2) The CSR Policy of the company|shall épocify that the surplus arising oul of the CSR projects or programs
or notivities shall not form part of the busiriess profit of a.company. . :

7, CSR Expenditure.- SR xpenditure shall include all expenditure including contribution to corpus,
for projects ot programs relating to SR activities approved by the Board on the recommendation of its CSR
Committee, but 7008 not include. any expenditure on an item notin conformity or not in line with activities
ule VII. of the Act. “ ह

8, CSR Reporting,-! ४ wy yO

(1) The Board’s Report 018 cortipainty covered under these rules pertaining to’a financial year commencing, on
or after the 1" day of April, 2014 shall include an aniual report on. CSR ‘containing particulars specified. in
Annexure, * ee ह

(2) In cdse of a foreign comipaay, the’ balatice scet filed under sub-clause (b) of sub-section (1) of

 gootion 381 shall contain an Annexure regarding report on CSR.

Et
9, Display of CSR activities on its website. - ad

The Boaird of Directors of the cortipakiy shall, after taking into account the recommendations of CSR
Cotuniittce, approye the CSR Policy for the company and disclose contents af such policy in its report and the
sumno shal ke displayed on the company’s website, if any, as per (he particulars specified in the Annexure,

[F. No, 11 8/2013-0.- ७]

RENUKA KUMAR, Jt. Secy.

2


(भा ॥[-ख

भार॥ का राजपत्र ; अराधाएण ५

ANNIE XURKE

'ORMAT FOR THE ANNUAL REPORT ON CSR ACTIVITIES 10 BE INCLUDED IN
| TI BOARD'S REPORT

1. A brief outline of the company’s CSR policy, including overview of projects or programs
proposed.to be undertaken and a reference to the web-link to the CSR policy and projects or
programs.

The Composition of the CSR Committee.

Average net profit of the company for last three financial years

Prescribed CSR Expenditure (two per cent. of the amount as in item 3 above)

Details of CSR spent during the financial year.

?
|
>
हे - (a) Total amount to be spent for the financial year;
(b) Amount unspent , if any;
(c) Manner in which the amount spent during the financial year is detailed below,
«
है . - :
) Dl e 3 हि.) किक लि G G Oe a)
S.No} CSR Sector Projdcts. or | Amount | Amount Cumul- Amount spent:
rh | project or} in programs : outlay spent on the | ative Direct or through
५ | activity which’ (1) tea area or | (budget) | projects or | expend-' | implementing agency
, | identified: | the er project’ | programs iture upto
) or Sub-heads: | to | the
programs | (1) Direct’ Teport-
» “wise expenditure. | iny
8
) | oft projects |- period.
of programs. |.
है ' (2) Overheads:
) 1 aoe
[eat |
» 1] ene ers यान बाज
) [Tora प्रबल

*Give details of implementing agency:

1 .

6. Incase the company has failed fo spend the two per cent of the average net profit of the last threo
financial years or-any.:pa fee f, the company’ shall provide the reasons for not spending the
amount in its Board report]. * : : i

7. A:tésporsibility statement| of the CSR Committee that the implementation and monitoring of CSR
Policy; is in compliance with CSR objectives and Policy of the cotnpany.

merle fe | Sd/:

Sd
(Chief Executive Officer or Mataging | (Chairman CSR {Person specified under clause (d) of.
Diroetor or Director) | Committee) sub-section (1) of sectién,380 of the.Act]

(wherever applicable)

|
|
1
\
a "न eee
1
|
1

Printed by the sont Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-1 10064
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-1 10054

2%



भारत LUST : असाधारण

ANNEX URE

FORMAT FOR THE ANNUAL REPORT ON CSR ACTIVITIES TO BE INCLUDED IN
| THE BOARD’S REPORT

1. A brief outline of the coinpany’s CSR policy, including overview of projects or pro; 8
+) proposed.to be undertaken and a reference to the web-link to the CSR policy and projects or
Le programs.

2. The Composition of the CSR Committee.
3. Average net profit of the company for last three financial years
4. Prescribed CSR Expenditure (two per cent. of the amount as in item 3 above)
5. Details of CSR spent during the financial year.
’’, (@) Total amount to be spent for the financial year;
(0) Amount unspent ; if any;
(० Matiner in which the amount spent during the financial year is detailed below.
1 शक
[1 2): : TG) कल tO TG (6 U 8
S.No [CSR [:Sebtor ished ‘or |-Amount | Amount, :Cumul-' | Amount spent:
Project ०: in Programs. ' outlay spent’ on ‘the | ative Direct or — through
; .| Botivity which 301) Local: area or | (budget) | projects . or | expend-’* | implementing agency
\ identified. '| the other 5 project | prograrns iture upto
Project’ | (2) Specify | or Sub-heads: to: ;. the
is the State and programs |.(1) Direct report-
covered: | district where wise - | expenditure | ing
proje¢ts or. | E | on projects period.
programs was of programs:
undértak (2) Overheads:
TOTAL

*Give details of implernenting agency:

G. In.case the company has failed to spend the two per cent of the average net profit of the last throe
. Ainancial years or! any: par theryof, the conipany shall: provide the reasons for not spending the
. Smount in its Board report}. ; ५ 2०2४ 7० हे
7. ‘A responsibility, statement|of the'CSR Committee that the implementation and monitoring of CSR.
Policy, is in.complianee swith CSR objectives and Policy of the, company.

Je का ora
\ |

न Sd yoy Sa Sd/-
(Chief Executive Officer or Managing ‘(Chairman CSR [Person specified under clause (d) of,
Director or Ditector) * " | Committee) sub-section (1) of section 380 of the. Act]

(wherever applicable)

. Manager, (Government of india Press, iting Road, Mayapuri, New Pelhi-110064
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Dethi-1 10054

- थ्था

Finted by

7



2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA: EXTRAORDINARY [Part Ste. ॥1॥)|

पैरालम्पिक खेल-कूद और ओलम्पिक खेल-कूदों

(भा) ग्रामीण खेल-कूद राष्ट्रीय स्तर पर मान्यताप्राप्त खेल-
के संवर्धन के लिए प्रशिक्षण देना;

(शां।) प्रधानमंत्री राष्ट्रीय राहत निधि या केंद्रीय सरकार द्वारा अनुसूचित जातियों, अनुसूचित जनजातियों, अन्य
पिछड़े वर्गों, अल्पसंख्यकों, स्त्रियों के सामाजिक-आर्थिक विकास और राहत के जिए और कल्याण वो
लिए गठित की गई किसी अन्य निधि में अभिदाय;

(») शैक्षणिक संस्थान, जिन्हें केंद्रीय सरकार द्वारा अनुमोदित किया गया है, के भीतर अवस्थित प्रौद्योगिकी
इनक्यूबेटरों के लिए प्रदान किये गये अभिदाय या निधियां;

(x) ग्रामीण विकास की परियोजनाएं;”।

2. यह अधिसूचना 1 अप्रैल, 2014 से प्रवृत्त होगी |
(wr. सं. 1/18ए/2013-सीएल-५]
रेणुका कुमार संयुक्त सचिव

MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 27th February, 2014
G.S.R. 130(E).—In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of section 467 of the Companies
Act, 2013 (18 of 2013), the Central Government hereby makes the following amendments to Schedule VII of the said
Act, namely :—

(1) In Schedule VII, for items (i) to (x) and the entries relating thereto, the following items and entries shall be

substituted, namely :—
(1). eradicating hunger, poverty and malnutrition, promoting preventive health care and sanitation and

making available safe drinking water:

(४). promoting education, including special education and employment enhancing vocation skills
especially among children, women, elderly, and the differently abled and_ livelihood enhancement

projects;

(iii) promoting gender equality, empowering women, setting up homes and hostels for women and
orphans; setting up old age homes, day cure centres and such other facilities for senior citizens and
measures for reducing inequalities faced by socially and economically backward groups;

(iv) ensuring environmental sustainability, ecological balance, protection of flora and fauna, animal
welfare, agroforestry, conservation of natural resources and maintaining quality of soil, air and
water;

(¥) protection of national heritage, aft जात culture including restoration of buildings and sites of
historical importance and works of art:-setting up public libraries; promotion and development of
traditional arts and handicrafts:

(vi) measures for the benefit of armed forces veterans, war widows and (heir dependents;

(vii) training to promote rural sports, nationally recognised sports, paralympic sports and Olympic
sports:

(viii) contribution to the Prime Minister's National Relief Fund or any other fund set up by the Central
Government for socio-economic development and relief and welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the
Scheduled Tribes, other backward classes, minorities and women;

(00. contributions or funds provided 10 technology incubators located within academic institutions
which are approved by the Central Government;

(00. rural development projects.”

2. This notification shall come into force with effect from Ist April, 2014.
(F. No. 1/18A/2013-CL-V}

RENUKA KUMAR, Jt. Secy.

Printed by the

| India Press, Ring Road,
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-1 10054.

30

ayn of WFC



yn क ०५३८ ONG
1

Wid] Wo Tlo Welo- 33004/99 REGD.NO.D. Led ॥॥)॥॥/0०

Hid का राजपन्न

Che Gazette of Gndia

असाधारण
EXTRAORDINARY
भाग 1---खण्ड 3---उप-खण्ड (i)
PART Il—Section 3—Sub-section (i)
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित ,

PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
a. 191] नई दिल्‍ली, बुधवार, अप्रैल 2, 2014/84 12, 1936
No.191] NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY, APRIL 2, 2014/CHATRA 12, 1936“

'कारपोरेट कार्य मंत्रालय
शुद्धिपत्र
नई दिल्‍ली, 31 मार्च, 2014

वि सा.का.नि. 261(अ).---भारत के राजपत्र, असाधारण, भाग 2, खंड 3, उपखंड (1) में सा.का.नि सं. 130( अ) , तारीख 28 फरवरी,
2014 द्वारा प्रकाशित भारत सरकार के कारपोरेट कार्य मंत्रालय की तारीख 27 फरवरी, 2014 की अधिसूचना में, पृष्ष्ठ 1, पंक्ति 8 में, “rarer
स्थास्थ्य देखरेख और स्वच्छता का संवर्धन'' शब्दों के स्थान पर, “' स्वास्थ्य संबंधी देखभाल, जिसके अंतर्गत निवारक स्वास्थ्य संबंधी देखभाल भी
है, तथा स्वच्छता का संवर्धन'' शब्द पढ़ें 1

[फा. सं. 11 80/2013-सी.एल.-५ ]
रेणुका कुमार, संयुक्त सचिव

MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS
CORRIGENDA,
New Delhi, the 31st March, 2014

GS.R. 261(E).—In the notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of Corporate Affairs dated the 27th
February, 2014 published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, Sub-section (i) vide G.S.R. No. 130(E),
dated the 28th February, 2014 at page 2, line 20 for “promoting preventive health care” read “promoting health care
including preventinve health care”.

[F.No. 1/18A/2013-CL.V]

RENUKA KUMAR, Jt. Secy.

1512 Girold (1)

Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Dethi-1 10064
and Published by the Controtler of Publications, Dethi 110054

-3H