196th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/196threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:07:06]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
       
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
ONE HUNDRED AND NINETY SIXTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE 191ST REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 9TH MARCH, 2007)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 9TH MARCH, 2007)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY, 2007/ PHALGUNA, 1928 (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
                                                                                                 
 1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                          
 2.INTRODUCTION                                                                                      
 3.REPORT                                                                                                     
   (i)CHAPTER – I                                                                     
      Recommendations/observations, which have been
      accepted by the Ministry.                                                                                     
 
(ii)CHAPTER–II                                                                                                  
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
does not desire to pursue for now in view of the
Government's replies                                                                                        
(iii)CHAPTER–III                                                                                             
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the
Committee has not accepted replies of the Ministry and has asked the Ministry to review the reply or has raised queries over the reply
furnished by the Ministry.                                                       
   
(iv)CHAPTER – IV                                                                                                                                                                                         
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Ministry have not been received                            
          COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
(Date of constitution 5th August, 2006)
 
                  Shri Santosh Bagrodia                —        Chairman
   
     RAJYA SABHA
2.       Dr.  G. Sanjeeva Reddy
3.       Dr. Prabha Thakur      
4.       Shri Kalraj Mishra       
5.       Smt. Hema Malini       
6.       Dr. K. Malaisamy       
7.       Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
8.       Dr. Vijay Mallya         
9.       Shri O.T.Lepcha
10.   Vacant
                   
                           LOK SABHA
 
11.   Shri Guharam Ajgalle
12.   Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary        
13.   Shri Ajoy Chakraborty 
14.   Shri Swadesh Chakraborty                  
15.   Shri Subhash   Sureshchandra Deshmukh         
16.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan          
17.   Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria          
18.   Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani                                     
19.   Shri Kishanbhai V.  Patel

196th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/196threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:07:06]
20.   Shri P.Rajendran         
21.   Shri Badiga  Ramakrishna
22.   Shri  Gurjeet Singh Rana
23.   Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana    
24.   Shri Rajnarayan Budholiya
25.   Shri K.C. Pallanisamy             
26.    Kunwar  Manvendra Singh                 
27.   Shri Ganesh Singh                   
28.   Shri V.K. Thummar                
29.   Shri Girdhari Yadav
30.   Shri Umakant Yadav
31.   Shri Mohan S. Delkar  
     Secretariat
 
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Girija Shanker Prasad, Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having   been  authorized  by the
Committee, hereby present this  One hundred and Ninety  Sixth  Report on Action taken Report submitted by the Government on the One
Hundred and Ninety First  Report  of   the  Committee  on  the  Demand  for   Grants  to Department of  Public Enterprises (2006-07)
 
2.         The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry considered and adopted the Draft report at its meeting
held on the 7
th March, 2007.
 
3          I thank the Department of Heavy Industries for providing valuable inputs to the Committee. 
NEW DELHI;
7th March , 2007
SANTOSH BAGRODIA
Chairman                                                                          Department -
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry
 
 
Report
 
 
1.         This One Hundred and Ninety Sixth Report deals with action taken by the Government on the One Hundred and Ninetieth
Report of the Committee.
 
2.         Action Taken Notes have been received from the Department of Heavy Industries in respect of the recommendations
contained in the Report. These have been categorized as follows:-
Chapter -I- The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry.
Chapter -II- The recommendation/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government's
replies.
Chapter -III- The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has either not accepted replies of the Ministry
or has asked the Ministry to review its reply.
Chapter -IV- The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry have not been received. In respect
of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV. The Ministry has either furnished the interim replies or mater has been forwarded to
other agency/Department whose reply is awaited or couched its language in vague terms like noted for compliance/guidance.
CHAPTER – I
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry.
 
 Recommendation
1.         The Committee observes that of the PSEs recommended for revival maximum 16 cases belonged to PSEs under administrative
control of DHI, three PSEs under Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals, two PSEs each of Department of Textiles and Fertilizers,
and one PSE each from the Department of Coal, Mines, Shipping, Scientific and Industrial Research and Ministry of Water Resources.
The Committee hopes that the administrative Ministries/Departments of these PSEs will ensure that the revival packages are implemented
earnestly and comprehensively as approved by the Government and that the targets as promised are achieved.  The Committee desire that

196th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/196threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:07:06]
as the administrative Ministry of BRPSE, the DPE should pursue and coordinate with the concerned administrative Ministries/
Departments.
 (Para 61)
Action Taken
 
2.         The Resolution constituting BRPSE states that the implementation of the recommendations of the Board will essentially be the
responsibility of the concerned administrative Ministry/ Department, which shall in consultation with DPE monitor their timely
implementation. The recommendation of the Committee for effective   implementation of the revival packages is being conveyed to the
concerned administrative Ministry/Department. 
CHAPTER – II
Recommendation/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies.
Recommendation
 
1.         The Committee feels that the BRPSE was set up as a specialized body mandated to look into the possibilities and ways of the
revival of the PSEs.  It is irrelevant if it is a part time or full time body, till such time it is delivering on its mandate.  Though it was
empowered to seek independent advice, yet in practice the BRPSE is relying on the inputs given by the concerned administrative
Departments. The Committee would like to know about the cases where the BRPSE has consulted independent experts. The Committee
wonders that devoid of independent advice, if BRPSE’s role is only to ratify the inputs given by concerned administrative Department.
(para 8)
Action Taken
 
2.         The Resolution constituting BRPSE states that the administrative Ministry/Department would be responsible for preparing a
comprehensive package for revival/rehabilitation or closure of loss making CPSEs after due consultations with all stake holders. The
proposals submitted to BRPSE by the Administrative Ministries/Departments are generally based on the report of the independent experts
appointed by the CPSE/BIFR. The outside experts/consultants who were involved in the preparation the revival package of CPSEs are
invited to attend the meetings of BRPSE when such proposals are considered by the Board. The Board invariably seeks clarifications
from the experts on the sustainability of the revival proposal as also the reasonableness of the assumptions made in the projected
performance of the concerned CPSE. The Board also considers the comments of Chief Advisor (Cost)/ Controller General of Accounts on
the cases referred to them. Of the 35 cases recommended by BRPSE, in respect of 27 cases, the Board had the benefit of not only the
report of the independent consultants/operating agency appointed by the PSE/Administrative Ministry/BIFR but also their presence in the
meeting for providing necessary clarifications required by the Board. Further, when BRPSE felt the need for review of the revival
proposal submitted by the administrative Ministry/Department by an independent consultant, it had advised the concerned administrative
Ministry/Department to resubmit the same after vetting by an independent expert/consultant.
 
 
Committee’s Further Recommendation  
 
3.         The Committee has taken note of the exhaustive format in which revival proposal are submitted to the BRPSE. The Committee still
holds the view that BRPSE gets to know only a unilateral view. Most of the recommended cases pertain to financial and manpower
restructuring, with no detailed information being provided on the submission under the heading Future Prospects and its subheadings.
The Committee is of the view the BRPSE needs expertise for an extensive and objective appraisal of the proposals submitted before it. 
Recommendation
 
4.         The committee feels it is essential that the country shares the experience of other countries in reconstructing their public Sector.
The DPE could be a repository of such studies on the revival of Public Sector in other countries. The committee however desires that the
DPE should make an assessment of the benefits of such short-term programmes made.
(Para 22)
Action Taken
 
5.         As far as obtaining experience of other countries is concerned, Executives of CPSEs and officials of Government of India are
being sent to International Centre for Promotion of Enterprises (ICPE), Ljubljana, Slovenia for short term training programme and long
term training programme being conducted by ICPE.  Short-term programme is in the areas of corporate governance, strategic
management, total quality management and knowledge management.  In the long term course ICPE conduct MBA programme.  So far
about 300 Executives of PSEs, Government of India and other organizations in India have availed the benefits of short term and long-
term programme of ICPE.  The inputs derived during the training have helped participants from India in enhancing their management
skills.  As recommended attempt will be made to undertake study of experience of other countries in restructuring their public sector.
 
Recommendation
 
6.         The Committee observes that number of PSEs signing the MoU is highest 44 in Schedule A and the numbers gradually descend to
2 in Schedule D.  The Committee would like to have the comments of DPE on this trend.
(Para No.36)
Action Taken
 
7.         The number of CPSEs in various schedules and the number of MOU signing CPSEs  for the year 2004-05 in each schedule is as
follows:
 

196th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/196threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:07:06]
Schedule No.
 
 
Schedule A
Schedule B
Schedule C
Schedule D
Uncategorised
 
 
No. of CPSEs
 
  
 52
    87
    54
    07
    27
 
227
No. of MOU CPSEs
Short-listed
 
45       
36
21
02
03
 
107
No. of MOU
Signing CPSEs
 
44       
32
18
02
03
 
99 
% of CPSEs
signed MOU
 
84.61
36.78
33.33
28.57
11.11
 
43.61
8.         Traditionally the under construction enterprises and the CPSEs which are referred to BIFR have not been signing MoU.  Also,
subsidiaries are not signing separate MoU with their administrative Ministries/Departments. The declining trend in the number of CPSEs
being short-listed/ signing the MoU down the schedule is based on the fact that the majority of CPSEs in schedule- B, C and D are
subsidiaries/ sick BIFR referred companies. In schedule D, two CPSEs were shortlisted/signed MoU due to the fact that five out of seven
CPSEs in this schedule were Sick/ BIFR referred enterprises.
 
Recommendation
 
9.         The Committee would like to know if the MoU scores at the end of the year form the basis for providing the Budgetary support to
the Company in subsequent year.  Without such incentives the system of annual MoU would only mean running the Company by
commanding and imposing the objectives.
(Para 49)
Action Taken
 
10.       Majority of MoU signing CPSEs are not dependent upon the Government for budgetary support. Budgetary support is provided in
exceptional cases. The decision to provide budgetary support depends on factors like financial position of the company, implementing
certain government sponsored programmes, supplementing the efforts of CPSEs in improving the financial position of the CPSE, etc.
Government also provides budgetary support to sick CPSEs in the form of revival packages on the recommendation of the BIFR/BRPSE.
 
Recommendation
 
11.       The Committee desires to know the ratings of the nodal agencies and the parameters of their performance.  Further Committee
observes that such training should be imparted in the vicinity of the existing parent company, so as to save the incidental costs that might
prohibit the VRS optee to join the training.  The Committee also observes that in several cases the location of such nodal agencies was
not in the vicinity of the PSEs.  Location of the nodal agency should facilitate the VRS optees to take advantage of this scheme.  The
Committee desires if the parent PSE could invite the nodal agencies to conduct courses to train their employees.
(Para 73)
Action Taken
 
12.       The performance of nodal agencies is judged on the basis of achievement in terms of  assigned physical target and rate of
redeployment.
 
13.       CPSEs’ units are scattered in various states/UTs in remote areas where VRS may take place.  VRS optees after quiting migrate to
home state immediately.  The optees are therefore spread even in remote villages.  In the scheme, there is a provision of sensitization/
counselling programme under which immediately after separation from the CPSE, three days’ counselling is undertaken by the nodal
agencies in the premises of the parent company.  Under such programmes basic inputs and information /guidance by the personnel of the
CPSE/nodal agency are provided to the separated employees.  Through Counselling the optees are motivated to undergo the training
programme in the area of their interest, motivated to opt for alternative employment or preferably avail self employment opportunity. 
Training under the CRR Scheme is being conducted by the nodal agencies through Employees Assistance Centres (EACs) which are
located as close as possible to the location of VRS optees. As compared to 17 Nodal Agencies and 40 Employment Assistance Centres in
2001-02 there were 42 Nodal Agencies and 126 EACs in 2005-06.  For technical courses under Skill Development Programmes and
Entrepreneurship Development Programmes nodal agencies hire training institutes which have workshop facilities. Nodal agencies try to
cover VRS optees at the nearest EAC. 
CHAPTER - III
Recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has either not accepted replies of the Ministry or has asked
the Ministry to review its reply
 
Recommendation
 
1.         The Committee reiterates its recommendation that DPE should use its IT resources to collect the updated information on its
Guidelines, various programmes and policies that are applicable to all the CPSEs.  The DPE should also provide linkages from its
Website to the Websites of other CPSEs.  DPE’s  Website should be enriched with the linkages with relevant Websites, Executive
Development Programmes, Research Studies and Media Reports on the CPSEs, Parliamentary Questions and the Acts that are relevant to
the CPSEs.  The Committee recommends that possibility should be explored to create an IT Network among CPSEs with DPE as its hub.
(Para 4)
Action Taken
 
2.         As far as the use of information technology in DPE is concerned, all the guidelines of DPE have been uploaded on the website and

196th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/196threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:07:06]
as and when new guidelines are issued, the same are being uploaded.  As far as appointment of independent Directors on the Board of
CPSEs is concerned, a data bank has been maintained in the DPE which is being utilized for submission of suitable names by concerned
administrative Ministries/Departments for appointment of independent Directors. PE Survey Input Form, information related to RTI are
being operated from the DPE Website.  Suitable programme is being developed with the support of NIC which would facilitate online
submission of data by the CPSEs for the Public Enterprises Survey as also for regular monitoring.  Websites of CPSEs are being linked
with the DPE Website.  Through the DPE website CPSEs have been requested to feed data on VRS optees.  Nodal Agencies have been
requested to send reports to DPE website.
 
Committee’s Further Recommendation 
 
3.         The Committee still feels that the information regarding progress and performance of the major policies, programmes and
guidelines is not regularly posted and updated on the Department’s Website, which the Committee considers should act as the nodal
website for all the PSEs.  The Website must also contain Texts of the Acts pertaining to CPSEs and Rules formed thereunder,
Parliamentary Questions pertaining to CPSEs. As the Department provides the Secretariat for the BRPSE, the Website should give the
details of the revival plans approved by the BRPSE and progress thereon. The Website should also post annual Outcome and
Performance Budgets.
Recommendation
 
4.         The Committee has in a few cases observed that other stake holders like the State Governments, municipal authorities or
ancillaries units too had claims on the surplus assets like land.  In absence of a clearer policy, the process of negotiations among these
stake holders could be protracted and prolonged, resulting in avoidable delay in disposal of surplus assets like land and its consequences
for the concerned PSE. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the DPE to take initiative to formulate a uniform policy on the issue
and if required, consult the State Governments and other stakeholders.
(para 12)
Action Taken
 
5.         The issues concerning disposal of assets including surplus assets are handled by the concerned CPSEs as they are well versed with
them and if such CPSEs require intervention of Central Government, the concerned Administrative Ministry/Department may take up the
matter with all stakeholders including State Government. The issues concerning surplus assets particularly land are of complex nature and
therefore require unit specific remedial measures.
 
Committee’s Further Recommendation 
 
6.         The Committee is of the view that in absence of set guidelines formulated in consultation with a wider spectrum of stakeholders
any recommendation by BRPSE to dispose off surplus assets may create a conflict situation with the State Governments or local
authorities. The previous experience does suggest that the issue can result in protracted litigation and the consequent delay in final
decision over revival of the concerned PSE. This will eventually entail higher cost of revival and increasing liabilities of the respective
PSEs. The DPE must appreciate the need for set policy guidelines on this issue to avoid costly delays in disposal of such assets. 
 
Recommendation
 
7.         The Committee has not been informed of the number of beneficiaries of the CRR scheme in NE region and if the target set for the
2005-06 was met.  The Committee would also like to be informed on the likely number of VRS optees from the NE region this year and
the targeted coverage of  the CRR scheme.
(Para  15)
Action Taken
 
8.         CRR scheme is under implementation by this department since 2001-02.  Since then,  in all 337 VRS optees have been imparted
training in NE region under the scheme and 105 people have been redeployed.
 
9.         During 2005-06, the following five nodal agencies were considered for carrying out CRR activities:
(i)
                  Indian Institute of Entrepreneurship, Guwahati
(ii)                National Productivity Council, Delhi
(iii)               Indian Council of Small Industries (ICSI), Kolkata
(iv)              Central Institute of Plastics Technology (CIPET), Guwahati
(v)                Small Industry Service Institute, Guwahati and Agartala.
 
10.       However, Action Plan for 2005-06 was submitted only by ICSI and CIPET. A physical target of 370 was set for 2005-06 for these
two agencies against which, actual achievement was 214.
 
11.       For 2006-07, action plan has been received from ICSI and CIPET. During 2006-07, a physical target of 150 has been assigned in
respect of these two agencies.     Coverage of CRR Scheme is lower in NE Region mainly because of non-availability of sufficient VRS
optees in the region. The nodal agencies engaged in NE Region to implement CRR Scheme have not been able to locate sizable VRS
optees in North East.    CPSEs have been requested to intimate details of VRS optees at the earliest so that the Nodal Agencies can
approach them for counselling and training. 
 
Committee’s Further Recommendation 
 
12.       The Committee finds such under performance by the nodal agencies unacceptable when the issue pertains to the prospect

196th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/196threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:07:06]
livelihood of the VRS optees. The Committee would like to know on what basis did the nodal agencies fixed higher physical target when
they were not sure of availability of candidates. And if any action has been taken against such agencies for giving inflated estimates.
 
Recommendation
 
13.       The Committee notes that the objective of the CRR scheme is to provide training to VRS  optees so as to align them to the job
market for a gainful employment. A comparison between number of VRS optees and  those actually redeployed after  being trained under
CRR , reveals that the scheme has not been effective in meeting this objective with only about 10%  of the VRS optees actually getting
redeployed.  In such a scenario, manpower rationalization can only lead to wide-spread unemployment.  Despite the fact that the
Government is spending huge amount to settle the VRS  and other statutory dues of the rationalized employees, the entire process of
manpower  rationalization appears to be precipitating social insecurities and unemployment among a productive section of the society.
(Para 68)
 
Action Taken
           
14.       A total of 1.85 lakh employees took VRS during 2001-02 to 2004-05.  60267 VRS optees have been covered during the same
period under the Scheme.  Further, during 2005-06 another 28424 VRS optees have been retrained under the Scheme.  It is accepted that
there is a gap between total number of VRS optees and redeployed persons. With the increased budget allocation from Rs 8 crore to Rs
31.5 crore, more VRS optees are being covered. 
 
 
 
Committee’s Further recommendation  
 
15.       The reply does not address the concern raised by the Committee regarding low rate of redeployment of the employees trained
under CRR. The DPE has not given any assessment on the reasons for low redeployment. The Committee recommends that DPE must
make a thorough assessment of low redeployment and redesign the programme to enhance employment prospects of the VRS optees.
 
Recommendation
 
16.       Furthermore, the Committee wants to know if the core competencies, skills and expertise of the personnel are considered before
selecting the nodal agencies.  Given the poor performance in deploying the trainees, the Committee apprehends that these critical issues
are perhaps not given due importance while selecting the nodal agencies.  Bearing such possibilities into consideration the Committee has
been  impressing upon the DPE about the need for some policy guidelines for regular skill upgradation and mid-career training for the
supervisory staff and below.  Such training will not only benefit the PSEs but shall also enhance the professional prospects of its
employees in case of VRS.  The Committee seeks DPE’s comments on these issues.
(Para 74)
Action Taken
           
17.       For implementation of CRR Scheme, nodal training agencies  have been engaged. Nodal agencies are selected by Selection
Committee headed by the Development Commissioner, Ministry of Small Scale Industry and representatives of Planning Commission,
Banking Division, Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion, Ministry of Labour and DPE as members. The criteria for selection of
nodal agencies include  infrastructure and training facilities available, past experience in the field of training under social safety net or
similar programmes, catering to various CPSEs under its network, faculties etc. 
 
18.       DPE has been supplementing the efforts of the public enterprises in regard to human resources development by organizing
training programmes in collaboration with premier management / training institutes in the country like IIM, Lucknow, Institute of Public
Enterprises, Hyderabad and Indian Institute of Public Administration etc. In order to upgrade the skills and knowledge of middle and
senior level executives in CPSEs, DPE has been conducting Entrepreneurship Development Programmes (EDPs). Under CRR Scheme
also training under EDP is  being imparted to VRS optees of senior and middle level position while for below supervisory and workers’
level VRS Optees,  training is generally  imparted under Skill Development  Programmes (SDPs). 
 
Committee’s Further recommendation
 
19.       The Committee feels that despite a fairly elaborate procedure for the selection of nodal agencies, the hard fact remains that the
redeployment under CRR is abysmal. The PSEs are still not inclined to intensify the skill upgradation of the supervisory and lower lever
employees, who are hit the hardest in case of VRS/VSS. The Committee recommends that serious effort should be made for the skill
upgradation of these levels.     
CHAPTER – IV
Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry have not been received. In respect of recommendations
placed in Chapter-IV. The Ministry has either furnished the interim replies or mater has been forwarded to other agency/Department
whose reply is awaited or couched its language in vague terms like noted for compliance/guidance.
 
Recommendation
 
1.         The Committee takes note of the efforts made by the DPE and desires that it should be apprised of the responses of the premier
institutions of excellence on training the participants of ICPE member countries.
(Para 27)

196th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/196threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:07:06]
Action Taken
           
2.         As  recommended  by the Committee, the matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Human Resource Development for
advising premier Management Institutes of the country and Indian Institutes of Technologies to explore the possibility of  imparting
training to member countries of ICPE.   DPE has reminded  Ministry of HRD.
 
3.         As far as Council for Scientific & Industrial Research is concerned, DG CSIR has stated that they have built impressive scientific
and training potential which can be used for training of personnel of ICPE for member countries.  Scientists of CSIR can be invited by the
member countries of ICPE for delivering management related lectures on project management, capital budgeting, management
information system leadership etc.  Further CSIR institutions and experts could organize technology transfer seminars and events show
casing various CSIR technologies in the ICPE member countries.  ICPE member countries can take the help of CSIR for establishing new
enterprises on the feed back received from DG(CSIR). The matter has been taken up with ICPE.
 
Committee’s Further Recommendation 
 
4.         The Committee recommends that the matter should be pursued with the Ministry of HRD. The Committee also observes with
reservation that Ministry of HRD has yet not conveyed its views on the Committee’s recommendations. Further, the DPE as a member of
the ICPE, should engage and collaborate with CSIR to organize training courses for the member countries of the ICPE in India as well
as in respective countries. 
 
Recommendation
 
5.         In the revival plans as approved by the Government for PSEs, it has been observed by the Committee that the emphasis is more on
the financial restructuring and not much stress is laid on aspects like technological up gradation, marketing and human resource
development.  Given the fact that Government has been making major investment is either settling the VRS dues or on CRR  schemes,
the Committee considers it only prudent to upgrade the skills of human resources with respective PSEs.  Therefore human resource
planning and development should have been an integral part of the revival strategy of the PSEs.
(Para  30)
Action Taken
 
6.         As per the Common Minimum Programme, Government would make all efforts for strong and effective Public Sector Enterprises
by way of modernization, restructuring and reviving.  To begin with, the Government has set up Board for Reconstruction of Public
Sector Enterprises to consider these aspects and advice the Government on strategies, measures and scheme related to them.  The terms of
reference to BRPSE is to advice the Government on ways and means for strengthening PSEs and making them more autonomous and
professional to consider restructuring-  financial, organizational and business aspects.  DPE has also devised  a format for furnishing
revival plan by administrative Ministries which includes manpower position,  location,  product mix, management team, financial
position, strategic issues, operational issues, marketing issues, technology and market access issues, product diversification, improvement
in marketing etc.  On the basis of the recommendations of the 168
th report of Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Industry, DPE has already issued a detailed circular on 26.8.2005 about the need of skill development programme for shop floor level
technical functionaries as they are the end users of new material management and production techniques.   A copy of the circular is
enclosed.
 
Committee’s Further Recommendation 
 
7.         The Committee has yet not been apprised of the action taken by the respective administrative Departments/Ministries on the DPEs
circular on this issue. The Committee also notes that the format in which revival plan is submitted to BRPSE does not sufficiently reflect
the human resource development and professional training of the employees. Rationalisation of manpower which should have included
HR development and training, has been rather reduced to become an acronym for retrenchment.
 
 
Recommendation
 
8.         The committee also takes note of the fact that Nav Ratna and Mini Ratna companies have been empowered on the issues relating
to human resource development. The committee may be apprised if the DPE, as the nodal department for all the CPSEs on the non-
financial matters, has issued any guidelines for the regular skill upgradation and training of the supervisory and floor shop level
functionaries.
(Para 31)
 
Action Taken
 
9.         Navratna and Miniratna companies have been delegated with enhanced powers on financial, managerial and human resource
development issues.  These CPSEs are empowered to undertake human resource development activities including training for skill
development as per their requirements. CPSEs can also device curriculums to suit their operational requirements.  However, based on the
recommendations made in the 168
th Report of Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, the Department has
already advised all the administrative Ministries/Departments and Chief Executives of CPSEs in August, 2005 to take action to organize
domestic skill enhancement programmes in PSEs for shop-floor level technical functionaries.  PSEs were also advised to adhere to the
principle of total quality management. Responses have been received from various CPSEs in this regard. Many CPSEs like

196th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/196threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:07:06]
MECL,NRL,TCIL,Cotton Corporation, HEC RIPL have informed that shop floor training is an integral part of their training curriculum.
 
Committee’s Further Recommendation 
 
10.       The Committee has yet not been apprised of the action taken by the respective administrative Departments/Ministries on the DPEs
circular on this issue.
 
Recommendation in 191
st  Report
 
11.       The Committee observes that maximum Excellent and Very Good Ranking PSEs belonged to Schedule A and the numbers
gradually come down in successive Schedules.  The Committee would like to have the comment of DPE if the MoU performance of the
PSE is directly linked with the factors like investment, capital base, net sales and profits etc. according to which the PSEs are categorized
in Schedules by the DPE and there was any system of relocating the Schedule of PSE according to its MoU performance.
(Para 40)
Action Taken
 
12.       The number of Excellent and Very Good ranking PSEs are maximum in schedule- A and the numbers come down gradually
owing to the fact that the number of PSEs short-listed/ signed MoU are also maximum in Schedule- A, which comes down gradually in
successive schedules.
 
13.       The public enterprises are categorized in four Schedules namely ‘A’, ‘B’, ‘C’ and ‘D’ based on various quantitative, qualitative
and other factors.  The quantitative factors are: investment, capital employed, net sales, profit before tax, number of employees, number
of units and value added per employee.  Qualitative factors are: national importance, complexities of problems, level of technology,
prospects for expansion and diversification of activities and competition from other sectors, etc. Other factors are: the image of the PSU (
in terms of its share price, MoU ratings, classification as Navaratna/ Miniratna, ISO 9000/ IS 14000 certification), productivity of the
PSU ( in terms of capacity utilisation), value added per employee and factors like strategic importance to the enterprise.
 
14.       MoU performance is the reflection of a CPSE’s actual achievement at the end of the year vis-à-vis the MoU targets fixed at the
beginning of the year. The MoU performance of CPSE is measured in terms of various parameters viz., static-financial parameters,
dynamic parameters and sector-specific/enterprise-specific parameters.  In the MoU, both financial and non-financial parameters are
included. 50% weightage have been assigned to the financial parameters which are broadly as under:
 
I. Static Financial Parameters (50%)
(a) Financial performance indicators
(i) Gross Margin/Gross Block                                             Þ        02
(ii) Net Profit/Net Worth                                                     Þ        10
            (iii) Gross Profit/Capital Employed                          Þ        10
(b) Financial indicators -  Size
             (i) Gross Margin                                                                Þ        08
 (ii) Gross Sales                                                                  Þ        04
(c) Financial returns – Labour productivity and Total Factor productivity
            (i) PBDIT/Total Employment                                              Þ        07
(ii) Added Value/Gross Sales                                              Þ        09
 
15.       The MoU performance is one of the indicators taken into consideration while scheduling/ re-scheduling the category of a CPSE.
 
 
Committee’s Further Recommendation 
 
16.       The reply of the DPE does not give any explanation on the observation of the Committee on the obvious linkage between Schedule
and the MoU performance of the PSEs, rather the reply tends to delink the two categories. The Committee observes that the DPE may
assess the close linkage between the PSEs’ MoU ratings and their respective Schedules and place the detailed findings before the
Committee.
Recommendation in 191
st Report  
 
17.       The Committee has not been furnished the details about the process and criteria on the basis of which the PSEs are short- listed for
signing the MoU.  The Committee may also be informed of the existence of BIFR once the BRPSE has been formed to look into the
possibility and prospects of revival of the PSEs.  The Committee would like to know the views of DPE on the possibility and desirability
of transferring the cases of PSEs before the BIFR to the BRPSE.
(Para No.45)
Action Taken
 

196th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/196threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:07:06]
18.       Traditionally the under construction enterprises and the CPSEs which are referred to BIFR have not been signing MoU.  Also,
subsidiaries are not signing separate MoU with their administrative Ministries/Departments.   While, shortlisting the CPSEs for signing of
MoU in a particular year, the name of these type of CPSEs are excluded. 
 
19.       BIFR is a statutory body created by an Act of Parliament i.e. Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 (SICA),
under the Ministry of Finance to look into the cases of CPSEs whose accumulated losses are equal to or exceed their Net worth and make
suitable recommendations for the consideration of the Government. BRPSE, on the other hand, is an advisory body created by a
resolution of the Government to address the task of strengthening, modernising, reviving and re-structuring of PSEs and advise the
Government on strategies, measures and schemes related to them. The jurisdiction of BIFR is larger as it covers both public and private
sector enterprises, whereas BRPSE deals with only CPSEs. While BIFR’s role is restricted to only industrial enterprises, BRPSE may
also deal with non-industrial CPSEs. Further, Incipient sick CPSEs may be referred to BRPSE, so that its advice may help the enterprise
to avoid reference to BIFR.
 
20.       The resolution constituting BRPSE provides that all sick CPSEs including those CPSEs, which are sick within the meaning of
SICA, 1985 are to be referred to BRPSE. Advice of BRPSE is sought by the Government in the case of CPSEs that have been referred to
BIFR in order to firm up Government’s views on revival/ rehabilitation of such CPSEs.
 
Committee’s further recommendation
 
21.       The Committee may be apprised of the status of BIFR after the repeal of SICA, 1985.
 
Recommendation
 
22.       However, the Committee feels that the PSE-wise details of VRS optees and those who took up the training under CRR scheme
could have been provided for a better appraisal by the Committee.  The Committee directs the DPE to furnish the updated details to the
Committee.
(Para 66)
Action Taken
           
23.       CPSE wise figure of VRS for the years 2002-03, 2003-04 and 2004-05 are given vide statement placed at Annexure-I.  CPSE wise
detail of trained persons under CRR scheme for the year 2004-05 and 2005-06 are at Annexure-II & III respectively.  Year wise detail of
the achievement under CRR Scheme is given as under:-
 
Year
Fund
allocated
(Rs. in crore)
Fund Utilised
(Rs. in in crore)
 
 Physical
 target Achievement
Redeployment
2001-02   8.00 7.00   8000   8064 2660
2002-03 10.00 8.68 11900 12066 4705
2003-04 10.00 8.74 12000 12134 5732
2004-05
 
26.50 20.70 29700      28003 11917
2005-06 30.00 27.29 28000 28718 12247
Total 84.50 72.41 89600 88985 37261
 
Committee’s Further Recommendation  
 
24.       The Committee observes that while actual utilization of fund has been less than the allocation, however, the physical training
targets have exceeded the annual targets except for 2004-05. Yet the redeployment has been dismal. The Committee observes with
reservation that without worthwhile remunerative redeployment neither the value of money spent in the scheme could be realized nor the
very objective of the scheme can be justified.  Poor rate of redeployment also indicates perhaps the poor quality of training that is de
linked with the market requirements. The Committee was not furnished information regarding PSEs wise CRR beneficiaries so as to
enable it to make PSE wise comparison between the VRS optees and actual CRR beneficiaries.
Recommendation in 191
st  Report
 
25.       The Committee feels that the DPE must study the experiences of other countries those have gone through the similar process of
reforms.  The Committee also recommends that with present performance where only about 1/3 of the CRR beneficiaries actually get
redeployment after training, there is a huge scope  of improvement in the present status of CRR schemes.
 
(Para 69)
Action Taken
 
26.       As recommended attempt will be made to undertake study of experiences of other countries where similar programmes are
running. Efforts will also be made to increase the reach of the scheme and also improve the redeployment.
 
Committee’s Further recommendation
 
27.       The Committee may be apprised of the specific steps taken in this regard and impact thereof.
 
Recommendation

196th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/196threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:07:06]
 
28.       The Committee made that recommendation in view the abysmal performance in redeploying the CRR trainees.  The Committee
reiterates its recommendation and is not convinced with the nuances as explained by the Planning Commission.  The Committee notes
that the CRR Scheme is being financed by the planned allocation, as per the guidelines 30% of the allocation should be meant for women
participants. Accordingly, the Committee would like to know the participation of women in the CRR scheme, and if the spouse or female
dependent of the VRS optee could be considered under such provision.  The Committee asks the DPE to apprise the Planning
Commission of the current performance of the CRR scheme regarding redeployment of trainees and also the views Committee seeking
inclusion of dependents of the VRS optees into the CRR  scheme.  The Committee requires the DPE to obtain the opinion of the Planning
Commission in view of the facts referred to above.
 
(Para 77)          
Action Taken
 
29.         Out of 17 lakh CPSE employees there are about 1 lakh women employees which is slightly less than 6%.  During past 5 years
88985 VRS optees were retrained under CRR out of which 3967 were women VRS optees, which is about 4.5%.  Since number of
women employees itself in CPSEs is less it has not been possible to maintain 30% allocation to women beneficiaries in CRR. 
 
30.       This Department has again taken up the matter with Planning Commission for extending the benefit of CRR to the dependents of
VRS optees.  Planning Commission has, however, not agreed so far.
 
Committee’s Further Recommendation
31.       The DPE’s reply does not apprise the Committee of the grounds upon which the Planning Commission did not agree with
Committee’s suggestion. The Committee reiterates that if the 30% of the Planned expenditure earmarked for the women is not spent due
to non availability of  eligible women employees, the remaining fund should be used to the advantage of wife or dependent daughter of
the VRS optee so as to enhance the financial prospects of the family. 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE
 
The Committee feels it is essential that the country shares the experience of other countries in reconstructing their public Sector.
The DPE could be a repository of such studies on the revival of Public Sector in other countries. The committee however desires that the
DPE should make an assessment of the benefits of such short-term programmes made.(Para 22)
 
            The Committee has not been furnished the details about the process and criteria on the basis of which the PSEs are short- listed for
signing the MoU.  The Committee may also be informed of the existence of BIFR once the BRPSE has been formed to look into the
possibility and prospects of revival of the PSEs.  The Committee would like to know the views of DPE on the possibility and desirability
of transferring the cases of PSEs before the BIFR to the BRPSE.(Para No.45)
 
            The Committee would like to know if the MoU scores at the end of the year form the basis for providing the Budgetary support to
the Company in subsequent year.  Without such incentives the system of annual MoU would only mean running the Company by
commanding and imposing the objectives.(Para 49)
 
            The Committee observes that of the PSEs recommended for revival maximum 16 cases belonged to PSEs under administrative
control of DHI, three PSEs under Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals, two PSEs each of Department of Textiles and Fertilizers,
and one PSE each from the Department of Coal, Mines, Shipping, Scientific and Industrial Research and Ministry of Water Resources.
The Committee hopes that the administrative Ministries/Departments of these PSEs will ensure that the revival packages are implemented
earnestly and comprehensively as approved by the Government and that the targets as promised are achieved.  The Committee desire that
as the administrative Ministry of BRPSE, the DPE should pursue and coordinate with the concerned administrative Ministries/
Departments.  (para 61)
 
            The Committee feels that the BRPSE was set up as a specialized body mandated to look into the possibilities and ways of the
revival of the PSEs.  It is irrelevant if it is a part time or full time body, till such time it is delivering on its mandate.  Though it was
empowered to seek independent advice, yet in practice the BRPSE is relying on the inputs given by the concerned administrative
Departments. The Committee would like to know about the cases where the BRPSE has consulted independent experts. The Committee
wonders that devoid of independent advice, if BRPSE’s role is only to ratify the inputs given by concerned administrative Department.
(para 8)
 
            The Committee observes that number of PSEs signing the MoU is highest 44 in Schedule A and the numbers gradually descend to
2 in Schedule D.  The Committee would like to have the comments of DPE on this trend.(Para No.36)
 
            However, the Committee feels that the PSE-wise details of VRS optees and those who took up the training under CRR scheme
could have been provided for a better appraisal by the Committee.  The Committee directs the DPE to furnish the updated details to the
Committee.(Para 66)
 
            The Committee desires to know the ratings of the nodal agencies and the parameters of their performance.  Further Committee
observes that such training should be imparted in the vicinity of the existing parent company, so as to save the incidental costs that might
prohibit the VRS optee to join the training.  The Committee also observes that in several cases the location of such nodal agencies was

196th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/196threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:07:06]
not in the vicinity of the PSEs.  Location of the nodal agency should facilitate the VRS optees to take advantage of this scheme.  The
Committee desires if the parent PSE could invite the nodal agencies to conduct courses to train their employees.(Para 73)
 
            The Committee reiterates its recommendation that DPE should use its IT resources to collect the updated information on its
Guidelines, various programmes and policies that are applicable to all the CPSEs.  The DPE should also provide linkages from its
Website to the Websites of other CPSEs.  DPE’s  Website should be enriched with the linkages with relevant Websites, Executive
Development Programmes, Research Studies and Media Reports on the CPSEs, Parliamentary Questions and the Acts that are relevant to
the CPSEs.  The Committee recommends that possibility should be explored to create an IT Network among CPSEs with DPE as its hub.
(Para 4)
 
            The Committee has in a few cases observed that other stake holders like the State Governments, municipal authorities or
ancillaries units too had claims on the surplus assets like land.  In absence of a clearer policy, the process of negotiations among these
stake holders could be protracted and prolonged, resulting in avoidable delay in disposal of surplus assets like land and its consequences
for the concerned PSE. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the DPE to take initiative to formulate a uniform policy on the issue
and if required, consult the State Governments and other stakeholders. (para 12)
 
            The Committee has not been informed of the number of beneficiaries of the CRR scheme in NE region and if the target set for the
2005-06 was met.  The Committee would also like to be informed on the likely number of VRS optees from the NE region this year and
the targeted coverage of  the CRR scheme.
(Para  15)
 
            The Committee notes that the objective of the CRR  scheme is to provide training to VRS  optees so as to align them to the job
market for a gainful employment. A comparison between number of VRS optees and  those actually redeployed after  being trained under
CRR , reveals that the scheme has not been effective in meeting this objective with only about 10%  of the VRS optees actually getting
redeployed.  In such a scenario, manpower rationalization can only lead to wide-spread unemployment.  Despite the fact that the
Government is spending huge amount to settle the VRS  and other statutory dues of the rationalized employees, the entire process of
manpower  rationalization appears to be precipitating social insecurities and unemployment among a productive section of the society.
(Para 68)
 
            Furthermore, the Committee wants to know if the core competencies, skills and expertise of the personnel are considered before
selecting the nodal agencies.  Given the poor performance in deploying the trainees, the Committee apprehends that these critical issues
are perhaps not given due importance while selecting the nodal agencies.  Bearing such possibilities into consideration the Committee has
been impressing upon the DPE the need for some policy guidelines for regular skill upgradation and mid-career training for the
supervisory staff and below.  Such training will not only benefit the PSEs but shall also enhance the professional prospects of its
employees in case of VRS.  The Committee seeks DPE’s comments on these issues.(Para 74)
 
            The Committee takes note of the efforts made by the DPE and desires that it should be apprised of the responses of the premier
institutions of excellence on training the participants of ICPE member countries.
(Para 27)
 
            In the revival plans as approved by the Government for PSEs, it has been observed by the Committee that the emphasis is more on
the financial restructuring and not much stress is laid on aspects like technological up gradation, marketing and human resource
development.  Given the fact that Government has been making major investment is either settling the VRS dues or on CRR  schemes,
the Committee considers it only prudent to upgrade the skills of human resources with respective PSEs.  Therefore human resource
planning and development should have been an integral part of the revival strategy of the PSEs.(Para  30)
 
            The committee also takes note of the fact that Nav Ratna and Mini Ratna companies have been empowered on the issues relating
to human resource development. The committee may be apprised if the DPE, as the nodal department for all the CPSEs on the non-
financial matters, has issued any guidelines for the regular skill upgradation and training of the supervisory and floor shop level
functionaries.(Para 31)
 
            The Committee observes that maximum Excellent and Very Good Ranking PSEs belonged to Schedule A and the numbers
gradually come down in successive Schedules.  The Committee would like to have the comment of DPE if the MoU performance of the
PSE is directly linked with the factors like investment, capital base, net sales and profits etc. according to which the PSEs are categorized
in Schedules by the DPE and there was any system of relocating the Schedule of PSE according to its MoU performance.(Para 40)
 
            The Committee feels that the DPE must study the experiences of other countries those have gone through the similar process of
reforms.  The Committee also recommends that with present performance where only about 1/3 of the CRR beneficiaries actually get
redeployment after training, there is a huge scope  of improvement in the present status of CRR schemes.
(Para 69)
 
            The Committee made that recommendation in view the abysmal performance in redeploying the CRR trainees.  The Committee
reiterates its recommendation and is not convinced with the nuances as explained by the Planning Commission.  The Committee notes
that the CRR Scheme is being financed by the planned allocation, as per the guidelines 30% of the allocation should be meant for women
participants. Accordingly, the Committee would like to know the participation of women in the CRR scheme, and if the spouse or female
dependent of the VRS optee could be considered under such provision.  The Committee asks the DPE to apprise the Planning
Commission of the current performance of the CRR scheme regarding redeployment of trainees and also the views Committee seeking
inclusion of dependents of the VRS optees into the CRR  scheme.  The Committee requires the DPE to obtain the opinion of the Planning
Commission in view of the facts referred to above.

196th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/196threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:07:06]
 
(Para 77)          
Annexure-I
 
List of PSEs with details of VRS for 3 yrs
                                                                                (Rs. in Lakhs)
     -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
     Sno.   NAME OF THE COMPANY                                      2004-05  2003-04  2002-03
     -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
     MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE                
     D/O AGRICULTURE AND COOPERATION        
 
       1.  NATIONAL SEEDS CORPN. LTD.                                     28       45        0
       2.  STATE FARMS CORPORATION OF INDIA LTD.                          13       35      209
                                                        SUB TOTAL :       41       80      209
 
 
     MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS    
     D/O CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMICALS         
 
       3.  BENGAL CHEMICALS & PHARMACEUTICALS LTD.                         0        0        1
       4.  BIHAR DRUGS & ORGANIC CHEMICALS LTD.                            0        0        0
       5.  HINDUSTAN ANTIBIOTICS LTD.                                      0        0        0
       6.  HINDUSTAN FLUOROCARBONS LIMITED                                 0        0        0
       7.  HINDUSTAN INSECTICIDES LTD.                                     4       11       35
       8.  HINDUSTAN ORGANIC CHEMICALS LTD.                                0        0        0
       9.  IDPL (TAMILNADU) LTD.                                           2        0        0
      10.  INDIAN DRUGS & PHARMACEUTICALS LTD.                             0        0        0
      11.  KARNATAKA ANTIBIOTICS & PHARMACEUTICALS LTD.                   18        6       10
      12.  ORISSA DRUGS & CHEMICALS LTD.                                   0        0        0
      13.  RAJASTHAN DRUGS & PHARMACEUTICALS LTD.                          0        0        0
                                                        SUB TOTAL :       24       17       46
 
 
     MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS    
     D/O FERTILIZER                         
 
      14.  BRAHMAPUTRA VALLEY FERTILIZER CORPN. LTD.                       0        0        0
      15.  FCI ARAVALI GYPSUM & MINERALS (INDIA) LTD.                      0        0        0
      16.  FERTILIZER CORPN. OF INDIA LTD.                                 6        0       21
      17.  FERTILIZERS & CHEMICALS (TRAVANCORE) LTD.                     115      850      326
      18.  HINDUSTAN FERTILIZER CORPN. LTD.                                0      255     4400
      19.  MADRAS FERTILIZERS LTD.                                        15      127      127
      20.  NATIONAL FERTILIZERS LTD.                                       0        0      556
      21.  PROJECTS & DEVELOPMENT INDIA LTD.                               0     1188       69
      22.  PYRITES, PHOSPHATES & CHEMICALS LTD.                            0      280      280
      23.  RASHTRIYA  CHEMICALS  AND  FERTILIZERS  LTD.                   23       68       93
                                                        SUB TOTAL :      159     2768     5872
 
 
     MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION              
                                            
 
      24.  AIR INDIA AIR TRANSPORT SERVICES LTD.                           0        0        0
      25.  AIR INDIA CHARTERS LTD.                                         0        0        0
      26.  AIR INDIA LTD.                                                  0       13        0
      27.  AIRLINE ALLIED SERVICES LTD.                                    0        0        0
      28.  AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA LTD.                                0        0        0
      29.  HOTEL CORPN. OF INDIA LTD.                                      0      548        0
      30.  INDIAN AIRLINES LTD.                                            0        0        0
      31.  PAWAN HANS HELICOPTERS LTD.                                     0        0        0
                                                        SUB TOTAL :        0      561        0
 
 
     MINISTRY OF COAL                       
                                            
 
      32.  BHARAT COKING COAL LTD.                                      1236     2102     2006
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
                                                                                 (Rs. in Lakhs)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
     Sno.   NAME OF THE COMPANY                              2004-05  2003-04  2002-0   
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
      33.  CENTRAL COALFIELDS LTD.                                       891     1124      883
      34.  CENTRAL MINE PLANNING & DESIGN INSTITUTE LTD.                  12       39        3
      35.  COAL INDIA LTD.                                                 9       86       52
      36.  EASTERN COALFIELDS LTD.                                      1330     1361     2016
      37.  MAHANADI COALFIELDLS LTD.                                      67      101      141
      38.  NEYVELI LIGNITE CORPN. LTD.                                   133       56      222
      39.  NORTHERN COALFIELDS LTD.                                        0        0        0
      40.  SOUTH EASTERN COALFIELDS LTD.                                 105      358      648
      41.  WESTERN COALFIELDS LTD.                                       565      771      854
                                                        SUB TOTAL :     4348     5998     6825
 
 
     MINISTRY OF COMMERCE & INDUSTRY        
     D/O COMMERCE                           
 
      42.  EXPORT CREDIT GUARANTEE CORPN.OF INDIA LTD.                     0        0        0
      43.  INDIA TRADE PROMOTION ORGANISATION                              0        0       21
      44.  KARNATAKA TRADE PROMOTION ORGANISATION                          0        0        0
      45.  M M T C LTD.                                                   35       48      197
      46.  P E C LTD.                                                      0        1        2
      47.  STATE TRADING CORPN. OF INDIA LTD.                              0        0      224
      48.  STCL LTD.                                                       0        0        2
      49.  TAMIL NADU TRADE PROMOTION ORGANISATION                         0        0        0
                                                        SUB TOTAL :       35       49      446
 
 
     MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS&INFORMATION T
     D/O TELECOMMUNICATIONS                 
 
      50.  BHARAT SANCHAR NIGAM LTD.                                       0        0        0
      51.  I T I  LTD.                                                   299     3726     1199
      52.  MAHANAGAR TELEPHONE NIGAM LTD.                               2015        0        0
      53.  MILLENNIUM TELECOM LTD.                                         0        0        0
      54.  TELECOMMUNICATIONS  CONSULTANTS (INDIA)  LTD.                   0        0        0
                                                        SUB TOTAL :     2314     3726     1199
 
                                                     SECTOR TOTAL :     4859    12550    14148
     SERVICE SECTOR
     --------------
 
     MINISTRY OF COMSUMER AFFAIRS,FOOD & PUBL
     D/O FOOD & PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION         
 
      55.  CENTRAL WAREHOUSING CORPN.                                      0        0     1300
      56.  FOOD CORPN. OF INDIA                                         2777        0        0
      57.  HINDUSTAN VEGETABLE OILS CORPN. LTD.                            0        0        0

196th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/196threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:07:06]
                                                        SUB TOTAL :     2777        0     1300
 
 
     MINISTRY OF DEFENCE                    
     D/O DEFENCE PRODUCTION                 
 
      58.  BEL OPTRONICS LTD.                                              0        0        0
      59.  BHARAT DYNAMICS LTD.                                            0      186        0
      60.  BHARAT EARTH MOVERS LTD.                                      571        7        0
      61.  BHARAT ELECTRONICS LTD.                                       591      617        0
      62.  GARDEN REACH SHIPBUILDERS & ENGINEERS LTD.                      0      119        0
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
 
                                                                                (Rs. in Lakhs)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sno.   NAME OF THE COMPANY                                           2004-05  2003-04  2002-03
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
      63.  GOA SHIPYARD LTD.                                               6       86       87
      64.  HINDUSTAN AERONAUTICS LTD.                                      0        0        0
      65.  MAZAGON DOCK LTD.                                               0        0        0
      66.  MISHRA DHATU NIGAM LTD.                                         0        0        0
      67.  VIGNYAN INDUSTRIES LTD.                                         0        0        9
                                                        SUB TOTAL :     1168     1015       96
 
                                                     SECTOR TOTAL :     6027    13565    14244
     SERVICE SECTOR
     --------------
 
     MINISTRY OF DEVELOPMENT OF NORTH EASTERN
                                            
 
      68.  NORTH EASTERN  HANDICRAFTS & HANDLOOM DEV.CORPN. LTD.           0        1        0
      69.  NORTH EASTERN REGIONAL AGRI. MARKETING CORP.LTD.                0        0        0
                                                        SUB TOTAL :        0        1        0
 
 
     MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS      
                                            
      70.  ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISL. FOREST & PLANT.DEV.CORP.LTD              0        0        0
                                                        SUB TOTAL :        0        0        0
 
 
     MINISTRY OF FINANCE                    
     D/O DISINVESTMENT                      
 
      71.  BALMER LAWRIE INVESTMENTS LTD.                                  0        0        0
                                                        SUB TOTAL :        0        0        0
 
     MINISTRY OF HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE    
     D/O AYUSH                              
 
      72.  INDIAN MEDICINES & PHARMACEUTICAL CORPN. LTD.                   0        0        0
                                                        SUB TOTAL :        0        0        0
 
 
     MINISTRY OF HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE    
     DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
 
      73.  HINDUSTAN LATEX LTD.                                           20       18       75
      74.  HSCC (INDIA) LTD.                                               1        0        0
                                                        SUB TOTAL :       21       18       75
 
     MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES & PUBLIC EN
     D/O HEAVY INDUSTRIES                   
 
      75.  ANDREW YULE & COMPANY LTD.                                    169      287      283
      76.  BBJ CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LTD.                                   0        0        0
      77.  BHARAT BHARI UDYOG NIGAM LTD.                                   0        5        0
      78.  BHARAT HEAVY ELECTRICALS LTD.                                   0     2117        0
      79.  BHARAT HEAVY PLATE & VESSELS LTD.                             128      170     1118
      80.  BHARAT LEATHER CORPN. LTD.                                      0        0        0
      81.  BHARAT OPHTHALMIC GLASS LTD.                                    0        0        0
      82.  BHARAT PUMPS & COMPRESSORS LTD.                                 0      111      128
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                               (Rs. in Lakhs)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
     Sno.   NAME OF THE COMPANY                                      2004-05  2003-04  2002-03
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
      83.  BHARAT WAGON & ENGG. CO. LTD.                                   8       97      443
      84.  BHARAT YANTRA NIGAM LTD.                                        0        6        0
      85.  BRAITHWAITE & CO. LTD.                                          2       11      309
      86.  BRIDGE & ROOF CO.(INDIA) LTD.                                   0        0       27
      87.  BURN STANDARD COMPANY LTD.                                     48      312      339
      88.  CEMENT CORPN. OF INDIA LTD.                                     5      503      867
      89.  ENGINEERING PROJECTS (INDIA) LTD.                               0        0      150
      90.  HEAVY ENGINEERING CORPN. LTD.                                   0       37      898
      91.  HINDUSTAN CABLES LTD.                                          16       44       81
      92.  HINDUSTAN NEWSPRINT LTD.                                        0        1       65
      93.  HINDUSTAN PAPER CORPORATION LTD.                               18       29       57
      94.  HINDUSTAN PHOTO FILMS MANUFACTURING CO. LTD.                    1      130      253
      95.  HINDUSTAN SALTS LTD.                                            0        2       10
      96.  HMT (INTERNATIONAL) LTD.                                        0        0        0
      97.  HMT BEARINGS LTD.                                               0        0        0
      98.  HMT CHINAR WATCHES LTD.                                        26        0      102
      99.  HMT LTD.                                                       53       71      149
     100.  HMT MACHINE TOOLS LTD.                                         75        0      511
     101.  HMT WATCHES LTD.                                               38       95     1083
     102.  HOOGHLY PRINTING COMPANY LTD.                                   0        0        0
     103.  INSTRUMENTATION LTD.                                           33      126      237
     104.  NAGALAND PULP & PAPER COMPANY LTD.                              0        0        5
     105.  NATIONAL INSTRUMENTS LTD.                                       0        0      212
     106.  NEPA LTD.                                                       0        0      390
     107.  PRAGA TOOLS LTD.                                               10       45      115
     108.  RAJASTHAN ELECTRONICS AND INSTRUMENTS LTD.                      0        0        0
     109.  RICHARDSON & CRUDDAS(1972) LTD.                                 0      359      121
     110.  SAMBHAR SALTS LTD.                                              0        0       40
     111.  SCOOTERS INDIA LTD.                                             2        2        0
     112.  TRIVENI STRUCTURALS LTD.                                        0      230      230
     113.  TUNGABHADRA STEEL PRODUCTS LTD.                                68       31       50
     114.  TYRE CORPORATION OF INDIA LTD.                                  0       28      169
                                                        SUB TOTAL :      700     4849     8442
 
 
     MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
     D/O SECONDARY EDUCATION & HIGHER EDUCATI
 
     115.  EDUCATIONAL CONSULTANTS ( INDIA ) LTD.                          0        0        0
                                                        SUB TOTAL :        0        0        0
 
 
     MINISTRY OF INFORMATION & BROADCASTING 
                                            
 
     116.  BROADCAST ENGG.CONSULTANTS INDIA LTD.                           0        0        0

196th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/196threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:07:06]
     117.  NATIONAL FILM DEV. CORPN. LTD.                                 11        1        2
                                                        SUB TOTAL :       11        1        2
 
 
     MINISTRY OF MINES                      
                                             
 
     118.  HINDUSTAN COPPER LTD.                                         265     1808     1570
     119.  MINERAL EXPLORATION CORPN. LTD.                                 0        1      175
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                (Rs. in Lakhs)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Sno.   NAME OF THE COMPANY                                       2004-05  2003-04  2002-03
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
     120.  NATIONAL ALUMINIUM COMPANY LTD.                                12       17      110
                                                        SUB TOTAL :      277     1826     1855
 
 
     MINISTRY OF NON-CONVENTIONAL ENERGY SOUR
                                            
 
     121.  INDIAN RENEWABLE ENERGY DEVT.AGENCY LTD.                        0        0        0
                                                        SUB TOTAL :        0        0        0
 
 
     MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS    
                                             
 
     122.  BALMER LAWRIE & CO. LTD.                                        0      193      321
     123.  BHARAT PETROLEUM CORPN. LTD.                                  430        0        0
     124.  BIECCO LAWRIE LTD.                                              0        0       37
     125.  BONGAIGAON REFINERY & PETROCHEMICALS LTD.                       0        0       20
     126.  CERTIFICATION ENGINEERS INTERNATIONAL LTD.                      0        0        0
     127.  CHENNAI PETROLEUM CORPORATION LTD.                              1        1       16
     128.  ENGINEERS INDIA LTD.                                            7        2      237
     129.  GAIL (INDIA) LTD.                                               0        0        0
     130.  GURU GOBIND SINGH REFINARIES LTD.                               0        0        0
     131.  HINDUSTAN PETROLEUM CORPN. LTD.                               530        0        0
     132.  I.B.P. CO. LTD.                                                33        0        0
     133.  INDIAN OIL BLENDING LTD.                                       11        6        0
     134.  INDIAN OIL CORPORATION LTD.                                   165      326        5
     135.  INDIAN OIL TECHNOLOGIES LTD.                                    0        0        0
     136.  INDIAN STRATEGIC PETROLEUM RESERVES LTD.                        0        0        0
     137.  KOCHI REFINERIES LTD.                                           0        0        0
     138.  MANGALORE REFINARY & PETROCHEMICALS LTD.                        0        0        0
     139.  NUMALIGARH REFINARY LTD.                                        0        0        0
     140.  OIL & NATURAL GAS CORPORATION LTD.                            479      686        0
     141.  OIL INDIA LTD.                                                  0      647        0
     142.  ONGC VIDESH LTD.                                                1        0        0
                                                        SUB TOTAL :     1657     1861      636
 
 
     MINISTRY OF POWER                      
                                            
 
     143.  BINA DEHGAM TRANSMISSION CO. LTD.                               0        0        0
     144.  NARMADA HYDROELECTRIC DEVELOPMENT CORPN. LTD.                   0        0        0
     145.  NATIONAL HYDROELECTRIC POWER CORPN.LTD.                       524        3       87
     146.  NATIONAL THERMAL POWER CORPORATION LTD.                        69      157      259
     147.  NORTH EASTERN ELECTRIC POWER CORPORATION LTD.                   0        0        0
     148.  NTPC ELECTRIC SUPPLY COMPANY LTD.                               0        0        0
     149.  NTPC HYDRO LTD.                                                 0        0        0
     150.  NTPC VIDYUT VYAPAR NIGAM LTD.                                   0        0        0
     151.  PIPAVAV POWER DEVP. COMPANY LTD.                                0        0        0
     152.  POWER FINANCE CORPORATION                                       0        0        0
     153.  POWER GRID CORPORATION OF INDIA LTD                             0        0        0
     154.  RURAL ELECTRIFICATION CORPN. LTD.                               6      211        0
     155.  SATLUJ JAL VIDYUT NIGAM LTD.                                    0        0        0
     156.  TEHRI HYDRO DEVELOPMENT CORP. LTD..                             0        0        0
                                                        SUB TOTAL :      599      371      346
 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                               (Rs. in Lakhs)
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
     Sno.   NAME OF THE COMPANY                                      2004-05  2003-04  2002-03
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
     MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS                   
                                            
 
     157.  CONTAINER CORPORATION OF INDIA LTD.                             0        0        0
     158.  INDIAN RAILWAY CATERING AND TOURISM CORPN. LTD.                 0        0        0
     159.  INDIAN RAILWAY FINANCE CORPORATION LTD.                         0        0        0
     160.  IRCON INTERNATIONAL LTD.                                        4        4      254
     161.  KONKAN RAILWAY CORPORATION LTD.                                 0        0        0
     162.  MUMBAI RAILWAY VIKAS CORPORATION LTD.                           0        0        0
     163.  RAIL VIKAS NIGAM LTD.                                           0        0        0
     164.  RAILTEL CORPORATION INDIA LTD.                                  0        0        0
     165.  RITES LTD.                                                      0        0       16
                                                        SUB TOTAL :        4        4      270
 
 
     MINISTRY OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY       
     DEPT. OF BIOTECHNOLOGY                 
 
     166.  BHARAT IMMUNOLOGICALS & BIOLOGICALS CORP. LTD.                  0        0        0
                                                        SUB TOTAL :        0        0        0
 
 
     MINISTRY OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY       
     DEPT.OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH
 
     167.  CENTRAL ELECTRONICS LTD.                                        3       20       74
     168.  NATIONAL RESEARCH DEVP. CORPN.                                  0        0       14
                                                        SUB TOTAL :        3       20       88
 
 
     MINISTRY OF SHIPPING,ROAD TRANSPORT AND
                                             
 
     169.  CENTRAL INLAND WATER TRANSPORT CORPN. LTD.                    134       63      427
     170.  COCHIN SHIPYARD LTD.                                           25       84        0
     171.  DREDGING CORPN.OF INDIA LTD.                                    8        0        0
     172.  ENNORE PORT LTD.                                                0        0        0
     173.  HINDUSTAN SHIPYARD LTD.                                         0       66      385
     174.  HOOGHLY DOCK AND PORT ENGINEERS LTD.                            0        9       99
     175.  SHIPPING CORPORATION OF INDIA LTD.                              3        1      177
                                                        SUB TOTAL :      170      223     1088
 
 
     MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES     
                                            
 
     176.  NATIONAL SMALL INDUSTRIES CORPN. LTD.                          13       26      131

196th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/196threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:07:06]
                                                        SUB TOTAL :       13       26      131
 
 
     MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE & EMPOWERMENT
                                            
 
     177.  ARTIFICIAL LIMBS MFG. CORPN. OF INDIA                           0        0        0
     178.  NATIONAL BACKWARD CLASSES FINANCE & DEVELOPMENT CORP.           0        0        0
     179.  NATIONAL HANDICAPPED FINANCE & DEVPT. CORPN.                    0        0        0
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                (Rs. in Lakhs)
     -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
     Sno.   NAME OF THE COMPANY                                      2004-05  2003-04  2002-03
     -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
     180.  NATIONAL MINORITIES DEVP. & FINANCE CORPN.                      0        0        0
     181.  NATIONAL SAFAI KARAMCHARIS' FINANCE & DEVPT. CORPN.             0        0        0
     182.  NATIONAL SCHEDULED CASTES FINANCE & DEVP. CORPN.                0        0        0
                                                        SUB TOTAL :        0        0        0
 
 
     MINISTRY OF STEEL                      
                                            
 
     183.  BHARAT REFRACTORIES LTD.                                        1       12     1010
     184.  FERRO SCRAP NIGAM LTD.                                          0       67        0
     185.  HINDUSTAN STEEL WORKS COSTN. LTD.                             418      346     3154
     186.  INDIAN IRON & STEEL CO. LTD.                                  249     1506     2544
     187.  J & K MINERAL DEVELOPMENT CORPN. LTD.                           0        0        0
     188.  KUDREMUKH IRON ORE CO.LTD                                     200        0       74
     189.  M S T C LTD.                                                    0        7        0
     190.  MAHARASHTRA ELEKTROSMELT LTD.                                  12       31       16
     191.  MANGANESE ORE(INDIA) LTD.                                       0      119      309
     192.  MECON LTD.                                                     32      504      255
     193.  NATIONAL MINERAL DEVELOPMENT CORPN. LTD.                        0        0        0
     194.  RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LTD.                                      0        0        0
     195.  SPONGE  IRON  INDIA  LTD.                                       2        7        0
     196.  STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LTD.                                1440     2000     4814
                                                        SUB TOTAL :     2354     4599    12176
 
 
     MINISTRY OF TEXTILES                   
                                            
 
     197.  BIRDS JUTE & EXPORTS LTD.                                      38       38        0
     198.  BRITISH INDIA CORPORATION LTD.                                126      126      300
     199.  BRUSHWARE LTD.                                                  0       13       33
     200.  CENTRAL COTTAGE INDUSTRIES CORPN. OF INDIA LTD.                34       42        0
     201.  COTTON CORPN. OF INDIA LTD.                                     0        0        1
     202.  HANDICRAFTS & HANDLOOM EXPORTS CORP. OF INDIA LTD.              1        3        3
     203.  JUTE CORPN. OF INDIA LTD.                                       0       25       19
     204.  NATIONAL HANDLOOM DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION LTD.                  4        0        0
     205.  NATIONAL JUTE MANUFACTURERS CORPORATION LTD.                    0        0        0
     206.  NATIONAL TEXTILE CORPN. (Holding Co.) LTD.                    106        1       20
     207.  NTC(A.PRADESH, KARNATAKA, KERALA & MAHE)LTD.                    0      354     1804
     208.  NTC(DELHI,PUNJAB & RAJASTHAN) LTD.                            119      605      692
     209.  NTC(GUJARAT)LTD.                                                0     1679     4140
     210.  NTC(MADHYA PRADESH)LTD.                                       982      400     5506
     211.  NTC(MAHARASHTRA NORTH)LTD.                                   1578     4768      627
     212.  NTC(SOUTH MAHARASHTRA)LTD.                                   1893     5933        0
     213.  NTC(TAMILNADU & PONDICHERRY) LTD.                             136       32      926
     214.  NTC(UTTAR PRADESH)LTD.                                        290     1321     5678
     215.  NTC(WEST BENGAL,ASSAM,BIHAR & ORISSA)LTD.                     423      901      881
                                                        SUB TOTAL :     5730    16241    20630
 
 
     MINISTRY OF TOURISM                    
                                             
 
     216.  ASSAM ASHOK HOTEL CORPN. LTD.                                   0        0        0
     -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                (Rs. in Lakhs)
     -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
     Sno.   NAME OF THE COMPANY                                      2004-05  2003-04  2002-03
     -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
     217.  DONYI POLO ASHOK HOTEL LTD.                                     0        0        0
     218.  INDIA TOURISM DEV. CORPN.LTD.                                   0      216        0
     219.  KUMARAKUPPA FRONTIER HOTELS LTD.                                0        0        0
     220.  MADHYA PRADESH ASHOK HOTEL CORPN. LTD.                          0        0        0
     221.  PONDICHERRY ASHOK HOTEL CORPN. LTD.                             0        0        0
     222.  PUNJAB ASHOK HOTEL COMPANY LTD.                                 0        0        0
     223.  RANCHI ASHOK BIHAR HOTEL CORPN. LTD.                            0        0        0
     224.  UTKAL ASHOK HOTEL CORPN. LTD.                                   0        0        0
                                                        SUB TOTAL :        0      216        0
 
 
     MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS             
                                             
 
     225.  NATIONAL SCHEDULED TRIBES FINANCE & DEVP. CORPN.                0        0        0
                                                        SUB TOTAL :        0        0        0
 
 
     MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT          
                                             
 
     226.  NATIONAL BLDG. CONSTN. CORPN. LTD.                             49       94      149
                                                        SUB TOTAL :       49       94      149
 
 
     MINISTRY OF URBAN DEV. AND POVERTY ALLEV
                                            
 
     227.  HINDUSTAN PREFAB LTD.                                          22        6       31
     228.  HOUSING & URBAN DEV. CORPN. LTD.                                0        0        0
                                                        SUB TOTAL :       22        6       31
 
 
     MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES            
                                            
 
     229.  NATIONAL PROJECTS CONSTRUCTION CORPN. LTD.                     13      274      210
     230.  WATER & POWER CONSULTANCY SERVICES(INDIA) LTD.                  0        0        0
                                                        SUB TOTAL :       13      274      210
 
 
     DEPT. OF ATOMIC ENERGY                  
                                            
 
     231.  BHARATIYA NABHIKIYA VIDYUT NIGAM LTD.                           0        0        0
     232.  ELECTRONICS CORPN. OF INDIA LTD.                              131      179      226
     233.  INDIAN RARE EARTHS LTD.                                        18       25       66
     234.  NUCLEAR POWER CORPN. OF INDIA LTD.                              0        0        0
     235.  URANIUM CORPORATION OF INDIA LTD.                              14       77       32
                                                        SUB TOTAL :      163      281      324

196th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/196threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:07:06]
 
 
     DEPT. OF SPACE                         
                                            
 
     236.  ANTRIX CORPORATION LTD.                                         0        0        0
     237.  SEMI-CONDUCTOR  COMPLEX LTD.                                   46        0        0
                                                        SUB TOTAL :       46        0        0
 
                                                     SECTOR TOTAL :     5461     2413     6754
     -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                          TOTAL :      22698    45125    62446
     -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Annexure-II
 
CPSE WISE TRAINED VRS OPTEES DURING 2004-05
 
 
Sl. No.
Name of CPSE
No. of trained VRS
optees
1.  AIR INDIA LTD. 3
2.  
ANDREW YULE & COMPANY LTD. 37
3.  
ARTIFICIAL LIMBS MFG. CORPN. OF INDIA 343
4.  
BENGAL CHEMICALS & PHARMACEUTICALS LTD. 1
5.  BENGAL IMMUNITY LTD. 4
6.  BHARAT COKING COAL LTD. 31
7.  
BHARAT EARTH MOVERS LTD. 216
8.  BHARAT ELECTRONICS LTD. 132
9.  
BHARAT GOLD MINES LTD.                              425
10.  
BHARAT HEAVY ELECTRICALS LTD. 1114
11.  
BHARAT HEAVY PLATE & VESSELS LTD. 89
12.  
BHARAT LEATHER CORPN. LTD. 2
13.  
BHARAT PETROLEUM CORPN. LTD. 19
14.  
BHARAT PROCESS & MECHANICAL ENGINEERS LTD.         1
15.  
BHARAT PUMPS & COMPRESSORS LTD. 94
16.  
BHARAT REFRACTORIES LTD. 300
17.  
BHARAT WAGON & ENGG. CO. LTD. 57
18.  
BRITISH INDIA CORPORATION LTD. 4
19.  BRUSHWARE LTD. 1
20.  
BURN STANDARD COMPANY LTD. 562
21.  
CAWNPORE TEXTILES LTD.                             254
22.  
CEMENT CORPN. OF INDIA LTD. 299
23.  CENTRAL COALFIELDS LTD. 17
24.  
CENTRAL COTTAGE INDUSTRIES CORPN. OF INDIA LTD. 33
25.  
CENTRAL ELECTRONICS LTD. 49
26.  
CENTRAL INLAND WATER TRANSPORT CORPN. LTD. 1
27.  
CENTRAL WAREHOUSING CORPN. 8
28.  COAL INDIA LTD. 1
29.  
COTTON CORPN. OF INDIA LTD. 54
30.  
CYCLE CORPORATION OF INDIA LTD.                     (NR) 30
31.  
DREDGING CORPN.OF INDIA LTD. 3

196th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/196threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:07:06]
32.  EASTERN COALFIELDS LTD. 15
33.  
ELECTRONICS CORPN. OF INDIA LTD. 240
34.  
ELGIN MILLS COMPANY LTD.                           371
35.  
ENGINEERING PROJECTS (INDIA) LTD. 26
36.  ENGINEERS INDIA LTD. 8
37.  FERRO SCRAP NIGAM LTD. 1
38.  
FERTILIZER CORPN. OF INDIA LTD. 677
39.  
FERTILIZERS & CHEMICALS (TRAVANCORE) LTD. 87
40.  FOOD CORPN. OF INDIA 44
41.  GOA SHIPYARD LTD. 64
42.  
HANDICRAFTS & HANDLOOMS EXPORTS CORP.INDIA LTD 1
43.  
HEAVY ENGINEERING CORPN. LTD. 1
44.  HINDUSTAN CABLES LTD. 159
45.  HINDUSTAN COPPER LTD. 1205
46.  
HINDUSTAN FERTILIZER CORPN. LTD. 433
47.  
HINDUSTAN INSECTICIDES LTD. 2
48.  
HINDUSTAN ORGANIC CHEMICALS LTD. 17
49.  
HINDUSTAN PAPER CORPORATION LTD. 4
50.  
HINDUSTAN PETROLEUM CORPN. LTD. 3
51.  
HINDUSTAN PHOTO FILMS MANUFACTURING CORPN. LTD. 8
52.  HINDUSTAN SALTS LTD. 6
53.  HINDUSTAN SHIPYARD LTD. 20
54.  
HINDUSTAN STEEL WORKS COSTN. LTD. 591
55.  
HINDUSTAN VEGETABLE OILS CORPN. LTD. 111
56.  
HINDUSTAN ZINC LTD.                                243
57.  HMT LTD. 355
58.  HMT WATCHES LTD. 33
59.  
HOTEL CORPN. OF INDIA LTD. 19
60.  I T I  LTD. 814
61.  I.B.P. CO. LTD. 0
62.  IDPL (TAMILNADU) LTD. 1
63.  
INDIA TOURISM DEV. CORPN.LTD. 21
64.  INDIAN AIRLINES LTD. 2
65.  
INDIAN DRUGS & PHARMACEUTICALS LTD. 1217
66.  
INDIAN IRON & STEEL CO. LTD. 1206
67.  
INDIAN OIL CORPORATION LTD. 15
68.  INDIAN RARE EARTHS LTD. 8
69.  
INDIAN ROAD CONSTN. CORPN. LTD.                     (NR) 6
70.  INSTRUMENTATION LTD. 147
71.  
KUDREMUKH IRON ORE CO.LTD 15
72.  M M T C LTD. 7
73.  MADRAS FERTILIZERS LTD. 10
74.  
MAHANADI COALFIELDLS LTD. 1
75.  

196th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/196threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:07:06]
MAHARASHTRA ELEKTROSMELT LTD. 39
76.  
MANGANESE ORE(INDIA) LTD. 2
77.  MECON LTD. 50
78.  
MINERAL EXPLORATION CORPN. LTD. 8
79.  
MINING & ALLIED MACHINERY CORPN. LTD.              116
80.  
NATIONAL ALUMINIUM COMPANY LTD. 4
81.  
NATIONAL BICYCLE CORPORATION OF INDIA LTD.         172
82.  
NATIONAL BLDG. CONSTN. CORPN. LTD. 5
83.  NATIONAL FERTILIZERS LTD. 163
84.  
NATIONAL MINERAL DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION LTD. 9
85.  
NATIONAL PROJECTS CONSTRUCTION CORPN. LTD. 1
86.  
NATIONAL SMALL INDUSTRIES CORPN. LTD. 3
87.  
NATIONAL TEXTILE CORPN. (Holding Co.) LTD. 7
88.  
NATIONAL THERMAL POWER CORPORATION LTD. 15
89.  
NEYVELI LIGNITE CORPN. LTD 12
90.  
NTC(A.PRADESH, KARNATAKA, KERALA & MAHE)LTD. 1781
91.  
NTC(DELHI,PUNJAB & RAJASTHAN) LTD. 120
92.  NTC(GUJARAT)LTD. 295
93.  
NTC(MADHYA PRADESH)LTD. 1284
94.  
NTC(MAHARASHTRA NORTH)LTD. 1213
95.  
NTC(SOUTH MAHARASHTRA)LTD. 189
96.  
NTC(TAMILNADU & PONDICHERRY) LTD. 1
97.  NTC(UTTAR PRADESH)LTD. 492
98.  
NTC(WEST BENGAL,ASSAM ,BIHAR & ORISSA)LTD. 619
99.  NTPC HYDRO LTD. 1
100.  
OIL & NATURAL GAS CORPORATION LTD. 2
101.  PRAGA TOOLS LTD. 23
102.  
PROJECTS & DEVELOPMENT INDIA LTD. 106
103.  
PYRITES, PHOSPHATES & CHEMICALS LTD. 59
104.  
R B L LTD.                                         1
105.  
RASHTRIYA  CHEMICALS  AND  FERTILIZERS  LTD. 57
106.  
REHABILITATION INDUSTRIES CORPN. LTD.              5
107.  
RICHARDSON & CRUDDAS(1972) LTD. 84
108.  
SAIL POWER SUPPLY COMPANY LTD.                     33
109.  SCOOTERS INDIA LTD. 314
110.  
SEMI-CONDUCTOR  COMPLEX LTD. 92

196th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/196threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:07:06]
111.  
SHIPPING CORPORATION OF INDIA LTD. 2
112.  
STATE TRADING CORPN. OF INDIA LTD. 25
113.  
STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LTD. 1378
114.  
TANNERY & FOOTWEAR CORPN. OF INDIA LTD.            130
115.  
TELECOMMUNICATIONS  CONSULTANTS (INDIA)  LTD. 158
116.  TRIVENI STRUCTURALS LTD. 174
117.  
TYRE CORPORATION OF INDIA LTD. 7
118.  
URANIUM CORPORATION OF INDIA LTD. 1
119.  
WEIGHBIRD (INDIA) LTD.                            27
120.  WESTERN COALFIELDS LTD. 69
                                                          Annexure-III
 
CPSE WISE TRAINED VRS OPTEES DURING 2005-06
 
 
Sl. No.
Name of CPSE
No. of trained VRS
optees
1.  
ANDREW YULE & COMPANY LTD. 13
2.  BALMER LAWRIE & CO. LTD. 3
3.  
BENGAL CHEMICALS & PHARMACEUTICALS LTD. 2
4.  BENGAL IMMUNITY LTD. 93
5.  
BHARAT BRAKES & VALVES LTD.                         (NR) 14
6.  BHARAT COKING COAL LTD. 41
7.  BHARAT DYNAMICS LTD. 19
8.  
BHARAT EARTH MOVERS LTD. 40
9.  BHARAT ELECTRONICS LTD. 114
10.  
BHARAT GOLD MINES LTD.                            1444
11.  
BHARAT HEAVY ELECTRICALS LTD. 784
12.  
BHARAT HEAVY PLATE & VESSELS LTD. 5
13.  
BHARAT PETROLEUM CORPN. LTD. 1
14.  
BHARAT PUMPS & COMPRESSORS LTD. 39
15.  
BHARAT REFRACTORIES LTD. 98
16.  
BHARAT WAGON & ENGG. CO. LTD. 44
17.  BIRDS,JUTE & EXPORTS LTD. 1
18.  
BRITISH INDIA CORPORATION LTD. 3
19.  BRUSHWARE LTD. 7
20.  
BURN STANDARD COMPANY LTD. 300
21.  
CEMENT CORPN. OF INDIA LTD. 431
22.  CENTRAL COALFIELDS LTD. 19
23.  
CENTRAL ELECTRONICS LTD. 54
24.  
CENTRAL INLAND WATER TRANSPORT CORPN. LTD. 10
25.  
CENTRAL WAREHOUSING CORPN. 11
26.  COAL INDIA LTD. 4
27.  

196th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/196threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:07:06]
COTTON CORPN. OF INDIA LTD. 4
28.  
CYCLE CORPORATION OF INDIA LTD.                    140
29.  E T & T LTD. 437
30.  EASTERN COALFIELDS LTD. 78
31.  
EDUCATIONAL CONSULTANTS ( INDIA ) LTD. 12
32.  
ELECTRONICS CORPN. OF INDIA LTD. 12
33.  
ELGIN MILLS COMPANY LTD.                           399
34.  
ENGINEERING PROJECTS (INDIA) LTD. 24
35.  ENGINEERS INDIA LTD. 1
36.  FERRO SCRAP NIGAM LTD. 1
37.  
FERTILIZER CORPN. OF INDIA LTD. 692
38.  
FERTILIZERS & CHEMICALS (TRAVANCORE) LTD. 403
39.  FOOD CORPN. OF INDIA 411
40.  
GARDEN REACH SHIPBUILDERS & ENGINEERS LTD. 2
41.  GOA SHIPYARD LTD. 19
42.  
HANDICRAFTS & HANDLOOMS EXPORTS CORP.INDIA LTD 1
43.  
HEAVY ENGINEERING CORPN. LTD. 180
44.  
HINDUSTAN AERONAUTICS LTD. 42
45.  HINDUSTAN CABLES LTD. 497
46.  HINDUSTAN COPPER LTD. 1348
47.  
HINDUSTAN FERTILIZER CORPN. LTD. 403
48.  
HINDUSTAN INSECTICIDES LTD. 2
49.  
HINDUSTAN ORGANIC CHEMICALS LTD. 128
50.  
HINDUSTAN PETROLEUM CORPN. LTD. 4
51.  
HINDUSTAN PHOTO FILMS MANUFACTURING CORPN. LTD. 34
52.  HINDUSTAN PREFAB LTD. 1
53.  HINDUSTAN SHIPYARD LTD. 7
54.  
HINDUSTAN STEEL WORKS COSTN. LTD. 957
55.  
HINDUSTAN VEGETABLE OILS CORPN. LTD. 42
56.  
HINDUSTAN ZINC LTD.                               194
57.  HMT LTD. 52
58.  
HOOGHLY DOCK AND PORT ENGINEERS LTD. 2
59.  HSCC (INDIA) LTD. 2
60.  I T I  LTD. 836
61.  
INDIA TOURISM DEV. CORPN.LTD. 11
62.  INDIAN AIRLINES LTD. 3
63.  
INDIAN DRUGS & PHARMACEUTICALS LTD. 828
64.  
INDIAN IRON & STEEL CO. LTD. 282
65.  
INDIAN OIL CORPORATION LTD. 9
66.  INSTRUMENTATION LTD. 130
67.  IRCON INTERNATIONAL LTD. 1
68.  
JESSOP & CO. LTD.                                  1
69.  JUTE CORPN. OF INDIA LTD. 2

196th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/196threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:07:06]
70.  M M T C LTD. 34
71.  
MAHANADI COALFIELDLS LTD. 6
72.  
MAHANAGAR TELEPHONE NIGAM LTD. 56
73.  
MAHARASHTRA ANTIBIOTICS & PHARMACEUTICALS LTD. 27
74.  
MAHARASHTRA ELEKTROSMELT LTD. 3
75.  MECON LTD. 61
76.  
MINERAL EXPLORATION CORPN. LTD. 31
77.  
MINING & ALLIED MACHINERY CORPN. LTD.              67
78.  
NATIONAL ALUMINIUM COMPANY LTD. 8
79.  
NATIONAL BICYCLE CORPORATION OF INDIA LTD.         257
80.  
NATIONAL BLDG. CONSTN. CORPN. LTD. 2
81.  NATIONAL FERTILIZERS LTD. 54
82.  
NATIONAL INDUSTRIAL DEV. CORPN. LTD. 1
83.  
NATIONAL INSTRUMENTS LTD. 25
84.  
NATIONAL MINERAL DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION LTD. 21
85.  
NATIONAL RESEARCH DEVELOPMENT CORPN. OF INDIA. 4
86.  
NATIONAL SEEDS CORPN. LTD. 8
87.  
NATIONAL SMALL INDUSTRIES CORPN. LTD. 9
88.  
NATIONAL THERMAL POWER CORPORATION LTD. 1
89.  NEPA LTD. 16
90.  
NTC(A.PRADESH, KARNATAKA, KERALA & MAHE)LTD. 1514
91.  
NTC(DELHI,PUNJAB & RAJASTHAN) LTD. 548
92.  NTC(GUJARAT)LTD. 1134
93.  
NTC(MADHYA PRADESH)LTD. 1109
94.  
NTC(MAHARASHTRA NORTH)LTD. 900
95.  
NTC(SOUTH MAHARASHTRA)LTD. 676
96.  
NTC(TAMILNADU & PONDICHERRY) LTD. 30
97.  NTC(UTTAR PRADESH)LTD. 1883
98.  
NTC(WEST BENGAL,ASSAM ,BIHAR & ORISSA)LTD. 867
99.  NTPC HYDRO LTD. 69
100.  P E C LTD. 3
101.  
PROJECTS & DEVELOPMENT INDIA LTD. 392
102.  
PYRITES, PHOSPHATES & CHEMICALS LTD. 6
103.  
R B L LTD.                                         8
104.  
REHABILITATION INDUSTRIES CORPN. LTD.              156
105.  
RICHARDSON & CRUDDAS(1972) LTD. 1
106.  

196th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/196threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:07:06]
RURAL ELECTRIFICATION CORPN. LTD. 10
107.  
SAIL POWER SUPPLY COMPANY LTD.                     38
108.  SCOOTERS INDIA LTD. 227
109.  
SEMI-CONDUCTOR  COMPLEX LTD. 128
110.  
SIKKIM MINING CORPORATION LTD. 65
111.  
SMITH STANISTREET & PHARMACEUTICALS LTD. 2
112.  
STATE FARMS CORPORATION OF INDIA LTD. 1
113.  
STATE TRADING CORPN. OF INDIA LTD. 4
114.  
STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LTD. 1687
115.  
TANNERY & FOOTWEAR CORPN. OF INDIA LTD.            12
116.  TRIVENI STRUCTURALS LTD. 90
117.  
TYRE CORPORATION OF INDIA LTD. 9
118.  
UTKAL ASHOK HOTEL CORPN. LTD. 1
119.  
VIDESH SANCHAR NIGAM LTD.                          1
120.  
WEIGHBIRD (INDIA) LTD.                             3
121.  WESTERN COALFIELDS LTD. 810
 