            
  
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2014/ Magha, 1935 (Saka) 
 
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON  250 TH  REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON IMPACT OF FOREIGN DIRECT 
INVESTMENT (FDI) IN MULTI - BRAND RETAIL             
ON MSME SECTOR  
 PERTAINING TO  
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES    
      
 (PRESENTED TO  THE RAJYA SABHA ON  19 TH  FEBRUARY, 2014) 
( LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 19 TH   FEBRUARY, 2014) 
257  
 

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2014/ Magha, 1935 (Saka) 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON  250 TH  REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON IMPACT OF FOREIGN DIRECT 
INVESTMENT (FDI) IN MULTI - BRAND RETAIL             
ON MSME SECTOR  
 PERTAINING TO  
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES    
      
 (PRESENTED TO  THE RAJYA SABHA ON  19 TH   FEBRUARY, 2014) 
( LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 19 TH   FEBRUARY, 2014) 
 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …………………………………(i)  
2. INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………(ii) 
3. REPORT …………………………………………………………………….    
(i) CHAPTER-I 
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by 
the Ministry…………………………………………………………… 
(ii) CHAPTER-II 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies……………………… 
(iii) CHAPTER-III 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has 
either not accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry 
to review its replies………………………………………………… 
 
(iv) CHAPTER-IV 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the  
Ministry have not been received……………………………………. 
 
 4. MINUTES ……………………………………………………………………… 
                  
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE   
(Date of Constitution w.e.f.  31 st  August,  2013) 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
     
 1.  Shri K.C. Tyagi —       Chairman  
       2.  Shri M.P. Achuthan  
 3.  Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel  
 4.  Shri Narendra Budania 
    5.  Shri Vivek Gupta  
 6.  Dr. V. Maitreyan   
 7.  Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar  
 8.  Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
 9.  Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
10. Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor  
LOK SABHA 
 
 
11.   Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala 
12.   Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
13. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
14. Shrimati Poonamben Veljibhai Jat 
15. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
16. Shri Hassan Khan 
17. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
18. Shrimati Ingrid Mcleod  
19. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal 
20. Shri Somen Mitra 
21. Shri P. R. Natarajan 
22. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey 
23. Shri Jayaram Pangi 
24. Shri R. K. Singh Patel 
25. Shri B. Y. Raghavendra 
26.   Shri Ramsinh Rathwa  
27.   Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
28.   Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
29.   Ch. Lal Singh 
30.   Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
31.   Shri E.G. Sugavanam 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.      Shri A.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
2.      Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
3.      Shri Roshan Lal, Joint Director 
4.      Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 
(i) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
  
  
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliame ntary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred Fifty 
Seventh Report on Action Taken Note furnished by th e Ministry of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises on the recommendations contained  in the Committee’s Two Hundred 
and Fiftieth Report on Impact of Foreign Direct Inv estment (FDI) in Multi-brand Retail on 
MSME Sector.  
 
2. I thank the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises for furnishing the 
Action Taken Note on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred 
and Fiftieth Report. 
  
3. The Committee in its meeting held on 17 
th  February, 2014 considered and adopted 
the report. 
 
  
 
  
K.C. Tyagi 
                          Chairman                                                                                   
                Department -related Parliamentary  
                                                                                       Standing  Committee   on    Industry  
 
New Delhi 
17 
th  February, 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 

REPORT 
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with  the Action Taken by the 
Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises on the recommendations contained in 
the Committee’s Two Hundred and Fiftieth Report on Impact of Foreign Direct Investment 
(FDI) in Multi-brand Retail on MSME Sector  pertaining to Ministry of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises. 
 
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises in respect of the recommendation s contained in the Report. These 
have been categorized as follows:  
 
Chapter –I   The recommendations/observations, which have bee n accepted by the 
Ministry. 
 
 The Committee is pleased to observe that the Minis try has accepted its 
recommendations as mentioned in the Chapter – I of the Report. 
 
Chapter -II   The recommendations/observations which the Commit tee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies. 
 
 In respect of these recommendations the Committee is convinced with the logic and 
explanations advanced by the Ministry and therefore  do not want to pursue them for the 
present. 
 
Chapter -III    The recommendations/observations in respect of w hich the Committee has 
either not accepted replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its reply. 
 
 The Committee expresses its concern over the non-i mplementation of 
recommendations contained in Chapter – III and desi res that the Ministry should furnish 
logical explanations therefor. 
 
Chapter -IV    The recommendations/observations in respect of wh ich final replies of the 
Ministry have not been received. 
 
 In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either 
furnished the interim replies or couched its langua ge in vague terms like noted for 
compliance/guidance, therefore, the Committee desir es that the Ministry should furnish 
Action Taken Notes in respects of recommendations c ategorized in Chapter-IV in detail 
and to the point, as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee. 
 
3. The details of the ATR are being discussed in the succeeding pages. 
 
 
 
 
 

-2- 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry  
       
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
1. The Committee would like the MSME Ministry to be  more vigilant to see that 
micro enterprises would not be excluded due to cons ervative interpretation of "Small 
Industries" in policy. The Committee also feels that the while focus on "Small Industries" is 
intended to encourage manufacturing sector, local " Small Enterprises" including the local 
service providers like IT service, Transporters, Te chnicians etc. too should get the benefits 
of this Policy.  
 
(Para 26) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
The Government is conscious about the procurement o f manufactured/processed 
products from micro enterprises in addition to thos e of small and medium as is clear from 
the language of the Press Note.  All the above enterprises having a total investment in Plant 
and machinery not exceeding US$2.00 million are eli gible for 30% procurement by the 
above Multi Brand Retail Trades (MBRTs).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

-3- 
 
CHAPTER-II  
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do es not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies  
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee while acknowledging the importance of  these issues feels that 
adoption of these systems will increase the costs o f MSME products.  The Committee 
suggests that existing schemes of M/o MS&ME for ski ll training, quality certification, 
packaging must be upgraded and strengthened keeping  in view the emerging requirements 
for mandatory procurement from MSE sector under FDI  retail scheme.  In fact the 
Committee feels that FDI in retail may not benefit the retail sector unless designing, 
packaging, bar coding, skill development, etc., are  improved upon and integrated into 
supply chain.  To achieve these objectives increase d budgetary allocation under the 
appropriate schemes would be required. 
(Para 24) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
To strengthen MSME sector in view of emerging requi rements variety of training 
programmes, including retail management, technical skills etc. are being conducted. A web 
based monitoring system to track training and place ment of trainees on real time basis has 
been put in place.  There is a continuous increase in budgetary allocation for training 
programmes as detailed under: 
2011-12              Rs. 10256 lakh 
2012-13   Rs. 11988 lakh 
2013-14   Rs. 15467 lakh 
 
To sensitize & encourage MSMEs to adopt latest Qual ity Management Standards 
(QMS) & Quality Technology Tools (QTT), Ministry is  undertaking the capacity building 
of manpower in technical institutes like, Polytechn ics & MSMEs through its QMS & QTT 
scheme. 
To encourage ISO certification in MSME sector, the Ministry has budgetary 
provision of Rs. 12 Crore toward reimbursement of e xpenses incurred for acquiring  ISO-
9001/14001/HACCP. In addition, allocation of Rs.108 44 crores in XII Plan, have been 
approved by Planning Commission towards Plan fund o f DC, MSME.  However, actual 
budgetary allocation would be done by Ministry of Finance. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
Initially the game plan of foreign big retail giant s would be to attract the customers 
from the indigenous retail shops by offering low pr ices. In doing so they will completely 
eliminate  our  retailers and  create  a  situation  where  they  will have monopoly over retail 
 

 
-4- 
 
 trade. Later they will sell the same goods at an u nreasonably higher price which the 
consumers would be forced to buy in absence of any other option available to them. Their  
continuing dominance and their direct dealings with  farmers by giving attractive prices in 
the beginning will cripple our Mandis and markets w hich form part of our rural economy. 
Once such Mandis are eliminated the big foreign ret ail giants will manipulate prices and 
our farmers would be forced to sell their products at a low price dictated by them. Our own 
squeezed out retailers and all those associated wit h the markets and retail trade would lose 
their livelihood and become jobless. It will add to  our already existing social and economic 
woes which generates so much unrest and violence.  
 
(Para 44) 
 
Action Taken  
 
 
The Government was well aware of such apprehensions/ concerns. Accordingly, the 
Government has  provided certain safeguards for domestic stakeholders as under: 
 
• FDI up to 51% through government approval mode. 
• Permitted only in cities with a population of more than 10 lakh as per the 2011 Census 
or any other cities as per the decision of the respective State Governments. 
• Minimum investment of US $ 100 million of which at least 50% to be invested in 
backend infrastructure, which would include capital expenditure on the entire spectrum 
of related activities excluding frontend units, land cost and rentals.  
• Mandatory sourcing of a minimum of 30% from Indian small industries with a total 
investment in plant and machinery not exceeding US $ two million.  
• 
Government to have first right of procurement of agricultural products.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
-5- 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which th e Committee has either not 
accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its replies  
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 
Keeping in mind the above observations of the PM’s Task Force the Committee is 
of opinion that the FDI for retail may not have ben eficial impact on the MSME sector.  
However, the Committee suggests that the Government  and more particularly the Ministry 
of MS&ME should commission a survey to assess the b enefits and losses of previous FDI 
policies on the MSME sector to ascertain if FDI pol icy so far has created any back-end 
infrastructure, imparted skills to domestic manpowe r or upgraded managerial skills as has 
been envisaged in the recent policy. 
(Para 11) 
 
Action Taken  
 
The Policy on FDI in retail for Multi-brand Retail Trade (MBRT) has for the first 
time provided limits of investment in backend infra structure which among others may be 
utilized for skill upgradation of  manpower. The FD I in retail has been permitted for the 
first time in September, 2012. Therefore it is in i nfancy stage and empirical data may be 
available after a few years of experience. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The FDI in wholesale trade was first introduced in 1997.  Eversince there have 
been a gradual evolution of the Policy.  The Commit tee had desired that Ministry of 
MS&ME should have commissioned a study on the impac t of FDI so far  on the 
MSME sector, which has been ignored in ATN. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee notes the optimistic estimates given in the study made by Indian 
Council for Research and International Economic Rel ations (ICRIER) on behalf of 
Government. However, the figures on which study is based, need to be validated. The 
Committee finds this arrangement rather strange whe re Government commissions a study 
with an independent research body which in turn dep ends on another non-Government 
source for data and estimates. The Government shoul d ascertain the methodology of study 
and validate the estimates and figures, before taki ng such a major policy decision on the 
basis of this study.  
(Para 19) 

-6- 
Action Taken  
 
The findings of ICRIER were based on the largest ev er survey of unorganized 
retailers, consumers, farmers, intermediaries, manu facturers, and organized retailers. In 
addition, an extensive review of international expe rience, particularly of emerging 
economies of relevance to India, has also been carried out as part of the study. 
 
The Government allowed FDI in MBRT after due consul tations with stakeholders, 
including traders’ associations; consumers’ organiz ations; farmers’ representatives and 
associations; small & medium enterprises’ associati ons and representatives and food 
processing industry representatives. The consultati ons brought out views both for and 
against FDI in multi brand retail trading. However,  the discussions generally indicated 
support for the policy, subject to the introduction  of adequate safeguards. Reports/ studies 
by various agencies were taken into consideration a s part of consultations. Based on the 
studies, as well as the experience of other countri es, it was the Government’s assessment 
that implementation of the policy is likely to attr act great FDI inflows into the country 
thereby providing much needed growth to the economy. 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee is not satisfied with the reply.  The  Government has not 
conducted any study on the impact of FDI ever since  1997.  No information has been 
given regarding ICRIER survey and the sample base.  Debate in Parliament reflects 
lack of consensus on the impact of FDI in various e merging economies.  The 
Committee interactions with SME associations indicate lack of consensus on the issue.  
It is inaccurate to state that discussions generall y indicate support of FDI.  The 
Government itself should have commissioned a study instead of relying on sundry 
studies on such crucial issues.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
Another significant point is that as per the study estimates majority of jobs will be 
created in front end operations, whereas the Govern ment is emphasizing on the integration 
of small industries in the back-end supply chains. There is no clarity regarding employment 
potential of front end and back end operations. Fro m Policy it appears that 30% sourcing 
will be calculated on the basis of annual front-end  procurement. The Committee notes that 
the Ministry of MSME seeks back-end integration of small industries whereas, studies 
project maximum scope of job creation only in the front-end operations.  
 
(Para 20) 
Action Taken  
 
The FDI policy in retail trading has been formulate d with a view to generating 
employment in India in front end operations as well  as back-end operations. It would 
provide the Small manufacturers necessary scales fo r these entities to expand capacities in 
manufacturing, resulting in creation of more employment in the country and also strengthen  

-7- 
 
the manufacturing base of the country. The sourcing  condition will also enable the small 
enterprises to get integrated with global retail ch ains, thereby enhancing their capacity to 
export products from India. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The assertion is devoid of any conclusive empirica l data which has been raised 
at different forums and by different stakeholders.  Instead of stating generalities the 
Government must conduct survey and generate empiric al data at the initial steps of 
this new policy.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee takes cognizance of several studies d one by industry bodies and 
refers to study note provided by the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP), 
in support of prospective benefits which FDI in mul ti-brand retail may bring. However, the 
Committee suggests that the Ministry of MS&ME and D IPP should have done a study on 
impact of FDI in single brand retail and wholesale sectors in the MSME segment and the 
same could have been factored into the recent policy.  
(Para 22) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
The policy on FDI in MBRT has been formulated taking into consideration views of 
stakeholders including studies done by various agencies. A high level Committee under the 
Chairmanship of Department of Consumer Affairs exam ined the issues/ concerns raised by 
the stakeholders.  The Committee also considered va rious aspects of permitting FDI in 
MBRT. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee had sought a study by Ministry of MSM E and DIPP on the 
experience thus far.  The proposed Committee must h ave representatives from 
Ministry of MSME.  A copy of the Report of the Comm ittee under the Chairmanship 
of Department of Consumer Affairs (DCA) may be supp lied for perusal of the 
Committee.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee also takes note of the provision whic h states "in States/Union 
Territories not having cities with population of mo re than ten lakh as per 2011 census, 
retail sales outlets may be set up in the cities of  their choice, preferably the largest city and 
may also cover an area of 10 kms around the municip al/urban agglomeration limits of such 
cities". This provision is open to interpretation. It may allow the mega retail outlets even in 
or around smaller cities which have been consciously excluded in the provision.  
(Para 27) 

 
-8- 
 
Action Taken  
 
This clause pertained only to small States/UTs whic h do not have cities with 
population of ten lakhs. The said clause has subsequently been reviewed as under: 
 
Retail sales outlets may be set up only in cities w ith a population of more than 10 lakh as 
per the 2011 Census or any other cities as per the decision of the respective State 
Governments, and may also cover an area of 10 kms a round the municipal/urban 
agglomeration limits of such cities; retail locatio ns will be restricted to conforming areas 
as per the Master/Zonal Plans of the concerned citi es and provision will be made for 
requisite facilities such as transport connectivity  and parking. The decision on location in 
all cases has now been left to the States. If a Sta te is of the view that it is not in its interest 
to allow a particular location, it is free to take an appropriate decision. 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The latest definition effectively nullifies the con dition of minimum 10 lakh 
population of urban agglomeration. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee apprehends that the above provision o f putting an embargo only on 
front end operations and not on back end procuremen ts would enable entry of Foreign 
Direct Investors to all the States of our Union whi ch is not the express intent of the policy. 
The Committee notes that the policy was only an ena bling provision and that it left the 
respective States to take decision for allowing the  FDI in multi-brand retail trade. 
Therefore, there is a need to clarify the issue of back end operations in the policy itself. The 
Committee also feels that such provisions may be mi sused to create internecine 
competition among the inter-State small industries.  
 
(Para 29) 
Action Taken  
 
The investment towards back-end infrastructure can be made across all States 
irrespective of the fact whether FDI in MBRT is all owed in that State or not since such 
investment is in any case permitted under the FDI policy.  
   
The investment made towards processing, manufacturi ng, distribution, design 
improvement, quality control, packaging, logistics,  storage, ware-house, agriculture market 
produce infrastructure which constitutes the backen d would benefit the States in which 
such infrastructure is developed, irrespective of w hether or not they allow the front-end 
retail stores. 
 

-9- 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The response merely reiterates the Committee appre hensions but does not 
address the concerns expressed by the Committee.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
In absence of any previous survey on impact of FDI on the SSI sector in the 
country, the Committee feels that the implementatio n of policy provision should be closely 
monitored through an institutional mechanism in the  initial year and must not be left to 
self-certification. The Committee also suggest that  the auditor should specifically certify 
the adherence to the 30% sourcing norm and it must be mentioned in the audited report of 
the Companies which would invest under FDI in retai l scheme. These provisions should be 
provided in the relevant Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA) Regulations itself. 
 
(Para 32) 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee took serious note of the apprehension s. The representative of the 
DIPP too agreed to take note of the apprehensions. The Committee recommends that 30% 
sourcing norms should be applicable item-wise. 
(Para 34) 
 
Action Taken on Paras 32 & 34  
 
Certificate issued by District Industries Centre wo uld be adequate authentication to 
confirm status of supplier as ‘small industry’.  
 
A condition has been incorporated in the policy for  FDI in MBRT that, self-
certification will be done by the company, to ensur e compliance of the conditions 
stipulated for FDI in MBRT including sourcing condi tions, which could be cross-checked, 
as and when required. Accordingly, the investors sh all maintain accounts, duly certified by 
statutory auditors. 
 
As regards certifying the adherence to the conditio nalities including sourcing 
norms, it is stated that the approvals issued to th e applicants are subject to compliance of 
certain conditions mentioned therein. Any deviation  from the prescribed conditions would 
result in violation of FDI policy, which would tant amount to violation of FEMA 
Regulations. Any violation of FDI regulations is co vered by the penal provisions of the 
Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999. 
 The Department of Economic Affairs (Ministry of Fi nance) administers FEMA.  
The Reserve Bank of India administers the Regulatio ns issued under FEMA and the 
Directorate of Enforcement, under the Ministry of F inance, is the authority for the 
enforcement of FEMA. The Directorate takes up inves tigation in any contravention of 
FEMA. 

 
-10- 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee is of the view that for FEMA Regulat ion to apply, first 
violation needs to be detected for which an audit i s required.   Self certification may 
not reveal the violation, considering the reported reservations of potential major 
investors against 30% sourcing norms. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee emphasizes the need for setting up an institutional mechanism like 
a Retail Regulatory Authority. 
(Para 39) 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee also takes note of lack of efficient and adequate monitoring 
mechanism to enforce policy provisions and to disco unt violations. In such a scenario, 
leaving adherence of policy provisions solely to self-certification would be self defeating. 
 
(Para 40) 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee finds that there are still some areas , where details need to be 
elaborated and modified in interest of MSMEs.  The Committee finds that notwithstanding 
study reports, a major section of industry associat ions and experts were apprehensive of 
FDI Policy, its provisions and their implementation  in absence of detailed norms and 
monitoring mechanism.  As such, the Committee has s erious reservations over the 
prescribed  Self-certification norms.  The Committe e recommends that auditors must 
specifically certify the adherence of sourcing norm s by the retail companies.  The 
Committee recommends that M/o MSME should conduct r egular survey of MSMEs to 
monitor sickness/takeovers/mergers and other trends. 
(Para 43) 
 
Action Taken on Paras 39, 40 & 43  
 
As per the Cabinet decision dated 14.9.2012, a high -level group to examine various 
issues concerning internal trade and make recommend ations for internal trade reforms, has 
to be constituted under the Minister of Consumer Affairs. 
 
The constitution of abovementioned committee is und er consideration in the D/o 
Consumer Affairs. The proposed Terms of Reference, inter-alia include the following:  
 
(i) to determine the safeguards to be put in place to p rotect the interest of small 
traders vis-à-vis orgainsed retail; 
(ii) to examine the need and the possible mandate for a Regulatory body/ authority 
for the regulation of organized retail trade  

 
-11- 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee apprehends that self certification m ay not reveal the violation 
in absence of audit.  The Committee, therefore, ins ists that the Ministry of MSME 
must be involved in proposed regulatory mechanism a nd that Ministry of MSME 
must conduct surveys and report it to regulatory body.   The Ministry of MSME must 
also discuss the FDI Policy and changes therein in the National MSME Board. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

-12- 
 
CHAPTER-IV  
 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which fi nal replies of the Ministry have 
not been received 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee feels that FDI Policy is an extension  of liberal trade policy and that 
the two have hardly any substantial differences. Th e Committee, therefore, does not accept 
the so called nuanced distinction outlined before i t. It is of the view that not enough 
safeguards have been provided for to insulate the SME sector from sudden changes in trade 
policy. In view of this the Committee is quite appr ehensive of the constructive and 
beneficial impact of the FDI policy on the MSME sector. 
(Para 15) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
FDI policy is different from trade policy. The FDI policy on multi-brand retail trade 
provides safeguards for small producers- both farme rs and MSMEs. The requirement of 
strengthening backend infrastructure as well as 30%  sourcing from small industries are 
envisaged to integrate small producers in the value  chain by strengthening their production 
capacities and making them more competitive. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee, therefore, is of the view that an institutional monitoring mechanism 
is essential to remove any unwarranted consequences  of this policy. The Committee 
concurs with the recommendation of the Parliamentar y Committee on Commerce in this 
respect, which suggested that “there is a need for setting up of a Retail Regulatory 
Authority, to look into the problems and act as a w histle blower, in case of anti competitive 
behaviour and abuse of dominance.” 
 
(Para 45) 
Action Taken 
 
 
The Cabinet while approving the policy on FDI in mu lti-brand retail trading sector, 
inter-alia, envisaged action on the part of Departm ent of Consumer Affairs for constitution 
of a high-level group under the Minister of Consumer Affairs. The terms of reference of the 
group include   determination of the safeguards to be put in place to protect the interest of 
small traders vis-à-vis orgainsed retail and need f or a Regulatory body/ authority for the 
regulation of organized retail trade. 
 
 
 
 

-13- 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 
 The Ministry of MS&ME too should be involved in su ch group to suggest 
terms of regulatory body. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee is also cognizant of the recent media  reports suggesting that the 
expected investment in multi-brand retail has not c ome yet and the retails companies are 
negotiating with the Government to dilute sourcing norms. The Committee cautions against 
any such dilutions. Any consultation in respect of FDI and its likely impact on SME sector, 
must mandatorily involve Ministry of MSME. The Comm ittee also recommends that 
National Board on MSME, as statutory advisory body must take up the issue of impact of 
FTAs, Trade Policy and the FDI on MSME sector for i ts study and present its 
recommendations periodically. Any new clarification  on the policy must be discussed in 
the Board. The Committee feels that without efficie nt regulatory frame work, this policy 
will not give intended benefits to the MSME sector, instead it may imperil its very survival. 
 
(Para 46) 
Action Taken  
 
Global investors normally take time to assess a new  policy and its implications in 
the context of a particular market.  
 
Potential investors seek clarifications on various provisions and/ conditionalities in 
the extant policy and also make suggestions. The co ncerns/ suggestions of the potential 
investors are examined in the Department, in consul tation with stakeholders including 
investors, concerned Ministry/ Department, Organisation etc.   
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee reiterates that National Board of MS MEs should monitor the 
impact of FDI in retail and discuss every change in  Government Policy in this regard.   
Board should communicate with proposed regulators, RBI and other bodies.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
******** 