140th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/140threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:43:11]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
ONE HUNDRED – FORTIETH REPORT
 
ON
 
 
ACTION TAKEN  BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED 
IN THE COMMITTEE ' S 126
TH   REPORT ON  REVIVAL OF NAGALAND PULP AND
PAPER COMPANY
 
(MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES) 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 23RD   DECEMBER, 2003)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 23RD DECEMBER.,  2003)
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
DECEMBER, 2003/PAUSA, 1925  (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                                                 
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                              
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE      
MINUTES      
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
(Date of Constitution - 1st January, 2003  )
 
 Dr. P.C. Alexander      —Chairman
                      
                        RAJYA SABHA
2.      Prof. M.M. Agarwal

140th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/140threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:43:11]
3.      Shri Jayantilal Barot
4.      Dr. M.N. Das
5.      Smt.  Saroj Dubey
6.      Shri Faguni Ram
7.      Shri Lajpat Rai
8.      Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
9.      Shri P.K. Maheshwari
10.  Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
11.  Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
12.  Shri S. Sivasubramanian
13.  Smt. Sushree Devi
14.  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
15.  Shri K. Chandran Pillai
 
LOK SABHA
 
16.  Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
17.  Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
18.  Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
19.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das
20.  Shri K Francis George
21.  Shri Thomas Hansda
22.  Md. Anwarul Haque
23.  Shri A.C. Jose
24.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
25.  Shri Mansoor Ali Khan
26.  Shri Sunil Khan
27.  Shri Deepak Kumar
28.  Shri Manjay Lal
29.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
30.  Shri A. Narendra
31.  Shri Ananta Nayak
32.  Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
33.  Shri Uttamrao Patil
34.  Shri Malyala Rajaiah
35.  Shri P. Rajendran
 
(i)
 
 
36.
  Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
37.  Shri Tarachand Sahu
38.  Shri Ramanand Singh
39.  Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
40.  Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
41.  Shri V. Vetriselvan
42.  Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari
43.  Shri Radha Mohan Singh
44.   Shri Vijay Sankeshwar
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 

140th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/140threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:43:11]
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
Shri  A.K. Singh, Deputy  Secretary
Shri  K.P. Singh, Under   Secretary
Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
I N T R O D U C T I ON
 
I,  the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry,  having   been
authorised  by the Committee, hereby present this One Hundred –Fortieth Report on the Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in  the  Committee ' s  126 th  Report  on Revival of Nagaland Pulp and
Paper Company (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises).
 
2.   The Committee   examined and  considered  the Action Taken Notes on recommendations contained  in the  
Committee ' s  126 th  Report  on Revival of Nagaland Pulp and Paper Company (Ministry of Heavy Industries and
Public Enterprises).  The Committee adopted the analytical and descriptive approach to examine the action taken notes
and after assessing the action taken note as furnished by the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises and
judging the same in the true spirit of the recommendations, the Committee  has prepared the present Action Taken
Report.  The observations/conclusions and Recommendations of the Committee have been placed in a separate chapter.
 
3.         The Committee at its meeting held on  18
th   December,  2003 considered and adopted the Report.
 
 
NEW DELHI;                
December 18, 2003     
                                    
                            
 DR.P.C. ALEXANDER   
 Chairman
 Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry
REPORT
1.1       The present  Action Taken Report (of Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry) is
Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the  Committee’s 126 th Report  on  Nagaland
Pulp and Paper Company Limited which  was presented and laid to the Parliament on 8 th May, 2003. The  Nagaland
Pulp and Paper Company Limited, incorporated in 1971,  was the First and only large & medium unit in the State of
Nagaland and the first paper mill in the central public sector in the North Eastern region. This project was conceived
with the technical specifications of Capacity of 100 Tons per day i.e. 33000 tons per annum producing writing and
printing paper which required 60% of bamboo and 40% of reed as basic raw material and 13MW (8MW to be generated
internally form waste head of boilers and 5MW to be supplied from State Grid).  Hindustan Paper Co-operation
undertook the managerial responsibility to execute the project.  However, the project to 10 years to complete and the
mill started making commercial production in 1982 with scores of problems from the very beginning.  As a result the
mill continued to make losses due to under capacity utilization  which ranged between 3% to 19% and at times  the peak
capacity utilization remained merely 60%. The production was abruptly suspended in 1992 as the net worth of the
company was eroded and it was declared sick. Subsequently, it was referred to BIFR in 1992.
1.2       The operating agency i.e. IDBI framed a revival proposal and recommended – (1) Capital restructuring; (2)
Operation at 60 TPD; and (3) Fresh investment of Rs. 16.5 crore. Government of India accepted the proposal as
approved by the BIFR and it was taken out of purview of BIFR in 1996. Government of India carried out capital
restructuring but did not infuse fresh funds except for VRS, hence production could not be resumed and it was again

140th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/140threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:43:11]
referred to BIFR in 1998 for the second time. IDBI was again appointed operating agency and a Draft Rehabilitation
Scheme (DRS) was submitted by them which recommended revival at 60 TPD, fresh investment of 55 cores, other
reliefs and concessions applicable to new industrial units in the North Eastern region  and a marginal viability was
envisaged. Nagaland Government agreed to support DRS for its share of reliefs and concessions and fresh investment.
However, Government of India declined to support this Scheme. The decision of Government of India was conveyed to
BIFR who in turn asked the IDBI to advertise for change of management. Although IDBI advertised for change of
management, no expression of interest was received. This position was conveyed to BIFR and thereafter the matter was
taken up by Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) who decided to take a fresh view.
1.3       An Expert team consisting of Hindustan Paper Corporation, Central Pulp and Paper Research Institute and State
Government officers was sent to determine the technical viability of the Scheme. The team recommended revival at 120
TPD of value added paper for technical and economic viability and an approximate investment to the tune of 150 crores.
The MHA directed to carry out the Scheme by outside consultants. Outside consultants were identified. The cost of
detailed project report was to the tune of 30-35 lakhs. The Department for Development of North Eastern Region agreed
to meet the cost of project. However, BIFR refused to grant any further time and issued orders of winding up.
1.4       The matter relating to NPPC was raised by the Members almost in every meeting of the Department related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry when Demands for Grants came up for discussion.  The management of
HPC constantly informed the committee that the company has become non-operational due to insurgency problem in
Nagaland.  The Ministry of Heavy Industry also in their annual reports routinely stated that the company, which came
out of the purview of BIFR due to financial restructuring again became sick as the revival scheme could not be put into
operation due to law and order problem, lack of infrastructure and absence of banking facilities.The Committee has been
noting over the past years the stereotype statement of the HPC as well as the Ministry of Heavy Industry.  Law and
Order situation has been cited as a major cause for the non-revival of the company.  Since law and order situation
appears to have improved in Nagaland, the committee felt that a beginning may be made towards reviving NPPCL for
the benefit of the people of Nagaland.
1.5       The Committee’s 126
th Report was the outcome of  series of meetings held by the Sub-Committee-III on 15 th
April, 24th June, 12th December, 2002 and 23rd April, 2003 with the Central Ministries, State Governments and PSUs. 
After hearing the  Department of heavy Industry, Department for Development of North Eastern Region (DONER) and
Hindustan Paper Corporation, the Committee understood that the main question related to funding the project was to be
made clear before the AAIFR in its  hearing scheduled  on 1st July 2003. 
1.6       The Committee, however, observed that the Government did not take the revival of NPPC seriously.  The
DONER was created for the development of North Eastern Region but it could not contribute funds for NPPC from non-
lapsable pool as their mandate is to aid only new projects.  In fact, DONER could be made a model agency for the
development of the North Eastern Region, which should encompass not only new projects but also the existing units if
any meaningful role is to be played by the newly created department. The Committee viewed that DONER could play a
leading role for the development of the North East in coordination with concerned central ministries to usher in real

140th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/140threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:43:11]
development of the North East.  The Committee noted that out of Rs.1600 crores non-lapsable pool for North East,
Rs.550 crores goes to the budget of DONER for creation/completion of last mile projects in social infrastructure.  The
Committee felt that the balance fund may be tapped for funding revival of the company.
1.7       The Committee noted that the cost of closure is Rs.107 crores.  In addition Rs.112 crores worth of investment is
sunk.    In the light of the views expressed by the HPC, Central Pulp and Paper Research Institute and Economic
Advisor to DHI on how to make the company viable, excise duty exemption for 25 years coupled with transport subsidy
should be made available to the company.  NPPC should also have assured supply of bamboo for a period of 15 years.
The Committee took up the case of NPCC as the peace process in Nagaland is going on and industrial development of
Nagaland should go hand in hand with the peace process.
1.8       The Committee was of the opinion that in case NPPC is wound up the immediate impact would be –
(i)
                  Colossal waste of all investment made in infrastructure
(ii)                Serious erosion of credibility of Central Government in sensitive border area.
(iii)               Wrong signals to ongoing peace process
(iv)              accentuate already alarming unemployment situation
(v)                Nagaland would be wiped of the map of large industries of India.
1.9       The committee noted that a number of sick PSUs have been given more than one revival schemes and feels that
no discrimination should be made in the case of NPPC in view of its location.  The Committee hoped that Government
of India, in view of the sensitivity of the matter, would not belie the hopes of Nagaland  people.
 
1.10     Committee’s recommendation in 126
th Report
(i)                  DHI and Government of Nagaland should properly place the matter before the AAIFR, specially with
reference to the funding position.  Since Rs.250 crores is not required at one go, this can be arranged in a
phased manner.
(ii)                Excise exemption for 25 years coupled with transport subsidy be provided to NPPC as a special
dispensation.
(iii)               Assured supply of bamboo be made available for a period of 15 years.
(iv)              Since the proposal involves financial implications, the clearance of Union Cabinet be obtained at the
earliest.
Action Taken
2.         In respond to the Committee’s recommendation the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises
informed the Committee that an inter-Ministerial meeting was held on 2
nd September, 2003 under the Chairmanship of

140th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/140threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:43:11]
Secretary Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises to discuss formulation of stand of Government of India on the revival
of Nagaland Pulp & Paper Company Limited.  The meeting was attended by Secretary, Department of Development of
North East Region and representatives of other concerned Ministries/Departments including Department of Expenditure,
etc.  It was decided in the meeting to obtain approval of the Competent Authority so that matter can be taken to the
Cabinet putting forth all the options, and a final decision, which would include the source and methodology of funding. 
This Department is in process of obtaining approval of the Competent Authority accordingly.
 
3.0       Further Recommendations
3.1       The Committee appreciates the initiave taken by the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises in
conducting the Inter Ministerial meeting on  2
nd September,2003 to discuss the  formulation of  stand of  Government 
of India on  the revival of  Nagaland  Pulp and Paper  Mill in response to the Committee’s recommendations.  The
Committee appreciates  also the sincere participation of  representatives of   the Department for   Development of North
Eastern Region (DONER) and  representatives of other concerned Ministries/Departments  including the Department of
Expenditure etc.  The Committee is pleased to observe that the trump call of  this Committee ( Department related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry) in regard to the revival of Nagaland Pulp and paper Mills has  been
well taken by the  Government.
3.2       The  Committee, however, is  constrained to  express its deep concern  over the delay in taking up  the matter by
Ministry of heavy Industries and Public Enterprises with the  concerned authority.  The  procrastinating  and the
reluctant  approach of the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public  Enterprises may  mar  the  prospect of the revival of
Nagaland Pulp and Paper Mill.  It may be noted that the project took  itself  10 years  to complete  at the initial stage 
and the considerable  period of time has already elapsed  on the  discussion of `Options and source and methodology of
funding  for  the revival   of crisis-ridden NPPM.  Therefore, the revival of Nagaland pulp and Paper Mill which is at the
present at the  “Moribund Stage” requiring the immediate attention of the Government for injecting the new lease of
life, cannot afford the dilly –dallying  approach of the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises in the so
called process of obtaining approval of the competent authority.  The status of NPPM being fully known to the Ministry
of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises that the Mill had not waiting time for initiating the actual course of action for
its revival, the Committee feels that the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises should have taken up the
matter more seriously than conveying a meeting once and that too after the elapse of three months of the presentation of
the Committee’s 126
th Report on the issue.
 
3.3       The observations and recommendations of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on

140th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/140threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:43:11]
Industry as contained in its 126 th report for the immediate revival of NPPM was the outcome of a series of brain
storming session (i.e. a series of meetings held on 15th April, 24th June, 12th December, 2002 and 23rd April, 2003 were
held the concerned Sub-Committee of the Committee with the Central Ministers, State Government ands PSUs along
with Department of Heavy Industries, Department of Development for North East Region etc.,) and the Committee
made its observations and recommendations on the following reasonings:-
(i)                  Nagaland Pulp and Paper Company Limited, incorporated in 1971, was the first and only large & medium
unit in the State of Nagaland and the first paper mill in the central public sector in the North Eastern region.
It generated great hope and enthusiasm among the people of Nagaland. The issue of its revival or winding up
is linked with not only with the emotion and hopes of Nagaland people that the vision of the policy maker for
balanced regional economic development.
(ii)
                Economic development of North East Region and encouraging the participation of  ultra nationalist in the
decision making process and thus bringing them to the national mainstream would also help in national
integration. The committee noted that the President of India in his address to Parliament on 25 th February
2002 had said “ The peace process in Nagaland has been strengthened with satisfactory progress of talks with
various militant groups.  What is specially heartening n the last one year is that people of Nagaland have
come out strongly in favour of peace, dialogue and development, often by staging spontaneous mass
activities”.
(iii)
               An Expert team consisting of Hindustan Paper Corporation, Central Pulp and Paper Research Institute and
State Government officers was sent to determine the technical viability of the Scheme. The team
recommended revival at 120 TPD of value added paper for technical and economic viability and an
approximate investment to the tune of 150 crores.
(iv)
              The cost of detailed project report was to the tune of 30-35 lakhs. The Department for Development of
North Eastern Region agreed to meet the cost of project. 
(v)                Infrastructure development over the years in Nagaland was favourable for revival of the company which
inter-alia included Railway line extended to Tuli; Upgraded to broad gauge; Kohima-Mokokchung-Tuli-
Amguri road upgraded to National Highway; 66/33 HT transmission lines extended to TULI; TULI
transformer upgraded from 1.6 to 7.5 MVA; Power availability improved by commissioning 75 MW Doyang
and 24 MW Likhimro hydel projects; Substantial investment for road connectivity of Tuli with rest of the
State ; Coal and Limestone available within a radius of 250 kilometers; Communication and transport
facilities many times better than 30 years back.
(vi)
              Const benefit analysis:-The Committee examined and considered  the Three options on the issue of revival

140th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/140threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:43:11]
of NPPM which  are mentioned below:-
(a)    Wind up and spend Rs.107 crore for closure.
(b)   Revive and let HPC manage with the existing arrangement
(c)    Revive and privatize as a going concern
 
3.4             The Committee, however,  considered the revival  the most feasible and desirable option also compatible
with Central Government policy on sick PSUs.  That is so because the cost of the closure of NPPM is Rs. 107 crore
in addition to Rs. 112 crore worth of investment if the decision other than the revival of NPPM is taken, besides the
threat of bellying the hopes of the people of Nagaland and thus halting the peace process.
 
3.5
                          The Committee therefore, reiterates its recommendations as made in its 126th report for the immediate
revival of NPPM and recommends further that the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises
must take up efficiently and effectively all the follow up necessary actions for the revival of NPPM by
sketching out “Massive Course of Action” and putting the executive machinery at work besides setting
forth monitoring mechanism for the timely execution of action.
3.5
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE
The Committee appreciates the initiave taken by the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises in
conducting the Inter Ministerial meeting on  2
nd September,2003 to discuss the  formulation of  stand of  Government 
of India on  the revival of  Nagaland  Pulp and Paper  Mill in response to the Committee’s recommendations.  The
Committee appreciates  also the sincere participation of  representatives of   the Department for   Development of North
Eastern Region (DONER) and  representatives of other concerned Ministries/Departments  including the Department of
Expenditure etc.  The Committee is pleased to observe that the trump call of  this Committee ( Department related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry) in regard to the revival of Nagaland Pulp and paper Mills has  been
well taken by the  Government.
(Para 3.1)
           
The  Committee, however, is  constrained to  express its deep concern  over the delay in taking up  the matter by
Ministry of heavy Industries and Public Enterprises with the  concerned authority.  The  procrastinating  and the
reluctant  approach of the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public  Enterprises may  mar  the  prospect of the revival of
Nagaland Pulp and Paper Mill.  It may be noted that the project took  itself  10 years  to complete  at the initial stage 

140th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/140threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:43:11]
and the considerable  period of time has already elapsed  on the  discussion of `Options and source and methodology of
funding  for  the revival   of crisis-ridden NPPM.  Therefore, the revival of Nagaland pulp and Paper Mill which is at the
present at the  “Moribund Stage” requiring the immediate attention of the Government for injecting the new lease of
life, cannot afford the dilly –dallying  approach of the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises in the so
called process of obtaining approval of the competent authority.  The status of NPPM being fully known to the Ministry
of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises that the Mill had not waiting time for initiating the actual course of action for
its revival, the Committee feels that the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises should have taken up the
matter more seriously than conveying a meeting once and that too after the elapse of three months of the presentation of
the Committee’s 126
th Report on the issue.
(Para 3.2)
            The observations and recommendations of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Industry as contained in its 126
th report for the immediate revival of NPPM was the outcome of a series of brain
storming session (i.e. a series of meetings held on 15th April, 24th June, 12th December, 2002 and 23rd April, 2003 were
held the concerned Sub-Committee of the Committee with the Central Ministers, State Government ands PSUs along
with Department of Heavy Industries, Department of Development for North East Region etc.,) and the Committee
made its observations and recommendations on the following reasonings:-
(i)
                  Nagaland Pulp and Paper Company Limited, incorporated in 1971, was the first and only large & medium
unit in the State of Nagaland and the first paper mill in the central public sector in the North Eastern region.
It generated great hope and enthusiasm among the people of Nagaland. The issue of its revival or winding up
is linked with not only with the emotion and hopes of Nagaland people that the vision of the policy maker for
balanced regional economic development.
(ii)
                Economic development of North East Region and encouraging the participation of  ultra nationalist in the
decision making process and thus bringing them to the national mainstream would also help in national
integration. The committee noted that the President of India in his address to Parliament on 25 th February
2002 had said “ The peace process in Nagaland has been strengthened with satisfactory progress of talks with
various militant groups.  What is specially heartening n the last one year is that people of Nagaland have
come out strongly in favour of peace, dialogue and development, often by staging spontaneous mass
activities”.
(iii)
               An Expert team consisting of Hindustan Paper Corporation, Central Pulp and Paper Research Institute and
State Government officers was sent to determine the technical viability of the Scheme. The team
recommended revival at 120 TPD of value added paper for technical and economic viability and an

140th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/140threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:43:11]
approximate investment to the tune of 150 crores.
(iv)              The cost of detailed project report was to the tune of 30-35 lakhs. The Department for Development of
North Eastern Region agreed to meet the cost of project. 
(v)                Infrastructure development over the years in Nagaland was favourable for revival of the company which
inter-alia included Railway line extended to Tuli; Upgraded to broad gauge; Kohima-Mokokchung-Tuli-
Amguri road upgraded to National Highway; 66/33 HT transmission lines extended to TULI; TULI
transformer upgraded from 1.6 to 7.5 MVA; Power availability improved by commissioning 75 MW Doyang
and 24 MW Likhimro hydel projects; Substantial investment for road connectivity of Tuli with rest of the
State ; Coal and Limestone available within a radius of 250 kilometers; Communication and transport
facilities many times better than 30 years back.
(vi)
              Const benefit analysis:-The Committee examined and considered  the Three options on the issue of revival
of NPPM which  are mentioned below:-
a.       Wind up and spend Rs.107 crore for closure.
b.      Revive and let HPC manage with the existing arrangement
c.       Revive and privatize as a going concern
(Para 3.3)
The Committee, however,  considered the revival  the most feasible and desirable option also compatible with
Central Government policy on sick PSUs.  That is so because the cost of the closure of NPPM is Rs. 107 crore in
addition to Rs. 112 crore worth of investment if the decision other than the revival of NPPM is taken, besides the
threat of bellying the hopes of the people of Nagaland and thus halting the peace process.
(Para 3.4)
The Committee therefore, reiterates its recommendations as made in its 126 th report for the immediate revival of
NPPM and recommends further that the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises must take up efficiently
and effectively all the follow up necessary actions for the revival of NPPM by sketching out “Massive Course of
Action” and putting the executive machinery at work besides setting forth monitoring mechanism for the timely
execution of actions.
(Para 3.5)
MINUTES
XIV
Fourteenth Meeting
 
            The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry met at 3.30 p.m. on Thursday, the 18th
December, 2003 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

140th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/140threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:43:11]
 
 
PRESENT
     Dr. P.C. Alexander              -- Chairman
 
                        RAJYA SABHA
 
2.
                  Prof. M.M. Aggarwal
3.                  Shri Faguni Ram
4.                  Shri P.K. Maheshwari
5.                  Shri KhanGhufran Zahidi
6.                  Shri K. Chandran Pillai
 
LOK SABHA
 
7.                  Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
8.                  Shri Nepal Chandra Das
9.                  Shri K. Francis George
10.              Shri Thomas Hansda
11.              Shri A.C. Jose
12.              Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
13.              Shri Sunil Khan
14.              Shri Manjay Lal
15.              Dr. K. Malaisamy
16.              Shri P. Rajendran
17.              Smt. D.M. Vijayakumari
18.              Shri Radha Mohan Singh
SECRETARIAT
            Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
            Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
 
2.
                  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee and
recalled the work transacted by the Committee during the year 2003.  The Committee also took note of the work
transacted by the four Sub-Committees.
 
3.
                  The Committee then took up the following reports for its consideration:-
 
(i)                  130th Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in Himachal Pradesh (Ministry of Small Scale
Industries);
(ii)                131st Report on constraints in Industrial Development of North Eastern Region (Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises);
(iii)               132nd Report on  MoU performance in respect of PSUs of Power Sector (Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises);
(iv)              133rd Report on Action Taken by the Government on Recommendations contained in the
Committee’s 117th Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of Small Scale Industries;

140th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/140threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:43:11]
(v)                134th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the
Committee’s 119th Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Department of Public Enterprises
(Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
(vi)              135th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the
Committee’s 120th Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Department of Heavy Industries
(Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
(vii)             136th Report on Action Taken by the Government on Recommendations contained in the
Committee’s 127th Report on MoU performance in respect of PSUs of Shipping Industry, (Ministry
of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
(viii)           137th Report on Action Taken by the Government on Recommendations contained in Committee’s
122nd Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of Steel;
(ix)              138th Report on Action Taken by the Government on Recommendations contained in the
Committee’s 111 th Report on Operational Efficiency and Survival of Alloy Steel Plan ( ASP)
Durgapur (Ministry of Steel);
(x)                139th Report on Action Taken by the Government on Recommendations contained in the
Committee’s 125th Report on Implementation Status of Modernization Expansion and Financial-cum-
Business Restructuring Programme of SAIL at a Glance (Ministry of Steel);
(xi)              140th Report on Action Taken by the Government on Recommendations contained in the
Committee’s 126 th Report on Revival of Nagaland Pulp and Paper Mills (Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises);
(xii)             141st Report on Potential and Promotion of Coir Industries in West Bengal and Andaman and
Nicobar (Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries);
(xiii)           142nd Report Action Taken by the Government on Recommendations contained in the Committee’s
123rd Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of Mines;
(xiv)           143rd Report on level Playing Field for the Capital Goods Industries (Ministry of heavy Industries
and Public Enterprises); and
(xv)            144th Report on Action Taken by the Government on Recommendations contained in the
Committee’s 124 th Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of Agro and Rural
Industries.
4.         The Chairman requested the Members to give any suggestion or change in the Report, if required.  After a brief
discussion all the Reports were adopted.
 
5.         The Committee authorized Prof. M.M. Aggarwal and in his absence Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi, members Rajya
Sasbha, to present the Reports to the Rajya Sabha.  It also authorized Smt. Jayashree Banerjee and in his absence Shri
A.C. Jose, Members Lok Sabha, to present the Reports in the Lok Sabha on 22
nd and 23rd December, 2003.
 
 
6.                                 *                                    *                                            *
 
7.         The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 p.m.
_______________________________________________________________________
***relates to other matters.