            
  
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
November, 2014/ Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) 
TWO HUNDRED SIXTIETH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON  251 st   REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON IMPLEMENTATION OF                  
PRIME MINISTER’S EMPLOYMENT GENERATION 
PROGRAMME (PMEGP) 
 
 PERTAINING TO  
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM 
ENTERPRISES     
      
 (PRESENTED TO  THE RAJYA SABHA ON 26th  NOVEMBER, 2014) 
( LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 27 th  NOVEMBER, 2014) 
260  
 

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
November, 2014/ Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED SIXTIETH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON  251 st   REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON IMPLEMENTATION OF  PRIME MINISTER’S 
EMPLOYMENT GENERATION PROGRAMME (PMEGP) 
 
 PERTAINING TO  
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES    
(PRESENTED TO  THE RAJYA SABHA ON 26th  NOVEMBER, 2014) 
 ( LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 27 th  NOVEMBER, 2014) 

CONTENTS 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …………………………………(i)  
2. INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………(ii) 
(I) REPORT ………………………………………………………………1    
(ii) CHAPTER-I 
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by 
the Ministry…………………………………………………………     2-3 
(iii) CHAPTER-II 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies………………………   4-9 
(iv) CHAPTER-III 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has 
either not accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry 
to review its replies…………………………………………………   10-12 
 
(v) CHAPTER-IV 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the  
Ministry have not been received…………………………………          13 
 
 3. MINUTES ………………………………………………………………………  14-15 
                  
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

DEPARTMENT- RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
(CONSTITUTED  W.E.F.  1 ST   SEPTEMBER,  2014) 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
1. Shri  K.C. Tyagi  _   Chairman  
2. Shri M. P. Achuthan 
3. Shri Ramdas Athawale 
4. Shri Vivek Gupta  
5. Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya 
6. Shri Praful Patel 
7. Shri T. K. Rangarajan 
8. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
9. Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
10. Shri Pramod Tiwari 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
11. Shri Deepak Adhikari (Dev) 
12. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer 
13. Shri Birendra Kumar Chaudhary 
14. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque 
15. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
16. Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena 
17. Smt. Poonamben Maadam 
18. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
19. Shri S. P. Muddahanumegowda 
20. Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
21. Shri M. Srinivasa Rao 
22. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
23. Shri Konda Veshweshwar Reddy 
24. Shri Y. V. Subba Reddy 
25. Shri Rajkumar Saini 
26. Shri B. Senguttuvan 
27. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
28. Shri Rameshwar Teli 
29. Smt. Savitri Thakur 
30. Smt. Dev Varma (Moon Moon Sen) 
31. Shri Rajan Vichare 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.      Shri A.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
2.      Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
3.      Shri Roshan Lal, Joint Director 
4.      Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 
(i) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
  
  
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliame ntary Standing Committee on Industry, 
having been authorized by the Committee, hereby pre sent this Two Hundred Sixtieth Report on 
Action Taken Note furnished by the Ministry of Micr o, Small and Medium Enterprises on the 
recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hu ndred Fifty First Report on 
implementation of Prime Minister’s Employment Generation Programme (PMEGP).  
 
2. I thank the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises for furnishing the Action 
Taken Note on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred Fifty First 
Report. 
  
3. The Committee in its meeting held on 22 
nd  September, 2014 considered and adopted the 
report. 
 
  
 
  
K.C. Tyagi 
                                               Chai r man                                                                                   
                Department -related Parliamentary  
                                                                                                     Standing  Committee   on    Industry  
 
New Delhi 
22 
nd  September, 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 

REPORT 
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with  the Action Taken by the Ministry of 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two 
Hundred Fifty First Report on implementation of Pri me Minister’s Employment Generation 
Programme (PMEGP)  pertaining to the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. 
 
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises in respect of the recommendations conta ined in the Report. These have been 
categorized as follows:  
 
Chapter –I   The recommendations/observations, which have bee n accepted by the Ministry. 
 
 The Committee is pleased to observe that the Minis try has accepted its recommendations as 
mentioned in the Chapter – I of the Report. 
 
Chapter -II   The recommendations/observations which the Commit tee does not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government's replies. 
 
 In respect of these recommendations the Committee is convinced with the logic and 
explanations advanced by the Ministry and therefore do not want to pursue them for the present. 
 
Chapter -III    The recommendations/observations in respect of w hich the Committee has either 
not accepted replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its reply. 
 
 The Committee expresses its concern over the non-i mplementation of recommendations 
contained in Chapter – III and desires that the Min istry should furnish logical explanations 
therefor. 
 
Chapter -IV    The recommendations/observations in respect of wh ich final replies of the Ministry 
have not been received. 
 
 In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either furnished the 
interim replies or couched its language in vague te rms like noted for compliance/guidance, 
therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in respects 
of recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in det ail and to the point, as per the intention and 
spirit of the recommendations of the Committee. 
 
3. The details of the ATR are being discussed in the succeeding pages. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

-2- 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry  
       
 
Recommendation/observation 
 
 
The Committee recommends that similar linkages should be established with North Eastern 
Development Financial Corporation (NEDFIC), propose d Women’s Bank envisaged in Budget 
(2013-14), National Minority Development Finance Co rporation (NMDFC) and other similar 
financial institutions.  
(Para 28) 
 
Action Taken  
 
Convergence have already been initiated with Nation al Scheduled Caste Financial 
Development Corporation. Similar efforts will be ta ken up with other related corporations. 
Department of Financial Services (DFS) agreed with the recommendation of the Committee.  
 
 
Recommendation/observation 
 
 
The Committee accordingly suggests that PMEGP proje cts should be developed as clusters 
with common facilities like training, finance and market. 
(Para 31) 
 
Action Taken  
 
The suggestion is welcome. The Ministry has already  initiated a process for development 
of large number clusters of traditional industries under Khadi, Village Industries and Coir by 
revamping the existing SFURTI scheme.  
 
Recommendation/observation  
 
The Committee strongly recommends that the KVIC sho uld give wide publicity to PMEGP 
Scheme, jointly with Banks.  It must be done across  the country and in target areas among 
potential target groups.  The Committee recommends that the banks must publicize PMEGP as a 
bankable scheme.  The Committee appreciates that th e KVIC has developed an exclusive web-
portal to showcase and promote the product range of  PMEGP units.  This will project PMEGP 
products to domestic and international markets. The  Committee recommends that possibility 
should be explored for promotion of PMEGP products internationally as a single Brand name.  
 
(Para 33) 
 
 
 

-3- 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
The suggestion is welcome and the KVIC will approac h Banks for publicity, in addition to 
its existing initiatives.   Promoting PMEGP product s under a single brand name will be explored 
with the proposed marketing organization being set up under PPP.  
 
 
Recommendation/observation 
 
 
The Committee therefore recommends that the negative list should be reviewed considering 
the specific requirements of States, particularly t he North Eastern Region.  The Committee also 
recommends that the Government should enhance the p resence of KVIC in that region and should 
undertake a special drive for the financial inclusi on of the region by expanding banking network.  
The Committee noted that North Eastern Development Financial Corporation has implemented 
Micro Finance Scheme for the entrepreneurs.  The Co mmittee suggests that the KVIC and 
NEDFIC should complement their efforts in expanding  the PMEGP in North Eastern Region.  The 
Committee also suggests that Ministry should develo p PMEGP clusters in NE region under the 
cluster development programme.  These clusters shou ld have financial, marketing and training 
facilities. 
 
(Para 35) 
 
Action Taken  
 
The suggestion is welcome and tie-up with North Eas tern Development Financial 
Corporation will be explored by KVIC for north east ern region. CNG autorickshaws have been 
allowed under PMEGP in North Eastern states on the ground of encouraging micro-enterprises in 
service sector besides encouraging manufacturing/pr oduction activities. Business/trading activities 
in the form of sales outlets have also been allowed under PMEGP in North Eastern states.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
-4- 
 
CHAPTER-II  
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do es not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s replies  
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee finds that the structure of the schem e is too complex. The stakeholder like 
KVIC, DLTFC and Bankers do not coordinate seamlessl y.  The Committee is of the view that for 
efficient implementation of such an important schem e the structure of the scheme must be 
simplified.  The Committee proposes that along with  existing system of extending margin money 
to the entrepreneur an interest subvention scheme m ay also be considered for encouraging the 
youth to become self-employed. 
(Para 5) 
Action Taken  
 
 District level Task Force Committee (DLTFC) headed  by District Magistrates/Collectors is 
a forum for identification of beneficiaries. Implem enting Agencies and Bankers are duly 
represented in DLTFC. KVIC, the national nodal agen cy for PMEGP has taken up the matter with 
all the District Collectors in the country to ensur e that DLTFCs meet regularly. To simplify the 
process of applying for  PMEGP, beneficiaries have been given the option to file applications 
‘ONLINE’ Ministry has also recently constituted a D istrict Level Advisory Committee for 
monitoring the progress of PMEGP at district level with active involvement of the Hon’ble 
Member of Parliament(MP) of the district.  This bro ught to the notice of the Committee that the 
Margin Money under this scheme will be released to the Financial branch from KVIC and the 
same will be kept in the form of FDR’s in the name of the entrepreneur & no interest will be 
charged on the equivalent amount of the loan(disbur sed) for a period of 3 years after which it will 
be adjusted to the loan account of the entrepreneur.      
 As regards considering interest subvention under P MEGP scheme, the issue will be 
appropriately considered at the time when the scheme is revised next. 
 
Further Recommendation/observation 
 
 
In this respect the Committee takes note of the submission made by the Secretary, D/o 
Financial Services, during its meeting on 15 th  April, 2014. Elaborating on the issue of interest 
rates, he stated that “it depends on the cost of fu nds. It is regulated by the RBI. We will have 
to talk to RBI. I don’t have any immediate solution  to this because it is a complex issue. “ To 
a query pertaining differential approach to this pr iority sector as agriculture, the Secretary 
further responded” Sir, there is no differential ap proach. The Government has to provide 
subventions. “ To another related query if it was n ecessary to have differential approach,  
and if there were some concrete proposals, the Secr etary admitted that “ this issue has to be 
addressed at higher level. What sector are to be provided, what subvention has to be decided, 
we will put these before the right level.”As regard  involving Hon’ble MPs in the DLTFCs, 
Members from both Houses i.e. Lok Sabha as well as Rajya Sabha, should be involved. 

 
-5- 
 
In view of submission made by the Secretary, D/o Fi nancial Services, the Committee 
proposes to pursue the issue in future. 
 
 The Committee recommends that Ministry must study the similar scheme being 
implemented by State Government of Goa with  intere st subvention and on  more liberal 
terms.  As a result the performance of State Govern ments Schemes has been much better 
than the PMEGP in that State. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee is of the view that manufacturing sector has greater employment potential, 
therefore it should have larger share under the scheme. 
(Para 14) 
 
Action Taken  
 
The share of manufacturing sector in project assist ed under PMEGP is indicated in the 
following table.  
 
Year Manufacturing Sector Service sector 
2009-10 70.44% 29.56% 
2010-11 67.57% 32,43% 
2011-12 63.16% 36.84% 
 
Efforts would be made by KVIC to encourage more man ufacturing units to come up under 
PMEGP in future.  
 
 
Further Recommendation/observation  
 
 The Committee observes gradual reduction over the years, in share of manufacturing 
sector under PMEGP. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
However the Committee is of the opinion that such s tate of affairs cannot be attributed to 
Banks alone.  There has to be regular meetings of D istrict Level Task Force as per the prescribed 
guidelines.  Also the DLTFC should do due diligence  while examining a proposal, so that they 
recommend only sound and viable projects and least time is wasted by the Banks in further 
scrutinizing the applications.  The KVIC and RBI sh ould formulate templates against which the 
DLTFC should examine a proposal.  Still, the Commit tee finds prevailing state of affairs grossly 
unsatisfactory, where the KVIC has admitted that th e number of applications exceed the annual 
target and yet they are not disposed off within a f inancial year and instead, the money allocated 
remains idle with the Banks.  And yet, the KVIC cla ims to have met the target.  The Committee 
recognizes that PMEGP has great potential for remunerative self employment by imparting skill.   

 
-6- 
 
The scheme will enable urban and rural unemployed y outh to use their skills for earning their 
livelihood.  The Committee has therefore always sup ported enhanced allocation for the PMEGP.  
There is however need for greater and effective mon itoring by the KVIC, RBI, State Governments 
and Ministry of Finance. 
(Para 21) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
District Collectors and Principal Secretaries, Stat e Governments have been requested for 
timely conducting of DLTFC meetings. Directions hav e been issued to complete all DLTFCs and 
forward applications by September, 2013 during the current financial year. The same is being 
monitored by the State Level Monitoring Committees. 
 
 
The Ministry of MSME has provided enhanced allocati on of Rs.1418.28 crore which is 
34% more than the actual of the previous year. However in view of the large number of application 
being received, there is need for enhancement of the allocation under PMEGP. 
 
       For greater coordination, Zonal Review Meeti ngs are being undertaken by KVIC with KVIB, 
DIC and Banks for monitoring implementation of PMEG P in addition to the meetings of SLMC 
and SLBC in the State. 
 
According to the Department of Financial Services ( DFS), the targets and  achievements is 
monitored at the Zonal, State and District levels b y the Dy. CEOs, Directors of KVIC and the 
Commissioner/Secretary of Industries (DIC) of the S tates Concerned as per the guidelines of 
PMEGP. The issues related to funds remaining idle w ith the banks, may be taken up by KVIC in 
the State Level  Bankers` Committee(SLBC) meetings. In fact, when an issue relating to settlement 
of margin money claims had been brought to RBI noti ce in the past, RBI has advised KVIC that 
meetings of SLBC are convened  every quarter by the  respective SLBC convener banks. The 
members of the Committee include officials from ban ks, RBI, NABARD, SIDBI and senior 
officials of the State and Central Government inclu ding KVIC. These Committees aim to review  
and monitor banking developments in the state  perf ormance under ACP and Government 
sponsored programmes, flow of credit to priority sector, MSME Sector, performance of SHGs, etc.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee was dismayed to note that in certain States like Tamil Nadu and West 
Bengal, no fresh applications were entertained for a year, in order to clear the backlog of 
applications pending from previous years.  Such ins tances constitutes the violation of mandate and 
intent of this scheme.  The committee feels that there should not be any embargo on submitting the 
applications, which should be accepted throughout t he year.  The DLTFC should regularly meet at 
least once in two months to examine and approve the cases.  The objective should be to expand the 
coverage of this Schemes and intent of this Scheme must not be diluted due to procedural nuances. 
 
(Para 22) 

 
-7- 
 
Action Taken  
 
No ban on entertaining fresh applications under PME GP was imposed by the Ministry.  
However, commitment in excess to the available budg etary resources is not a desirable situation, 
and might put the beneficiaries in unnecessary hard ship/uncertainty.  Hence, KVIC was asked to 
ensure proper financial discipline keeping in view the budget aspect.  Even then, during 2012-13, 
Tamil Nadu was given Margin Money subsidy of Rs. 60 .84 crore against the original allocation of 
Rs. 35.84 crore to meet pending Margin Money claims  arising out of its excess commitment under 
the Scheme after re-distributing the amounts available against slow-performing states. 
 
CEO, KVIC has written to all the District Collector s in the country requesting them to convene 
DLTFC meetings regularly and to dispose off the app lications received within 30 days of its 
receipt at their end.  
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee agrees that there is a scope of scali ng up the PMEGP scheme.  The 
Committee also supports higher allocation for PMEGP in view of the fact that with current level of 
allocation certain States like Tamil Nadu and West Bengal are not able to cater to growing number 
of applications.  However, the structure of the Scheme is too complex and needs to be streamlined.  
The figures and pattern of expenditure suggest that  different agencies involved in this scheme do 
not coordinate seamlessly.  The Committee therefore  recommends that there is scope for 
improving the institutional framework by closely in volving the stakeholders and monitoring their 
performance.  
(Para 26) 
Action Taken  
 
Under PMEGP, Government has already released Rs. 45 75.01 crore upto 2012-13 since its 
inception in 2008-09 and an estimated 20.39 lakh pe rsons have already been provided self-
employment and wage employment opportunities throug h 2.22 lakh new micro-enterprises in the 
country set up with a total margin money assistance  of Rs. 4147.95 crore.  XII Plan has an 
allocation of Rs. 8060 crore for PMEGP, which is 70 % higher than the XI Plan allocation.  A total 
of 27.13 lakh employment is proposed to be generate d through 3.39 lakh micro-enterprises during 
XII Plan under PMEGP alone. 
CEO, KVIC has written to all the District Collector s in the country requesting them to 
convene DLTFC meeting regularly and to dispose off the applications received within 30 days of 
its receipt at their end.  
 
 
It has now been decided by the Ministry that one mo re member may be added in the Task 
Force to represent urban local bodies of the Distri ct, such as Municipalities and Nagar Palikas and 
amongst the three representatives from Panchayats a lready provided in the DLTFC, at least one 
among the three Panchayat representatives may be no minated from Scheduled Caste or Scheduled 
Tribe and Woman. The additional representative from urban local bodies as mentioned  above  will  

-8- 
 
be nominated by the Chairman/District Magistrate/De puty Commissioner/ Collector by rotation as 
is being done in the case of three Panchayat representatives.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
Therefore, the Committee is of the view that the pr ocessing of projects designed KVIC and 
NSIC, should be fast tracked and should be decided favorably.  Therefore Banks must ensure 
filling in the relevant data in the e-tracking syst em relating to bank’s sanction and disbursement.  
Banks should encourage and ensure that applicant mu st be entered in the e-tracking system.  The 
Committee recommends that all the banks should join in e-tracking platform and that banks should 
start receiving application online.  
(Para 27) 
Action Taken  
 
E-tracking of applications under PMEGP has been int roduced by KVIC in the PMEGP 
scheme. It has been decided that to ensure 100% com pliance of e-tracking system, all the 
implementing agencies will forward the PMEGP applic ations to the Banks after entering the 
applications in the e-tracking system. Banks should  accept the applications of PMEGP received 
through e-tracking system. A circular dated 13.06.2013 has been issued by KVIC in this regard. 
 
State Bank of India has already issued guideline to  all its financing branches. Others banks are 
being persuaded for the same. 
 
A letter is being issued by Department of Financial  Services(DFS) to all public Sector 
Banks (PSBs) to take  the Committee’s observations seriously and act accordingly. 
 
 
Further Recommendation/observation 
 
 
 The Committee reiterates that projects designed by  agencies like KVIC or NSIC 
should be fast tracked.  In this respect Rajiv Gand hi Udyami Mitra Yojna could be a useful 
institution. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee is of firm view that priority sector must not only get easy access to bank 
finance but also terms and conditions and the cost of credit too should affordable.  In this respect 
the Committee found that the rate of interest charg ed by bank was universally high and also the 
banks were charging differential rate of interest.  The committee recommends that the Government 
through RBI should impose a cap on rate of interest  which should in any case be reduced for 
PMEGP.  As stated earlier, Committee also suggests that along with the existing system of 
extending margin money, the entrepreneurs an intere st subvention scheme may also be considered 
for encouraging the youths to become self-employed.   This in Committee’s view would simplify 
the procedure and minimize the discretion of banks in deciding on an application.   In addition, all 
the loan under PMEGP should be automatically covere d under Credit Guarantee Scheme and no 
collateral must be sought from the beneficiary.  The premium for credit guarantee should be borne  

-9- 
 
 
by the KVIC.  The Committee notes that despite the provision that banks would not ask for 
collateral for a certain amount of loan, in practic al they ask for collateral from the beneficiaries.  
The Committee finds this is an unacceptable situati on which must be monitored by the Banks and 
the RBI at the Branch level and represented on the Boards of the Public Sector Banks through their 
officers.  The representatives of the Ministry shou ld monitor the implementation of Government 
Schemes particularly employment generation schemes like PMEGP by Banks. 
 
(Para 29) 
Action Taken  
 
RBI has issued a circular dated 06 May 2010, in whi ch it is mentioned that Banks have 
been mandated not to accept collateral security in case of loans upto Rs. 10 lakh extended to units 
in the micro and small enterprises sector. However units can also avail guarantee cover under the 
scheme of CGT-MSE. 
 
As per  Department of Financial Services(DFS), RBI has deregulated interest rates. Banks 
charge interest with reference to the Base rate.  R egarding  banks taking  collateral , for loans 
which are  mandated to be collateral free as per ou r guidelines, RBI would  request to furnish bank 
specific cases to enable them to take up the matter with the concerned banks. 
 
Further Recommendation/observation 
 
 
 The Committee finds the reply routine and does not  address the concerns raised by it 
in the recommendation.  The committee proposes to p ursue the recommendation in future as 
well. 
However, the Committee takes note of the submission  made by the Secretary, M/o 
MSME during its meeting on 15 th  April, 2014. The Secretary stated :  
“Now, the question primarily was in relation to the  PMEGP because in the PMEGP scheme, it 
is the commercial rate which is being charged from the entrepreneurs. About the interest rates 
being charged from the small scale industry in gene ral, we have taken it up any number from 
the small scale industry in general, we have taken it up any number of times; there are reports 
of various committees including PM’s Task Force whi ch went into the question of the interest 
rate which is being charge, the cost of loans for the small scale industry. Every one tried to raise 
this issue with the Reserve Bank of India and , of course, with the banks themselves through the 
Department of Financial Services. But, to the best of my understanding, they have not agreed to 
it because of the larger context  under the BASIL norms etc.” 
The Secretary further stated that :  
“This is something which our Ministry has always be en advocating as to having some kind of a 
reasonable interest on the cost of credit for the s mall scale industry. But in the PMEGP scheme 
itself, it is provided that loans would be given by  banks on existing interest rate. So, there is no 
provision in the scheme for providing a subsidy, in terest-subvention kind of a thing, for those 
who are funded under the PMEGP.” 
In view of above the Committee proposes to pursue the issue further.  
 
 

-10- 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-III  
 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which th e Committee has either not accepted 
the replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its replies  
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee however, observes that the above time -line is seldom adhered to either by 
DLTF or Banks.  The Committee therefore recommends that the KVIC with elaborate process of 
monitoring at every level, must ensure scrupulous adherence to the time schedule.  The Committee 
also recognizes that the guidelines provide for mee ting of district level task force every two 
months.  The Committee recommends this should be a mandatory provision instead of being a 
mere guideline.  In addition, the KVIC in consultat ion with RBI should prescribe norms against 
which any application is scrutinized by the DLTFC. 
(Para 24) 
Action Taken  
 
Directions have already been issued for regular con vening of DLTFC meetings.  KVIC 
issued a letter dated 28 th  May,2013 to all CMDs of Public sector banks reques ting to set a time 
limit of maximum 30 days for sanctioning of PMEGP l oan by banks and another 30 days for 
disbursement of loans so that the entire process of  setting up of the project may be not more than 
100 days from the date of receipt of applications f rom the beneficiary.  It is also insisted to ensure  
that complete disbursement of the cases sanctioned is made in a time-bound manner to ensure that 
viability of the projects is not jeopardized.  
 
As per the Department of Financial Services, lendin g is commercial decision which banks 
take on the basis of viability of the project. Bank s have been given  freedom to frame their own 
board approved policies based on their commercial j udgment. Further the banks  representatives 
are also members of the Task Force and as such may take a view. 
 
Further Recommendation/observation 
 
 
 The Committee would like to know the impact of dir ectives by Ministry of MSME 
regarding regular meetings of DLTFC.  The Committee  also takes cognizance of KVIC’s 
letter to CMDs regarding time bound sanctioning if cases under PMEGP.  However, the 
responses of Department of Financial Services puts areas of Banks for its commercial 
viability and their policies.  As such there is no coordination between Ministry of MSME and 
Department of Financial Services. 
 
 
 
 

-11- 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee notes that the schemes were applicable for both rural as well as urban areas 
and suggests that KVIC should conduct a study on th e rural and urban spread of the scheme.  The 
Committee is of the view that the self employment o pportunities in rural areas should be 
emphasized.  In this respect of the Committee takes  note of the recent study done by Institute of 
Applied Manpower Research on informalization of lab our force which suggest that unskilled and 
semi-skilled manpower from villages is migrating to  bigger cities and is being absorbed as casual 
laborers without much social security cover.  Simil arly the recent figures released by NSO 
(National Statistical Organization) indicate massiv e loss and low wages for rural women.  In such 
a situation implementation of schemes like PMEGP in  rural areas will hugely benefit people in 
rural areas and successfully addressed poverty and unemployment situation in our villages.  
However, the Committee notes that the negative list prescribed under the scheme includes industry 
and business connect with cultivation, sericulture,  horticulture, floriculture etc.   Therefore such a  
negative seriously constricts the options of villag e entrepreneurs.  The Committee therefore 
recommends that negative list should be reviewed in  the context of village /rural industry and in 
the context of region.  For instance in the context  of States of north eastern region the negative lis t 
must be prepared taking into account specificities of the States of region.  The respective State 
Governments too should be consulted while preparing State specific negative list.  
 
(Para 30) 
Action Taken  
 
Schemes relating to promotion of Cultivation, Sericulture, Horticulture and Floriculture etc. 
which comes under farm sector are implemented by co ncerned departments. To avoid duplication 
of subsidy, KVIC is dealing with only non farm sector.  
 
As regards negative list, keeping in view of the et hos of Gandhian philosophy KVIC has 
circulated a negative list, which could be duly considered for revision while revising the scheme. 
 
 
Further Recommendation/observation  
 
 The Committee reiterates that there is a need to e xpand the base for which it will have 
to address the local needs and skills.  Also, Minis try of MSME has not responded to the 
Committee’s observation regarding need for a study of rural –urban spread of PMEGP. 
PMEGP must include vocation allied to agriculture i n rural areas and can synergise with 
schemes implemented by concerned Departments. In th is respect the Ministry should study 
the model of similar scheme being implemented by th e State Government of Goa, which has 
performed better than the PMEGP in the State. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The committee has been informed of proposal for eng aging an agency for concurrent 
monitoring and evaluation of PMEGP.  The Committee expects that the observations and 
recommendations contained in this Report will constitute important references for such evaluation. 
(Para 36) 

-12- 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
The evaluation agency has already been selected and the report is expected in due course.  
 
Further Recommendation/observation 
 
 
 The Committee finds the reply generic and evasive.  The Committee therefore is of 
opinion that the Ministry should recommend the Scheme for comprehensive performance 
audit by the CAG.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

-13- 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which fi nal replies of the Ministry have not 
been received 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee also notes that there is a prominent training component built in the PMEGP 
scheme.  The training institutions should be spread  all over the State.  The selection of training 
institutions should be transparent under standard t erms and conditions.  The KVIC should monitor 
the training module and employability of trainees. 
(Para 32) 
Action Taken  
 
The original guidelines for selecting the EDP cente rs with transparent and standard terms 
and conditions have already been circulated by KVIC, which would be considered for modification 
on the receipt of feedback from fields. 
 
Further Recommendation/observation 
 
 
 The Ministry may provide details of new Draft Guid elines and feedback there on, to 
the Committee for its further examination. The Ministry should also inform about the norms 
set  to ensure wider spread of such skill developme nt centers. It is also imperative that these 
Centers should maintain data on employability of their trainees. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee also recommends that the scope of the  scheme should be expanded.  So far 
the mandate of this scheme has been to assist the n ew units.  The Government should explore the 
possibility of assisting the existing PMEGP units f or their expansion and for this purpose some 
percentage of the allocation should be earmarked.  
(Para 34) 
Action Taken  
 
The recommendation will be duly considered at the t ime of next round of revision of the 
scheme guidelines for continuation to XII Plan alon g with finding of independent evaluation, 
which is underway.     
 
Further Recommendation/observation  
 
 The Committee may be informed of the outcome of su ch review particularly in 
context of its recommendation. 
 
 

-14- 
 
III                                                  
Third Meeting  
 The Committee met at 2.00 p.m. on Monday, the 22 nd  September, 2014 in Committee 
Room `A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present  
Shri K.C. Tyagi -  Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA  
1. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
2. Shri Vivek Gupta 
3. Shri T.K. Rangarajan 
4. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
5. Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
6. Shri Pramod Tiwari 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
7. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer 
8. Shri Birendra Kumar Chaudhary 
9. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
10. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
11. Shri S.P. Muddahanumegowda 
12. Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
13. Shri M. Srinivasa Rao 
14. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
15. Shri Konda Veshweshwar Reddy 
16. Shri Y.V. Subba Reddy 
17. Shri Rajkumar Saini 
18. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
19. Shri Rameshwar Teli 
20. Smt. Savitri Thakur 
21. Shri Rajan Vichare 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
 3. Shri Roshan Lal, Joint Director 
 4. Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 
 
 
At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welcom ed the members of the Committee 
and briefed them that the agenda of the meeting was to consider and adopt the draft 260 
th  and 261 st   

 
-15- 
Reports of the Committee on Action Taken on the 251 st  and 247 th  Reports of the Committee on 
Implementation of Prime Minister's Employment Gener ation Programme (PMEGP) and 
Implementation of Interest Subsidy Eligibility Cert ificate (ISEC) Scheme, respectively, pertaining 
to Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. 
2. Thereafter, the Committee took up the reports fo r consideration.  After some discussion the 
Committee adopted the 260 th  draft Report with certain amendments pertaining in volvement of 
Members of Rajya Sabha in District Level Task Force  Committees (DLTFCs) for Prime Minister's 
Employment Generation Programme (PMEGP) as included  in Para 5 Chapter-II of the ATR.  The 
Committee unanimously adopted 261 st  draft Report.   
3. The Committee also decided to undertake a study visit during the second fortnight of 
October and first fortnight of November, 2014 to Hy derabad, Tirupati, Chennai, Kochi and 
Munnar and authorized the Chairman to obtain necessary approvals and make arrangements.. 
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Meet ing was kept. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 2.27 p.m. 
 
New Delhi                                     Rosha n Lal 
22 
nd  September 2014                                                                                                    Joint Director 
 
To 
 The Chairman and Members of the  
 Department related Parliamentary  
 Standing Committee on Industry 
 
 
 
 
 
***** 