PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
ONE HUNDRED  EIGHTY  FIFTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE COMMITTEE’S 173RD REPORT ON INTER-
SECTORAL STRATEGIC CO-OPERATION TO PROMOTE SMALL 
SCALE INDUSTRIES 
(MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES ) 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON      MAY, 2006) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON    MAY, 2006) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
MAY  ,  2006/VAISAKHA, 1928 (SAKA) 
CONTENTS 
1.COMPOSITION OF  THE COMMITTEE                                                         
2.INTRODUCTION                                                                                              
3.REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                   
     4.OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS  AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE   
     5.MINUTES                                                                                               
                                    
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
Shri Santosh Bagrodia              —        Chairman 
 RAJYA SABHA 
Shri Surendra Lath         
Shri Suresh Bhardwaj    
Dr. K. Malaisamy 
Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
Dr. Vijay Mallya            
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan          
*Shri O.T. Lepcha 
Vacant 
Vacant 
LOK SABHA 
Shri Guharam Ajgalle 
Shri Kailash Baitha 
Shri Ra
jnarayan                         
Page 1 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

Shri Swadesh Chakraborty                    
Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
Shri Subhash  Deshmukh           
Shri Ram Singh Kaswan            
Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
Smt. Susmita Bauri 
Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato           
Shri Prakash Paranjpe               
Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel             
Shri Bagida  Ramakrishna 
Shri  Gurjeet Singh Rana            
Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana       
Smt. Rubab Sayeda                   
Kunwar  Manvendra Singh                    
Shri Ganesh Singh                      
Shri Suraj Singh 
Shri Girdhari Yadav                               
Shri Chandramani Tripathi          
             
SECRETARIAT 
  
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary  
Shri  A.K. Singh, Deputy  Secretary 
Shri  K.P. Singh, Under   Secretary 
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Committee Officer 
_____________________________________________________________ 
nominated w.e.f   8th May, 2006 
I N T R O D U C T I ON 
  
I,  the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee  on Industry,  having   
been   authorized  by the  Committee, hereby present this   185th  Report on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the 173rd Report on Inter-Sectoral Strategic Co-
operation to Promote Small Scale Industries (Ministry of Small Scale Industries ) 
  
2. The Committee examined and considered the Action Taken Notes furnished  by the Ministry of Small 
Scale Industries on the recommendations contained in 173rd Report of the Committee  on Inter-Sectoral 
Strategic Co-operation to Promote Small Scale Industries (Ministry of Small Scale Industries). This 
report is based on the outcome of such examination.  
  
3. The Committee in its meeting held on 16th May considered and adopted the Report. 
  
                                                                                                             
REPORT 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Small Scale 
Industries on the Recommendations contained in the  173rd     Report (of the Department-related 
NEW DELHI; 
16 May, 2006 
  
SANTOSH BAGRODIA
 Chairman 
 Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry
Page 2 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry) on  Inter-sectoral Strategic Co-operation to Promote 
Small Scale Industries pertaining to the Ministry of Small Scale Industries.  The Report was 
presented /laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha on  the 12th May, 2005. 
  
2.         Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Small Scale Industries     in respect 
of the   recommendations contained in the Report.   These have been categorized as follows: 
  
Chapter - I- The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry :- Paras : 
1.3.2, 1.6.7, 2.4.6, 2.5.8, 2.5.10, 2.5.15, 4.9.3, 5.7.1,7.21.3, 7.23.2, 8.1.2, 8.5.2, 8.6.5 and 8.15.2    
  
             The Committee is pleased to observe that  the   Ministry  has accepted its  recommendation as  
mentioned in Chapter –I of the  Report.   
  
Chapter - II- The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view 
of the Government's replies: - Paras :- 1.6.21, 2.5.23 and 6.1.4.   
  
 In respect of these recommendations the Committee is  convinced  with the logic and explanation  
advocated by the Ministry  and therefore   does not want to  pursue  further.   
Chapter - III- The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted 
replies of the Ministry: -  Paras: 1.4.1, 1.5.2, 1.6.5, 1.6.8, 1.6.9, 1.6.10, 1.6.11, 1.6.12, 1.6.17, 1.6.19, 
1.6.22, 1.6.26, 1.6.27, 1.6.28, 1.6.30, 2.1.5, 2.3.3, 2.5.5, 2.5.12, 3.2.1, 3.4.7, 3.4.8, 5.7.3, 6.1.11, 6.1.13, 
6.1.14, 7.1.4, 7.23.2, 7.13.6, 7.14.2, 7.21.7,  and  
 The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementations  of recommendations contained in  
Chapter-III  and desires that the Ministry should furnish  logical  explanation  in respect of these 
recommendations.    
  
Chapter - IV- The recommendations/observations in respect of which  final replies of the  Ministry have 
not been received :- 1.6.18, 3.1, 5.7.2, 6.1.9, 6.1.12, 7.21.4, 7.21.5, 7.21.6,7.21.8, 8.8.38.10.2, 8.15.4 and 
In respect  of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV, the Ministry has  either   furnished the interim 
replies or couched its language in  vague terms like  noted for compliance/guidance, therefore, the 
Committee desires  that the Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in  respects of 
recommendations categorized   in Chapter-IV  in detail and to the point, as per the intention and spirit of 
the recommendations of the Committee. 
                                     
3.         The Details of the ATR is being discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages. 
CHAPTER - I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
  
Recommendation 
  
1.1       Defining SME Sector 
1.1.1    The Committee observes that World over, policies are being  devised to meet the requirement of 
small and medium enterprises (SME).  In India too, adequate steps are required to initiate policies for 
Medium Enterprises in order to give the SSI units to grow into Medium Enterprises. The Committee is 
of the view that Government should, at the earliest, delineate and draw the demarcation line between 
SEs and MEs by providing suitable definition and the mechanism for institutional arrangement, along 
with the classification of incentive and the exemption required for units of  the Small scale Industries 
and the medium enterprises for their growth and development.  
( Para 1.3.2) 
Action Taken  
Page 3 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

1.1.2    Action in this regard  has already been initiated.  The Small & Medium Enterprises Development 
(SMED) Bill, 2005 has  proposed to define  small and medium enterprises (both in manufacturing and 
service sectors) and the Parliamentary Standing Committee has further recommended, inter alia,  
inclusion of definition  of micro (tiny) enterprises, as well. The recommendations of the Standing 
Committee are under active consideration of the Government. 
Recommendation  
1.2       Technology management for SMEs 
1.2.1    The Committee, therefore, is of the considered view that schemes for technology up-gradation 
for SMEs should be made more functional and accessible to the existing entrepreneurs as well as the 
first generation entrepreneurs.  Due budgetary provisions should be made for R & D so that outcome of 
the research work should assist the entrepreneurs in cutting the cost of production as well as enhancing 
the value engineering of SMEs product through product development and product diversification.  The 
Committee recommends that public private partnership approach may be focused by the Government for 
infusion of latest technology in the SMEs sector. 
(Para  1.6.7) 
Action Taken  
  
1.2.2    The Ministry of SSI operates two schemes for technology upgradation of SSI units.  These are: 
(a) Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS) and  (b) Small Industry Cluster Development 
Programme (SICDP). While the former provides  15%  capital  subsidy (subject to a maximum loan 
amount of Rs. 1 crore)  to the  SSIs,  including tiny units,  on institutional loan availed of by them, the 
SICDP aims at  holistic  development of clusters as a whole,  including technology upgradation. The 
SICDP  is implemented  in a cluster in which active participation of the local associations is ensured.  
The members of the association are made aware of  the outcome of the programme  from time to time 
through seminars, workshops, etc. Technicalinstitutions, CSIR laboratories and other Research and 
Development institutions are involved in the  research activities for product development and product  
diversification of the SSI units in the cluster. The  Department of Scientific and Industrial Research 
(DSIR) is implementing  schemes which promote and facilitate R & D activities taken up by the 
industry. The  Ministry of SSI remains in close contact with these institutions and the  DSIR and utilises 
their services for implementing the SICDP. 
  
1.2.3    The concept of public private partnership  is made use of while implementing the SICDP.  The 
participation of the associations concerned is ensured and so is their financial commitment. Common 
Facility Centers,  raw material banks,  processing centers of raw materials, etc.,  are set up in the cluster 
under the scheme.  The small enterprises associations make contributions to the cost of land & building 
and plant and machinery needed for the common facility centers, etc.   Moreover, the running of these 
centres on self sustainable basis is entirely the responsibility of the associations concerned. 
Recommendations  
1.3       Key Areas for Massive Action in Sericulture 
1.3.1    The Committee feels that For further improving the sericulture sector Central Sericulture Board 
(CSB) should focus on  the following areas: 
Improving Research & Development and the effective transfer of technology at all stages; 
Considerably improving the production of non-mulberry varieties of silk 
Augmenting efforts for the spread of bivoltine sericulture; 
Encouraging technology upgradation in activities of reeling, weaving  and finishing.  Strengthening 
linkages between the producers and industry and deregulating  markets. 
Periodically reviewing the import policy for raw silk taking into account the balanced interests of the 
sericulturists as well as export manufacturers 
(Para 2.4.6) 
Action Taken  
            1.3.2    Improvin
g Research and Development  and  Transfer of Technology: Research and 
Page 4 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

Development  (R&D) /Transfer of Technology / Training with an outlay of Rs. 207.34  crore  during the 
Tenth Plan period is being implemented under which activities related inter alia to development of 
technologies for pre-cocoon and post-cocoon silk processes like farm equipment  & infrastructure,  
rearing, reeling and weaving practices, cocoon drying,  dyeing,  degumming etc. are undertaken.  
Technologies successfully developed are popularised through a centrally sponsored scheme, i.e. 
Catalytic Development Programme in which there is a sub-component for financial assistance to 
popularise new technologies. 
1.3.3    Improving the Production of Non-mulberry Varieties of Silk: The Central Silk Board (CSB) is 
implementing the non-mulberry Catalytic Development Programmes (CDP) in selected States,  covering 
activities ranging from food plant cultivation to marketing of products.  Technology absorption,  quality 
up-gradation,  investment generation,  productivity improvement and employment generation form the 
basic objectives of these CDP schemes.  The CSB is implementing special SGSY projects,  cluster 
development projects and   R & D projects for  development of  non-mulberry silks  in different States 
to improve their productivity potential. Apart from this,  the Ministry of Environment and Forests has 
issued policy guidelines under the Forest Conservation Act 1980,  wherein rearing of all varieties non-
mulberry silk worms on its identified host plants in the forest areas is treated as  forest-based activity.  
These policy guidelines have given wide scope for  expansion of non-mulberry host plant areas in the 
forests in collaboration with the Forests Department. 
1.3.4    Augmenting Efforts for the Spread of Bivoltine Sericulture: The third phase of the Japan 
International Cooperation Agency  (JICA), assisted “Project on Strengthening Extension System for 
Bivoltine Sericulture”(PEBS) aims at establishing a replicable model of extension system for 
development of bivoltine sericulture in the country.  Under PEBS as part of the  “In-Country  Training 
Programme”,  CSB is organising training to field functionaries specially in bivoltine sericulture. To 
facilitate production of quality silk, the CSB is extending assistance to the farmers,  reelers and State 
units through the State Governments under Catalytic Development Programme.The CSB has established 
sufficient training institutions and created sufficient trained man power to train the functionaries,  
farmers and reelers.The National Slikworm Seed Organisation(NSSO)  of CSB over the years has 
developed a well knit system of bivoltine seed production.  Its production progrmame has been fine 
tuned in line with the requirement of all the bivoltine silk producing States looking for seed support.The 
Central Silk Technological Research Institute (CSTRI) of CSB has introduced a quality based pricing of 
BV commercial cocoons in selected cocoon markets to ensure better pricing of commercial cocoons to 
BV farmers.  So also,  Silk Testing Laboratories have been established to test the quality of raw silk for 
promoting quality.The CSB has developed the bivoltine reeling technology package which includes 
pressured cocoon cooking equipment to cook bivoltine cocoon effectively.  Bivoltine reeling technology 
is being promoted in the field through interaction programmes  and demonstrations.  
1.3.5    Encouraging Technology Up-gradation in activities of Reeling,  Weaving and Finishing.  
Strengthening linkages between           producers   and Industry and  deregulating Markets:  
Technological up-gradation has been one of the focus areas of research at the CSB and,  as a result, a 
range of machinery and processes have been developed in the field of post cocoon technology.  These 
technologies are being taken to the field primarily through  (i) support through Plan schemes and (ii) 
technology dissemination through field programmes and demonstrations. 
1.3.6    The efforts are being made to strengthen the linkages between rearers,  reelers and weavers. 
Reelers / weavers interaction meets are held regularly in major reeling and  weaving clusters. 
Information on production clusters and their capabilities are made available to the consuming clusters 
through field sub-units.  Producers are taken on visits to consuming clusters for interaction. 
1.3.7    Market Deregulation:   The CSB has launched “Futures Trading” in cocoons and raw silk 
through National Commodities and  Derivatives  Exchange Ltd (NCDEX) in January 2005.  This is seen 
an effective tool to cover the risks associated with price fluctuations. 
1.3.8    In order to safeguard the interests of the Sericulturists,  anti-dumping duty has been imposed on 
raw silk originated in or exported from China P.R. since  2003.  There is also  considerable reduction in 
the duty structure on various commodities (i.e., to the level of 15% on most of the items.)  However,  
Page 5 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

due to intervention of the  Ministry of Textiles, the customs duty on import of raw silk has been kept at 
30%.    
Recommendation  
1.4       Handloom Sector 
1.4.1    The Committee observes that large number of handloom weavers remain outside the fold of the 
cooperative, and the cooperative structures are being increasingly weekend due to financial and other 
mismanagement.  Therefore, the Committee feels that the Office of the Development Commissioner for 
Handlooms should give impetus to cluster based approach to the development of the handloom sector.  
The cluster scheme would provide and promote small and medium enterprises in the handloom sector in 
the ambit of development initiatives of the Central Government. (Para   2.5.8) 
Action Taken  
1.4.1    In the budget  of 2005–06, Government has already announced an outlay of Rs. 40  crore for the 
development of 20 clusters in the country.  Accordingly, a scheme under the name of “Integrated 
Handloom Cluster Development Scheme” is under formulation by the Ministry of Textiles.  The 
proposed scheme envisages a comprehensive package of assistance to the selected handloom clusters in 
the country,  involving holistic and total intervention by the Central Government. 
Recommendations  
1.5       Handloom Sector 
1.5.1    The Committee feels that Government must continue to accord priority to Handlooms sector. 
Following Steps should be taken to promote and develop its exclusiveness for the global market:-  
training modules may be developed for weavers engaged in the production of low value added items, 
with the objective of upgrading their skills to enable them to find alternate employment in the textile or 
other allied sector;  
Comprehensive welfare measures will continue to be implemented in close cooperation with the State 
Governments, for better working environment and the social security of the weavers;  
Effective support systems in research and development, design inputs, skill upgradation and market 
linkages will be provided;  
Revamping of Weavers Service Centres will be revamped in consonance with the contemporary trends, 
and, using Information Technology for efficacy, their activities suitably dovetailed with activities of 
centres of design excellence like NIFT and NID;  
Production of value added fabrics may be streamlined; innovative market-oriented schemes should be 
introduced; and joint ventures be  encouraged both at the domestic and international levels. Brand equity 
of handlooms must be commercially exploited to the extent possible. 
(Para   2.5.10) 
Action Taken  
1.5.2    The Integrated Handloom Training Project (IHTP), a Central Sector Plan Scheme,  is in 
operation since December, 2003 for imparting comprehensive training in weaving techniques, design 
development, dyeing techniques, upgradation of technical and managerial skills of handloom weavers 
and workers so as to enable them to produce and market a diversified range of quality products in 
keeping with current trends in the domestic and international markets. 
            1.5.3    The Government of India is implementing the following schemes for        providing 
better working environment and social security to weavers. 
            Workshed-cum-Housing Scheme:   
This scheme was introduced in 1985-86 with the objective of providing a dwelling unit and suitable 
work place for weavers so as to improve their productivity, quality of life and earnings.   
Central assistance under the scheme is provided for the construction of rural/urban worksheds/ 
workshed-cum-houses. 
Weavers Welfare  Scheme: 
  
Health Package Scheme was introduced in March 1993.  Under the scheme, the weavers are provided 
financial assistance for the treatment of diseases like asthma, tuberculosis and inflammation of 
Page 6 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

respiratory system, cost of testing of eyes and spectacles, supply of drinking water, maternity benefits to 
women weavers, payment of additional compensation for permanent measures of family planning and 
infrastructure for  primary health care. 
Thrift Fund Scheme for Handloom Weavers was introduced in the Eighth Five Year Plan as one of the 
special welfare measures from the Government of India.  The scheme envisaged creation of a fund in the 
nature of a provident fund.  The weavers belonging to  the corporate sector were also covered under the 
scheme.  As per the funding pattern, 8% of the wages were contributed by the weavers and 4% each by 
the Central and the State Governments. 
New Insurance Scheme provided coverage against loss or damage to dwelling unit due to flood, fire 
earthquake, etc.; damage to contents of the dwelling place like looms, raw material etc; medical 
coverage and personal accidental insurance against accidental death at a premium of Rs.120/- per 
annum, with a contribution of Rs.20/- by the weaver, Rs.40/- by the State Government and Rs.60/- by 
the Government of India. 
Bunkar  Bima  Yojana  p
rovides enhanced cover to weavers for cases of accidental or natural death or 
disabilities. The scheme is being implemented in collaboration with LIC. 
  
1.5.6    At present, 25 Weavers Service Centre (WSC) are functioning under the Office of the 
Development Commissioner for Handlooms in various parts of the country.  These play a vital role in 
imparting training to the weavers to upgrade their skills and increase productivity in the handloom 
sector. They have also been instrumental in evolving new designs and reviving traditional designs. In 
order to   provide creative & innovative designs input for development/diversification of the handloom 
products, 18 Weavers Service Centres have been equipped with Computer Aided Textile Design 
(CATD) systems. 
  
1.5.7    Under the Handloom Export Scheme, design support is being provided to the handloom agencies 
under the component of exportable product development by engaging professional designers.  There is a 
provision in the scheme for skill upgradation of the weavers for production of innovative and diversified 
range of handloom products.  Export Market linkage is being facilitated by the Handloom Export 
Promotion Council by way of organising participation of its member exporters in international fairs and 
exhibitions.  Domestic market linkage is provided  to the weavers under the Market Promotion 
Programme which provides for assistance to State Governments for organisation of National Expos, 
Special Expos, District level Events, Craft Melas,etc.  
  
1.5.8    Weavers Service Centres are being revamped in consonance with the contemporary trends and 
there is regular interaction between  Weavers Service Centres,  NIFT and National Institute of Design 
(NID). During the          previous years, 93 Officers of WSCs were sponsored by this office for 
orientation course in Design Development at NIFT. The students of the NIFT/NID from time to time 
undergo     training in WSCs and also keep visiting for development of the samples. 
  
1.5.9    The Handloom Export Scheme is facilitating the eligible handloom   agencies for production of 
innovative and diversified range of handloom products, including value added fabrics and products.  
There is a component in the scheme for setting up of value addition units.  In order to give handlooms a 
distinct identity, particularly in niche market segments, it has been decided to develop a trademark for 
handlooms.  The work in this regard has been entrusted to the Textile Committee under the Ministry of 
Textiles. Under the “Deen Dayal Hathkargha Protsahan Yojana” (DDHPY), assistance is being provided 
to handloom agencies in the form of marketing incentive.  Under this component, assistance is provided 
to handloom  agencies based on their average sales, turnover of handloom fabrics, made-ups and 
garments for the 3 years preceding the financial year during which  the grant of assistance for which is 
under consideration.  The implementing agencies are expected to use this assistance towards activities 
which would attract consumers in order to gear up the overall sales of handloom goods.  Details of funds 
released under this component during the last 3 years are as under:
Page 7 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

  
  
Recommendations  
  
1.6       Handicrafts 
  
1.6.1    The Committee visualises to improve the handicrafts sector in the country with more emphasis 
should he given on creating employment generation opportunities in rural areas by modifying the 
existing schemes as under: 
  
(i)                     Extension of credit guarantee scheme to rest of India. 
(ii)           Setting-up of Local Haat / Minin Urban Haat / Eco Haat as new         component of existing 
Marketing and Marketing         Support            Scheme. 
      (iii)             Entrepreneurship Development Programme as new component of  existing  Marketing & 
Marketing Support Scheme. 
      (iv)   Setting-up electronic Kiosk in CFCs being set-up in potential    clusters to facilitate e-enabled 
micro credit delivery system,  e-supervision and trade through e-commerce as new component of 
existing Marketing & Marketing Support Scheme. 
      (v)              Extension of workshed scheme to rest of India.(Para 2.5.15) 
 
 
Action Taken  
1.6.2   The point-wise status of action taken  is as under: 
  
The  Credit Guarantee Scheme for handicrafts artisans have been launched on 13.09.2005.  
34 Urban Haats in all the states have so far been approved / sanctioned to provide permanent direct 
marketing facilities to the artisans on rotational basis throughout the year. Out of 34 haats,  5  haats at 
Jammu,  Ahmedabad,  Bhubaneswar, Bhopal & Karnal (Haryana)  have become functional. 
The Entrepreneuership Development Programme (EDP) is an offshoot of the Marketing Workshop 
Programme with a view to providing thrust and focus  on the development of  entrepreneurship among 
artisans.  Beside, this objective is also achieved by organising various types of marketing events at 
various locations where artisans interact with buyers / sellers. 
Setting up of electronic kiosks in the clusters through the ICICI bank is under active consideration.  One 
kiosk each has been finalised to be set up in  two clusters at Jhalawar (Rajasthan)  and Saharanpur (U.P).
The Scheme of Worksheds has already been extended for implementation in the rest of India since 
March 2005. 
  
Recommendation  
  
1.7       Prerequisites for Development of Food Processing Industries and Support provided by MFPI 
  
1.7.1    The Committee understands that the prospects  of Food Processing Industry is tremendous in 
India keeping in view the availability of raw material for various segments of Food Industry.  The 
growth rate to the tune of 7 to 8 per cent in the food processing sector has to be maintained.  Therefore, 
the Committee feels that the Government should undertake following strategic decision / actions for 
promoting small, medium and large food processing units for promotion and proliferation of food 
industries in India:- 
  
Year Amount released (Rs. In lakh)
2002-03 5412.69
2003-04 3538.98
2004-05 4787.75
Page 8 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

Greater impetus to basic development for facilitating food processing industry and paying attention to 
decentralization of Infrastructural development i.e. food parks, packages centres, optimum utilization of 
by - products, cold chain facilities, value added centres, irradiation facilities so that balanced regional 
development of food processing industry may take place in the country;   
Awareness programme for technology up-gradation, establishment of modernization of food processing 
industries covering fruits, vegetable, milk products, meat, poultry, fishery, oil seeds and horticultural 
sector for adequate and optimum value addition;  
Special impetus to rural entrepreneurship through Mass Entrepreneurial developmental programmes 
throughout the country by imparting necessary training and skill; 
Managing sustainable backward and forward linkages system and linking to ARI sector for ensuring a 
regular supply of raw material and to workable commercial and marketable system for providing 
remunerative income to the farmers; 
 For injecting competitiveness to face the global challenges from MNCs engaged in Food Processing 
Industry, there is the need for maintaining global quality and hygiene standard; 
Promotion and adoption of ISO, HACP and Good Manufacturing Practices(GMP)  standards by the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industry; 
Popularization of processed food through participation in Seminars, Workshops, national, international 
fairs and generic advertisement for customer awareness;  
Focused impetus to the growth and development of SMEs in Food Processing Industries throughout the 
country by providing institutional and commercial support; and 
Food processing sector needs to take advantage of backward linkages scheme of MFPI so that there are 
no middlemen / players in between the processors and farmers. 
( Para     4.9.3) 
Action Taken  
  
1.7.2    A scheme for infrastructure development has been implemented by providing grant  assistance 
for establishment of food parks,  packaging centres, modernisation of abattoirs, cold storages,   value 
added centres and irradiation facilities.  Under the food park scheme,  financial assistance @ 25% for 
general areas and 33.33% for difficult  areas is provided for specified infrastructural facilities,  subject to 
a maximum of Rs. 4 crore. The idea behind setting up  food parks is that small and medium 
entrepreneurs find it difficult to invest in capital-intensive activities.  Therefore, as a part of the strategy 
to develop food processing infrastructure,  the Ministry of Food Processing Industry (MoFPI) has been 
pro-actively pursuing the task of setting up of food parks in different parts of the country.  In the food 
parks,  common processing facilities,  packaging centre,  power supply,  water supply,  seminar / 
conference / training facilities, etc.,  are provided.  So far,  49 food parks  have been approved under the 
scheme.  Assistance is also  being extended for establishment of facilities like cold storage,   packaging,  
irradiation, etc. 
1.7.3    The MoFPI is operating a Plan Scheme for technology upgradation,  establishment and 
modernisation of food processing industries.  The scheme covers  fruits and vegetables,  milk products, 
meat, poultry,  fishery,  oilseeds and other horticultural sectors leading to value addition and higher shelf 
life.  The scheme provides for grant of financial assistance @ 25% of the project cost in general areas 
and 33.33% in difficult areas,  subject to maximum of Rs. 50  lakh and Rs. 75  lakh respectively. 
1.7.4    For development of rural entrepreneurship and  providing hands-on experience, a grant of upto 
Rs. 2. lakh with Rs. 1  lakh as revolving seed capital is provided for a single product line centre  which 
is expected to function as production-cum-training centre for rural entrepreneurs with focus on SC / ST / 
OBC and women.  For multi-product line,  grant of upto Rs. 7.50  lakh with revolving seed capital of Rs. 
2 lakh is being provided.   Assistance of upto Rs. 1  lakh is also provided for launching four-week 
training programmes to enable potential entrepreneurs to set up food processing industries.   
  
1.7.5    Backward  linkage scheme has been introduced to ensure regular supply of processable variety of 
farm produce,  minimise wastage,  make value addition,  avoid distress sale and provide remunerative 
Page 9 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

income to the farmers.  Under the scheme,  the processor is eligible for reimbursement from MoFPI @ 
10% of total purchase made by him from the farmers in a year subject to a maximum of Rs. 10  lakh,  
for three years. Financial assistance is provided  by the Ministry to enable FPI units to adopt ISO / 
HACCP standards / GMP.   Assistance is also provided for seminars / workshops / conferences / fairs / 
exhibitions organised for improvement in quality and population of processed food. 
Recommendation  
  
1.8       Adequate and timely supply of coal to Small Scale Industries 
  
1.8.1    The Committee takes note of the fact that Indian Small Scale Industries suffer from inadequate 
supply of coal to the SSI units. As per the extant policy, the supply of coal to the SSI units falls under 
the non-core sector.  As a result, there has been huge mismatch between the demand and supply of coal 
to SSI sector.  As many of the SSI units require timely and adequate supply of coal for running the units, 
non-availability of coal has adversely affected to growth of SSI sector. 
(Para   5.7.1) 
Action Taken  
  
1.8.2    The Government has given approval for sale of 10 million tones of coal through electronic 
auction on the Internet for the year 2005-06 on trial basis.  In this e-auction,  non-core consumers, 
irrespective of linkage  and sponsorships as well as traders,  can participate and bid for the quantity  as 
per requirement from the preferred sources.  This would be in addition to the quantity sold to non-core 
consumers during 2004-05 which is also offered to no-core valid linked consumers based on the 
Maximum Permissible Quantity (MPQ) at the weighted average e-auction price of  the preceding 
month.  Hence the valid non-core linked consumers need not participate in the e-auction to receive coal 
at the weighted average e-auction price of preceding month. The non-core sector consumers would 
continue to receive coal on the basis of past linkages and sponsorships and MPQ,  subject to furnishing 
of the desired documents by the consumers arising out of the re-verification exercise being conducted by 
the State  authorities. 
  
Recommendation 
  
1.9       Enabling Credit to SMEs 
  
1.9.1    he Committee recommends the following further measures for enhancing credit to SMEs in 
India:- 
  
Improving the functional aspects of Technology Bank for SME for facilitating technology transfer and 
upgradation and project evaluation, risks management etc; 
Re-orienting the role of Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) for extending credit flow to rural Small Scale 
Industries; 
encouraging Laghu Udyog Credit Cards; and  
Popularization of credit rating in SMEs. 
(Para   7.21.3) 
Action Taken  
 
 
1.9.2    As per the announcement made in the Comprehensive Policy Package for SSIs, SIDBI initiated 
suitable measures for institutionalising Technology Bureau for Small Enterprises (TBSE) as Technology 
Bank for SMEs. The services of a consulting firm,  viz., Ernst & Young Private Ltd. (E&Y) were 
engaged by SIDB. The consultant has submitted its report in which it has  outlined the urgent need for a 
technology intervention agency in the country for SME sector.  
  
Page 10 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

1.9.2    SIDBI  has approached some public sector banks for equity participation in the proposed 
Technology Bank. The Oriental Bank of Commerce (OBC), the Indian Bank and the State Bank of India 
(SBI) have since given their consent and some other commercial banks are considering the proposal to 
subscribe to the equity capital of the proposed entity. The office of the Registrar of Companies (ROCs),  
Delhi & Haryana,  has since advised the availability of the name India SME Technology Services Ltd. 
(ISTSL) for registration. The Memorandum and Articles of Association of ISTSL have been drafted and 
forwarded to the Indian Bank and the OBC for approval.  
             
1.9.3    The RBI has informed that the Regional Rural Banks have been prescribed higher target of 60% 
for extending finance to priority sector (including SSIs). On the advice from the Ministry of Finance 
(Banking Division) regarding enhancement in the credit limit of Lahgu Udyog Credit Cards (LUCCs) 
from Rs.2 lakh to Rs.10 lakh for borrowers who have a satisfactory track record, the Indian Banks’ 
Association (IBA) has written to all the Public Sector Member Banks for its implementation.  
  
1.9.4    The Ministry of SSI has launched the ‘Performance and Credit Rating Scheme for Small 
Industries’ being implemented through the National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC). NSIC is 
playing a proactive role in implementing the scheme.  To create awareness of the scheme among the SSI 
units, 33 open house meetings and exclusive sessions on the rating scheme have been organised by 
involving various Industry Associations up to 31 March 2005. The representatives of Rating Agencies 
have also attended The open houses and exclusive sessions on the rating scheme are being organized 
during the current financial year also. So far, more than 275 SSI units have applied for rating under the 
Rating Scheme and rating has been assigned to 50 units by various  rating agencies.   
  
1.9.5    With a view to providing credit enhancement and comfort to the bank officials at the field level 
in their taking credit decisions, the SIDBI, in association with select public sector banks, has launched a 
dedicated credit rating agency for SMEs.  The agency aims at providing affordable, credible and 
independent ratings to the SMEs, which would help enhancing their credibility and standing. It is felt 
that with the setting up of the agency, banks would be provided with an independent external assessment 
for quicker decisions in extension of credit to the SME sector.  
Recommendation  
  
1.10     Credit Flow to Medium Enterprises 
1.10.1  The Committee hopes that the Annual Monetary & Credit Policy 2005-06 would go a long way 
in providing credit to Indian SMEs as per the requirement of SEs and MEs sectors and RBI’s this year’s 
announcement for credit policy would not prove mere annual rituals.  The Committee firmly believes 
that RBI would issue suitable guidelines and adopt and adhere resilient monitoring – mechanism for 
implementation of stated objectives in the credit policy 2005-06, otherwise, policy would remain mere 
window-dressing or arm-chair-intellectual exercise.  The Committee recommends that the policy must 
go beyond the formulation stage so that it may be implemented in practice.  
(Para   7.23.2) 
Action Taken  
 
 
1.10.2  With a view to further smoothening the flow of credit, as part of the Annual Policy Statement for 
2005-06, the RBI announced the formulation of a scheme of strategic alliance between branches of 
banks and SIDBI located in the clusters. As mentioned in para.   7.1.4, the RBI has since formulated a 
scheme for Small Enterprises Financial Centres (SEFCs), which is important in the context of expanding 
outreach of banks and improving credit flow to the SSI sector.  The RBI has circulated the details of the 
scheme to the banks for initiating an early action in this regard.  
  
Recommendation  
  
Page 11 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

1.11     Legal framework affecting the Small Scale Industries is satisfactory 
  
1.11.1  The Committee understands that the plethora of laws, rules and regulations and the burden of 
inspections under these, have affected the SSI sector adversely. Therefore, with a view to simplifying 
and streamlining the system of inspections under these laws, and also reducing the burden of statutory 
returns/ registers prescribed hereunder, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Bill, 2005 (earlier 
referred to as the Small Enterprises Development Bill) must be enacted without further delay. Following 
measures are therefore required to be taken in order to give fillip to the promotion and development of 
Small Scale Industries: -  
  
A single Unified Act governing the rules pertaining to retrenchment and layoff and social benefits for 
employees. 
Enactment of Single Comprehensive Small Enterprises Development Act for SSEs similar to the 
Industrial Development and Regulation (IDR) Act. 
Comprehensive Social Security Scheme for widening the social safety nets as proposed in SED Bill 
Since the Inspector Raj is causing severe harassment to Small Scale Units, therefore, the provision made 
in the proposed legislation for giving good bye to Inspector Raj to wipe out the tyranny of Inspector 
Raj.    (Para  8.1.2  ) 
Action Taken  
  
1.11.2  The Small and Medium Enterprises Development (SMED) Bill 2005, inter alia, addresses the 
above issues.  Recommendations of the Standing Committee on this Bill (for further improvements)  are  
under active consideration of the Government. 
Recommendation  
1.12    Public-private partnership in regard to technology upgradation for the SMEs 
  
1.12.1  The Committee is of the view that in order to promote Public-Private Partnership for technology 
upgradation under the Schemes monitored by SIDO, awareness of the provisions of the schemes among 
the Industry Associations would have to be increased.  Further, Associations need to be guided for 
identifying the felt-needs of SSIs and chalking out the operational modalities of such common facilities 
so as to enable them to prepare project proposals, which are technically sound and financially viable.
(Para 8.5.2) 
  
Action Taken  
  
1.12.2  The Ministry of SSI operates  a scheme named Small Industry Cluster  Development Programme 
(SICDP) for holistic development of  clusters,   including technology upgradation.  The concept of 
public – private partnership  is fully used while implementing the SICDP.  The participation of the 
associations concerned is ensured and so is their financial commitment.   Common facility centers,   raw 
material banks,  processing centers for the raw materials, etc.,  are set up in the cluster under the 
programme.  Associations make contributions towards the cost of land and building and plant and 
machinery.  The running of these centres on self sustainable basis remain entirely the responsibility of 
the associations. The programme is implemented through specialized institutions in their respective 
fields.  They conduct diagnostic study and identify the felt needs of the clusters. They also prepare  
project report concerning techno-economic-commercial viability  and ensure that common facility 
centres set up under the programme run on self sustainable basis.  All the members of the associations 
are made aware of the outcome of the programme from  time to time through seminars, workshops, etc. 
Recommendation  
  
1.13     International cooperation between Indian enterprises and SME abroad “key areas for mutual 
cooperation.” 
Page 12 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

  
1.13.1  The Committee is of the view that the Institutional support can be utilized further, in promotion 
of SMEs through assistance in:- 
Developing and implementing a technology transfer strategy, in addition to financial, marketing and 
operational strategies.   
Conducting of technology audits for and benchmarking and assessment of technology needs.  
Technology sourcing and acquisition and applications of new techniques 
 Identification of new export markets by encouraging their participation in sector specific exhibitions. 
(Para   8.6.5) 
Action Taken  
  
1.13.2  To give an impetus to the development and growth of small scale industries in the country,  the 
following national programmes  are being  implemented  by the Government of India, in collaboration 
with  UNIDO and other  stakeholders concerned. These programmes are aimed at technological and 
quality  upgradation of small scale industry,  strengthening  their competitiveness   and  increasing their  
share in the world market. 
  
National Programme for the Development of Toy Industry 
National Programme for the Development of Lock Industry 
National Programme for the Development of Machine Tool Industry 
National Programme for the Development of Stone Industry 
National Programme for Promoting Energy Efficiency in Hand Tools. 
  
1.13.3  To display the products of SSI units in international exhibitions and trade fairs and to help  
improve the exports of SSI products,   the SIDO has been participating in selected international fairs 
every year.  Under the scheme,  participation in selected  international exhibitions is arranged by SIDO 
to assist  SSI units in exhibiting their products.  All the charges pertaining to participation such as rent of 
exhibition space, display of exhibits, shipment of exhibits,  handling and clearing, insurance, etc. are met 
by SIDO for selected SSI units displaying their products in international exhibitions abroad. The 
customer enquiries generated during such exhibitions are promptly disseminated to the SSI units to 
explore the possibilities of exporting to new overseas buyers /  markets, etc. Under the scheme,  SIDO 
participates in 6 to 7 selected international exhibitions annually. 
Recommendation  
  
1.14     Protection  from the on-slaught of Frankstein MNCs 
  
The Committee is of the considered that emerging SMEs in india should be protected from the on-
slaught of Frankstein MNCs who are launching its monstrous head -way to Indian market due to 
opening of economy under WTO-regime in order to fulfill the commandants of liberalisation and 
globalization by undertaking following strategic decision and action:   
  
Strengthening of Anti-dumping mechanism ; 
Conversion of Quantitative restriction (QRs) into rationalised tariff regime; 
Rationalisation of countervailing duties and safeguard duties to protect domestic;  
Awareness among SSI entrepreneurs about India's obligation under WTO regime; and 
Expeditious disposal of dumping cases are anti-dumping actions thereto. 
(Para     8.15.2) 
Action Taken  
  
1.14.1  The process of globalisation and liberalisation has increased competition for the small 
enterprises  in the Indian as well as world markets. The Government  is full
y aware of the World Trade 
Page 13 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

Organisation (WTO) environment and have taken appropriate measures for preparing the small scale 
sector to meet the challenges of liberalization and globalisation. Taking a view of the whole situation, 
the Government  has put in place several measures to help small enterprises to become globally 
competitive.  These  include schemes/programmes  for technology upgradation, development of clusters 
of  industries, making bank credit of up to Rs.5 lakh available without collateral, 75 per cent credit 
guarantee for loans upto Rs.25 lakh, creating awareness among these industries regarding export- related 
issues and sensitizing them to the emerging challenges of trade liberalisation, reimbursement of the cost 
of obtaining  ISO 9000 / 14001 certification upto Rs.75,000, reimbursement of registration fee up to 
Rs.15,000 for adopting bar coding of products, assistance to SSI units for participating in international 
fairs / exhibitions, etc.  
  
1.14.2  The Government has also put in place appropriate trade defence mechanisms, such as import 
licensing, safeguards against surge in imports and anti-dumping measures to provide protection to 
domestic industries, including small and cottage industries. 
CHAPTER - II 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
  
Recommendation 
  
2.0       Garment Industry 
  
2.1       The Committee observes that the supply channel/chain pertaining to raw- materials of Garment 
Industry must be quick and reliable. In order to reduce the cost of raw material, Government must 
reduce the excise duty, the Committee reiterates.  The small-scale garment units must be assisted in 
updating to bring them at par with their international counterparts. This could be achieved by assisting 
such units with high quality testing facilities. Different agencies in charge of developing SSIs must also 
help these units to improve their organizational methods such as total quality management system and 
ISO-9000 certification, which is essential for the SSI units to ensure the supply of quality goods in time. 
(Para 1.6.21) 
Action Taken  
  
2.1.1    In the Budget 2004-05,  the CENVAT Scheme for textiles has been made optional with 
mandatory duty only on man-made fibres and filament yarns. Except for these two items,  all other 
textiles items are fully exempt from excise duty if no credit of duties is taken under the CENVAT  
Credit Rules.   For those opting to pay the duty and thereby  avail of duty  credit,  the applicable rates of 
duty is 4% for cotton textiles items (i.e., yarns,  fabrics,  garments and made-ups) and 8% for other 
textiles items including yarn,  fabrics,  garments,  and made-ups. 
  
2.1.2    The Textiles Committee under the Ministry of Textiles  has been rendering the following  
services to the textile Industry including SSI units: 
  
Assistance  to exporters in the form of quality inspection,  certification with respect to loom origin,  
country origin (GSP) and classification of apparels, etc. 
Testing of textiles, chemicals, dyes and effluents through 17 laboratories  all over India. 
Consultancy on implementation of ISO 9000 Quality Management System  (QMS),  ISO 14000 
Environmental Management System (EMS) and Social Accountability (SA) 8000 Standards – more than 
250 units have availed of these services. 
Training to the industry personnel on testing,  quality inspection and assessment. 
Industry specific research & development studies / surveys / projects etc. (i.e. Processing Survey,  
Ginnin
g Survey, Hand Processing Survey,  Data Collection for Consumer Panel,  Consumer Awareness 
Page 14 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

Programme, etc.) 
Survey on consumption of textiles related items  in household and other sectors. 
  
2.1.3 The office of DC(SSI) is also operating a scheme under which assistance is provided to SSI sector, 
including the garment industry,  for quality control  including establishment of Quality Management 
System like ISO 9000 certification.  
  
Recommendation  
  
2.2 Cluster Production Method 
  
2.2.1 The Committee feels that to improve the competitiveness of handicrafts in the International 
Market, the steps required to be taken include providing commercially useful information and assistance 
to exporters in developing and increasing exports; offering professional advice and services in areas of 
technology upgradation, quality and design improvement, standards and specifications, product 
development, innovation etc.; organizing visits of exporters/Export Promotion Councils etc. abroad to 
explore market opportunities in new and existing markets in Europe, America and other potential 
markets in Latin America, Africa, ASEAN and CIS countries; participating in specialized International 
Trade Fairs; create an awareness through Workshops on “Export Marketing, Procedures and 
Documentation”, Packaging, Design Development, Buyer Seller Meet, Open House etc. amongst 
exporters and manufacturers, enabling them to enter into export trade with confidence; setting up of 
Common Facility Centres equipped with state of art technology in important export clusters;  and setting 
up of Indian Exposition Mart at Greater Noida. 
(Para 2.5.23) 
Action Taken  
  
2.2.3 All the recommendations of the Committee are broadly covered under the parameters of Export 
Promotion Scheme of the office of Development Commissioner (Handicrafts). 
  
Recommendation  
  
2.3 Transport of  goods by Railways 
  
2.3.1 The committee further recommends that the Ministry of Railways should enable the SSI sector by 
providing all possible assistance for the transportation of SE raw materials and products to strengthen 
and facilitate to remain  competitive in the market-led  global economy.  Keeping in view the potential 
of Small Scale Industries in India,  the Railway Board must reconsider the case of Small Scale Industries 
and provide infrastructure in the major industrial clusters for transportation of raw material and finished 
SSI products.  The Committee desires that Railways should play a pro-active role and reach out to the 
major industrial clusters for providing transportation services to its customers. 
(Para   6.1.4) 
Action Taken  
  
2.3.2 The Ministry of Railway is always ready to help and give all possible assistance for transporting   
small enterprises’ raw materials and products.  For SSI,  provision already exists at all major stations for 
transportation  of raw material and finished products as parcel. 
CHAPTER - III 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT OR THE 
COMMITTEE WANTS TO MAKE FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS 
  
Page 15 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

Recommendation 
  
3. 1  SWOT Analysis of Small Scale Industries 
  
3.1.1 The Committee is of the view that for streamlining and strengthening the SSI sector in the national 
economy, the focus should be on the following: 
  
Providing full credit, technology upgradation, modernisation and marketing 
support to the SSI sector; 
Infrastructure upgradation in general particularly in the major SSI industrial 
clusters; 
Freedom from the plethora of rules and regulations existing in the SSI sector, which is known as 
Inspector Raj; 
Full support to the service industry to fulfill its true growth and employment. generation potential; and 
Training of existing and potential entrepreneurs and workers on a massive scale. 
Modern management practices and skill upgradation through advanced training facilities for capacity 
building in the SSI sector. 
  
(Para   1.4.1) 
Action Taken  
  
3.1.2 The Government is in agreement with the recommendations.  Many of these are already being 
implemented through a number of schemes and programmes.  In addition,  the Government is in the 
process of finalising a promotional  package to provide further  support to the micro and small 
enterprises. The draft package is under circulation for inter-Ministerial consultation. 
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION  
  
3.1.3 The Committee is pleased to observe that the Government is taking appropriate initiatives to 
encourage SEs and MEs by promulgating  the SMED Bill. However, the process needs to be accelerated 
for the speedy consolidation and proliferation of SEs and MEs. The Committee understands that with 
the promulgation of SMED Bills many of problems like 'Inspection Raj'  and plethora  of rules and 
regulations would be streamlined but the Government needs to bring forth the promotional  package 
without further delay whereby the issue  of technology-upgradation, facilitation of basic infrastructure 
like  supply of continued power to SEs & MEs at reasonable rate; adequate and timely  credit flow 
without  hassles of collateral security; adoption of modern management Practices (MMPs) ; opening of 
new markets and provision for relevant training ought to be taken for promotion of SEs and MEs so that 
new avenues for  employment generation in these potential sector may be explored with the  objective of 
poverty alleviation in Rural India.  
Recommendation  
 
 
3.2 Re-orienting the Role of DC(SSI) 
  
3.2.1 The Committee in the changing scenario of liberalization and globalisation, feels that the role of 
the office of DC (SSI) should be reoriented, broadly on the following lines:- 
  
The DC(SSI) would need to be re-designated as the Central Development Commissioner for Small and 
Medium Enterprises, [CDC(SME)]and he and his organisation (Small Industries Development 
Organisation) equipped and strengthened to view the sector as a composite whole, without losing focus 
on the need for generation of employment as well the specific development/promotional requirement 
and inter-linkage of each distinct component of the composite sector, e.g., tiny enterprises, small 
Page 16 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

enterprises, etc. and the products and service produced by them.
  
The Office of the CDC(SME)would need to widen and continuously up-date its knowledge base 
regarding the global trends in policies  and Government interventions concerning the SME  sector and 
recommend and design/implement appropriate measures for continuously enhancing the competitiveness 
of the sector in India. It would also need to continually ascertain the “best practices” in this field, within 
the country and abroad, and appropriately adopt them, through schemes, projects and programmes, to 
suit the Indian conditions. 
  
The Office of the DC(SSI)further need to be strengthen its linkage with the State Governments, on the 
one hand, and with the field offices and specialized institutions of its own and those of other Central 
Ministries/ Departments, on the other, so that the activities of its field offices and specialized institutions 
are better attended to the local needs of the SME sector in each State and region, with an eye on the 
future opportunities and challenges. It would also need to interact more regularly and closely with the 
associations of SMEs so that the efficacy of various policies and measures adopted and implemented by 
the Central Governments are tested regularly on the ground and refined/modified to achieve the 
objectives more efficiently. 
  
(d)        The Office of DC(SSI) must forge stronger links with the relevant international institutions and 
bilateral organisations so that more effective cooperation between India and other countries as well as 
India and multi-lateral institutions can be achieved, to derive full advantage of the comparative strengths 
of the Indian SME sector and to address its areas of weaknesses and concerns, in the light of 
international experience. 
(Para   1.5.2)   
Action Taken 
  
 3.2.2 A Bill, namely,  “The Small and Medium Enterprises Development (SMED) Bill, 2005” has  been 
introduced in the Lok Sabha on  12.05.2005 which,  inter alia,  proposes that the Central Government or 
the State Government may appoint such officers with such designations and such other employees as it 
thinks fit for the purposes of  this Act and may entrust to them such of the powers and functions under 
this Act as it may deem fit (Clause 27).  The SMED Bill, 2005 defines the  small and medium 
enterprises (in both manufacturing  and services). 
  
3.2.3 The Office of the Development Commissioner (SSI) is continuously engaged in updating  its 
knowledge base regarding global trends in policies and Government interventions concerning the SME 
sector.   The best practices available in the country and abroad are kept in view, to the extent possible, 
while reviewing existing policies / programmes or formulating new ones.  
  
3.3.3    The Office of DC(SSI) constantly liaises with  other Central Ministries, Planning Commission,  
State Governments and financial institutions,  through the Ministry of SSI as well directly,  as per 
requirement.  Secretary (SSI) is a member of the Standing Advisory Committee of the RBI,  which deals 
with the credit policy for the small scale sector.  The Development Commissioner (SSI) is on the Board 
of Directors of the   Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI). The  Director of Small 
Industries Service Institute  (SISI) in each State is a member of the State Level Inter-Institutional 
Committee, which deals with the revival of sick SSI units.  
  
3.3.4    The Office of DC(SSI),  through the Ministry of SSI, has all along taken steps to forge links with 
relevant international institutions and bilateral organisations,  including  signing of MOUs for more 
effective cooperation between India and other countries.   In addition, the office is also implementing  
following projects,  in collaboration with the UNIDO,  for specific industries, for technological & 
quality upgradation,  further strengthening the competitiveness of the Indian industry and increasing  its 
Page 17 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

share in the world market: 
  
National Programme for the Development of Toy Industry 
National Programme for the Development of Lock Industry 
National Programme for the Development of Machine Tool Industry 
National Programme for the Development of Stone Industry 
National Programme for Promoting Energy Efficiency in Hand Tools. 
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.3.5    The Committee understands that the provision under clause 27 of the SMED Bill, 2005 for CDC 
(SME) and its function and power would generate professional proficiency and would also lead to 
streamlining   and strengthening of future outlook of SEs and MEs Sectior in the country.  
  
3.3.6    The Committee is of the considered view that the institutional provisions of CDC (SME) at the 
Central Level and the Small Industries Services Institute (SISI) in each state level must have functional 
and operational impact on the provision of  SEs and MEs at the field level. Such institutions have to play 
the pro-active role in combating the problems being faced by SEs and MEs so that their empirical 
impact is felt in terms of the  facts and figures and their contribution is observed in the economic growth 
and development of the nation.  
  
3.3.7    The Committee recommends that the Government should expedite the enactment of  'SMED 
Bill  as the same would usher  a new era for the better tomorrow of SEs and MEs in the country. The 
Committee desires the role of CDC (SSI) should be completely re-designed to as to make it relevant and 
functional in the fast changing global scenario  unleashed due to liberalisation and globalisation process. 
The Committee understands that  the suggested CDC  (SME) may play the role of catalyst in the 
adoption of 'Global Best Practices (GBPs) for injecting and enhancing competitiveness in India’s SEs 
and MEs working  through decantation and dissemination of information pertaining to global policies 
and practices at field level.  
  
Recommendation  
  
3.4       Key Areas of Massive Action  for Revitalization of SEs 
  
3.4.1    Cluster Approach : A step  ahead towards synchronization  of SEs 
The Committee strongly believes that the Small Enterprises can be developed in cluster through the 
Small Industry Cluster Development Programme. The common facilities like testing, infrastructure such 
as power and roads, assured supply chain and credit should be provided within the clusters so that these 
enterprises can grow without any hindrance. The small enterprises must be provided marketing 
assistance by organizing Vendor Development Programme (VDP) to bring small and medium 
enterprises on a common platform to decide their marketing strategy and to resolve their problems 
mutually. 
(Para  1.6.5) 
Action Taken  
  
3.4.2    Small Industry Cluster Development Programme (SICDP) :-The  scheme of Technology 
Upgradation and Management Programme (UPTECH) was launched in February 1998,  to address the 
issues related to technology upgradation and modernisation of small scale industries,  based on the 
“cluster” approach. The scheme was renamed in 2003-04 as Small Industry Cluster Development 
Programme (SICDP) with the expanded objective of a holistic development of clusters. The scheme 
provides for taking up  diagnostic study,  resourcing of technology,  facilitating  transfer of technology 
Page 18 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

from  producer to end-user,  setting up  common facility centers (including demonstration plants  and  R 
& D units),  market development assistance and organising workshops,  seminars,  training and study 
visits for quicker diffusal of technology across the  small enterprise clusters,  in the light of the findings 
of the diagnostic study and in  consultation with the stakeholders.  The SICDP  covers a wide range of 
need-based support related to technology upgradation, improvement of productivity,  energy 
conservation,  pollution control, product diversification,  skill upgradation, etc.   
  
3.4.3    Vendor Development Programmes (VDPs)  provide a common platform for the buying 
organisations to interact with  the existing / potential manufacturers  in the  small scale sector for 
establishing long-term business linkages.  They are becoming increasingly popular as the number of 
participants  (both buying organisations and  sellers) increasing and  so is the number of interaction as 
well as business linkages. 
  
3.4.4    The objective of  such programmes is to bring  a number of buying organisations, including 
Government Departments like Defence (Army,  Navy & Air Force),  Paramilitary organizations,  Public 
Sector Undertakings,  Private Sector Undertakings,  Star Export Houses  also in closer contact with 
small scale manufacturers.  
  
3.4.5    The VDPs also expose  the small  entrepreneurs to  alternative marketing channels,  thus  
imbibing  confidence in  them through a process of  change in their attitudes and  gearing them up to 
meet the requirements of such buyers who are currently  obtaining  their supplies from foreign sources. 
Every year,  on an average, 30 – 35 VDPs are being organised through the field  offices of  Small 
Industries Development Organisation (SIDO), i.e., the Small Industries Service Institutes  (SISIs).  The 
VDPs organised by SISIs have been  successful in providing  marketing assistance to small 
entrepreneurs to sell their products to large scale  organisations / PSUs / Defence Sector.   During 2005-
06,  38 VDPs have been  planned by  the SISIs,   out of which 11 VDPs will be organised  at the  
national level. 
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
 
 
3.4.6    The Committee is of the view that re-designing of the scheme of Technology Upgradation and 
Management Programme (UPTECH)    as Small Industry Cluster Development Programme (SICDP) 
would lead to holistic development of clusters in various states in general but the massive impetus must 
be given in those states where there is the absence of the large scale industrial units so that industrial 
development and exploration of new-avenues of employment-generation might be undertaken in these 
states  as well. The Committee would like to know the success  rate of SICDP in Bihar, Orissa, 
Jharkhand and Uttar Pradesh , which lay behind of other states. 
  
3.4.7    The Committee is pleased to know that under Vender Development Programme (UDPs), SISIs 
have been successful in providing marketing assistance to small entrepreneurs to sell their produce to 
large scale organization PSVs/Defence Sector. The Committee would like to know the total sale of 
various products in term of value and quantity  to large scale organisation PSUs/Defence Sector under 
(VDPs) during last two years and its projection for such sale in next three years along with the steps 
being undertaken/envisaged to be undertaken to promote sale under VDPs to Government Department 
like Defence (Army, Navy and Air Force) Paramilitary Organization Public  Sector undertaking and Star 
Exports Houses.  
  
Recommendation  
  
3.5       Broad based ownership of SSI enterprises 
  
Page 19 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

3.51     The Committee observes that majority of SSI units are primarily proprietary concerns. The 
required investment has been provided by the property owners themselves. Such type of ownership 
pattern suffers from severe limitations. The main limitation that such units face is in their access to 
institutional finance and development of the units is restricted by non-availability of finance at the time 
of need. In order to encourage broad basing of the ownership of SSI enterprises, provisional for some 
additional facilities for units going in for company formation could be considered. The SSI units going 
in for company formation should be provided some additional facilities like incentives to form 
cooperatives, concession to create infrastructure, increase in investment limit etc. 
(Para    1.6.8) 
Action Taken  
  
3.5.1    For smoother and enhanced  delivery of credit to this sector is concerned,  both the Reserve Bank 
of India and the Government have  recently come out with progressive credit  policies which aim at 
doubling the flow of credit to the small enterprises in the next five years.  Apart from the efforts to get 
the Small and Medium Enterprises Development Bill, 2005 passed, the Government has also been 
working on  including small enterprises within the ambit of a Limited Liability Partnership Act.  These 
enactments,  when passed,  will help more small enterprises to get organised as companies or limited 
liability partnerships and improve their capability to access institutional credit. 
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
                         
3.5.2    The Committee  strongly feels that the Government should expedite the incorporation of Small 
Scale Enterprises within the ambit of the Limited Liability Partnership (LLP) Act  so as to encourage 
SEs for company-formation through broad-basing of the ownership of SSI and impress upon the 
Ministry to liase with the concerned Ministry & Department. 
  
Recommendation  
  
3.6       Closer cooperation between large and small scale sector 
  
3.6.1    The Committee is of the view that a closer cooperation between large and small scale sector is 
highly desirable to foster the growth of small units as ancillary to large units.  Industries associations of 
both large or smaller units should play a vital role in creation of such tie-ups and the members of such 
association may set-up the sub-committees in collaboration with small industry. The Service Institutes 
should chalk out the  programme for encouraging ancillary relationship.  The smaller units must be 
given quality raw material by the larger units for converting the same into quality finished goods.  
(Para    1.6.9) 
Action Taken  
  
3.6.2    The SISIs located all across the country have set-up Sub Contract Exchanges  (SCXs) to 
disseminate information / data on small scale units and large scale organsations to potential buyers / 
seller.  Similar exchanges have also been set up by Institutes  and Associations / NGOs with  financial 
assistance from the Office of DC(SSI). These SCXs are playing an important role in encouraging 
ancillary  relationship.  In addition,  Directors of SISIs take up the issue of development of ancillaries at 
the meetings of   the Plant Level Committees where representatives of large and small scale industry 
Associations  exchange views. In some cases,  small scale units are provided with quality raw materials 
by large units for supplying quality finished goods. The National Small Industries Association has also 
been engaged in  supplying some important raw materials to small scale industries. 
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
 
 
Page 20 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

3.6.3    The Committee is of the view that encouragement to anciliarisation would not only open avenues 
for employment generation but would also foster integrated industrial development through giving 
impetus to SMEs. Therefore, it is required that Sub-Contact-Exchange as operated by SISI must play the 
pro-active role in dissemination of information with the purpose of promoting functional bonds between 
SEs and MEs. The Committee feels that the issue may be taken up on priority- basis in the meetings of 
Plant Level Committees by the  Directors of SISI. The Committee desires the progress at empirical level 
in the field on this count.  
Recommendation  
  
3.7       Closer cooperation between large and small scale sector 
  
3.7.1    The Committee is of the further view that  Small units performing ancillary role to large 
industrial units should be ensured prompt and effective payments by large units for supplies made by the 
SSI units as per purchase order and quality standard.  The Committee recommends that the Government 
should come out with Policy framework and sustainable guidelines  to encourage ancillary relationships 
and to safeguard the interests of the SMEs.  The Government should  set up the mechanisms for 
ensuring that capacities of SMEs as ancillaries are fully utilized while ensuring adherence to quality 
standards.   
(Para   1.6.10) 
Action Taken  
  
3.7.2    While the Government is conceptually in agreement with these views,  it believes that future 
relationship between large and small enterprises will increasingly depend  on their mutual self-interest,  
with the Government’s role being  facilitation  of their interface.  Many large scale producers such as 
those in the automotive and heavy engineering products have already established large ancillary 
networks,  thereby helping thousands of small enterprises to upgrade their technology and become 
competitive. 
  
3.7.3    Delayed payment continues to be a problem inspite  of the Interest on Delayed Payments Act,  
1993 being  in place.  As rest  of the SMED Bill,  the Government is making efforts to address the 
delayed payment issue and make stricter provisions to ensure quicker settlement of small enterprise 
dues. 
  
3.7.4    To ensure optimal utilisation of ancillary  units in the  SSI sector, the Office of DC(SSI) also 
conducts VDPs ( details provided in reply to para. 1.6.5. of the ATR) and has set up SCXs (details 
provided in reply to para. 1.6.9. of the ATR). 
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.7.5    The Committee desires that Government should continue to foster closer-co-operation between 
large and small- scale sector through the Sub-Contract Exchange (SCEs) and delineating the areas of 
mutual co-operation in the meeting of the Plant Level Committees.  
             
3.7.6    The Committee is of the considered view that the sooner  the Government  solves the problem of 
delayed payment, the better would be for the Small -Scale Industries as the phenomenon  of delayed 
payment has not only affected the balance-sheet of SEs but also arrested the rehabilitation of sick SSI 
units.  
Recommendation  
  
3.8       Optimum Capacity utilisation 
  
Page 21 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

3.8.1    The Committee has been given to understand that a large number of SSI units are not able to 
utilise their full capacity due to lack of finance and power shortage including high power rates, lack of 
demand, non-availability of raw materials, labour and marketing problems. Therefore, the Committee is 
of the view that availability of assured power supply at  reasonable rates, assisting the units in obtaining 
quality raw  materials, assisting them in publishing their products and advising them about new and 
emerging markets would promote and proliferate SMEs in India.(Para 1.6.11) 
Action Taken 
  
3.8.2    The issue of  ensuring power supply at reasonable rates, etc.,  comes  under the purview of State/ 
UT Governments. However, based on the representations received form Small Industries Associations & 
other stakeholders,  this matter is taken up  from time to time by the office of DC(SSI) at appropriate 
level with the  State Governments concerned from time to time. 
  
3.8.2    Credit and  raw material:  The Government has schemes in place for making both steel and coal 
available to small enterprises through the National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) and other 
Central and State Public Sector Undertakings. 
  
3.8.3    Under a number of schemes being implemented by the Office of DC(SSI) and NSIC,  marketing 
support is also being extended to the small emprises to help them enhance the sale of their products both 
in domestic and international markets. 
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
 
 
3.8.3    The Committee, while agreeing  with the argument advocated by the Ministry of Small Scale 
Industries that the issue of ensuring power supply at reasonable rates etc. comes under the purview of 
State/UT Governments, recommends that the Ministry of Small Scale Industries should act as 
facilitation by liaising with   the representation of the concerned State Governments/UT so that Small 
Scale Unit is not prevented from utilizing their full capacity due to power-shortage. The role of DC 
(SSI) is appreciated in this regard. However, the Committee feels that the Ministry of SSI, should also 
interact with the Ministry of Power to explore the possibility for framing special guidelines to state/UT 
Government for ensuring timely and adequate power supply at reasonable rate to SSI units.  
  
3.8.4    As regards the supply of steel as raw -material and Coal to be used as fuel, the Committee is of 
the considered view that the Ministry of SSI should continue to have an eye on the actual requirement of 
steel  and coal in term of quality and grade and  liaising in tandem with the  Ministry of Steel and the 
Ministry of Coal, the Ministry of SSI  strive its best to  ensure the timely and adequate  supply of Steel 
and Coal  at reasonable price to SSI units.  
             
3.8.5    Pertaining to the Marketing support to emerging SMEs, the Committee feels that DC (SSI) 
should guide NSIC to chalk out region-specific Action-Plan to boost the domestic and global exposure 
to the local products in each region. 
  
Recommendation  
  
3.9       Human resource development for SMEs 
  
3.9.1    The Committee observes that  there are absence of technical persons and trained workers in the 
SSI sector due to lack of institutional arrangement  for preparing trained manpower for the sector, 
therefore, the Committee recommends that vocational training institutes may be established in each 
district of the country to impart training and skill for the person engaged in the SMEs sector.  The 
Committee feels that there is urgent need for increasing capitalization of SSIs to enable them to procure 
Page 22 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

better technical equipment, training inputs, marketing management etc. in order to increase the 
efficiency of the units and their workers.  SSI units should be provided facilities for upgrading their 
technology and also skill of their workers which would result in increasing productivity.  (Para 1.6.12) 
Action Taken  
  
3.9.2   Establishment of Vocational Training Institute :- The field level offices of SIDO, i.e., Small 
Industries Service Institutes (SISIs)  conduct vocational training programmes at District and Taluka 
levels on various topics such as information  technology(IT),. fashion technology,  food & fruits 
processing, servicing of electrical and electronic appliances,  herbal cosmetics,  soaps and detergents,  
catering,  etc., to upgrade the skill of entrepreneurs. These programmes are  implemented in active 
collaboration with private training institutions associated with these activities.  Therefore, this Ministry 
is of the view  that instead of establishing new vocational training institutes,  the SISIs need to  be  
further strengthened  and re-orient themselves to provide such training in active cooperation with the 
private sector institutions. 
3.9.3 Management Development Programmes (MDPs) – Marketing Management & Entrepreneur 
Development Programmes (EDPs) :- MDPs are conducted by SISIs to improve the decision making 
capabilities resulting in higher productivity and profitability of existing entrepreneurs in respect of 
marketing management,  financial management,  material management, export and import management, 
etc. On an average,  5000 to 7000 entrepreneurs are provided training annually under this programme. 
The SISIs also conduct EDPs of 4-6 weeks  to  help potential entrepreneurs in taking up self 
employment and other economic generation activities  as their career.  On an average,  12,000 to 16,000 
entrepreneurs are trained every year under this programme. 
  
3.9.4    Skill Development Courses for  Workers in Small Scale            Industries :- These programmes 
are organised by the SISIs to uprgrade the skills of the work force already engaged in small scale 
industries through common facility workshop attached to them. The courses conducted are machine 
shop practices, heat treatment, lense grinding, carpentry,  electroplating,  leather & footwear, etc. Many 
innovative programmes are being organized by field institutions like training CNC machines, CAD,  
CAM, etc. On an average, 1000 to 1500  workers from small scale industries are trained every year. 
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
 
 
3.9.5    The Committee is abreast of the fact that Small Scale Industries Service Institutes (SISI) is 
playing the role of imparting training to the emerging SME entrepreneurs on various topics such as 
information Technology (IT); fashion Technology; food and fruits processing etc. The Committee, 
however, is of the view that SISI is not pro-active in discharging its intended role in every districts of 
the country.  Testimony to the fact is the data, as furnished by the Ministry of SSI itself that only 1000 to 
1530 workers from SSI are being trained annually under skill Development Courses; the figure is too 
meager, keeping in view the population of the country.  
  
3.9.6    The Committee is in agreement with the view that the SISIs need to be strengthened and re-
oriented to impart training to workers and Entrepreneur to all parts of the country, especially the rural 
areas. This is what the Committee wanted through the institutional management for preparing trained 
manpower for the SME Sector. SISIs needs to be pro-active across the country for imparting vocational 
training at district and Taluk-level, besides encouraging and facilitating the Management Developments 
Programmes (MDPs) and Entrepreneur Developments Programmes, especially in the  rural areas.   
 
 
Recommendation  
  
3.10     Sunrise Industries in the SMEs sector 
 
 
Page 23 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

3.10.1  The Committee is of the considered view that the Sunrise industries in the SMEs sector e.g. 
Information Technology(IT), Biotechnology(BT), Pharmaceuticals and Nano-technology along with IT 
enabled services have a strong component in-built. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of SSI 
should make Action Plan for promotion and proliferation SMEs in these Select Sector. 
(Para 1.6.17) 
Action Taken  
  
3.10.2  Steps taken to promote the sunrise industries are as under: 
  
The Small Industries Service Institutes (SISIs) are regularly conducting EDPs  on Information 
Technology (IT) and IT-enabled services. 
The SISIs are also preparing IT related project profiles / reports for SMEs and are providing IT related 
consultancy services to  them. 
The Electronic Service and Training Centre  (ESTC), Ramnagar,  an autonomous body under the SIDO, 
is regularly conducting specialised training programmes on IT and IT-related topics,  software 
development,  instrumentation, etc., for SMEs,  such as Computer aided PCB design and manufacturing; 
Industrial electronic instrumentation ; Computer hardware repair,  maintenance and networking ; 
Computer aided design & manufacturing; Micro-processor programme; Public limited companies (PLC) 
programming ; Supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) training. 
  
The Institute for Design of Electrical Measuring Instrument (IDEMI), Mumbai,  also an autonomous 
body under the SIDO,  is regularly conducting training programmes on computer hardware maintenance, 
IT and IT-related topics software development,  instrumentation, etc., for SMEs  such as Electronic 
automation ; Process instrumentation ; Micro- PLCs;  PLC & SCADA; Design of automated systems ; 
Advanced softwares like AutoCAD,  Pro-E, Solid Edge Computer aided design & manufacturing. 
3.10.3  Biotechnology is a new subject in the SSI sector  and  accordingly, a  Biotechnology Cell was 
created in the office of DC(SSI) in   
August  2002. The main aim of this Cell is to promote awareness among the SSI entrepreneurs of the  
benefits of biotechnology and to disseminate techno-economic information on various biotech products 
feasible in the  SSI sector. To further  strengthen our field offices in promotion of biotechnology in the 
SSI sector, a group of 23 officers from SISIs all over the country were trained   in July, 2004   by 
Biotech Consortium India Limited (BCIL) at Chennai.   During  2004-05,  15  one-day sensitisation 
programmes on biotechnoloy were  conducted by different SISIs including  Agra, Gorakhpur and 
Kolkata. During 2005-06 also, one-day sensitisation programmes on biotechnology are proposed to be 
held at Ranchi, Cuttack and eight other locations in the country.  In close coordination with BCIL and  
the Department of Biotechnology, Government  of India, efforts are being made to identify new biotech 
products commercially viable in the SSI sector and also   formulation of new policy initiatives.  For the 
guidance of the  prospective biotech  entrepreneurs, a few    project profiles  have been compiled and 
brought out. Biotechnology based units in the SSI sector have been set-up  in the fields of plant tissue 
culture,  bio-fertilizers,  bio-pesticides,  fresh water prawn culture / hatchery, vermi composting, 
medicinal plant extractions, etc. The proposed promotional package for SSI  also contains provision for 
the promotion of sunrise industries. 
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.10.4  The Committee would like to know the steps taken or being taken  by the  Government for 
encouraging Sunrise Industries in the SME Sector in economically backward states of the country, and 
the outcome thereof.  The Committee would also like to know what further can be done for the 
promotion of  Sunrise Industries in SMEs sector, e.g. Information Technology (IT).  
  
3.10.5  The Committee is pleased to know that effort are being taken by the Government of India (the 
Page 24 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

Department of Biotechnology and Biotech Consortium Indian Limited, BCIL) to identify new biotech 
product which may be  commercially viable in the SSI sector and also the  formulation of new Policy 
initiatives are on the card. The Committee hopes that the Govt. would act promptly in a scheduled time-
frame and would come out with the formulation of "New Policy Initiatives" to promote commercially 
viable bio-product  in the SSI Sector. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in 
this regard, therefore, the Ministry of SSI should furnish the details in the Action Taken Notes of the 
present report.  
Recommendation  
  
3.11     Strategic Management for Inter-sectoral Corporation 
  
3.11.1  The Committee is of the view that the Ministry  of SSI should take initiative for lodging inter- 
Sectoral co-operation of Select sectors of economy for promoting SMEs in Steel; garments, Electronics, 
Food products; leather products; chemical and Chemical products, Railways and Finance.  The status of 
these segments is enumerated as under:- 
  
Steel Sector: 
  
The Ministry of Steel should ensure adequate supply of iron and steel to the small enterprises through 
the State Small Industries Corporations (SSICs) and the National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC); 
The Ministry of Steel   should introduce a mechanism for keeping the prices stable so as to provide iron 
and steel to the small enterprises at reasonable prices; 
The meetings of the Coordination Committee should be held regularly to review             the availability 
and supply of iron and steel to the SSICs / NSIC and small enterprises. 
(Para 1.6.19) 
Action Taken  
 
 
3.11.2  Adequacy of Supply of Iron & Steel to SSI Units :- Adequate supply has been maintained to the 
Small Scale Units through the State level Small Scale Industries Corporations (SSICs)  and the National 
Small Industries Corporation (NSIC). The allocations for 2005-06 have been issued and are based on the 
actual lifting done by the corporations during 2004-05.  The corporations have been allotted 10% over 
and above the actual lifting done in the last year. 
  
3.11.3  The NSIC started the distribution of iron & steel to the SSI units for the first time  during  2004-
05.  NSIC was allocated about 4,27,799 MT of the material to be distributed to the SSI unit during the 
year.  However, the actual  operations took off only in September 2004.  In addition,  there was no 
demand for pig iron because  this material was available cheaper in the market.  As a result, NSIC 
distributed about 74000 MT of iron & steel to the SSI units during  2004-05. The Steel Authority of 
India Limited  (SAIL)  and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL),  by and large, able to meet the 
actual  demand placed for supply of material to the SSI units.  However,  in the absence of  godowns of 
SAIL / RINL in  Uttaranchal,  Megahalaya and Dadra & Nagar Heveli,  the supply of iron & steel to the 
SSI units in these areas was adversely  affected.  This matter was also discussed  in the Coordination 
Committee of the Ministry of Steel at its meeting held  on 20th January 2005 and it was decided that the 
producers  would take necessary steps in this regard.  However, according to  available information,  no 
godown facilities are yet available in these States.  
  
3.11.4  For 2005-06,   NSIC has been allocated 1,63,756 MT of the material to be distributed to the SSI 
units.  In addition, SAIL & RINL are also mandated to supply steel to SSI units through some State level 
Small Industries Corporations as well as directly to the SSI units with  requirements of more than 600 
MT during the year. It is felt that this mechanism will generally meet the requirement of the SSI units 
during the current financial year, except in the States of Uttaranchal,  Meghalaya and Dadra & Nagar 
Page 25 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

Haveli,  as mentioned above. 
  
3.11.5  Mechanism for Keeping Prices Stable :-In a de-regulated environment,  the Government does not 
intervene directly to influence prices.  Prices are determined by the interplay of market forces.  The 
Government has taken several measures  which inter alia include  reduction in customs duty on finished 
steel products as well as on raw materials required for steel making and removal of all barriers to import 
of steel.  The Government has also issued instructions to the public sector steel plants to effect exports 
only after meeting the domestic requirement.  These measures were aimed at increasing the domestic 
availability of steel,  thereby putting a downward pressure on steel prices.  Moreover,  for the benefit of 
small scale units,  the Government provides handling charges of about Rs. 500/- per tonne of steel which 
is distributed through SSICs/NSIC in order to ensure door step delivery of steel items at the premises of 
the SSI units. 
  
3.11.6  Meeting of the Coordination Committee :-The issues related to supply of steel to the small scale 
sector are being reviewed regularly in the quarterly meetings of the Co-ordination Committee consisting 
of the representatives of the Ministry of Steel,  Ministry of SSI,  Steel producers,  NSIC and  State level 
Small Industries Corporations. 
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.11.7  The Committee is of the considered view that the Ministry of SSI should continue to have an eye 
on the actual requirement of steel  in terms of quantity, quality and grade and  liaising in tandem with 
the  Ministry of Steel and also    ensure the timely and adequate  supply of Steel and Coal  at reasonable 
price to SSI units.  
  
3.11.8  The Committee feels that DC (SSI) should guide NSIC in this regard for timely and adequate 
lifting of iron and steel and employ rational principle of distribution of steel to SSI units keeping in view 
their actual requirement in terms of grade and quantity. 
  
3.11.9  The Committee feels that the Co-ordination Committee consisting of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Steel,  Ministry of SSI,  Steel producers,  NSIC and  State Level Small Industries 
Corporations should meet frequently to review the Adequate and timely   Supply of Iron & Steel to SSI 
Units. 
  
Recommendation  
  
3.12     Garment Industry 
  
3.12.1  The Committee is of the view that information technology is the backbone of apparel industry, 
therefore, the Committee desires that the information about latest trends and fashions should be 
collected central organizations  or other agency and pass  on expeditiously to the manufacturers . Since 
the Garment Sector exporting garments to U.S.A., Latin America and Europe is facing tough 
competition from China, Pakistan and Sri Lanka, therefore, it is desirable for the sector to keep on 
improving the quality of goods and innovate in new designs and products. Requisite competitive 
resilience should be injected in garment manufacturing units to enable them to face the challenges 
created by the WTO regime in transacting the global business. The Committee  further recommends that 
the  greater R&D support for the sector should be provided under the guidance of CSIR and SIDBI.
(Para  1.6.22) 
Action Taken  
  
3.12.2  The National Institute of Fashion Technolo
gy (NIFT)  is a premier institute of fashion business 
Page 26 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

education in India.  It is a college of Design,  Technology and Management.  It was established by the 
Ministry of Textiles as the apex body  of human resources development for the textile and garment and 
allied sectors in 1986 in Delhi.  With growing demand from industry across the country, NIFT 
established its six centers in the major garment centres of India viz. Kolkota, Chennai, Gandhinagar,  
Hyderabad and Mumbai in the year 1995 and in Bangalore in 1997. 
  
3.12.3  The NIFT offers various full time diplomas and part-time certificate programmes to develop 
professionals for Fashion Industry in India,  and  undertakes applied research studies and application 
thereof in relevant areas of the fashion industry,  particularly concerning the integration of locally 
produced materials,  the requirements of mass production,  improved product design and international 
marketing.  It also provides technical assistance to artisans,  craftsmen,  manufacturers,  designers and 
exporters of fashion products. 
             
3.12.4  The prime objective  of the NIFT is to assist the Fashion Industry in India in meeting the 
challenges of industrial competitiveness  on global plane. It also undertakes selected applied research 
studies and applications thereof in relevant areas of the fashion industry.  The NIFT has been conducting 
short-term programmes as part of “Continuing Education Programme (CEP).” In the year 2004-05,  
NIFT has conducted16 such programmes.   The  students  of the CEP are either working in the fashion 
industry  or have their own business. The Fashion Designers trained by NIFT have already made 
presence on the national and international forum by their creative  and innovative designs and by 
providing   fresh ideas to the fashion industry.   The Ministry of SSI will also explore the possibility 
with the CSIR and the SIDBI of providing  specific R & D support for the SSI sector engaged in the 
garment industry. 
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.12.5  The Committee appreciates the contribution of the National Institute of Fashion Technology 
(NIFT) in extending support to the apparel industry so far the design, technology and overall 
management" is concerned, however,  the Committee would like to know the outcome of efforts 
undertaken by the Ministry of SSI towards exploring the possibility with the CSIR and the SIDBI for 
providing specific R&D support to the SSI units engaged in the garment industry.  
  
Recommendation  
  
3.13     Processed foods 
  
3.13.1  Having observed the vast potential and prospects of Processed food in SSI sector, the Committee 
has made its detailed deliberation in a separate chapter in this report, however, the Committee wishes to 
pin-point that milk-related items, dried and frozen fruits and vegetable have a vast market but the 
common complaint is the inadequate infrastructure of transport, cold storage and marketing. The 
committee is of the view that these inadequacies have to be rectified and strict quality controls must be 
adhered to tap the vast potential of overseas markets. (Para 1.6.26) 
Action Taken  
  
3.13.2  The Ministry of Food Processing Industry (MoFPI) is the nodal Ministry  for the  development 
of food processing industry in the country.  This Ministry operates multiple schemes for the 
development of infrastructural facilities like transport,  cold storage,  establishment of food parks by 
PSUs and State Governments and marketing support including quality management system for food 
processing industries, viz. ISO 9000 /  Hazards Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP). A scheme for 
infrastructure development has been implemented  for providing assistance for establishment of food 
parks,  packaging centres,  modernisation of abattoir, cold storage, value added centres and irradiation 
Page 27 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

facilities.  Under the food park scheme,  financial assistance @ 25% for general areas and 33.33%  for 
difficult areas is provided  for specified infrastructure facilities, subject to a maximum of Rs. 4.00 crore.  
The idea behind  setting up of food parks  is that small and medium entrepreneurs find it difficult to 
invest in capital-intensive activities.  Therefore,  as a part of the strategy to develop food-processing 
infrastructure,  the Ministry has been pro actively pursuing the task of setting up of food parks in 
different parts of the country.  In the food parks, common facilities like cold storage, food testing and 
analysis laboratory, effluent treatment plant, common processing facilities,  packaging centre, power 
supply,  water supply,  seminar / conference / training facilities, etc.  are provided.  So far,  49 food 
parks have been approved under the scheme. Assistance is also being extended for establishment of  
facilities like cold storage,  packaging,  irradiation, etc.  Recently,  customs duty on freezer van has been 
reduced from 20% to 10% for increasing  the facility of air-conditioned transport of processed food.  
Assistance is also provided for organising  /  participating in fairs /  exhibitions meant for promotion of 
the marketing of processed food.  Financial assistance is  also provided by the MoFPI to enable FPI 
units to adopt ISO / HACCP standards / Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP). The Office DC(SSI) is 
also operating schemes for  quality control including establishment of quality management system like 
ISO 9000,  marketing development  assistance and technology upgradation scheme under Credit Linked 
Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS) for the growth and development of SSI sector,  including food 
processing industry, in the country. 
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.13.3  The Committee is of the view that the office DC (SSI) should chalk out Action Plan in 
collaboration with Ministry of Food Processing Industries to promote processed Food Industry in SME 
Sector based on the distribution of raw-material and in coordination with the concerned authority to 
provide adequate and timely capital and other basic infrastructure viz transport, cold storage and 
marketing 
  
3.13.4  The Committee is also of the view that all out efforts should be made to explore the potential of 
food  processing industry in SME sector in those  states where the Heavy industries could not have made 
inroads.  
  
Recommendation  
  
3.14     Leather Products 
  
3.14.1  The Committee is of the view that the Indian leather industry has not been able to make its 
presence felt in the international market mainly because of technological obsolescence and is losing to 
China in cost leadership. Major leather goods manufacturers are also shifting their production centres to 
south Asian countries posing stiff competition to Indian goods. Another problem for Indian 
manufacturers is that almost the entire range of machines for making quality leather goods are imported 
making them costly for small entrepreneurs. The availability of chemical inputs used in leather 
processing is also limited. Therefore, the Committee feels that leather sector should be made aware of 
new technologies and excise duty on chemical inputs used for leather processing units be reduced. The 
Committee is of the considered view  that the ancillary tie-ups of SSI units with large manufacturing 
houses in the leather sector should be encouraged.  
(Para 1.6.27) 
Action Taken  
  
3.14.2  For promotion of small enterprises engaged in the leather sector is concerned, the Ministry of 
SSI is taking following steps: 
  
Page 28 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

The Central Footwear Training Institutes (CFTIs) at Agra and Chennai are creating awareness of new 
technologies by conducting various long-term and short-term training programmes for footwear 
making.  Both  these Institutes are well equipped with latest machines for footwear manufacturing.  New 
technologies for footwear making are being incorporated in these Institutes on regular basis. The 
Ministry of SSI is providing financial assistance in the form grant in aid to these Institutes for 
procurement of latest machines.  Both the Institutes are  also providing consultancy and job work 
services to SSIs to enable  production of quality products.   
The Process cum Product Development Centre (PPDC), Meerut is providing services for sports goods 
industries. The Centre is working for the development of new technologies and improvement of 
existing  technologies in the sports goods industry.  It also imparts training for the craftsman and 
supervisors of the sports goods industry. The Centre is also helping in improving the quality of products 
by testing them in the laboratory of the Centre which is accredited  with NABL. 
The SISIs are  also providing training and  consultancy services and organising awareness workshops, 
seminars, etc;. for introduction of new technologies and improvement of quality products of small scale 
manufacturers. 
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.14.3  Despite the efforts undertaken by the Central Footwear Training Institutes (CFTIs) at Agra, the  
Process-cum-Product Development Centre (PPDC), Meerut, it is felt by the Committee that an  all- out 
efforts is required to make the Indian Leather Industry globally competitive. Lots of efforts are, 
however,  required to introduce and absorb the latest technology and reduce the cost of production, 
besides adopting the aggressive marketing strategy. 
  
3.14.4  The Committee observes that  that the Ministry of SSI has not furnished details   on the measure 
for encouraging the ancillary tie-ups of SSI units with large manufacturing houses in the leather sector.  
Therefore, the Committee desires that a detailed background note should be furnishing to the Committee 
apprising it the steps taken in this regard.  
  
Recommendation  
  
3.15     Electric Machinery and Apparatus  
  
3.15.1  The Committee is of the view that the Electronic industry is one of the most important segments 
of the small-scale industrial fraternity. Observing the potential of the sector, and associated demands of 
the products, this sector is required to get into mechanized and automated production with high quality 
testing instruments. The Committee is of the further view that the government should encourage the 
Electronic sector to develop sales and marketing strategies to dispose off the variety of goods produced 
by its manufacturing units.  The Committee is also of the view that the Electronic sector must develop 
ancillary relationships with the larger industries. Adequate assistance and guidelines must be extended 
the sector for encouraging the units to adopt organizational improvements such as total quality 
management system (ISO 9000) and ancillary tie-ups of SSI units with main manufacturers. (Para 1.6.28
Action Taken  
  
3.15.2  With a view to facilitating technology upgradation of electronics industry,  activities such as 
assembly / manufacture of electronic / microprocessor based automated assembly / production 
equipment,  jigs and fixtures have been included as approved technologies under   the Credit Linked 
Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS).  These equipment, while helping automate assembly / manufacture 
of electronic items, also ensure product quality,  improved productivity and minimisation of wastages. 
  
3.15.3  Further,  pro
ject profiles / reports, in the fields of electrical and electronic trade groups are being 
Page 29 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

prepared by the SISIs for the benefit of SMEs. The  SISIs also assist the sector in marketing and exports 
through participation of SSIs in national / international  exhibitions.  They provide need-based 
consultancy services in the areas of consumer electronics,  electrical appliances, etc.  Testing and 
calibration services are also provided to the SME sector, through Regional Testing Centres (RTCs). 
  
3.15.4  The ESTC, Ramnagar and  the IDEMI, Mumbai,   both autonomous bodies under SIDO, are 
regularly conducting specialised training programmes in the areas of electrical and electronic 
equipment / appliances.  Also, they provide testing and calibration services in electrical & electronic 
instrumentation. The Office of DC(SSI) is also operating a scheme under which assistance is provided to 
the SSI sector,  including the garment industry, for quality control  including establishment of Quality 
Management System like ISO 9000 certification.  
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.15.5  The Committee is pleased to note  that the Electronic Industry is being promoted under the 
Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS) as managed by the Ministry of SSI. The Committee 
appreciates the role of DC (SSI), Regional Training Centres (RTCs) and ESTC, Ramnagar and IDEMI, 
Mumbai under SIDO in this regard.  
             
3.15.6  However, the Committee would like to know the total volume and the  quantum of Electronic 
Industry falling under SME Sector along with the steps  taken to organise and regulate the Electronic 
Industry under SME Sector for rapid promotion and proliferation of this Sector. 
             
3.15.7  The Committee would also  like to be enlightened in regard to the  steps taken by the Ministry of 
SSI for ancillary and structuring of ancillary  tie-ups and relationship of SSI units with the  main 
manufactures. 
  
Recommendation  
  
3.16     Chemical and Chemical Products 
  
3.16.1  The Committee observes that pharmaceutical sector is now having serious problems due to 
obligations under the Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights  (TRIPS). The manufacturing processes 
of bulk drugs and drug intermediates are continuously changing with a view to reduce the cost of 
production and improve the quality of the product. The Committee therefore, recommends that the 
improved technology can be obtained through continued R&D efforts, technical collaborations and 
purchase of know-how.  The Committee understands that small scale units have little capacity for such 
efforts, therefore,  there is the need for the assistance of the Government and national and regional 
research institutions for providing viable technologies at reasonable cost and training their personnel. 
(Para 1.6.3) 
Action Taken  
  
            3.16.2  For the  promotion of technological and quality up gradation of bulk  drugs  and drug 
intermediate industry, following actions were taken: 
             
The inclusion of bulk drugs and intermediates among the approved technologies under the  Credit 
Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS) enables SSI units  to avail of capital subsidy for technology 
upgradation under the Scheme. 
For up gradation of technology in this sector,  the SSI investment limit in respect of 10 out of 16 
reserved bulk drugs and drug intermediates has been raised from Rs. 1  crore to Rs. 5 crore. 
A few dru
gs and drug intermediates are being extracted from medicinal plants.  For further promotion 
Page 30 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

and dissemination of information about these plants, five Cluster Development Centres have been 
established in the potential States. These clusters also have the common plant processing and testing 
equipment / instruments to facilitate the plant growers. 
The above mentioned Cluster Development Centres conducted 79 awareness /  motivation /  training 
programmes  at various places in the country and one national seminar on the issues related to aromatic 
and medicinal plants. To encourage R & D in the SSI sector, 15% weighted tax deduction is allowed 
subject to recognition of their R & D by the Ministry of Science & Technology.   The equipment / 
instruments relevant to R & D are allowed to be imported duty free.  Further, R & D work may be taken 
up through well-established CSIR Laboratories.  The National Research Development Corporation 
(NRDC) is providing technical know-how at reasonable cost and also training of industry personnel. 
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.16.3  The Committee observes that the Drugs  and Drug Intermediate Industry is on the up-swinging 
mode, therefore, little assistance on the part of the Government would boost the industry to the 
considerable extent. The inclusion of bulk drugs and intermediates among the approved technologies 
under the  Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS) is a welcome step, which would enables SSI 
units  to avail of capital subsidy for technology upgradation under the Scheme, however, the committee 
is of the view that the National Research Development Corporation (NRDC) need to popularize its 
activities for the proliferation of the benefits of  R  & D  activities and the  technical know-how at 
reasonable cost. 
Recommendation  
  
3.17     National Textile Policy 
  
3.17.1  The Committee observes that the National Textile Policy aiming at  specific initiatives 
promoting  Small Scale and Agro- Rural units in the field of organized Industry e.g. Power looms, 
Handlooms, Hand-Knotted Carpets, Silk and Handicrafts.  What is required  here is that the concept of 
SEs  has to be re-oriented into a broad -based notion , the first and the foremost  step in this regard is to 
liberate SEs from conventional  definition of SSIs. There is  no need for SSI unit to remain confined to 
SSI units just to avail exemption/concession. An awareness programme is to be launched to educate the 
existing and first generation entrepreneur.   
(Para    2.1.5) 
Action Taken  
  
3.17.2  In order to boost the textiles sector,  the Government had earlier de-reserved the ready made 
garment industry.  Further, in 2005-06,  36  textiles products / items relating to knitting and knitwear,  
including hosiery,  were de-reserved from the ambit of SSIs.  The powerlooms,  handlooms,  hand-
knotted carpets,  silk,  and handicrafts segments of  the textiles industry fall mainly in decentralised and 
unorganised sector.  It is believed that de-reservation will help  in upgradation of technology  and 
enhancing competitiveness in the textiles sector. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.17.3  The Committee appreciates the intention of the Government for up- gradation of technology and 
enhance competitiveness in the Textile sector as underlined in the National Textile Policy, however,  the 
Committee desires that the Government should take steps for organising the Garment Industry in such  a 
manner as to  encourage its  units to adopt Modern Management Principle and the corporate character. 
Recommendations  
  
3.17.4  Modernisation Schemes for SSI in Textile Sector 
  
Page 31 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

3.17.5  The Committee feels that measures required to be taken for improving  the woolen industry are 
Promotion of private sector linkages for marketing of wool;  establishing pre-loom processing facilities;  
Taking up an integrated development programmes for angora wool; working on design and process 
development in a mission mode;  systematization of grading  and marketing of wool;  Increasing the 
production of speciality woo, viz. Pashmina goat, Angora rabbit etc. and increasing the quality and 
productivity of wool in the country. 
(Para 2.3.3) 
Action Taken  
  
3.17.6  The Ministry of Textiles has launched an Integrated Wool Improvement Programme (IWIP) in 
July, 2003 to be implemented in the 10th Five Year Plan period with a budget of Rs. 35 crore.  The 
IWIP,  inter alia,   made  provisions for creating  synergy amongst various agencies involved in different 
activities relating to woolen industry such as marketing of raw wool,  pre-loom and post-loom 
processing facilities,  training and design development, dissemination of information, etc. 
  
3.17.7  The IWIP has ingredients  which cover the recommendations of the Committee.  Some of the 
salient features of IWIP,  which translate these recommendations into action,  are as follows: 
  
(i)         It envisages a financial assistance of Rs. 7 lakh for setting up of each Marketing Yard 
Development and Quality Testing Centre consisting of construction of godowns, quality testing 
facilities,    equipment and machineries. 
  
(ii)        Financial assistance for setting up Common Facility Centres to provide both pre-loom and post-
loom processing facility,  such as, scouring /        drying / carding and product development,  design 
development &         product diversification. 
  
(iii)       Development of speciality fibre such as Pashmina and Angora has also   been made an integral 
part of the IWIP consisting of essential    components, viz., availability of quality germplasm;  proper 
health care   facilities and nutritional supplementation of Pashmina goat and Angora rabbit stock;  
making provision for Common Facility Centres for early   stage processing for value addition;  and  
evolving a marketing strategy for the produce. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
 
 
3.17.8  The Committee is pleased to know that Integrated Wool Improvement Programme (IWIP), being 
implemented during the 10th five Years Plan contains the provision for creating Synergy amongst 
various agencies, involved in different activities relating to woolen industry such as marketing of raw 
wool,  pre-loom and post-loom processing facilities,  training and design development, dissemination of 
information, etc, however,  the Committee would like to know as to what actual action /steps have been 
taken during the elapsed period of the 10th Five Years Plan and what has been the impact thereof on the 
Woolen Industry.  
  
Recommendation  
  
3.18     Powerloom Sector 
  
3.18.1  he Committee feels that Government needs to give impetus to harmonious development of all the 
segments of the fabric-manufacturing sector.  The balanced growth of these  sectors should be achieved 
basing on their intrinsic strength and capacity to meet the demands and requirements of the domestic as 
well as international markets. 
(Para 2.5.5) 
Page 32 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

Action Taken  
3.18.2  For giving impetus to harmonious development and also balanced growth of the powerloom 
sector,  the Government is encouraging establishment of Hi-Tech Weaving Parks involving modernised 
powerlooms through assistance under the schemes like (i) the Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme 
(TUFS) providing an additional option of credit linked 20% capital subsidy for powerlooms and 
weaving preparatory machinery;  (ii) the Group Workshed Scheme (GWS) providing subsidy for 
construction of modern powerloom worksheds, and  (iii)  the Textile Centre Infrastructure Development 
Scheme (TCIDS)  providing assistance for improving critical infrastructure in existing or emerging 
textile centers.  To facilitate  creation of new designs and  improving the  existing designs and 
production in  tandem with the fast changing global trends  in fashion,  Computer Aided Design (CAD) 
Centres have been set up in 17 major powerloom clusters.  
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
 
 
3.18.3  The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Government in regard to the harmonious 
development of all the segments of the fabric-manufacturing sector, however the Committee would like 
to know the outcome thereof in terms of facts and figures product and state-wise along with India's    
market-share in the global-market.  
  
Recommendations  
  
3.19     Carpets 
  
3.19.1  The Committee recommends that Government should undertake measures for technology 
upgradation including indigenisation of machines,  development of testing,  facilities, and use of natural 
dyes.  Adaptation of traditional motifs and promotion of brand image would constitute thrust areas. 
(
Para  2.5.12) 
Action Taken  
  
3.19.2  The office of Development Commissioner (Handicrafts), through the Indian Institute  of Carpet 
Technology (IICT),  Bhadohi has taken up the following steps for the development of carpets sector in 
India: 
  
Technology upgradation including indigenisation of machines. 
Development of testing facilities. 
Use of natural dyes. 
Adoption of traditional motifs. 
Promotion of brand image. 
  
3.19.3  In addition,  satellite centres of IICT have been set-up at Jaipur and Srinagar for providing 
similar services to the local carpet industry under technical supervision & guidance of IICT, Bhadohi.  
Further,  under UNDP Carpet Sub-programme, IIT, Delhi has developed improved looms, tools & post 
processing equipment,  which are user friendly.  The technology is under dissemination to enhance 
productivity and quality of carpets. 
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.19.4  The Committee observes that the Action Taken Note does not provide the  details of  outcome 
of  steps taken  by Ministry of Textiles  Development Commissioner (Handicrafts) and IICT.  In the 
absence of these details, the Committee is unable to  assess the progress.  
  
Page 33 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

Recommendation  
  
3.20     SWOT –analysis of Jute Industry  
  
3.201   The Committee is of the view that  conscious efforts may be made for assessing the SWOT 
analysis of Jute Industry in India and harvesting,  marketing and diversification of Jute and Jute products 
should be carried out with the mission as per details given below: 
  
Creation of strong marketing network for better market linkage of raw jute; 
Providing market information to jute growers in order to enable them to take a decision regarding sale o
f 
their produce at market driven price; 
Implementation of Technology Transfer programmes for better and quicker retting of raw jute for 
ensuring improvement in fibre quality; 
Development of cost effective community retting facilities; 
Transfer of Technology as discovered after R & D efforts by IJIRA to jute industry and growers. 
  
(Para   3.2.1) 
Action Taken  
  
3.20.2  A synoptic  SWOT analysis of Jute Industry in India is as follows: 
  
Strength:           Jute as a natural fibre has some inherent advantages like silky luster, high tensile 
strength,  considerable heat resistance and long staple length ,  qualities that cannot be matched by 
synthetic fibres.  Jute is easily available in abundant quantity at a comparatively reasonable price.  
Moreover, jute can easily be blended with other natural and man made fibres.  Being a natural renewable 
source, it helps in the maintenance of the environment and ecological  balance.  It is a natural and 
annually renewable fibre,  is bio-degradable,  non-toxic and environment friendly and offers excellent 
scope as a raw material for different textile and other diversified products. 
  
Weakness:  There is widespread sickness  in the jute industry.  Out of 78 jute mills,  38 are sick and 
most of them have been referred to the BIFR.  19 jute mills have been lying close for varied periods. A 
combination of factors such as instability in supply of quality raw jute of uniform specifications,  high 
labour cost, demand erosion due to competition from .synthetics,  obsolescence of machinery,  
uneconomical management practices, etc.  has resulted in the widespread sickness. 
             
Opportunity:  The jute sector has lot of potential for creation of employment opportunities in the 
agricultural,  organised & decentralised industrial sectors and rural & urban areas,  particularly for 
women and the disadvantaged.  There is also tremendous potential for increasing export earnings of the 
country   thus  contributing to the overall  economic growth of the  country and preparing it  to compete 
with confidence for an increasing  share of the global market in geotextiles,  composites and jute 
diversified products (JDPs). 
  
Threats:   The perceived threat to the jute industry is primarily from alternative packaging material like 
plastics, card board, etc., and from synthetic fibres.  Technological obsolescence and high labour cost 
are also some of the inhibiting factors affecting the health of the jute industry. 
  
3.20.3  On the basis of the deliberations held and the recommendations arrived at the two-day National 
Conference held in November 2004 at Kolkata, the National Jute  Policy  2005 was framed.  The 
recommendations of the Committee as mentioned above find a mention in the Policy document. 
  
3.20.4  Government also intends to launch the Jute Technology Mission (JTM) shortly which comprises  
Page 34 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

Mini Missions I, II, III and IV with specific  goals. Of these,  Mini Mission  III aims at increasing 
coverage of jute growers under modern marketing infrastructure from existing 12 per cent to 20 per cent 
by the end of Mission period through upgradation of existing marketing  facilities and creating new ones 
in the Jute Corporation  of India under the Agricultural Produce Marketing Committee (APMC) and 
establishment of viable demonstration retting tanks.  Under Mini Mission IV,  it is proposed to 
strengthen the R & D structure in the jute sector for   transferring technology already proven by 
Institutions like  IJIRA.   
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.20.5The Committee,  while take note  of the SWOT-analysis of the  Jute Industry, expresses its 
pleasure that recommendations of the Committee find a place in the National Jute Policy. However, the 
Committee desires that keeping in account the SWOT - analysis of Jute-Industry the Government should 
chalk out development strategy by overcoming the weakness and treats to Jute Industry and taking 
advantages of its strength and opportunities ahead. The wide spread  sickness in June-Industry (as out of 
78 June mill, 38 are sick and most of them have been referred to BIFR  is matter of concern for the 
Committee.   
Recommendation  
  
3.21     Rehabilitation of Sick Jute Mills in India 
  
3.21.1  The Committee is of the view that for  increasing production of value added JDP’s extension of 
Jute Service Centre and Raw Material Schemes to more areas, development of Standards of quality for 
JDPs and certification of quality jute products to facilitate the growth of the market for jute diversified 
products ;strengthen the design and Development Cell of NCJD; Extension of incentives to the 
manufacturer on   production of value added jute products; implementation of a scheme providing 
higher rate of incentives on export of value added jute diversified products without any ceiling; 
Government is considering proposal to increase the number of Jute Service Centers and Jute Raw 
Material Banks operating under NCJD.  
  
(Para   3.4.7) 
Action Taken  
  
3.21.2  In order to propagate the  diversified jute products in the country, the National Centre for Jute 
Diversification (NCJD)  implements the following schemes: 
  
Jute Service Centre (JSC) Scheme. 
Jute Raw Material Bank (JRMB) Scheme 
Market Support Scheme  
Design Development Scheme, 
Jute Entrepreneuers (Capital Subsidy) Assistance Scheme (JEAS) 
Micro Finance / NGO Assistance Scheme. 
  
3.21.4  In order to give  thrust to the jute diversification programme,  the  Government has sanctioned 
two additional JSCs and JRMBs each.  Under the  Design / Product Development Scheme,  beneficiaries 
are kept abreast of the time and trends,  with the involvement of specialised institutions and expert 
individuals.  Design and product development support is extended through Design Workshops and 
Training. The recently announced National Jute Policy 2005 envisages the establishment of full-fledged 
Design and Development Centre. 
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
Page 35 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

3.21.4  The Committee, while expressing its deep concern over the widespread sickness in the jute 
industry desires that the Government should guide the existing institutions intended to support the 
promote jute mills and implement the various scheme in letter and spirit as chalked out by the 
Government for promotion  and proliferation of the Jute Industry under the overall working of the 
National Jute Policy.  
  
Recommendation  
  
3.22     Rehabilitation of Sick Jute Mills in India 
  
3.22.1  The Committee is of the view that the Government should come out with formulation of separate 
“Jute Policy” on the line of Textiles Policy for  giving impetus to Jute Industry in India and giving due 
consideration to the emerging market - scenario and SMEs . The Jute Policy may incorporate the 
detailed provisions on the  introduction of modern technology machines for higher productivity and 
quality improvement, implementation of productivity linked wages; removal of Tariff and non Tariff 
barriers; development of modern technology machines;  encourage R&D Institutions in developing 
value added Jute/jute blended diversified products and machinery required thereof. 
                                           (Para   3.4.8)                      
Action Taken  
  
3.22.2  The Government has announced the National Jute Policy 2005 on 15th April 2005 in order to 
give the required impetus to the jute industry.  The objectives of the policy are to increase the quantity of
export  of jute and jute products by achieving  a Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of 15% per 
annum,  produce good quality jute fibre and value added diversified  jute products,  ensure remunerative 
prices to the jute farmers and enhance per hectare yield. 
  
3.22.3  The National Jute  Policy is also aimed at enabling millions of jute farmers to produce better 
quality jute fibre and ensuring remunerative prices. The specific sectoral thrusts to achieve the aforesaid 
objectives are: 
  
Enhance R & D efforts to improve yield and quality of jute fibre alongwith  emphasis on technology 
transfer and better agronomic practices.  
Accelerated modernisation of the jute industry. 
Restructuring and revitalising  existing public sector undertakings. 
Revamping the market support scheme to enhance the share of exports in total production of jute goods 
from existing 18% to 35% in the next 10 years. 
Enhanced efforts in R & D to achieve higher degree of jute diversification to restructure  and revamp  
the existing public  
institutions and establishing new ones to give fresh impetus to the jute sector.    
To expedite the process for  operationalising  of the  Jute Technology Mission. 
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.22.4  The Committee welcomes the formation of National Jute Policy, 2005 which is in line with the 
recommendation of the Committee. However, the Committee hopes that the Government would leave no 
stone unturned to implement the schemes and programme as enshrined in the Jute Policy in order to 
action the objectives  of Compound  Annual  Growth rate (CAGR) of 15% per annum as set in the 
Policy.  
  
Recommendation  
  
Page 36 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

3.23     Adequate and timely supply of coal to Small Scale Industries
3.23.1  In the process of examination, the Committee   interacted   with the representative of SSI 
Associations/ Entrepreneurs and Coal India Limited and the  Department of Coal  during the its study 
visit to Ranchi,  on the issue of adequate and timely supply of coal to SSI. Thereafter, the Committee 
heard the Secretary, Department of Coal and Chairman, Coal India Limited in the matter.  Having taken 
into consideration the mater placed before the Committee and the evidence tendered by the witnesses, 
the Committee feels that following strategic steps may be as under: 
  
SE sector should be brought at par with the 'core sector' consumers; 
The Coal Companies should establish Depots in each district/State for distribution/marketing of Coal, 
either by themselves or through outsourcing with adequate accountability on the outsourced entities. 
Direct linkages should be given to the SSI units in all such districts which produce Coal. 
Ministry of Coal may constitute a Standing Advisory Committee and the representative of SSI 
Associations should also be the member of the Standing Advisory Committee.   
To the extent possible, all the coal consuming SSI should be given coal mines for direct mining in 
private sector as a matter of reserved mines for SSI sector and it should be made mandatory to any big 
private mine owner whoever gets coal mine from Government of India to ensure that priority must  be 
fixed for SSI units. 
Government should consolidate the Small Scale Industries in the country by       implementing    the 
Action Plan to enable the sector to provide employment   generation opportunities to millions of youths 
in the urban as well as rural            areas. It is hoped that the suggested  solutions would bring some 
relief to    the SSI entrepreneurs in procuring coal.     
(Para   5.7.3) 
Action Taken  
3.23.2  As regards allocation of captive mining block to SSI units is concerned,  as per the existing legal 
framework governing coal mining, companies in the private sector engaged in iron and steel production,  
power generation and cement production can do mining of coal for captive use in their respective end-
use projects. The SSI units engaged in any of the aforesaid approved end-uses can apply for any of the 
unallocated coal blocks identified for captive mining.  If the requirement of SSI units is small in 
quantity,  a number of SSI units could form consortium and apply for coal blocks for joint operation and 
captive mining  of coal for their SSI units in the area of approved end-users.  However, under the new 
policy being considered,  all fresh applications received for allocation of captive blocks would be given 
through  a competitive bidding process of selection,  as and when the policy is finalised by the 
Government.  Further, SSI units with small requirements could apply for small and isolated reserves,  
either on a sub-lease basis (if already under lease of Coal Indian Limited / Subsidiary) for use of the 
coal  mined  from such reserve in their plants and in the local areas.  This is as per provisions of section 
3(3) of the Coal  Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973.  A policy for selection of applicants for small and 
isolated reserves is under consideration of the Ministry of Coal. 
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.23.3  The Committee, while taking note of the procedure and facilities being extended to SME in 
regard to the adequate and timely supply of coal to SSI units, recommends that the Ministry of SSI 
should assess the same in tandem with SSI associations and enterprises to get assured that no problem 
exist an account of  requirement and supply of Coal to SMEs. 
Recommendation  
  
3.24     Railway as preferred Mode of Transport 
  
3.24.1  The Committee is  however, constrained to observe  that  the Railways have done very little to 
encoura
ge the SSIs to choose railways as their preferred mode of transport.  As the rake load (2200-2300 
Page 37 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

tonnes) is the basic transport unit of the Railways, the SSI units are not able to utilize the Railways for 
transportation of either the raw material or the finished products due to smaller quantum. The 
introduction of movement of goods in rake- load/train-load and running of point-to-point trains since 
1982 created problems in transportation of raw material/finished product of Small Scale units.  
Moreover,  the closure of 79 marshalling yards between 1985 and 2000 due to rake-load/train-load 
movement restricted the collection/delivery of smaller loads originating from adjoining sections.  
Besides bulk volume of delivery are not accommodated at rural stations.  The container services of the 
Railways, which can carry up to 24 tonnes, has also not served the cause of SSI sector due to limited 
terminals in the country (52 locations throughout the country).  Due to these constraints, most of the SSI 
units have to depend on roads for transporting raw material and finished products.   
  
(Para 6.1.11) 
Action Taken  
  
3.24.2  The following schemes have been developed in which Small Scale Industries (SSIs) can organise 
their movement through Indian Railways: 
  
Provision of multi-party system of booking of rakes. 
The concept of the  Land Development Authority is also being thought of. In this concept,  private 
participation  for development of warehouses in different areas for promoting the Freight Forwarder 
Scheme will be considered. 
Freight Forwarder Scheme in which demand of piecemeal wagons can be clubbed into full loads, is in 
force.  An MOU has been signed with Central Warehousing  Corporation (CWC) for opening 22 
warehousing centres all over the country after the success of its warehouse at Whitefiled,  Bangalore. 
Loading  parcels in the brake vans of passenger carrying and mail / express trains. 
Leasing  second class luggage cum brake van. 
Loading  full parcel van to be attached by passenger carrying trains. 
Utilising space of the Millennium Express trains ( a kind of parcel train) running on selected routes. 
Loading of containers from the doorstep  and moving by road to nearest Inland Container depot for 
movement by train after formation of rake. 
Piecemeal indenting by all SSIs is totally free.  Whenever,  the demand of piecemeal indents is adequate 
to carry a rake for  a single or two point permissible destination, the same is loaded and cleared by the 
Railways. 
The Indian Railways will continue to look after the needs of Small Scale Industries.  
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.24.3The Committee takes note of the Scheme that facilitates the transportation of raw-material and 
finished products of SSIs. The Committee is pleased to receives the assurance given by the Railways 
that Indian Railways would continue to look after the needs of Small Scale Industries, therefore, the 
Ministry of SSI should keep an interacting with SSI association and Enterprises to find out whether any 
problems exists in transportation of raw-material and finished products by the SME.  
  
Recommendation  
  
3.25     Railways as preferred mode of Transport 
  
3.25.1  The Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Railways should take immediate 
measures for providing the needed facilities to the SSI sector for transportation of raw material and 
finished products throughout the country: 
  
Page 38 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

Railways should restore the facility of booking quantities (wagon loads) to help the transportation of SE 
raw materials and products. 
Booking at smaller stations should be accepted. 
Adoption of cluster-based approach for better collection and delivery of raw material / finished goods of 
SEs. 
Railway Board to constitute a Standing Advisory  Committee under the Chairmanship of Member 
(Traffic) with representation from Ministry of SSI  and Ministry of ARI and selected Associations of 
SEs to devise new schemes for addressing all concerns of SEs. 
(Para   6.1.13) 
Action Taken  
  
3.25.2  Already  there is a provision of piecemeal indenting.  Whenever, the demand of piecemeal 
indents is adequate to carry a rake for single or two-point permissible destination,  the same is loaded 
and cleared by the Railways.  At smaller stations, booking of parcels is accepted.  Where clusters exist,  
the Container Corporation of India Limited (CONCOR) is setting up  Inland Container Depots (ICDs).  
Not only at headquarter’s level, but  also at Divisional level, officers are nominated whom the 
representatives of SSIs can meet and get their problems solved. 
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.25.3  The Committee would like to know the Comments of the Railways in regard  to the Committee's 
recommendation to constitute a Standing Advisory Committee under the Chairmanship of Member 
(Traffic) with representation from Ministry of SSI and  ARI selected association of SMEs. Now the onus 
lies on the Ministry of SSI to find out the problems being faced by SMEs, if any in transportation of 
raw-martial and  products and taking up the same  with  Railway.  
Recommendation  
  
3.26     Transportation of SE raw materials and products 
  
3.26.1  The committee further recommends that the Ministry of Railways should enable the SSI sector 
by providing all possible assistance for the transportation of SE raw materials and products to strengthen 
and facilitate to remain  competitive in the market-led  global economy.  Keeping in view the potential 
of Small Scale Industries in India,  the Railway Board must reconsider the case of Small Scale Industries 
and provide infrastructure in the major industrial clusters for transportation of raw material and finished 
SSI products.  The Committee desires that Railways should play a pro-active role and reach out to the 
major industrial clusters for providing transportation services to its customers. 
(Para  6.1.14) 
  
Action Taken 
  
3.26.1  The Ministry of Railway is always ready to help and give all possible assistance for transporting  
of small enterprises’ raw materials and products.  For SSI,  provisions already exist in all major stations 
for transportation  of raw material and finished products as parcel. 
  
Further Recommendation 
  
3.26.2  The Committee is pleased to find that Railways are doing well recently for transportation of raw-
material and finished product as parcel as  the provision has also been made in Rail Budget (2006-07), 
however, the Committee desires that Railway should provide infrastructure in the major industrial 
clusters for transpirations of raw-materials and finished SSI and ARI  products of Small quantity at 
sustainable fri
ght charge.  
Page 39 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

  
Recommendation  
  
3.27     Credit flow  to SSI sector   
  
3.27.1  The Committee expresses its deep concern that credit rate to Small Scale sector as percentage of 
net bank credit from Public Sector Banks has declined from 17.5% (March, 1998) to 14.2% (March, 
2001) and further to 10.4% (March, 2004).  Not only this, number of SSI accounts has also declined 
from 29.64 lakh in 1998 to 16.33 lakh in 2004 i.e. by about 50%.  
  
(Para  7.1.4) 
Action Taken 
  
3.27.2  The Government has recently announced a  ‘Policy Package for Stepping up Credit to Small and 
Medium Enterprises (SMEs)’.  The measures in the Policy Package to increase the quantum of credit to 
SMEs (including small scale industries – SSIs) include:  
Public sector banks to fix their own targets for funding SMEs in order to achieve a minimum 20 per cent 
year-on-year growth in credit to the SME sector.  
Public sector banks to follow a transparent rating system with cost of credit linked to the credit rating of 
the enterprise.  
Commercial banks to make concerted efforts to provide credit cover on an average to at least 5 new tiny, 
small and medium enterprises at each of their semi-urban / urban branches per year. 
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) to issue detailed guidelines relating to debt restructuring mechanism 
so as to ensure restructuring of all eligible small and medium enterprises. 
Introduction of a one-time settlement scheme to apply to small scale Non-Performing Asset (NPA) 
accounts in the books of the banks as on March 31, 2004. 
Taking the existing RBI guidelines as indicative minimum, banks to formulate a comprehensive and 
more liberal policy relating to advances to the SME sector.  
Special dispensation under the Credit Guarantee Scheme for all (a) loans upto Rs.2 lakh, (b) eligible 
women entrepreneurs and (c) eligible borrowers located in the North Eastern region (including Sikkim) 
and Jammu and Kashmir.  
Banks to adopt cluster based approach for SME financing.  
The RBI to constitute empowered committees with the Regional Director of RBI as the Chairman to 
review the progress in SME financing and rehabilitation of sick small and medium enterprises. 
Boards of banks to review the progress in achieving the self-set targets as also rehabilitation and 
restructuring of SME accounts on a quarterly basis.  
             
3.27.3  The RBI has issued circulars dated 19.08.2005 and 25.08.2005 to banks advising them to 
implement the measures announced in the policy package. In line with the policy package for stepping 
up credit to small and medium enterprises (SMEs),  recently announced by the Government, the RBI has 
circulated on 3.09.2005 the guidelines on one-time settlement (OTS) scheme for SME accounts for the 
all the public sector banks.  Further, the RBI has issued the guidelines on debt restructuring mechanism 
for SMEs on 8.9.2005 to all the commercial banks.  
  
3.27.4  Further, as per the announcement made by the Governor, RBI in the Annual Policy Statement for 
2005-06, the RBI has formulated a scheme for strategic alliance between branches of banks and SIDBI 
located in the clusters, viz., Scheme for Small Enterprises Financial Centres (SEFCs). This scheme is 
important in the context of expanding the outreach of banks and improving credit flow to the Small 
Scale Industries (SSI) sector.  
  
 3.27.5 In order to improve the flow of credit to  the  SSI, SIDBI is enhancin
g the scale of operations 
Page 40 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

under direct finance schemes and directly reach out to its SSI clients. For this purpose, major steps taken 
by SIDBI include simplification of the schemes of assistance, simplification of the delegation of powers 
and increase in the retail business by opening of new branches at different centres and reducing the 
minimum loan limit for direct assistance to Rs. 10 lakh.  The SIDBI has also entered into MoU with 
Canara Bank, Punjab National Bank, Indian Bank, Bank of India, Bank of Baroda, Oriental Bank of 
Commerce and UCO Bank for the purposes of joint financing /co-financing of projects to augment the 
flow of credit to the sector and make use of the wide network of the banks. Setting up of SEFCs by 
SIDBI as per recent policy announcement by RBI would also provide impetus to credit flow to the 
sector.  
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.27.6  The Committee is pleased to find that the Government has recently announced the Policy 
package for stepping up the credit to Small and Medium Enterprises and the Committee takes note of 
the  provisions therein which are  in Committee's viewpoint contains the potential for enhancing credit 
to SMEs provided the intended actionS therein are implemented in letter and spirit  by all those 
concerned.  
  
Recommendation  
  
3.28     Credit Flow to Medium Enterprises 
 
3.28.1  The Committee hopes that the Annual Monetary & Credit Policy 2005-06 would go a long way 
in providing credit to Indian SMEs as per the requirement of SEs and MEs sectors and RBI’s this year’s 
announcement for credit policy would not prove mere annual rituals.  The Committee firmly believes 
that RBI would issue suitable guidelines and adopt and adhere resilient monitoring – mechanism for 
implementation of stated objectives in the credit policy 2005-06, otherwise, policy would remain mere 
window-dressing or arm-chair-intellectual exercise.  The Committee recommends that the policy must 
go beyond the formulation stage so that it may be implemented in practice. (Para   7.3.2) 
Action Taken 
  
3.28.2  With a view to further smoothening the flow of credit, as part of the Annual Policy Statement for 
2005-06, the RBI announced the formulation of a scheme of strategic alliance between branches of 
banks and SIDBI located in the clusters. As mentioned  in  para. 7.1.4, the RBI has since formulated a 
scheme for Small Enterprises Financial Centres (SEFCs), which is important in the context of expanding 
outreach of banks and improving credit flow to the SSI sector.  The RBI has circulated the details of the 
scheme to the banks for initiating  early action in this regard.  
  
Further Recommendation 
  
3.28.3  The Committee understands that the Government comes out with Annual Monetary & Credit 
Policy each year and accordingly RBI issues guidelines to banks & implement the stated objective in the 
policy, however the Committee desires that the financial institution must go beyond the formation of 
Policy and issuance of guidelines and circulars.  Banks should ensure that their policy & guidelines are 
implemented in letter and spirit. 
  
Recommendation  
  
3.29     The Committee is of the view that RBI should examine the recommendations contained in the 
Ganguly Committee Report and issue guidelines to all banks for immediate implementation and thus 
enhancing the credit to SMEs on reasonable rate of interest so that Indian Small Enterprises may grow 
Page 41 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

and thrive into Medium Enterprises.  
(Para   7.13.6) 
Action Taken  
  
3.29.1  The details of the recommendations of the Working Group on Flow of Credit to SSI Sector under 
the chairmanship of Dr. A.S. Ganguly,  accepted by the RBI and commended to the banks for 
implementation,  are as under: 
Lending to SMEs in clusters and measures to promote corporate- linked SME cluster models.   
Sponsoring specific projects as well as widely publicising successful working models of NGOs by Lead 
Banks which service small & tiny industries and individual entrepreneurs.  
Sanctioning of higher working capital limits to SSIs by banks operating in the North-East region due to 
the peculiar situation of hilly terrain and frequent floods causing hindrance in the transportation system. 
Exploring new instruments by banks for promoting rural industry and to improve the flow of credit to 
rural artisans, industries and rural entrepreneurs.  
Tenure and interest rate on deposits kept by foreign banks with SIDBI on account of their shortfall 
towards priority sector lending.  
  
3.29.2  The structure of the revised scheme has following features: 
The amount of shortfall in priority sector obligation will be placed with SIDBI by foreign banks for a 
tenor of three years.  
The funds placed with SIDBI will have a graded interest rate     structure linked to the Bank Rate. 
Further Recommendation 
  
3.29.3  The Committee takes note of the recommendations of the Ganguly Committee on flow of credit 
to SSI Sector, as accepted by RBI and commended to the banks for implementations. The Committee 
hopes that the banks would implement those guidelines in letter and spirit and the Banking Davison 
would monitor the implementation- machinery working  in order to boost the domestic SEs to grow into 
MEs.  
  
Recommendation  
  
3.30     Restructuring of State Financial Corporations (SFCs)
 
  
3.30.1  The Committee is of the view that restructuring of the States Financial Corporations (SFCs) 
would go a long way in enhancing the credit to SMEs as per the requirement.  The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the outcome of efforts made by SIDBI through restructuring package to SFCs 
under MOU.  
  
(Para   7.14.2) 
Action Taken  
 
 
3.30.2  SIDBI has taken a number of proactive steps to help State Financial Corporations (SFCs) to tide 
over their financial and liquidity problems, which include MOU with SFCs and grant of need-based 
restructuring packages to SFCs.  SIDBI has extended a package of relief and concessions to the SFCs, 
which have entered into tripartite MOU with SIDBI and the respective State Governments. So far, 10 
SFCs,  viz., Andhra Pradesh State Financial Corporation (APSFC), Delhi Financial Corporation (DFC), 
Haryana Financial Corporation (HFC), Himachal Pradesh Financial Corporation (HPFC), Kerala 
Financial Corporation (KFC), Karnataka State Financial Corporation (KSFC), Madhya Pradesh 
Financial Corporation (MPFC), Rajasthan Financial Corporation (RFC), West Bengal Financial 
Corporation (WBFC) and Tamilnadu Industrial & Investment Corporation Ltd. (TIIC) have signed the 
MOU.  
Page 42 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

  
3.30.3  Under these MOU,  SIDBI has reduced the interest rate on outstanding refinance, extended 
moratorium for repayment of refinance outstanding, redrawn repayment schedules of outstanding 
refinance repayable over next 10 years and agreed to provide rebate on fresh refinance disbursements. 
These SFCs have expressed that the concessions given by SIDBI under the arrangement have helped 
them in reducing their cost of borrowing and making them competitive in  SME credit dispensation. 
Further, these SFCs have honoured their commitments to SIDBI in terms of payment of dues on time. 
Greater emphasis is being laid on cutting  down the cost of borrowing through debt swap arrangement, 
negotiation with banks, taking up with the respective State Governments for funding support and 
obtaining guarantees, etc. In order to improve the outcome of the package, SIDBI brought in 
modification/relaxations in the existing package /scheme of restructuring, wherever required.  
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.30.4  The Committee is aware of the fact that SIDBI  has signed  MoU with the select SFCs and has 
taken number of steps for there financial restructuring but the Committee is interested  to know the 
outcome of efforts so made in real objective terms i.e. how many  SFCs have managed to be out of red 
and what have been their financial strength. , enough to provide capital to SMEs.  
  
Recommendation  
  
3.31     Declining Net Bank Credit Flow to the SSI 
  
3.31.1  The Committee observes that the extant course of action and programme as adopted by the 
Banking Division and the financial institutions failed to arrest the declining net bank credit flow to the 
SSI and extend the credit to SSI units  at the reasonable rate of interests.  Although, lot of schemes and 
programmes are being said to be launched for promoting and proliferating the prospects of SSI sector 
but the declining number of SSI units and increasing number of sick units is a testimony to the fact that 
Government efforts at present is failing miserably to ameliorate the SSI sector, therefore, need of the 
hour is to have a focused approach/ schemes for enhancing the credit and reverse the trend.   
(Para 7.21.7) 
Action Taken  
  
3.31.2  various measures have been initiated by the Government and RBI/ SIDBI with a view to 
improving the flow of credit to the SSI sector. The scope of the Credit Guarantee Scheme has been 
widened and credit facilities upto Rs. 25 lakh sanctioned without collateral security and/ or third party 
guarantee by the Member Lending Institutions (MLIs) of the Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Small 
Industries (CGTSI) to the new and existing Small Scale Service & Business (Industry Related) 
Enterprises (SSSBEs) have also been made eligible for coverage under the scheme.  The CGTSI has 
been propagating among the MLIs to extend more collateral-free and/or third party guarantee-free credit 
facilities to the eligible SSI/ SSSBE borrowers and its coverage under the Credit Guarantee Scheme.  As 
a result of the concerned efforts of CGTSI, the coverage of loans under the scheme has increased.  As on 
31
st August, 2005, 31,576 proposals involving credit amount of Rs. 672.10 crore have been approved 
under the Credit Guarantee Scheme. 
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.31.3  The Committee  held meetings   with the representatives  of SSI Associations and nationalized 
banks  on 7th Febuary, 2006 and 7th March, 2006 and noted with  concern  the  declining Net Bank 
Credit Flow to the SSI to the point of 9.8 percent  of the Net Bank Credit which  poses a serious threat to 
the survival to the SSI sector, therefore, all comprehensive and correctives measures are  therefore, 
Page 43 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

required to enhance the Credit Flow to the SSI, if the target of 12 percent growth rate is to be achieved 
and the SSI sector is to be given free space to grow into medium enterprises and the same is to be 
entrusted as the dynamic engine of growth.  
CHAPTER - IV 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE  MINISTRY OF AGRO AND RURAL INDUSTRIES    HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
  
Recommendation  
  
4.0       Sunrise industries in the SME’s sector 
  
4.1       The Committee impress  upon the Government should give approval to the proposal of DC(SSI) 
for the Financial Assistance Scheme for registered small scale /tiny units for adoption of patents in India 
and abroad to generate confidence amongst small scale/tiny units and enable them to convert an original 
idea/ invention /know-how in to working prototype/processes. 
(Para 1.6.18 )  
Action Taken 
  
4.1.1    In the proposed package for the promotion of micro and small enterprises,   financial assistance 
is to be provided to small entrepreneurs for obtaining patents in India & abroad. 
  
Recommendation  
  
4.2       Proliferation of SEs  through  ancillarisation  of  jute  industry  
  
The Committee desires that adequate  steps may be taken in regard to improvement of quality of Jute 
fibre by genetic method and improved retting practice by Biotechnological and other methods.  Such 
measures would give fillip to the promotion of Medium Enterprises in the country.  
(Para    3.1) 
Action Taken  
  
4.2.1    Retting plays an important role in determining the quality of jute fibre.  In India, the method of 
retting has been traditional.  It is also cumbersome and time consuming.  Therefore,  there is need for 
better and quicker retting of raw jute to ensure improvement in fibre  quality.  The Indian Jute Industries 
Research Association (IJIRA),  Kolkata  has undertaken  several  R & D projects to improve the 
technique of retting. Efforts are being made to introduce the methods developed by the IJIRA.  The 
Government is committed to launch the Jute Technology Mission  (JTM)  soon.  Special emphasis has 
been laid on the improvement of retting in the JTM. This will help the jute growers as well as the jute 
industry.  
  
Recommendation  
  
4.3       Adequate and timely supply of coal to Small Scale Industries 
4.3.1    The Committee is anguished to note that Coal Companies are not maintaining separate statistics 
regarding the supply of coal to SSI units.  The 16% of coal is supplied to non-core sector consumers 
including SSI units under sponsorship and linkage based on the Maximum Permissible quantity (MPQ).  
The Committee feels that the requisite quantity of coal is not supplied under the sponsorship and  
linkage based on MPQ which is arrived at the average lifting of coal for the past three years, by the 
units.  Coal companies are supplying coal to SSI units on the basis of availability of coal after meeting 
the requirements of core sector consumers like Power, Cement, Steel etc. and often pro rata cuts are 
imposed in certain coal companies where availabilit
y of coal for non core sector after meeting the 
Page 44 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

requirement of core consumers do not permit the booking under MPQ.
(Para   5.7.2) 
Action Taken  
  
4.3.2    To meet the demand of SSI and brick kilns,  the Government  has earmarked a further 2 MTPA 
for State Government Undertakings for sale at average e-auction price for the year 2005-06.  The Coal 
India Limited (CIL) has already requested all the State Chief Secretaries to nominate one State 
Government undertaking for allocation of coal for distribution to SSI and tiny   consumers.  Also, the 
Government has allotted 2 MTPA of coal to  NCCF,  an apex body of the Ministry of Consumer  
Affairs  and Public Distribution for distribution to SSI and tiny consumers.  NCCF would also be 
charged average e-auction price of the preceding month.  NCCF has since submitted its distribution 
programme to CIL. NCCF will have coal depots at various destinations in UP,  MP,  Maharashtra,  
Chattisgarh,  West Bengal.  With this decision,  it is expected that the needs of SSI and other small 
consumers would be adequately met. 
  
Recommendation  
  
4.4  Concept of Road Railer   
  
4.4.1   The Committee was apprised that  the concept of Road Railer is being developed to facilitate 
multi- modal transportation which would  help the SSI. 
(Para 6.1.9) 
Action Taken 
  
4.4.2    Road Railer are vehicles capable of running on highways on rubber tyres hauled by motor truck 
and on rail with conventional steel wheels in the train loads.  Road Railer consists of a prime mover and 
an attached trailer.  The trailer unit can be pushed onto rails,  placed on rail bogies and detached from 
the prime movers.  The concept  of Road Railer,  in which individual customers will be able to load one 
container,  which can move on rail,  as well as on road is being considered.  A proposal for introduction 
of Road-Railer system in the Indian Railways has been received and is under examination in the 
Ministry of Railways. 
 
 
Recommendation  
  
4.5       The Committee welcomes the concept of Road Railer intended to facilitate multimodal 
transportation and hopes that the said measure would help the SMEs in transportation: 
(Para   6.1.12) 
Action Taken  
  
4.5.1    Road Railers are to be owned by private parties.  A proposal for the introduction of Road-Railer 
System in India Railways has been received and is under examination of the Ministry  of Railways. 
  
Recommendations  
  
4.6       Global Economy and Generation  of Additional Employment   
  
4.6.1    Considering the higher potential for growth in the SSI sector in term of output, employment and 
export , the committee is of the considered that the Government should strengthen and facilitate the SSI 
sector to enable it to remain competitive in market-led global economy and generate additional 
employment. In recognition of employment generation potential, the SSI sector has been assigned a 
target of 12% of annual growth rate and creation 44 lakh employment opportunities in the Tenth Five 
Page 45 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

Year Plan. Keeping in view the potential of Small Scale Industries in India, the National Common 
Minimum Programme as announced by the Government on 27th May 2004 stressed on providing full 
credit, technological and marketing support, infrastructure upgradation  in the major industrial clusters 
and to free the sector from Inspector Raj. But mere announcement would not work. Now the time has 
come, when the Government should keep its promises of consolidating the Small Scale Industries in the 
country by implementing the Action Plan to enable the sector to achieve the stipulated 12% growth rate 
and accordingly provide employment generation  opportunities to millions of youths in the urban as well 
as rural areas. 
  
(Para   7.21.4  ) 
Action Taken  
  
4.6.2    To further enhance the competitiveness of Micro and Small Enterprises to enable them to face 
the challenges of the Global Economy and to generate additional employment, a promotional package is 
under active consideration of the Government.  
Recommendation  
  
4.7       Erratic and Inadequate Flow of Credit to SSI Sector  
  
4.7.1    The Committee is astonished to find the pathetic condition of the SSIs and the erratic and 
inadequate flow of credit to SSI sector which has been the key reason for continuous languishing of this 
sector.  Although the credit to SSI has increased from Rs. 38,109 crore for financial 1997-98 to Rs. 
58,278 for financial year 2003-04- a growth of 53% but what concern the Committee the most is the 
declining share of SSI in Net Bank Credit over the same period has from 17.5% to 10.4%.  No efforts 
seem to have been taken in the last seven years to arrest the declining trend.  It was primarily result of 
lack of policy initiative by the Government and apathy of banks in particular towards SSI lending.  
Various factors like high risk perception, higher transaction cost in processing SSI loan applications, 
lack of credit rating facilities for SSI units contributed further to the woes of Small Scale Industries.  
Moreover, the non-adherence to RBI guidelines on SSI lending by the banks (e.g. inadequate/ delayed 
sanction of credit despite guidelines on computation of working capital requirements of SSI units/ 
prescribed time schedule for disposal of loan applications, insistence on collateral despite instructions 
from RBI about no collateral for loans upto Rs. 5 lakh and upto Rs. 25 lakh for units having good track 
record, etc.) is continuing till date.    
  
(Para 7.21.5) 
Action Taken   
  
4.7.2    The Government and RBI/ SIDBI have initiated various measures with a view to improving the 
flow of credit to the SSI sector. In line with the ‘Policy Package for Stepping up Credit to Small and 
Medium Enterprises’ announced by the Government, the RBI has advised the banks that they may 
initiate necessary steps to rationalise the cost of loans to SME sector by adopting a transparent rating 
system with cost of credit being linked to the credit rating of enterprise.  The SIDBI has developed a 
Credit Appraisal & Rating Tool (CART) as well as a Risk Assessment Model (RAM) and a 
comprehensive rating model for risk assessment of proposals of SMEs.  The banks have been advised by 
the RBI that they may consider to take advantage of these models as appropriate,  and reduce their 
transaction costs.  The National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) has recently introduced a Credit 
Rating Scheme for encouraging SSI units to get themselves credit rated by reputed Credit Rating 
Agencies.  The banks have been advised by the RBI that they may consider these ratings as per 
availability and wherever appropriate structure their rates of interest depending on the ratings assigned 
to the borrowing SME units.   
  
Page 46 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

4.7.3    The RBI had issued a master circular on lending to SSI sector dated July 1, 2005 incorporating 
instructions on the time to be taken for disposing of loan applications of SSI units, the limit up to which 
banks are obliged to grant collateral-free loans, etc. As announced in the ‘Policy Package for Stepping 
up Credit to Small and Medium Enterprises’, the RBI has advised the banks that based on the above 
guidelines, the Boards of banks may formulate a comprehensive and more liberal policies than the 
existing policies in respect of loans to SME sector. Further, the RBI has advised the banks that for wider 
dissemination and easy accessibility, the policy guidelines formulated by Boards of banks as well as 
instructions/guidelines issued by the RBI may be displayed on the respective web sites of banks. The 
banks may also prominently display all the facilities/schemes offered by them to small entrepreneurs at 
each of their branches. 
  
Recommendation  
  
4.8       Mortality Rate 
  
            4.8.1    The Committee express its concern that it is because of the inadequate credit flow to SSI 
sector, the mortality rate is increasing year after year and sickness of SSI units is posing a matter of great 
concern.  Moreover, after the deregulation of interest rates regime from 18-20% in 1997-98, the lending 
rates have come down to around 9-12% at present.  As per extant guidelines the banks are required to fix 
their own prime lending rates (PLRs) and the maximum band over the PLR.  The existing guidelines for 
banks for lending SSI is plus/minus 2% on PLR which translates into a range of 8.25% to 12%.  While 
interest rates for Large Scale Industries are negotiable and are generally at sub-PLR.  Limiting to the 
plus/ minus two per cent of PLR de-motivated the banks in general to lower the interest beyond PLR 
minus two per cent.   
  
(Para    7.21.6) 
Action Taken  
  
4.8.1    As mentioned in para. 7.21.5, in line with the ‘Policy Package for Stepping up Credit to Small 
and Medium Enterprises’ announced by the Government, the RBI has advised the banks that they may 
initiate necessary steps to rationalize the cost of loans to SME sector by adopting a transparent rating 
system with cost of credit being linked to the credit rating of enterprise.  SIDBI has developed a Credit 
Appraisal & Rating Tool (CART) as well as a Risk Assessment Model (RAM) and a comprehensive 
rating model for risk assessment of proposals of SMEs.  The banks have been advised by the RBI that 
they may consider to take advantage of these models as appropriate and reduce their transaction costs.  
The National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) has recently introduced a Credit Rating Scheme for 
encouraging SSI units to get themselves credit rated by reputed Credit Rating Agencies.  The banks have 
been advised by the RBI that they may consider these ratings as per availability and wherever 
appropriate structure their rates of interest depending on the ratings assigned to the borrowing SME 
units.    
Recommendation  
 
 
4.9       Strategy to ensure timely and adequate credit to the SMEs at reasonable rate of interests  
  
4.9.1    The Committee, therefore, feels that the foremost requirement is to extend timely and adequate 
credit to the SMEs at reasonable rate of interests.  The following Course of Action may be adopted by 
the Government:- 
  
Treating the Small Scale sector on the priority basis, banks should fix self-set targets of minimum 15% 
per annum for growth in advances to the SSI sector over the previous year’s achievements and in 
relation to the overall target set by them for growth in their Net Bank Credit for the year.  Shortfall in 
Page 47 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

achieving this target should be deposited with SIDBI by the banks at rate of interest linked to “bank 
rate”. 
RBI should issue guidelines to banks to the adopt differential rates of interest under three slabs of loans 
to Small Scale units as per the following rationalised pattern:- 
  
Upto Rs. 1 lakh                        Not exceeding bank rate plus 1.5% 
Rs. 1 to 2 lakh                           Not exceeding bank rate plus 2.25% 
Rs. 2 to 5 lakh              Not exceeding bank rate plus 3% 
Rs. 5 lakh and above    Not exceeding bank rate plus 4% 
  
RBI should issue effective guidelines to be followed by the banks strictly for speedy revival of 
potentially viable sick SSI units.  Test of viability of sick SSI units should be conducted with attitude to 
improve the SSI units.  Viable sick SSI units should be given an opportunity for debt restructuring 
whereby the outstanding debt of sick SSI units could be restructured through various forms such as 
moratorium, rescheduling of debts, infusion of fresh capital, etc. 
Each public and private sector bank to set up at least a “SSI Desk” at each branch under a trained bank 
official as the Nodal Officer with three years beginning 2005-2006. 
Lead banks to set up Institutes for training of SE entrepreneurs in such districts where major SE clusters 
are located.  
Government to expand the existing portfolio risk fund to Rs. 150 crore in the next     five years to enable 
SIDBI to cover 29 lakh SEs by the end of that period.  This would benefit mostly women in setting up 
micro enterprises through Self-Help Groups. 
Since SIDBI is meant solely for promoting SSI, there is the need to re-orient its role viz strengthening of 
State Financial Corporation (SFCs) in a time bound manner with Central/State Government assistance; 
expanding coverage under industrialization programmes; setting up of a Technology Bank; launching 
direct finance and Micro-Finance Programmes and setting up of a dedicated credit rating agency for 
Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs). 
While extending credit facilities Bank should be advised to observe the credit history of the 
entrepreneurs and accordingly fix the volume of credit, rate of interest and mode of repayment. 
RBI, banks and other financial institutions should change the mindset in order to really promote and 
proliferate SMEs so that Indian SMEs should not lag behind the global trend.   
  
(Para   7.21.8) 
Action Taken  
  
4.9.2    In line with the ‘Policy Package for Stepping up Credit to Small and Medium Enterprises’ 
announced by the Government, the RBI has advised the public sector banks that they may fix self-
targets for financing  SME sector and initiate necessary steps so as to achieve a minimum 20 per cent 
year-on-year growth in outstanding level of credit to SMEs. 
  
4.9.3    The National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) has recently introduced a Credit Rating 
Scheme for encouraging SSI units to get themselves credit rated by reputed Credit Rating Agencies.  As 
per the ‘Policy Package for Stepping up Credit to Small and Medium Enterprises’ announced by the 
Government, the banks have been advised by the RBI that they may consider these ratings as per 
availability and wherever appropriate structure their rates of interest depending on the ratings assigned 
to the borrowing SME units.  Further, the banks have been advised that they may initiate necessary steps 
to rationalize the cost of loans to SME sector by adopting a transparent rating system with cost of credit 
being linked to the credit rating of enterprise.  
  
4.9.4    Based on the recommendations of Kohli Working Group, the RBI has issued detailed revised 
guidelines to banks in January, 2002 for detection of sickness at an early stage and taking remedial 
Page 48 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

measures, and for rehabilitation of sick SSI units identified as potentially viable.  Further, as per the 
‘Policy Package for Stepping up Credit to Small and Medium Enterprises’ announced by the 
Government, the RBI will issue detailed guidelines relating to debt restructuring mechanism so as to 
ensure restructuring of debt of all eligible small and medium enterprises at terms which are not less 
favourable than the Corporate Debt Restructuring (CDR) mechanism in the banking sector. All 
accounts, except those classified as ‘loss assets’ will be eligible for restructuring, provided the industrial 
units are viable or potentially viable.  
  
4.9.5    The Internal Group constituted by the RBI in its report has inter alia recommended that at the 
branch level, a  nodal officer may be designated to help the SME entrepreneurs in complying with the 
bank’s formalities and his name may prominently be displayed.  The report is under examination  by the 
R.B.I.   
  
4.9.6    The recommendations of the Committee have been forwarded to  the R.B.I. for appropriate 
action. With regard to entrepreneurship development, the promotional and developmental activities of 
SIDBI are designed to achieve twin objectives of national importance viz., (a) enterprise promotion 
resulting in self-employment and creation of additional employment through its select programmes, such 
as Rural Industries Programme, Entrepreneurship Development Programme, and (b) strengthening the 
existing SSI sector to face the emerging challenges of growing internationalization and intensifying 
competition through its select programmes such as Cluster Development Programme, Small Industries 
Management Programmes, Skill–cum-Technology Upgradation Programme, Environmental Initiatives, 
Marketing Assistance, etc. Since inception, through its promotional and developmental initiatives, the 
SIDBI has facilitated training of over 1 lakh entrepreneurs and helping in creating employment 
opportunities for similar number of persons. 
  
4.9.7    The proposal has been included in the package for promotion of micro and small enterprises. The 
steps taken by the SIDBI for restructuring of SFCs, enhancing the scale of operations under direct 
finance schemes and setting up of Technology Bank for SMEs and a dedicated credit rating agency for 
SMEs . .The RBI has advised the banks to accord SSI units with a good track record the benefit of lower 
spreads over the prime lending rates (PLR).  Further, as per the ‘Policy Package for Stepping up Credit 
to Small and Medium Enterprises’ announced by the Government, the banks have been advised by the 
RBI that they may initiate necessary steps to rationalise the cost of loans to SME sector by adopting a 
transparent rating system with cost of credit being linked to the credit rating of enterprise. ] 
  
4.9.8    The RBI has informed that banks have already been advised in the matter.   For financing and 
development of SMEs in the country, SIDBI has recently taken a series of initiatives including the 
following:- 
  
Operationalising an SME fund of Rs. 10,000 crore under which assistance is being provided to SMEs at 
an interest rate of 9.5             per cent.   
  
Launch of SME growth fund of Rs. 500 crore under which        assistance of Venture Capital nature is 
provided to knowledge             based industries. 
  
The SIDBI has signed a line of credit of USD 120 milllion          (approx. Rs.500 crore) for financing 
and development of SMEs, which is expected to not only upscale the flow of credit, but would         also 
help in increasing output and employment. 
  
Recommendation  
 
 
4.10     Raising equity participation from the existing 24% to 49% (FDI) in SSI sector 
Page 49 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

             
4.10.1  The Committee is of the considered view that the Department of Industry Policy and Promotion 
(IPP), Ministry of Commerce  & Industry may explore the possibility of raising equity participation in 
the SSI sector from the existing 24% to 49% (FDI) for the better technology transfer in SSI sector in 
which FDI can be encouraged for sizable investment towards larger returns.  
(Para   8.8.3 )  
Action Taken  
  
4.10.2  The issue is under examination  of the Government. 
  
Recommendation  
  
4.11     Enactment of Limited Partnership Act  
  
4.11.1  The Committee is in agreement with the opinion of the Ministry of SSI that the Limited Liability 
Partnership will provide higher flow of capital in to the Sector, especially to the upcoming sections like 
IT, Bio-Technology, Pharma, etc. and would also encourage venture capital, therefore, the committee 
recommends that the Ministry of SSI should take up the matter of Enactment of Limited Partnership  
Act with the Ministry of Company Affairs. 
(Para   8.10.2) 
Action Taken  
  
4.11.2  This Ministry is constantly pursuing the matter with the Ministry of  Company Affairs (MoCA)  
for inclusion of small enterprise in the proposed Limited Liability Partnership (LLP) Bill.  Steps are 
being taken by MoCA in the direction of enacting a Limited Liability Partnership Act. The enactment, 
when passed,  will help more enterprises to get organised as  limited liability partnerships and improve 
their capability to access credit from institutional sources. 
  
Recommendation 
  
4.12     The Government should bring forth a policy package to boost the SME Sector, which inter alia 
must contain the provision of enhancing the investment limit of small enterprise providing the policy, 
credit, technological and market support, infrastructure development to pave a way for small enterprises 
to graduate to medium and to boost the SME Sector. Moreover, the Small and Medium Enterprises 
Development (SMED) Bill,2005 must see the light of the day at the earliest. 
(Para    8.15.4) 
Action Taken  
  
4.12.1  The Government is in the process of finalising a promotional  package to provide  the support 
listed above to  the micro  and small enterprises. The note on the package  is under circulation for inter-
Ministerial consultation. 
  
4.12.2  The  recommendations of the Standing Committee on the SMED Bill,  2005 are under active 
consideration of  the Government. 
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT 
A GLANCE 
  
SWOT Analysis of Small Scale Industries 
 
 
The Committee is pleased to observe that the Government is taking appropriate initiatives to encourage 
SEs and MEs by promulgating  the SMED Bill. However, the process needs to be accelerated for the 
Page 50 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

speedy consolidation and proliferation of SEs and MEs. The Committee understands that with the 
promulgation of SMED Bills many of problems like 'Inspection Raj'  and plethora  of rules and 
regulations would be streamlined but the Government needs to bring forth the promotional  package 
without further delay whereby the issue  of technology-upgradation, facilitation of basic infrastructure 
like  supply of continued power to SEs & MEs at reasonable rate; adequate and timely  credit flow 
without  hassles of collateral security; adoption of modern management Practices (MMPs) ; opening of 
new markets and provision for relevant training ought to be taken for promotion of SEs and MEs so that 
new avenues for  employment generation in these potential sector may be explored with the  objective of 
poverty alleviation in Rural India.  
(Para   3.1.3 )   
 Re-orienting the Role of DC(SSI) 
  
            The Committee understands that the provision under clause 27 of the SMED Bill, 2005 for CDC 
(SME) and its function and power would generate professional proficiency and would also lead to 
streamlining   and strengthening of future outlook of SEs and MEs Sectior in the country.  
(Para   3.3.5)   
Functional and operational impact on the provision of  SEs and MEs 
  
            The Committee is of the considered view that the institutional provisions of CDC (SME) at the 
Central Level and the Small Industries Services Institute (SISI) in each state level must have functional 
and operational impact on the provision of  SEs and MEs at the field level. Such institutions have to play 
the pro-active role in combating the problems being faced by SEs and MEs so that their empirical 
impact is felt in terms of the  facts and figures and their contribution is observed in the economic growth 
and development of the nation.  
(Para   3.3.6)   
Enactment of  'SMED Bill   
  
            The Committee recommends that the Government should expedite the enactment of  'SMED 
Bill  as the same would usher  a new era for the better tomorrow of SEs and MEs in the country. The 
Committee desires the role of CDC (SSI) should be completely re-designed to as to make it relevant and 
functional in the fast changing global scenario  unleashed due to liberalisation and globalisation process. 
The Committee understands that  the suggested CDC  (SME) may play the role of catalyst in the 
adoption of 'Global Best Practices (GBPs) for injecting and enhancing competitiveness in India’s SEs 
and MEs working  through decantation and dissemination of information pertaining to global policies 
and practices at field level.  
(Para 3.3.7) 
Key Areas of Massive Action  for Revitalization of SEs 
  
The Committee is of the view that re-designing of the scheme of Technology Upgradation and 
Management Programme (UPTECH)    as Small Industry Cluster Development Programme (SICDP) 
would lead to holistic development of clusters in various states in general but the massive impetus must 
be given in those states where there is the absence of the large scale industrial units so that industrial 
development and exploration of new-avenues of employment-generation might be undertaken in these 
states  as well. The Committee would like to know the success  rate of SICDP in Bihar, Orissa, 
Jharkhand and Uttar Pradesh , which lay behind of other states. 
(Para 3.4.6) 
            The Committee is pleased to know that under Vender Development Programme (UDPs), SISIs 
have been successful in providing marketing assistance to small entrepreneurs to sell their produce to 
large scale organization PSVs/Defence Sector. The Committee would like to know the total sale of 
various products in term of value and quantity  to large scale organisation PSUs/Defence Sector under 
(VDPs) during last two years and its projection for such sale in next three years along with the steps 
Page 51 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

being undertaken/envisaged to be undertaken to promote sale under VDPs to Government Department 
like Defence (Army, Navy and Air Force) Paramilitary Organization Public  Sector undertaking and Star 
Exports Houses. (Para 3.4.7) 
  
Broad based ownership of SSI enterprises 
                         
            The Committee  strongly feels that the Government should expedite the incorporation of Small 
Scale Enterprises within the ambit of the Limited Liability Partnership (LLP) Act  so as to encourage 
SEs for company-formation through broad-basing of the ownership of SSI and impress upon the 
Ministry to liase with the concerned Ministry & Department. (Para 3.5.2) 
Closer cooperation between large and small scale sector 
 
 
            The Committee is of the view that encouragement to anciliarisation would not only open avenues 
for employment generation but would also foster integrated industrial development through giving 
impetus to SMEs. Therefore, it is required that Sub-Contact-Exchange as operated by SISI must play the 
pro-active role in dissemination of information with the purpose of promoting functional bonds between 
SEs and MEs. The Committee feels that the issue may be taken up on priority- basis in the meetings of 
Plant Level Committees by the  Directors of SISI. The Committee desires the progress at empirical level 
in the field on this count.  
(Para 3.6.3) 
Closer cooperation between large and small scale sector 
  
The Committee desires that Government should continue to foster closer-co-operation between large and 
small- scale sector through the Sub-Contract Exchange (SCEs) and delineating the areas of mutual co-
operation in the meeting of the Plant Level Committees.  
(Para 3.7.5) 
             
            The Committee is of the considered view that the sooner  the Government  solves the problem of 
delayed payment, the better would be for the Small -Scale Industries as the phenomenon  of delayed 
payment has not only affected the balance-sheet of SEs but also arrested the rehabilitation of sick SSI 
units.  
            (Para 3.7.6) 
Optimum Capacity utilisation 
  
            The Committee, while agreeing  with the argument advocated by the Ministry of Small Scale 
Industries that the issue of ensuring power supply at reasonable rates etc. comes under the purview of 
State/UT Governments, recommends that the Ministry of Small Scale Industries should act as 
facilitation by liaising with   the representation of the concerned State Governments/UT so that Small 
Scale Unit is not prevented from utilizing their full capacity due to power-shortage. The role of DC 
(SSI) is appreciated in this regard. However, the Committee feels that the Ministry of SSI, should also 
interact with the Ministry of Power to explore the possibility for framing special guidelines to state/UT 
Government for ensuring timely and adequate power supply at reasonable rate to SSI units.  
(Para 3.8.3) 
  
            As regards the supply of steel as raw -material and Coal to be used as fuel, the Committee is of 
the considered view that the Ministry of SSI should continue to have an eye on the actual requirement of 
steel  and coal in term of quality and grade and  liaising in tandem with the  Ministry of Steel and the 
Ministry of Coal, the Ministry of SSI  strive its best to  ensure the timely and adequate  supply of Steel 
and Coal  at reasonable price to SSI units.  
(Para 3.8.4) 
             
Page 52 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

            Pertaining to the Marketing support to emerging SMEs, the Committee feels that DC (SSI) 
should guide NSIC to chalk out region-specific Action-Plan to boost the domestic and global exposure 
to the local products in each region. 
(Para 3.8.5) 
Human resource development for SMEs 
  
            The Committee is abreast of the fact that Small Scale Industries Service Institutes (SISI) is 
playing the role of imparting training to the emerging SME entrepreneurs on various topics such as 
information Technology (IT); fashion Technology; food and fruits processing etc. The Committee, 
however, is of the view that SISI is not pro-active in discharging its intended role in every districts of 
the country.  Testimony to the fact is the data, as furnished by the Ministry of SSI itself that only 1000 to 
1530 workers from SSI are being trained annually under skill Development Courses; the figure is too 
meager, keeping in view the population of the country.  
  
(Para 3.9.5) 
  
            The Committee is in agreement with the view that the SISIs need to be strengthened and re-
oriented to impart training to workers and Entrepreneur to all parts of the country, especially the rural 
areas. This is what the Committee wanted through the institutional management for preparing trained 
manpower for the SME Sector. SISIs needs to be pro-active across the country for imparting vocational 
training at district and Taluk-level, besides encouraging and facilitating the Management Developments 
Programmes (MDPs) and Entrepreneur Developments Programmes, especially in the  rural areas.   
  
(Para 3.9.6) 
Sunrise Industries in the SMEs sector 
  
The Committee would like to know the steps taken or being taken  by the  Government for encouraging 
Sunrise Industries in the SME Sector in economically backward states of the country, and the outcome 
thereof.  The Committee would also like to know what further can be done for the promotion of  Sunrise 
Industries in SMEs sector, e.g. Information Technology (IT).  
  
(Para 3.10.4) 
            The Committee is pleased to know that effort are being taken by the Government of India (the 
Department of Biotechnology and Biotech Consortium Indian Limited, BCIL) to identify new biotech 
product which may be  commercially viable in the SSI sector and also the  formulation of new Policy 
initiatives are on the card. The Committee hopes that the Govt. would act promptly in a scheduled time-
frame and would come out with the formulation of "New Policy Initiatives" to promote commercially 
viable bio-product  in the SSI Sector. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in 
this regard, therefore, the Ministry of SSI should furnish the details in the Action Taken Notes of the 
present report.  
  
(Para 3.10.5) 
Strategic Management for Inter-sectoral Corporation 
  
            The Committee is of the considered view that the Ministry of SSI should continue to have an eye 
on the actual requirement of steel  in terms of quantity, quality and grade and  liaising in tandem with 
the  Ministry of Steel and also    ensure the timely and adequate  supply of Steel and Coal  at reasonable 
price to SSI units. (Para 3.11.7) 
  
            The Committee feels that DC (SSI) should guide NSIC in this regard for timely and adequate 
liftin
g of iron and steel and employ rational principle of distribution of steel to SSI units keeping in view 
Page 53 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

their actual requirement in terms of grade and quantity. (Para 3.11.8)
             
The Committee feels that the Co-ordination Committee consisting of the representatives of the Ministry 
of Steel,  Ministry of SSI,  Steel producers,  NSIC and  State Level Small Industries Corporations should 
meet frequently to review the Adequate and timely   Supply of Iron & Steel to SSI Units. 
(Para 3.11.9) 
Garment Industry 
  
            The Committee appreciates the contribution of the National Institute of Fashion Technology 
(NIFT) in extending support to the apparel industry so far the design, technology and overall 
management" is concerned, however,  the Committee would like to know the outcome of efforts 
undertaken by the Ministry of SSI towards exploring the possibility with the CSIR and the SIDBI for 
providing specific R&D support to the SSI units engaged in the garment industry.  
  
(Para 3.12.5) 
Processed foods 
  
             The Committee is of the view that the office DC (SSI) should chalk out Action Plan in 
collaboration with Ministry of Food Processing Industries to promote processed Food Industry in SME 
Sector based on the distribution of raw-material and in coordination with the concerned authority to 
provide adequate and timely capital and other basic infrastructure viz transport, cold storage and 
marketing (Para 3.13.3) 
  
            The Committee is also of the view that all out efforts should be made to explore the potential of 
food  processing industry in SME sector in those  states where the Heavy industries could not have made 
inroads.  
(Para 3.13.4) 
  
Leather Products 
 
 
            Despite the efforts undertaken by the Central Footwear Training Institutes (CFTIs) at Agra, the  
Process-cum-Product Development Centre (PPDC), Meerut, it is felt by the Committee that an  all- out 
efforts is required to make the Indian Leather Industry globally competitive. Lots of efforts are, 
however,  required to introduce and absorb the latest technology and reduce the cost of production, 
besides adopting the aggressive marketing strategy. 
(Para 3.14.3) 
  
            The Committee observes that  that the Ministry of SSI has not furnished details   on the measure 
for encouraging the ancillary tie-ups of SSI units with large manufacturing houses in the leather sector.  
Therefore, the Committee desires that a detailed background note should be furnishing to the Committee 
apprising it the steps taken in this regard.  
 (Para 3.14.4) 
Electric Machinery and Apparatus  
  
            The Committee is pleased to note  that the Electronic Industry is being promoted under the 
Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS) as managed by the Ministry of SSI. The Committee 
appreciates the role of DC (SSI), Regional Training Centres (RTCs) and ESTC, Ramnagar and IDEMI, 
Mumbai under SIDO in this regard. (Para 3.15.5) 
             
            However, the Committee would like to know the total volume and the  quantum of Electronic 
Industr
y falling under SME Sector along with the steps  taken to organise and regulate the Electronic 
Page 54 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

Industry under SME Sector for rapid promotion and proliferation of this Sector.(Para 3.15.6)
3.15.7  The Committee would also  like to be enlightened in regard to the  steps taken by the Ministry of 
SSI for ancillary and structuring of ancillary  tie-ups and relationship of SSI units with the  main 
manufactures.(Para 3.3.7) 
  
Chemical and Chemical Products 
  
            The Committee observes that the Drugs  and Drug Intermediate Industry is on the up-swinging 
mode, therefore, little assistance on the part of the Government would boost the industry to the 
considerable extent. The inclusion of bulk drugs and intermediates among the approved technologies 
under the  Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS) is a welcome step, which would enables SSI 
units  to avail of capital subsidy for technology upgradation under the Scheme, however, the committee 
is of the view that the National Research Development Corporation (NRDC) need to popularize its 
activities for the proliferation of the benefits of  R  & D  activities and the  technical know-how at 
reasonable cost. 
 
 
(Para 3.16.3) 
National Textile Policy 
The Committee appreciates the intention of the Government for up- gradation of technology and 
enhance competitiveness in the Textile sector as underlined in the National Textile Policy, however,  the 
Committee desires that the Government should take steps for organising the Garment Industry in such  a 
manner as to  encourage its  units to adopt Modern Management Principle and the corporate character.
(Para 3.17.3) 
Modernisation Schemes for SSI in Textile Sector 
            The Committee is pleased to know that Integrated Wool Improvement Programme (IWIP), being 
implemented during the 10th five Years Plan contains the provision for creating Synergy amongst 
various agencies, involved in different activities relating to woolen industry such as marketing of raw 
wool,  pre-loom and post-loom processing facilities,  training and design development, dissemination of 
information, etc, however,  the Committee would like to know as to what actual action /steps have been 
taken during the elapsed period of the 10th Five Years Plan and what has been the impact thereof on the 
Woolen Industry.  
(Para 3.17.8) 
Powerloom Sector 
  
            The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Government in regard to the harmonious 
development of all the segments of the fabric-manufacturing sector, however the Committee would like 
to know the outcome thereof in terms of facts and figures product and state-wise along with India's    
market-share in the global-market.  
(Para 3.18.3) 
Carpets 
 
 
The Committee observes that the Action Taken Note does not provide the  details of  outcome of  steps 
taken  by Ministry of Textiles  Development Commissioner (Handicrafts) and IICT.  In the absence of 
these details, the Committee is unable to  assess the progress. (Para 3.19.4) 
  
SWOT –analysis of Jute Industry  
  
The Committee,  while take note  of the SWOT-analysis of the  Jute Industry, expresses its pleasure that 
recommendations of the Committee find a place in the National Jute Policy. However, the Committee 
desires that keeping in account the SWOT - analysis of Jute-Industry the Government should chalk out 
development strategy by overcoming the weakness and treats to Jute Industry and taking advantages of 
Page 55 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

its strength and opportunities ahead. The wide spread  sickness in June-Industry (as out of 78 June mill, 
38 are sick and most of them have been referred to BIFR  is matter of concern for the Committee.   
(Para 3.20.5  ) 
Rehabilitation of Sick Jute Mills in India 
  
            The Committee, while expressing its deep concern over the widespread sickness in the jute 
industry desires that the Government should guide the existing institutions intended to support the 
promote jute mills and implement the various scheme in letter and spirit as chalked out by the 
Government for promotion  and proliferation of the Jute Industry under the overall working of the 
National Jute Policy.  
(Para 3.21.4) 
Rehabilitation of Sick Jute Mills in India 
  
            The Committee welcomes the formation of National Jute Policy, 2005 which is in line with the 
recommendation of the Committee. However, the Committee hopes that the Government would leave no 
stone unturned to implement the schemes and programme as enshrined in the Jute Policy in order to 
action the objectives  of Compound  Annual  Growth rate (CAGR) of 15% per annum as set in the 
Policy.  
(Para 3.22.4) 
Adequate and timely supply of coal to Small Scale Industries 
  
            The Committee, while taking note of the procedure and facilities being extended to SME in 
regard to the adequate and timely supply of coal to SSI units, recommends that the Ministry of SSI 
should assess the same in tandem with SSI associations and enterprises to get assured that no problem 
exist an account of  requirement and supply of Coal to SMEs. 
  
(Para 3.23.3) 
 Railway as preferred Mode of Transport 
The Committee takes note of the Scheme that facilitates the transportation of raw-material and finished 
products of SSIs. The Committee is pleased to receives the assurance given by the Railways that Indian 
Railways would continue to look after the needs of Small Scale Industries, therefore, the Ministry of SSI 
should keep an interacting with SSI association and Enterprises to find out whether any problems exists 
in transportation of raw-material and finished products by the SME.  
(Para 3.24.3) 
Railways as preferred mode of Transport 
            The Committee would like to know the Comments of the Railways in regard  to the Committee's 
recommendation to constitute a Standing Advisory Committee under the Chairmanship of Member 
(Traffic) with representation from Ministry of SSI and  ARI selected association of SMEs. Now the onus 
lies on the Ministry of SSI to find out the problems being faced by SMEs, if any in transportation of 
raw-martial and  products and taking up the same  with  Railway.  
(Para 3.25.3) 
Transportation of SE raw materials and products 
  
            The Committee is pleased to find that Railways are doing well recently for transportation of raw-
material and finished product as parcel as  the provision has also been made in Rail Budget (2006-07), 
however, the Committee desires that Railway should provide infrastructure in the major industrial 
clusters for transpirations of raw-materials and finished SSI and ARI  products of Small quantity at 
sustainable fright charge. (Para 3.26.2) 
Credit flow  to SSI sector   
  
            The Committee is pleased to find that the Government has recently announced the Policy 
Page 56 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

package for stepping up the credit to Small and Medium Enterprises and the Committee takes note of 
the  provisions therein which are  in Committee's viewpoint contains the potential for enhancing credit 
to SMEs provided the intended actionS therein are implemented in letter and spirit  by all those 
concerned. (Para 3.27.6) 
  
Credit Flow to Medium Enterprises 
 
            The Committee understands that the Government comes out with Annual Monetary & Credit 
Policy each year and accordingly RBI issues guidelines to banks & implement the stated objective in the 
policy, however the Committee desires that the financial institution must go beyond the formation of 
Policy and issuance of guidelines and circulars.  Banks should ensure that their policy & guidelines are 
implemented in letter and spirit. 
(Para 3.28.3) 
Ganguly Committee Report 
  
            The Committee takes note of the recommendations of the Ganguly Committee on flow of credit 
to SSI Sector, as accepted by RBI and commended to the banks for implementations. The Committee 
hopes that the banks would implement those guidelines in letter and spirit and the Banking Davison 
would monitor the implementation- machinery working  in order to boost the domestic SEs to grow into 
MEs. (Para 3.29.3) 
Restructuring of State Financial Corporations (SFCs)
 
            The Committee is aware of the fact that SIDBI  has signed  MoU with the select SFCs and has 
taken number of steps for there financial restructuring but the Committee is interested  to know the 
outcome of efforts so made in real objective terms i.e. how many  SFCs have managed to be out of red 
and what have been their financial strength. , enough to provide capital to SMEs.  
  
(Para 3.30.4) 
Declining Net Bank Credit Flow to the SSI 
  
            The Committee  held meetings   with the representatives  of SSI Associations and nationalized 
banks  on 7th Febuary, 2006 and 7th March, 2006 and noted with  concern  the  declining Net Bank 
Credit Flow to the SSI to the point of 9.8 percent  of the Net Bank Credit which  poses a serious threat to 
the survival to the SSI sector, therefore, all comprehensive and correctives measures are  therefore, 
required to enhance the Credit Flow to the SSI, if the target of 12 percent growth rate is to be achieved 
and the SSI sector is to be given free space to grow into medium enterprises and the same is to be 
entrusted as the dynamic engine of growth. (Para 3.31.3) 
Minutes of the Meeting 
  
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 16th May, 2006  in the Committee Room  ‘A’  
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  
Shri Santosh Bagrodia              —        Chairman 
Rajya Sabha 
Shri Surendra Lath 
Suresh Bhardaj 
Dr. K. Malaisamy 
Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
Lok Sabha 
Shri  Guharam Ajgalle 
Shri Ra
jnarayan 
Page 57 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
Smt. Susmita Bauri 
Shri Suraj Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
  
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary  
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary  
Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary 
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Committee Officer 
2.         The Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members of the Committee.  
3.         The Committee then took up the following reports for   consideration and adoption:- 
(i) One Hundred Seventy-ninth Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations 
contained in Committee's One Hundred Sixty-eighth  Report on Demands for Grants             (2005-06) 
of the Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises); 
                        (ii) One Hundred Eightieth  Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the 
recommendations contained in One Hundred Sixty-ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of 
the Department of Heavy Industries  (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises); 
           (iii) One Hundred Eighty- first  Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the 
recommendations contained in One Hundred Seventy-first  Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)  of 
the Ministry of  Small Scale Industries; 
            (iv) One Hundred Eighty- second Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the 
recommendations contained in the One Hundred Sixtieth Report on  the Tax Proposals affecting various 
segments of industries  of  the Ministry of Small Scale Industries; 
                         (v) One Hundred Eighty- third  Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the 
recommendations contained in the One Hundred Seventieth  Report  on  the Demands for Grants 
                ( 2005-06) of the Ministry of  Agro and Rural Industries;  
           (vi) One Hundred Eighty- fourth  Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the 
recommendations contained in the One Hundred  Seventy- second Report on Demands for Grants          
 (2005-06) of the Ministry of  Agro and Rural Industries ; 
            (vii)  One Hundred Eighty- fifth  Report  on Action Taken by the Government  on the 
recommendations contained in the One Hundred Seventy-third Report on Inter-Sectoral  Strategic Co-
operation to Promote Small Scale Industries of the Ministry of  Small Scale Industries;   
             (viii) One Hundred Eighty- sixth   Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the 
recommendations contained in the One Hundred Seventy-fourth   Report on  Operational Effectiveness 
of PMRY, REGP and KVI  Schemes  in Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal and Maharastra of the Ministry 
of  Agro and Rural Industries ; 
       (ix) One Hundred Eighty-seventh Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the 
recommendations contained in the One Hundred Seventy-fifth Report on Key concern areas  of SSI in 
select states of the Ministry of  Small Scale Industries; 
(x) One Hundred Eighty-eighth Report  on Demands for Grants (2006-07)   Ministry of Agro and Rural 
Industries; 
(xi) One Hundred Eighty-ninth   Report  on Demands for Grants (2006-07)  Ministry of Small Scale 
Industries. 
(xii) One Hundred Ninetieth  Report  on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of  Department of Heavy 
Industries ( Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);  and 
(xiii)  One Hundred Ninety - first Report on   Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Department of Public 
Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises). 
4.         The Committee, after a brief discussion, adopted all the above reports without any modification. 
  5.       The Committee authorized Shri Surendra Lath  and in his absence Dr. Malaisamy  to present the 
Report in Ra
jya Sabha and Shri Ram Singh Kaswan and in his absence Shri  Guharam Ajgalle to ley a 
Page 58 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm

copy of the Report in Lok Sabha.  
The meeting was adjourned at 4.25 pm. 
  
  
New Delhi 
16th May, 2006 
  
K.P. Singh
 Under Secretary 
Page 59 of 59185th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/185threport.htm