PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August 
THREE HUNDRED AND 
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in 
the 321st  Report of the Committee on 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
(Laid o n the Table of Lok Sabha on 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY  
  
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
August , 2023 / Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
  
 
HREE HUNDRED AND TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
ON 
 
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in 
Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2023 
Ministry of Heavy Industries 
 
 
 
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 3rd  August , 202 
n the Table of Lok Sabha on 3rd  August , 202 
 
 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE   
REPORT  
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in 
Demands for Grants (2023 -24) pertaining to 
, 202 3) 
, 202 3) 
  
  REPORT NO. 
 
323 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND TW 
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in 
the 321st  Report of the Committee on 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
August , 2023 / Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
THREE HUNDRED AND TW ENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
ON 
 
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in 
Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2023 
Ministry of Heavy Industries 
 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  3rd  August , 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 3rd  August 
 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
REPORT  
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in 
Demands for Grants (2023 -24) pertaining to 
, 2023) 
August , 2023) 

 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGES 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………………………………     (i) 
 
2.  INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………………….    (ii) 
 
3.  ACRONYMS………………………………………………………………………..    (iii) – (v) 
 
4.  REPORT…………………………………………………………………………………    
1-30 
 
 
  CHAPTER – I Recommendations/Observations which ha ve been accepted 
by the Ministry………………………............................. 
 
    2-9 
  CHAPTER–II Recommendations/Observations which the  Committee does 
not desire to pursue further in view of the replies  of the 
Ministry……………………………….............................. 
 
 10-21 
         
  CHAPTER–III Recommendations/Observations in respe ct of which the 
Committee has not accepted the replies of the 
Ministry……………………….............................................. 
 
 
 22-30          
 
 
5. 
* MINUTES…………………………………………………………………………….          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*
 To be appended later . 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Constituted w.e.f.  13 th  September, 2022) 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 1. Shri Tiruchi Siva         -       Chairman 
  2.  Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya     
 3. Shrimati Sulata Deo 
 4. Shri Mithlesh Kumar 
 5. Shri Sandosh Kumar P  
 6. Shri Hishey Lachungpa 
 7. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
 8. Dr. Amee Yajnik 
 9. 
♣Dr. Sikander Kumar 
 10. + Vacant 
     
   LOK SABHA 
 
 10.   Shri Hanuman Beniwal 
 11.   Ms. Mimi Chakraborty 
 12.   Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
 13.   Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse 
 14.   Dr. S. T. Hasan 
 15.   Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
 16.   Shri Ravindra Kushwaha 
 17.   Shrimati Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam   
 18.   Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
 19.   Shri Ramprit Mandal 
 20.   Shri Vincent H. Pala 
 21.   Shri Chirag Paswan 
 22.   Shri T. R. V. S. Ramesh 
 23.   Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy 
 24.   Shrimati Gomati Sai 
 25.   Shri Ravi Kishan Shukla 
 26.   Shri Sunil Soren 
 27.   Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare 
 28.   Shri Su.Thirunavukkarasar 
 29.   Shri Vijaykumar ( alias ) Vijay Vasanth 
 30.   *Shri Kumbakudi Sudhakaran 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Vandana Kumar, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri S.Jason, Joint Secretary 
3.    Shri Jayanta Kumar Mallick, Director 
4.   Ms. Niangkhannem Guite, Deputy Secretary 
5.   Shri. Pratap Shenoy, Under Secretary 
 6.   Shri Abhimanyu Vishnoi, Assistant Committee O fficer 
 
♣ Nominated to the Committee w.e.f.  11.10.2022 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f.  13.02.2023 
+ Vacancy due to demise of Shri Hardwar Dubey on 26 th  June, 2023 
(i) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamen tary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorised by the Committee, hereby present this Three Hundred 
Twenty-Third Report on the Action Taken by the Mini stry of Heavy Industries on the 
recommendations contained in the Committee’s Three Hundred and Twenty-First Report 
on the Demands For Grants (2023-24) pertaining to Ministry of Heavy Industries. 
 2.  The Three Hundred and Twenty-First Report of t he Committee was presented to 
the Parliament on the 23 
rd  March, 2023. The Ministry of Heavy Industries furn ished the 
Action Taken Notes on the 5 th  June, 2023.  
3.  The Committee in its meeting held on the 1 st  August, 2023 considered and 
adopted the report. 
 
 
 TIRUCHI SIVA  
NEW DELHI;                                                                                                        Chairman, 
1
st  August, 2023                                                              Department-related Parliamentary 
Sravana 10, 1945 (Saka)                                                   Standing Committee on Industry, 
                                                                                                                           Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (ii) 
 

 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
2W Two- Wheeler 
3W Three-Wheeler 
4W Four Wheeler 
ABS Anti-Lock Braking Systems 
ACC Advanced Chemistry Cell 
AE Actual Expenditure 
AIS Automotive Industry Standards 
AYCL Andrew Yule and Company Ltd. 
BS Bharat Stage 
B&R Bridge & Roof Company Ltd. 
BE Budget Estimates 
BHEL Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited 
BHU Banaras Hindu University 
BMS Battery Management System 
BPCL Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited 
CAPEX Capital Expenditure 
CBS Combined Braking Systems 
CCEA 
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs  
CCI Cement Corporation of India Ltd. 
CGD Core Group of Secretaries on Disinvestment 
CHCs Custom Hiring Centres 
CMTI Central Manufacturing Technology Institute 
CMVR Central Motor Vehicles Rules 
CPSE  Central Public Sector Enterprises 
DA&FW Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
DEWG Digital Economy Working Group 
DFS Department of Financial Services 
DMRC Delhi Metro Rail Corporation 
 
(iii) 

 
 
 
DRDO Defence Research and Development Organisation 
EEPC Engineering Export Promotion Council 
EESL Energy Efficiency Services Limited 
EPIL Engineering Projects (India) Limited 
EV Electric Vehicle 
FAME  
 
Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid &) Electric 
Vehicles 
FPO Farmer Producer Organizations 
FY Financial Year 
GSR General Statutory Rules 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
GTRI Global Trade Research Initiative 
HEC Heavy Engineering Corporation 
HMT Hindustan Machine Tools 
HSL Hindustan Salts Limited 
ICE Internal Combustion Engine 
ICEMA Indian Construction Equipment Manufacturers A ssociation 
 
I&EBR Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources 
IFCI Industrial Finance Corporation of India 
 
 
IISCs Indian Institute of Sciences 
IIT Indian Institute of Technology 
MCCIA Mahratta Chambers of Commerce, Industry and A griculture 
MHI Ministry of Heavy Industries 
MoRTH Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways 
MSTC Metal Scrap Trade Corporation Limited 
MT Metric Tonne 
MTL  Machine Tools Limited 
MW Mega Watt 
 
 
(iv) 

 
 
NBFC Non Banking Financial Company 
NSTL Naval Science & Technological Laboratory 
OBD On-Board Diagnostics 
OMCs Oil Marketing Companies 
OEMs Original Equipment Manufacturers 
OPEX Operating Expenses 
PIOs Project Implementation Organizations 
PLI Production Linked Incentive 
PMA Premarket Approval 
PSEs Public Sector Enterprises 
PSU Public Sector Undertakings 
PV 
Photovoltaic  
QRR Quarterly Recurring Revenue  
RBI Reserve Bank of India 
R&D Research and Development 
RE Revised Estimates 
REIL Rajasthan Electronics and Instruments Limited 
RMDP Revival and Mill Development Plan 
SIAM 
Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers  
SHGs Self Help Groups  
SIL Scooters India Limited 
SMAM Sub-Mission on Agricultural Mechanization 
SPV Special Purpose Vehicles  
SSL Sambhar Salts Limited 
TMMA Textile Machinery Manufacturers Association 
UPSIDA Uttar Pradesh State Industrial Development A uthority 
VNIT 
Visvesvaraya National Institute of Technology  
VRS Voluntary Retirement Scheme 
 
 
 
 
(v) 
 

1 
 
REPORT  
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with  the Action Taken by 
the Ministry on the recommendations as contained in  its Three Hundred and 
Twenty First Report on Demands for Grants (2023-24)  pertaining to the Ministry 
of Heavy Industries.  
 
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries in respect of the recommendations/observations as contained in the 321 st  
Report. These have been categorized as follows: 
 
Chapter-I The Recommendations/observations, which h ave been accepted by the 
Ministry. 
   
Para: 7, 12, 17, 36, 38, 65 and 69  
(Total 07) 
  
Chapter-II  The Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not 
desire to pursue further in view of the Ministry’s replies. 
   
Para: 20, 23, 41, 45, 50, 53, 55, 56, 63 and 71  
 (Total 10)  
 
Chapter-III The Recommendations/observations in res pect of which the 
Committee has not accepted the replies of the Ministry.  
 
  Para: 8, 10, 29, 31, 34, 39 and 74 
  (Total 07) 
 
Chapter-IV The Recommendations/observations in resp ect of which the final 
replies of the Ministry are still awaited.  
  
 (Nil) 
 
3. The details of the Action Taken Replies of the Mini stry and further 
recommendations/observations of the Committee there on wherever found 
necessary are given in the succeeding pages.  
  

2 
 
CHAPTER – I 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes that the Budgetary allocation o f Rs 6171.63 crore for 
the Financial Year 2023-24 is the highest ever enha ncement in comparison to the 
BE of the previous years. The Committee notes the s ignificant enhanced fund 
allocation to the Ministry and hopes that the alloc ation would be utilized 
effectively in achieving the targets set by the Min istry for the Financial Year 2023-
24. 
 (Para 7) 
Action Taken Replies 
Against the Budget projection of Rs.6574.93 crore, Ministry of Heavy Industries 
has been allocated a fund of Rs.6171.63 crore which  is almost double the previous 
year’s budget. The major allocations of funds are f or FAME India Scheme-II 
(Rs.5171.97 crore), Production linked Incentive (PL I) Scheme for Automobiles 
and Auto Components (Rs.604.00 crore) and Enhanceme nt of Competitiveness in 
the India Capital Goods Sector (Rs.250.00 crore) for the Financial Year 2023-24. It 
is hoped to utilize the full allocation during 2023-24. 
 
(i).  AUTO: The FAME India Scheme Phase II is demand driven.  T his scheme 
helps in demand generation of electric vehicles by way of reducing the cost of 
acquisition of such vehicles. As the demand of elec tric vehicles increases, the pace 
in implementation of FAME India Scheme increases an d the fund utilization also 
increases.  
  The sale of electric vehicles under this scheme h as significantly increased 
over the years as seen from the table below:          
                                                                           (in lakh) 
Description FY 2019-20 FY 2020-21 
 FY 2021-22 FY 2022-23  
Registered EVs 1.72 1.41 4.50 11.76 
   

3 
 
As a result, the electric vehicle incentive disburs ement is expected to increase to 
meet the increasing demand of electric vehicles. 
(ii) . PLI Scheme for Automobile and Auto Components: Under this scheme, FY 
2023-24 is the first disbursement year as per the n otification issued by the MHI. 
Therefore, Rs. 604.00 crores has been allocated for  meeting the expenditure as per 
the scheme incentive outlay. 
(iii). Capital Goods Sector: It is pertinent to mention that under the Capital Goods 
Scheme Phase II, a  total of 27 projects with Proje ct Cost of Rs.909.38 crores have 
already been sanctioned so far. Thus, the total com mitment of MHI contribution 
for these projects is Rs.725.46 crore i.e. approx 8 0% of the project cost. MHI was 
able to utilize Rs.199.25 crores allocated for FY 2022-23. The budgetary allocation 
under the Scheme for FY 2023-24 is Rs 250 crores. T herefore, MHI expects to 
fully utilize the amount allotted under BE 2023-24 for the projects sanctioned so 
far and also for the projects which will be sanctioned in the current Financial Year.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee observes that for the Financial Year 2023-24, the Budget 
Projection of the Ministry was Rs 6574.93 crore against which Ministry of Finance 
has allocated Rs 6171.63 crore, which is about 93.8 7% of the projection, as such, 
there is a shortfall of Rs 403.30 crore in allocati on. The budgetary allocation for 
the major Schemes of Ministry such as FAME India an d Scheme for 
Competitiveness in Capital Goods Sector have also s hortfall in allocation for the 
FY2023-24. The Committee recommends that the Minist ry should take all-out 
effort to strategize and utilize the major part of the allocations timely and if need 
be, allocation for more funds should be projected a t the RE stage to avoid any 
hindrance  in the effective implementation of these Flagship Schemes. 
 (Para 12) 
Action Taken Replies 
The recommendation of the Committee is noted. Under  the Scheme for 
Competitiveness in Capital Goods Sector, MHI is exp editing process of 
sanctioning of proposals and has already sanctioned  Rs 909 crores worth of 
proposals till 22.05.2023 out of total outlay of th e scheme of Rs.1207 crores. 
Further sufficient proposals for development of nic he technologies from different 
Institutes spread across India are under examinatio n for approval. As mentioned 

4 
 
earlier, MHI was able to utilize funds to the tune of Rs 199.25 crores, allocated at 
RE stage for FY 2022-23. MHI will make best efforts  to ensure that Rs 250 crores 
allotted for year 2023-24 are also fully utilized. The allocation shall be reviewed at 
RE stage based on fund utilization and demand recei ved from the Project 
Implementation Organizations (PIOs) and more funds will be sought at RE stage, if 
required.  
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee notes that there were various unforeseen circumstances such 
as Covid-19 Pandemic induced constraints, etc. due to which the major portions of 
the funds were surrendered in the FYs 2019-20, 2020 -21 and 2021-22. It was also 
observed that under the major and important Scheme for Enhancement of 
Competitiveness in Capital Goods Sector, surrender of huge amounts were made 
continuously since FYs 2019-20 to 2021-22 due to re ceipt of less number of 
proposals from the implementing agencies. The Commi ttee is of the view that huge 
surrender of funds defeats the very objective of th e schemes envisioned. The 
Committee desires that the Ministry should analyze and find out the reasons why 
adequate number of proposals were not received unde r the scheme and should 
devise a plan to promote the Schemes through awaren ess programmes/campaigns 
so that the funds made available to the Schemes are  properly utilized and the goal 
of Make in India and Atmanirbhar Bharat Mission is realized for the overall 
economic development of the country. 
(Para 17) 
Action Taken Replies  
MHI takes note of the above observation of the Comm ittee. It is submitted that   in 
order to further boost the Capital Goods Sector, on  January 25, 2022, the Ministry 
of Heavy Industries (MHI) has notified the Scheme o n Enhancement of 
Competitiveness in The Indian Capital Goods Sector-  Phase-II for providing 
assistance for Technology Development and creation of common Services 
Infrastructure. The scheme has a financial outlay of Rs. 1207 crores with budgetary 
support of Rs.975 crore and Industry Contribution o f Rs.232 crores. Since 
the  notification of the Scheme, several project pr oposals have been received and 
after due diligence, as per the guidelines of the S cheme, a total of 27 projects with 
Project cost of Rs. 909.38 crores have been sanctio ned so far.  The total 
commitment of MHI contribution for these projects i s Rs.725.46 crore i.e. approx 
80% of the project cost.  MHI was able to gainfully make a utilization of Rs.199.25 

5 
 
crores out of the allocated amount of Rs.199.32 crores at RE stage for FY 2022-23. 
Thus, MHI was able to fully utilize the allocated funds for the FY 2022-23.  
   Further, a large number of promotional events fo r the promotion of Capital 
Goods Sector and Capital Goods Scheme have been sup ported in the FY 2022-23. 
These events have been organised by several Industr y Associations and 
organizations such as Engineering Export Promotion Council (EEPC), Textile 
Machinery Manufacturers Association (TMMA), ICEMA, IIT BHU, Mahratta 
Chambers of Commerce, Industry and Agriculture (MCC IA), VNIT Nagpur etc. 
Further, on its own, MHI has also organized followi ng two major events to create 
awareness/ importance of Capital Goods Sector towards ‘Atmanirbhar Bharat’: 
i. A one day Conference on Industry 4.0 with theme “In dustry 4.0 -Challenges 
Ahead" was organised on 7th October 2022 at Kevadia , Gujarat. The event 
was chaired by Dr. Mahendra Nath Pandey, Hon'ble Mi nister for Heavy 
Industries and was also attended by Shri Bhupendra Patel, Hon’ble Chief 
Minister, Gujarat and Shri Krishan Pal Gurjar, Hon’ ble MoS for Heavy 
Industries. The deliberations in the Conference has  emphasized upon faster 
adoption of Industry 4.0 on a larger scale and maki ng India a manufacturing 
powerhouse. More than 200 participants from various  industries, Academic 
institutions, research institutes, skill councils e tc. from various parts of the 
Country attended the event and more than 15,000 att ended the Conference 
through online mediums. The event was well apprecia ted by the participants 
as it also provided them an opportunity to interact  and share their 
experiences with the experts from Industry, Academi c and Research 
Institutes etc.  The event also witnessed the flagg ing off the 175 Electric 
Buses for the States of Gujarat and Karnataka by Dr . Mahendra Nath 
Pandey, Hon’ble Minister for Heavy Industries. 
ii. MHI participated in the First Digital Economy Worki ng Group (DEWG), 
G20 meeting held from 13th to 15th February, 2023 i n Lucknow. The event 
was inaugurated in the presence of Hon’ble Minister  of Heavy Industries, 
Hon’ble Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh, Hon’ble Mi nister of Electronics & 
Information Technology, and Hon’ble Minister of Sta te for Electronics and 
Information Technology of India. 
In the exhibition, MHI set up an SMART pavilion whi ch portrayed its 
digital capabilities and initiatives through SAMART H Centres developed 
under the MHI’s Scheme for “Enhancement of Competit iveness in the 
Indian Capital Goods Sector”, Centres of Excellence and BHEL. 

6 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee is of the view that charging infrastr ucture is critical for 
successfully switching over to the EV mode of trans port and expresses its concern 
that EV charging stations have been sanctioned only  for a few cities, expressways 
and highways. For the effective promotion of the EV s throughout the country, it is 
needless to say that more charging stations need to  be installed. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should approach the Mi nistry of Finance for 
enhanced allocation of funds at the RE stage, so th at the requirements of installing 
more charging facilities under the FAME-II Scheme are met to give a much needed 
boost to the Electric Mobility.  
(Para 36) 
Action Taken Replies  
The required fund will be sought from the Ministry of Finance at RE Stage. 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee notes the higher allocation of Rs 517 1.97 crore made under 
the FAME-II Scheme for the Financial Year 2023-24, which constitutes more than 
80% of the total budget of the Ministry, which woul d provide greater thrust to the 
electric mobility in the country. The Committee also notes that the major portion of 
the fund allocated under FAME-II Scheme for the FY2 023-24 is for the Buses and 
Chargers, i.e. Rs 3179 crores with around Rs. 180 c rore for the chargers and rest 
for the buses. However, the Ministry has not been a ble to install most of the 
Chargers under the FAME Scheme and therefore, the M inistry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas has been roped in on the proposal to ro ll out charging stations in the 
retail outlets of Public Sector Units. The Committee appreciates the decision of the 
Ministry as Public Sector Units in oil industries a re more apt and already in the 
business of providing energy solutions to the count ry and such tie up will result in 
faster realization of the Scheme. 
 (Para 38) 
Action Taken Replies  
The Ministry of Heavy Industries has released an am ount of Rs. 560 Cr. to Oil 
Marketing Companies (OMCs) for charging infrastruct ure under FAME India 
Scheme Phase-II in the FY 2022-23. Further, the rec ommendations of the 

7 
 
committee are noted to provide greater thrust to th e electric mobility in the 
country. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee notes that, under autonomous bodies, only Central 
Manufacturing Technology Institute (CMTI) has been sanctioned funds under the 
BE for the FY 2023-24, and there has been no provis ion of funds for other 
autonomous bodies. In the present time, R&D and tec hnological upgradation are 
of critical importance to keep pace with the global  competition. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should also focus on o ther R&D institutions as well 
and provide them the necessary budgetary support fo r the advancement of 
technology. The budget allotted to CMTI, Bengaluru should be utilized optimally to 
get the desired results and if the need arises, the  Ministry may seek for 
enhancement of allocation at the RE stage. 
(Para 65) 
Action Taken Replies  
Regarding the allocation for Central Manufacturing Technology Institute (CMTI), 
it is stated that the allocation of Rs.24 crore has been fully utilised during the   year 
2022-23. Further, for the FY 2023-24, in addition t o the regular requirement, 
CMTI has committed to develop 16 machines and subsy stems over next three 
years under MHI Capital Goods Scheme. This demands additional resources to 
cater for the increased needs. Therefore, the same allocation of Rs.24 crore has 
been kept for the FY 2023-24. The allocation would be reviewed at RE stage and if 
required the enhanced allocation would be sought at  RE stage for CMTI. If any 
proposal is received from any autonomous organizati on seeking budgetary support 
for the development of technology, that will be considered. 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee notes with dismay that year after yea r the number of Central 
Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) under the control  of the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries (MHI) are decreasing. The Committee reco mmends that the Ministry 
should work towards enhancing the performance of CP SEs under its control and 
adopt restructuring measures to revive the loss mak ing CPSEs so that no further 
closure of the CPSEs takes place. In view of the fa ct that while privately run 
enterprises/industries are thriving ever in the com petitive market conditions, the 

8 
 
Ministry should take a serious and holistic analysi s of the causes making its PSEs 
sick and loss-making and make concerted efforts for  their revival/restoration. The 
steps taken in this regard may be furnished to the Committee at the time of Action 
Taken Replies.  
(Para 69) 
Action Taken Replies  
EPIL: With increased opportunities in Infrastructure, EPI L is likely to increase its 
order book substantially and turn profitable shortly. 
 h)  Project Management Consultant for Solar Projects. 
 
HSL/SSL: Not Applicable on HSL /SSL since both companies are earning Profits.   
 
HMT: In order to turn around of HMT Group of Companies, following steps are 
taken: 
(a)  Management has taken many initiatives like ent ering into Joint working 
arrangements.  
(b) Collaboration with Academic Institutions, utili zation of spare capacity by 
manufacturing Customer Components, and   
(c)  Appointment of Channel Partners etc.  
REIL : REIL has taken several initiatives to enhance the p erformance in order to 
make it profitable CPSE which are detailed below:- 
a) Capacity enhancement through upgradation of Solar P V Module (100 MW) 
manufacturing facilities. 
b) Project for supply of Solar Home Lighting System in  Guyana Energy Agency 
c) Milk Analysis Solutions to infrastructures under State Co-op. Milk Federations 
d) Solutions for Solar Water Pumping under PM KUSUM Sc heme, Solar Roof 
Top projects, SPV Module sale etc. 
e) Setting up of Electric Vehicle Charging Stations under FAME 
f) Smart Classroom Solution in Education Sector 
g) Drone and Aerial Surveillance System in the area of  Agriculture, Mining and 
Land record etc. 

9 
 
With these above initiatives, the HMT Group is expe cting to improve the 
performance substantially during the current financial year. 
NEPA Ltd.: On completion of the Revival and Mill Development P lan (RMDP), 
the capacity of the production of the company has i ncreased from 80,000 MT/ 
Annum to 100000 MT/Annum. The quality of the newspr int produced by the 
company is comparable to the best in the market as per feedback received from 
various leading Newspaper Publishing Houses. The co mpany has received a major 
order from Danik Bhaskar Group of Companies and exp ects to receive more 
sustainable orders from other Publishing Houses. Al so, the company is 
diversifying into the writing and printing segment once established, the company 
expects to make profit from the Financial Year 2024-2025 onwards. 
CCI: CCEA in its meeting held on 27.10.2016 approved tha t ‘Units of CCI, 
wherever legally permissible, be dis-invested unit- wise or in groups of Units to 
strategic buyer identified through two stage auctio n processes. In pursuant to 
CCEA's decision the disinvestment of CCI is under process.  
However, periodic performance review meetings are h eld in the Ministry 
wherein bottlenecks in production, turnover, capacity utilisation etc., are addressed 
& discussed and ways to increase the profitability,  net worth etc., are 
suggested.  These periodic performance reviews, constant monitoring and feedback 
process has inter-alia resulted in improvement of CCI's results.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10 
 
CHAPTER–II 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE FURTHER IN VIEW OF 
THE MINISTRY’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee notes that the passenger car sector o f India grew 
significantly as India became the 3rd largest manufacturer of passenger cars in the 
world.  At the same time, in 2-Wheeler sector, Indi a has slipped to 2nd position 
from the 1st position as compared to the FY2021-22.  While the Committee 
commends the efforts of the Ministry in respect of manufacture of passenger cars, 
it however notes with concern the decline in manufa cturing of 2-Wheelers in view 
of the extensive use of 2-Wheelers in the country. The Committee is of the view that 
the Ministry should conduct a holistic study and lo ok into the shortcomings that 
have caused India to slip down to 2nd position in m anufacturing of 2-Wheelers so 
that corrective measures can be taken timely to enable India to regain its position.         
                       
(Para 20) 
Action Taken Replies 
As per the information received from SIAM, India ha d manufactured more than 25 
million units of two-wheelers in the year 2018, whi ch has been the highest ever. 
Thereafter, for the next two-years India had posted  decline in manufacturing of 
Two-wheelers by (-) 12% and (-) 23% in 2019 and 202 0, respectively, compared to 
the preceding year. 
  Though the decline in manufacturing of two-wheele rs has been due to Covid 
in the year 2020, however, this industry witnessed a de-growth even in the pre-
Covid period, in the year 2019. In the year 2021, t here was a slight increase in the 
manufacturing of two-wheelers to 18.9 million units  and in 2022 to about 19.6 
million units. This increase was primarily driven b y the demand in the Exports 
market, while the domestic demand for two-wheelers in 2021 remained almost flat 
and there was a marginal increase in 2022. 
 There are multiple factors that have led to this de-growth:  

11 
 
• Regulatory Impact: Several new mandatory regulation s were introduced in 
India that led to the increase in cost of the Two-W heelers. In the year 2018, 
Government of India mandated Anti-Lock Braking Syst ems (ABS) for all Two-
Wheelers above 125 cc and Combined Braking Systems (CBS) for all Two-
Wheelers up to 125 cc. Subsequently in 2020, within  a period of 3 years, it was 
mandated for all Two-Wheelers to move directly to B S VI Emission norms, from 
BS IV emission levels which were only introduced across the country in year 2017. 
Recently, from 1 st  April 2023, the Two-Wheeler industry has been agai n mandated 
to move to next stage of BS VI Emission norms, which has additional requirements 
on On-Board Diagnostics (OBD) systems and these req uirements would be again 
made more stringent from April 2025, resulting in i ncrease in the cost of the Two-
Wheelers.  
• Mandatory Long Term 3 rd  Party Insurance: In the year 2018, Hon’ble 
Supreme Court of India mandated payment of 5-year u pfront premium for 3 rd  party 
insurance based on the recommendation of the Suprem e Court Committee on Road 
Safety. The premium was also increased in the year 2022, which has put further 
burden on the two-wheeler consumers.  
• Increase in Commodity Prices: Following the Covid P andemic in 2020, 
prices of commodities and shortages of electronic items, especially in 2021, pushed 
up the input cost of the two-wheelers significantly.  
• Recovery of the Rural Economy: A large portion of t he Two-Wheeler sales 
in India is driven through rural market, especially  for the motorcycles. Following 
the Covid, the rural segment has recovered at a muc h slower pace compared to the 
urban areas in India, which has resulted in subdued  growth of the two-wheeler 
segment, compared to much faster growth in Passenge r Vehicles or Commercial 
vehicles.  
• Higher Lending Rates: Recently RBI has hiked the le nding rates. These have 
impacts on the rates offered by NBFCs to the consum ers. NBFCs support about 
60% of two-wheeler sales in the country. Hence, non-availability of credits at lower 
rates has also impacted the Two-Wheeler purchases. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee expresses its appreciation that India n Tractor Industry has 
begun to make penetration slowly into the internati onal market which is 
encouraging and laudable. However, it observes with  concern that the production 
of Power Tillers, Combine Harvesters and other Agri cultural Machineries are 
negligible and therefore recommends that the Minist ry of Heavy Industries in 
coordination with the Ministry of Agriculture and F armers Welfare should work 

12 
 
towards promotion of agricultural tools and machinery which will ultimately boost 
the Agricultural Machinery Sector. It is of the fir m confidence that a robust push 
towards production of agricultural machineries will  go a long way in agriculture 
production of the country as well as bring in more revenue to the farmers. 
 (Para 23) 
Action Taken Replies 
India is already largest manufacturer of tractors i n the world. The production of 
indigenous power tillers is undertaken by 5 differe nt companies and together their 
annual production is 55000 Nos. Similarly, combine harvesters are manufactured 
by 48 manufactures with total annual volume of 7000  Nos. Farm machinery and 
equipments are also manufactured by more than 2500 small scale manufacturers. 
The organized farm machinery sector includes about 250 medium to large -scale 
units that produce sophisticated machinery. 
In order to lay special emphasis towards promotion of agricultural mechanization 
in the country and to bring more inclusiveness, Sub -Mission on Agricultural 
Mechanization (SMAM) is being implemented by DA&FW since April 2014 with 
the major objectives of increasing the reach of far m mechanization to small and 
marginal farmers and to the regions where availabil ity of farm power is low; 
promoting ‘Custom Hiring Centres’ to offset the adv erse economies of scale 
arising due to small landholding and high cost of i ndividual ownership of 
machines; and creating awareness among stakeholders  through demonstration and 
capacity building activities. 
Under SMAM, financial assistance for purchase of ag ricultural machines and 
equipments by the farmers on individual ownership b asis is provided to the small 
and marginal farmers, Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tri be farmers, Women farmers 
and North Eastern Region Farmers @50% of the cost o f machine with applicable 
ceiling limits. For other farmers the rate of finan cial assistance is @40% of the 
cost. 
Custom Hiring Centres (CHCs) and Hi-Tech, High Productive Equipment Hubs for 
Custom Hiring aims at creating infrastructure for m aking available machines and 
equipments to the farmers on rental basis. Financia l assistance @ 40% of the 
project cost is provided to Rural Entrepreneurs (Ru ral youth and farmer as an 
entrepreneur), Cooperative Societies of farmers, Fa rmer Producer Organizations 
(FPOs), SHGs and Panchayats. The project cost of CH Cs can be up to Rs. 60 lakh 
and that of Hi-tech hubs can be up to Rs. 250 lakh. 

13 
 
Financial assistance @ 80% of the project cost is p rovided to Cooperative 
Societies, FPOs, SHGs and Panchayats to set up Farm  Machinery Banks of project 
cost up to Rs. 10 lakhs in identified villages in l ow mechanized States. For the 
North-Eastern States, the rate of financial assista nce is @95% of the project cost 
for the projects up to Rs. 10 Lakhs.  
Since inception of the scheme, Rs.6120.85 Crore hav e been provided to various 
States for distribution of 15,23,650 numbers of agricultural machineries. The States 
have also established 43,954 numbers of Custom Hiri ng Centres/Hi-tech hubs of 
high-cost machinery/Village level farm machinery ba nks to ensure easy 
availability of agricultural machines and equipments to the farmers on rental basis. 
The Department has also implemented a Central Secto r Scheme on Crop Residue 
Management in the States of Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and NCT of Delhi. 
Under this schemes, during the period from 2018-19 to 2022-23, more than 2.41 
lakh various agricultural machines and equipments s uitable for in-situ and ex-situ 
management of crop residue have been provided to th e farmers on individual 
ownership basis with financial assistance @ 50% of the cost of machines and to 
more than 38000 Custom Hiring Centres with financia l assistance @ 80% of the 
project cost. 
The interventions under the above stated schemes ha s helped in increasing the 
level farm power availability for various farming o perations in the country and 
thus contributed to increasing the production and p roductivity of farms for higher 
income of the farmers. It has also helped boosting the agricultural machinery 
manufacturing sector of the country. 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. As the Vehicle Scrapping Policy of the Ministry of Road, Transport & 
Highways, provides various incentive mechanisms to induce End-of-life vehicle 
owners to scrap older vehicles like good scrap valu e for old vehicles, registration 
fee waiver on purchase of new vehicles, tax concess ions by State Governments, 
upfront discount by auto Original Equipment Manufac turers (OEMs) etc., the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should colla borate with other concerned 
Ministries for a holistic promotion of EVs and also  work out a comprehensive 
policy to give incentives on purchase of new Electr ic Vehicles to the End-of-life 
vehicle owners, which will go a long way in encoura ging the faster adoption of the 

14 
 
Electric Vehicles and promoting environment friendl y transportation in the 
country.  
(Para 41) 
Action Taken Replies 
As per the vehicle Scrapping policy of MoRTH, follo wing incentives has been 
mentioned in the scheme: 
(i) Scrap Value for the old vehicle given by the sc rapping centre, approximately 4-
6% of ex-showroom price of a new vehicle  (ii)   Re gistration fees to be waived off 
for purchase of new vehicle against the certificate  of deposit - draft notification 
issued  (iii) Draft rules notified for state govern ments to offer concession on motor 
vehicle tax of • Up to 25% for non-transport vehicl es • Up to 15% for transport 
vehicles  (iv) Auto OEMs have been advised to provi de 5% discount on purchase 
of new vehicle against the certificate of deposit. 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee was informed that the Production Link ed Incentive (PLI) 
Scheme for Automobile and Auto Components is expect ed to attract investment of 
around Rs 67,690 crore and will generate around 1.4 5 lakh direct employment. 
Eighty five (85) applicants, both overseas and Indi an, have been approved under 
the components of this scheme. As per the data prov ided by MHI, the actual 
expenditure under this scheme for the FY 2022-23 till 31st January, 2023 is nil and 
the RE amount of Rs. 10.74 crore is lying unutilize d which is not a good reflection 
of expenditure management in view of the importance  of the Scheme to promote 
domestic manufacturing as a part of Make in India a nd Atmanirbhar Bharat 
Mission. The Committee is of the view that a yearly  action plan with time-frame 
should be devised for optimum utilization of funds under the Scheme and its 
effective implementation.  
(Para 45) 
Action Taken Replies 
The first disbursement year for PLI Automobile Sche me is FY 2023-24 and an 
amount of Rs. 604.00 crores has been allocated unde r BE 2023-24. Further, the 
Ministry of Heavy Industries has organized regular meetings with IFCI (PMA for 
PLI Automobile), DFS to review on regular basis. Fu rther, it is mentioned that all 

15 
 
the approved applicant under this scheme submit the ir performance on quarterly 
basis through designated portal (PLI Auto) under QRR Section.  
Recommendation/Observation 
12. As per the data provided by the Ministry, the RE fo r the FY 2022-23 is fully 
utilized. However, the budget allocated for this Sc heme is Rs 1.00 crore for the 
financial year 2023-24. The Committee is of the vie w that this is an ambitious 
scheme which will facilitate in realizing the goal of Make in India and 
Atmanirbhar Bharat by promoting newer and niche tec hnologies and therefore 
needs to be implemented timely and effectively. The  Committee recommends that 
the Ministry should complete its pre-requisites in the gestation period by providing 
necessary support for setting up and commissioning of manufacturing facilities by 
the beneficiary firms and if required, seek for enh anced allocation at the RE stage 
so that the scheme is implemented effectively and proved to be efficacious.  
(Para 50) 
Action Taken Replies 
The projects of the beneficiaries awarded under PLI -ACC Scheme, are under 
gestation for a period of 2 years w.e.f. 01/01/2023 . After the achievement of 
milestone-I, the beneficiaries shall start submission of the claims for subsidy. In FY 
2023-24, no claims are expected towards subsidy. In  view of above, the budget 
allocation of Rs. 1 crore in FY 2023-24 seems to be in order.  
Recommendation/Observation 
13. Taking note of the  report of the economic think ta nk, Global Trade 
Research Initiative (GTRI) as reported by the Indian Express dated the 8th March, 
2023, the Committee recommends that the Ministry sh ould look into the issues 
raised therein holistically with a view to address the concerns and apprehensions 
with regard to the viability of the electric mode of transport and the dependence on 
China for battery production and apprise the Committee in this regard.  
 (Para 53) 
Action Taken Replies 
PLI-ACC aims to optimally incentivize potential inv estors, both domestic and 
overseas, to set- up Giga-scale ACC manufacturing f acilities. The scheme 
envisages domestic value addition and will reduce t he overall cost of battery cells 

16 
 
thereby shifting dependence on imports, reducing co st and improving viability of 
electric vehicles.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
14. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should i n consultation with 
the stakeholders analyse and ascertain the root cau se of fire incidents in EVs and 
find a solution for it so that such incidents do no t take place so as to avoid any 
casualty. Besides, proper guidelines should be issu ed for the users and adequate 
awareness should be generated among the people rega rding the proper usage of 
Electric Vehicles.  
 (Para 55) 
Action Taken Replies 
As per the information received from the Ministry o f Road Transport and 
Highways (MoRTH), the prototypes/components of elec tric vehicles are tested by 
the test agencies notified under Rule 126 of Centra l Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989, 
for compliance to standards notified by the Ministr y of Road Transport and 
Highways.  Further, MoRTH had constituted a team of  independent experts from 
DRDO, Indian Institute of Science (IISC) Bengaluru,  and Naval Science & 
Technological Laboratory (NSTL) Visakhapatnam, IIT Chennai to revise the safety 
Standards for the battery and its components, BMS a nd related systems in electric 
vehicles.                                      
Based on the recommendation of the committee, Ministry of Road Transport 
and Highways vide S.O. 4567(E) dated 28th September , 2022 has brought 
amendment to the Automotive Industry Standards, AIS :156 [Specific requirements 
for L (a motor vehicle less than four wheels and qu adricycle) category electric 
power train vehicles] and AIS:038 (Rev 2) [Specific Requirements for M Category, 
(a motor vehicle with at least four wheels used for  carrying passenger) N Category 
(a motor vehicle with at least four wheels used for  carrying goods) Electric Power 
Train Vehicles] to prescribe Technical Requirements  for Traction Battery of L, M 
and N Category of Electric Power Train Vehicles. Th e said Amendments are 
applicable from 1st December, 2022 and some clauses  of these AIS standards will 
be effective from 31st March, 2023.  

17 
 
MoRTH vide G.S.R. 888(E) dated 19th December 2022 h as amended sub 
rule 4 of Rule 124 of  CMVR (Central Motor Vehicles  Rules), 1989  whereby the 
procedure for type approval and establishing confor mity of production for 
components related to Traction Battery for Electric   Power train Vehicles has been 
prescribed. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
15. The Committee recommends that adequate and internat ionally accepted 
safety standards should be adopted to ensure safety  of the vehicles and its users. A 
proper venting mechanism for overheated cells in th e battery must be put in place. 
Besides, the following safety measures to prevent f ire hazards in the Electric 
Vehicles may be followed:  
(i) Use of fire-resistant materials such as aluminum, s tainless steel, and 
other non-combustible materials for the body of the electric vehicles.  
(ii) Use of fire-resistant insulation materials in the b attery compartment 
and other areas where the electric vehicle components are located.  
(iii) Installation of fire-extinguisher system in the bat tery compartment to 
extinguish any fires that may occur. 
(iv) Installation of fire-resistant wiring and other electrical components to 
reduce the risk of fire due to short circuits.  
(v) Installation of fire-resistant brakes and other saf ety components to 
reduce the risk of fire due to friction.  
(vi) Installation of temperature sensors in the battery compartment to 
detect any overheating and activate the fire suppression system.  
(vii) Installation of battery management system to monito r the temperature 
and charge levels of the battery and alert the driv er if any anomalies 
are detected.  
(viii) Installation of cooling system in the battery compa rtment to keep 
the temperature of the battery within a safe range. 
 (Para 56) 
Action Taken Replies 
As per the information received from the Ministry o f Road Transport and 
Highways (MoRTH), the prototypes / components of electric vehicles are tested by 
the test agencies notified under Rule 126 of Centra l Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989, 

18 
 
for compliance to standards notified by the Ministr y of Road Transport and 
Highways. Further, MoRTH had constituted a team of independent experts from 
DRDO, Indian Institute of Science (IISC) Bengaluru,  and Naval Science & 
Technological Laboratory (NSTL) Visakhapatnam, IIT Chennai to revise the safety 
Standards for the battery and its components, BMS a nd related systems in electric 
vehicles.                                  
Based on the recommendation of the committee, Ministry of Road Transport 
and Highways vide S.O. 4567(E) dated 28th September , 2022 has brought 
amendment to the Automotive Industry Standards, AIS :156 [Specific requirements 
for L (a motor vehicle less than four wheels and qu adricycle) category electric 
power train vehicles] and AIS:038 (Rev 2) [Specific Requirements for M Category, 
(a motor vehicle with at least four wheels used for  carrying passenger) N Category 
(a motor vehicle with at least four wheels used for  carrying goods) Electric Power 
Train Vehicles] to prescribe Technical Requirements  for Traction Battery of L, M 
and N Category of Electric Power Train Vehicles. Th e said Amendments are 
applicable from 1st December, 2022 and some clauses  of these AIS standards will 
be effective from 31st March, 2023. 
MoRTH vide G.S.R. 888(E) dated 19th December 2022 h as amended sub 
rule 4 of Rule 124 of  CMVR (Central Motor Vehicles  Rules), 1989  whereby the 
procedure for type approval and establishing confor mity of production for 
components related to Traction Battery for Electric   Power train Vehicles has been 
prescribed.  
Recommendation/Observation 
16. The Committee is of the view that enhancement of Co mpetitiveness in 
Capital Goods Sector is vital for its successful ex pansion, which plays an 
important role in boosting the growth in manufacturing sector and accelerating the 
growth trajectory of the country. As constraints fa ced due to shortage of funds are 
undesirable for the effective implementation of the  Scheme, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should timely utilize the funds and make effort to 
compensate the shortfall at the RE Stage. The Commi ttee also notes that no 
allocation has been made for industry associations and PSUs for undertaking 
promotional activities for the development of capit al goods sector. The Committee 
is of the view that promotional activities for deve lopment of capital goods sector 

19 
 
are important to disseminate the benefits of scheme s of the Government to the 
stakeholders and the Ministry should take up the ma tter with the Ministry of 
Finance for a re-look on budgetary projection for u ndertaking promotional 
activities by industry associations and PSUs.  
(Para 63) 
Action Taken Replies 
It may be mentioned that under the Capital Goods sc heme, MHI was able to fully 
utilise funds allocated in the FY 2022-23. Further for FY 2023-24, Rs.250 
crore have been allocated for the scheme. Therefore , there are no such constraints 
faced by the Ministry in effective implementation o f the Capital Goods Scheme 
and the implementation of the scheme is on track. 
 
With regard to the issue of allocation for the head  ‘Industry associations and 
PSUs for undertaking promotional activities’, the s ame will be covered under the 
promotional activities for development of Capital G oods Sector to disseminate the 
benefits of Capital Goods scheme to the stakeholder s are being carried out through 
the head ‘Advertising & Publicity’ of the Capital G oods Scheme itself and there is 
no constraints faced by MHI in supporting the promotional activities.  
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
17. The Committee observes that the actual utilisation of funds till 31.01.2023 in 
case of a number of Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) through Internal & 
Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR) as against the RE 2022-23 is very negligible.  
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should f ind out the reasons for the 
under-utilisation of IEBR and ensure that the funds  raised are properly utilised 
before the end of financial year.  
(Para 71) 
Action Taken Replies 
B&R: It may be stated that Bridge and Roof does not rece ive any Budgetary 
Support from the Government and the Capital Expendi ture (IEBR) of B&R is the 
expenditure against procurement of Capital Equipmen t from internal generation of 
funds. 
 It may please be noted that B&R has purchased Capi tal Equipment of 
Rs.5.38 cr. (Unaudited Provisional) during FY 2022- 23 surpassing its B.E. of 
IEBR of Rs.5.00 cr. 

20 
 
 The funds are fully utilized for purchase of Capit al Equipment which are 
deployed at various project sites during execution of the contracts across the 
country. 
 
AYCL: In this regard, AYCL has informed that actual Utili zation of IEBR funds 
till 31.01.2023 is Rs.33.36 cr. which is 99% (appro x.) of the IEBR budget till 
31.01.2023. Further, 100% of the IEBR funds of Rs.3 8.53 cr. as per RE 2022-23 
for AYCL has been achieved from Internal Resources only. 
 
HSL/SSL: Company has not received any extra budgetary suppor t from the 
Ministry during FY 2022-2023. HSL/SSL spent Rs. 4.85 crores for CAPEX during 
FY 2022-23. The funds for the IEBR was earmarked ou t of the profits earned by 
the company during FY 2022-23 and were fully utilized.  
 
EPIL: EPIL didn’t receive any budgetary support form Ministry of Heavy Industry 
(MHI) for Capex and the same is managed with Intern al Resources only. The 
IEBR target has been set for Capex i.e. Software & Computers, furniture & 
Fixtures and Office Equipments only which is based on the need and case to case 
basis. The CAPEX has been incurred judicially accordingly. 
The target viz. achievement details of the IEBR (CAPEX) of current year up 
to 31.01.2023 are place below for ready reference. 
The IEBR (CAPEX) achievement details are as below:- 
                                                                                                (Rs. in Crore) 
Year BE/RE Actual Expenses % Achievement 
2022-23 till 
31.01.2023 
1.50 1.08 72% 
 
HMT:  Revised Estimate IEBR of Rs.13.33 crore from HMT G roup for the year 
2022-23,  
• Out of Rs 13.13 crores estimated, Rs.11.15 crore gi ven to wholly owned 
subsidiary HMT Machine Tools Limited (HMT MTL) as W orking capital 
loan.  
• The balance amount of Rs.1.28 crore has been utiliz ed towards Capital 
expenditure of HMT Group of companies (till 31.01.2023).  

21 
 
HMT Group has submitted IEBR of Rs 1.50 crores for FY 2022-23.  
NEPA Ltd.:  No amount was sanctioned in the Financial Year 202 2-2023. The 
carried forward amount of RMDP was paid based on te rms and conditions of the 
contract which directly depended on work progress. Therefore, the company has 
not defaulted in this regard. 
CCI: CCI does not raise any funds for IEBR from External  Resources. Any 
expenditure in IEBR done by CCI is from its own res ources, therefore, projects 
taken up are on need basis only for smooth operation of plants. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

22 
 
CHAPTER–III 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
THE COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED THE REPLIES OF THE 
MINISTRY 
Recommendation/Observation 
18. The Committee also notes that the Ministry has been  able to utilize more 
than 99% of the funds provided at the RE Stage in t he previous two Financial 
Years i.e. 2020-21 & 2021-22. However, in the Finan cial Year 2022-23, the 
Ministry has been able to utilize only Rs. 1428.71 crore, which is 44.36% of the RE 
allocations of Rs. 3220.33 crore till 31.01.2023. T he Committee recommends that 
the Ministry should ensure that the entire fund all ocated at the RE stage is utilized 
effectively in consonance with the financial policy  and henceforth should 
rationalize the expenditure throughout the year eve nly to avoid any uneven 
spending during the last quarter of the financial year in future. 
 (Para 8) 
Action Taken Replies 
In the financial year 2022-23, budget provision of MHI was Rs.3306.00 crore 
which was reduced to Rs.3220.33 crore at RE Stage. Against the RE allocation of 
Rs.3220.33 crore, an expenditure of Rs.2713.18 cror e was made by the end of the 
FY 2022-23. However, the recommendations/observatio n of the committee has 
been noted for future compliance. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
The Committee notes that the funds allocated for th e FY 2023-24 is almost 
double the allocations made in the FY 2022-23 as gi ven in the Action Taken 
Replies to Para 7 of the 321 
st  Report of the Committee. Keeping in view the 
fact that an expenditure of only Rs 2713.18 crore i.e.  84.25 per cent, could be 
made by the end of the FY 2022-23 against the RE al location of Rs. 3220.33 
crore, the Committee is of the view that the Minist ry should monitor the fund 
utilization pattern regularly so that the possibili ty of under-utilization of 
funds is avoided in the FY 2023-24.  
 
 

23 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
19. The Committee observes that the expenditure of the Ministry under most of 
its minor heads was sluggish throughout the Financi al Year 2022-23, and even at 
the fag end of the financial year, expenditure unde r “Revenue Section” was barely 
43.6% of the RE and most of the funds under “Capita l Section” was surrendered 
at the RE stage, which reflects imprudent financial management and planning. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should draw up a clear and 
comprehensible plan for the Financial Year 2023-24 so as to avoid accumulation 
of the unspent funds in the last quarter of the fin ancial year and refrain from 
spending more than 33% of the allocated amount duri ng the last quarter of the 
financial year contrary to the General Financial Rules.  
(Para 10) 
Action Taken Replies 
SIL: Union Cabinet on 20.01.2021 approved closure of SIL . All employees of SIL 
have been given VRS by 30.6.2021. The movable asset s have been disposed of, 
through MSTC (a PSU under Ministry of Steel). The l and  of SIL is transferred 
to  to Uttar Pradesh State Industrial Development Authority (UPSIDA) . 
  
The funds for the FY 2022-23 were kept for payment of any Court related 
matters / judgment and the various tax related paym ents (Income Tax, GST, 
etc.).  As expenditure on these accounts was not in  the hands of MHI, the funds 
were surrendered timely, so that these can be utilized for some other purpose. 
 
BPCL: Union Cabinet in its meeting dated 09.12.2020 accor ded approval for 
closure of operations of BPCL and giving VRS to its employees. All the employees 
of BPCL have since been given VRS. Movable assets d isposed of through MSTC 
(a PSU under Ministry of Steel). The immovable properties of BPCL include 7 flats 
at Mumbai and 04 flats at Prayagraj.The 295-acre la nd of BPCL is handed over to 
UP Government. 
  
The funds for the FY 2022-23 were kept for payment of any Court related 
matters / judgment and the various tax related paym ents (Income Tax, GST, 
etc.).  As expenditure on these accounts was not in  the hands of MHI, the funds 
were surrendered timely, so that these can be utilized for some other purpose. 
 
NEPA Ltd.:  No amount was sanctioned in F.Y. 2022-23. The carr ied forward 
amount of RMDP was paid based on terms and conditio ns of the contract which 

24 
 
directly depended on work progress. Therefore, the company has not defaulted in 
this regard. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
The Ministry in its Action Taken Replies only provi ded the details regarding 
the budget surrendered/unspent under the Capital Se ction and is silent on the 
underutilization of funds allocated under the Reven ue Section. Keeping in 
view the above, the Committee recommends that the M inistry should actively 
monitor its funds utilization pattern and try to av oid spending the unspent 
allocations in the last quarter of the financial year. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
20. The Committee notes that 100% of the budget allocat ed at the RE stage 
under Phase-II of the FAME Scheme has been utilized  by the Ministry in the 
Financial Years 2019-20 to 2021-22 which reflects t he sincerity, commitment and 
determination with which the Scheme has been implem ented and the funds utilized 
for popularizing the Electric Mobility in the count ry. The Committee, while 
expressing its concern regarding the fuel security amidst global uncertainties as 
well as vehicular emissions, welcomes the efforts b eing made through the FAME-
Scheme for transition to electric mobility. However , the expenditure as against the 
budget allotted at the RE stage i.e. Rs. 2897.84 cr ore for the FY 2022-23 has not 
reached even halfway-mark till 08.02.2023 with less  than two months left in the 
current financial year. The Committee recommends th at the Ministry should speed 
up the process and make earnest efforts to ensure optimal utilization of the unspent 
funds in consonance with the Financial Rules during the Financial Year 2022-23.  
(Para 29) 
Action Taken Replies 
FAME India Scheme Phase II is demand driven. This s cheme helps in demand 
generation of electric vehicles by way of reducing the cost of acquisition of such 
vehicles. As the demand of electric vehicles increa ses, the pace in implementation 
of FAME India Scheme increases and the fund utilization also increases. 
The sale of electric vehicles under this scheme has  significantly increased 
over the years as seen from the table below: 

25 
 
                                                                                                                  (In Lakhs) 
Description FY 2019-20  FY 2020-21  FY 2021-22 FY 2022-23  
Registered EVs 1.72 1.41 4.50 11.76 
  
As a result, the electric vehicle incentive disbursement is expected to 25 increase to 
meet the increasing demand of electric vehicles.  
  Therefore, the Ministry of Heavy Industries has a lready taken permission 
from Ministry of Finance for spending more than 33 percent of the allocated fund 
during the last quarter of the financial year. Furt her, another exemption for 
spending more than 15% of the allocated fund during  the month of March is 
obtained from the Ministry of Finance for complete utilization of allocated fund 
and smooth implementation of the FAME India Scheme Phase-II. 
 In the financial year 2022-23, an amount of Rs. 24 02.51 crore has been utilized 
against the RE of Rs. 2897.84 crore under FAME India Scheme Phase-II. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
Although the FAME-II is a demand driven Scheme, but the onus of promoting 
the demand for Electric Vehicles lies with the Mini stry. Accordingly, the 
Ministry through various schemes viz.  promotional campaigns, advertisement 
of the ownership cost of EVs in Print/Electronic me dia (including in regional 
languages), incentives and other efforts should try to popularise the benefits of 
electric vehicles in the country, especially in rur al areas. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should devis e new initiatives to 
promote EVs and ensure that the funds allocated for  the purpose are utilised 
optimally. 
Recommendation/Observation 
21. The Phase-II of the FAME Scheme which has set the t arget to support 
15,62,090 vehicles within the timeline of 5 years i s about to complete 4 years and 
till 31.12.2022 has achieved only 51.96% of the tar get by supporting 8,11,725 
vehicles. The Committee recommends that the Ministr y should put greater 
emphasis on the implementation of the Scheme and prepare a blueprint to increase 

26 
 
the sales of Electric Vehicles in consultation with  the stakeholders and ensure that 
the targets are achieved. Besides, the Committee re commends that, in order to 
meet the set targets of the scheme, the possibility  of extending subsidies and 
incentives to the private vehicles should be explor ed along with considering the 
incentives such as exemption from road tax, registration fee etc. on the purchase of 
electric vehicles which would help accelerate the a cceptance of Electric Mobility 
in the country. 
 (Para 31)  
Action Taken Replies 
FAME India Scheme Phase II is demand driven. This s cheme helps in demand 
generation of electric vehicles by way of reducing the cost of acquisition of such 
vehicles. As the demand of electric vehicles increa ses, the pace in implementation 
of FAME India Scheme increases and the fund utilization also increases. 
  Under FAME-II, total 10,26,335 electric vehicles (e-2 W, e-3W & e-4W) 
have been sold in India as on 17.04.2023 (source: at FAME-2 Portal ).  Further, the 
following initiatives have been taken for promoting  electrical and hybrid vehicles 
in the country under the Faster Adoption and Manufa cturing of Hybrid & Electric 
Vehicles (FAME- India) Phase II Scheme to achieve the target within the timeline: 
i. From 11 th  June, 2021 the demand incentive under Phase II of FAME India 
Scheme has been increased to Rs.1 5,000/KWh from Rs .10,000/KWh with an 
increase in cap from 20% to 40% of the cost of vehicle.  
ii. For Electric 3 Wheelers, aggregation will be the ke y method to bring the 
upfront cost at an affordable level and at par with  ICE-3 Wheelers. Energy 
Efficiency Services Limited (EESL) will aggregate d emand for 3 lakh Electric 
3 Wheelers for multiple user segments. 
For Electric Buses, 9 cities with over 4 million po pulation (Mumbai, Delhi, 
Bangalore, Hyderabad, Ahmadabad, Chennai, Kolkata, Surat and Pune) will be 
targeted. EESL will aggregate the demand in these 9  cities for remaining Electric 
Buses under the scheme on OPEX basis.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
The efforts of the Ministry are laudable in case of  promotion of e-3 Wheelers 
as the EESL has been roped in for the aggregation o f demand for 3 lakh 

27 
 
electric 3 Wheelers for multiple user segments. The  Committee recommends 
that the Ministry should also explore similar metho ds of enhancing the 
demand in other categories of vehicles viz.  e-4 Wheelers as less than 10,000 
vehicles have only been supported so far. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
22. The Committee notes that the Ministry has under-per formed in respect of 
supporting e-3W and e-4W and in case of e-buses onl y a few cities are covered 
under the Scheme. India is a vast country and provi ding e-buses only to a few big 
cities will not able to resolve the issues of the r ising fossil fuel imports and 
vehicular air pollution adequately. The Committee r ecommends that the Ministry 
should expand the scope of the scheme for other sma ller cities and, if required, 
seek enhancement in the budget allocation at the RE  stage from the Ministry of 
Finance so as to reach its optimum potential to inc rease uptake of the electric 
buses to promote green energy.  
 (Para 34) 
Action Taken Replies 
In order to promote manufacturing and adoption of e lectric vehicle in India, the 
Government of India launched the Faster Adoption an d Manufacturing of (Hybrid 
&) Electric Vehicles in India (FAME India) Scheme i n 2015 on pan India basis 
with an aim to reduce dependency on fossil fuel and  to address issues of vehicular 
emissions. 
At present, Phase-II of FAME India Scheme is being implemented for a 
period of 5 years w.e.f.   01st April, 2019 with a total budgetary support o f Rs. 
10,000 crores. This phase focuses on supporting ele ctrification of public & shared 
transportation and aims to support, through subsidi es, 7090 e-Buses, 5 lakh e-3 
Wheelers, 55000 e-4 Wheeler Passenger Cars and 10 l akh e- 2 Wheelers. In 
addition, creation of charging infrastructure is al so supported to address range 
anxiety among users of electric vehicles. 
  In this regard, it is stated that total 7210 e-bu ses have been sanctioned 
and total 91,078 e-3W, 8,732 e-4W have been sold un der this scheme as on 
17.04.2023 [source: FAME-II Website]. 

28 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
The Committee notes that 7210 e-Buses have been san ctioned by the Ministry 
under FAME-II Scheme so far with a major focus especially on 9 cities having 
population of over 4 million. The Committee recomme nds that smaller cities 
should also be brought under the ambit of FAME-II S cheme and 
enhancement of the budget allocations for the purpo se, if needed, should be 
considered at the RE stage. 
Recommendation/Observation 
23. The Committee notes that FAME-II Scheme was notifie d for 5 years and has 
a deadline of 31st March 2024 to complete its targe ts of supporting 15.62 lakh 
electric vehicles. Indian automotive industry is of  the size of about Rs.10, 00,000 
crores and in the FY 2021-22, there was a total pro duction of 2.29 crore vehicles 
in the country, out of which there were 1.75 crores  domestic sales. In a country 
like India, supporting only 15.62 lakh electric veh icles may not be enough to 
reduce the carbon emissions & improve the air quali ty and to save forex on fossil 
fuel imports. The Committee is of the opinion that the Phase-II of the FAME 
Scheme should be extended further with new targets,  incentives and measures to 
give boost to the electric mobility in the country.  Furthermore, as one of the 
objectives of transition to electric mobility is to  improve the air quality, the 
Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Envir onment, Forest and Climate 
Change may be roped in as partner player in the imp lementation of FAME-II 
Scheme.  
(Para 39) 
Action Taken Replies 
At present no such proposal is under consideration in the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries. However, the recommendations of the com mittee are noted for 
consideration. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
The Committee is of the view that the cost of electric vehicles is still at the high 
end and reduction of subsidy under the FAME-II Sche me in case of 2-
Wheelers would further broaden the gap between EVs and ICE vehicles which 
would discourage the buyers to opt for electric veh icles. Therefore, the 

29 
 
Committee reiterates its recommendation that Phase- II of the FAME Scheme 
should be extended for at least another three years  beyond the 31 st  March, 
2024 to make EVs a norm in the domestic auto market. 
Recommendation/Observation 
24. Out of the 16 Operational CPSEs under the administr ative control of the 
Ministry of Heavy Industries, 5 CPSEs namely Engine ering Projects (India) 
Limited (EPIL), Heavy Engineering Corporation (HEC), Hindustan Machine Tools 
(HMT), Rajasthan Electronics and Instruments Limited (REIL) and NEPA Ltd. are 
loss making CPSEs. It has been observed that HEC is  a loss making enterprise 
continuously for the past several years. Despite th e loss-making status of HEC, a 
meagre token amount of Rs 0.01 crore has been kept as a budgetary support for 
the enterprise in BE for the Financial Year 2023-24 . The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry should make concerted efforts to improve the situation of HEC 
and if need arises, may seek additional funds at RE stage and also furnish the steps 
taken and plans conceived to revive and strengthen the CPSEs within its 
administrative ambit in its Action Taken Replies.  
(Para 74)  
Action Taken Replies 
HEC:  In the last two decades five revival packages were  sanctioned by the 
Ministry of Heavy Industries to HEC in the years 20 05, 2008, 2013, 2014 and 
2017.   
After 2017, Strategic disinvestment of HEC was attempted but also could not 
be taken forwarded. The recommendation of NITI Aayo g and Core Group of 
Secretaries on Disinvestment (CGD), for closure of HEC Ltd is under consideration 
in Ministry of Heavy Industries.  
NEPA Ltd.: The Company has completed RMDP on 23rd August 2022 and started 
commercial production from 5th October 2022. The is sue of shortage of coal, raw 
material, chemicals etc., were sorted out by Februa ry, 2023. Though the issue of 
availability of skilled manpower still remains a ca use of concern which is being 
addressed.  
The Company expects to make profit from the Financi al Year 2024-2025 
onwards. 

30 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
The Committee notes the status of HEC and NEPA Ltd.  and appreciates the 
revival of NEPA Ltd. However the Ministry is silent  on the status of 
Engineering Projects (India) Limited (EPIL), Hindus tan Machine Tools 
(HMT) and Rajasthan Electronics and Instruments Lim ited (REIL). The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the plans co nceived to revive the 
above remaining three CPSEs. 
 
 
 
******* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 