PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA



PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT - RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY FOURTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON RECOMMENDATIONS
CONTAINED IN THE COMMITTEE'S 150™ REPORT ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2004-05) PERTAINING TO

DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES

(MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES)

(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 5™ MAY, 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 5™ MAY, 2005)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

MAY, 2005/VAISAKHA, 1927 (SAKA)


CONTENTS

PAGES

Composition oF THE COMMITTEE.

INTRODUCTION

OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE ...

Minutes.


8४99 +३० ७ + ४७

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
Shri Santosh Bagrodia] -—— Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Prof M.M. Agarwal
. Shri Surendra Lath
. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj

Dr. K. Malaisamy

. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
. Dr. Vijay Mallya

. Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy.

. Shrimati Vanga Geetha

LOK SABHA

. Shri Guharam Ajgalle

. Shri Kailash Baitha

. Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
. Shri Subhash Deshmukh

. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan

. Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria

५ Shri Sunil Khan

. Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato

. Shri Prakash Paranjpe

. Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel
. Shri Rajnarayan

. Shri Bagida Ramakrishna

. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
. Shrimati Rubab Sayeda

. Shri Gurjeet Singh Rana

. Shri Manvendra Singh

. Shri Ganesh Singh

. Shri Suraj Singh

. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
. Shri Girdhari Yadav

. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure

SECRETARIAT

Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary

Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer

(i)


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having been
authorised by the Committee, hereby present this One Hundred Sixty four Report on the Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s 150" Report on Demands for Grants
(2004-05) pertaining to Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises)

2. The Committee examined and considered the Action Taken Notes supplied by the Government (Ministry
of Small Scale Industries) on the recommendations contained in its 150" Report on Demands for Grants
(2004-05) pertaining to Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises)

3. The Committee in its meeting held on 3rd May, 2005 considered and adopted the Report.

SANTOSH BAGRODIA
New DELH, Chairman,
3rd May, 2005 Department-related Parliamentary

Standing Committee on Industry.

(ii)


REPORT

The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Public
Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises) on the recommendations contained in the
150th Report (of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry) on Demands for
Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Department of Public Enterprises. The Report was presented /laid on the
Table of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha on the 26th August, 2004

2 Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries in respect of
the recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as follows:

Chapter-I— The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry :-
Paras:- 45; 56; 570); 57(ii); 57 (iii); 57 (iv) and 57(vi)

The Committee is pleased to observe that the Ministry has accepted its recommendations as mentioned
in Chapter-I of the Report.

Chapter-II— The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies:-
Paras :- 10; 33; 41 and 52.

In respect of these recommendations the Committee is convinced with the logic and explanation
advocated by the Ministry and therefore does not want to pursue further.

Chapter-III— The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies
of the Ministry: -
Paras:- 6; 13; 16; 17; 24; 26; 27; 35; 36; 49; 50; 51; 53; 57 (v) and 57 (ii).

The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of recommendations contained in
Chapter-III and desires that the Ministry should furnish logical explanation in respect of these recommendations.

Chapter-IV—The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry have
not been received:-

Paras :- 34; 38 and 55.

In respect of recommendations in Chapter-IV, the Ministry has either furnished the interim replies or
couched its language in vague terms like noted for compliance/guidance, therefore, the Committee desires
that the Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in respect of recommendations categorized in Chapter-
IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee.

3. The Details of the ATR is being discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.


CHAPTER -1
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNME

Recommendation
1.0 Displaced employee needs psychological counselling

1.1 The Committee expresses its concern that the displaced employee needs psychological counselling to
absorb the trauma of loss of job and to face the new circumstances. They need advice for the prudent
management of their compensation amount and other financial benefits from the CPSU. They also need to be
made aware of the new environment of market opportunities so that they may, depending upon his aptitude
and expertise, take up economic activities.

(Para No 45)

Action Taken

1.1.1 The Consultant appointed to undertake the efficacy study of the CRR Scheme has submitted its report,
which also contains the above views of the Committee. A concerted effort will be initiated alongwith compliance
of other recommendations of the consultant.

Recommendation
1.2 Recommendations of Expenditure Reform Commission

1.2.1 The Committee observes that the recommendations of Expenditure Reform Commission regarding the
existence of Department of Public Enterprises may be viewed considering the activities, achievements and
proposed plans of the Department. The Committee is of the view that the effective implementation of these
plans is of critical importance for success of current economic reforms.

(Para 56)

Action Taken

1.2.2 Recommendations of the ERC have been examined in the Department in consultation with SCOPE
with regard to preparation of PE Survey Work and Ministry of Law regarding PMA. While Ministry of Law
has stated that taking back PMA from DPE will hamper the work whereas SCOPE has regretted their
inability to undertake the PE Survey Work. Department is of the view that the transferring of MOU work to
administrative Ministries /Department will erode the neutrality of the MOU work. Since there was a diversion
of views of DPE and ERC representation, the matter was taken up with Committee of Secretaries with the
request that DPE may be allowed to continue to act as a nodal Ministry of CPSUs. COS has now advised this
Department to take the matter with Department of Expenditure in this regard. Accordingly, the matter is

_ being taken up with expenditure. However, Government has also decided to set up Board for Reconstruction
of Public Sector Enterprises which should be administered under DPE. Once it is approved by the
Government, the work of DPE is bound to increase and the role of DPE will also be vital and the staff
strength would need to be increased. The recommendations of ERC regarding DPE would need to be reviewed
appropriately.


Recommendation
1.3. Financial and functional autonomy

1.3.1 Initiatives for policy planning in providing financial and functional autonomy to the CPSEs in order to
help make them globally competitive.
[Para 57(i)]

Action Taken

1.3.2 Government has already given enhanced powers to Navratna CPSEs way back in 1997. Since the
Government has pledged in its National Common Minimum Programme to devolve full managerial and
commercial autonomy to successful profit making companies operating in competitive environment action
has already been taken in this direction for providing enhanced financial powers to the Boards of successful
profit making CPSEs operating in a competitive environment. Apart from enhancing the financial ceiling on
investment, powers for merger and acquisition, approval of foreign business tours etc. are also proposed to
be delegated. 7

Recommendation
1.4 Revival/reconstruction/restructuring/closure of the sick/loss making CPSEs

1.4.1 Initiatives for the revival/reconstruction/restructuring/closure of the sick/loss making CPSEs including
decisions related to disinvestments by the administrative Ministries/departments should be in consultation
with DPE.

[Para 57(ii)]

Action Taken

1.4.2 The Government has since decided to establish a Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises
(BRPSE), to be located in the Department of Public Enterprises. The Board will, among other things, examine
proposals of the administrative Ministries for revival/restructuring of sick/loss making CPSEs for their turn
around, advise the Government on disinvestment/closure/sale of chronically sick/loss making companies
which cannot be revived, monitor incipient sickness, etc. Department of Public Enterprises has to provide
secretariat assistance to the Board.

Recommendation
1.5 Changing industrial and business scenario

1.5.1 Constant review of the guidelines in line with changing industrial and business scenario so as to
facilitate the CPSEs in fulfilling their commercial and social objectives in a prompt and competitive manner.
[Para 57(iii)]

Action Taken

1.5.2 The guidelines issued by DPE/BPE are reviewed from time to time. As a result of their reviews 696
guidelines were cancelled in 1997and another 77 guidelines were deleted in 2003. This process of review is
ongoing.

Recommendation
1.6 Use of information system

1.6.1 Enhanced use of information system i.e. web based computer applications, networking etc.
[Para 57(iv)]


Action Taken

1.6.2 All the sections of DPE have been provided computers and have the = of internet facilities. There
is a Local Area Network (LAN) operational in the Department. Department has proposed to undertake
following steps in this direction:

(i) Impetus on use of LAN Based Intra-Departmental Communication.
(ii) Publication such as “DPE’s Overview” for international circulation.
(iii) Upgradation of H/W for various officers.
(iv) Use of latest virus protection s/w for greater data security.
Recommendation
1.7 Focus on social safety net schemes

1.7.1 The Committee recommends greater focus on social safety net schemes i.e. counselling, retraining and
redeployment scheme and promoting it wider coverage.
[Para No. 57 (vi)]

Action Taken

1.7.2 There has been continuous focus on widening the network of the social safety net scheme, 1.6.
Counselling, Retraining and Redeployment Scheme for the rationalized employees of Central PSUs. Initially,
when the scheme was introduced in the year 2001-02, there were 17 nodal agencies. Presently, there are 34
such agencies having more than 100 Employees Assistance Centres located all over the country to meet the
demand of training under the scheme. Based on need, nodal agencies and their centres are added.

|


CHAPTER - II

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES

Recommendation
2.0 One time comprehensive package

2.1 The committee, therefore, recommends that one time comprehensive package should be given to the
PSEs which should be enjoined with accountability clause on the part of management.
(Para No. 10)

Action Taken

2.1.1 DPE does not directly deal with restructuring packages. Such exercise is done by the concerned
administrative Ministries/Departments. Hence, the recommendation of the Committee has been brought to
the notice of these Ministries/Departments for taking appropriate action vide DPE’s O.M. No. DPE. 4(3)/
2004- Fin. dated the 20% September, 2004.

Recommendation
2.2 Financial parameters and the targets

2.2.1 The Committee observes that MOU system has been relevant in the past and still holds relevance in the
current scenario though it needs a review. It is desirable if the weightage given to the financial parameters is
significant and the targets should be sufficiently high with a view to improve performance and productivity,
year after year.

(Para No. 33)

Action Taken

2.2.2 In the MOU guidelines for the year 2004-05, 50% weight has been assigned to financial parameters. In
order to ensure sufficiently high targets, it has been stipulated that Budget Estimates (BE) should be placed in
“Good” column and that the differential between Excellent and Very Good targets column should be around
15% and 5% .

Recommendation
2.3. Corrective measures for improvement of PSEs whose performance was graded as Poor

2.3.1 The Committee also desires to have some feedback/report from the PSEs who have signed MOU
particularly those who have been graded as excellent or poor. Such a feedback will help the Committee to
assess the strengths of MOU system and the constraints some PSEs are still facing. The Committee also
secks the Department’s view on the PSEs that have been graded as Poor. Does the Department suggest any
corrective measures for such PSEs. 7
(Para No. 35)

Action Taken

2.3.2 The Department of Public Enterprises does not suggest any corrective actions for PSEs which are
rated as Poor as these corrective actions are to be undertaken by the concerned Administrative Ministry/



Department. All issues related to the performance of the PSEs are discussed in detail during the MOU
negotiation meeting where the Task Force Members also discuss and suggest about the various strategies to
improve the performance of particular PSE.

Recommendation
2.4 Obligations on the part of Government

2.4.1 The Committee further desires to be apprised about the obligations on the part of Government as the
contracting party signing the MOU.
(Para 36)

Action Taken

2.4.2 The obligations on the part of Government as the contracting party are included as a separate chapter
in the MOU. These are related to the nature and operations of the particular PSE and therefore vary from
company to company.

Recommendation
2.5 Speedy settlement of disputes

2.5.1 The Committce considers it to be a positive initiative. It desires to be apprised of the impact of this
mechanism in speedy settlement of disputes.
(Para 41)

Action Taken

2.5.2 Permanent Machinery of Arbitrators has been set up in Department of Public Enterprises for ‘resolving
commercial disputes except taxation between PSEs inter-se as well as between a PSE and a Central Government
Department/Ministry. From 1993-94 disputes with Port Trusts have also been included under the purview of
PMA for arbitration, and the Ministry of Railways were excluded from the purview of PMA vide DPE OM
dated 12.2.97. All the disputes between the PSUs are required to be referred to Department of Public Enterprises
for its reference to the Arbitrator of PMA. Secretary, Department of Public Enterprises on being satisfied
with prima facie existence of dispute, refers the dispute to the Arbitrator of the PMA for Arbitration. The
Arbitration Act, 1940 is not applicable in these cases. No lawyer is allowed to appear on behalf of either party
for presenting/defending the cases, however they may use their own lawyers who are under their employ.
This saves the PSUs from paying unnecessary money to lawyers when the disputing parties involved are
PSUs. The PSU’s are not supposed to go to court, their cases are settled by the Arbitrator of PMA. This
avoid the delay caused in courts and helps in early settlement of their disputes. Ever since the PMA was set
up in 1989, 183 disputes have been received, out of which 102 cases have been settled.

Recommendation
2.6 Facilitics of medical, educational and other social securities

2.6.1 The Committee recommends that the facilities of medical, educational and other social securities should
remain available to the former employees in respective PSEs.
(Para 52)

Action Taken

2.6.2 As regards making available the medical facilities to the former employees of CPSEs, DPE have already
directed the CPSEs vide Para 13 of DPE OM No. 2(49)/98 DPE(WC) 25.6.99 to look into the mediclaim
cover through Insurance Companies for their retired employees.


2.6.3 Regarding the educational and other social securities to the former employees of CPSEs, DPE have not
formulated any scheme in the matter as these facilities are to be evolved and implemented by the concerned
managements of the CPSEs.



= - Til

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE HAS NOT
ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY

Recommendation
3.0 DPE’s role as the nodal Department for all the CPSEs

3.1 The Committee acknowledges DPE’s role as the nodal Department for all the CPSEs and as such its
importance inthe economic development of the country. While specific action is to be taken by the concerned
administrative Ministry, DPE provides policy framework and facilitates atmosphere for better productivity,
smooth functioning and higher contribution to national economy.

(Para 6)

Action Taken

3.1.1 The Department of Public Enterprises acts as the nodal Department for all Central PSEs and assists in
the formulation of policy pertaining to performance evaluation, autonomy and financial delegation, personnel
management, human resource development of CPSEs. DPE will continue to extend all policy support to
CPSEs for creating atmosphere conducive to improving the efficiency of CPSEs.

Further Recommendation

3.1.2 The Committee is of the view that the Department of Public Enterprises must assume its
responsibility in order to discharge its function as per its mandate and according to the changing
corporate environment and the domestic economic reality caused duc to globalisation and liberlisation.
It is because of the pivotal importance of its function that the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry had recommended in its earlier report for strengthening of the
Department of Public Enterprises. It is now the time for the Department of Public Enterprises to
prove its raison-deter/justification for its continuation as separate Department. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department of Public Enterprise should undertake following activities
effectively:-

(i) Review of parameter under MoU system for performance evaluation as per global trend ;

Gi) Determination of level of functional autonomy and linking the same with performance
with mode of periodic review;

(iii) fixation of delegation of financial power as per requirement of corporate world;

(iv) Evaluation of existing human resources in al! Central PSUs and determine parameters
and premises for Comprehensive Human Resource Planning and Management including
induction of professionalisation at all levels of management.

3.1.3 The Committee desires that Department of Public Enterprises must come out with concrete
actions taken on above issues and accordingly apprise the Committee in its action taken note of the
present report.


Recommendation
3.2 Pian allocation for IT sector

3.2.1 The Committee concurs with the plan allocation for IT sector, and hopes that it would result in
improvement of efficiency of the Department. As the Department functions as the centralized coordinating
unit for all the CPSEs, the IT would be useful for maintaining a comprehensive database for all the stakeholders.
The Committee further suggests for creation of an exclusive website for the CRR scheme to create and
maintain a comprehensive database for the use of all the stakeholders.

(Para 13)

Action Taken

3.2.2 Efforts have been initiated to create a website for CRR Scheme and the details are being worked out by
the NIC.

Further Recommendation

3.2.3 The Committee is of the view that the Department of Public Enterprises have been entrusted
with significant responsibility without adequate secretariat structure causing delay in the
accomplishment of its duties. The Department seems to have remained under the shadow of
Department of Heavy Industry. This Department has been entrusted with enormous responsibility
for co-ordinating and managing the affairs of Central PSEs, which is called in Nehruvian term, the
“Temple of Modern India”. The Department acts as nodal agency and is supposed to lay down the
policy guidelines on performance improvement and evaluation, financial accounting and provides an
inter-face between the administrative Ministries and PSEs. Therefore, the Committee recommends
that the Department should be strengthened and adequately staffed.

Recommendation
3.3 Policy for Economic Development for North Eastern Region

3.3.1 The Committce recommends that extensive initiative by the DPE must be taken in consonance with the
overall policy for economic development for North Eastern Region. As such the Department should take
concerted initiatives with Ministry of the Development of North Eastern region.

(Para 16)

Action Taken

3.3.2 DPE is making all efforts to strengthen the CRR. Scheme in N.E. Region. In view of existing
difficulties and adversities in implementation of the scheme in the region, this Department has taken up the
matter with Planning Commission for granting special dispensation so as to allow the agencies in this
region to start residential programmes at higher norms for the VR optees to attract more and more number
of trainees.

Further Recommendation

3.3.3 While the Committee appreciates the efforts undertaken by the Department of Public
Enterprises in the strengthening of CRR Scheme in the NER, however, the Committee would like to
know the outcome of efforts of the Department for taking up the issue with the Planning
Commissioner on granting special dispensation for starting residential programme for the VR optees
to attracts large number of trainees. The Committee would like to know the details of number of
ben aries under the scheme and their post training engagement during last 5 years alongwith
details of expenses incurred thereon.



Recommendation
3.4 CRR scheme should cover the traditional industrics

3.4.1 The Committee further observes that in view of rich natural resources and traditional industries of this
region, the CRR scheme should cover the traditional industries, agro-based, small scale and cottage industry
specific to the region. The region has vast potential of tourism. Rationalized employees of this region may
be involved in such region-specific industries. In view of the geographical, climatic and environmental
factors IT based enterprises have great potential in the NE region. The Committee recommends that the
Government should ensure that IT potential is suitably exploited.

(Para No. 17)

Action Taken

3.4.2 The nodal agencies cngaged to undertake training programme in Guwahati under CRR Scheme offer
different type of EDP courses in Food Processing , Marketing Strategy for rural entrepreneurship products,
etc. In IT sector courses like Basic Computer Application, Teachers’ Training programme on Computer
Application, DTP and Screen Printing, etc. are conducted. The recommendations of the Committce will be
taken care of.

Further Recommendation

3.4.3 The Committee desires that the Department of Public Enterprises procure from the concerned
Ministries the details regarding the deployment of VR optecs in the post CRR phase in traditional
industries of the region viz small scale and cottage industries, agro-based industries, IT, Tourism
Industries, Food Processing Industries and furnish the same to the Committee.

Recommendation
3.5 Effect of Miniratna Status

3.5.1 The Committee desires DPE to furnish an appraisal of the effect of such (Miniratna) status and directs
the Department to ensure a mechanism of making any assessment of the benefits of such schemes.
(Para No.24)

Action Taken

3.5.2 There are established mechanisms for monitoring of the performance of Miniratna PSEs. These are as
under:

(i) Board of Directors and Committees of the Board (Audit Committee, etc.) - continuous and regular
basis

(ii) Team consisting of Secretary of the administrative Ministry, Chief Executive of the PSU and one
or more outside expert - quarterly basis.

(iii) Inter-Ministerial Group consisting of Secretary, DPE, Secretary, Planning Commission, Secretary
(Expenditure) and the Secretary of the administrative Ministry concerned.

3.5.3 The Inter-Ministerial Group had reviewed the performance of all the Miniratna PSEs during 2003-04.
The IMG has observed that the introduction of the Scheme of Miniratna has resulted in the delegation of
enhanced autonomy and financial and operational powers to these PSUs and they are in a position to take
decisions quickly, reduce cost and time over-run and to set up joint ventures/subsidiaries. Further, Board
restructuring has resulted in the professionalisation of Boards. The existing schemes of delegation of powers
to Miniratna is being reviewed and suitable proposals being made to CCEA for approval.


11

Further Recommendation

3.5.4 The Committee is not disputing the criteria and mode of performance evaluation of Miniratna
PSEs by the Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) and the Committee is also in agreements with IMG that
the introduction of the scheme of the Miniratna resulting into delegation of financial and operational
power to PSEs might have benefited the PSEs due to enhanced autonomy. So far so good. But the
effect of the introduction of the scheme of Miniratna must have a bearing on the performance of the
PSEs. Therefore, the success of instruments of Miniratna depend largely upon the evaluation of
enhanced performance of PSEs which have been so awarded as Miniratna status. Then and only
then, the benefits of delegation of financial and operational powers backed by so acclaimed financial
autonomy could be examined in appropriate perspective. Moreover, the membership of Miniratna
status should not remain a permanent feature, rather there should be a dynamic and vibrating
membership system wherein the actual/physical and financial performance should be the guiding
consideration for awarding and de-reserving the status of Miniratna.

Recommendation
3.6 Appointment of Non-official Directors

3.6.1 The Committee takes note of the fact that non-official Directors have been appointed in 24 of 44
Miniratna PSEs. The remaining vacancies are yet to be filled up. The Committee therefore recommends that
the non-official part-time Directors of the remaining Miniratna PSEs must be appointed at the earliest to
facilitate efficient functioning of the concerned PSEs.

(Para No.26)

Action Taken

3.6.2 The Search .Committee had earlier made recommendations for appointment of non-official Directors
on the Boards of the remaining Miniratna PSEs also and these are with the concerned administrative Ministries/
Departments. In some of these cases the Ministries have made fresh proposals for consideration of the
Search Committee. The concerned administrative Ministries/Departments have been advised to take necessary
action to appoint non-official Directors in all these PSEs following the due procedure.

Further Recommendation

3.6.3 The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure over the delay in the appointment of
non-official Director on one or other ground. The Committee has not been apprised of as to in how
many of twenty Miniratna PSEs the vacancies of non-official director have been filled up, therefore,
the Committee finds the Department of public enterprises short of its responsibility in discharging
its function in relation to Board structure and its professionalisation of central PSEs. The Committee
during its study visits and interaction with select PSEs has found that post of part-time non-official
directors (say in CCL, HEC, NALCO, Hindustan Copper Ltd., HAL etc.) have remained vacant for
more than one year. This is a pathetic condition. On the other hand PSEs claim to have
professionalisation of Board of Directors and functional autonomy as a result of delegation of financial
and operational power, however, on the other hand, it is found that the posts of part-time non-
official directors remain vacant for years. Under the circumstances, the functioning of the Board of
Director become a matter of crystal understanding rather than a conjecture.

3.6.4 The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the Department of Public Enterprises to take up
its responsibilities under its mandate and advise and monitoring the constitution of board of
directors of central PSEs to commensurate the acclaimed professionalisation and functional
autonomy:


Recommendation
3.7 Training and skill development of lower and middle level executives

3.7.1 The Committee recommends that lower and middle level executives and technical staff too should be
given opportunity to enhance and upgrade their skills through regular short duration courses at reputed
professional and technical institutions. The Committee is of the view that new management techniques and
office process must be adopted to make respective PSEs competitive. For this there should be regular inter
face between PSE management and management experts and institutions.

(Para No. 27)

Action Taken

3.7.2 DPE has been organizing Executive Development Programmes (EDPs) for executives of PSUs in
collaboration with premier management and training institutes in the country. DPE also sponsors names of
PSU executives for training abroad. But these programmes can accommodate only few executives. It is
basically for the public sector managements themselves to provide training to their executives and to interact/
liaise with management experts and institutions for this purpose. This item is normally covered in the MoUs
signed by the Chief Executives with their administrative Ministries.

Further Recommendation

3.7.3 The Committee is pleased to note that Department of Public Enterprises keep in organizing
executives Development Programmes for executives of PSUs. However, what the Committee desires
to convey is that due to the emerging complex domestic and global working environment as a result
of under going liberalization and globalization process, the lesson of new management technique
and practices must percolated down to lower and middle level management in order to make than
capable for coping with the pulls and pressures of fast emerging corporate governance in the post
WTO-regime.

Recommendation
3.8 Rehabilitation of rationalized employees

3.8.1 The Committee expresses its concern that due to fund constraints, only about 10% of the rationalized
employees could be covered under CRR scheme. The number of workers covered under the scheme during
the 3 years is around 30,000. The Committee is of the’ view that the success of current economic policy will
largely depend on the productive rehabilitation of :rationalized employees. The CRR scheme is a vital initiative
in this regard and should get, adequate budgetary support; to cover maximum numbers of employees in
effective manner.

(Para No. 49)

Action Taken
3.8.2 Views of the Committee have been noted.
Further Recommendation

3.8.3 The Committee is particular to the of the Department of Public Enterprises over the response
of the Committee’s recommendation /conclusion that or presents only about 10 % of the rationalized
employees are covered under CRR scheme. Instead of just noting the recommendation of the
Committee DPE should have acted upon by framing proposal as to how to cover the maximum of
rationalized employees under the CRR scheme and same should have been taken up with the planning
commission for obtaining required budgetary support. The productive rehabilitation of rationalized


|
।

13

employees is the issue which concerns the Committee the most. The Committee desires that DPE
may seck the assistance of private sector companies in this regard by framing a policy on the issue.

Recommendation
3.9 Skill upgradation and Entrepreneurship Development

3.9.1 The Committee notes with satisfaction that under the CRR scheme, during 2003-04, a physical target
of 10000 VRS optces was fixed which was subsequently revised to 12000. Against this, 12200 rationalized
employees were covered under the scheme. The Committee hopes that with enhanced budget, a physical
target of 32000 would be achieved during 2004-05. The substantial increase in budget and overall physical
targets would enable to cover larger number of VR optees and help to adopt new avocation through skill
upgradation and entrepreneurship development to enable them to engage themselves in income generating
activities by taking advantage of market opportunities.

(Para No. 50)

Action Taken
3.9.2 Views of the Committee have been noted.
Further Recommendation

3.9.3 The Committee would like to know whether with enhanced budgetary support a physical target
of 32000 under the CRR scheme have been covered during the year 2004-2005 and if no, the reasons
therefore; along with the alternative policy measure in this regard .

Recommendation
3.10 Training and credit facilities

3.10.1 Employment Generation Programme of the KVIC (Margin money scheme), Prime Minister’s Rozgar
Yojana (PMRY), various schemes formulated by the SIDBI and other similar schemes of self employment,
must be availed for the benefit of VRS optees of the PSUs. Preference may be given to such employees in the
schemes launched by Departments Ministries of Agro and Rural Industries, Small Scale Industries, Rural
and , Urban Development. Training and credit facilities should be extended also to the family members . of
rationalized employces so that the family income can be enhanced. The respective PSEs and nodal agencies
should impart training according to region-specific requirements or in the traditional industries of the
region.

(Para No. 51)

Action Taken

3.10.2 Nodal training agencies have been informed to get themselves associated with centrally sponsored
schemes like Rural Employment Gencration Programme, PMRY and other schemes sponsored by KVIC,
SIDBI etc. wherever necessary. Nodal agencies give necessary guidance with regard to need based micro
credit in consultation with lead banks. Region-specific requirement / traditional industries are generally kept
in view by the nodal agencies in the training programmes.

Further Recommendation

3.10.3 The Committee reiterates that Training and credit facilities should be extended also to the
family members of rationalized employees so that the family income can be enhanced and preference
should be given under CRR Scheme whose outstanding money/amount of VRS is pending with the
PSEs. The preference should be given to the wards of VR optees in the centrally sponsored schemes
like PMRY, REGP and other such schemes as sponsored by KVIC and SIDBI.



Recommendation
3.11 Social Audit of such rationalization

3.11.1 The Committee is of the view that the social audit of such rationalization in respective PSEs
should be conducted. Rationalisation if remains unattended may become a factor of social disruption
and delinquency in the region. The conclusions of such social auditing may help in upgrading the CRR
Scheme.

(Para No. 53)

Action Taken
3.11.2 The suggestion of the Committee has been noted.
Further Recommendation

3.11.3 The Committee would like to know the follow-up action undertaken by the Department of
Public Enterprises in line with the recommendation regarding the conducting of Social Audit of PSEs
undergoing the rationalization Programme. The Committee desires to know the conclusion of social
auditing of VR optees and its bearing on the CRR scheme.

Recommendation

3.12 Higher impetus in facilitating the CPSEs in the areas of Human Resource Development through
training and development and their exposure to latest management models and techniques through
EDPs and training abroad.

[Para No.57(v)]

Action Taken
3.12.1 Human Resource Development

3.12.2 The Public Sector Enterprises are primarily responsible for Human Resource Development. However,
DPE supplement their efforts by organizing EDPs in collaboration with premier Management/ Training
Institutions to equip them with the latest development. DPE also nominates PSE executives for training
abroad.

Further Recommendation

3.12.3 The Committee feels that the Department of Public Enterprises must come forward in
facilitating the CPSEs in the areas of Human Resource Development which well falls within parameter/
mandate of Department of Public Enterprises. The Department of Public Enterprises must respond
to the mandate and act in the like manner in the general interest of CPSEs.

Recommendation
3.13 Induction of professionals in Department of P. E. in CRR, MoU and Restructuring Divisions

3.13.1 The Committee further recommends that in order to make the department more efficient and effective,
there is a nced to induct more professionals in this Department specially in Management, CRR, MoU and
Restructuring Divisions.

(Para No. 57-vii)

Action Taken

3.13.2 The recommendation has been noted.


15

Further Recommendation

3.13.3 The Committee would like to know the follow up action on the part of Department of Public
Enterprises in regard to induction of professionals in Management CRR, MoU and Restructuring
Division etc. and the out come in the form of effectiveness and efficiency in the working of these
divisions as a result of induction of the professionals.



CHAPTER- IV

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINALREPLIES OF THE
MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED

Recommendation
4.0 More Funds to MoU Division/DPE

4.1 The Committee also feels that the MoU Division in DPE, which implements the MoUs, needs to be
strengthened by induction of additional manpower. More funds needs to be allocated to MoU Division/DPE,
so that it is able to get MoU related studies done by professional bodies. It should also be ensured that senior
officials of the administrative Ministries actively associated in all MoU related matter.

(Para No. 34)

Action Taken

4.1.1 The, issue of induction of additional manpower and allocation of more funds to MoU Division/DPE is
being examined. In order to associate senior officials of Administrative Ministries, Secretary(DPE) had taken
up this matter with Secretaries of concerned Ministries.

Recommendation
4.2 Purchase preference policy

4.2.1 The Committee acknowledges that the purchase preference policy, which was in force till 31.3.2002,
has been extended for two more years i. ९. upto 31.3.2004 on its recommendation. The Committee recommends
a study to be done on the efficacy of this policy. In consonance with its pronounced policy, Government
may consider to extend this policy for next 3 to 5 years.

(Para No. 38)

Action Taken

4.2.2 Department of Public Enterprises has already been collecting quarterly status report on the implementation
of the purchase preference policy. During 2002-03 and 2003-04, 43 CPSEs have been benefited by getting
orders amounting to Rs. 2745 crore due to the purchase preference policy.

4.2.3 Based on the analysis of the information received from the CPSEs and observations made there from
DPE moved a proposal for extension of the Policy. In the meantime, the Government have extended the
policy upto 31.3.05. For subsequent extension of the purchase preference policy, the Government has
constituted a Group of Ministers (GoM) which will look into various issues involved in this regard and make
recommendations accordingly.

Recommendation
4.3 Board (BRPSE)

4.3.1 The Committee appreciates that the proposed Board (BRPSE) as it is likely to expedite the process of
advice to the questions of revival, restructuring, dis-investment or closure, as the case may be. However, the
exact details of its constitution, terms of reference, modalities including the Ministry in which it is to be set

16


—

up (locus) are under consideration of the Government. The Committee urges upon the Government to
finalize it at the earliest.

(Para No. 55)
Action Taken

4.3.2 It has since been decided that the Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE) will
be located in the Department of Public Enterprises. Its constitution, terms of reference, etc. are being
notified by the Government shortly.



OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE

DPE’S ROLE AS THE NODAL DEPARTMENT FOR ALLTHE CPSES

The Committee is of the view that the Department of Public Enterprises must assume its
responsibility in order to discharge its function as per its mandate and according to the changing
corporate environment and the domestic economic reality caused due to globalisation and liberlisation.
It is because of the pivotal importance of its function that the department related parliamentary
standing Committee on Industry had recommended in its earlier report for strengthening of the
Department of Public enterprises. It is now the time for the Department of Public Enterprises to
prove its raison-deter/justification for its continuation as separate Department. The Committee
therefore recommends that the Department of Public Enterprise should undertake following activities
effectively :-

(i) Review of parameter under MoU system for performance evalution as per global trend ;

(i) Determination of level of functional autonomy and linking the same with performance
with mode of periodic review ;

(ii) fixation of delegation of financial power as per requirement of corporate world;

(iv) Evaluation of existing human resources in all central PSUs and determine parameters
and premises for Comprehensive Human Resource Planning and Management including
induction of professionalisation at all levels of management. (3.1.2)

The Committee desires that Department of Public Enterprises must come out with conercte
actions taken on above issues and accordingly apprise the Committee in its action taken note of the
present report. (3.1.3)

PLAN ALLOCATION FOR ITSECTOR

The Committee is of the view that the Department of Public Enterprises have been entrusted
with significant responsibility without adequate secretariat structure causing delay in the
accomplishment of its duties. The Department seems to have remained under the shadow of
Department of Heavy Industry. This Department has been entrusted with enormous responsibility
for co-ordinating and managing the affairs of Central DSEs, which is called in Nehruvian term, the
“Temple of modern India”. The Department acts as nodal agency and is supposed to lay down the
policy guidelines on performance improvement and evaluation, financial accounting and provides an
inter-face between the administrative ministries and PSEs. Therefore, the Committee recommends
that the Department should be strengthened and adequately staffed. (3.2.3)

POLICY FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT FOR NORTH EASTERN REGION

While the Committee appreciates the efforts undertaken by the Department of Public
Enterprises in the strengthening of CRR Scheme in the NER, however, the Committee would like to
know the out come of efforts the Department for taking up the issue with the Planning Commissioner
on granting special dispensation for starting residential programme for the VR optees to attracts
large number of trainees. The Committee would like to know the details of number of beneficiaries

18


19

under the scheme and their post training engagement during last 5 years alongwith details of expenses
incurred thereon. (3.3.3)

CRR SCHEME SHOULD COVER THE TRADITIONAL INDUSTRIES

. The Committee desires that the Department of Public Enterprises procure from the concerned
Ministries the details regarding the deployment of VR optees in the post CRR phase in traditional
industries of the region viz small scale and cottage industries, agro-based industries, IT, Tourism
Industries, Food Processing Industries and furnish the same to the Committee. (3.4.3)

EFFECT OF MINIRATNA STATUS

The Committee is not disputing the criteria and mode of performance evaluation of Miniratna
PSEs by the Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) and the Committee is also in agreements with IMG that
the introduction of the scheme of the Miniratna resulting into delegation of financial and operational
power to PSEs might have benefited the PSEs due to enhanced autonomy. So far so good. But the
effect of the introduction of the scheme of Miniratna must have a bearing on the performance of the
PSEs. Therefore, the success of instruments of Miniratna depend largely upon the evaluation of
enhanced performance of PSEs which have been so awarded as Miniratna status. Then and only
then, the benefits of delegation of financial and operational powers backed by so acclaimed financial
autonomy could be examined in appropriate perspective. Moreover, the membership of Miniratna
status should not remain a permanent feature, rather there should be a dynamic and vibrating
membership system wherein the actual/physical and financial performance should be the guiding
consideration for awarding and de-reserving the status of Miniratna. (3.5.4)

APPOINTMENT OF NON-OFFICIAL DIRECTORS

The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure over the delay in the appointment of
non-official Director on one or other ground. The Committee has not been .apprised of as to in how
many of twenty Miniratna PSEs the vacancies of non-official director have been filled up, therefore,
the Committee finds the Department of public enterprises short of its responsibility in discharging
its function in relation to Board structure and its professionalisation of central PSEs. The Committee
during its study visits and interaction with select PSEs has found that post of part-time non-official
directors (say in CCL, HEC, NALCO, Hindustan Copper Ltd., HAL etc.) have remained vacant for
more than one year, This is a pathetic condition. On the other hand PSEs claim to have
professionalisation of Board of Directors and functional autonomy as a result of delegation of financial
and operational power, however, on the other hand, it is found that the posts of part-time non-
official directors remain vacant for years. Under the circumstances, the functioning of the Board of
Director become a matter of crystal understanding rather than a conjecture. (3.6.3)

The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the Department of Public Enterprises to take up
its responsibilities under its mandate and advise and monitoring the constitution of board of
directors of central PSEs to commensurate the acclaimed professionalisation and functional
autonomy. (3.6.4)

TRAINING AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT OF LOWER AND MIDDLE LEVEL EXECUTIVES

The Committee is pleased to note that Department of Public Enterprises keep in organizing
executives Development Programmes for executives of PSUs. However, what the Committee desires
to convey is that due to the emerging complex domestic and global working environment as a result
of under going liberalization and globalization process, the lesson of new management technique
and practices must percolated down to lower and middle level management in order to make than



eee

20

capable for coping with the pulls and pressures of fast emerging corporate governance in the post
WTO-regime. (3.7.3)

REHABILITATION OF RATIONALIZED EMPLOYEES

The Committee is particular to the action taken wated Department of Public Enterprises over
the response of the Committee’s recommendation /conclusion that or presents only about 10% of
the rationalized employees are covered under CRR scheme. Instead of just noting the recommendation
of the Committee DPE should have acted upon by framing proposal as to how to cover the maximum
of rationalized employees under the CRR scheme and same should have been taken up with the
Pianning Commission for obtaining required budgetary support. The productive rehabilitation of
rationalized employees is the issue which concerns the Committee the most. The Committee desires
that DPE may seek the assistance of private sector companies in this regard by framing a policy on
the issue. (3.10.3)

SKILLUPGRADATION AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP DEVELOPMENT

The Committee would like to know whether with enhanced budgetary support a physical target
of 32000 under the CRR scheme have been covered during the year 2004-2005 and if no, the reasons
therefore; along with the alternative policy measure in this regard. (3.11.3)

TRAININGAND CREDIT FACILITIES

The Committee reiterates that Training and credit facilities should be extended also to the
family members of rationalized employees so that the family income can be enhanced and preference
should be given under CRR Scheme whose cutstanding money/amount of VRS is pending with the
PSEs. The preference should be given to the. wards of VR optees in the Centrally sponsored schemes
like PMRY, REGP and other such schemes as sponsored by KVIC and SIDBI. (3.12.3)

SOCIALAUDIT OF SUCH RATIONALIZATION

The Committee would like to know the follow-up-action undertaken by the Department of
Public Enterprises in line with the recommendation regarding the conducting of Social Audit of PSEs
undergoing the rationalization Programme. The Committce desires to know the conclusion of social
auditing of VR optees and its bearing on the CRR scheme. (3.13.3)

Recommendation
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

The Committee feels that the Department of Public Enterprises must come forward in facilitating
the CPSEs in the areas of Human Resource Development which well falls within parameter/mandate
of Department of Public Enterprises. The Department of Public Enterprises must respond to the
mandate and act in the like manner in the general interest of CPSEs. (3.14.3)

INDUCTION OF PROFESSIONALS IN DEPARTMENT OF P. E. IN CRR, MOU AND
RESTRUCTURING DIVISIONS

The Committce would like to know the fellow up action on the part of Department of Public
Enterprises in regard to induction of professionals in Management CRR, MOU and Restructuring
Division ctc. and the out come in the form of effectiveness and efficiency in the working of these
divisions as a result of induction of the professionals. (3.15.3)



MINUTES



Bef PN

10.
11.
12.
13.

XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 5.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 3 May, 2005 in Committee Room 'E', Basement,
PHA, New Delhi.

PRESENT
Shri Santosh Bagrodia — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA.

Prof M.M. Agarwal

Dr. K. Malaisamy
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
Dr. Vijay Mallya

Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy

LOK SABHA

Shri Guharam Ajgalle

Shri Kailash Baitha

Shri Swadesh Chakraborty

Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria

Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel
Shri Rajnarayan

Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
SECRETARIAT

Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer

At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee.

The Committee then took up the following Reports for its consideration:-

@

(ii)

(ii)

(iv)

(vy)

161* Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s
132” Report on MoU Performance in respect of Select Public Sector Undertakings.

162™ Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the
Committee’s 146" Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in Maharashtra.

163" Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the
Committee’s 147° Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in the Region of Bulandshahr.

164" Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s
150° Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Department of Public Enterprises
(Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises).

165" Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s
151° Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Department of Heavy Industries
(Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises)

23


24

(vi) 166% Report on Action Taken by the Government on = contained in the Committee’s
1527 Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries.

(vii) 1677 Report on / ction Taken by the Government on recommendations coatained in the Committee’s
153° Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Ministry of Small Scale Industries.

(viii) 168" Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) pertaining to Department of Public Enterprises
(Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises).

(ix) 169% Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) pertaining to Department of Heavy Industries
(Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises).

(x) 170" Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) pertaining to Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries.
(xi) 171* Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) pertaining to Ministry of Small Scale Industries.

4, The Committee decided to present these reports in the current session. After a brief discussion the
Report were adopted.

5. | The Committee authorized Prof. M.M. Agarwal and in his absence Dr. K. Malaisamy to present the
Reports to the Rajya Sabha. Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel and in his absence Shri Rajnarayan to lay the
copies of the Reports in the Lok Sabha.

4. — The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 p.M.