 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
  
                     
  
 
 
    Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
    February, 2021/Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
  
  
THREE HUNDRED AND FIRST REPORT 
 
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 
298th  Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2020-21) pertaining to the 
Department of Public Enterprises 
(Ministry of Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises) 
(Presented to the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 15th December, 2020) 
(Forwarded to the Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 15th December, 2020) 
 
             (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 3rd February,2021) 
            (Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 3rd February,2021) 
 
   REPORT NO. 
301 

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
              
 
 
 
 
      Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
      February, 2021/Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 THREE HUNDRED AND FIRST REPORT 
 
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 
298th  Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2020-21) pertaining to the 
Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises) 
(Presented to the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 15th December, 2020) 
(Forwarded to the Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 15th December, 2020) 
 
             (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 3rd  February,2021) 
            (Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 3rd February,2021) 
 

 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGES 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …………………………………………             (i) 
 
2.  INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………………….    (ii) 
 
3.  REPORT ……………………………………………………………………………            1-14 
  
     
 CHAPTER – I Recommendations/observations, which have been 
accepted by the Ministry  ……………………............. 
 
          2-3 
 
 CHAPTER–II Recommendations/Observations which the Commi ttee 
does not desire to pursue further in view of the 
Government's replies………………………………......... 
 
         4-8 
 CHAPTER–III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the 
Committee has not accepted  the replies of the Ministry  
and desires the  Minist ry to review their replies 
………………………................................................... 
 
         9-13 
 
 CHAPTER – IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which the                         
Committee desire further comments of the Ministry 
.............……................................................................ 
          14 
 
    
4.    Minutes…………………………………………………………………………….         15-17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2020-21) 
(Constituted  w.e.f.  13th September, 2020) 
1. Dr. K. Keshava Rao  -                                      Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
  2.  Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya    
 3. Shri Subhasish Chakraborty 
 4. Shri Shwait Malik 
 5. Shri Jose K. Mani 
 6. Shrimati Ranee Narah 
 7. Shri Subhas Chandra Bose Pilli 
 8. Shri K.C. Ramamurthy 
 9. Shri Sanjay Seth 
 10. Dr. Amee Yajnik 
    LOK SABHA 
 11.   Shri Hanuman Beniwal 
 12.   Ms. Mimi Chakraborty 
 13.   Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
 14.   Shrimati Annpurna Devi  
 15.   Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse  
 16.   Dr. S. T. Hasan 
 17.   Ms. S. Jothimani 
 18.   Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanjibhai Kundariya 
 19.   Shri Ravindra Kushawaha 
 20.   Shrimati Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
 21.   Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
 22.   Shri Rampreet Mandal 
 23.   Shri Vincent H. Pala 
 24.   Shri Chirag Paswan 
 25.   Shri T. R. V. S. Ramesh 
 26.   Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy  
 27.   Shrimati Gomati Sai 
 28.   Shri Ravindra Shyamnarayan Shukla alias Ravi Kishan 
 29.   Shri Sunil Soren 
 30.   Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare 
 31.   Shri Su Thirunavukkarasar 
SECRETARIAT  
1. Shri Jagdish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Secretary 
3.  Smt. M. Sasilekha Nair, Director 
4.  Shri J.K. Mallick, Additional Director 
5.  Smt. Sreeja. V., Deputy Secretary 
6.  Shri. Ajin J. R., Under Secretary 
7.  Smt. Deepti Rana, Assistant Committee Officer 
                                                                      (i) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on  
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present  this Three Hundred 
and First Report on Action Taken Notes furnished by the Depart ment of Public 
Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises) on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred and Ninety 
Eighth Report on the Demands For Grants (2020 -21) pertaining to Department of Public 
Enterprises. 
 
2.  I, thank the Department of Public Enterprises  (Ministry of Heavy Industries and 
Public Enterprises) for furnishing the Action Taken Notes on the recommendatio ns 
contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred and Ninety Eighth Report. 
 
3.  The Committee in its meeting held on the  16th October, 2020 considered and 
adopted the report. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
October  16, 2020 
Asvina 24, 1942 (Saka) 
 
Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (ii) 

 1 
REPORT 
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry 
of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises) on the 
recommendations contained in the Committee‟s Two H undred and Ninety- Eighth Report on the 
Demands for Grants (2020-21) pertaining to Department of Public Enterprises. 
 
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public 
Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises) in respect of the recommenda tions contained in 
the 298th Report. These have been categorized as follows: 
 
Chapter-I    The recommendations/observations,  which  have  been accepted by the Ministry. 
 
The Committee is pleased to observe  that the Ministry has accepted its 
recommendations as mentioned in the Chapter – I of the Report.  
 
 Chapter-II-  The recommendations/observations  which  the  Committee  does  not  desire to  
   pursue further in view of the Government's replies. 
 
In respect of these recommendations, the Committee is co nvinced with the logic 
and explanation advanced by the Ministry and therefore does not want to pursue 
them further for the present. 
 
 Chapter-III-  The recommendations/observations  in  respect of  which   the Committee has not  
   accepted replies of the Ministry and desires the Ministry to review their replies. 
 
The Committee is not convinced with the replies of the Ministry in respect of 
recommendations contained in Chapter – III and desires that the Ministry in the 
light of further recommendations/obser vations of the Committee , furnish 
comments/explanations thereof. 
 
  Chapter-IV-  The recommendations/observations  in  respect of  which  the  Committee desire  
   further comments of the Ministry. 
 
In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter -IV, the M inistry has either 
furnished the interim replies, therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry 
may furnish Action Taken Notes in respect of recommendations categorized in 
Chapter-IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention and spirit of the 
recommendations of the Committee. 
 
3. The details of the Action Taken Replies of the Ministry and further recommendations/ 
observations of the Committee thereon wherever found necessary are given in the succeeding 
pages. 
 
 
 

 2 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1. The Committee takes note with satisfaction that the objective of the RDC Scheme 
to keep senior management of CPSEs abreast of the latest developments in corporate 
governance, Corporate Social Responsibility Laws, financial matters, Accounting 
Standards, organization and management etc. is being met with the kind of training 
programmes and workshops being conducted by DPE. The Committee notes that 
utilization under RDC Scheme  for 2017 -18 is almost 100% & for 2018 -19, it is 92%. 
However, during 2019 -20, the actual utilization till 31.12.2019 stood at 41%. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that DPE should continue to make efforts to conduct 
more number of training programmes & workshops under RDC scheme in 2020 -21 so 
that the budget allocation can be used optimally. 
                                                                                                                           (Para No 34) 
Action Taken Replies 
 The Committee has observed that utilization under RDC Scheme for 2017 -18 is 
about 100% and for the year 2018 -19 it is 92%.  The Committee has advised that the 
budget allocation should be utilized 100% under RDC Scheme.   
 The recommendation would be duly consid ered for the year 2020 -21 taking into 
account the directions issued by the Government on expenditure management. 
DPE has been conducting training programmes under RDC scheme as per training 
calendar approved for a year.   For the year 2020 -21 more numbers o f training 
programmes may be approved in respect of DPE. 
DPE has been keeping management of CPSEs abreast of latest developments in 
Corporate Social Responsibilities (CSR) by conducting workshops and conferences. A 
workshop on implementation of Corporate S ocial Responsibility by CPSEs in 
Aspirational Districts in Education, Healthcare & Nutrition sectors to discuss the best 
practices, challenges and means to resolve the same was organized by DPE on 3.3.2020 
at New Delhi. The workshop was attended by partici pants from CPSEs, concerned 
Ministries/Departments, District officials of few aspirational districts and implementing 
agencies. Further, it is proposed to organise similar workshops during 2020 -21 on CSR 
under RDC Scheme of the Department.   
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
2. The Committee notes with satisfaction that there has been almost 100% utilization 
of the budget allocation under CRR Scheme.  The Committee is, however, of the view that 

 3 
the real achievement of the scheme can be gauged from the number of VRS/ VSS optees/ 
dependants getting re -deployed after availing the skill training.  DPE in their Annual 
Report has stated that during the year 2018 -19, an allocation of Rs.3.96 crore (RE) was 
made available for the CRR scheme.  2000 VRS/ VSS/ dependents we re trained and 924 
were re-deployed (self/ wage employment) which is 46.2%.  The same has been the trend 
in the previous years also.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that re -deployment of 
the trained VRS/ VSS optees/ dependents should be given equal we ightage along with 
their counselling and retraining.  The Committee also recommends that enhancement in 
the redeployment rate of VRS/ VSS optees be perceived by DPE with the association of 
NSDC.  The Committee notes that „Job Fairs‟ have been held in the S tate of Jharkhand 
and West Bengal by the NSDC for the beneficiaries in order to enhance re -deployment.  
The Committee suggests  that more job fairs may be organized in other States as well, 
especially the North Eastern States to promote re-deployment. 
 (Para No 39) 
Action Taken Replies 
 Basic objective of the CRR scheme is to provide redeployment opportunities 
through wage employment /self -employment after skill training in job oriented trades. 
Enhancement of redeployment rate is being perceived with NSDC‟s  association. During 
the last three years viz. 2016-17 to 2018 -19, 5576 persons were trained and 3190 were 
redeployed with an average redeployment rate of 57.2%. The final figure for 2018 -19 
reflects 64% redeployment through skill training in sectors like Healthcare, Electronics, 
Retail Associates, Automotive, Food Processing, Plumbing, Handicrafts, Logistics, I.T   
etc. As advised by the Committee, NSDC will be asked to hold more number of „Job 
Fairs‟. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
3. The CAPEX increases pro ductivity of PSEs thereby improving economic growth.  
CAPEX by PSEs also contribute to fixed assets creation in the economy.  The 
Government has already directed Maharatna & Navratna companies to review and 
enhance their CAPEX.  The Committee, therefore, d esires that DPE may encourage 
CPSEs to increase their CAPEX through regular monitoring as it is also a parameter for 
MoU evaluation. The committee recommends to conduct outreach programmes to 
sensitise CPSEs to leverage their net worth for infusion into their CAPEX fund.   
(Para No 44) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 DPE regularly monitors the CAPEX achievement of select CPSEs and furnish 
report of the same to PMO every month. The recommendation of the Hon‟ble committee 
to conduct outreach programmes to sensitise CP SEs to leverage their net worth for 
infusion into their CAPEX fund has been noted for compliance.   
 
 

 4 
 
CHAPTER–II 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE FURTHER IN VIEW OF 
THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee is aware that CPSEs in India are undergoing rapid changes and have 
to contribute towards the twin objective of economic development and social cause, within 
the rules and guidelines framed by Government of India. CPSEs are also e xpected to remain 
competitive and generate profit in a highly globalised and market environment. Under such 
circumstances, it is very challenging for CPSEs to show impressive performances. The 
Committee is also aware of the fact that all CPSEs give utmost importance to critical 
performance indicators including R & D, technology upgradation etc. in order to improve 
their performance. The Committee also observes that as the Nodal Department for all 
CPSEs, DPE has been entrusted with a huge responsibility to f ulfill. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the guidelines being framed by the DPE should be in unison with 
the rapid changes the CPSEs are going through. Further, the guidelines should enable 
CPSEs to stand on their own and prove their worth in the expending globalised and market 
economy. The committee further recommends that DPE being the formulator of general 
policy guidelines affecting CPSEs should have a full-fledged the R&D wing of its own to aide 
and advice the CPSEs to achieve the desired goal as explained above. 
 (Para No. 13) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 DPE has taken various steps to strengthen CPSEs such as helping CPSEs become 
financially self -sustaining, making their presence felt in the expanding global market 
economy, export substitution etc. To facilitate this, the Department of Public Enterprises 
(DPE) has taken the following measures which inter alia  include, (i) introduction of 
Maharatna, Navratna and Miniratna schemes envisaging delegation of financial and 
operational powers to Boards of such CPSEs, (ii) thrust on performance improvement 
through regular evaluation under the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) mechanism,  
(iii) professionalization of Boards of CPSEs and strengthening corporate governance 
framework,  etc. The Boards of Maharatn a, Navratna and Miniratna CPSEs have been 
delegated financial and operational powers in the areas of capital expenditure, investment 
in joint ventures/ subsidiaries, entering technology joint ventures or strategic alliances, 
raising of debts, etc. Further, the Department of Public Enterprises on 29 th October, 2015 
issued guidelines for “Streamlining the mechanism for revival and restructuring of sick/ 
incipient sick and weak Central Public Sector Enterprises: General principles and 

 5 
mechanism of restructurin g". These guidelines are to be implemented by the concerned 
administrative Ministries/ Departments. These guidelines provide mechanism to the 
administrative Departments/Ministries for monitoring sickness, identifying the sub -
optimal performing CPSEs and ta king pre -emptive corrective actions to check onset of 
sickness and take appropriate steps to put the CPSEs back to good financial health. The 
guidelines also provide principles on which administrative Ministries/ Departments draw 
revival/ restructuring pla ns of their CPSEs. DPE has been sensitizing the administrative 
Ministries/ Departments of CPSEs from time to time to take pre -emptive measures in 
accordance with the said guidelines.   
As the CPSEs are under the control of sectoral/ line Ministries, the co ncerned 
sectoral/line Ministries are better placed to take steps to address the issues affecting the 
performance of the CPSEs under their domain, keeping in view the problems faced by 
particular sectors. 
  
Recommendation/ Observation 
5. The Committee finds  that during 2018 -19, the total BE of Rs.20.44 crore was 
increased to Rs. 21.44 crore in RE whereas the AE stood at 21.20 crores. For  the year 
2019-20, both BE & RE were 22.64 crore and the AE for the year till 31.12.2019 is Rs. 
15.96 crore. The Committee appreciates that the Department has managed almost 100% 
fund utilisation of RE during 2018 -19 and 70.49% during 2019 -20 till 31.12.2019. The 
Committee hopes that the Department will optimally utilise the fund allocation in the 
remaining quarter of the yea r. While examining the Head wise budgetary provisions for 
2020-21, the Committee observed that the largest allocation has been made under the 
head „Secretariat Economic Services‟. Out of the total allocated funds of 24.15 crore, 
12.98 crore has been given to Non-Scheme head and the Scheme allocation is only 10.5 
crore. The Committee notes that year after year, budget allocation under Non -Scheme 
Head is higher than the Scheme Head. The Committee recommends that allocation of 
funds should be more concentrated on the “Scheme Heads” which in fact, pertains to the 
flagship scheme of the DPE such as CRR and RDC and on the efficient running of which, 
the performance and result-orientation of CPSEs hinges on.   
                                                                                                                                                                        
(Para No 28) 
Action Taken Replies 
 The expenditure of DPE for the year 2019 -20 has been Rs.21.10 crores which is 
93.2% of BE.  DPE has two Sche mes viz. Counselling, Retraining & Redeployment 
(CRR) and Research Development  & Consultancy (RDC) Scheme. Demand of funds 
under CRR during the year 2020 -21 has been kept in consonance with projected 
VRS/VSS figure. 
 
So far as RDC scheme is concerned, DPE  has made all efforts to diversify 
activities for coverage. Besides undertaking   some senior level training of CPSEs, 

 6 
specific activities/studies take place from time to time under RDC. DPE in collaboration 
with IIT Bombay has set up a CSR Study Unit know n as DPE-IITB project at Centre for 
Technology Alternative in Rural Areas (CTARA), IIT Bombay. The CSR Unit will 
undertake PAN - India study of all CSR eligible CPSEs in the country and the impact 
assessment of CSR activities / projects undertaken by CPSEs . A one -day conference on 
“Implementation of CSR in Aspirational Districts by CPSEs in Education, Healthcare and 
Nutrition Sectors – Issues, Challenges and Best Practices”  was organized by DPE on 3rd 
March, 2020 in association with IIT Bombay and NITI Aayog.  
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
6. The Committee notes that MoU system is an important tool that enables DPE to 
evaluate the performance of the management of CPSEs on key selected parameters 
against targets agreed upon so as to improve critical performan ce indicators of the 
organization.  The MoU system also helps CPSEs to upgrade their processes and 
systems, address corporate governance imperatives and improve accountability.  During 
the year 2019 -20, 144 CPSEs have signed MoU with their respective Minis tries/ 
Departments and their performance rating would be evaluated after completion of the 
financial year.  Since Independent Directors of Boards of CPSEs play a key role in 
ensuring good corporate governance, the Committee recommends that MoU system may 
be reviewed to incorporate a new evaluation parameter on „non-filling up of vacant posts 
of Non-Official Directors on the Boards of CPSEs as a deterrent for CPSEs which do not 
take action timely to fill up such vacant posts. 
(Para No 50) 
Action Taken Replies 
 
 In MoU, it is to evaluate the performance of Management in those parameters 
which are within the control of CPSE.  At present, the CPSE have no direct role in the 
process of selection and appointment of Independent Directors.  The proposals for 
appointment of Non -official Directors for CPSEs are initiated by the concerned 
Administrative Ministries/Departments. The selection of Non-official Directors in respect 
of all CPSEs is made by the Search Committee which presently consists of Secretary 
(DoPT), Sec retary (DPE), Secretary of the Administrative Ministry/Department of the 
concerned CPSE and 2 non -official Members. The concerned Administrative 
Ministry/Department appoints the Non -official Directors on the basis of 
recommendations of the Search Committee  after obtaining the approval of Appointments 
Committee of the Cabinet (ACC). Therefore, it may not be feasible to include it in MoU 
process. 

 7 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
7. The Committee notes that Government is keen on disinvestment of CPSEs except 
those belonging to high priority areas such as National Security, Sovereign function at 
arm‟s length & market imperfection and public purpose, as Government doesn‟t want to 
engage itself in Sectors where competitive markets have come of age. However, the 
Committee recommends that to support and strengthen the CPSEs operating in „Priority 
Areas‟ of Business, as identified by NITI Aayog. DPE should play a more pre-active role, 
especially in respect of those CPSEs, which are already doing business in the „Priority 
Areas‟, which need support to excel their performance. In the case of sick, incipient sick 
and weak CPSEs, their concerned Administrative Departments have been vested with the 
responsibility of monitoring their sickness and evolve measures for their reviva l/re-
structuring. The Committee also observed that even through DPE is not mandated to deal 
with matters concerning disinvestment of CPSEs, it issues broad policy guidelines of 
CPSEs. Therefore, the Committee recommends that while disposing of the land of CPSEs 
identified for closure/strategic disinvestment, the applicable guidelines should be 
scrupulously followed. The Committee during the course of examination of the Demands 
for Grants desired to know whether in the „Net Worth‟ of a Company , its total hol ding 
value, including land assets were taken into consideration as per its current market value 
or only its paid -up capital and reserves mode out of its profits were taken into 
consideration.  In case only the latter parameter is considered while assessing  the 
networth of a company, then a policy intervention is the need of the hour, which was to 
be taken up by DPE with the concerned Ministry. Further, the Committee suggest that 
networth of the land of such CPSEs should be calculated as per the prevalent ma rket 
rates. 
                                                                                                                                 (Para 57) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
DPE as per its mandate continue to support CPSEs including in the „Priority 
Areas‟ of Business through various capacity building programmes, laying down of 
guidelines on corporate governance, delegation of powers under „Ratna‟ Scheme, 
monitoring of CAPEX of Select CPSEs and regular Performance Evaluation through MoU 
System.  DPE has also written to the concerned administrative Ministries/ Departments to 
advise their respective CPSEs for bench marking with national/ international peers to 
cover productivity, efficiency with quality standards and areas.  
 
With regard to the recommendation o f the Committee on disposal of land, it is 
submitted that the implementation of the guidelines regarding sale and disposal of land of 
CPSEs approved for closure is done by the CPSE and the concerned administrative 

 8 
Ministry/ Department. Therefore, the recommendation of the committee has been brought 
to the notice of the administrative Ministries/ Departments. 
 
With regard to the issue of net worth, it is submitted that Section 2 (57) of the 
Companies Act 2013, defines the “net worth”. The Companies Act  2013 was passed by 
the Act of p arliament. The Companies Act is administered by Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs.  It defines “net worth” of a company as “the aggregate value of the paid -up share 
capital and all reserves created out of the profits, securities premi um account and debit or 
credit balance of profit and loss account, after deducting the aggregate value of the 
accumulated losses, deferred expenditure and miscellaneous expenditure not written off, 
as per the audited balance sheet, but does not include res erves created out of revaluation 
of assets, write -back of depreciation and amalgamation.” Net worth is different from 
“market value” of the company. 
 
Companies follows the accounting standard while preparation and presenting their 
financial statements. Acc ounting Standard (AS) 10/Indian Accounting Standard (IND 
AS) 16 on “Plant, Property, and Equipment (PPE)” are the extant Accounting Standards 
dealing with the Plant, Property, and Equipment which is represented by different class of 
assets, such as land, l and & Building, machinery, etc.  As per the standard, the value of 
fixed assets, including land, can be either at historical cost or revalued cost in the Annual 
Accounts. If an asset is revalued, the entire class of PPE to which that asset belongs 
should be revalued. But for the purpose of book of accounts, if it is valued at a particular 
point of time, then it will be the same value until and unless it is revalued.   
 
Further, as per the Accounting Standards, when fixed asset is revalued, the excess of 
market value over the book value on the date of revaluation is not considered as a normal 
profit earned in the normal course of business/operations and is credited to revaluation 
reserves. Since it is not created out of net profits - i.e. by appropriation out  of the net 
profit, it is excluded in calculation of networth. Therefore, the networth is not a market 
value. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 9 
 
 
CHAPTER–III 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY AND 
DESIRES THE MINISTRY TO REVIEW THEIR REPLIES 
 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
8. The Committee notes that the total No. of CPSEs stood at 348 during 2018 -19, 
whereas the figure for 2017 -18 showed 339 CPSEs only.  Therefore, the No. of CPSEs 
has increased by 9 which shows 2.65% growth over the previous year.  However, the No. 
of operating CPSEs has reduced from 258 during 2017 -18 to 249 during 2018 -19, 
showing a decrease in growth by 3.49%.  Further most of the indicators such as the paid-
up capital, Capital Employ ed, Networth, Investment, Reserves & Surplus total turnover, 
overall profit, Foreign Exchange Earnings, etc., indicate a steady increase from 2016 -17 
to 2018-19. 
 
However, indicators such as Dividend paid, regular employment in numbers, 
Market Capitalisation, etc., have shown a steady decline from the year 2016 -17 to 2018-
19.  The Committee observes that one of the main objectives for setting up of PSEs was to 
create employment opportunities in the country.  However, the macro -view of the 249 
operating CPSE s for the last 3 years show gradual decline in number of regular 
employees.  As per the information furnished by DPE as part of examination of Demands 
for Grants 2020-21, there is a reduction of 55,560 employees from 2017-18 to 2018-19. 
 
However, as per th e Public Enterprises Survey 2018 -19 brought out by DPE, 
CPSEs across Sectors provided employment to 15,14,064 people as on 31.03.2019, 
including casual workers and contract workers, as against 15,54,967 as on 31.03.2018.  
As per the Survey, there is a reduction of 40,903 employees (2.63%) in total No. of people 
employed by CPSEs including casual and contract employees. 
 
The Committee notes that there is a mismatch in the figures regarding number of 
employees in CPSEs as shown in the written submission made by DPE before the 
committee and the Public Enterprises Survey 2018 -19.  However, it is a fact that there is 
a gradual decline in number of regular employees in CPSEs.  The Committee therefore 
recommends that CPSEs should be encouraged to fulfil their Socia l Objective and 
provide more permanent employment to people, instead of engaging personnel on casual 
and contract basis. 
 

 10 
 
The Committee also observed during the course of examining the Demands for 
Grants that a number of PSUs, even the profit making Mahar atnas fail to fill up 
vacancies of personnel and many a time, such vacancies are filled by hiring of 
superannuated employees on contractual basis, to fill up the vacancies, which is not a 
healthy trend. The Committee recommends that DPE should take steps t o encourage 
CPSEs and Ministries concerned to desist from this practice and employ young minds in 
the vacancies, on regular basis, so that CPSEs can gain from the new concepts and 
interests evinced by such young minds and become globally competitive. 
(Para No 20) 
Action Taken Replies 
 In compliance of the Recruitment / employment of personnel to the posts below 
Board level are done by the Management of respective Central Public Sector Enterprises 
(CPSEs) as per their Recruitment/ Human Resource Policy. The necessary qualification 
and eligibility criterion for posts below Board level is also decided by the respective 
CPSE as per their H.R. Policy.   In compliance of the recommendation, the Department 
has written to all administrative Ministries on 6th April, 2020 to sensitize all CPSEs under 
their respective administrative jurisdiction to put in place a system of „Succession 
Planning‟ and to ensure that all vacant positions related to core activities of CPSEs are 
filled through regular incumbents.  
 
Further Recommendations/ Observations 
  
The Committee notes from the Government's reply that the DPE is silent on 
the observation of the Committee regarding the mismatch in the figures about the 
number of employees in CPSEs as presented before the Committee and the f igures 
shown in the Public Enterprises Survey 2018 -19.  The Committee desires that the 
discrepancy in data be clarified and also rectified. 
 
 Further, the Committee acknowledges the fact that the 
Recruitment/employment of Personnel to the Post below Board level are done by the 
Management of the  respective Central Pubic Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) as per 
their recruitment/Human Resources Policy that lays down the necessary 
qualification and eligibility Criteria Post -wise depending upon their nature of work 
and requirement.  The Committee wh ile appreciating the efforts taken up by the 
Department to sensitise CPSEs through their administrative Ministries, to put in 
place a System of "Succession Planning" for filling up vacant position s in CPSEs, 
also expect the  DPE, being the Nodal Department of all CPSEs with regard to 
overall Human Resource Management, to act as a watchdog to ensure timely filling 
up of all vacancies arising from time to time, by conducting surveys at regular 
intervals rather than putting the onus on the administrative Ministries alone. 
 
 
 

 11 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee is aware that professionalization of boards of CPSEs is extremely 
essential for making CPSEs more competitive and viable in the emerging market 
economy. It is also essential for ensuring good corporate governance. In its 290 th Report 
the Committee had inter alia recommended that the process of filling up the regular 
Board level vacancies should be initiated by the CPSEs at least one year before vacancy 
actually occurs so that there is no gap between the anticipated vacancy and recruitment. 
Subsequently, the Department of PE in its ATR had informed that the said 
recommendation had been forwarded to Public Sector Enterprises Selection Board 
(PSEB) under the DOPT for nec essary action, as it initiates the selection process for 
filling up of Board level posts in CPSEs one year in advance of occurrence of anticipated 
vacancies. However, it is saddening to note that around 313 positions out of 701 
positions of non -official Di rectors are at present vacant in various CPSEs. The 
Committee therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation that the process for filling up 
of vacant post of regular non -official Directors in various CPSEs should be initiated one 
year before the actual occurrence of the vacancy to avoid delay in filling up of vacancies. 
The Committee also recommends that DPE should follow up the matter with PESB and 
concerned administrative ministries and report the outcome to the Committee. The 
Committee further recomme nds that the existing 313 vacant positions of Non -official 
Directors in various CPSEs should be filled up expeditiously to ensure good corporate 
governance. 
 (Para No 61) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 Public Enterprises Selection Board has been requested again vi de OM dated 15 th 
April, 2020 to furnish their reply on the matter of timely filling up of vacant positions of 
functional Directors of CPSEs. As regards vacant posts of non -official (Independent) 
Directors on the Boards of CPSEs, the Department takes note o f the concern expressed 
by the Hon‟ble Committee and submits that necessary steps are being taken to fill up 
vacant positions of Independent Directors on the Boards of CPSEs. 
 
Further Recommendations/ Observations 
  
The Committee notes the reply given by DPE and desires to know the specific 
measures being taken to fill up the vacancies of non -official (Independent) Directors 
in the Boards of CPSEs, expeditiously. 
 
 The Committee is, however constrained to express is displeasure in the 
inordinate delay in fi lling up the vacancies of Directors (both functional as well as 
Independent) on the Boards of CPSEs despite the several recommendations in this 
regard made by the Committee earlier.  These vacancies would have a cascading 

 12 
effect on the effective functionin g of CPSEs and also indicate lack of vision, 
planning and good corporate governance.  The Committee, therefore, recommend s 
that DPE should follow up the  matter with Public Enterprises  Selection Board, 
Department of Personnel & Training vigorously and moni tor the progress regularly 
so that the existing vacancies of functional Directors  in the Boards of CPSEs can be 
filled up expeditiously.  The Committee would also like the Department to report 
back to the Committee. 
  
Recommendation/ Observation 
10. The C ommittee notes that all CPSEs meeting the criteria specified in Section 
135 of Comp any Act, 2013 are mandated to undertake CSR activities in project mode 
preferably, in the local area of the company's unit, plant or factory as far as possible. 
Wherever it is not possible, the CPSEs are at liberty to undertake the CSR activities 
in any part of the country. Further, as per the latest guidelines for CSR expenditure 
of CPSEs issued by DPE on 10 th December, 2018, a common theme will be identified for 
each year f or undertaking CSR by CPSEs, which should cover 60% of annual CSR 
expenditure and Aspirational Districts have to be given preference.  
However, during the recent Study V isit of the Committee to Hyderabad on 
08/01/2020 the Committee observed that the CSR exp enditure by most of the CPSEs 
were incurred on construction of toilets, contribution to Swachh Bharat Kosh, 
improving existing drinking water facility, health care facilities, etc.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that DPE in co -ordination with admini strative ministries 
should ensure that the CPSEs are aware of the new provisions in the revised 
guidelines such as theme based activity to be undertaken every year, preference to be 
given to Aspirational Districts, etc.  
 
The Committee also recommends that the CPSEs should desist from using CSR 
fund to supplement Government schemes as the objective of CSR fund is to involve 
corporates in discharging their social responsibility with their innovative ideas and 
management skills.  The Committee is also of the c onsidered opinion that the CSR 
expenditure in NE R should be given more weightage.  
 
The Committee feels that the involvement of local representatives such as the 
area MLA/ MLC and MP is of paramount importance in CSR related activities.  The 
Committee, acco rdingly, recommends that area MLA/ MLC and MP should be 
consulted both at the time of selection of CSR projects as well as at their 
implementation stage.  This will go a long way to fulfil the aspirations of residents of 
these areas.  
(Para No. 67) 

 13 
Action Taken Replies 
 Recommendation/ observation made by the Hon'ble Committee has been 
noted. In order to ensure that the CPSEs undertake Corporate Social Responsibility 
(CSR) activities in a focused and theme based manner, the Department of Public 
Enterprises (DPE) has issued guidelines in December, 2018 in line with the 
recommendations of the CPSEs Conclave held in April, 2018.  The guidelines 
provide for 60% of annual CSR expenditure by CPSEs on a specific theme with 
preference to aspirational districts in th e country identified by NITI Aayog.  The 
theme for 2018 -19 was “School Education and Healthcare” whereas for 2019 -20, 
the theme was “School Education, Healthcare and Nutrition”.  The Department of 
Public Enterprises has been sensitizing the CPSEs through v arious meetings, 
conferences, workshops, etc. for undertaking CSR activities in line with the above 
guidelines.   
 
 
Further Recommendations/ Observations 
 
The Committee  appreciates the measures being taken by DPE to sensitise 
CPSEs to undertake CSR activit ies in a focussed and the me based manner in 
accordance with the guidelines issued in December, 2018.  However, the Committee 
notes from the Department's reply that its recommendation for involving local 
representatives such as the area MLAs/MLCs and MPs ha s not been addressed.  
The Committee feels that involving local representatives will help in selecting need 
based projects and the area where such projects are to be implemented, thus  
benefitting a larger population of the area/community.  The Committee, t herefore, 
reiterates its recommendations that DPE may frame guidelines for involving local 
representatives like MLAs, MLCs and MPs right from the initiation process of the  
CSR Projects till the competition thereof.  
 
The Committee further notes that DPE ha s not addressed the following 
recommendations made by the Committee:- 
 
The Committee also recommends that the CPSEs should desist from using 
CSR fund to supplement Government schemes as the objective of CSR fund is to 
involve corporates in discharging thei r social responsibility with their innovative 
ideas and management skills.  The Committee is also of the considered opinion 
that the CSR expenditure in NER should be given more weightage.  
  
The Committee would like to be apprised of the action on the afore said 
recommendations.  
 
  
  

 14 
CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DESIRE FURTHER COMMENTS OF THE MINISTRY 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
11. The Committee notes that DPE has been able to use the budget allocation under 
RDC Scheme optimally, in the North Eastern Region.  The Committee also notes that 
DPE periodically reviews the CRR scheme to make it more useful to VRS/ VSS optees/ 
dependants.  The scheme, however, will be more meaningful when the trained VRS/ VSS 
optees/ dependants are re -deployed.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates that the 
beneficiaries of a particular area should be imparted training in such skills which are in 
demand and which can be made use for employment in that area.  The Committee cannot 
fathom the fact that year after year, DPE has not been able to utilize the fund allocated 
under CRR in North Eastern Region, due to non -availability of VRS/ VSS optees/ 
dependants in North Eastern Region.  Even though the unutilized funds do not lapse and 
gets tr ansferred to Non Lapsable Pool, it does not reach the beneficiaries, thereby 
hampering the development of the North Eastern Region.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that DPE should re -visit the CRR Scheme and find out ways and means to 
make it more attractive for the VRS/ VSS optees/ dependents of North Eastern Region, so 
that the desired results can be achieved.  Further, quarterly/ mid term review of the 
scheme may be undertaken to improve the utilization of the Scheme.  DPE should also 
sensitise the CPSEs in North Eastern Region which undertake downsizing of employees 
to use the data bank available with them to encourage VRS/ VSS optees/ dependants of 
such CPSEs to make use of the CRR scheme. 
(Para No 42) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 As already stated in reply to Para 28 that setting up of physical targets under CRR 
scheme depends on number of persons released under VRS/VSS.  The scope of CRR 
scheme has been reviewed from time to time to include dependents of VRS/ VSS optees, 
nature of job rolls, training ar eas, duration of training, etc., to improve the redeployment 
percentage under the Scheme. 
 Regarding NER, DPE has been pursuing with the CPSEs having units in NER  for 
providing lists of VRS/VSS optees. During the year 2019 -20, candidates from the unit of 
NTC in Guwahati have been identified where training is in progress. DPE has taken note 
of the suggestions of the Committee with regard to sensitization of CPSEs in NER for 
sharing the available data bank of VRS/ VSS optees to improve the number of trainees in 
NER and would be following up with the CPSEs. 

 15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 16 
I 
 
First Meeting 
 
The Committee met at 2:30 p.m. on Friday, the 16 th October, 2020 in 
Committee Room- „A‟, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
 
Dr. K. Keshava Rao -   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
3.     Shri Shwait Malik 
4.    Shri K. C. Ramamurthy 
5.   Dr Amee Yajnik 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
6. Shri Hanuman Beniwal 
7.   Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse 
8.   Dr. S. T. Hasan 
9.     Ms. S. Jothimani 
10.  Shri Ravinder Kushwaha 
11.  Shri Vincent H. Pala 
12. Shri T. R. V. S. Ramesh 
13.   Shrimati Gomati Sai 
14.   Shri Ravindra Shyamnarayan Shukla alias Ravi Kishan 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Jagdish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
2.     Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Secretary 
3. Smt. M. Sasilekha Nair, Director 
4. Smt. Sreeja V., Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Ajin J. R., Under Secretary 
 
Department of Heavy Industry: 
 
1.   Shri. Arun Goel, Secretary 
2.   Smt. Sukriti Likhi, Joint Secretary 
3.   Shri. Amit Varadan, Joint Secretary 

 17 
4.  Shri Amit Mehta, Joint Secretary 
BHEL: 
Shri Nalin Shinghal, CMD 
HMT: 
Shri S. Girish Kumar, CMD 
 
At the outset, the Chairman of the Commi ttee welcomed all the 
Members to the first  meeting of the Committee after its reconstitution . As 
per the agenda, the Committee firstly took up  the 300th, 301 st ,302nd  and 
303rd draft Reports for consideration and adoption. Draft 300th, 301st & 302nd 
Action Taken Reports of the Committee were prepared based on the replies 
furnished by the Government on the recommendations/ observations 
contained in the 297 th, 298 th and 299 th Reports of the Committee on 
Demands for Grants, 2020 -21 pertaini ng to the Ministry of MSME, 
Department of Public Enterprises and Department of Heavy Industry 
respectively. Draft 303 rd Report was on the subject “Downturn in 
Automobile Sector - Its Impact & Measures for Revival”. After a brief 
discussion, the Committee adopted all the above  four draft Reports  
unanimously without any change.  As both the Hous es of the Parliament are 
not in S ession and the recommenda tions made in the 303 rd Reports require 
immediate attention of the Go vernment, the Committee decided to present 
the Report to the Hon‟ble Chairman of Rajya Sabha at an early date. 
  
2. *     *     *  
3. *     *     * 
   
4. *     *     *  
 
5. *     *     *  
6. *     *     *  
 
7. *     *     * 
   
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
 
9. The Committee adjourned at 4.22 p.m. 
______________________________________________________________________________________  
***Pertains to other matter. 