PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY

SIXTY-SEVENTH REPORT

ON

ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE AND PERFORMANCE REVIEW
OF INDIAN BUREAU OF MINES (IBM) DEPARTMENT OF MINES

(MINISTRY OF MINES AND COAL)

(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 8™ MARCH, 2002)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 8™ MARCH, 2002)

Seal

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2002/PHALGUNA, 1923 (SAKA)


9 ४ ३ ७ हज ले

CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

(COMPOSITION OF THE PREVIOUS COMMITTEE

COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE -IV

INTRODUCTION

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE

OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE —

AT A GLANCE

MINUTES

PAGES
(Hii)
Gii}iv)
)
(vii)
1-13
14-17

19-29


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

(Date of Constitution - 1* January, 2002)

Shri Ramdas Agarwal - Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
Shri Faguni Ram

Shri P.K. Maheshwari

Ms. Frida Topno

Shri Jibon Roy

Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
Shri S. Sivasubramanian
Smt. Saroj Dubey

Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha
Prof. M.M. Aggarwal

Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil

LOK SABHA

Shri A. Narendra

Shri Tarachand Sahu

Shri G. Mallikarjunappa
Shri Basangouda R. Patil
Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
Shri Ramanand Singh
Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
Shri Ananta Nayak

Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
Shri Nepal Chandra Das
Shri Thomas Hansda

Shri Uttamrao Patil

Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
Shri A.C. Jose

Shri P. Rajendran

Shri Sunil Khan

Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
Shri Malyala Rajaiah
Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari
Shri Beni Prasad Verma
Shri Deepak Kumar
Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
Shri Brijlal Khabri

Shri Manjay Lal

(i)


38.
39.
40.
41.

Dr. S. Jagathrakshakan
Dr. K. Malaisamy
Kumari Mamata Banerjee
Shri Ajoy Chakraborty

SECRETARIAT

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer

di)


COMPOSITION OF THE PREVIOUS COMMITTEE
Shri Ramdas Agarwal —Chairman

RAJYA SABHA
Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi

Dr. Faguni Ram

Shri P.K. Maheshwari

Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma
Shri Jibon Roy

Shri Somappa R. Bommai
Smt. Saroj Dubey

Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhundar
Shri S. Sivasubramanian
Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha
Prof. .M.M. Aggarwal

Shri Bangaru Laxman

LOK SABHA

Shri A. Narendra

Shri Ramdas Athawale

Shri Ram Ragnunath Chaudhary
Shri Nepal Chandra Das
Shri K.P. Singh Deo

Shri Anant Mahadeoappa Gudhe
Shri Thomas Hansda

Shri G.J. Javiya

Shri A.C. Jose

Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
Shri Sunil Khan

Shri Deepak Kumar

Shri Manjay Lal

Shri K. Malaisamy

Shri G. Mallikarjunappa
Shri K.H. Muniyappa

Shri Nagmani

Shri Anant Nayak

Shri R. Basanagouda Patil
Shri Uttamarao Deorao Patil
Shri M. Rajaiah

Shri P. Rajendran

Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
Shri Tarachand Sahu

Shri Ram Sajivan

Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh

(ii)


41.

43.

Shri Ramanand Singh
Shri Chunnilal Thakur
Shri Rizwan Zaheer.
Smt. Renu Kumari

SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer

(iv)


ही ४2 ७

See AY

COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-IV

Shri A.C. Jose —Convenor
RAJYA SABHA

Smt. Saroj Dubey
Shri Somappa R. Bommai
Dr. Faguni Ram

LOK SABHA

Shri R. Basangouda Patil
Shri Ramdas Athwale
Shri Thomas Hansda
Shri Nepal Chandra Das
Shri Nagmani

Shri K.H. Muniyappa

(v)


INTRODUCTION

1, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Industry, having been authorised by the Committee, hereby present this Sixty-Seventh Report
of Sub-Committee-IV for Ministry of Mines ( of Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Industry) on Organisational Structure and Performance Review of Indian Bureau
of Mines (IBM) which is under the administrative control of Department of Mines ( Ministry of
Mines and Coal ).

2. The Committee on Industry at its meeting held on 12" February, 2001 inter-alia
constituted Sub-Committee-IV for Ministry of Mines. The Sub-Committee took up the issue to
examine organisational structure and performance review of Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM). The
Sub-Committee visited Nagpur from 11" to 14 September, 2001 and interacted with the
Management of Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM)). The Sub-Committee in its meeting held on 7”
December, 2001 heard the Secretary, Ministry of Mines and official concerned to Indian
Bureau of Mines. The Report has been prepared on the basis of on the spot study and
interaction with the Secretary , Ministry of Mines and officials of IBM.

3. The Sub-Committee in its meeting held on 26" December, 2001 considered and adopted
the Report.

4.The Committee at its meeting held on 26" December, 2001 considered and adopted the
Report.

NEW DELHI; RAMDAS AGARWAL
December 26, 2001 हि Chairman,

Department -related Parliamentary

Standing Committee on Industry

(vii)


REPORT
INDIAN BUREAU OF MINES

The Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM) established in 1948, is a multi-disciplinary
government organization under the Department of Mines, Ministry of Coal and Mines, engaged
in promotion of conservation and scientific development of mineral resources other than coal,
petroleum & natural gas, atomic minerals and minor minerals. During the first two years of its
existence, the IBM functioned mostly as an Advisory Body and helped the government in
framing the mineral legislation viz. the Mines and Minerals (Regulation & Development) Act
1948; Mineral Concession Rules 1949 and Petroleum Concession Rules 1949. Later Mineral
Conservation & Development Rules 1955 (MCDR) and Mining Leases (Modifications of terms)
Rules 1956 were framed. With the enactment of the MM (R&D) Act 1948; the IBM was
entrusted with a set of additional functions in August 1950. Accordingly, inspection of mines
and mineral prospects became a regular activity. By 1953, the IBM was entrusted with an
additional function of undertaking detailed exploration of Mineral deposits. Al! the mineral
deposits which were to supply raw materials to the Public Sector Steel Plants established in the
Second and Third Five Year Plan Periods, were proved by the IBM. Accordingly, IBM under-
took exploration for coal, iron ore, limestone, base metals, magnesite, pyrite, tungsten etc. With
the formation of National Coal Development Corporation, the prospecting of coal was transferred
to it from IBM.

2.0 CHARTER OF FUNCTIONS OF IBM

2.1. The Sub-Committee was apprised by IBM management that with the expansion of
mining industry and gradual adoption of updated technology in large mines, the functions of IBM
were reviewed and revised in 1966 and more recently in 1981.

1. The current Charter of functions of the IBM is as follows:-

(a) Enforcing conservation and systematic development of mineral resources
through inspection of mines, beneficiation plants, and mineral-based
industries;

(b) Conducting geological, mining, beneficiation and other related techno-
economic field studies and applied research on mining-geological problems.

2. Approval of mining plans in respect of mining leases granted/ renewed as well as
for existing mining leased on behalf of the Central Government.

3. Conducting studies on environmental protection and pollution control in regard
to the mining and mineral beneficiation operations.

4. Preparation of mineral maps and the inventory of mineral resources of India.

5. Providing technical consultancy services on suitable terms within the country and

abroad in connection with:

(i) Appraisal and exploitation of deposits ‘including ore dressing
investigations and analysis of ores and minerals and preparation of
feasibility reparts and detailed project reports of mines/ore dressing
projects.

(ii) Improving efficiencies and reducing operation costs.
(iii) Market surveys.

(iv) Financial analysis of capital requirements, and charter.


(v) Matters related to any of the functions enunciated in the charter.

6. Conducting under the departmental programme testing and analysis of ores and
minerals, mineral beneficiation and related technological studies on samples
obtained from land and sea; research on fundamental aspects of mineral
beneficiation. 33

7. Collection, processing and storage of data on mines, minerals and mineral-based
industries, collection and maintenance of world mineral intelligence, foreign
mineral legislation and other related matters.

8. Publication of bulletins, monographs, information circulars and reports of
investigation relating to mining, mineral beneficiation and mineral-based
industries.

9. Publication of statistics relating to mineral production in India, mineral stocks,
exports, local consumption, etc. rendering assistance to the mineral trade in the
marketing of minerals.

10. Advising on matters in regard to the mineral industry particularly on planning for
exploitation and utilization of the country's mineral resources and those of the
sea, infrastructure requirements, environmental protection and pollution control,
export and import policies, trade, mineral legislation, wages, taxes, royalty and
related matters.

11. Training of scientific, technical and other cadres of the department and persons
front the mineral industry and other agencies in India and abroad.

12. Promoting awareness regarding the conservation and systematic development of
mineral deposits through museums, exhibitions 5.10 other audio-visual media

13. Undertaking such other activities as may become necessary in the light of the
developments in the field of mining, mineral beneficiation an related technology.

2.2 The Committee takes note of functions envisaged in the charter of functions of IBM
and hopes that IBM would be able to accomplish its task as enshrined in the charter of functions.
The Committee recommends that the Department of Mines should take steps towards further
empowering IBM so that IBM would be able to discharge its functions and responsibility in
efficient and effective manner. IBM from time to time should monitor mining plan of all the

* Mines.

23 The Committee further recommends that" since IBM has been entrustea with the
function of approving mining plans in respect of mining leases granted on behalf of the Central
Government as well as conducting studies of environmental protection and pollution Control, it
is pertinent on the part of IBM management that while approving the mining, plans the issue of
environmental protection should be given due importance. The Committee is also of the
opinion that the time-gap between the environmental clearance and app oval of mining lease
should not be too large as to hamper the: growth rate of mining industry.


3.0 FINANCIAL PROVISIONS AND APPROPRIATION DURING FIVE YEAR
PLANS

3.1 The Department of Mines furnished the Sub-Committee the details of financial
provisions and the appropriation from Vth Five Year Plan onwards which stated below:-

(Rs. in crores)

Five Year Plan | Major Head Financial Appropriation
Period Provision (Actual
( Budget} Expenditure)

Vth Five Year Plan | 2853-Non Ferrous Mining & Metallurgical | 1:7976 1.5465
1974-79 Industries

4853-Capital Outlay on Non-Ferrous Mining | Nil Nil

& metallurgical Industries.

Vith Five Year Plan | 2853-Non Ferrous Mining & Metallurgical | 7.6185
1980-85 Industries
4853-Capital Outlay on Non-Ferrous Mining | Nil
& metallurgical Industries.
Vilth Five Year Plan | 2853-Non Ferrous Mining & Metallurgical | 16.7559 14.7959
0.9100 0.8352

(1985-90) Industries

4853-Capital Outlay on Non-Ferrous Mining
& metallurgical Industries.

Annual Plan 2853-Non Ferrous Mining & Metallurgical | 5,3000 4.4307
(1990-91) Industries
4853-Capital Outlay on Non-Ferrous Mining | 0.2000
& metallurgical Industries
Annual Plan 2853-Non Ferrous Mining & Metallurgical
(1991-92) Industries.

4853-Capital Outlay on Non-Ferrous Mining
& metallurgical Industries.

Vilth Five Year Plan | 2853-Non Ferrous Mining & Metallurgical
(1992-97) Industries.

4853-Capital Outlay on Non-Ferrous Mining
& metallurgical Industries.

IXth Five Year Plan | 2853-Non Ferrous Mining & Metallurgical
(1997-02) Industries.

4853-Capital Outlay on Non-Ferrous Mining
| & metallurgical Industries.

* Including anticipated expenditure for the year 2001-02.

33.5944

7.9279

94.2264*

2.2314*



40 BUDGETARY SUPPORT

4.1 The Department of Mines furnished the details of budgetary support provided to IBM
during last five years which is as under:-
(Rs in crores)

Bu Appropriation

1997-98 20.8500
19.2275

1999-2000 18.5160
2000-01 21.8743
19.0000 19.66(Anticipated)

4.2 The IBM management informed the Sub-Committee that the current level of
Budgetary Support ( Plan & Non Plan) is just sufficient for limited ongoing activities only.
However, while considering the new areas of activities as envisaged for IBM enhanced budgetary
support will be required to discharge the additional functions efficiently and to promote
conservation of minerals, scientific development of mineral resources and protection of mines
environment. The new areas of activities for IBM include a) Strict enforcement of MCDR.; b)
Monitoring of prospecting/reconnectory operation over large areas; c) Preparation of mining map
covering forest overlays entire country as desired by Ministry of Environment and Forests; d)
Examination of 2nd renewal cases of mining leases; e) Enforcement/acquisition of data in respect
of granite/marble, consequent to the implementation of granite conservation and development
Rules. ;_ f) New laws of offshore mining and the role envisaged for IBM; g) Adoption of UNFC
certification in preparation of National Inventory on Mineral Resources, etc. The IBM
management stated that in order to carry out and discharge the above mentioned additional
responsibilities smoothly and efficiently, the enhanced budgetary support would be required.

43 The Committee, taking note of the need of the enhanced budgetary support for IBM,
recommends that the Department of Mines in tandem with IBM management would estimate the
actual need of budgetary support and take it up with the Ministry of Finance.

44 Replying to the Sub-Committee's query as to what extent IBM has been successful in
its aims of preparing and updating of mineral maps of major minerals, the management stated
that the geographical area of the Union of India is about 328 million hects. Of these almost
2/3" are under agricultural cultivable pastures and grazing land. The total area under forest is of
the order of 68.80 m. hects. constituting about 21% of the total geographical area. The mining
lease area constitutes 6,73,425 hects. i.e. 0.200% of the total geographical area. As on date there
are 8870 mining leases in the country with the mining lease area of 6,73.425 hects. The mining
activity is restricted to 21 States in the country for 63 different minerals. The IBM initiated the
preparation of mineral leasehold maps from 1977 and has prepared the mineral leasehold maps on
1 :50,000 scale for 17 important minerals namely. chromite, iron ore, manganese, copper, lead,
zinc, bauxite. rock phosphate, kyanite, sillimanite. wolframite. magnesite. fluorite, soapstone.
graphite, barytes and limestone. The total leasehold covered in these mineral lease hold maps is
of the order of 1950 and the total lease area covered in these maps is of the order of about 3 lakh.
hects. constituting 44.55% of the total leasehold area of the country. In the process of preparation
of mineral leasehold maps, a total of 294 index maps has been prepared thereby covering about
500 Survey of India top sheets on 1 :50,000 scale. Looking to the environmental and ecological
problems due to mining and other activities and thereby causing degradation of land. the IBM


promptly decided to prepare the forest cover maps in the form of transparencies for these index
maps from 1986. These forest overlay maps are prepared based on the Survey of India toposheets.
the forest atlas of India. So far 162 forest overlays have been prepared for the above minerals and
387 Survey of India toposheets has been covered. Very recently, the IBM in collaboration with
Forest Survey of India and Ministry of Environment and Forest has procured 27 forest overlays
maps for some of the districts and minerals. of MP, Chattisgarh. Bihar states. These forest
overlays are based on the latest satellite imageries and the details are given and plotted after
computer analysis and are all ia digitised forms. These maps show the mining leases and also
some of the freehold deposits located in these toposheets.

45 The mineral maps with forest overlays will be used to process the Mining Lease cases by
the respective State Governments and State and Central Forest Departments. The use of these
maps may help to cut down delays in obtaining forest clearance for ML and PL.

4.6. | The Committee is happy to note that IBM has taken up the to provide the specialised
and customized data, preparation of Minerals maps and forest overlays. The Committee hopes
that the IBM__ in tandem with Forest Surveys of India and Ministry of Environment and Forests
would continue to take up latest forest overlays maps. Forest overlays maps used by State
Governments and Central Forest Department would help to cut-down delays in obtaining forest
clearance for ML&PL.

5.0 DIVISION WISE FUNCTIONS
5.1 IBM has following divisions to discharge its functions :~

5.1.0. Mines Control and Conservation of Minerals Division (MCCM Division):-

5.1.1. The Division office is located at Nagpur and headed by the Chief Controller of Mines. It
has three zonal offices; 12 Regional and 2 Sub-Regional offices spread all over the country. The
Division is the primary wing of the IBM and responsible for enforcement of systematic
development of mineral deposits and conservation of mineral resources of the country through
inspection of mines, conservation studies, special studies and approval of mining plans, through
its Zonal, Regional and Sub-Regional Offices. This Division through its Regional Offices gives
approval for registration to recognized qualified persons for preparing mining plans an mining
schemes. It also monitors prospecting activities in prospecting licence and lease areas, prepares
and up-dates Mineral Maps and takes up model field studies as an adjunct to the National Mineral
Inventory.

5.1.2 The Committee feels that MCCM division of IBM would be able to function effectively
once IBM is made as a regulatory body because MCCM is entrusted with enforcement of
systematic development of mineral deposits and conservation studies.

5.1.3. The Committee further recommends that MCCM should keep on up-dating mineral maps
and cover all minerals through the country.

5.2.0 ORE DRESSING DIVISION (0.D DIVISION)

5.2.1 The ore dressing Division is an applied research and development set-up. It provides
research, consultancy and training support in mineral processing to the mineral industry in India
& abroad. From a small beginning in Delhi, to a Laboratory & Pilot Plant set-up in Nagpur in
early ‘60s, and later with opening of two Regional centres in Ajmer and Bangalore in early '80s,


the Division has now become a centre of excellence in mineral processing with the world-class
Mineral Processing Laboratory and Pilot Plant established in Nagpur with UNDP assistance for
equipment, fellowship training and expertise services. The R&D infrastructures of OD Division
consists of the Modern Mineral Processing Laboratory and Pilot Plant located at Nagpur for Ore
dressing Laboratory for bench scale studies with comprehensive and versatile 2 tonnes/hour
capacity pilot plant ; Analytical Laboratory situated at Nagpur and has Chemical Analysis
Laboratory , Mineralogical Laboratory, Physical Characterization Laboratory, Environmental
Sample Analysis Laboratory ; Regional Ore Dressing Laboratory and Pilot Plant at Ajmer and
Bangalore with Ore dressing Laboratory & Pilot Plant, Chemical Analysis Laboratory,
Mineralogical Laboratory; Mineral Processing for development of process know-how by testing
on batch laboratory and continuous pilot plant scale on low grade, ferrous, non-ferrous and
precocious metal ores as well as industrial minerals, establishment of process flow sheet and
design parameters for commercial concentrators, trouble shooting jobs and implant studies of
mineral processing plants , technological auditing with a view to improve plant performance,
preparation of techno-economic feasibility reports for beneficiation of low-grade ores; Chemical
Analysis with the facilities of rapid and precise elemental analysis including precious elements,
wet and instrumental analysis of ores, minerals and ore dressing products, analysis of
environmental samples such as air, water and solids from mines, processing and metallurgical
plants; Mineralogy for mineralogical studies on ores, rocks, sinters, slag, etc., quantification of
minerals for size, shape, interlocking, etc.; Mineral Characterization of Particle size analysis,
surface area measurements, brightness and Zeta potential, viscosity, density

5.2.2. The Ore Dressing Division of the Bureau has three well equipped laboratories and pilot
plants at Ajmer, Bangalore and Nagpur to carry out mineral beneficiation and agglomeration
studies on a variety of ores/minerals. These centres also have facilities for mineralogical and
chemical and environmental analysis. Considering the expertise already developed the
Government of India decided to establish the Modern Mineral Processing Laboratory and Pilot
Plant, as a centre of excellence in Nagpur. The pilot plant was formally commissioned on
28.8.1994. Construction of Analytical Laboratory at Nagpur has been completed and is now
functional.

5.2.3. The Ore Dressing Division of Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM) has well equipped
laboratories and pilot plants at Nagpur, Ajmer & Bangalore with its headquarters at Nagpur.
These laboratories are equipped with latest technology and equipment for-achieving its set target.
The Modem Mineral Processing Laboratory and Pilot Plant at Nagpur is well equipped with most
sophisticated equipment and scientific expertise and is regarded as "Centre of Excellence" in the
field of Mineral Beneficiation. This has been established, at the cost of Rs. 18.2 crores with
partial assistance (2.41 million US$) from UNDP. This is a core center to cater to the needs of the
mining/mineral industry for beneficiation test work. The pilot plant has flexible capacity ranging
from 0.5 to 2.0 tonnes/hour for confirmation of the process evolved in the laboratory as well as to
generate additional process and design data before commercial application and also if need be to
produce adequate quantity of concentrate for end use testing. This R&D centre is also expected to
meet the requirement of other countries in Asia, Pacific Region, Middle East, and African
countries directly or through national/multinational companies/consultancy firms etc.

5.2.4, The Committee recommends that IBM management and the Department of Mines should
ensure that R&D wings of IBM may be well equipped for mineral beneficiation. The Sub-
Committee further recommends that Ore Dressing division of IBM should undertake such
research work pertaining to beneficiation of low -Ore content mineral in cost effective manner
for viable and commercial production of metals.


5.3.0. MINERAL ECONOMICS DIVISION (MLE. DIVISION)

5.3.1 This Division is located at Nagpur. The Division complies National Mineral Inventory,
conducts market surveys on mineral commodities, demand projections, information circulars,
renders assistance in framing mineral legislation including modifications and brings out a
prestigious Indian Minerals Year Book.

5.3.2. The Committee feels that M.E. division of IBM should undertake adequate market
survey and research for procuring demand for cost/projection so that IBM would function in
right direction.

5.3.3. The Committee further recommends that M.E division should undertake study of
comparative mining loss and suggest reforms in Indian Mining legal framework, including
modifications in the provision of MM (D&R) Act, 1957, MCR, 1960, MCDR, 1958 and
Coastal Regulation Zone ( CRZ) Notifications, if required.

5.4.0. TECHNICAL CONSULTANCY DIVISION (T. ८. Division)

5.4.1. This Division is located at Nagpur and undertakes consultancy work in the fields of
geology, mining and environment. Technical Division provides following services;

A. GEOLOGICAL SERVICES:-

(i) Survey of mineral properties and preparation of mine plans & sections.
(ii) Preparation of geological plans and preliminary geological appraisal of
mineral properties, formulation of scheme of detailed exploration with
: estimate of cost.
(iii) Supervising exploratory drilling done by contract agencies.

(iv) Logging and sampling of bore holes, evaluation of exploratory date
including Geostatical evaluation and preparation of detailed reports on
exploration.

(v) Collection and preparation of samples for laboratory/ pilot plant tests.

(vi) Geostatistical computer evaluation of mineral deposits.

B. MINING SERVICES

6) Preparation of feasibility reports.

(ii) Preoperational of mine development scheme.

(iii) Preparation of environment management plan.

(iv) _ Evaluation of feasibility reports on behalf of financial institutions

(v) Financial analysis of mining projects

(vi) Determination of productivity & fuel consumption norms for mining
ventures

(vii) production., Planning and grade control on given process parameters
(viii) Re-modeling of old mines for introduction of advance mining technology

(ix) Supervision and management of assorted mining services


5.4.2. The Sub-Committee was informed that the Technical Consultancy Division is equipped
with the latest technology and equipments for the set targets excepting the field equipments.

5.4.3. The Committee notes that the functions and responsibilities entrusted to T.C. Division
of IBM and hopes that T.C. division of IBM would leave no stone untumed in accomplishing
its task. The Committee recommends that the Department of Mines in tandem with IBM
management would estimate the requirement of field equipments Technical Consultancy
division and accordingly, manage funds for purchase of those equipment in the financial year (
2002-2003), itself.

5.5.0. DIVERSIFICATION OF CONSULTANCY SERVICES.

5.5.1. Pertaining to the issue of overall scope of diversification of consultancy services
imparted by IBM, it was informed that IBM offers technical services to mining industries in
surveying, exploration, geology, mining feasibility studies, mineral processing and
environmental related issues on payment of charges approved by the Government from time to
time. The management stated that certain areas where diversification opportunities are there
include areas like Geo-technical Investigation for non-mining projects like National Highways,
Hydro-electric Power, State Highways etc., Design of Excavation including Geo-technical
aspects in Tunnels for Hydro-electric Power projects and other non-mining projects; Hydro-
geological Surveys inclusive of Ground Water Modeling; Remote Sensing; ISO Certification
including Environmental Auditing; Assignments outside India particularly in the under
developed countries, Techno-economic scrutiny of Foreign investment proposals in the
Mining sector of India; and Design of Blast Parameters for optimisation of blast operation. The
management further stated that in the field of minerals benefication, diversification may be
initiated through creation of a new Business Promotion Cell to obtain jobs on charge basis;
extending activities to other neighbouring countries in South East Asia and Africa;
Enforcement of regulatory functions under Rule 20 of MCDR, 1988 for the development of
mines; organising R&D meets with the representatives of the industry; Publicity of the facilities
and capabilities; Credibility and improvement in the standard of work; and Dissemination of
information on the work carried out. The management stated that in order to diversify the
activities of consultancy services, the additional resources in terms of manpower, equipment
and training are required.

5.5.2. The Committee, appreciating the wide scope for diversification, desires that IBM
management may explore diversification of consultancy services which might be imparted by
IBM in the areas like Geo-technical investigation for non-mining projects and techno-
economic scrutiny of Foreign Investment proposals in the Mining sector in India. The
Committee also recommends that the requirement of IBM in respect of manpower , equipment
and training to enable it to diversify consultancy services may be fulfilled.

5.5.3 The Committee further recommends that IBM should create the business promotion cell
for procuring work order from developing countries particularly South-East-Asia and Africa.
IBM should charge for providing consultancy services ‘and thus generate revenue.

5.6.0. PLANNING AND CO-ORDINATION DIVISION

5.6.1. This Division is responsible for common services, i.e. Administration, Technical Co-
ordination, Training, Press and Hindi Anubhag. The Training Centre which is under the charge


of a Director (Training) imparts training both to in-house and industry as well as overseas
participants.

5.6.2. The Committee is of the view that IBM should impart training to Geology students of
various Indian university on nominal fee basis which would serve the purpose of injecting geo-
logical insight into students of Geology as well as generation of revenue for IBM. In this
regard, the Committee recommends that training unit of IBM should be strengthened. If
necessary, the Department of Mines should approach University Grants Commission for
incorporation of compulsory geology training for students of geological to be imparted by
IBM.

5.7.0. MINING RESEARCH CELLS

5.7.1. Mining Research Cell of IBM of Mines was established in 1972 with a view to conduct
applied mining research to serve the growing needs of mining industry, with its rich experience in
conducting various types of research investigations in environmental, geo-technical projects. The
mining research cell has developed a strong technological base comprising pool of highly trained
man power to conduct investigations on various mineral based industries.

5.7.2. Keeping in view the growing technological needs of mining industry, the Mining
research Cell has conducted several promotional research projects. Some of the important
projects include;

(i) Productivity studies in underground mines, asbestos and manganese
(ii) Performance studies in mechanised mines; copper, iron ore an d limestone
(iii) Research for evolving guidelines for exploration mica bearing pegmatites
(iv) Control of mineralisation of economic mineral deposits; tungsten and graphite
(v) Improvement of blasting efficiency; iron ore and limestone
(vi) Optimisation of ore recovery by adopting concrete mat in stops
(vii) Design of stopping method for soft minerals like soapstone
(viii) Geo-technical investigation to assess slope stability in chromite mines
5.7.3. Considering the requirements of the Mining Industry, Mining Research Cell has also

provided consultancy services on Environmental and Geo-technical problems in open case and
underground mines. The important projects handled so for include;

(i) Source monitoring of re-spirable dust generation in mining projects for assessing
the efficiency of dust contro! measures: Iron ore and diamond.

(ii) Generation of environmental baseline data for preparation of environmental
management plans: Base metals, iron and limestone.

(iii) Geo-technical investigation for designing supports for transportation tunnels for a
cement plant in Himachal Pradesh.

(iv) Slope stability investigation in hilly and fragile ground conditions: iron,
limestone and wollastonite


(v) Geo-technical investigation to assess conditions for safer mining below a river in
an underground copper mine in Sikkim.

(vi) | Monitoring of ground vibration due to blasting in mines: Bauxite, Limestone
mines.

(vii) _ Preparation of Environmental management plan: Limestone mine.

5.7.4. The Sub-Committee was also informed that the Mining Research Cell has acquired
necessary expertise and state of the art technology, equipments to conduct investigations on the
following areas:-

(i) Environmental baseline data generation and monitoring for air, water, soil, noise
and ground vibration etc.

(ii) Evaluation of adequacy and efficiency of environmental control measures.
(iii) | Monitoring air borne dust level in work environment

(iv)  Geo-technical investigations on rock mass characterization, stability of pit slopes,
waste dumps and design of underground excavations

5.7.5. The Committee opines that Mining Research cell has been entrusted with important take
of Mining research. The Committee feels that with growing mining industry the relevance of
mining research cell would be felt further. The Committee recommends that the mining
Research Cell of IBM may be strengthened further. Its expertise can be utilised in a better
manner for safety in industries and mines and prevent pollution.

6.0... COMPUTER DATA PROCESSING :

6.1 Presently, IBM is equipped with latest technology in the fields of mineral beneficiation.
mining feasibility studies, environnlental related issues, geo-technical investigations. The above
activities are mainly discharged by Ore Dressing Division, Technical Consultancy Division,
Mining Research Cell of IBM. Besides, computer based data processing has also been introduced
in other Divisions in the Department to some extent. In other Divisions of IBM, namely MCCM,
Mineral Economics, MMS are having data base for monitoring of MCCM Division, mineral
production, mining lease details, approval of mining plans, etc. These data bases are linked with
LAN and W AN in different Offices of IBM. At present, IBM is having GIS software of Micro-
Station 95 which prepares maps of different subject like forest, geology, village, etc. by
digitization. Facilities are available in IBM to just meet the requirement to achieve the targets.
However, there is a need to enhance technological upgradation in the Department for which
funds to the extent of Rs.2.16 crores will be required for procurement of equipment , software,
etc. as per the details given below:-

10


[a | Geo-technical testin;

Building to house the equipments
Environmental equipments and supporting soft wares

[b |
[८]
|" | Survey equipments with supporting software 20
| | Geo-technical software's
f | Import of technology for stopping method .
Week ore body with Weak walls

28.00
18 | Upgradation of FTDMA V SAT by SCPC V SAT.
gradati

Upgradation of GIS software, remote sensing software, plotter scanner

[h_| ;
a Personal computers with other peripherals
|_|

6.2. _ Replying to the Sub-Committee's query as to how the amount of Rs.2.16 crore is to be
raised for technological upgradation and procurement of equipment, software etc., Department
of Mines stated that the required amount is to be raised by Budgetary Support and the
necessary provisions have been proposed in the X Plan.

6.3. The Committee recommends that the Department of Mines may provide the required
funds for purchase of computer equipments at least during the financial year ( 2002-2003) for
collection and dissemination of data.

6.1.0. REVENUE GENERATION BY IBM

6.1.1. The Sub-Committee was informed that Technical Consultancy Division, Ore Dressing
Division and Mining Research Cell of Indian Bureau of Mines have generated revenue through
their activities and consultancy services. The details of revenue generated during the last five
years is mentioned below:-

REVENUE GENERATION

(1996-2001)

MR Cell

(Rs. in crores)

i [ 0.0. ||
[30.16 |ै॥ै]

2000-2001 20.53 78.05 51.37
upto 20.3.2001

6.1.2 The Sub-Committee appreciates the IBM management for generating internal revenue
and hopes that IBM management would encourage M.R. Cell, T.C. Division and Ore- dressing
division for enhancing revenue generation in the ensuing financial years.

aR]


7.0

TA

7.2

SWOT ANALYSIS OF IBM

The Department of Mines furnished the details of strength weaknesses; opportunities
and threats (SWOT Analysis) of Indian Bureau of Mines which stated below:-

A multi-disciplinary scientific and. technical staff | (i)

Distinct statutory and
responsibilities

Well equipped Ore Dressing laboratories;
Expertise in mine planning, mine regulation and
environmental issues relating to mining; and
Computerized data bank and
management system.

developmental

information

Enhanced role as regular;

Develop expertise in large scale mine planning
and operations;
Develop expertise in environmental issues,

management of mine wastes and mine
closures;

Provide specialized maps and customized data
preparation of Minerals maps and forest
overlays has been taken up;

Mineral resources and Intelligence System
(MRIS) and Technical Management
Information System (TIMS) was added to IBM
for effective data base management,
preparation of Mineral Inventory has been
strengthened by conforming to United Nations
Framework Classification (NFC).

Need more scientists trained in
using computers;

More advanced and specialized
courses in environment and mine
planning; and

More exposure to international
trends and developments

(i) As far as threats are concerned,
there is hardly and duplication of
work carried out by IBM in relation
to other Central Government &
state Government Agencies viz.
GSI, MECL, State Directorates etc.
as such, no immediate threat is
anticipated . But it may not be able
to play its assigned role, if it does
not keep up with industry trends
and developments.

The Committee understands that IBM draws its strengths from its charter of functions

and it is but natural that duty and responsibilities must have requisite infrastructure and facilities
coupled with statutory provisions. However, in order to inject new vision and trained hands in
the system it is essential that IBM should go for pruning of surplus manpower from non-core
sector and recruit scientists/staff as per requirement. By adopting the policy of rationalisation
of manpower in non-core sector and recruitment of scientists in desirable field would keep the
non-plan expenditure under control with the added advantage of having manpower as per
requirement.

7.3 The Committee is also of the opinion that officials of IBM should have interactive -

sessions with national and international scientists and institutions of repute engaged in
environment studies to gather knowledge & expertise. The Committee also recommends

12


that IBM should continue to undertake study of comparative mining laws and practice and keep
the Indian legal framework in consonance not only with the international trends and
developments but also re-orient its activities in conformity with industry trends and
developments.

7.4 Being engaged in mine planning since long IBM would face little problems in
developing expertise in large scale mine planning and operation. IBM should also undertake the
recourse to the management of mine waste, and once having gained experience and expertise
in large scale mine planning and operation and management of mine waste, the same could
be imparted to interested party engaged in mining operations and thus IBM would be able to
generate more revenue to meet its non-plan expenditure.

13


OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE

CHARTER OF FUNCTIONS OF IBM ,

The Committee takes note of functions envisaged in the charter of functions of IBM
and hopes that IBM would be able to accomplish its task as enshrined in the charter of functions.
The Committee recommends that the Department of Mines should take steps towards further
empowering IBM so that IBM would be able to discharge its functions and responsibility in
efficient and effective manner. IBM from time to time should monitor mining plan of all the
Mines.

(Para 2.2)

The Committee further recommends that since IBM has been entrusted with the
function of approving mining plans in respect of mining leases granted on behalf of the Central
Government as well as conducting studies of environmental protection and pollution Control, it
is pertinent on the part of IBM management that while approving the mining plans the issue of
environmental protection should be given due importance. The Committee is also of the
opinion that the time-gap between the environmental clearance and approval of mining lease
should not be too large as to hamper the growth rate of mining industry.

(Para 2.3)
BUDGETARY SUPPORT

The Committee, taking note of the need of the enhanced budgetary support for IBM,
recommends that the Department of Mines in tandem with IBM management would estimate the
actual need of budgetary support and take it up with the Ministry of Finance.

(Para 4.3)

The Committee is happy to note that IBM has taken up the to provide the specialised
and customised data, preparation of Minerals maps and forest overlays. The Committee hopes
that the IBM_ in tandem with Forest Surveys of India and Ministry of Environment and Forests
would continue to take up latest forest overlays maps. Forest overlays maps used by State
Governments and Central Forest Department would help to cut-down delays in obtaining forest
clearance for ML&PL.

(Para 4.6)

DIVISION WISE FUNCTIONS OF IBM
Mines Control and Conservation of Minerals Division (MCCM Division)
The Committee feels that MCCM division of IBM would be able to function effectively

once IBM is made as a regulatory body because MCCM is entrusted with enforcement of
systematic development of mineral deposits and conservation studies.

(Para 5.1.2)

The Committee further recommends that MCCM should keep on up-dating mineral maps
and cover all minerals through out the country.

(Para 5.1.3)

4


ORE DRESSING DIVISION (OD DIVISION)

The Committee recommends that IBM management and the Department of Mines should
ensure that R&D wings of IBM may be well equipped for mineral beneficiation. The Sub-
Committee further recommends that Ore Dressing division of IBM should undertake such
research work pertaining to beneficiation of low -Ore content mineral in cost effective manner
for viable and commercial production of metals

(Para 5.2.4)
MINERAL ECONOMICS DIVISION (M.E. DIVISION)

The Committee feels that M.E. division of IBM should undertake adequate market
survey and research for procuring demand for cost/projection so that IBM would function in
right direction.

(Para 5.3.2)

The Committee further recommends that M.E division should undertake study of
comparative mining loss and suggest reforms in Indian Mining legal framework, including
modifications in the provision of MM (D&R) Act, 1957, MCR, 1960, MCDR, 1958 and
Coastal Regulation Zone ( CRZ) Notifications, if required.

(Para 5.3.3)
TECHNICAL CONSULTANCY DIVISION (T. C. DIVISION)

The Committee notes that the functions and responsibilities entrusted to T.C. Division
of IBM and hopes that T.C. division of IBM would leave no stone unturned in accomplishing
its task. The Committee recommends that the Department of Mines in tandem with IBM
management would estimate the requirement of field equipments Technical Consultancy
division and accordingly, manage funds for purchase of those equipment in the financial year (
2002-2003), itself.

(Para 5.4.3)
DIVERSIFICATION OF CONSULTANCY SERVICES.

The Committee, appreciating the wide scope for diversification, desires that IBM
management may explore diversification of consultancy services which might be imparted by
IBM in the areas like Geo-technical investigation for non-mining projects and techno-
economic scrutiny of Foreign Investment proposals in the Mining sector in India. The
Committee also recommends that the requirement of IBM in respect of manpower , equipment
and training to enable it to diversify consultancy services may be fulfilled.

(Para 5.5.2)

The Committee further recommends that IBM should create the business promotion cell
for procuring work order from developing countries particularly South-East-Asia and Africa.
IBM should charge for providing consultancy services and thus generate revenue.

(Para 5.5.3)

15


PLANNING AND CO-ORDINATION DIVISION

The Committee is of the view that IBM should impart training to Geology students of
various Indian university on nominal fee basis which would serve the purpose of injecting geo-
logical insight into students of Geology as well as generation of revenue for IBM. In this
regard, the Committee recommends that training unit of IBM should be strengthened. If
necessary, the Department of Mines should approach University Grants Commission for
incorporation of compulsory geology training for students of geological to be imparted by
IBM.

(Para 5.6.2)
MINING RESEARCH CELLS

The Committee opines that Mining Research cell has been entrusted with important take
of Mining research. The Committee feels that with growing mining industry the relevance of
mining research cell would be felt further. The Committee recommends that the mining
Research Cell of IBM may be strengthened further. Its expertise can be utilised in a better
manner for safety in industries and mines and prevent pollution.

(Para 5.7.5)
COMPUTER DATA PROCESSING :

The Committee recommends that the Department of Mines may provide the required
funds for purchase of computer equipments at least during the financial year (2002-2003) for
collection and dissemination of data.

(Para 6.3)
REVENUE GENERATION BY IBM

The Sub-Committee appreciates the IBM management for generating internal revenue
and hopes that IBM management would encourage M.R. Cell, T.C. Division and Ore- dressing
division for enhancing revenue generation in the ensuing financial years.

(Para 6.1.2)

SWOT ANALYSIS OF IBM

The Committee understands that IBM draws its strengths from its charter of functions
and it is but natural that duty and responsibilities must have requisite infrastructure and facilities
coupled with statutory provisions. However, in order to inject new vision and trained hands in
the system it is essential that IBM should go for pruning of surplus manpower from non-core
sector and recruit scientists/staff as per requirement. By adopting the policy of rationalisation
of manpower in non-core sector and recruitment of scientists in desirable field would keep the
non-plan expenditure under control with the added advantage of having manpower as per
requirement.

(Para 7.2)

16


The Committee is also of the opinion that officials of IBM should have interactive -
sessions with national . and international scientists and institutions of repute engaged in
environment studies to gather knowledge & expertise. The Committee also recommends
that IBM should continue to undertake study of comparative mining laws and practice and keep
the Indian legal framework in consonance not only with the international trends and
developments but also re-orient its activities in conformity with industry trends and
developments.

(Para 7.3)

Being engaged in mine planning since tong IBM would face little problems in
developing expertise in large scale mine planning and operation. IBM should also undertake the
recourse to the management of mine waste, and once having gained experience and expertise
in large scale mine planning and operation and management of mine waste, the same could
be imparted to interested party engaged in mining operations and thus IBM would be able to
generate more revenue to meet its non-plan expenditure.

(Para 7.4)

17


MINUTES


m
THIRD MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday the 12" February, 2001 in Room No. 62,

Parliament House, New Delhi.

9० :७ ०७ ४ + YWN

2.

PRESENT
Shri Ramdas Agarwal -—— = Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
Shri P.K. Maheshwari

Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma
Shri Jibon Roy

Smt. Saroj Dubey

Shri S. Suvasubramanian
Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

LOK SABHA

Shr Kam Raghunath Chaudhary
Shri Anant Mahadeoppa Gudhe
Shri 0.7. Javiya

Shri Ram Singh Kaswan

Shri Sunil Khan

Shri Deepak Kumar

Shri Manjay Lal

Shri K. Malaisamy

Shri K.H. Muniyappa

Shri Nagmani

Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah

Shri Ram Sajivan

Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh

Shri Ramanand Singh

Shri A.C. Jose

Shri Ramdas Athawale

SECRETARIAT

Shri P.C. Paikray, Under Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer

The Chairman welcomed the Members and announced the formation of four Sub-

Committees of his Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry and also
the names of the Convenors of the Sub-Committees:

Sub-Committee -I for Ministry of Steel -Convenor -Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi .

val


Sub-Committee ना for Ministry of Small Scale Industries and Agro and Rural Industries
Convenor - Prof. M.M. Aggarwal .

Sub-Committee- III for Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises
Convenor- Dr. B.B. Ramaiah.

Sub-Committee -IV for Ministry of Mines -- Convenor - Shri A.C. Jose

3. Thereafter, the Chairman also announced the subject matter of the study for the Sub-
Committees i.e. Sub-Committee-I for the Ministry of the Steel and Sub-Committee-IV for the
Ministry of Mines will take up the issues of Modernisation, Restructuring and Expansion
Programmes in the PSUs of the Ministry of Steel and the Ministry of Mines respectively. The
Sub-Committee-III will continue with the subject matter of study ,i.e., Performance review of the
PSUs under the Ministry of Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises and Examination of MoU
system of select Central PSUs. The Sub-Committee-IV will also continue with the study of
Impact of Liberalisation and Globalisation on Small Scale Industries.

4. * * *

5. * * के

6. Thereafter, the Committee adjourned at 4.00 P.M.

*#* Relates to other matters.


I
- FIRST MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 P.M.on Monday, the 18™ June, 2001 in Committee Room

‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

ayeye

Pen

2

PRESENT

Shri A.C. Jose — Convenor

RAJYA SABHA
Smt. Saroj Dubey
LOK SABHA

Shri Ramdas Athawale
Shri Thomas Hansda
Shri Nagmani

Shri K.H. Muniyappa.

SECRETARIAT

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharytlu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
WITNESSES

Representatives of Ministry of Mines

Shri Dipak Chatterjee, Secretary

Shri S.C. Tripathi, Additional Secretary
Smt. Aruna Bagchee, Joint Secretary
Shri S. P. Gupta, Joint Secretary

At the outset the Convenor welcomed the Members of the Sub-Committee to the

meeting . Members present discussed the proposed tour programme to Jaipur , Ajmer and
Udaipur from 24" to 30" June, 2001 to make study of Modernisation, Restructuring and
Expansion Programmes-in the PSUs of Ministry of Mines. After a brief discussion the Sub-
Commitice decided to undertake the said study visit to*Khetri, Jaipur and’Udaipur from 25" to
28" June, 2001.

3.

The Sub-Committee then heard the oral evidence of the Secretary of the Ministry of

Mines on the overview of the Mining Sector.

4.

A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was Kept.
The Sub-Committee adjourned at 4.00 P.M.

23


ptf
SECOND MEETING

The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 97" August, 2001 in Room No.63,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Shri A.C. Jose — Convenor
LOK SABHA

Shri Ramdas Athawale
Shri K.H. Muniyappa.

फ ०

SECRETARIAT

Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer

2. At the outset the Convenor welcomed the Members of Sub -Committee - IV and
apprised them of the agenda for the meeting . Members present discussed status of various PSUs
under the administrative control of Ministry of Mines.

3. The Sub -Committee, thereafter, decided to make on the spot study of Modernisation,
Restructuring and Expansion Programmes in mining sector and in this connection decided to visit
Nagpur from 11" to 147 September ,2001 ; Vishakhapatnam, Bhubaneshwar and Ghatshila
(Jharkhand) from 247" to 28" September ,2001 and Kolkata and Sikkim from 8" to 13°
October ,2001

4. The Sub-Committee adjourned at 5.00 P.M.

24


या

THIRD MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 7" December , 2001 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Shri 80.0..1058 — Convenor

RAJYA SABHA
Nil

LOK SABHA
2. Shri Thomas Hansda
SECRETARIAT

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer

WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Mines

Shri Dipak Chaterji, Secretary

Shri S.P. Gupta, Joint Secretary

Smt. Aruna Bagchee, Joint Secretary

Shri Sutanu Behuria, JS&FA

Shri A.K. Bhandari, Director

Shri S.S. Mehra, Director (Fin.)

Smt. Aditi S. Ray, Director

Shri B.K. Menon, CMD, HCL

Shri S.K. Kar, Director, (F), HCL

10. Shri B.N. Mittal, CMD, HZL

11. Shri M.G. Desmukh, Director (1) MECL
12. Shri K.S. Raju, CG-IBM

13. Shri ५.५. Kutumbarao, Director (JNARDDC)

1० 9० ७५ 9 ७ + ४७ ७ 5

2. At the outset the Convenor welcomed the Members of the Sub-Committee and
Secretary, Department of Mines ( Ministry of Coal and Mines) and informed the agenda of the
meeting

3. The Convenor, thereafter, requested the Secretary to give his presentation on various
issues concerned to Hindustan Zinc Ltd ( HZL), Hindustan Copper Ltd. (HCL), Jawaharlal
Nehru Aluminium Research Development and Design Centre ( JNARDDC), Indian Bureau of
Mines (IBM) and Mineral Exploration Corporation Ltd. ( MECL), in the light of the Sub-
Committee's visit and interaction with the respective management. The Secretary, deliberated

25


upon mainly on modemisation, restructuring and expansion programme of Hindustan Zinc Ltd.
and Hindustan Copper Ltd. and structural and functional aspects of JNARDDC, IBM and
MECL. After the Secretary's presentation, the Convenor and the Member present asked some
questions which were answered by Secretary and officials of the Department of Mines.

4. The Sub-Committee adjourned at 4.00 P.M.

26


Iv
FOURTH MEETING

The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 26° December , 2001 in

Committee Room ‘A Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

yn

2

PRESENT
Shri A.C. Jose — Convenor
RAJYA SABHA

Smt. Saroj Dubey
Dr. Faguni Ram

LOK SABHA

Shri Ramdas Athawale
Shri Nagmani

SECRETARIAT

Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer

At the outset the Convenor welcomed the Members of the Sub-Committee and informed

them the agenda of the meeting.

3.

The Sub-Committee, thereafter, took up the following draft reports for consideration:-

(0) Draft 647 Report on the "Modernisation, Restructuring and Expansion
Programme of Hindustan Zinc Ltd. (HZL)";

(ii) Draft 65" Report on the "Modernisation, Restructuring and Expansion
Programme of Hindustan Copper Ltd. (HCL)";

(iii) Draft 66" Report on "Performance Review of Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminium
Research Development and Design Centre (INARDDC)";

(iv) Draft 67" Report on the "Organisational Structure and Performance Review of
Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM)"; and

(v) Draft 68" Report on the "Working and Performance Review of Mineral
Exploration Corporation Ltd. (MECL)".

After some discussions, the Reports were adopted.
The Sub-Committee adjourned at 3.00 P.M. to join the meeting of the Main Committee -

27


XVI
SIXTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 26" December, 2001 in Committee
Room °A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Shri Ramdas Agarwal — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
Dr. Faguni Ram

Shri P.K. Maheshwari
Shri Jibon Roy

Smt. Saroj Dubey

Shri S. Sivasubramanian
Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha
Shri Bangaru Laxman

OMPNAMWP YN

LOK SABHA

10. Shri A Narendra

11. Shri Ramdas Athawale
12. Shri Anant Mahadeoappa Gudhe
13. Shri G.J. Javiya

14. Shri A.C. Jose

15. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
16. Shri Manjay Lal

17. Shri G. Mallikarjunappa
18. Shri Nagmani

19. Shri R. Basanagouda Patil
20. Shri Ram Sajivan

21. Shri Ramanand Singh

22. Smt. Renu Kumari

SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer

*** Relates to other matters.

28


3. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft reports for consideration :-

(i) Draft 64" Report on the "Modernisation, Restructuring and Expansion
Programme of Hindustan Zinc Ltd. (HZL)";

(ii) Draft 65" Report on the "Modernisation, Restructuring and Expansion
Programme of Hindustan Copper Ltd. (HCL)";

(iii) Draft 66 Report on "Performance Review of Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminium
Research Development and Design Centre (INARDDC)";

(iv) Draft 67" Report on the "Organisational Structure and Performance Review of
Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM)"; and

(v) Draft 68" Report on the "Working and Performance Review of Mineral
Exploration Corporation Ltd. (MECL)".

3.1 After some discussions, the Reports were adopted with certain modifications as
suggested by the Chairman and Members of the Committee.

4, The Committee thereafter, then decided that the Chairman of the Committee may
present the Reports to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha so that government.may start
working on the recommendations of the Committee.

5. The Committee adjourned at 4.30 P.M.

ee मम,
*** Relates to other matters.

MGIP(PLU)MRND—488RS—24.4.2002.