PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/204threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:15:19]
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
                                               
                                                                                                                          
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
TWO HUNDRED AND   FOURTH  REPORT
 
ON
 
ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE 201ST    REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2007-08)
PERTAINING TO THE  DEPARTMENT OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES (MINISTRY OF HEAVY  INDUSTRIES & PUBLIC
ENTERPRISES)
                                        
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON  29.04.2008  )
   (LAID ON THE TABLE  OF THE  LOK SABHA ON   29.04.2008 )
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
APRIL, 2008/ VAISAKHA, 1930 (SAKA)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
                       RAJYA SABHA
 
 
         
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/204threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:15:19]
 
                                         TWO HUNDRED AND   FOURTH  REPORT
 
       ON
 
ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE 201ST   REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2007-08)
PERTAINING TO THE  DEPARTMENT OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES (MINISTRY OF HEAVY  INDUSTRIES & PUBLIC
ENTERPRISES)
___________________________________________________________________________________________________________
 
( PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29.04.2008  )
(LAID ON THE TABLE  OF THE  LOK SABHA ON29.04.2008   )
 
 
 
                RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
               NEW DELHI
 
              APRIL, 2008/ VAISAKHA, 1930 (SAKA)
        C O N T E N T S
 
                                                                                                 PAGES
       
 1.       COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                          ( i
)                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
 2.        INTRODUCTION                                                          ( ii)                                                                                                                                                        
 3.        REPORT                                                                             1 - 
   (i)      CHAPTER – I                                                                             2 - 
      Recommendations/observations, which have been
      accepted by the Ministry.                                                                                     
 
(ii)            CHAPTER–II                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                           
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
does not desire to pursue for now in view of the
Government's replies                                                        3 -
 
(iii)
              CHAPTER–III                                                                                             
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the
Committee has not accepted replies of the Ministry                                  
and has asked the Ministry to review the reply or has
raised queries over the reply furnished by the Ministry.                                                 
   

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/204threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:15:19]
(iv)    CHAPTER – IV                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Ministry have not been received                                                    
 
 
 
         
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
    (Date of constitution 5th August, 2007)
 
                  Shri V. Hanumantha Rao                       —        Chairman
   
     RAJYA SABHA
2.       Shri  G. Sanjeeva Reddy
3.       Shri Kalraj Mishra       
4.       Smt. Hema Malini       
5.       Dr. K. Malaisamy       
6.       Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
7.       Shri O.T.Lepcha
8.       Shri Rahul Bajaj
9.       Vacant
10.   Vacant
                   
                           LOK SABHA
 
11.
   Shri Guharam Ajgalle
12.   Shri Rajnarayan Budholiya
13.   Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary        
14.   Shri Ajoy Chakraborty 
15.   Shri Swadesh Chakraborty                  
16.   Shri Mohan S. Delkar
17.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan          
18.   Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria          
19.   Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani                                     
20.   Shri Kishanbhai V.  Patel
21.   Shri P.Rajendran         
22.   Shri Badiga  Ramakrishna
23.   Shri  Gurjeet Singh Rana
24.   Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
25.   Shri K.C. Pallanisamy
26.   Shri Ganesh Singh                   
27.    Kunwar  Manvendra Singh                 
28.   Shri V.K. Thummar                
29.   Shri Girdhari Yadav
30.   Shri Umakant Yadav

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/204threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:15:19]
31.   Shri Subhash  S. Deshmukh     
     SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Director
Shri Girija Shanker Prasad,  Assistant  Director
Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Research Officer
                          Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Committee Officer
 
(i)
INTRODUCTION
 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having   been  authorized  by the Committee, hereby present this  Two
Hundred and Fourth  Report on Action Taken Report submitted by the Government on the Two Hundred First  Report  of   the  Committee  on  the  Demand  for   Grants  of 
Department of  Heavy Industries (2007-08), Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises
 
2.         The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry considered and adopted the Draft report at its meeting held on the 28th  April, 2008.
 
3          I thank the Department of Heavy Industries, Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises  for providing valuable inputs to the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                                                                             V. HANUMANTHA RAO  
 29 April, 2008                                                                                                                     Chairman                                                                                            
                                                                     Department -related Parliamentary
                                                                                                                           Standing Committee on Industry
 
REPORT
 
 
1.         This Two Hundred Fourth  Report  deals with action taken by the Government on the Two Hundred  First  Report of the Committee.
 
2.         Action Taken Notes have been received from the Department of Heavy Industries, Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises  in respect of the
recommendations contained in that Report. These have been categorized as follows:-
Chapter -I- The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Department.
Chapter -II- The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies.
Chapter -III- The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has either not accepted replies of the Department or has asked the Department to review
its reply.
Chapter -IV- The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Department have not been received. In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-
IV. The Department has either furnished the interim replies or mater has been forwarded to other agency/Department whose reply is awaited or couched its language in vague

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/204threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:15:19]
terms like noted for compliance/guidance.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE DEPARTMENT.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
None.
 
The Department has not accepted any of the recommendations made by the Committee.
CHAPTER – II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S
REPLIES.
 
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
1.            The Committee observes with concern that as per the Outcome Budget 2007-08, a substantial part of Rs 1807.84 crores of IEBRs are committed for settling
the VRS/statutory dues and salaries, in addition to Rs 150 crores of Budgetary support. Only Rs. 227.88 crores of IEBR in addition to Rs 5 crores  of Budgetary
support will be used for capital investments in PSEs. The Committee considers it as an evidence of a lopsided revival and restructuring of PSEs where greater stress
is being laid on restructuring the manpower instead of capital investments in the PSEs.                                    
 (Para 3.5)
ACTION TAKEN
 
2.         Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR) as per details given below are being used for the capital investment programmes of PSEs as per the plan schemes.
 
S.No. PSE I.R. EBR

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/204threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:15:19]
1. BHEL 836.00 -
2. BRAITHWAIT - 8.00
3. BPCL 5.00 20.00
4. B&R 20.00  
5. HEC 75.10  
6. PTL 0.50 -
7. REIL 1.00 2.98
8. HPC (Main) 136.88 91.00
9. HNL 45.90 465.00
10. NPPC - 128.00
11. CCI 110.45 -
12. HSL/SSL - 79.39
13. TCIL 1.52 -
14. EPI 8.50 -
 
3.         Investments are being done purely based on the necessity of a particular PSE and as per the approved revival plan. No money out of IEBR is being used for the
purpose of payment of VRS/statutory dues.
 
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
4.         The Committee expresses its reservations over the DHI’s inability to spend allocated funds for NE region. Yet the planned allocation has been hiked to Rs.
100 crores in the year 2007-08 for the very same projects as in 2006-07. The Committee wants the DHI to explain the causes of such lackluster performance  in NE
and steps taken to improve the situation.
(Para 14.3)
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
5.         In the previous years, capital expenditure in North East was envisaged for AYCL and CCI. Budget was being kept at least at 10% of the total plan budgetary support.
However, enough schemes were not available for fully utilizing the funds of NE region.  However, now a decision has been taken by Government to revive NPPC with an
estimated cost of over Rs. 500 crore.  Therefore, allocated funds for the current financial   year (2007-08) are likely to be utilized fully.
 
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
6.       The Committee would  like to have the DHI’s comments on certain discrepancies in the figures furnished by the Department at different places in its replies. 
The Committee noted one such discrepancy in case of Rs. 150 crore  allocation as loans for the revival to settle salary dues of the PSE employees. As per the
information furnished Rs 257 crores had already been spent and another Rs 50 crores were likely to be spent by the end of march 2007. Whereas only Rs 120 crores
out of the allocation of  Rs 250 crores  meant for loans to settle VRS dues, have been spent. The reply of the DHI does not match with the written replies to the
subsequent questions.
(Para 16.7)
 
ACTION TAKEN
           
7.         In order to mitigate the hardship of the employees of the sick and loss making PSEs whose revival schemes are under consideration of BRPSE or the Govt. and the
PSEs are not able to meet the expenditure on account of salary and wages of their employees, non-plan budgetary support is provided to PSEs.  During the last financial year
the funds fell short in the lump sum provision of Rs.150 crore for revival schemes and hence the funds were re-appropriated from the other lump sum provision of Rs.250
crore for VRS and other statutory dues with the approval of Ministry of Finance to meet the requirement of funds for salary and wages of the employees of the PSEs.  With

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/204threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:15:19]
these re-appropriations and further supplementary grants, the Department of Heavy Industry could be able to release the non-plan loans to the sick and loss making PSEs to
pay the salary and wages of their employees till December, 2006.
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
 8.           The Committee is concerned that same PSEs may be repeated over the successive years.  It presumes that these PSEs can not even raise funds from the
market against VRS Bonds and seeks that DHI must inform it of the road map as to how long such allocations are likely to continue and from when the PSEs shall
start paying back the loans.  The Committee  apprehends that the DHI as the Government department has been reduced to fund raising agency for the PSEs. The
Committee finds such situation unacceptable.
 (Para 16.10)
 
9.            In reply to a query the Committee was informed that these non-planned loans ostensibly meant for the revival of PSEs, are in fact utilized in paying the
salary dues to the employees. The Committee accordingly, recommends that the DHI should change the nomenclature from a generic heading “Lumpsum  Loans for
the Revival Schemes of PSEs” to a more specific “Lumpsum  for salaries”.  Such a change in heading will give greater clarity about the specific objective of
allocation.
(Para 16.19)
ACTION TAKEN      
 
10.       Government is only releasing funds as non-plan loans only to sick and loss making PSEs whose revival is under consideration of BRPSE and to mitigate the  hardship
of the employees of the PSEs who are not able to generate sufficient funds to meet their requirements of funds for payment of salary and wages to their employees. This
Department is not releasing funds directly for salaries, hence, the nomenclature of the head of account “Lumpsum provision for implementation of revival schemes of PSEs-
Loans and Advances” appears to be the right nomenclature instead of lumpsum for salaries.
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
11.          In response to Committee’s view on modeling the NATRIP on the lines of Public -Private Partnership, the DHI informed that of the Rs. 1728 crore  project
Rs 1090 crores will come from planned resources, Rs. 519 crores from non-planned cess funds and only Rs 118 crores as user charges.  The Committee is of the view
that the private component in this project is very less and should be increased substantially.
(Para 21.13)
 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
12.       Out of the investment of Rs. 1718 crore, Rs. 1090 crore is from the Plan support by the Government and Rs. 273 crore of this Plan support is in the form of loan which
has to be re-paid back by the industry, Rs. 510 crore is being contributed through automotive cess and Rs. 118 crore will be collected through user charges.  DHI agrees with
the view of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee that Cess cannot be taken as a contribution of the Automotive Industry.  NATRIP is largely a public
project of development nature being financed by the Govt. funds for establishment of facilities.    The Project has been conceived, designed and being implemented in total
tandem with the automotive industry and its running is also proposed to be looked after by the autonomous bodies having complete involvement of the industry.
 
13.       Automotive Industry is also contributing to NATRIP in the following way:
 
Automotive Industry is providing their experience, expertise assistance and support by way of formation and interaction with Technical Advisory Team (TAT)
which comprises of the technical experts of the automotive industry.  The TAT consisting of R&D heads of various OEM and Manufacturers is meeting
regularly with NATRIP and guiding the technical architecture of the project.
 
Automotive industry is providing specific advisory service on a regular basis as and when required by NATRIP.
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/204threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:15:19]
Comments of Committee
14.       While Committee welcomes close interaction with industry, greater financial stakes from the industry will not only reduce the burden on budget but will also
give the project financial autonomy.
15.       NATRIP is in the process of selecting a HR consultant firm to device the overall HR Policy, manpower requirement and recruitment strategy for NATRIP
and its centres.  HR consultant shall be interacting with the Automotive Industry in developing the overall HR architecture for the project, as and when the
consultants start their work.
16.       Facilities being developed under NATRIP are being publicized through brochure, newsletters, video presentations, seminars, conclaves etc. being organized
from time to time.  The Automotive Industry has already envisaged great interest in using NATRIP facilities once these have been commissioned.
17.       Automotive Industry will facilitate and assist in the process of accreditation of the test and the R&D facility of NATRIP overseas and collaborate in their
upgradation such Indian facilities to world standards.
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
 
18.       The Committee also takes an exception of using non-planned Road Cess funds for the Auto sector. The Road Cess was meant for maintenance of national
highways and rural roads and certainly not for the auto sector, where going by current growth, the private players have sufficient resources to contribute into such
world class R&D facility. The Committee notes that the DHI is funding some 124 R&D projects out of the cess fund.  The Committee seeks information from the
DHI about the basis of such diversion of cess funds from their stated objective of maintenance of   national highways and rural roads and if these stated objectives
have been fully met.  
(Para 21.14)
ACTION TAKEN
19.         Road Cess fund is not being used by the Automotive Sector for undertaking R&D in Automotive Sector.  For undertaking R&D in Automotive Sector, Cess @ 1/8%
is levied on the sale of vehicle which is collected by Ministry of Finance and deposited in the Consolidated Fund of India.  A part of it is allocated by Ministry of Finance
through the Budget of Department of Heavy Industry for undertaking R&D projects in the automotive sector.  Therefore, automobile Cell and not Road Cess is used for R&D
in Automotive Sector.
 
       
 
 
 
CHAPTER – III
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE HAS EITHER NOT ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY OR
HAS ASKED THE MINISTRY TO REVIEW ITS REPLY
 
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
 
1.         The Committee notes with concern that more than  half of budget support of Rs 4733 crores to the revival will go into waivers and conversions of outstanding
dues. Fresh infusions of about Rs. 1100 crores will be required. Only less than 10% of the total cost, about Rs 400 crores will go into capital investments.                 
           
(Para 1.15)
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/204threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:15:19]
2.            The Committee finds that revival package is largely about restructuring the manpower, waiving or converting the financial liabilities over the PSEs. It is
apparent that not much of the Budgetary support is available to the more critical issues of technology upgradation and strengthening the marketing of PSEs. PSE
are left to generate Internal and External Budgetary Resources for capital investments. This is despite the fact that DHI has recognized technological obsolescence
as one of the factors of PSEs’ losing competitive edge.   The Committee therefore observes that the Government should  consider this aspect while preparing 
 revival  packages for the sick PSEs.
(Para 1.16)
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
3.         Some of the PSEs had gone into losses due to problems specific to each PSE.  There are PSEs where major element of input is financial restructuring for cleaning their
balance sheet.  Capital investment is kept at a level where the Company can be turned viable.   All these aspects are kept in view/considered by the Consultants, BRPSE and
the Govt. before a comprehensive revival package is approved.  However, as suggested by the Hon’ble Committee, greater emphasis shall be laid on technological
upgradation in future revival plans.
(Para 1.15 & 1.16)
Committee’s Further Recommendations
4.         Taking in view the reply of the  Department justifying  the meager allocations for capital expenditure, it appears that PSEs mostly suffered due to financial
mismanagement requiring clearing their balance sheet.  Same pattern was reflected in the previous revival attempts.  However even the new  revival  plans are
limited to clearing the balance sheet and manpower rationalization.   The Committee feels that if the fundamental of the Companies are so   firm    and do not
require capital investment and that financial problems  were only transient,  the Company should have been able to generate funds from  market even against
Government’s guarantees instead of relying on the  outright Budgetary support.
           
5.         In view of meager capital allocations, the Committee is apprehensive of the Ministry’s assurance  regarding greater emphasis and technological upgradation,
this needs to be looked into seriously.
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
6.         The Committee in its 169th Report had raised question regarding the criterion for dividing the allocations under  four categories of Plan, Non-Plan, Revenue
and Capital Expenditure. This year too, the Committee had sought clarification on such division. Though the GFR 78 and 79 define the Planned and Non-Planned
expenditures and Revenue and Capital expenditures respectively.  No clarification has been furnished by the Ministry on the hybridized four categories. In absence
of such clarification, the Committee apprehends a fair scope of arbitrariness in the classification of allocations,   which  must be avoided.                                 
(Para 4.3)
ACTION TAKEN
 
7.         Allocations are divided in the four categories as per the definition given in the GFR, which are as follow :-
 
7.1       Plan Expenditure
 : Plan expenditure represents expenditure on Plan outlays approved for each scheme or Organization by the Planning Commission and indicating
the extent to which such outlays are met out of budgetary provisions an is shown distinctly from the other Non-Plan expenditure.
 
7.2       Non-Plan 
Expenditure : Non-plan expenditure is used to cover all expenditure of Government not included in the Plan expenditure.
 
7.3       Revenue 
Expenditure : Subsequent charges on maintenance, repair, upkeep and working expenses which are required to maintain the assets in a running order as also
all other expenses incurred for the day to day running of the organisation, including establishment and administrative expenses are classified as Revenue expenditure..
 
7.4       Capital 
Expenditure : Expenditure incurred with the object of acquiring tangible assets of a permanent nature (for use in the Organization and not for sale in the
ordinary course of business) or enhancing the utility of existing assets.
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/204threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:15:19]
Committee’s Further Recommendations
 
8.         Despite repeated observations made by the Committee to the effect, the Department has yet not responded to Committee’s query.  The Committee
apprehends that allocation under such ambiguous categories could lead to obfuscation of clearer assessment of allocation and its expenditure.  The Committee
therefore recommends that the four categories should be clearly defined to discount any arbitrariness. The Department should ascertain the criteria for such
classification with M/O Finance and inform the Committee.
 
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
9.        The Committee finds it rather intriguing that the lumpsum allocations of Rs. 400 crores meant for the loans to the PSEs to settle the VRS and other statutory
dues and to pay the salaries to the employees are categorized as Non-Planned Capital Expenditure, whereas  the Salary under the Major Head of Secretariat is
placed as a Revenue Expenditure.   The Committee finds  the explanation of the Department untenable  that allocations for ‘Loans’ per se are Capital Expenditure
even if it is meant for payment of Salaries or VRS dues to the staff. Similarly Rs 25 crores meant for R&D in Auto Sector, other than NATRIP,, is classified as a
Non-Planned Revenue expenditure.  The Committee direct the Department to  take note of the Government Accounting Rules 1990, which states “ the classification
of the transactions in Government Accounts, shall have closer reference to the function, programme and activity of the Government and the object of revenue or
expenditure …”   If that  be the case how can  allocation  meant  for salary  be classified differently in the  same  Demand.   In this context the Committee also finds
 it relevant to  mention the recent pattern  of loans eventually being waived or converted into unsecured equity.    The Committee observes that the  definition of 
capital expenditure  has been contrived and directs the Government to take appropriate  measures to avoid such inconsistencies.
(Para 4.4)
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
10.       Provision of salaries under the Major Head “Secretariat” under the Revenue Section is for the salaries of the Government employees of Department of Heavy Industry
whereas the provision of Rs.400 crore under  the 2 major Non-Plan heads of DHI are Rs.150 crore for ‘Implementation of revival schemes of PSEs’ and Rs.250 crore for
‘restructuring of PSEs in Department of Heavy Industry’.  The former provision is mainly utilized with the approval of the Government for payment of salary & wages to the
employees in sick and loss making PSEs and funds are released as non-plan loans to PSEs.  Comments/consent of Planning Commission are being obtained on the proposals. 
Similarly in case of the latter provision of Rs.250 crore for VRS etc., the funds for VRS are to be provided for such VRS schemes which would be/ have been approved by the
Competent Authority as a part of the revival schemes of PSEs and these are also provided as Loans to the PSEs.  In these cases also Planning Commission is being consulted
while considering the restructuring schemes.  Thus in cases of Non-plan Expenditures also Planning Commission is being consulted. Hence, both these provisions come under
Capital Expenditure.
 
11.       Non-Plan budgetary support of salary & wages and VRS & statutory dues are provided only to sick and loss making undertakings which are unable to meet these
expenditures and are not provided to commercially viable PSEs. Under the NCMP for revival etc. of the sick PSEs, a Board for Reconstruction of PSEs had been set up and a
number of revival schemes have been cleared or are in the process of being cleared by this Board. 
 
12.       As regards the non-plan provision of Rs.25 crore meant for R&D in Auto Sector other than NATRIP is concerned, this is being released as grant to the Development
Council for Automobile and Allied Industries for the Research and Developmental activities in the Auto Sector, hence, this is being placed under Non-plan in the Revenue
Section.
 
13.       In the case of waiver of loans duly approved by the BRPSE and the Government under the revival scheme, this is the loss to the Government revenue hence these are
being placed under the Revenue Section.  These are only book adjustments.   No funds are released in such cases.  In the case of conversion of loans into equity in the case of
the revival schemes of the PSEs duly approved by the BRPSE/BIFR and the Govternment, since the loans had been released to the PSEs under the Capital Section , hence,
these are being shown  in the Capital Section at the time of conversion.  These are only book adjustments.
 
Committee’s Further Recommendations                                                 
           
14.       The reply of the Department obfuscates the cardinal objection of the Committee as to whether expenditures for similar objective i.e. payment of salaries/VRS
dues could be classified differently given the Government Accounting Rules 1990.  Classification of expenditure should have closer reference to functions.  In this
regard the Committee observed arbitrariness is classification of expenditure.
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/204threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:15:19]
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
15.       Given the unequal quarterly appropriation and unutilized funds till the end of the Financial Year, the Committee apprehends the tendency of committing
expenditures towards the end of FY instead of actually meeting the objectives/ targets. The Committee is of the view  that  norms of expenditures as prescribed by
Ministry  of Finance are not being adhered to .  The Committee impresses upon Department of Heavy Industries to  ensure compliance of these  norms in 
future.                                                 
 (Para 5.4)
ACTION TAKEN
 
16.       Expenditure is based on the requirement of the PSEs.  This cannot be distributed evenly as release are made based on demand, for example funds for revival package
are released only after the approval of the Govt. for revival of a PSE.
Committee’s Further Recommendations
 
17.       The Committee finds such assertion unacceptable.  The Demands for Grants are made on the estimated annual expenditure.  However most of such
expenditure occur only towards the end of the FY. That similar disparity in annual expenditure was observed by the Committee in its 169 th report on the Demands
for 2006-07 is a regular pattern.   The Department should have substantiated its assertion by giving specific details of quarter-wise approvals of revival package.The
Committee’s  view of the  that if Department of Heavy Industries  is not able to envisage the expenditure for this year, it may seek supplementary  Demands as and
when required during the FY instead of piling up the  unutilized funds till the end of the Financial Year.
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
18.       The Committee finds under utilization of fund till the end of Financial Year as unacceptable particularly in the view that RE 2006-07 had retained Rs 87.82
crores. The Committee also expresses reservation over rationale to provide unsecured equity component to PSEs by the Government whereas Banks provide more
secured loans. The Committee finds that providing guarantee to raise bank finance is a better option instead of providing unsecured investments in equity.
(Para  15.5)
ACTION TAKEN
19.       Funds utilized for restructuring of PSEs in 2006-07 has been far greater than Rs. 87.82 crore.  In fact total amount spent for this programme in 2006-07 was Rs. 603.83
crore . Additional funds were sought in the supplementaries.
20.       As many of the companies are sick/loss making, banks are unable to extend finances to them.   Therefore, budgetary support is being provided for immediate
implementation of the revival plans. In some cases the projected cash flows do not permit repayment of bank loans.
 
 
 Committee’s Further Recommendations
 
21.       At the stage of Demands for Grants the Committee was informed that by the 1.3.2007, Rs 72.66 crores were spent out of this lumpsum allocation to
restructure the PSEs. Yet the RE 2006-07 was shown as 87.82 crores . As such it was inferred that the DHI expected another expenditure of some Rs 15 crores  in the
last month of the FY 2006-07. However in its reply the DHI has informed that it incurred massive excess expenditure of Rs 531.17 crores in the last month of the FY
06-07, thereby grossly overshooting  even its RE for the year. The DHI should have given detailed explanations of such gross under-estimation of RE.  The
Committee finds the reply unacceptable and seeks more detailed explanation.
           
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
22.         The Committee observes that there has been an underutilization of funds meant for the planned investment  in PSEs. In case of  most of the PSEs  non
Planned  investment has been made throughout the year. Even the lumpsum allocations for AMR and crucial balancing have not been utilized yet Rs. 46.97 crores
were retained in RE 2006-07.  The Committee takes a serious view of the prevailing pattern of seeking unspecified lumpsum allocations and then under utilizing

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/204threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:15:19]
them. The Committee also observes that since there is hardly any difference between the AMR and crucial balancing, the two schemes should be merged together as
both are meant to meet unforeseen requirements for addition, modification and replacement of machinery and tools.
(Para 18.6)
ACTION TAKEN
 
23.       During 2006-07, there was an allocation of Rs. 10.00 crore under AMR and Rs. 2.60 crore under crucial balancing.   Out of Rs. 10.00 crore under AMR, the utilization
was as under:-
HPF Rs. 3.00 crore
Baithwaite Rs. 0.57 crore
TSL Rs. 0.50 crore
BSCL Rs. 0.18 crore
Total Rs. 4.25 crore
 
24.       Under crucial balancing, however, no proposal could be identified.  In view of the poor utilization under this head, as suggested by the Hon’ble Committee, it has been
decided in 2007-08 to merge the two schemes into one, to meet unforeseen requirements of PSEs.
Committee’s Further Recommendations
25.       The Committee expresses serious concern over under utilization of even measure     AMR. Even this year, out of a meager allocation of Rs 25 crores  for
capital investments under AMR, only Rs 1.42 crores could be spent till the end of second quarter. The Committee also took into  view the expenditures proposed
under AMR for 2007-08 as given in the Outcome Budget 2007-08. It appears that though there is a requirement for funds under AMR, yet the money remains under
utilized throughout the Financial Year.  The Committee strongly objects to such trend.
26.       The Committee also observes that a strange pattern seems to be emerging wherein the Government in name of revival/restructuring support PSEs through
huge non plan expenditure to clear the balance sheets of outstanding liabilities, however for capital expenditure, technology and marketing networks, the
Government looks for strategic partners viz. TCIL, CCI   (Dalmia  Dadri Unit).
 
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
27.       The Committee observes that the Supplementary Demands have been sought for waivers or conversion of the loans and interests for mere accounting
adjustments and not to create actual worth of the PSEs. 
(Para 20.3)
ACTION TAKEN
 
28.       In order to convert a sick Company into a viable enterprise it is essential to clean up the balance sheet by providing required inputs as per the revival plan in the form
of waivers/conversions.  It is only after providing these inputs, the Companies are expected to turnaround and show better results as per future financial projections.
 
Committee’s Further Recommendations
 
29.       The Committee disapproves the assertion that an enterprises could be converted into a viable one merely by cleaning up the balance sheet without addressing
more critical issue of Cap investment, technology modernization and marketing alignments.  As the revival plan aim to clear the balance sheets, the Committee
should be informed, whether such PSEs can be listed in Stock Exchange to generate IEBRs for capital investments.  If yes, give the details of such PSEs.
 
30.       Regarding the Supplementary Demands the Committee observed that while certain token and technical demands were made in the first batch of
Supplementary Demands, it was also informed the Committee that the estimates of corresponding savings could be made only towards the end of Financial Year.
The Committee wonders if it is prudent way of reallocating the resources in the middle of a Financial Year without assessing the corresponding savings. The

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/204threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:15:19]
Committee apprehends if such an approach may actually harm the objective from where savings are being diverted/reappropriated. The DHI may respond.
CHAPTER – IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
1.           In view of the sectoral  growth rates, the Committee observes that with 29 of the 48 PSEs of Department of Heavy Industry belonging to engineering and
machine tools sector, it is obvious that negative growth in this sector is reflected in the performance of the PSEs. It is a matter of concern for Department of Heavy
Industries and corrective measures need to be taken in this regard.
                 (Para 1.3)
                                                                              
 ACTION TAKEN
 
2.         The overall industrial growth and growth in the machine tools sector has been positive in 2006-07 (11.3% and 29%... respectively). As per the mandate under National
Common Minimum Programme , revival/restructuring programme for sick/loss making PSEs has been undertaken.   Viable PSEs are being revived with necessary financial
restructuring and fresh infusion of other inputs.  These efforts on revival are likely to improve the performance of the PSEs under DHI.  A close monitoring is being done in
each case, based on MOU targets, set for them. During the last 3 years number of loss making PSEs has come down from 24to20 and the loss of loss making PSEs has come
down from Rs.1966 crores to Rs.1630 crores.
 
Committee’s Further Recommendations
3.         The Committee takes note of the mandate under NCMP regarding revival of viable PSEs. However the reply does not elaborate on an objective criterion to
determine the viability of a PSE.  PSEs with huge accumulated losses and negative net worth have been considered viable despite previous failed efforts to revive
them.  The Committee may be informed of the objective basis on which revivability and sustainability of a PSEs in determined by the BRPSE.  Has the Government
decided on any acceptable cost of revival of a PSE or this critical criteria of revivability  has remained subjective on case to case basis. If not, the Committee
recommends that the Government must determine objective criteria in accordance with NCMP.  As regards reduction in number of loss making PSE, the
Committee would like to know how many of such profit- making PSEs have been provided with Budgetary support in form of waivers/conversion, guarantee-fee
subsidies or loans and grants. The DHI may provide such information in a tabular presentation.
 
 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
4.        The Committee observes steep decline in profits of HMT ( Holdg.), REIL, HNL, Hooghly Printing and PTL and desires that the Committee may be apprised
of the reasons therefor. The Committee may also be apprised whether the  current loss making Companies which are likely  to make profit in 2007-08 would be
making notional or actual profit, break  up  of each such Company may be provided.                     
(Para 1.9)
ACTION TAKEN
 
5.         As per the provisional results of 2006-07, in case of HMT (holding), REIL and HNL, the profits have increased.   However, decline in the performance of Hooghly
Printing Company Ltd. is due to old plant & machinery Deep decline in profit of PTL is on account of asset sale in 2005-06 and drop in production due to shifting of
production facilities. A plan for merger of PTL with HMT(MT) is also under the consideration of the Government. Details of profit/loss in PSEs of DHI during the last few
years including 2007-08 (Target) are enclosed.
 
Committee’s Further Recommendations     
 
6.         The Department  has not responded to the Committee’s query whether the PSEs that are likely to make profit would make only  notional profit due to

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/204threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:15:19]
conversion/waivers of liabilities. The DHI may provide information regarding budgetary support or waivers/conversions given to such profit making PSEs. 
 
           
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
7.         From the Demands for Grants of last few years, it appears that no lessons have been learnt from the failures of the previous revival attempts. The Committee
considers that even the current efforts of revival may remain only a costly window dressing unless the more critical issues of marketing and technological alliances
are not effectively addressed. The Committee however is constrained to note that in successive Budgets this aspect of rehabilitating the PSEs, has been ignored. It
appears from the Demands for Grants that while liabilities are being liquidated with the budgetary support, for the capital investment the PSEs are being asked to
generate IEBRs. The Committee wonders if such an arrangement could make the revival of PSEs sustainable.  The Committee therefore recommends that
Government should review and re-assess the revival plans of the PSEs.                                                                                                    
(Para 1.18)
 
 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
8.         The revival plan of the PSEs are considered/prepared as per the reports of the consultants, whose recommendations are based on the indepth study of all the aspects of
the PSEs, including their strength and weaknesses. The Government does provide necessary budgetary support for capital investment wherever necessary, apart from advising
PSEs to arrange funds from other sources like banks, FIs etc.  Some of the revival plan already approved include capital investment of Rs.180 crore [HMT(MT)], Rs.102 crore
(HEC), Rs.60 crore (B&R) etc.
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
9.        The Committee observes the divergence in the opinion of DHI and SIAM in respect of reduction of customs duty on commercial vehicles and auto
components from 12.5% to 10%. In the view of DHI, the step is likely to benefit the PSEs with high import content, however in the view of SIAM   such reduction in
duty is likely to affect the industry adversely, as this would open up imports from low cost economies and deflect investment in the sector.   The Committee therefore
desires the Department of Heavy Industries to take up the issue with Ministry of Finance and ensure that the interests of Auto sector too are protected.
                                                                        
(Para 2.3)
ACTION TAKEN
 
10.       There is no divergence in the views of DHI and SIAM in so far as custom duty on commercial vehicles and auto components is concerned.   DHI had recommended to
the Ministry of Finance that custom duty on commercial vehicles and auto components should not be reduced from the level of 12.5% in the Budget 2007-08 and that the duty
on Commercial Vehicles should be delinked from the peak custom duty.
 
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
11.        The Committee desires DHI to explain the reduction in budgetary support and IEBR and the steps taken to help PSEs to generate IEBRs in order to reduce
their continuous dependence on budgetary support. The Committee observes that despite Government’s guarantees the PSEs have not been able to meet IEBR 
targets which needs to be reviewed seriously.
                                                                                
(Para 3.3)
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
12.       One of the reasons for undertaking financial restructuring is to improve the credit worthiness of the Company and to help them generate internal resources.  As a result
IEBR during the last 3 years has increased as per the details given below:-
                                                                       

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/204threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:15:19]
                                                                             (Rs. in crore)          
                        2004-05                       2005-06           2006-07
 
IEBR                168.20                         280.88             401.29
 
13.       The MOU mechanism has been adopted to review the performance of PSEs under DHI. This Department had signed MOU for 7 PSEs for the year 2006-07. However,
for the year 2007-08, almost all PSEs have signed MOU with the Government/holding company, to enable monitoring on specific parameters for performance improvement.
 
Committee’s Further Recommendations
14.       The Department has not replied the steps taken by the PSEs to generate IEBR and the reasons for not meeting the annual target.  The Committee questions
the very logic of providing the Budgetary support to clear the balance sheets only to improve the credit    worthiness of  PSEs.  The Committee argues that if the
fundamentals of the PSEs are so promising then they should be able to generate sufficient IEBRs against Government guarantee or their surplus assets.
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
15.            The Committee expresses its serious concern over the constraints faced by the engineering and machine tools sector in generating the IEBR and even
utilizing the allocations, despite the healthy growth of more than 15 % in successive years 2005-06 and 2006-07. 
(Para 3.4)
 
 ACTION TAKEN
 
16.       The level of IEBR has been improving over the years as would be seen in reply to para 3.3 above.  This is further targeted at Rs. 2368 crore in 2007-08 as per the
budget. IEBR in case of Engineering and Machine Tools units is anticipated to go up in 2007-08 to Rs.914.60 crore against an actual IEBR of Rs.325 crore in 2006-07.
 
Committee’s Further Recommendations
 
17.       The Committee has expressed reservations against the practice of getting rather ambitious annual targets that eventually remain elusive.  The Department 
has not explained the reason for shortfall in generating targeted IEBR despite Government’s guarantees. Not only IEBR were not achieved, the PSEs in Engineering
and Machine tool sector were not  able to utilize the budgetary allocations.  Ministry’s reply does not state the reasons there of.
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
 18.      The Committee notes the definition of Planned and Non-Planned expenditure, as given in GFR 78, which states “Plan expenditure represents expenditure on
Plan outlays approved for each scheme by the Planning Commission and indicates the extent to which such outlays are met out of budgetary provisions. 
Expenditure other than these are categorised as Non-Plan expenditure.” The obvious corollary to this definition is that the allocations to the tune of Rs 456.30 crores
have not been approved by the Planning Commission. However no clarification   has been  offered about the criteria on which any scheme is approved by the
Planning Commission.                                          
 (Para 4.5) 
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
19.       The ‘Plan expenditure’ is laid down under Rule 78 of GFR on the basis of which approval of Planning Commission is sought to allocations under Plan..  Non-Plan
allocations are finalized in consultation and approval of Ministry of Finance.   Hence, for non-plan provision, approval of Planning Commission is not required.  However, in
the case of release of non-plan funds under the revival schemes of the PSEs, the comments of Planning Commission are being sought before placing the revival proposals for
the approval of the Competent Authority.
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/204threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:15:19]
Committee’s Further Recommendations
 
20.       The Department has not responded to the Committee’s query regarding the criteria on which any scheme is selected for Planning Commission’s approval. 
Furthermore in the Department’s reply it has been stated that comments of Planning Commission are sought even for the release of Non – Plan funds.   The
Committee observes arbitrariness in absence of clear guidelines on the approval of Planning Commission. The Committee recommends that Department should
inform the Committee of the guidelines regarding the approval of Planning Commission.
 
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
21.       The Committee also notes recurrent steep hikes in supplementary demands for Non-Planned Expenditure every year have led to serious imbalance between
Planned and Non-Planned Expenditures.   
     (Para 5.6)
                                                                          
 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
22.       Lumpsum provision at BE stage are made keeping in view the number of restructuring schemes likely to be cleared during the year with the approval of the Competent
Authority.  These provisions are made for budgetary support to sick PSEs for fresh funds under the approved restructuring schemes for meeting the expenditure on VRS/VSS
until a revival scheme of sick PSE is approved.  The requirement cannot be ascertained in advance.   Therefore, any shortfalls are met through supplementary grants. As such
there can be no correlation between Plan and Non-plan Expenditure in DHI as a revival/restructuring exercise is a continuous process and demands are based on the  
approved revival plans.
 
Committee’s Further Recommendations
 
23.       Though the first and Second Supplementary Demands did not require cash outgo, yet the Demands were covered through Token and Technical
appropriations.  The Committee however was not informed as to from  where the savings have been withdrawn to be re-appropriated in Supplementary Demands
and how does the Department plan to meet the demands for the objective and  from where savings have been re-appropriated. The Committee also questions the
rationale of relocating the saving so early in the FY instead of doing so at the RE stage.
 
24.       The Committee’s  apprehensions have been justified in the first Supplementary Demand when the allocations made for Capital Expenditure were re-
appropriated for revenue purposes to pay the dues in respect of NIDC. Furthermore, huge loans and interests in respect of AYCL, NIL and NPPC Ltd, have been
written off in the Supplementary Demand as part of approved restructuring plan for these Companies.  Obviously going by the definition, these Loans initially
would have constituted Capital Expenditure but have been rescinded as Revenue Expenditure. The Committee should be informed the details of these restructuring
plans and if they were approved only after the passage ofAnnual Demands.  Also the Committee must be informed of PSE-wise Loans/interest  being
waived/converted ever since formation of BRPSE and of these how many of the  PSEs have booked Profits this year and as such are able to generate IEBRs to meet
their capital requirements?
 
 
Recommendations/Observation of the Committee
 
25.       It gives an impression as if Department of Heavy Industries  has not taken appropriate measures  to rationalize  the non-planned expenditure.  The
Committee  accordingly  desires the  Department of Heavy Industries to contain their non-plan expenditure in   coming years. 
                                                                         
(Para 5.7)
 
ACTION TAKEN
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/204threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:15:19]
26.       Non-plan expenditure is varying mainly on account of financial restructuring approved under the revival plans.  Such trends are likely to persist till the exercise of
restructuring/revival of sick/loss making PSEs is completed.
 
Committee’s Further Recommendations
 
27.       The Committee has been concerned over the fact that revival plans predominantly entail non planned expenditure without actually adding to the capacity. 
The Committee desires that DHI must inform of the revival packages approved before every Supplementary Demand so as to ascertain the content of revival plan
which necessitate  huge revenue expenditures in Supplementary Demands. The Committee had apprehended that revival plans pertain only to financial window
dressing at a huge cost of clearing the balance sheets, without making the revival of a PSE self-sustainable.
 
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
28.     The Committee observes that same amount of Lumpsum  Loans to PSEs to settle VRS/statutory dues and to pay salary under the revival and restructuring of
the PSEs are being paid ever since 2000-01. With the rationalizing of a sizable manpower over these years, the liability over budget should have reduced in
successive budget, however, these liabilities have remained the same. It is even more disconcerting that a large part of IEBR raised by the PSEs are being committed
to these liabilities considering that several of the extra budgetary resources are being raised from the market against the Government guarantees.  This needs to be
reviewed seriously.                                               
 (Para 5.8)
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
29.       Total number of PSEs seeking budgetary support for payment of salary/wages from the Govt. is reducing for last 3 years.  As against budgetary support provided to 24
defaulting PSEs for salary/wages and statutory dues etc. in October, 2004, now budgetary support has been given to only to 13 PSEs in July, 2007.IEBR reflected under plan
programmes is not utilized for the purpose of payment of wages/salary as stated in reply to para 3.5 above.
Committee’s Further Recommendations
 
30.       The Ministry has not responded to the Committee’s concern over allocation of same amount as loans to settle VRS/statutory dues and to pay salaries.  Given
the fact that the number of VRS optees have been reducing each successive year, the Committee has noted that the aggregate amount given in loans to settle
VRS/statutory/salary dues too has been reducing each successive year. Yet the lumpsum allocations for the loans to settle such dues have remained the same. The
Department should justify the retention of same amount for successive years. The Department should also inform the Committee if the such lumpsum allocations
are used for Token/technical reappropriations in the Supplementary Demands? If yes, give details.
 
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
31.        The Committee is of the view that the money should be utilized in more effective way by maintaining the digitized records, enriching the Website, IT based
communications and by implementing principles and processes of e-governance in the financial administration of the Department and in accounting/auditing
procedures.   The Committee feels besides procuring hardware, steps should be taken for training into e-governance and modifying office procedures with the help
of appropriate tailor-made software and office network. The money should also be used for training the medium and junior level officers and staff into these new
technologies. The Committee observes that no money has been earmarked for the training and skill development in the  Department. The Committee accordingly
recommends that adequate stress should be laid on HR and training issues as the Department adopts new IT based e-governance systems.
(Para 6.3)
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
32.       DHI has already taken effective steps for maintaining digitized records, IT based communications and implementing principles and processes of e-Governance in the
financial administration of the Department and in accounting/auditing procedures.  Steps have been taken for training e-governance and modifying office procedure with the

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/204threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:15:19]
help of appropriate tailor-made software and office network.
 
33.       Broad information of this Department is available on website of DHI.  Information relating to e-Governance systems, DHI information, important circulars, important
messages, training material, utilities services is available on the intranet site of DHI.  Information regarding Utilization Certificate from Chief Controller of Accounts (CCA)
and weekly expenditure statement from CCA has been linked on the intranet site.  All important activities and Policy initiatives of this Department are also available.
 
34.       Regular computer related training courses are being conducted by the Institute of Secretariat Training and Management (ISTM), NIC Headquarters as per the specific
needs of the Department.  The NIC has been requested to identify the specific training requirements of the Department so that suitable officials could be sponsored for paid
training at NIC HQs and other Institutes/Organizations.  Funds for such training programmes shall accordingly be earmarked / allotted.
 
35.       In DHI, the computer training is being provided by NIC from time to time to the Officers/Staff.   However, if any special training is recommended by IT Cell the
officers/staff members will be suitably nominated to impart the said training(s).   However, funds already exist under Plan  (OE) for the development of IT activities in this
Department and training expenses could be utilized for training out of this provision.
Committee’s Further Recommendations
 
36.       The Committee appreciates the gradual increase in IT usage  in DHI, also recommends that the Parliamentary questions/replies, debates pertaining to DHI
and the Acts piloted by DHI too should be posted at the Website instead of maintaining the link with Parliament website.
 
Recommendations/Observation of the Committee
 
37.      The Committee finds it to be a typical example of misplaced priorities where a critical project for the revival of capital goods sector has been delayed due to
extraneous considerations, administrative complexities and layers of approval. A project that was allocated funds by the Government in the Budget has been over-
ridden by the Planning Commission. The Committee feels that the administrative constraints of the last year of the  Five Year Plan can not be an alibi for delaying a
project for modernizing the capital goods sector. The Committee desires the DHI to inform  the Committee of the business model, backward and forward linkages
and commercial viability of the project and if DHI has done a survey of the stakeholders and their stakes in the project. DHI needs to ascertain about the
management structure of the scheme.
(Para 7.5)
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
38.       This Department has been in constant dialogue with the Planning Commission for early implementation of the scheme.  Now Planning Commission has agreed to
provide Rs. 20.00 crore in 2007-08 as budgetary support.  DHI has, with the help of consultants, prepared a Comprehensive Scheme for capital goods for 11
th Five Year Plan
for which necessary approval is being sought.  This scheme is not a commercial project where the gains can be quantified.   However, it is expected that such a scheme would
go a long way in improving the competitiveness of the industry.
 
Committee’s Further Recommendations
 
39.       The DHI has not responded to the Committee’s query regarding the institutional structure of the scheme, financial delegation, backward and forward
linkages, survey of beneficiary stakeholders.  The Department may also inform the Committee if all the four strands under the scheme were being  led by DHI.  If
yes, what is the progress made on the four strands.
 
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
40.       The Committee expresses concern over the fact that the HMT which requires  the Guarantee Fee Subsidy, is also being provided Non-Plan Loans to settle
VRS dues. The Committee seeks  to know the credit worthiness of such PSEs given their financial position and  if any steps are  being taken for the recovery of
loans.                  
(Para 8.4) 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/204threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:15:19]
41.         The Committee feels that though the Guarantee Fee Subsidy does not entail cash flow, yet the Government loses on the revenue in respect of guarantee fee.
The Committee therefore, suggests that instead of waiving the returns,    Government should   defer the payment till Companies  attains profitability.  
(Para 8.5)
ACTION TAKEN  
 
42.         The Guarantee Fee Subsidy is given in rare cases to enable the Company to raise term loan for CAPEX, working Capital etc.  Under the Turnaround Plan 2000, HMT
Ltd. had to raise a loan of Rs. 469 crore for implementation of VRS.  This entailed a heavy interest burden of Rs. 21.98 crore even after 50% interest subsidy on the Company.
It was because of its precarious financial condition that the Guarantee Fee Subsidy was allowed.  In other cases, it has paid the requisite Guarantee Fee.      
Committee’s Further Recommendations (Para 8.4 & 8.5)
           
43.       The DHI has not responded to the Committee’s observation that if the HMT is being provided Budgetary support in form of loans to settle the VRS dues,
what is the need to provide Guarantee Fee Subsidy   to raise loans for the very same purpose? The DHI has also not responded on the steps taken by the DHI to
recover such loans given out of the Budgetary support. Further, given the precarious financial condition, if the DHI had made arrangements of the possible default
on the repayment of loans for which Guarantee Fee Subsidy has been paid?
 
 
44.       The DHI may also inform the Committee the year wise details of the beneficiary PSEs of the Guarantee Fee Subsidy Scheme.  The DHI should also give the
details of the amount raised from Banks against such Guarantee and the purpose thereof.
 
     
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
45.       The Committee is not  in agreement  with the replies of Department of Heavy Industries passing  the   onus on  BRPSE  as if its recommendations are
prevailing upon the Government.   Furthermore, the Committee feels that the BRPSE is  guided  largely  by the  inputs provided by the  concerned  PSEs  and  the 
Administrative Ministry.  BRPSE’s  recommendation should not become the justification  per se for  the Department of Heavy Industries , as the ultimate decision
has to be taken by the Government eventually .  The Committee gets  the  impression that Department of Heavy Industries   has tried to disassociate with the
BRPSE’s   recommendations, which should not be the case once the recommendations are accepted by the competent authority.  It is Department of Heavy
Industries ’s  obligation to justify the  rationale of such recommendations to the Committee.                                                                  
(Para 9.8)
 
 ACTION TAKEN
 
46.       DHI seeks the approval of the competent authority after fully satisfying itself on the revival proposals. DHI has no hesitation in owning the revival packages.
Accordingly so far packages for 11 PSEs have been approved and the same are under implementation.
 
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
47.       The Committee observes that waivers involve only  book adjustments and there is no cash outflow. Such waivers do affect the possible revenue over the
Government’s investment. The Committee further recommends that  the DHI should furnish the specific details of the revival/restructuring for which the waivers
were sought.          
(Para 10.3)
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
48.       Details of waivers/conversions sanctioned by the Govt. for revival/restructuring cases is as under:-
 
(Rs. in crore)

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/204threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:15:19]
S.No. Name of PSE Waiver/conversion
1 Hindustan Salts Ltd. 66.32
2 Bridge & Roof Company Ltd. 42.92
3 BBJ Construction Co. Ltd. 54.61
4 Praga Tools Ltd. 177.12
5 Heavy Engg. Corporation , Ranchi 1116.30
6 HMT (Bearings) Ltd., Bangalore 26.57
7 Braithwaite & Company Ltd., Kolkatta 112.91
8  Cement Corporation of India Ltd. 1252.25
9 Bharat Pumps & Compressors Ltd. 153.15
10 HMT(MT) Ltd. 157.80
11 Andrew Yule & Company Ltd. 154.75
 TOTAL 3314.70
 
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
49.       The Committee expresses serious reservations over the delay due to indecision on the part of Boards of Directors of NTPC and BHEL over the Draft Project 
Report (DPR).  Despite approval of the technical feasibility and the requisite yearly  budgetary allocations, the Board of the two Companies have not been able to
arrive at conclusion over the DPR ever since its submission in January 2006. The Committee finds such a situation unacceptable. The Committee desires the Boards
of  the two PSUs to be alive to the critical importance of such R&D project for the Power Sector in the country.    The Government should also ensure an early
decision on the issue and that DHI should inform the progress  to this Committee.                                                                        
(Para 13.9)
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
50.       BHEL prepared a Detailed Project Report on the 125 MW IGCC Demonstration Project in January, 2006 and submitted to NTPC and all concerned
agencies/Ministries. The objectives of the proposed demonstration plan include establishment of IGCC technology at 125 MW rating and refinement of plant operational
procedures in order to establish a platform for designing large commercial size IGCC plants in future.
 
51.       As per DPR, the project is estimated to cost Rs. 885.07 crore and is expected to take 36 months (best case scenario) from the date of receipt of financial and statutory
approvals.  The projected capital cost as per DPR of Rs. 6.96 crore per MW compares very favourably with the reported costs of other IGCC demonstration plants worldwide,
which range from Rs. 8.66 crore to Rs. 13.15 crore per MW.
 
52.       BHEL would set up the project for NTPC at its Auraiya site as finalized by the Inter-Ministerial Steering Group.  As stated earlier, BHEL Board has approved a
contribution of Rs. 50 crore for the 125 MW IGCC Demonstration Project.  The   expenditure incurred by BHEL on pre-project activities is as follows:-
 
Year 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07
Expenditure (Rs. crore) 0.386 3.97 5.35 6.61
 
53.       Under the Budget Head “Grant for Coal Gasification” Project, there was a provision of Rs. 2.00 crore for the FY 2005-06.  The Government has released Rs. 0.67
crfore during 2005-06 for pre-project activities.   In previous years Rs. 1.33 crore has been released for the purpose to BHEL.  As per extant rules, any additional release of
funds over and above the amount of Rs. 2.00 crore, approval of Public Investment Board (PIB) in the Ministry of Finance is required.
 
54.       A joint committee of BHEL and NTPC was assigned the job of preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR) by January, 2006 and would require  approval of the
Board of Directors of BHEL and NTPC.  Thereafter, for requirement of funds from the Govt. submission of the case before the PIB is required.   On receipt of
recommendations of the PIB, the case would be processed to obtain the decisions of the Govt.
           

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/204threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:15:19]
55.       In BE 2006-07, a token provision of Rs. one lakh was made in the budget head 2852 Industries (Major Head)- 80 General (Sub Major Head) 80003 Industrial
Education Research and Training (Minor Head) -04 Grants for Coal Gasification Project 04.00.31 Grants in aid under Demand No. 48 of DHI.  The same amount has been
retained in BE 2007-08.  The project has been included in the 11th plan of DHI.
 
56.       This Department has requested Ministry of Power and BHEL to arrange for approval of DPR on 125 MW IGCC Demonstration Project by Board of Directors of
NTPC and BHEL and convey the same to DHI.  The same are awaited.   Once DPR duly approved by Board of Directors of NTPC and BHEL is received in DHI, further
action will be initiated to seek the approval of the competent authority for grant of funds by Govt. of India.
 
57.       A meeting of DRPSC was held on 25.05.2007 to consider the issue of progress in Coal Gasification Project.   Senior officials from DHI, Ministry of Power BHEL and
NTPC attended the meeting and explained the respective positions to the Committee regarding progress of IGCC project.   The Chairman, DRPSC in his concluding remarks
has indicated that another meeting will be convened in near future to review the matter further. 
Committee’s Further Recommendations
 
58.       In the said meeting of the Committee, the NTPC and M/o Power had indicated certain reservations over certain technical aspects in BHEL’s DPR.  DHI may
inform if such issues have been resolved.  If not what is the status of 125 MW IGCC Demonstration Project now.
 
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
59.       The Committee has reservations on a few counts- firstly as per the GFR 79 such allocations for the payment of retirement and statutory dues and salaries can
not be normally classified as a capital expenditure, even if the allocations are meant for loans. The Committee has observed on earlier occasions that funds initially
allocated as loans are eventually waived off. Furthermore, the Committee has observed that same amount is being allocated for same purposes every year since
2000-01. The Committee expected that after as many years of paying the VRS and salaries to the employees of the PSEs, the amount should have reduced over the
successive years. That annual allocation for loans to pay VRS and salary dues have remained same, it does rise concern over the viability of this scheme and security
of such investments. The Committee accordingly recommends that the DHI should  give year-wise details of the loans given to the beneficiary PSEs out of these two
lump sum allocations  ever since the inception of this scheme. DHI must also inform the Committee about the PSE-wise number of employees benefited from the two
schemes every year since their inception.  The Committee reiterates its apprehensions that revival/restructuring of the PSEs has been resorted largely for
 retrenchment of employees and minimizing the wage cost in future.  However excess manpower is the not the sole factor of PSEs’ financial problems. PSEs have
suffered due to lack of orders, lack of working capital, obsolete technology and their inability to create a niche in high value market segment with value added
products. The Committee wonders if any budgetary support is given to improve upon these factors.
(Para 16.5)
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
60.       The excess manpower is not the only reason for the current financial problems and, therefore, other measures like modernization of manufacturing facilities, training
and retraining, provisions for working capital, marketing strategy etc. are also being incorporated in the revival plans. Funds are also being provided for capital expenditure as
per the statement given below where revival plans have been approved.
 
 
INPUTS BY GOVERNMENT FOR REVIVAL/RESTRUCTURING CASES SANCTIONED BY GOVT.
(Rs.cr.)
Sl.No. PSE Fresh GOI funds Waiers/
conversions
GOI
guarantee
Total
Cap.   
invest.
Others   
1 Hindustan Salts
Ltd. Jaipur
4.28 Nil 66.32 Nil 70.60
2 Bridge & Roof Co.
LTd., Kolkata
60.00 Nil 42.92 Nil 102.92
3 BBJ Constn. Co. Nil Nil 54.61 Nil 54.61

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/204threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:15:19]
Year No. of persons retired
(Approx.)
Amount released(Rs. in
crore)
1992-93 9000 128.37
1993-94 13000 179.08
1994-95 5000 85.23
1995-96 3000 51.80
1996-97 3000 56.33
1997-98 3000 89.41
1998-99 6000 304.99
1999-2000 5500 293.03
2000-01 12521 486.55
2001-02 21062 614.28
2002-03 7000 424.69
2003-04 4354 344.48
2004-05 700 54.36
2005-06 68 6.97
2006-07 229 20.35
Total 93434 3139.82
Ltd. Kolkata
4 Praga Tools Ltd.
Secudnerabad
(AP)
5.00 Nil 177.12 32.59 214.71
5 Heavy Engg Corp,
Ranchi
100.00 Nil 1116.30 150.00 1366.30
6 HMT (Bearings)
Ltd. Hyderabad
7.40 Nil 26.57 17.40 51.37
7 Braithwaite & Co
ltd., Kolkata
4.00 Nil 112.91 Nil 116.91
8 Cement Corpn of
India Ltd., New
Delhi
30.67 153.62 1252.25 15.70 1452.24
9 Bharat Pumps &
Compressors Ltd.,
Allahabad
Nil Nil 153.15 3.37 156.52
10 HMT (MT) Ltd. 180.00 543.00 157.80 - 880.80
11 Andrew yule & Co
Ltd.
29.56 87.06 154.75 111.96 383.33
 TOTAL 422.91 783.68 3314.70 331.02 4852.31
       
 * Investment details under finalization.
 
 
61.       The number of employees separated under Voluntary Retirement Scheme/Voluntary Separation scheme and loan given by Government year-wise is as follows:
 
 
 
 
 
                 Details of Budgetary support provided for liquidation of pending salary/wages
and statutory dues in PSEs under DHI since October 2004 are given in the attached
statement-I.
 
Statement-I(Para 16.5)
62.      
Details of Budgetary support provided for liquidation of pending salary/wages and statutory
dues in PSEs since October 2004
S.No. Name  of the
PSE
1st
Tranche
2nd
Tranche
3rd
Tranche
4th
Tranche
5th
Tranche
6th
Tranche
7th
Tranche
No. of
Employees
1.        Andrew Yule &
Co. Ltd
32.12 7.22 - 28.34 12.77 14.88 23.29 15890
2.        Bharat Heavy
Plates &
Vessels Ltd.
45.72 16.25 22.75 9.92 1.00 -  990

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/204threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:15:19]
3.        Bharat
Ophthalmic
Glass Ltd.
1.95 0.957 0.77 1.79 - - -** 185
4.        Bharat Pumps
& Compressors
Ltd.
14.07 1.86 3.39 - - - - 1245
5.
        Braithwaite &
Co. Ltd.
1.11 - - - - - -  
6.        Burn Standard
Co. Ltd.
4.27 1.30 0.65 3.25 1.95 - - 1556
7.
        Bharat Wagon
Engg. Co. Ltd.
5.92 2.71 2.06 3.40 4.27 4.10 2.24 950
8.
        Cement
Corporation of
India Ltd.
11.55 - -  - - - 1515
9.
        Hindustan
Cables Ltd.
105.11 63.32 25.22 27.49 34.70 31.29 16.77 3159
10.     Heavy
Engineering
Corporation
Ltd.
125.65 - - 10.18 - - - 3500
11.
     HMT Ltd.  
 
79.32
- -  9.17 2.44 3.55 2489
12.
     HMT Bearings
Ltd.
- - - - - - 322
13.     HMT Machine
Tools Ltd.
-  9.92 6.10 7.82 - 4417
14.
     HMT
(Watches) Ltd.
22.11 14.28 18.11 19.93 20.54 10.23 2171
15.
     HMT(Chinar
Watches)Ltd.
8.83 4.25  5.78 6.83 3.38 632
16.
     Hindustan
Photo Films
Ltd
3.06 8.74 4.24 5.92 6.93 6.19 5.63 1075
17.
     Instrumentation
Ltd.
32.28 2.14 - 8.02 7.63 6.64 3.88 1731
18.     NEPA Ltd.
 
 
12.86 7.36 5.06 7.07 3.26 8.68 4.33 1468
19.
     National
Instruments
Ltd.
1.81 0.45 0.25 0.27 0.33 0.34 0.185 69
20.     Praga Tools
Ltd.
1.72 1.03 -  - - - 482
21.     Richardson &
Cruddas Ltd.
1.61 -- - - - - -  
22.     Triveni
Structurals Ltd.
14.60 1.09 1.69 2.26 2.40 2.47 1.49 312
23.
     Tungabhadra
Steel Products
Ltd.
5.06 0.88 2.14 2.60 3.09 1.21 1.05 345
24.
     Tyre
Corporation of
India Ltd.*
- - - - - - - -
Total 499.79 146.247 86.75 138.54 119.31 113.43 76.025  
* An amount of Rs. 4.07 was approved but was not released as the same was met by internal generation. by the PSE
**Release of funds to BOGL has been held up as  Kolkata High Court  vide its order dated 9th July, 2007 ordered for winding up the company and handing over the company to Official Liquidator. The issue with regard to

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/204threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:15:19]
the release of funds to BOGL is being presently processed in this context.
Committee’s Further Recommendations
 
63.    The figures provided by the DHI substantiate the apprehensions of the Committee.
After 2004-05, the Department of Heavy Industries could never exhaust Rs.250 crore  meant to disburse loans to settle VRS dues, rather only small fraction was
released for the purpose. Further the  number of VRS optees has been coming down since 2003-04. Yet Department of Heavy Industries demands have remained
stagnant at Rs.250 crores. Further it has not been informed if the same PSEs were extended loans to settle VRS dues in successive years. The Committee also noted
that after the completion of second quarter only Rs 34 crores  out of Rs 250 crores  could be spent on some 11 CPSEs. These are the same PSEs that have been
receiving such loans for years in succession.
 
64.       Similarly the Government has provided budgetary support in seven trenches since October 2004 to liquidate salary and statutory dues. The total sum has
been coming down significantly in each successive trench. Yet the annual lumpsum allocations to liquidate such liabilities have remained the same for years.  The
Committee noted that even this year, against an allocation of Rs 150 crores, only Rs 53 crores have been spent till the completion of second quarter. The beneficiary
PSEs are the same as those that availed loans to clear VRS dues. Such PSEs have been thriving on such Government loans for successive years. 
 
65.      The Committee takes a strong view of this continuing trend in DHI to keep the resources unutilized and yet seek huge lumpsum allocations annually to
provide loans to  clear  the liabilities of PSEs. While taking such view the Committee also bears in consideration the trend of converting the loans/interests into
equity or waiving them altogether.
 
66.       The Committee may also be informed about the terms of repayment of these loans for VRS dues/salaries. Has the Department of Heavy Industries
formulated any model terms of such loans for PSEs to avail these loans?
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
67.     The Committee observes inconsistency in seeking lumpsum. For certain prospective planned capital investments only token sum of Rupees one lakh was
allocated in BE 2006-07 with an understanding to enlarge the allocation through Supplementary Demands as and when required. However same criterion is not
applied for the massive lumpsum allocations made for the prospective non-planned  expenditures. The Committee is of the view that instead of providing large
lumpsum allocations, it is more appropriate that PSE-wise specific grants are sought in the Supplementary Demands.
(Para 16.6)
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
68.       The two non-plan lump sum provisions are made for providing budgetary support to sick units for fresh fund infusion under the approved restructuring schemes; for
meeting the short-fall in expenditure on salary & wages and for meeting the expenditure on VRS etc. as approved under the revival schemes of sick PSEs.  Until a revival
scheme of each sick PSE  is approved, the requirement of funds cannot be explained PSE wise in details.   Keeping in view the number of restructuring schemes likely to be
cleared during the year,  the  lumpsum provisions have been made.
Committee’s Further Recommendations
69.       The Department of Heavy Industries has yet not addressed the inconsistency observed in respect of Lumpsum  allocations for Capital investment vis a vis. 
Non – Plan expenditure to settle VRS dues and salary/ statutory dues. Furthermore, in view of the information furnished by the DHI in response to the Committee’s
observation in Para 16.5, it is clear that the DHI has been seeking the Lumpsum allocations that are  much in excess to what is  actually required and spent. The
Committee expects that the estimates of DHI should be more accurate and judicious and that there should be a review of this trend of piling up the allocations till
the end of a Financial Year.   
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
70.      Despite terms and conditions that loans the outstanding loans and interest are being waived or converted into equity on the recommendations of BRPSE
which in turn bases its recommendations only on the draft project report prepared by the PSE.  No efforts are being made to recover defaulted dues. It is apparent
that the PSEs are not considered credit worthy in the market, yet the Government has been annually putting huge funds at the stake only to liquidate the liabilities.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/204threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:15:19]
The Committee wonders if the cost of previous unsuccessful attempts is considered while making fresh allocations and waivers. The Committee would like to know
about the steps taken by the DHI to comply with the guidelines in respect of repayment of dues. The Committee expresses its serious concern over the dismal
prospects of returns on the investments Government is making in these PSEs.
(Para 16.14)
ACTION TAKEN 
71.       Whenever a revival plan is prepared, repayment of loan/interest is accounted for while the viability is worked out. The viability of the revival plan is assessed in
consultation with independent experts in BRPSE and the Planning Commission/Finance Ministry. The Companies which successfully turnaround, pay back the loans to the
Govt.   In some cases such loans are repaid after sale of surplus assets/ closed units etc. Decision to provide funds to PSEs are taken after thorough examination and due
consideration by the Government in the light of the policy enunciated in the NCMP. However, in cases where revival of PSE appears unlikely, Government have decided to
close the PSE concerned rather than to provide funds endlessly to them.
(Para 16.10 & Para 16.14)
 
 
Committee’s Further Recommendations
 
72.       The Committee’s concern regarding extending the loans to same PSE in successive years has not been replied.   Further, contrary to Department of Heavy
Industry’s   assertion, the Committee noted that most of the PSEs that have been granted waivers, had availed such waivers earlier too?
 
73.       Going by the information provided by the Department of Heavy Industries, the Government has already agreed to waive/convert Rs.3314.70 crores  to
Eleven PSEs. 
 
74.       The Department of Heavy Industry’s reply should have given the details of such PSEs that have repaid the loans after the turn around. The DHI should give
the details of such cases, as to how much was the total liability of loans and interest their on, Year of giving such loans , whether  entire liability was cleared or only
part of it was repaid and if the Government gave any support to clear off the liabilities or were the resources generated internally by the PSEs.
 
75.       The Committee should also be informed of the details if the PSEs approved for revival had liabilities towards the Banks and whether such bank liabilities are
to be borne by the Government as the part of revival.
 
76.       Department of Heavy Industries may also inform the Committee if the repayment of loans and other liabilities is included in the MoU with the respective
PSEs.  Also, if the guidelines for the disposal of surplus assets for the repayment of liabilities, have been formulated.
 
 Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
 77.      The Committee observes that Rs. 96.82 crores were spent in the first quarter and another Rs 28.93 crores  were spent in the Second quarter. There was no
expenditure in the third quarter and about Rs 24 crores were spent in the last quarter. The Committee finds uneven appropriations out of lumpsum funds.
(Para 16.20)
 
ACTION TAKEN
           
78.       Rules under GFR lay down the detailed procedure for the control of expenditure on the basis of which expenditures are evenly distributed in each quarter to monitor
the expenditure during the financial year.   In the case of DHI, expenditure is based on the requirements of PSEs which cannot always be distributed evenly because
requirements like providing of budgetary support to PSEs for salary wages etc. and for their revival plans cannot be planned in advance.  It is possible that no revival plans get
approved during a quarter of a year and several revival plans get approved in the next quarter.  Hence the expenditure in each quarter is need-based and not uniform.
 
Committee’s Further Recommendations
79.       The Committee feels that Department of Heavy Industries should  have substantiated its reply with specific quarter wise information.  Moreover, the

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/204threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:15:19]
Committee has observed earlier that the amount being approved for the payment of salary has been reducing once the second trench, yet the annual Lumpsum
allocation have remained the same.  Similarly the number of employees seeking VSS has come down over the years, yet the Lumpsum  allocation have remained the
same. 
 
80.       The Committee noted that even this year, against an allocation of Rs 150 crores , only Rs 53 crores have been spent till the completion of second quarter. The
beneficiary PSEs are the same as those that availed loans to clear VRS dues. Such PSEs have been thriving on such Government loans for successive years. 
 
81.       The Committee takes a strong view of this continuing trend in DHI to keep the resources unutilized and yet seek huge lumpsum allocations annually to
provide loans to  clear  the liabilities of PSEs. While taking such view the Committee also bears in consideration the trend of converting the loans/interests into
equity or waiving them altogether.
 
82.       The Committee may also be informed about the terms of repayment of these loans for VRS dues/salaries. Has the Department of Heavy Industries
formulated any model terms of such loans for PSEs to avail these loans?
 
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
83.       The Committee finds distinct contradiction between the explanation furnished by the DHI and the Demands for Grants. As per the information furnished by
the DHI, Rs. 125.20 crores had been utilized by the RE stage, however the Demands for Grants show Rs. 24.80 crores  as RE 2006-07.  At another place the DHI
informed that Rs 257 crores were spent as salary/wages and another Rs 50 crores  were likely to spent by 30
th March 2007. The DHI may give detailed explanation
of such factual contradictions.
(Para 16.21)
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
84.       A Provision of Rs. 150 crore was made in the B.E. for the year 2006-07 for revival plans of various PSEs.  A sum of Rs. 125.20 crore has been re-appropriated to
various PSEs at various stages and this amount has been shown against the concerned PSEs.  Balance 150.00-125.20) Rs/ 24.80 crore has been shown in Demand for Grant
against Lump-sum-Provision under head 6854.
85.       A Provision of Rs. 250 crore was made in BE for 2006-07 for implementation of voluntary retirement scheme & payment of statutory dues to employees of various
PSEs.  A sum of Rs. 207 crore was booked as expenditure upto 04.01.2007.  Another sum of Rs. 50.37 crore  was obtained in IIIrd Batch of Supplementary for the above
purpose.
86.       Total expenditure for the year 2006-07 was Rs. 299.95 crore.
Committee’s Further Recommendations
87.       The Committee desires the Department of Heavy Industries to ascertain as to what constitutes an RE estimated expenditure or the unspent part of allocation.
Similarly of the Rs.250 crores  allocated in BE 2006-07 for the loans to clear VRS/statutory dues Rs.89.72 crores  have been shown as RE 06-07. The Demands for
Grants for DHI as presented  to the Parliament do not explicitly indicate the beneficiary PSEs from these Lumpsum  allocations. The Committee must be informed
of the Rules regarding the preparation of revised estimates and if the parliamentary sanction is required to make appropriations to individual PSEs  out of these
lumpsum allocations.
 
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
88.        The Committee is constrained to note that such non-planned allocations are being made annually for last nine years since 1998-1999. However, the allocation
has remained same. In fact most the beneficiary PSEs, had also availed the loans for VRS and statutory dues. The situation raises serious question regarding the
security of such loans. The Committee apprehends that going by the current practice, such loans may either be waived off or converted into unsecured- equity some
time in future.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/204threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:15:19]
(Para 16.22)
ACTION TAKEN
 
89.       Current policy of the Govt. as per NCMP is to revive sick PSEs which can be made viable. Accordingly revival plans are being attempted. Such revival plans
invariably have provisions for treatment of past loans/interest so that the Company can start with a clean slate.
 
Committee’s Further Recommendations
 
90.       The Committee should be informed if there is any objective criteria to determine the revivability  and sustainability of a PSE.  It has often been observed that
while the revival is limited to clearing the liabilities without making any effort towards ensuring the sustainability for which technical modernization,  marketing
etc., are critical for these facts, the Government looks for strategic partners to bring in technology and capital investment
91.       It is also observed that the Government looks for JV partners to bring capital investments only after clearing the books of PSEs at a huge cost. The
Committee should be informed of the rationale of clearing the books of a PSE whose management is eventually to be transferred to a JV partner.
 
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 
92.       The Committee observes that only a few select PSEs are able to generate IEBRs. In view of under performance in generating the IEBRs by the PSEs, the
Committee apprehends that majority of PSEs have to be funded through the budgetary resources to liquidate their outstanding liabilities or to meet their working
capital requirements. The fact that the PSEs are not able to generate IEBRs is indicative of the long term credit worthiness of the PSEs, this is despite the fact that
the Government has been providing the guarantees and interest subsidies.
(Para 19.4)
 
ACTION TAKEN
93.       With the revival of some PSEs, the Companies in the coming years are expected to generate higher IEBR.  During 2007-08, IEBR expected to be generated is Rs.
2368.52 crore against an actual IEBR of Rs. 401.28 crore in 2006-07.
 
 
Committee’s Further Recommendations
94.       The Department of Heavy Industry’s response does not address the Committee’s observation regarding under achievement in generating IEBR as against
the annual target.  Also, the reply does not deal with Committee’s  impression regarding low credit worthiness as indicated by PSEs inability to generate IEBRs
despite Government’s guarantees  and subsidies towards guarantee fees and interest liabilities, Committee should be informed about the steps taken by Department
of Industry to encourage PSEs to list at stock exchange as suggested by the Prime Minister recently.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/204threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:15:19]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*****************
Annexure I  (Para 1.9)
 
STATEMENT SHOWING PROFIT(+) LOSS (-)  (BEFORE TAX) OF PUBLIC SECTOR ENTERPRISES UNDER THE
DEPARTMENT OF HEAVY INDUSTRY.
(Rs.in crores)
Sl.No. Name of PSE 2003-04
(Actual)
2004-05
(Actual)
2005-06
(Actual)
2006-07
(Prov.)
2007-08
(Target)
(A) PROFIT MAKING PSEs *      
1 Hooghly Printing 1.16 1.50 0.39 0.11 0.56
2 BHEL 1015.00 1581.00 2564.00 3675.00 3222.00
3 HPC 59.69 55.60 87.98 91.09 68.18
4 HNL 8.22 9.54 27.36 45.02 65.79
5 HMT(Hldg. Co.) -7.19 18.50 13.55 66.58 21.09
6 HMT(I) 0.13 0.08 0.98 1.58 0.43
7 BPCL -16.91 -9.81 2.17 18.40 26.91
8 B&R 3.18 1.49 3.11 7.10 17.87
9 BCL -23.56 -21.91 2.21 2.24 14.49
10 BBJ -24.30 0.33 0.49 1.34 8.25
11 CCI -80.95 -218.94 831.84 37.05 499.62
12 EPI 29.66 7.75 13.31 16.54 16.70
13 REIL 2.88 3.03 3.16 4.05 3.30
14 SSL -3.11 2.35 -1.26 0.18 0.11
       
Sub-total for (A) Profit making Companies 963.90 1430.51 3549.29 3966.28 3965.30
(B) LOSS MAKING PSEs 
15 AYCL -54.63 -75.35 -73.35 -27.68 20.37
16 BSCL -110.65 -118.72 -442.74 -152.58 6.36
17 BWEL -24.05 -28.10 -24.88 -23.03 3.32
18 TSP -99.98 -57.53 -30.08 -36.80 -17.40
19 BHPV -152.92 -78.23 -71.38 -36.00 -17.81
20 R&C -39.26 -33.06 -42.54 -51.39 -23.42
21 TSL -74.78 -51.54 -48.91 -43.80 0.84
22 HCL -307.87 -270.88 -295.32 -288.98 -310.00
23 HEC -132.68 -285.02 -86.89 -8.12 0.31

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/204threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:15:19]
24 HMT(B) -9.58 -10.38 0.31 -5.48 -3.02
25 HMT(MT) -119.08 -73.80 -6.56 -50.96 36.25
26 HMT(Watches)) -135.00 -135.00 -76.00 -125.95 95.00
27 HMT(Chinar Watches) -21.92 -25.23 -30.88 -32.13 3.06
28 HSL -2.41 8.34 -0.57 -1.21 0.67
29 IL -29.02 -16.98 -13.96 -29.72 2.78
30 HPF -443.02 -496.41 -560.90 -613.20 -688.82
31 NEPA -31.22 -47.27 -51.93 -45.05 -47.26
32 PTL -37.50 16.04 116.51 -6.21 2.93
33 SIL 3.16 1.39 1.90 -3.72 4.40
34 TCIL 4.55 -56.87 -47.53 -47.92 -48.78
Sub-total (B) Loss making Companies. -1817.86 -1834.60 -1785.70 -1629.93 -980.22
GRAND TOTAL(A&B) -853.96 -404.09 1763.59 2336.35 2985.08
 
 
 