Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON INDUSTRY
 
REPORT NO. 
238
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 21st March, 2013) 
(Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 21st March, 2013)  
Action Taken Note on the Two Hundred Thirty Fourth Report 
of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2012-13) pertaining 
to the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises
(Department of Heavy Industry)


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON INDUSTRY
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT
Action Taken Note on the Two Hundred Thirty Fourth Report
of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2012-13) pertaining
to the Ministry of Heavy Indstries and Public Enterprises
(Department of Heavy Industry)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  21 st March, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on  21 st March, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—15
(i) Chapter–I
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the
Ministry ............................................................................................................... 2
(ii) Chapter–II
Recommendations/Observations which the  Committee does not desire
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies .......................................... 3—6
(iii) Chapter–III
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has
either not accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the
Ministry to review its replies ......................................................................... 7
(iv) Chapter–IV
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the
Ministry have not been received .................................................................... 8—15
4. M
INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 17—20

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Date of Constitution : 31 st August, 2012)
1. Shri Tiruchi Siva — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Narendra Budania
3. Shri Ashk Ali Tak
4. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu
5. Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor
6. Shri Basawaraj Patil
7. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
8. Shri Vivek Gupta
9. Shri Nandamuri Harikrishna
10. Shri M.P. Achuthan
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
12. Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa
13. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
14. Shrimati Poonamben Veljibhai Jat
15. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
16. Shri Hassan Khan
17. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar
18. Shrimati Ingrid Mcleod
19. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal
20. Shri Somen Mitra
21. Shri P. R. Natarajan
22. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey
23. Shri Jayaram Pangi
24. Shri R. K. Singh Patel
25. Shri B. Y . Raghavendra
26. Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat
27. Shri Ijyaraj Singh
28. Ch. Lal Singh
29. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
30. Shri E. G . Sugavanam
31. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Roshan Lal, Deputy Director
Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry,
having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred and Thirty Eighth
Report on Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises
(Department of Heavy Industry) on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two
Hundred and Thirty-fourth Report on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) pertaining to Department
of Heavy Industries.
2. I thank the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of Heavy
Industry) for furnishing the Action Taken Notes on the recommendations contained in the
Committee’s Two Hundred and Thirty-fourth Report.
3. The Committee in its meeting held on the 19
th March, 2013 considered and adopted the
Report.
TIRUCHI SIV A
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
19th March, 2013 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry.

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of Heavy Industry) on the recommendations
contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred and Thirty-fourth Report on the Demands For Grants
(2012-13) pertaining to Department of Heavy Industry.
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises (Department of Heavy Industry) in respect of the recommendations contained in the
Report. These have been categorized as follows:
Chapter-I– The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry.
The Committee is pleased to observe that the Ministry has accepted its recommendations
as mentioned in the Chapter–I of the Report.
Chapter-II – The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to
pursue in view of the Government’s replies.
In respect of these recommendations the Committee is convinced with the logic and
explanations advanced by the Ministry and therefore does not want to pursue them for the present.
Chapter-III – The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has
either not accepted replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its reply.
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of recommendations
contained in Chapter–III and desires that the Ministry should furnish logical explanations thereof.
Chapter-IV – The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the
Ministry have not been received.
In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either furnished the
interim replies or couched its language in vague terms therefore, the Committee desires that the
Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in respects of recommendations categorized in Chapter-
IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the
Committee.
3. The details of the ATR is being discussed in the succeeding pages.

2
CHAPTER-I
The Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry
Recommendations/Observations
1. The Committee notes that the IEBR of some important PSEs under DHI are far from the
expected figures during 2010-11 and 2011-12. It is a matter of grave concern that HPC is still
reeling under the impact of non-availability of raw materials . Though, the Committee has dealt with
the issue separately in one of its earlier reports, it is reiterated that an important enterprise in the
North Eastern Area should not be allowed to incur losses owing to problems which can be sorted
out by approaching the State Government and the Ministry of Railways. (Para 28)
Action Taken
Internal mobilization of resources has lagged behind the expected figures as the market
conditions have not been favourable in recent years. In respect of HPC, the State Government has
already been apprised about the impact of the non-availability of raw materials and their help is
sought for in sorting out the matter. State Government of Assam on its part has already held three
rounds of the meeting to find out the ways and means for improving the raw material scenario.
Regular follow up is being made with Railway authorities both at Guwahati and at New Delhi in
the matter of allotment of rakes for supply of raw material to HPC units, the response to which
is positive.
Committee’s observation
The Committee does not accept the DHI’s argument attributing failure to mobilize
even the conservative estimates of Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR), on
market conditions. There exists huge scope in the infrastructure sector. The argument of
adverse market conditions must be used carefully and efforts should be made to overcome
such trend. The Committee also noted that the BE (2010-11) for IEBR were retained even
in RE (2010-11). Yet actual figures were way below the RE (2010-11). The Committee would
like to know the actual IEBR for 2011-12. The Committee also notes that PSU’s capacity of
generating IEBR is decreasing every year.
2

3
CHAPTER-II
The Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies
Recommendations/Observations
1. The Committee finds that the Plan funds allocated for 2011-12 have been well utilized by
DHI. It is the lower rate of utilization of Non-Plan funds that has pulled down the overall utilization
figure for the year. In this circumstance, the Committee views the spurt in Plan allocation for
2012-13 to be encouraging and observes that the Department should be able to continue the
efficient utilization of funds during the current year also. This will go a long in augmenting the
performance of CPSEs under DHI and the schemes of the Department. (Para 4)
Action Taken Note
Total allocation of funds for the financial year 2012-13 is Rs. 1009.67 crore, Rs. 553.00
crore under Plan and Rs. 456.67 crore under Non-Plan. Out of Rs. 553.00 crore under Plan,
Rs. 488.48 crore is allocated to National Automotive Testing and Research & Development
Infrastructure Project. All efforts will be made to utilize the entire allocation of funds under Plan
& Non-Plan during the financial year 2012-13.
Committee’s observation
The Committee expects that both the Plan and Non-Plan expenditure are evenly
spread out four quarters of the Financial Year. Cautions must be maintained as per the GFR
56 (3).
Recommendations/Observations
2. The Committee notes that BHEL features right at the top of the priorities of Department of
Heavy Industry, as it is one of the largest PSEs in India and has every potential to become an
established global player in its field. While studying the Turnover and PBT of BHEL, the
Committee’s attention was drawn to a decrease in the growth parameters in relation to 2011-12
compared to 2010-11. However, the Committee takes note of the explanations in this regard
provided by the BHEL. Even so, since the Committee views BHEL as a would-be Maharatana
Company in the near future, it is observed that BHEL has to take measures to prevent shortfall in
its performance. (Para 35)
Action Taken Note
Performance in 2011-12, post audit, indicating improvements in both Turnover and PBT
w.r.t. 2010-11 is as under.
3

4
Y ear Turnover T.O. Growth PBT PBT growth
(TO) % over last (Rs. crore) % over last
(Rs. crore) year year
2010-11 41299@ 20.9% 8487@ 28.8%
(43337) (9006)
2011-12 49510 19.9% 10302 21.4
(Post audit)
@ Excluding onetime impact of change in policy related to provisions for warranty obligations for earlier years
To further enhance the performance, the company is focusing efforts on several thrust
areas which include Capability enhancement, Cost competitiveness, Diversification & Strategic Tie-
ups etc. A brief account of the actions taken in these areas is as following:
(i) The significant actions taken as a part of enhancing cost competitiveness include
(a) maximizing the level of Indigenization of high value items, (b) localization of parts
and components through vendor development, (c) competitive buying by way of
widening vendor base, Rate contracts Memorandum of Understanding with suppliers,
bulking of generic requirements, leveraging Information Technology through Reverse
Auction and e-procurement and (d) sourcing from low cost countries.
(ii) As a part of expanding its business vista in non-power area, the company is pursuing
diversification initiatives in Renewables, Transmission and Transportation segments. In
transportation the company is in the lookout for business in several areas which
include IGBT based propulsion systems for Electric & Diesel-electric Locos, EMUs in
Urban transportation, High HP Locos for Dedicated Freight Corridors (DFC) etc. In
Transmission, the thrust is for Products & Systems for ultrahigh voltage transmission
(765 and 1200 KV), Gas Insulated Substations etc.
Committee’s observation
The Committee notes that BHEL’s capacity of generating IEBR has been decreasing
despite its ambitious expansion plan. The Committee is also cognisant that BHEL’s order
books are impressive, however, there have been persistent complaints about delay in supply
of equipments and in commissioning the projects, thereby causing significant financial
losses to the client companies. The Ministry and the Board of the Company must ensure
that the expansion plan of the Company must also include the measures of timely delivery
of contracts and equipments to the clients.
Recommendations/Observations
3. The Committee would like to get a detailed note from the Department of Heavy Industry
with regard to the points raised by the Associations. (Para 39)
Action Taken Note
The Meeting was attended by the Representatives of Machine Tools Industry (IMTMA),
Electrical and Electronics Industry (IEEMA), Earthmoving and Construction Equipment Industry
(IECIAL) and CII.
(i) As far as Machine Tools Industry is concerned, main points raised by the Industry are
as under:
(a) There is a huge technology gap that exists in the demand and supply within the
country.

5
(b) Machine Tools industry per se  is capital intensive industry with long gestation
period. Bank charges industry at a higher rate ranging from 13 per cent-15 per-
cent and the Industry is in need for a special rate reduction.
(c) Reduction in import duties and import of second hand machinery are also having
an adverse effect on the industry.
(d) Machine Tools Industry has proposed a Technology Development Fund which will
be utilized through certain institutes specialized in machine tool technology
development and through in house R&D facilities within the industry.
(e) Machine Tools industry needs low interest loan support to the tune of Rs.2000
crore for capacity building.
(f) Machine Tools Industry has also asked for common facility centers.
(g) On Government procurement, domestic machine tools industry is seeking some
modification in procurement policy in PSE to get itself secured from currency
value fluctuation and improvement of payment term vis-a-vis foreign players.
(h) The industry is also suffering from inverted duty structure where finished
machines can be imported at low rate of import duty whereas import duty for
components is higher.
Here, it is stated that in the proposed Scheme by the Department of Heavy Industry on
enhancement of competitiveness of the Capital Goods Sector with an outlay of Rs. 2360 crore
envisages, inter alia , establishment of Product Development Centres, Interest rate subvention and
Common Facility Centres for Capital Goods Sector including machine tool. As far as inverted duty
structure for machine tools is concerned, the Department has taken up the matter with the Tariff
Commission which has been requested to undertake a study.
(ii) As far as Earthmoving and Construction Equipment Industry is concerned, the main
points raised by the Industry in the meeting are as under:
(a) In the budget, there are some equipments which are manufactured domestically
have been given duty exemption for examples Excavators, Loaders for road work
and three stage crushers.
(b) For Construction equipment, there is a need for dedicated technical testing
facilities.
(c) There is a need to regulate import of used equipments to ensure emission and
security standards.
In this regard, it is stated that the construction machinery mainly, Excavators, Loaders,
Shotcrete machines, mobile concrete pumps are covered under zero duty though these machines
are manufactured indigenously. The Department has taken up the matter for updation of the import
list of construction machinery as well as appropriate protection of the domestic manufacturers.
Further, the Department is working with Industry to develop a feasibility report for test facilities
for the Sector. Need for such test facilities have also been felt by the Department. Once the Report
is received, the Department will pursue for establishment of dedicated test facility for this sector.
Apart from the above, the Department is pursuing reforms in the Policy regime for import of used
equipment especially for self-propelled mining and construction equipments. In a recent meeting,
CoS has recommended a restricted policy regime, as indicated in Para 16 above. The Department
is in touch with its sister Ministries/Department for early implementation of the recommendations.

6
(iii) Points raised by CII :–
(a) There is a need for rationalization of taxes.
(b) Domestic industry need to attain cost competitiveness vis a vis  global players
before lowering import duty to prevent onslaught on local manufacturers.
The Department has recommended certain measures to address the above issues in the
Working Group Report on Capital Goods and Engineering Sector that has been submitted to the
Planning Commission.
(iv) Points rais ed by ASSOCHAM :–
(a) To link rebate in Income Tax to be paid by the firm if it spends on technology
development.
(b) Capital Goods, particularly those used in infrastructure developments which are
exported outside the country should be brought under the Focus Product Scheme.
Government provides IT reduction for R&D to in-house recognized units. The observation
of the ASSOCHAM to include Capital Goods which are exported outside the country under the
Focus Product Scheme may be considered favourably. The Department would take up the issue
at appropriate forum.
(v) In respect of points raised by IEEMA, comments of Department of Heavy Industry are
as under–
For the rapid development of the domestic electrical equipment industry encompassing the
complete value chain in power generation, transmission and distribution. DHI is in the process of
developing the Indian Electrical Equipment Industry Mission Plan 2012. The Mission plan will law
down as clear roadmap for enhancing the competitiveness of the domestic electrical equipment
sector. At micro level, two issues included here were:–
(a) Imposition of customs duty on imported BTC equipment to provide level playing
field to domestic manufacturers. Government has been taken, however, a formal
notification to this effect is awaited.
(b) Mandatory BIS standards on CRGO Electrical Steel and BQ Steel plates have been
notified and the requirements as well as impediments in their implementation are
being sorted out in consultation with the concerned agencies.
(vi) In respect of the points raised by ACMA and SIAM, comments of Department of
Heavy Industry are as under –
(a) Controlling or de-controlling diesel price is subject matter of Ministry of Petroleum
& Natural Gas.
(b) This Department is of the view not to impose any additional duty on diesel cars
since it would further lead to a slow down in the growth of auto sector in specific
and the industrial growth rate in general which is a cuase of  concern for the
Government.
(c) The views of this Department in respect of Chinese competition on auto
component industry has been conveyed to Department of Commerce for taking up
the matter.
(e) PMO is monitoring the issue of Automotive Skill Development Council (ASDC).
However, SIAM has already set up ASDC.
(f) As regrads issue of power crisis, this is the subject matter of Ministry of Power.

7
CHAPTER-III
The Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee
has either not accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked
the Ministry to review its replies
Recommendations/Observations
1. Notwithstanding the explanation furnished by the Department, the Committee notes with
concern that a project which has immense potential for clean power generation and minimal
environmental impact has been progressing at snails pace since the inking of MoU in the first half
of 2008. The Committee, therefore, recommends that apart from the equity participation of the
Andhra Pradesh Government. The Ministry of Environment & Forest may be approached at the
highest level possible for the clearance of the funding proposal under clean energy fund.
(Para 19)
Action Taken Note
As per advice of Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee (DRPSC) on
Industry, BHEL has taken up the matter with Principal Secretary (Energy), Andhra Pradesh
Government for approaching Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) for early clearance of
the funding proposal for the IGCC project under Clean Energy Fund. BHEL would also follow up
with all concerned on this after receipt of the copy of letter of Andhra Pradesh Government to
Ministry of Environment and Forest (MoEF).
Further Recommendation
The Committee expects that DHI instead of BHEL should have taken up the issue with
appropriate ministries and the State Government at highest level.
7

8
CHAPTER-IV
The Recommendations/observations in respect of which
final replies of the Ministry have not been received
Recommendations/Observations
1. The Committee notes that the Department has been able to secure only 15.68 per cent of
the Plan funds they sought for the year 2012-13. The funds for all major schemes have been
drastically curtailed. The Committee feels that it will be difficult for DHI to implement the schemes
efficiently. Taking into account the efficient utilisation of plan resources by DHI during 2011-12,
the Committee feels that the Department deserves a substantially higher allocation for 2012-13. The
Committee expects that the DHI with its proven record of good work would be able to persuade
and convince the Ministry of Finance to provide more funds at the time when the revised estimates
are finalised. The Committee also strongly recommends for higher allocation of funds for the
Department of Heavy Industry. (Para 6)
Action Taken Note
The suggestion of the Committee has been noted. The plan scheme of the Department for
the Twelfth Five Year Plan have been devised to provide the much needed support to the Machine
tools/Capital Goods Sector, the Automotive Sector and the CPSEs under the Department. Some of
the schemes are in the nature of pre-approved schemes during the previous Plan, which have to
continue in this Plan. Considerable efforts towards modernization, technology up-gradation, revival
of the CPSEs are also integrated in the Plan proposal. Therefore, the proposed allocation is essential
for realization of Plan target and is fully justified. Also efforts will be made to convince the
Planning Commission and Finance Ministry for more funds.
Committee’s observation
The Committee may be informed of the outcome of the Ministry’s efforts with the
Ministry of Finance and the Planning Commission in respect of enhancing the Plan outlay
for the Year 2012-13.
Recommendations/Observations
2. The Committee hopes that a path breaking project like NATRiP which is of great
significance for the automobile sector is completed according to the revised time schedule. It is
sad to note that the project has received only about 45 per cent of the budgetary support sought.
The Committee observes that no stone should be left unturned to complete the project as per the
revised time line of December, 2012. The officials of the DHI informed the Committee that it
would not be possible to complete the project by December, 2012 due to inadequate funds. NATRiP
is a project of national significance and of critical relevance to the automobile sector in India.
Given the fact that India is now emerging as a global hub for the automobile industry, it is
imperative that NATRiP is extended all facilities including the necessary monetary support for its
completion as per the revised schedule. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance
and the Planning Commission must be supportive for this project which has been delayed so long
due to insufficient allocation. Therefore, it is strongly recommended that more funds must be
released for this project. (Para 10)
8

9
Action Taken Note
The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs in April 2011 approved the revised cost estimate
of Rs. 2288.06 crore, in place of original cost estimate of Rs. 1718 crore due to budget escalation
and revised project completion date of 31.12.2012 from the earlier completion date of 30.09.2011.
NATIS, as on date, has received total funds of Rs. 1170.44 crores out of which
Rs.1150.96 crore has been utilized/committed and the balance amount is expected to be spent
shortly. During 2011-12, against a demand of Rs. 1131.85 crore, only a sum of Rs. 355.38 crore
was allocated. For additional funding during 2011-12, the matter was taken up with Department of
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance as well as Planning Commission. However, the additional fund
requirement was not acceded to. During 2012-13 also, as against the projected demand of
Rs. 1104.62 crore (Rs. 1095.13 crore as budgetary support and Rs. 9.49 crore on account of
internal accruals) only an amount of Rs. 488.48 crore has been allocated for NATRiP. As in
the past, the Department would take adequate steps for procuring additional funds for NATRiP in
2012-13 at the appropriate stage i.e. first supplementary stage as well as with the Ministry of
Finance and Planning Commission, so that insufficient funding does not have an adverse impact on
the schedule of the completion of the project.
Committee’s observation
The Committee takes note that of the total original cost of Rs 1718 crore, so far
only Rs. 1150 could be utilised. Yet the Ministry has been seeking steep rise in annual
allocations. The Committee would like to know the reason for such steep rise in demand.
The Committee is also apprehensive over time and cost overrun. The Committee also notes
that NATRiP was conceived as Public Private Partnership project. Whether efforts have been
made to bridge the resource gap by involving private partners?
Recommendations/Observations
3. The Committee is disheartened to note that the capital goods sector is almost handicapped
due to free flow of imported technology. In fact, import dependence is truly worrisome. The
absence of countervailing duties and elevated export duty structure seem to be adding to the vows
of the sector. In this circumstance, the Committee recommends that the Government may look into
re- imposition of countervailing duties on import of plants and machinery and rationalize the excise
duty structure so that the indigenous industrial units are not put in a disadvantageous position
vis-à-vis the foreign players. Technology transfer should be incentivised and programme initiatives
for R&D, joint technology development and acquisition, etc., should be prioritized . (Para 14)
Action Taken Note
Capital Goods Sector has been opened to import freely. Before 1991, the Sector had some
restriction on import of new machinery as well as second hand. Owing to import restriction the
manufacturers earlier forced to manufacture machinery indigenously. The technology collaborations
as well as joint ventures were happening. The technology was transferred in most of the machinery
sector with imposition of phased manufacturing programme to facilitate indigenous development of
critical components. After 1991, due to liberalization policy import of most capital goods, new as
well as used without any age limit, started to take place without any significant technology transfer.
The indigenous manufacture of machinery dried up slowly except large manufacturers who
managed to market their products. Generally, the manufacturers, particularly SMEs could not buy
the technology because of either non availability or high value of technology transfer. Lack of
desired R&D institutions added to the woes of the SME Sector.

10
In the Capital Goods Sectors, some specified machineries relating to power equipment,
mining & construction equipments and textile machinery are exempted from customs duty. Capital
Goods Industry is a capital and technology intensive Sector with a long gestation period.
Technology transfer is necessary for production of hi-tech and energy efficient contemporary
machinery. Working Group on Capital Goods & Engineering Sector set up by Planning Commission
under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Heavy Industry recommended, several measures to address
the above issues such as establishment of Product Development Centres, Industry Specific Cluster
Parks, Common Facility Centres, Technology Transfer/modernisation/capacity expansion through
Interest Rate Subvention, Research & Development through IITs/NITs as well as through DSIR &
CSIR, Skill Development through Capital Goods Skill Council, Duty and Tax Rationalization through
D/o Revenue and Export promotion through EEPC. Department of Heavy Industry has taken up the
issue of taxation policy reforms with Department of Commerce, Department of Revenue and the
other concerned Ministries. Recently in a Meeting of the Committee of Secretaries, held on
23.5.2012, a decision has been taken to impose certain restrictions on import of Second Hand
Capital Goods. The Department is in touch with the Department of Commerce for implementation
of the CoS decision. The Department has also taken up the issue of R&D support to the Capital
Goods Sector with Scientific Ministries.
Committee’s observation
The Committee may be informed of the steps taken by the Government on the
recommendations of the Working Group on Capital Goods and engineering sector of
Planning Commission. Whether adequate budgetary provisions have been made and whether
any policy been notified in this regard.
Recommendations/Observations
4. The Committee noted that with the economic reforms and liberalisation, technology flow
has come down drastically. It is given to understand that the Planning Commission set up a
Committee headed by Mr. Arun Maira to study the situation. The Report of the Arun Maira
Committee recommended for imposition of customs duty to a certain extent. The Department also
inform the Committee that the Minister for Department of Heavy Industry also took up the matter.
The Department was expecting that there would be some budgetary provision to remedy the
situation. However, the unfavourable situation for the capital goods sector continues to haunt the
entire Indian industry. It is tragic that our capacity to manufacture power plants and other capital
goods equipments are not being harnessed due to a liberal import regime with zero custom duty.
(Para 15)
Action Taken Note
The Committee headed by Shri Arun Maira was in favour of imposition of custom duty on
import of power plant equipment in which indigenous capabilities exist and the Department has
supported this viewpoint. The Government has introduced Zero import duty window to large
sectors like construction sector, power sector, mining project etc. Though domestic manufacturers
are capable to meet the local demand in the case of power equipment, yet they are in a
disadvantageous position vis-a-vis  global players because of zero import duty. Production of
domestic manufacturers is subject to excise and other forms of taxation whereas imported
machinery are free of such tax burdens. This is eroding the domestic competence.
The Department has been advocating on various fora for providing a level playing field to
domestic manufacturers against import of machinery with zero duty. Recently, the Cabinet has

11
approved the proposal to levy 5 per cent custom duty + 12% CVD+ 4% SAD on imported power
equipment, thus settling this long pending issue.
Committee’s observation
The Committee would like to know if such measures will raise the cost of power
production and whether domestic manufactures will be able to cater to growing demands of
power equipments particularly in view of greater private sector participation in power
generation.
Recommendations/Observations
5. Further, the Committee strongly recommends that import of second hand goods should be
discouraged to the extent possible, if not banned. HEC, HMT and other national level companies
have to be promoted for the cause of capital goods sector and bigger companies like BHEL should
be made fountainheads of Capital Goods Exports. A level playing field which would entail imposition
of customs duty on the imported technology and favourable duty structure for the indigenous
industry would promote competitiveness among domestic and foreign players. The scheme
Enhancement of Competitiveness in Capital Good Sector was proposed by the Working Group on
Capital Goods and Engineering Sector set up by the Planning Commission. The Committee feels
that adequate measures must be taken to approve the scheme and implement it during the Twelfth
Five Year Plan. The Committee also recommends that maximum budgetary support must be
provided for this purpose. (Para 16)
Action Taken Note
The Department of Heavy Industry is in agreement with the proposal of restricting import
of second hand capital goods. The Department has been taking up the issue of restriction of import
of second hand capital goods with the concerned Ministries/Departments. The similar view was
taken by the Department in the Committee of Secretaries (CoS) meeting dated 23.05.2012 on the
issue of promotion of domestic capital goods industry which imposed the following restrictions on
import of second hand capital goods:
(a) Import of second hand capital goods may be totally prohibited in schemes with explicit
or implicit subsidy, such as TUFS (Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme), EPCG
(Export Promotion Capital Goods Scheme), CLCSS (Credit Linked Capital Subsidy
Scheme).
(b) The second hand capital goods may be valued at 75 per cent of their original value.
This valuation will be for the purpose of determining import duty and not for any other
purpose, unless otherwise specified.
(c) Import of machinery more than five years old may not be allowed unless a different
maximum age is specified by DoC, in consultation with concerned Ministry/
Department and NMCC, keeping in view its sectoral requirement.
(d) NMCC may separately examine the impact of FTAs on domestic industries and
thereafter inter-ministerial consultations on its findings may be undertaken.
(e) NMCC may examine the issue of accurate and reliable data collection in respect of
import of second hand capital goods and suggest a suitable mechanism therefor.
Department is also pursuing with the Planning Commission for approval of a Scheme on
enhancement of competitiveness of the Capital Goods Sector. The consideration of the Scheme,

12
proposed during the Eleventh Plan was deferred to the Twelfth Plan period. The present Scheme
proposed has an outlay of Rs. 2360 crore. The Scheme envisages, inter alia , establishment of
Product Development Centres, Interest rate subvention and Common Facility Centres & Sector
specific parks for Capital Goods Sector. The DHI is also pursuing proposal based support for the
capital goods sector from other Ministries concerning R&D, export promotion, industrial
infrastructural development etc.
Committee’s observation
The Committee would like to know whether the restrictions imposed on the import
of second hand Capital Goods have been accepted by the Government and notified
accordingly. Also, how does DHI propose to proceed on the various other components of the
decision taken by the Committee of Secretaries. Whether NMCC (National Manufacturing
Competitiveness Council) has given its views in this regard and on the impact of FTAs (Free
Trade Agreement) on the domestic industries .
Recommendations/Observations
6. The Committee would like to have detailed explanation in this regard.
(Para 22)
Action Taken Note
A revised proposal for revival of Scooters India Limited (SIL) on its own is under
consideration for obtaining approval of Cabinet. The revised proposal of SIL, prepared on the basis
of joint study undertaken by Automotive Research Association of India (ARAI), Pune with
M/s Scooters India Limited, Lucknow is for exploring the possibilities of revival of the company
on its own. The company through revised revival proposal addressing all possible key areas
including HR, production and technology is expected to achieve the revival targets for sustainability,
growth and profitability of SIL. Accordingly, a draft Cabinet Note with the approval of Hon’ble
Minister (HI&PE) has been circulated on 16.07.2012 to all the concerned Ministries/Departments
for seeking comments.
Committee’s observation
The Committee would like to know whether Scooters India Limited proposes to revive itself
‘on its own’. Also, whether such revival entails clearing of present liabilities through budgetary
provisions.
Recommendations/Observations
7. The Committee views that the allocation and utilization of funds for VRS of CPSEs during
the Eleventh Plan is not satisfactory. Only Instrument Ltd, Kota (ILK) looks to have utilized their
funds completely. Large amounts of funds have been allocated to HPF, BSCL & BBUNL over the
years but their utilization is shown to be ‘nil’, which is not at all encouraging. This scenario either
brings out the lacunae plaguing the implementation of VRS. (Para 24)
Action Taken Note
In this regard, it is mentioned that HPF and BBUNL have utilized their allocated funds for
VRS during Eleventh Plan. However, BSCL have an unspent balance of Rs. 17.86 lakhs out of their

13
allocated fund of Rs. 13.15 crore. As BSCL has since been transferred to Ministry of Railways,
this fact has been taken up with them for resolution.
Committee’s observation
The Committee notes that it has been for too long that the VRS liabilities are being
settled under lumpsum allocation, is being shown as ‘loan’ to the PSUs. The Committee
would like to know PSUs wise the number of VRS cases settled so far. The Committee may
be informed whether the VRS dues of the employees of BSCL have been settled and what
was the response of the Ministry of Railways and the BSCL regarding continued delay in
settling the VRS dues.
Recommendations/Observations
9. The HEC, has shown excellent results and made good turn around due to leadership
qualities of the person who headed it. It is understood that the HEC sold its surplus assets to the
Government of Jharkhand. However, the HEC has not so far received the payment from the State
Government. It is rather troubling to note that due to non-payment of money by the Jharkhand
Government, the HEC is not able to get the worth of the surplus assets sold to the Jharkhand
Government. It is recommended that the DHI may intervene in this matter to sort the problem out.
(Para 29)
Action Taken Note
The revival package for HEC approved by the Government in September, 2008, included,
inter-alia , transfer of 17 buildings, 1155 residential quarters and 2342 acres of land to the
Government of Jharkhand in lieu of waiver of dues and payment of Rs. 275.51 crore. While the
buildings, residential quarters and 1987.67 acres of land (including 85 acres of appurtenant land to
the buildings) have been transferred to the State Government, the transfer of remaining 354.33
acres of land has not been accepted by the State Government as the same has been found to be
under encroachment. The State Government has released an amount of Rs. 164.21 crore to HEC
and the release of the remaining amount of Rs. 111.30 crore has been linked with the handing over
of the 354.33 acres of land after removal of encroachments. With the part implementation of the
revival package, the performance of HEC has substantially improved and the Company has been
making profits during the last six years but it has not been able to take up the Capax projects
envisaged in the revival package for want of funds. Immediate upgradation of plant and machinery
as well as technology is necessary to ensure optimum capacity utilization of HEC. HEC had filed
an application in the High Court of Jharkhand in PIL No.1783/2011 stating, inter-alia, that removal
of encroachments from 354.33 acres of land earmarked for transfer to the Government of
Jharkhand under the revival package was not possible for the HEC in view of law and order
problems and that the State Government may carry out the eviction after taking over the land and
the High Court directed the State Government and HEC to sit together to settle the issue. HEC is
pursuing the matter with the Government of Jharkhand. DHI has also requested the State
Government to accept transfer of the afore-mentioned 354.33 acres of land without insisting upon
removal of encroachment by HEC and release the withheld amount of Rs. 111.30 crore at the
earliest so that the Company could start the Capax projects without further delay and the revival
process is not hampered.
Committee’s observation
The Committee may be appraised to further development on the issue and also the
possible alternatives in case issue remains unresolved for longer period.

14
Recommendations/Observations
10. The problems faced by CCI appear to be same as that of the HEC. The delay in sale
proceeds of non-operating units and the resultant dry up of funds seem to have held up the
projects of the Company. Similar to HEC, the Committee recommends that Department of Heavy
Industry should immediately initiate measures for appropriate intervention and help the CCI to
secure the funds due to them. (Para 30)
Action Taken Note
Sanctioned Scheme duly approved by the Hon’ble BIFR envisaged the capacity expansion of
25 per cent capacity of Rajban, 100  per cent capacity expansion along with two split Grinding Units
of Bokajan and technical upgradation of Tandur unit partly from funds provided by Government of
India (Rs. 30.67 crores) and partly from sale proceeds of seven non-operating units of CCI but due
to some Court cases by various unions, the sale proceeds of the non-operating units got delayed.
As envisaged in the Sanctioned Scheme, CCI has started implementation of the sanctioned
project schemes by utilising the plan support as well as its own internally generated fund. For
speedy completion of the above sanctioned scheme, sale of seven non-operating units through Asset
Sale Committee (ASC) is in process.
As per the decision of the Assets Sale Committee (ASC) taken in its meeting held on
7.12.2010 to restart the sale process in respect of the closed units through e-auction, tender for
appointment of e-auctioneer was floated on 18.1.2011. It was opened on 28.4.2011 but before the
appointment of e-auctioneer could be finalised, ASC was reconstituted by the BIFR on 19.9.2011.
The reconstituted ASC, at its meeting held on 23.10.2011, decided to float fresh tender for
appointment of e-auctioneer. The e-auctioneer and IT auditor have since been appointed through
tendering process. The ASC had also appointed four valuers, also through tendering process, for
valuation of assets of the closed units. However, the valuation reports submitted by them were not
found in order and therefore, not accepted by the ASC. Therefore, fresh tender for appointment
of the valuers has been issued in May, 2012. After appointment of the valuers, they will be asked
to do the valuation of the assets of the closed units and submit their reports in a time-bound
manner. On the basis of valuation of the assets, reserve prices will be fixed and the sale through
e-auction will be started.
Committee’s observation
The Committee expresses its serious reservation over procedural delay which may
have crippling impact over revival prospects of the PSU. The Committee is of the view of
the revival package should have a time schedule, without which the cost of revival may
escalate due to accumulating liabilities. The Committee would like to know whether the cost
of revival has risen ever since the approval by BIFR? And whether Government’s
component of the revival package has been utilised. If yes, whether the CCI could be
revived efficiently even without ploughing in the sale proceeds of its seven units.
Recommendations/Observations
11. The Committee strongly feels that such waiver of duty on import would harm the domestic
investment and players in this field. The Government has to take this into serious consideration in
the request of domestic manufacturers. (Para 38)
Action Taken Note
The issue of restricting second hand Capital Goods which includes construction and mining

15
equipments has already been taken up by the Department. Machineries like Excavators, Loaders,
Shotcrete machines, mobile concrete pumps are manufactured indigenously though these are
covered under zero duty. The issue concerning waiver of import duty in respect of equipments
manufactured locally is being processed for taking up with the concerned authorities. For skills
development, the Department has initiated steps to set up a Capital Goods Skill Council, with
National Skill Development Corporation, in which FICCI has a role.
Committee’s observation
The Committee would like to be appraised of views of the concerned authorities/
ministries/industry in respect of imposing duty on the import of capital goods including
construction and mining equipments.

MINUTES

XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 19 th March, 2013 in Committee Room A,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Tiruchi Siva — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ashk Ali Tak
3. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu
4. Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor
5. Shri Basawaraj Patil
6. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
7. Shri Vivek Gupta
8. Shri M.P. Achuthan
LOK SABHA
9. Shrimati Poonamben Veljibhai Jat
10. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal
11. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey
12. Shri Jayaram Pangi
13. Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat
14. Shri Ijyaraj Singh
15. Shri E. G. Sugavanam
SECRETARIAT
Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Roshan Lal, Deputy Director
Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members and briefed them that
the agenda for the meeting was to consider and adopt the 236
th ATR pertaining to the Department
of Public Enterprises on MoU performance, 239 th ATR on the Credit Facilities to MSME sector
pertaining to Ministry of MS&ME, 238 th, 240 th and 241 st ATRs pertaining to the Department of
Heavy Industry, Ministry of MS&ME and Department of Public Enterprises, respectively, on their
respective Demands for Grants (2012-13).
19

20
2. Thereafter, the Committee took up the Reports for consideration. After some deliberation,
the Committee unanimously adopted all the Draft Reports.
3. Afterwards, the Committee decided to present/lay five of its reports i.e., the 236 th ATR
pertaining to the Department of Public Enterprises on MoU performance, 239 th ATR on the Credit
Facilities to MSME sector pertaining to Ministry of MS&ME, 238 th 240 th and 241 st ATRs pertaining
to the Department of Heavy Industry, Ministry of MS&ME and Department of Public Enterprises,
respectively on 21
st March, 2013 in both the Houses of Parliament. The Committee authorized its
Chairman, and in his absence, Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu, Member, Rajya Sabha, and in absence
of both Shri M.P. Achuthan, Member, Rajya Sabha to present the 236
th, 238 th, 239 th, 240 th and 241 at
Reports in the Rajya Sabha. The Committee also authorized Shri Ijyaraj Singh, Member, Lok Sabha
and in his absence Shrimati Poonamben Veljibhai Jat, Member, Lok Sabha to lay copies of the same
Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
The meeting adjourned at 3.58 
P.M.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.