160th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/160threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INDUSTRY
 ONE HUNDRED SIXTIETH REPORT
ON
TAX PROPOSALS AFFECTING THE VARIOUS SEGMENTS OF INDUSTRIES
(MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES)
AND
(MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES)
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 26TH APRIL, 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 26TH APRIL, 2005)
E-mail:rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
MAY,  2005/VAISAKHA, 1927 (SAKA)
                                                                                    CONTENTS                                                             
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2. INTRODUCTION
3. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
4. OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A
GLANCE
5. MINUTES
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
   1.  Shri Santosh Bagrodia         –---       Chairman
        RAJYA  SABHA
   2.  Prof M.M. Agarwal
   3.  Shri Surendra Lath
   4.  Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
   5.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
   6.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   7.  Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
   8.  Dr. Vijay Mallya
   9.  Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
10.  Shrimati Vanga Geetha
        LOK  SABHA
11.  Shri Guharam Ajgalle
12.  Shri Kailash Baitha
13.  Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
14.  Shri Subhash Deshmukh

160th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/160threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
15.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
16.  Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria
17.  Shri Sunil Khan
18.  Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato
19.  Shri Prakash Paranjpe
20.  Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel
21.  Shri Rajnarayan
22.  Shri Bagida Ramakrishna
23.  Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
24.  Shrimati Rubab Sayeda
25.  Shri Rana Gurjeet Singh
26.  Shri Manvendra Singh
27.  Shri Ganesh Singh
28.  Shri Suraj Singh
29.  Shri Chandramani Tripathi
30.  Shri Girdhari Yadav
31.  Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
        SECRETARIAT
        Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
        Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
        Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
        Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
         I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having been authorised
by the Committee, hereby present this One Hundred Sixtieth Report on Tax proposals affecting the various segments of
Industries.
2.      The Committee in its meeting held on 28th March, 2005 interacted with the representatives of Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises, Ministry of SSI and SSI Associations like PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry,
FISME, Laghu Udyog Bharti, Indian Plasticizers Manufactures Association (IPMA), Federation of Association of SSI
of India (FASSII), Indian Council of Small Industries (ICSI), Federation of Tiny and Small Industries of India (FTSII),
Indian Paint and Coating Association (IPCA) etc. on the Demands for Grants (2005-06) pertaining to the Ministries of
SSI, ARI and Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises and the impact of Budget proposals affecting the industries. The
Committee in its meeting held on 29th March, 2005 also interacted with the representatives of SIAM, ACMA, ARAI on
the issue of the concerns of auto sector regarding tax proposals in the Budget. After considering the grievances of the
SSI Associations and the representatives of the auto sector and the views of the respective Ministries, the Committee
decided to interact with the Secretary, the Department of Revenue and the Chairman, CBEC in the presence of the SSI
Associations and the representatives of the auto sector to have clarifications regarding the Tax proposal across the
board.
3.      The Committee, therefore, as the fallout of its budgetary exercise for the year        2005-06, interacted on the 12
th
April, 2005 with the representatives of various organizations in the presence of Secretary, Department of Revenue and
Chairman, Central Board for Custom and Excise on the issue of Tax proposals affecting various     segments of
industries. After the detailed discussion, the Committee decided to present a separate Report on “Tax proposals
affecting the various segments of Industries”, addressing various issues brought out by the industrial associations before
the Committee for their redressal.
4.      The Committee in its meeting held on 21st April, 2005 considered and adopted the Report.
SANTOSH BAGRODIA
NEW DELHI ;                                                                                                                                       Chairman,
21
st April, 2005                                                                                            Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry.
REPORT

160th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/160threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
CHAPTER -I
Balancing the Industry-Friendly Tax Regime and Consolidation of Fiscal
Measure for Revenue-Generation
l.1     It is a well known fact that industrial sector play the pivotal role in the development and growth of the economy. It
also plays the paramount role in balanced regional economic development of the nation. In order to downplay the
pressure; occupational structure on the land/agricultural sector, industrial sector has to be promoted and proliferated.
Investment has to be made in the industrial sector as new avenues for employment- generation and liberation from the
curse of poverty. The industrial sector, at present, needs the guided direction and assistance of the Government.
1.2    The Committee on Industry in its meeting held on l2th April, 2005 was apprised by the Department of Revenue
that the Fiscal Responsibility and Budgetary Management (FRBM) Act, 2003 (as amended) requires the revenue deficit
to be eliminated by 2007-08. A road map of reduction in revenue deficit has already been notified under the FRBM
Rules, 2004.
1.3    The Secretary, Department of Revenue informal that the indirect taxes have already been moderated through a
calibrated reduction in customs and excise duties. As regards customs duty, the peak rate on non-agricultural goods has
already been lowered, in this year’s budget 2005-06 to only 15 per cent. In fact, the Government is already committed to
a gradual reducing customs duties to ASEAN levels. In case of excise duty, the stated policy is that most manufactured
goods should attract the Cenvat rate of 16 per cent.
1.4    Under the circumstances, while it would be essential to keep the tax rates stable so as to be conducive to growth,
compliance and investment, it is also necessary for the Government to consider measures to raise tax revenues and the
tax-GDP ratio so as to meet the ever-growing Government expenditure and to meet the FRBM targets.
1.5    The Committee was further informed that the Government is making efforts to augment the tax resources through
various measures which have not resulted in substantially increasing the revenue, which paints a pessimistic picture on
the Tax-GDP ratio. Therefore, the Government is making earnest efforts in order to achieve higher Tax-­GDP Ratio.
Thus the Department of Revenue faces a severe limitation while considering any recommendation for reduction or
exemption from customs or excise duties or Service Tax.
1.6    During the course of interaction the Secretary, Department of Revenue apprised the Committee of the budgeting
procedure indicating the wide consultation with the representatives of various segment of industries. He indicated that
the Department interacted with the 78 industrial associations and after mutual consultation the provisions of the budget
have been drafted.
1.7    The Secretary, Department of Revenue also apprised the Committee that Parliament has instructed very tight fiscal
revenue deficit limits. The Parliament has passed the Fiscal Responsibility and the Budget Management Act under
which the revenue deficit has to be eliminated by 2007-08, and it must come down by 0.5 per cent of GDP every year.
Likewise, the fiscal deficit under section 4.1 of the Fiscal Responsibility and the Budget Management Act has come
down by 0.3 per cent of GDP every year.
1.8    The Secretary, Department of Revenue quoted a portion of Finance Minister Budget speech as under :­
         “Mr. Speaker, Sir, in the Budget Estimates from 2005-06, the total expenditure is estimated at Rs.514,344 crore
revenue receipts of the Central Government at Rs.351,200 crore and the revenue expenditure at Rs.446,512 crore.
Consequently, the revenue deficit is estimated at Rs.95,312 crore which is equal to 2.7 per cent of the estimated GDP.
The fiscal deficit is estimated at Rs.l5l,144 crore, which is 4.3 per cent of the estimated GDP.
         Consequent to accepting the recommendations of the Twelfth Finance Commission and the drastically changed
pattern of devolution and funding, there has been a considerable strain in making the Budget for 2005-06. I was left with
no option but to press the pause button vis-a-vis the FRBM Act. I am relieved that we have not been forced to go in the
opposite direction. I may add that we are perilously close to the limits of fiscal prudence and there is no more room for
spending beyond our limits.”
1.9    The Secretary, Department of Revenue further stated as under :­
         “There are very high priority objectives in the National Common Minimum Programme on which the expenditure
has to be incurred, and simultaneously, devolution to the States has also got to go up because of the Twelfth Finance
Commission almost by Rs.25,000 crores this year. There is a substantial increase in the demands on the revenue

160th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/160threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
Department. The Revenue receipts which were in the Revised Estimates at Rs.3,06,000 crores, for this year, we have to
earn more than Rs.3,50,000 crores in 2005-06, a huge increase.”
1.10  The Committee understands that the Small Scale Industries is today on the move world wide, therefore, Small
Scale Industries in India should be given top -priority by the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance not only
in plan -allocation, so that small scale units may get adequate space for maturing into medium enterprises, but also tax
exemption and concession for catching up the global trend . The Department of Revenue should provide the logistic
support to the SSI sector so far the tax concession is concerned. The Small Scale Industries needs to be strengthened to
remain competitive in market-led global economy and also for the reason for generating the additional employment
opportunities. The Government should assist the SSI sector in accessing (or provide) proper and timely inputs like
adequate credit from financial institutions/banks; funds for technology upgradation and modernization; adequate
infrastructural facilities; modern testing facilities and quality certification laboratories; modern management practices
and skill upgradation through suitable training facilities; marketing assistance; and level playing field at par with the
large industries sector.
l.11   The Committee understands the daunting task of revenue - collection. The Committee also understands that
revenue-collection is indispensable in order to shoulder the responsibility endowed with the Government but at the same
time the Committee wishes to point out that the Department of Revenue should follow the principle of equity in the
matter of distribution of tax burden in line with horizontal and vertical equity i.e. tax payer with equal ability, in like
circumstances should contribute equally and tax payer with unequal capacity, i.e. unlike circumstances should
contribute correspondingly differently. In this context the Committee is of the view that the Department of Revenue
should examine the issues of tax proposals keeping in view the taxable capacity of the various segments of industry in
ordinary and extra ordinary circumstances i.e. the stages of the Industrial Development in general and their needs for
protection in the domestic field and promotion in the international market arena. Imposition of the taxes or their
exemptions / concessions should be guided by the principle of efficiency of the producers keeping in view all   
domestic and international factors. It is desirable that the Department of Revenue should not bank on the principle and
practice of “plucking the goose despite squealing all around”, paying little attention to the logistics of “sparing the goose
in order to bask the golden eggs.”
l.12   The Economic Reforms in India encompassing structural reforms with components of liberlisation, privatization
and globalization has exposed the domestic industries to global industrial giants/MNCs, without having been given an
opportunity for consolidation of domestic industries. The PSEs of Nehru-Mahalois Era has thrived and grown under
protective regime where inter-sectoral co-operation reigned to a large extent and purchase preference policy were the
protective pillars of PSUs.
1.13  Even under the prevailing WTO regime countries like USA, China, Japan, Germany determine the economic
policy keeping in view the strength of the local industries and there competitive resileince to face the challanges of the
global competition, and these developed countries never forget to protect their domestic industries in the sector/field
where their products cannot compete with the products of other countries including India for example iron and steel
products. These countries impose anti-dumping measure and adopt/adhere to the other fiscal measures to discourage
Indian products with the motive to encourage/protect/promote there domestic industries. Such selective measure
adopted by developed nations goes against the interest of industries in the developing countries like India where on
practical plane there is enhanced need for protecting the domestic industries more than that of the developed nations as
the responsibility for developmental activities lies more with the Government of developing nations than the developed
one. That is so because the Governments in the developing nations has to overcome the mammoth problem of poverty,
population explosion and unemployment. Under the circumstances, a developing nation like India, the Government has
the added responsibility to protect, promote and consolidate the domestic industries from the onslaught of MNCs
unleashed due to on going liberalisation and globalisation process in the post WTO - regime. Indian domestic industries
must be strengthened and consolidated before their global exposure. Need is to imbibe competitive resilience into the
Indian industries of various segments.
1.14  The Committee understands that the tempest of globalisation would also gallop the Temple of Modern India unless
and until level playing field is provided to the domestic industry. Therefore, the Committee is of the strong view that the
architect of Modern India should not forget to have the protected layer of extending certain tax concessions/exemptions
to protect against the onslaught of Faustian MNCs.
CHAPTER -II
TAX  PROPSALS  AFFECTING  SSI  SECTOR

160th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/160threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
2.1    The Committee was apprised that the prevailing pattern of tax structure, including the announcements made by the
Finance Minister in the Budget Speech has bearing on the promotion of Small Enterprises Sector: ­
(i)     General SSI excise exemption upto Rs. 1 crore on the first clearances of specified goods during the year, for
SSI units. Units availing of this exemption are not entitled to take CENVAT credit on the inputs or utilize the
CENVAT credit on capital goods.
(ii)     Excise exemption on branded goods manufactured by SSI units located in rural areas.
(iii)    Tax holiday under the Income Tax Act for new and existing enterprises including SSI enterprises in the
States of Himachal Pradesh, Sikkim, Uttaranchal and North Eastern States and also the enterprises which go
for substantial expansion, i.e., increase in investment in plant and machinery by at least 50 per cent of their
book value.
(iv)    Small service providers having gross annual turnover less than Rs. 4 lakh have been exempted from the
purview of Service Tax.
(v)    Service Tax on business auxiliary service has been exempted for persons producing/ processing goods, from
the inputs received from a manufacturer and sending the resultant product to the same manufacturer for
further manufacture of final products, which are cleared on payment of excise duty.
(vi)    In order to revive the manufacturing sector, particularly small and medium enterprises and to enable them to
adjust to the competitive pressure caused by the liberalisation and modernization of tariff rates, a new scheme
called Manufacturing Competitive Programme to be launched to strengthen operations and sharpen
competitiveness. The design of the scheme will be worked out by the National Manufacturing
Competitiveness Council.
(vii)   Peak rate of customs duty for non-agricultural products reduced from 20% to 15%.
(viii)  The customs duty on selected capital goods and parts reduced to 10% in some cases and to 5% in some
others.
(ix)    Customs duty on seven specified machinery for leather and footwear industry reduced from 20% to 5%.
(x)    Customs duty on nine specified machinery used in pharmaceutical and biotechnology sector reduced from
20% to 5%.
(xi)    For primary and secondary metals, customs duty reduced from 15% to 10%.
(xii)   Industrial raw materials such as catalysts, refractory raw materials, basic plastic materials, molasses and
industrial ethyl alcohol ----- key inputs to manufacture, will have reduced customs duty of 10%. On lead,
customs duty is reduced to 10%.
(xiii)  Customs duty on coking coal is reduced from 15% to 5%.
(xiv)  4% Countervailing Duty (CVD) imposed on the imports of Information Technology Agreement (ITA) bound
items and their inputs that attract ‘nil’ duty.
(xv)   Excise duty reduced from 16% to 8% on imitation jewellery.
(xvi)  8% excise duty imposed on mosaic tiles.
(xvii)Surcharge of Re.1 per kg on tea abolished.
(xviii) Excise duty of Re.1 per kg on refined edible oils and Rs. 1.25 per kg on Vanaspati withdrawn.
(xix)  Excise duty reduced from 16% to 12% on matches made in mechanized and semi-mechanised sectors.
(xx)   Excise duty on iron and steel restored to the normal level of 16%.
(xxi)  An Advisory Committee to be set up to advise the Government on the extent of abatement for excise duty
and Service Tax.
2.2    The Committee welcomes the move for setting up of Advisory Committee to advise the Government on the extent
of abatement of excise duty and Service Tax. However, the Committee desires that the Advisory Committee must have

160th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/160threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
the representatives from various sections of economy including various segments of industry as well as Federations/
Associations from Industries so that any conclusion could be drawn only after consultation and mutual understanding in
the general interest of the industry.
2.3    The Committee received and considered Memoranda from various Associations/Organizations/ Entrepreneurs, and
after receiving the comments of Department of Revenue interacted with the Secretary, Department of Revenue,
Chairman, CBEC on 12 th April, 2005 in the presence of SSI Associations on the issues of Indirect Taxes affecting the
SSI units. The views Associations/organizations /entrepreneurs who participated in the discussion and
recommendations/observations of the committee, wherever necessary are stated below :­
THE INDIAN COTTON MILLS FEDERATION
2.4    The Federation emphasized the need for revisiting excise duty structure proposed for Polyester Staple Fibre (PSF)
falling under Chapter Heading 55.03 and Viscose Staple Fibre (VSF) falling under Chapter Heading 55.04 of Central
Excise Tariffs.
2.5    The excise duty on synthetic & artificial staple fibres falling under Chapter Headings 55.03 & 55.04 of Central
Excise Tariff have not been addressed fully and all such fibres attract excise duty @ 16% ad-valorem.
2.6    The Finance Minister in his address to the Members of the Federation on 5 th August 2004 while releasing the
Vision Statement 2010 on textile industry had stated as under: “Finally, we must give a fillip to man-made fibre because
that is the fibre of the poor man, in the long run the poor stands to gain through man-made fibre and garments made out
of man-made fibre. Today, as a result of Historical baggage, the poor buy cotton and rich wear polyester. In fact, it
should be the other way round. Therefore, a great deal of change is required to take place in this industry.”
2.7    Polyester staple fibre and viscose staple fibre are used in the same manner as cotton is being used for making spun
yarns, the production facilities and machines are known as “cotton spinning machines” and it is the choice of the
manufacturer to use any raw materials like cotton or man-made fibres or blands thereof. Thus, man made staple fibres
can be equated with the cotton fibre.
2.8    The rationalization of excise duties on man-made fibres like PSF and VSF would result in the reduction in cost of
production, higher employment generation: revenue neutrality in the mid-term and increase in the revenue in the long
term and large investments in the sector.
2.9    The Committee, therefore, urges upon the Government that the excise duty on synthetic and artificial staple fibres
under Chapter Heading 55.03& 55.04 of Central Excise Tariff may be reduced to 8 per cent in this Budget itself.
ELIN ELECTRONICS LIMITED
2.10  The representatives of Association suggested for reducing excise duty on electronics components and consumable
from 16% to 8%. It was stated that excise duty on electronic components and consumable is presently very high at the
maximum of 16% due to which electronic components manufacturers are finding it difficult to compete with the
imported goods particularly under invoiced goods. Because of high excise duty and anomalous tax structure the grey
market is increasing rapidly and as such the local components industry is on the anvil of death bed. Moreover due to
increase in grey market the Government is also loosing revenue because of less collection in custom duties.
2.11  The Committee understands that the market of consumer electronics is rapidly growing. The electronic
components are the input products and back bone of electronic consumer products. Even then no growth is coming in
the manufacture of electronic components because it cannot compete with the rapidly growing grey market due to
highest rate of excise duty @ 16%. The Committee, therefore, feels that the excise duty may be reduce to 8% for all
locally manufactured etectronics products and in puts.
INDIAN PLASTICIZERS MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION
2.12  The Association wanted redressal of anomaly which is driving the manufacturers of plasticizers in the SSI to
extinction. Phthalate Plasticizers namely Di-Butyl-Phthalate (DOP) and Di-Butyl -Phthalate (DBP) are reserved items to
be produced only in Small Scale Industry and cannot be produced by medium or large-scale units. However since the
items are in OGL for import, it can be freely imported from any country by large/multinational manufacturers. Abroad
the product is manufactured by large integrated plants producing basic raw materials to D.O.P/D.B.P. themselves.
2.13  The quality of Indian plasticizers meets the International and Indian Standards and is in no way inferior to
overseas manufacturers. India does not produce enough basic raw material oxo alcohols (Octanol/2 EHA/Iso
Nonanol/Butanol) for the manufcture of Phthalate Plasticizers and dependence on imported raw material is abundant
and inevitable.
2.14  The Committee wishes to point out an accepted policy of the Government that the import duty on the raw

160th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/160threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
materials has got to be lower than the duty on the finished products. Even in the world-class plants like Reliance, IPCL,
GAIL, Haldia, Finolex etc. the duty differential between the raw material and the end product is maintained.
2.15  In accordance with the announced policies of the Government at least at par with the Large Scale Sector, which
are at present, being rather penalized:­----
(a)   Allow the import of DOP (HS Code 29173920 & 29173200) DBP (HS Code 19173910 & 29173100) only
from the Exporters who qualify the Indian norms of SSI Units.
AND/OR
(b)   Restore fair competition by subjecting DOP and DBP to a higher rate of customs duty in cases where the
exporters do not qualify as SSI units as per Indian Regulations. Such imports may be subjected to duty at the
bound rate of 40%. It is submitted that such a course of action will be compatible with the WTO Article III on
national treatment.
(c)   Provide a 10 per cent duty differential between raw material to end products. the custom duty on its Raw
Material (HS Code), Octanol/2 Ethyl Hexannol (29051600&29051620, Butanol (Iso/Normal?mixed)
29051300& 29051400, Iso Nonanol/Other (29051900), Phthalic Anhydride (29173500)
DCW Ltd. (INDIAN POLYMAR MANUFACTURERS)
2.16  Issue:- The representative of the Industry stated that while the import duty on Vinyl Chloride Monomer (VCM)
has been reduced by 5% (from 10% to 5%), there has been a corresponding reduction in the import duty of the finished
product PVC (from 15% to 10%) as well, thereby negating advantage to the industry. The import duty deferential has
thus remained unchanged at 5%. (10% Import duty on PVC-5% Import duty on VCM) in the current budget for the year
2005-06. The basic customs duty on feedstock (e.g. VCM) in the neighbouring ASEAN countries ranges from 0% to 5%
whilst the basic custom duty on the finished product (e.g. PVC) ranges from 15% to 20%, to encourage value addition
and to protect domestic industry in their countries. Thus the duty differential between finished product and feedstock
ranges from 12% to 20% in these ASEAN countries as against only 5% in our country.
2. 17The Department of Revenue contended the view that the measures undertaken by the Department of Revenue will
make the Indian Polymer manufacturers at par with the ASEAN neighbours as duty differential between finished
product and feedstock ranges from 12% to 20% in the ASEAN countries as against only 5 per cent in our country.
2.18  The Committee is an agreement with the argument of the representative of the industries that the present duty
differential of 5% between the finished product (PVC) and feedstock (VCM) is insufficient to cover even the variable
costs and is therefore not only detrimental to the growth of the industry but also threatening its very viability. Therefore,
The Committee desires that the Department of Revenue should reconsider to reduce the import duty on VCM to 0%
from the current level of 5% and roll back the import duty on finished product PVC resin to the earlier level of 15%.
TAMIL NADU SMALL AND TINY INDUSTRIES ASSOCIATION
2.19  The Association emphasised the need for rescheduling of the launch advance to units, which have lost their assets,
machinery, raw materials and building and advised for a moratorium for twelve months for the SSI units which got
affected due to devastating Tsunami. The Association also stressed the need for formulation of Small Scale Policy and
Introduction of Small and Medium Enterprises Development Bill, 2005. The Association suggested under mentioned tax
reform:­
(i)    Increase the excise exemption limit from the present Rs.1 crore to Rs.2 crore.
(ii)    Increase in the excise duty on steel items from 12% to 16% should be given up.
(iii)   Excise Notification No. 92003-CE should be restored to enable the SSI units to have concessional excise
duty of 60 per cent of the normal rate with CENVAT Credit.
(iv)   SSI Units has to file a declaration with Excise Department if their turn over limit crosses Rs./ 40 lakhs as per
the Notification No. 14/2005-CE-It should be rolled back to the old level of Rs. 90 lakhs.
(v)   Levy of withdrawal tax on all withdrawals from commercial banks of Rs. 10,000 and above-It should be
dropped.
(vi)   The Service Tax is on the service extended by either individual or unit to others. But the ownership of the
unit is taken into account for differential treatment including exemption. This anomaly should be rectified by,
(a)   removing the nature of ownership of the service provider.
(b)   allowing the exemption limit for the SSI units on the levy of Service Tax to be raised from the announced

160th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/160threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
Rs. 4 lakhs. This may be fixed at Rs. 25 lakhs.
(vii)  Restoration of depreciation rates to the existing level.
INDIAN COUNCIL OF SMALL INDUSTRIES
2.20  The Indian Council of Small Industries were of the opinion that the basic questions regarding Tiny and Small
Scale Industries Sector have not been addressed. They presented their views which are enumerated as follows:
(i)     the Central excise limit should be raised to Rs.2 or 3 crore.
(ii)     SSI and Tiny Sectors should be redefined.
(iii)    The announcement of CBEC to bring the units undertaking marginal value addition activities “not
amounting to manufacture” in terms of the excise law have been brought under the Service Tax would
adversely affect the Tiny units, which covers the majority of the VSI population, should be encouraged to
grow into full scale manufacturing operation instead of being considered as Service provider.
(iv)    Liberalisation of tax provision in respect of partnership firms would be helpful to SSIs and small service
enterprises as well as enactment of the Limited Liability Partnership Act.
(v)    SSIs converting themselves into companies should be given one time exemption from capital gains tax.
(vi)    Introduction of standard deduction of 20% of gross income as an exclusive incentive for SSI entrepreneurs it
will increase the tax base.
(vii)   Introduction of Risk Insurance is a must thereby the element of perception of risk is a concern not only for
bankers but also for the entrepreneurs.
(viii)  increase in the excise duty of steel items 10% to 16% be abandoned.
(ix)    The Duty Entitlement Pass Book provides most realistic compensation of levies to the exporters among other
schemes. The scheme is simple, transparent and time saving and enable the exporters to avail the bebefits
faster than the Draw Back Scheme.
(x)    Excise Duty in the case of Mosaic Tiles should be slashed to 5% since large cluster of SSI sector are engaged
in various States in manufacturing Mosaic Tiles.
(xi)    Excise duty should be slashed down to 1% to branded article of jewellery since this is employment oriented
and both men and women are engaged in it.
(xii)   Service Tax should be exempted for non-profit making Small Industries.
(xiii)  Service Tax exemption for packaging service as it is mostly in the unorganised  sector and undertaken by
unemployed youth and women.
(xiv)  Mailing service should be also exempted from service since this job is undertaken by educated unemployed
youth and women.
(xv)   Total exemption of Service Tax to the clinical tests for treatment under the advice of doctors should be
given.
2.21  PHD CHAMBER OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY
(i)     The constitution of an Advisory Committee on abatement of the excise duty and Service Tax is welcome
measure and it should have Members of all the trade bodies in the country.
(ii)     The partial removal of the Special Excise Duty is a positive step. It should be completely removed on
automobile and aerated waters to enable the industries to stand on a better footing.
(iii)    The retrospective amendments in the area of excise taxation especially regarding CENVAT Credit Rules is
entirely inappropriate and the amendments should be with prospective effect.
(iv)    The Central Excise Act is ought to be amended whereby, in respect of goods that are exempted absolutely,
without any conditions the manufacture shall perforce to avail the exemptions and shall not pay duty on such
goods. This proposal should be given up and the assesses be granted the right to either avail the benefit of
exemptions or to forego it and pay duty.

160th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/160threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
(v)    Withdrawal of concessional rate of duty for SSI units is a serious blow on the sector. It is therefore requested
to restore the duty as in the past.
(vi)    In the case of Light Commercial Vehicle a clarification be issued to clear contradictions in the tariff headings
and notes to second schedule.
(vii)   The excise duty on confectionery products be reduced from 16% to 8%.
(viii)  The excise duty on the radial tyres, tyres and tubes of animal drawn vehicles be reduced from 16% to 8%.
(ix)    Increase the rate of abatement to 50% for the ceramic tiles.
(x)    Excise duty on bulb and tubelight and their allied products/ components should be rolled back.
(xi)    Excise duty on the iron and steel be reduced from 16% to 12%.
INDIAN WIND TURBINE MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION (IWTMA)
2.22  Issue: Withdrawal of CVD exemption on raw materials for manufacture of blades for rotors of wind operated
electricity generators.
         The Department of Revenue apprised that prior to budget 2004-05, raw materials imported for manufacture of
rotor blades for rotor of wind operated electricity generators were fully exempted from CVD. This CVD exemption was
withdrawn in budget 2004-05, as a part of the policy of review of CVD exemptions. No further changes were made in
this year’s budget 2005-06. The requests for restoring the CVD exemption for specified raw materials for manufacture
of blades for rotors of wind-operated electricity generators are under examination.
2.23  The Committee directs the Government to look into the matter of withdrawal of CVD exemption on raw materials
for manufacture of blades for rotors of wind operated electricity generators and ensure that the industry is not affected
adversely.
Federation of Tiny and Small Industries of India
2.24  Issue: Imposition of Service Tax on production of goods on behalf of the client vide notification No. 14/2004
dated 10.9.2004 affecting Tiny/ SSI sector. However, Government has exempted agriculture, printing, textile processing
and education vide notification No. 14/2004 dated 10.9.2004 and since electroplating/ zinc plating is similar to textile
process therefore, this sector needs similar exemption.
2.25  The Department of Revenue informed the Committee that in budget 2004, Service Tax has been imposed on the
service provided by a job worker, namely, the activity of ‘production of goods on behalf of the client’. But if such
activity amounts to ‘manufacturer’, it is not leviable to Service Tax since such cases are covered under levy of excise
duty. For instance, process of galvanization of articles of iron and steel which amounts to manufacture under Central
Excise Law is not liable to Service Tax.
2.26  However, activities provided by a job worker in relation to agriculture, printing, textile processing or education are
exempted from levy of Service Tax. The activity of electroplating/ zinc plating is generally performed on metals to
impart certain characteristics to the finished product. Thus, electroplating/ zinc plating undertaken on behalf of a client
being process which does not amount to manufacture is leviable to Service Tax. Electroplating/ zinc plating metal do
not fall under the category of agriculture, printing, textile processing or education and hence exemption is not available.
2.27  The Committee was further apprised that in this year’s budget, exemption from Service Tax has been extended to
persons providing taxable service of ‘production of goods on behalf of the client’ provided that the service provider
produces goods from the raw materials or semi-finished goods received from a manufacturer and the goods so produced
are sent back to the manufacturer for further manufacture of final products, which are cleared on payment of excise
duty. Thus, job worker performing the activity of electroplating/ zinc plating for a manufacturer of final products who
clears such final products after payment of excise duty would be exempted from payment of Service Tax.
2.28  Further, in this year’s budget, exemption from Service Tax has also been extended to provide relief to all small
service providers (with aggregate value of taxable service upto Rs. 4 lakhs in the preceding financial year), including
job workers, upto an aggregate value of taxable service upto Rs. 4 lakhs in a financial year. Genuinely small units
undertaking electroplating/ zinc plating on behalf of their client would thus be exempt from Service Tax. In view of the
above, it is not felt desirable to extend exemption from Service Tax on the activity of electroplating/ zinc plating.
2.29  Issue: Central Excise on Iron and Steel ----- The Government had earlier provided protection to the main
producers under non-tariff barriers, etc. and had brought down the excise duty from 16 per cent to 8 per cent. However,
the Government has now raised central excise from 8 per cent to 12 per cent in the interim budget 2004-05 which has

160th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/160threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
further been raised from 12 per cent to 16 per cent and thus affecting adversely the light engineering industry in the
Tiny/SSI sector.
2.30  The Department of Revenue informed the Committee that iron and steel have generally attracted the mean rate of
excise duty at par with other metals. Excise duty on iron and steel was 15 per cent upto 1998-99, and was rationalised to
16 per cent w.e.f. 1999-2000. There has been a steady and steep increase in international prices of both steel as well as
certain critical inputs for the steel making industry, namely, metallurgical coke/coking coal, during the past over one
year. The domestic steel manufacturers have been taking advantage of the high international prices of steel and steadily
increasing the domestic prices of steel. The steel user industry has been seriously affected by this steady increase in steel
prices. In order to bring about a reduction in domestic steel prices, excise duty on iron and steel (of chapter 72) was
reduced from 16 per cent to 8 per cent w.e.f. 28.2.2004, involving a substantial loss of revenue. However, it was
observed that the steel manufacturers had not passed on the benefit of these duty reductions to the consumers and
instead had adjusted their assessable value whereby the cum-excise duty price of steel did not come down. Moreover,
the general policy is that most manufactured goods should attract the CENVAT rate of 16 per cent. Steel is a leading
metal and other leading metals such as aluminium, copper, zinc, lead, etc. attract 16 per cent excise duty. Thus, in order
to partially recoup the revenue loss and as a step towards moving towards the mean CENVAT rate, excise duty on steel
was raised from 8 per cent to 12 per cent in budget 2004. The excise duty on iron and steel has been restored to the
CENVAT rate of 16 per cent in budget 2005-06.The total production of steel in India is about 36 million tonnes per
year. Flat products (HR/CR coils/sheets, etc.) are manufactured primarily by the integrated manufacturers and the total
production of flat steel is about 16-17 million tonnes. The flat products are mainly used for further manufacture of pipes
and tubes, automobiles, capital goods, etc. The duty paid on iron and steel would be eligible to be taken as input credit
by the further manufacturing units in most cases.
2.31  The Committee was further informed that the long products (rods, bars, channels, structures, etc. mainly used in
construction) are manufactured both by integrated as well as secondary (induction furnaces/ re-rollers) manufacturers
and the production of long products is about 17-18 million tonnes. About 55 per cent of the long products (i.e., 9-10
million tonnes) are produced by the secondary sector. The long products are mainly used in the construction industry.
2.32  The Department of Revednue clarified that it may be recalled that credit of duty has already been allowed across
goods and services and thus the excise duty on iron and steel even if used in construction is eligible to taken as input
credit for payment of Service Tax on taxable services. Commercial and industrial constructions have already covered
been brought under the Service Tax net in budget 2004-05. In this year’s budget construction of planned residential
complexes, with more than 12 dwelling units, developed by builders, are proposed to be brought under Service Tax. In
view of the above, the increase in excise duty on iron and steel should have little effect on prices because the entire duty
is convertible by most categories of consumers.
2.33  Issue: Customs duty on defective/secondary materials ----- The customs duty on prime steel is 5 per cent whereas
the customs duty on secondary/defective materials is 20 per cent. It is on the higher side and it should be reduced to zero
per cent. The SSI exemption limit at present is Rupees one crore for central excise purposes. There has been
unprecedented hike in the prices of inputs. It is suggested that the central excise limit should be raised to Rs. 2 crores.
2.34  In regard to Customs duty on seconds and defectives, the Department of Revenue informed the Committee that
Customs duty on seconds and defectives of steel was raised from 35 per cent to 40 per cent in budget 2002-03 on the
basis of the recommendation of the Ministry of Steel (MoS), on grounds of public health/safety and to check imports of
prime steel in the guise of seconds. With this increase customs duty differential between prime steel and
seconds/defectives was 10 per cent in 2002-03.
2.35  The Committee was further informed that customs duty on prime/semi-finished forms of non-alloy steel has been
reduced to 5 per cent and on alloy steel to 15 per cent. Thus the duty differential increased to 35 per cent in case of non-
alloy steel and 25 per cent in case of alloy steel. It was felt that such a large duty differential would encourage mis-
declaration and misuse. It was also necessary to increase availability of steel inputs for domestic manufacturing industry
and to contain the rising prices of steel.
2.36  The Ministry of Steel was also of the view that customs duty on seconds and defectives steel should be lowered
from 40 per cent to 20 per cent, and had stated such reduction would result in a reasonable duty differential between
seconds & defectives and prime steel. Accordingly, customs duty on seconds and defectives of iron and steel was
reduced from 4 per cent to 20 per cent w.e.f. 1.1.2005. However, the integrated steel industry is opposed to any further
reduction in the customs duty on seconds and defectives of iron and steel. In fact, they have actually opposed the
reduction to 20 per cent expressing a fear that low quality products will be dumped in the Indian markets as a result of
the said reduction in duty from 40 per cent to 20 per cent. Hence further reduction in customs duty on seconds and
defectives is likely to affect the domestic steel manufacturing industry and can be considered only in consultation with

160th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/160threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
the Ministry of Steel.
Issue : Increase the SSI excise duty exemption limit from Rs. 1 crore to Rs. 2 crore.
2.37  The Department of Revenue informed the Committee the Task Force on implementation of FRBM Act, headed by
Dr. Kelkar had also examined the issue of excise duty exemption for SSI and its implications on the economy as a
whole, and inter alia, had recommended that the SSI exemption limit should be reduced from Rs. 1 crore to Rs. 40
lakhs. In this year’s budget, excise duty exemptions schemes for SSI were reviewed and it was decided not to make any
change in the exemption limit of Rs. 1 crore. However, the eligibility limit for SSI exemption has been raised from Rs. 3
crore to Rs. 4 crore.
2.38  The Committee pleads that even to the Department of Revenue the Kelkar Committee’s recommendation on
confining the excise duties exemption to SSI to a limit of 40 lakh is not acceptable, and there is a valid reason for non
acceptance of the Kelker Committee’s recommendations on the issue keeping in view the inflation rate and largely the
reasons on account of the need for giving adequate space to small enterprises to grow into medium enterprises as per the
declared policy of the Government. Therefore, there is the need for purposive and supportive tax structure to give flip to
emerging SMEs. The Committee understands that there is the strong reason for enhancing the excise duties exemption
to SSI from the current level to a reasonable level.
Issue: Service Tax on transportation of SSI products is paid by the manufacturers and not by the transporters
2.39  The Department of Revenue informed the Committee that the Services provided by a goods transport agency in
relation to transport of goods by road in a goods carriage are leviable to Service Tax. Service Tax is generally leviable
on the service provider, however, the liability for payment of Service Tax may be cast on any other person [as per
provisions of section 68(2) of Finance Act, 1994]. In case of transportation of goods by road, where the consignor or
consignee of goods are a factory, company, corporation etc. the liability for payment of Service Tax is on the person
paying freight instead of the goods transport agency (service provider). This provision has been made keeping in view
that in such cases the person liable to pay Service Tax is already engaged in commercial activity and also the fact that
the Service Tax being an indirect tax the tax burden is ultimately borne by the person paying the freight. Moreover, if
such persons are the manufacturers of excisable goods or providers of taxable services, the Service Tax paid is available
as credit which can be utilised to discharge his duty liability. Shifting of tax liability is, thus, only for a procedural
convenience and would not cast any additional burden on the person paying the tax. An abatement of 75 per cent from
gross freight has been provided in respect of taxable service of transportation of goods by road. Thus, effectively only
2.5 per cent of the gross amount is payable as Service Tax.
Issue: Penal interest of 24 per cent on delayed payment of excise duty
2.40  The Department of Revenue informed the Committee that prior to budget 2003-04, in case of default in payment
of excise duty by the due date, the manufacturer was denied the benefit of utilisation of CENVAT credit for certain
period and in certain cases, even the facility of paying excise duty in instalments was liable to be withdrawn. In budget
2003-04, the provisions relating to penalties, etc. in such cases were made simpler so as to provide that in case of
default, the facility of paying duty in instalments would not be withdrawn nor would be the assesses be denied the use of
his CENVAT credit for payment of duty. Instead, the assesses was made liable only for a penal interest of 2 per cent per
month or Rs. 10,000 per day, whichever is higher, subject to the amount not exceeding the duty amount. Thus the penal
interest of 24 per cent has been prescribed for such delayed payment in order to check misuse of the facility of paying
excise duty on monthly instalments. Any further relaxation of this provision would not be desirable at this stage.
INDIAN PAINT & COATING ASSOCIATION
2.41  Indian Paint & Coating Association (IPCA) stated that in the Union Budget (2005-­06) the small units who opted
for CENVAT credit were provided a concessional rate of 60 per cent or normal rate upto a turnover of Rs.1.00 crore
have been axed of this concession. The Associations desired that excise exemption limit be raised from 1.00 crore to
Rs.5.00 crore and there should be further restoration of concessional rate of 60 per cent duty with CENVAT up to
Rs.1.00 crore.
2.42  The Committee understands the problems being faced by the industry and therefore, is in agreement that the
exemption limit be reasonably raised and the restoration of concessional rate of 60 per cent duty with the CENVAT up
to Rs.1.00 crore, as such fiscal measures would help in reducing the cost of SSI products and imbibe competitive
resilience in the units engaged in Paint & Coating Industry.

160th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/160threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
LAGHU UDYOG BHARTI
2.43  The association suggested for following Tax Reforms:­
1.     Exemption of small and tiny manufacturing units from all laws such as Income Tax, Central Excise and Sales
Tax as per the 10th Five Year Plan by Planning Commission.
2.     Creation of Market Development Fund of minimum of Rs.1000 crores for domestic industries for upgrading
and achievement of global competitiveness.
3.     Restoration of excise duty on steel to 8 per cent as existed earlier.
4.     Corporate Income Tax for domestic companies has been from reduced 35 per cent to 30 per cent, while the
surcharge has been hiked from 2.5 per cent to 10 per cent thus effective rate of taxation has gone down by less
than 3 per cent.
5.     The reduction in depreciation rate from 25 per cent to 15 per cent would further increase the tax burden of the
companies.
6.     As per the Notifications No.8/2003 CE (I) and No.8/2003 CE (2), the limit for the sale of goods on which the
excise duty is to be taken is extended from Rs.3 crore to Rs.4 crore. This limit is not sufficiently increased. It
must be extended up to Rs. 5 crores.
7.     The Notification No.9/2003 CE has been removed and hence only the, exemption under notification
No.2/2003 CE (I) & (2) will be in force for the SSI sector. As per the provision of Notification No.9/2003 CE
benefit of CENVAT Credit was available and hence the concessional rate of the excise duty i.e. 60 per cent of
the normal rate (i.e. 9.6 per cent) upto Rs. 1 crore will now have to pay full normal rate of excise duty and this
provision will go against the SSI units.
8.     Removal of excise duty on submersible pumps being used for irrigation purpose in agriculture while another
equipment of agriculture like tractors and its parts fetches no excise duty.
Land Mark Education
2.44  The representatives of Land Mark Education, a voluntary, non-profit making organisation involve in philanthropic
activities desired that the philanthropic activities should not be taxable under Service Tax.
2.45  The Committee is also of the view that the Department of Revenue should give kind consideration to exempt the
vocational institutes and recreational training institute including the institutes under philanthropic non-profit making
organizations from the Service Tax.
CREDIT ON SERVICE TAX
2.46  SSI units must be allowed to MODVAT the various Service Taxes, which cascade on to the price of the finished
goods/service. This should be two-ways Service Tax credit against excise and excise credit against Service Taxes.
2.47  The Department of Revenue stated that SSI units paying normal rate of duty (beyond Rs. 1 crore clearances or
from the beginning) are also eligible for credit of Service Tax. CENVAT credit is available across goods and services.
TURNOVER LIMIT FOR 60  PER CENT CENVAT RATE FOR SSIS VIDE NOTIFICATION NO. 9/2003
2.48 The representatives of SSI Associations pointed out that the SSI concessional turnover limit for 60  per cent of full
duty rate, be revised from Rs.l crore upwards to Rs. 1.50 crore at least or better to Rs. 200 lacs to account for future
inflation. CENVAT chapter 72 & 73, be kept under a common rate of 12 per cent or both be kept under a common rate
of 16 per cent. This will reduce the net burden of CENVAT on the smaller value addition manufacturers of products
without causing revenue loss to the Government.
2.49  The Department of Revenue stated that exemption scheme; which provided for a concessional rate of 60 per cent
of normal rate with CENVAT credit upto clearances of Rs. 1 crore (notification No. 9/2003-CE) has been withdrawn in
this year’s budget. The Committee was further informed that Excise duty on iron or steel of Chapter 72 has been raised
from 12 per cent to 16 per cent. Thus, at present, goods of chapters 72 and 73 attract a uniform excise duty of 16 per
cent.

160th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/160threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
2.50  The Committee recommends that in order to promote the small enterprises sector, certain fiscal measures
need to be taken to establish a SSI-friendly tax regime. These include:
(i)    Extension of General SSI Excise Exemption to SSI units manufacturing branded goods in urban areas, as
available in rural areas;
(ii)    Increase in the excise exemption to new as well as existing SSI units in rural as well as urban areas;
(iii)   Lower custom duties on import of raw material (basic raw material and intermediate goods) and higher duties
on finished products;
(iv)   Incentives to facilitate exports by the small enterprises;
(v)   In order to induce small enterprises sector to undertake technology up gradation, excise and customs duty
relief / concession be provided to small enterprises on purchase of plant and machinery for technology
upgradation;
(vi)   Incentives for ancillarisation so as to establish better linkages between the large and small enterprises.
         Above all, once a concession / new fiscal provision is announced, it should be maintained for at least three years in
order to maintain continuity and growth.
CHAPTER- III
TAX PROPOSALS AFFECTING THE INDUSTRIES IN GENERAL
3.1    The Committee has been apprised of the implications on some of the PSEs of the tax proposals contained in the
Union Budget 2005-06. Peak custom duty has been reduced from 20 per cent to 15 per cent, having negative impact on
the PSEs under DHI where they face competition from imported products. Moreover, custom duty of capital goods
sector has been reduced from 15 per cent to 10 per cent and to 5 per cent in some cases, having a negative impact on
PSEs like BHEL, HMT.
3.2    Excise duty on tyres had been reduced to 16 per cent. This would benefit the tyre manufacturing industry
including, Tyre Corporation of India. Infrastructure projects are likely to spur growth in cement sector. Cement
Corporation of India (CCI) is likely to benefit. Moreover, thrust to rural electrification will provide benefit to PSEs in
the Electrical Industry like AYCL.
3.3    The Committee views that current regime of lowering the customs and increasing the excise duty on items like
steel will have serious implications for the PSEs in capital goods sector. The Committee cautions the Government that
such a Duty regime would result in an uneven competition with PSEs facing serious handicap against cheaper imports
and MNCs. If the Government is serious about reviving the PSEs, it must help them regain their standing in domestic
market instead of imposing a duty regime that perpetuates the disadvantage against cheap imports. It is the
responsibility of the Government to seek redressal, if necessary, against such an uneven competition under the WTO
provisions.
3.4    The Committee took note that the benefit of 150 per cent weighted deduction u/s 35 (2AB) of Income Tax for Act
in-house R&D expenditure to the automotive industry has now been extended upto 31 March 2007. A number of OEMs
would be utilizing this benefit for continuously upgrading their R&D set up in India to meet the new emission and
safety norms over the next few years as also for new product and process developments in India which otherwise
requires considerable R&D effort.
3.5    In its interaction with auto associations, the Committee noted that the auto Sector has generally supported the
application of VAT but has sought further streamlining. The auto associations further apprised the Committee that
reduction in depreciation rates would adversely effect the new investments; customs duty on auto-components have
been reduced to below ASEAN levels, which will be a disincentive for value addition; custom duty on raw materials is
higher compared to ASEAN levels; Imposition of Cess on Petrol and Diesel would adversely affect the growth of Auto
Sector.
Issues:- CUSTOM DUTIES
3.6    The representatives of the industries stated that the peak (most common) rate of custom duty be reduced from the
present rate of 20 per cent to 15 per cent.

160th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/160threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
3.7    The Department of Revenue replied that peak rate of customs duty on non-­agricultural products has been
reduced from 20 per cent to 15 per cent with a few exceptions, in this year’s budget (2005-06).
3.8    The Committee recommends for favourable consideration by the Government of the peak (most common)
rate of custom duty.
3.9    The representatives of Industry desired for the reduction in duty by 5 to 10 percentage points on raw materials,
intermediates and components wherever possible, so that the duty on these is at least 5 per cent lower than the finished
products.
3.10  The Department of Revenue pleaded that consistent with the peak rate reduction , customs duty on specified raw
materials and intermediates (such as specified organic chemicals, polymer and metals) and components have also been
reduced in this year’s budget. However, maintaining a duty differential of at least 5 per cent between raw materials/
components and finished products in every case may not be feasible.
3.11  The Committee is of the considered view that a duty differential of atleast 5 per cent between raw materials /
components and finished products in every case must be maintained in order to give the units engaged in the business to
make profit. The Committee would like to seek clarification from the Department of Revenue as how to get Return On
Investment (ROI) if not even a differential of at least 5 per cent between raw material / components and finished
products is maintained with exceptions.
3.12  The Committee would further like to know the details of those industries where even such differential has been
omitted and the implication of such withdrawal on the growth and promotion of such industries along with user
industry, in cases, where it is involved, and the quantum of revenue so generated through undertaking such measures.
3.13  The Department of Revenue may give alternative means, measures / strategy to the entrepreneurs engaged in such
industries for making prof it where even the 5 per cent differential customs duty on raw materials and finished products
have been abolished.
ZERO per cent CUSTOMS DUTY
3.14  The representatives of industry urged that In general, scrap 0 per cent customs duties, except for life saving drugs,
security related items and those agreed to through multilateral or bilateral agreements.
3.15  The Department of Revenue advocated that general policy in indirect taxation is to minimise duty exemptions
except in certain meritorious cases in sectors like defence health, international obligations etc. However, this is a
continuous process.
3.16  The Committee desires to know the items where zero per cent customs duties continues and the WTO bound rates
thereon, alongwith the revenue loss as a result of continuation of zero per cent customs duties and the impact on the
domestic industries relating to those industries.
Early Harvest Scheme India-Thailand FTA
3.17  The representatives of the industries wanted reduction in duty to 5 per cent on major inputs required to
manufacture products covered in Early Harvest Scheme India-Thailand FTA before IInd phase of the Agreement on 1
September, 2005.
3.18  The Department of Revenue stated that customs duty on major inputs required to manufacture products covered in
Early Harvest Scheme India-Thailand FTA has already been reduced. The request for further reduction of customs
duties on inputs, if necessary; will be examined before the II phase of implementation of the EHS, consulting the
Administrative Ministries concerned.
3.19  The Department of Revenue may re-consider the reduction of customs duties on inputs (up to 5 per cent) required
to manufacture products covered in Early Harvest Scheme India-Thailand FTA.
Road map for achieving duty rates of 5 per cent, 8 per cent and 10 per cent,
3.20  The representatives of the industry wanted announcement of road map for achieving duty rates of 5 per cent, 8 per
cent and 10 per cent, as recommended by FRBM task-force headed by Dr. Vijay Kelkar.
3.21  The Department of Revenue stated that policy of the Government is to make customs duty structure close to that
of our East Asian neighbours. In line with that peak rate of customs duty on non-agricultural goods (with few
exceptions) has been reduced to 15 per cent. In addition customs duty on raw materials such as specified organic
chemicals polymer and metals has been reduced to 10 per cent or 15 per cent.

160th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/160threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
3.22  The Committee desires that the Department of Revenue may facilitate the industries with its declared item wise
time frame for achieving duty rates of 5 per cent , 8 per cent and 10 per cent as recommended by (FRBM) task force
headed by Dr. Vijay Kelkar so that various segments of industries in general would accordingly chalk out their short
term and long term business strategy.
EXCISE DUTIES
3.23  (i)                The representatives of industries desired that 8 per cent SED (Special Excise Duty) should be
withdrawn.
         The Department of Revenue stated that 8 per cent SED has been withdrawn on air-conditioners, tyres, tubes and
flaps and polyester filament yarn, including polyester textured yarn, in this year’s budget. Thus, at present only two
commodities namely car and aerated water attract SED of 8 per cent. Finance Minister had already mentioned in the
budget speech that reducing excise duty on these goods will have to wait for some more time.
         While the Committee is in agreement with withdrawal of 8 per cent SED on a number of items like tyre, tubes,
flaps and polyster, filament yarn and even air conditioner, however, the Committee would like to know the reasons for
continuation of 8 per cent SED on car and aerated waters.
(ii)    Exempt excise duty on equipment supplied to R & D industries/ IITs as CVD is exempted on imported
equipment.
        The Department of Revenue stated that general policy of the Government is to minimize sector specific
exemptions, particularly in relation to excise duty, which are difficult to monitor and prone to misuse.
(iii)   Reduce excise rate from 16 per cent to 8 per cent on certain basic goods of lower cost.
        The Department of Revenue stated that certain goods of mass consumption such as biscuits, tableware and
kitchenware of glass, toothbrushes, mosaic tiles, specified medical equipment, gas stoves of retail price upto Rs.
2000 per unit etc. are already at 8 per cent. The general policy is that most manufactured goods should attract the
CENVAT rate of 16 per cent.
(iv)   Given the present buoyant regime, this is the right time to reduce the CENVAT rate of 16 per cent to 14 per
cent.
        The Department of Revenue stated that this has been examined as part of the budget exercise. The CENVAT
rate of 16 per cent has been retained at present. Reduction in mean CENVAT rate would involve substantial loss of
revenue.
CHAPTER-IV
TAX PROPOSAL AFFECTING AUTO INDUSTRIES
Custom Duty
4.1    The representatives of the Auto Industries stated that customs duty on auto components has been reduced below
ASEAN levels. Customs duty on raw materials is much higher compared to ASEAN levels. It was stated that India
should maintain ASEAN levels of duty differential.
4.2    The Department of Revenue informed the Committee that peak rate of customs duty on non-agricultural goods has
been reduced to 15 per cent with certain exceptions, including CBU of motorcars and motorcycles, which attract
customs duty at 60 per cent. The stated policy is to reduce the customs duty rates gradually to ASEAN levels. It would
not be always possible to maintain a positive duty differential between raw materials and components of automobiles, in
a low customs duty regime.
4.3    The representatives of Auto Industries desired that there should be efforts to evolve an ‘automatic mechanism’ for
zero duty imports of raw materials, consumables and inputs for items included in FTAs.
4.4    The Department of Revenue clarified that it would not be always possible to maintain a positive duty differential
between raw materials and components for items included in FTAs in a low customs duty regime.
4.5    The Representatives of Auto industries desired that the Government should allow import of R & D equipment at
zero import duty.

160th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/160threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
4.6    The Department of Revenue stated that customs/excise duty exemptions have already been granted in respect of R
& D equipment for certain sectors, as well as R & D equipments imported by specified institutions. Such requests can
only be examined on a case to case basis. In any case, general rate of customs duty on capital goods has already been
reduced to 15 per cent in this year’s budget.
4.7    The Committee desires that the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises should act as a co-ordinator
for forwarding the suitable R & D related cases for consideration of Department of Revenue as and when the Ministry
of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises is approached for customs / excise duty exemptions.
4.8    The representatives of Auto Industries raised the issues regarding imposition of Cess on petrol and diesel.
4.9    The Department of Revenue stated that Cess is imposed for specific purposes and are administered by
Administrative Ministry concerned. The extra Cess of 50 paisa imposed in this year’s budget is meant exclusively for
development and maintenance of National Highways.
4.10  The Committee is in agreement with the plea of the Department of Revenue in regard to imposition of Cess on
petrol and diesel as the same would be exclusively earmarked for development and maintenance of National Highways
which in turn would save barrels of diesel and petrol if the conditions of the road is good.
ARAI AS RESEARCH INSTITUTE
4.11  The representatives of ARAI pleaded that Societies like ARAI engaged in R & D work are not extended the
benefit of concessional duty under the Notification No. 50/96­Customs, which covers only ‘companies’. The ARAI
informed the Committee of the adverse impact of the Notification No. 50/96 of Department of Revenue, Ministry of
Finance, pertaining to exemption of Customs Duty to the Companies engaged in R&D. ARAI, despite being the premier
R&D institution in Auto Sector is left out of the ambit of this exemption as it is registered as a `Society’ and not as a
Company. The Committee was further told that similarly the Notification No. 51/96 of Department of Revenue,
Ministry of Finance has extended certain import facilities to the ‘public funded research institution’ registered with
DSIR. The Notification practically excludes ARAI as it is a self sufficient R&D institution.
4.12  The Department of Revenue stated that the said notification provides exemption to R&D projects partially funded
by the Government run companies. In this year’s budget the exemption has been extended to projects funded the
Agencies like CSIR, ICMR, ICAR, UGC, DRDO and ICTE. On direct taxes side similar exemption (u/s 35 (2AB) of
I.T. Act is also available only to R&D projects run by companies. To maintain uniformity between the concessions on
direct and indirect taxes, it is not possible to extend the exemption to projects run by Societies etc.
4.13  Definition of the term ‘public funded research institution’ may be expanded to include societies such as ARAI for
the purpose of customs duty exemption under notification no. 51/96-Customs.
4.14  This notification provides exemption only to Public Funded Research Institutions, which are run on no profit no
loss basis. It would not be desirable to extend this exemption to projects run by non-aided societies etc.
4.15  The Committee is of the view that institutions like ARAI plays pivotal role and should not be debarred of benefit
of concessional duty under the Notification No. 50/96-Customs, which covers only ‘companies’. The Committee
recognizes that extension of such facility to ARAI would enhance the R&D capability in the auto sector. The case of
ARAI must be re-considered by the Department of Revenue. The Committee recommends that the benefits of the
Notifications No. 50/96 & 51/96 should not discriminate against the premier R&D institutionslike ARAI. The
Committee directs the DHI to pursue the matter with Ministry of Finance.
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
COMMITTEE ----- AT A GLANCE
LEVEL PLAYING FIELD TO THE DOMESTIC INDUSTRY                                              
         The Committee understands that the tempest of globalisation would also gallop the Temple of Modern India unless
and until level playing field is provided to the domestic industry. Therefore, the Committee is of the strong view that the
architect of Modern India should not forget to have the protected layer of extending certain tax concessions/exemptions
to protect against the onslaught of Faustian MNCs.                                                                                                     (Para
1.14)

160th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/160threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON THE EXTENT OF ABATEMENT OF EXCISE DUTY AND SERVICE TAX
         The Committee welcomes the move for setting up of Advisory Committee to advise the Government on the extent
of abatement of excise duty and service tax. However, the Committee desires that the Advisory Committee must have
the representatives from various sections of economy including various segments of industry as well as
Federations/Associations from industries so that any conclusion could be drawn only after consultation and mutual
understanding in the general interest of the
industry.                                                                                                                                      (Para 2.2)
EXCISE DUTY ON SYNTHETIC AND ARTIFICIAL STAPLE FIBRES
         The Committee, therefore, urges upon the Government that the excise duty on synthetic and artificial staple fibres
under Chapter Heading 55.03 and 55.04 of Central Excise Tariff may be reduced to 8% in this Budget itself.(Para 2.9)
ELECTRONIC CONSUMER PRODUCTS
         The Committee understands that the market of consumer electronics is rapidly growing. The electronic
components are the input products and back bone of electronic consumer products. Even then no growth is coming in
the manufacture of electronic components because it cannot compete with the rapidly growing grey market due to
highest rate of excise duty @ 16%. The Committee, therefore, feels that the excise duty may be reduced to 8% for all
locally manufactured etectronic products and in-
puts.                                                                                                                       (Para 2.11)
IMPORT DUTY ON THE RAW MATERIALS
         The Committee wishes to point out an accepted policy of the Government that the import duty on the raw
materials has got to be lower than the duty on the finished products. Even in the world-class plants like Reliance, IPCL,
GAIL, Haldia, Finolex, etc. the duty differential between the raw material and the end product is maintained.           
(Para 2.14)
         In accordance with the announced policies of the Government atleast at par with the Large Scale Sector, which are
at present, being rather penalized:­-
(a)   Allow the import of DOP (HS Code 29173920 & 29173200), DBP (HS Code 19173910 & 29173100) only
from the exporters who qualify the Indian norms of SSI units.
AND OR
(b)   Restore fair competition by subjecting DOP and DBP to a higher rate of customs duty in cases where the
exporters do not qualify as SSI units as per Indian Regulations. Such imports may be subjected to duty at the
bound rate of 40%. It is submitted that such a course of action will be compatible with the WTO Article III on
national treatment.
(c)   Provide a 10% duty differential between raw material to end products, the customs duty on its Raw Material
(HS Code), Octanol/2 Ethyl Hexannol (29051600&29051620), Butanol (Iso/Normal/mixed) (29051300 &
29051400), Iso Nonanol/Other (29051900), Phthalic Anhydride (29173500)                 (Para 2.15)
DUTY DIFFERENTIAL OF 5% BETWEEN THE FINISHED PRODUCT (PVC) AND FEEDSTOCK (VCM)
         The Committee is can agreement with the argument of the representative of the industries that the present duty
differential of 5% between the finished product (PVC) and feedstock (VCM) is insufficient to cover even the variable
costs and is therefore not only detrimental to the growth of the industry but also threatening its very viability. Therefore,
The Committee desires that the Department of Revenue should reconsider to reduce the import duty on VCM to 0%
from the current level of 5% and roll back the import duty on finished product PVC resin to the earlier level of
15%.              (Para 2.18)
         Withdrawal of CVD exemption on raw materials for manufacture of blades for rotors of wind operated electricity
generators
         The Committee directs the Government to look into the matter of withdrawal of CVD exemption on raw materials
for manufacture of blades for rotors of wind operated electricity generators and ensure that the industry is not affected
adversely.         (Para 2.23)
EXCISE DUTIES EXEMPTION TO SSI
         The Committee pleads that even to the Department of Revenue the Kelkar Committee’s recommendation on
confining the excise duties exemption to SSI to a limit of 40 lakh is not acceptable, and there is a valid reason for non

160th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/160threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
acceptance of the Kelkar Committee’s recommendations on the issue keeping in view the inflation rate and largely the
reasons on account of the need for giving adequate space to small enterprises to grow into medium enterprises as per the
declared policy of the Government. Therefore, there is the need for purposive and supportive tax structure to give flip to
emerging SMEs. The Committee understands that there is the strong reason for enhancing the excise duties exemption
to SSI from the current level to a reasonable
level.                                                                                                                       (Para 2.38)
PAINT AND COATING INDUSTRY
         The Committee understands the problems being faced by the industry and therefore, is in agreement that the
exemption limit be reasonably raised and the restoration of concessional rate of 60% duty with the CENVAT up to Rs.
1.00 crore, as such fiscal measures would help in reducing the cost of SSI products and imbibe competitive resilience in
the units engaged in Paint and Coating industry.                                                                                                             
(Para 2.42)
VOCATIONAL INSTITUTES AND RECREATIONAL TRAINING
         The Committee is also of the view that the Department of Revenue should give kind consideration to exempt the
vocational institutes and recreational training institute including the institutes under philanthropic non-profit making
organizations from the service tax.                                                                                                                        (Para 2.45)
FISCAL MEASURES FOR A SSI-FRIENDLY TAX REGIME
         The Committee recommends that in order to promote the small enterprises sector, certain fiscal measures need to
be taken to establish a SSI-friendly tax regime. These include:
(i)    Extension of general SSI excise exemption to SSI units manufacturing branded goods in urban areas, as
available in rural areas;
(ii)    Increase in the excise exemption to new as well as existing SSI units in rural as well as urban areas;
(iii)   Lower custom duties on import of raw material (basic raw material and intermediate goods) and higher duties
on finished products;
(iv)   Incentives to facilitate exports by the small enterprises;
(v)   In order to induce small enterprises sector to undertake technology upgradation, excise and customs duty
relief/concession be provided to small enterprises on purchase of plant and machinery for technology
upgradation;
(vi)   Incentives for ancillarisation so as to establish better linkages between the large and small enterprises.
New fiscal provition for atleast three years
         Above all, once a concession/new fiscal provision is announced, it should be maintained for at least three years in
order to maintain continuity and growth.                                                                                                    (Para 2.50)
LOWERING THE CUSTOMS AND INCREASING THE EXCISE DUTY
         The Committee views that current regime of lowering the customs and increasing the excise duty on items like
steel will have serious implications for the PSEs in capital goods sector. The Committee cautions the Government that
such a duty regime would result in an uneven competition with PSEs facing serious handicap against cheaper imports
and MNCs. If the Government is serious about reviving the PSEs, it must help them regain their standing in domestic
market instead of imposing a duty regime that perpetuates the disadvantage against cheap imports. It is the
responsibility of the Government to seek redressal, if necessary, against such an uneven competition under the WTO
provisions.                     (Para : 3.3)
PEAK (MOST COMMON) RATE OF CUSTOMS DUTY
         The Committee recommends for favourable consideration by the Government of the peak (most common) rate of
customs duty.                                                                                                                                    (Para 3.8)
DUTY DIFFERENTIAL OF ATLEAST 5% BETWEEN RAW MATERIALS/COMPONENTS
         The Committee is of the considered view that a duty differential of atleast 5% between raw materials/components
and finished products in every case must be maintained in order to give the units engaged in the business to make profit.
The Committee would like to seek clarification from the Department of Revenue as how to get Return On Investment
(ROI) if not even a differential of atleast 5% between raw material/components and finished products is maintained with

160th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/160threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
exceptions.  (Para 3.11)
         The Committee would further like to know the details of those industries where even such differential has been
omitted and the implication of such withdrawal on the growth and promotion of such industries along with user
industry, in cases, where it is involved, and the quantum of revenue so generated through undertaking such
measures.              (Para 3.12)
ALTERNATIVE MEANS, MEASURES/STRATEGY
         The Department of Revenue may give alternative means, measures/strategy to the entrepreneurs engaged in such
industries for making prof it where even the 5% differential customs duty on raw materials and finished products have
been abolished.                                                                                                                                       (Para 3.13)
ZERO PER CENT CUSTOMS DUTIES
         The Committee desires to know the items where zero per cent customs duties continues and the WTO bound rates
thereon, alongwith the revenue loss as a result of continuation of zero per cent customs duties and the impact on the
domestic industries relating to those industries.                                                                                                 Para 3.16)
EARLY HARVEST SCHEME INDIA-THAILAND FTA
         The Department of Revenue may re-consider the reduction of customs duties on inputs (up to 5%) required to
manufacture products covered in Early Harvest Scheme India-Thailand FTA.
                                                                                                                                                       (Para 3.19)
DUTY RATES OF 5%, 8% AND 10%
         The Committee desires that the Department of Revenue may facilitate the industries with its declared item-wise
time-frame for achieving duty rates of 5%, 8% and 10% as recommended by (FRBM) task force headed by Dr. Vijay
Kelkar so that various segments of industries in general would accordingly chalk out their short term and long term
business strategy.         (Para 3.22)
CONTINUATION OF 8% SED ON CAR AND AERATED WATERS
         While the Committee is in agreement with withdrawal of 8% SED on a number of items like tyre, tubes, flaps and
polyster, filament yarn and even air conditioner, however, the Committee would like to know the reasons for
continuation of 8% SED on car and aerated waters.                                                                                               (Para
3.23)
FORWARDING THE SUITABLE R & D RELATED CASES
         The Committee desires that the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises should act as a co-ordinator
for forwarding the suitable R & D related cases for consideration of Department of Revenue as and when the Ministry
of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises is approached for customs/excise duty exemptions.                          (Para 4.7)
Imposition of cess on petrol and diesel
         The committee is in agreement with the plea of the Department of Revenue in regard to imposition of Cess on
petrol and diesel as the same would be exclusively earmarked for development and maintenance of National Highways
which in turn would save barrels of diesel and petrol if the conditions of the road is good.                                      (Para
4.10)
ARAI
         The Committee is of the view that institutions like ARAI plays pivotal role and should not be debarred from
benefit of concessional duty under the Notification No. 50/96-Customs, which covers only ‘companies’. The Committee
recognizes that extension of such facility to ARAI would enhance the R&D capability in the auto sector. The case of
ARAI must be re-considered by the Department of Revenue. The Committee recommends that the benefits of the
Notifications No. 50/96 and 51/96 should not discriminate against the premier R&D institutions like ARAI. The
Committee directs the DHI to pursue the matter with Ministry of
Finance.                                                                                                       (Para 4.15)
MINUTES
VIII

160th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/160threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
EIGHTH  MEETING
         The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Monday, the 28 th March, 2005 in Room No. 63, Parliament House, New
Delhi.
   1.   Shri Santosh Bagrodia   —   Chairman
         RAJYA  SABHA
   2.   Prof. M.M. Agarwal
   3.   Dr. K. Malaisamy
   4.   Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   5.   Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
   6.   Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
   7.   Shrimati Vanga Geetha
         LOK  SABHA
   8.   Shri Kailash Baitha
   9.   Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
10.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
11.   Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria
12.   Shri Rajnarayan
13.   Shri Ganesh Singh
14.   Shri Chandramani Tripathi
         SECRETARIAT
         Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
         Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
         WITNESSES
         Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises
         Shri V.D. Vatwani, O.S.D.
         Shri Arvind Kumar, Addl. Eco. Advisor
         Ministry of SSI
         Shri Satyananda Mishra, A.S.& D.C.
         Dr. S. Rohini, Addl. Development Commissioner
         Shri K.S. Ludu, Addl. D.C.
         PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry
         Shri Sudarshan Sareen, Co-Chairman, SME Comm.
         Shri S.L. Kapoor, Member, SME Comm.
         Federation of Indian MICRO and SME (FIMSME)
         Shri Anil Bhardwaj, G.S.
         Laghu Udyog Bharti
         Shri Balwant Rai, President
         Indian Plasticizers Manufacture Association (IPMA)
         Shri K.L. Jain, President
         Shri Rajindra Gupta, Secretary
         Shri C.D. Anand, Executive Secy.
         Federation of Association of SSI of India (FASSII)
         Shri V.P. Chopra, President

160th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/160threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
         Shri S. Pandiaraj, Secretary
         Shri Jatinder Mittal, Member
         Shri Rajeev Sharma, Member
         Shri O.P. Bassi, Member
         Indian Council of Small Industries (ICSI)
         Shri P. Kumar, President
         Federation of Tiny and Small Industries of India (FTSII)
         Shri Joginder Kumar, President
         Shri B.N. Chopra, Secretary
         Association of Lady Entrepreneurs of Andhra Pradesh (ALEAP)
         Ms. K. Rama Devi, President
         Tamil Nadu Small and Tiny Industries Association (TSTIA)
         Shri K.V. Kanakambaram, President
         Indian Small Scale Paint Association (ISSPA)
         Shri Nitin Khanna, Chairman, Delhi Region
         Dr. H.B.S. Lamba, Vice Chairman, Delhi Region
         Shri N.K. Tekriwal, Finance Secy. Delhi Region
         Indian Paint and Coating Association (IPCA)
         Shri Ashok Kumar Jain, President
         Shri J.P. Nigam, Secretary
2.      The Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee, the representatives of Ministries of Heavy Industries and
Public Enterprises, Small Scale Industry and the industrial associations.
3.      The Committee asked the associations about their expectations from the Budget and .the extent to which they were
met. The representatives of associations apprised the Committee of the impact of Budget proposals on economy growth.
The Committee appreciated the significant perspective provided by the industrial associations on the Budget proposals
for 2005-06.
4.      The  Committee decided to call the Secretary, Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance and Chairman, Central
Board of Excise and Customs for presentation on the tax proposals as raised by the industry associations.
5.      A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. Witnesses then withdrew.
6.         The meeting was adjourned at 6.30 P.M.
IX
NINTH  MEETING
         The Committee met at 2.00 P.M. on Monday, the 29
th March, 2005 in Room No. 63, Parliament House, New
Delhi.
   1.   Shri Santosh Bagrodia   —   Chairman
         RAJYA  SABHA
   2.   Prof. M.M. Agarwal
   3.   Shri Surendra Lath
   4.   Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
   5.   Dr. K. Malaisamy
   6.   Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   7.   Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
   8.   Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy

160th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/160threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
   9.   Shrimati Vanga Geetha
         LOK  SABHA
10.   Shri Kailash Baitha
11.   Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
12.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
13.   Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria
14.   Shri Sunil Khan
15.   Shri Rajnarayan
16.   Shri Sarvey Satyanarayana
17.   Shri Ganesh Singh
18.   Shri Chandramani Tripathi
         SECRETARIAT
         Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
         Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
         Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Department of Heavy Industries
Shri S.V. Bhave, Joint Secretary
Shri S.K. Chaturvedi, Project Director
Shri M.K. Singh, Director
Shri B.B. Singh, Director
Shri Arun Singhal, Director
Shri Mukesh Nigam, Director
SIAM
Shri K.K. Swamy, Chairman, SIAM Taxation Committee
ACMA
Shri Ashok Taneja, Vice-President
Shri Vishnu Mathur, Executive Director
ARAI
Shri B. Bhanot, Director
Bharaty Antra Nigam Ltd. (BYNL)
Shri S.C. Gupta, C.M.D.
Shri N. Swaroop , G.M.F.
Shri S.K. Kesarwani, G.M.
Heavy Engineering Corporation (HEC)
Shri S. Biswas, C.M.D.
Praga Tools Ltd. (PTL)
Shri K.L. Mahrotra, M.D.
Tyre Corporation of India Ltd. (TCIL)
Shri Raji Philip, CMD
Rajasthan Electronics and Instruments (REIL)
Shri M.M. Bhardwaj, M.D.
BHEL

160th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/160threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
Shri Ashok K. Puri, C.M.D.
Shri C. Srinivasan, Director
2.      The Chairman welcomed members of the Committee, the representatives of Department of Heavy Industry, the
representatives of auto associations and also of the, BYNL, HEC, PTL, TCIL, REIL and BHEL the six PSEs under the
administrative control of Department of Heavy Industry.
3.      The Committee asked the auto associations about their expectations from the Budget and the extent to which they
were met. The representatives of auto associations apprised the Committee of the impact of Budget proposals on auto
sector and represented the concerns of auto sector regarding certain tax proposals in the Budget. The Committee
appreciated the significant perspective provided by the auto associations on the Budget proposals for 2005-06. The
Committee also asked the representatives of the Department of Heavy Industry to consider the concerns on tax
proposals and also take up the issue with the Ministry of Finance. The Committee also asked the Department of Heavy
Industry to call the representatives of auto associations to the Committee’s proposed meeting with the Secretary,
Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance and the Chairman, CBEC, to discuss the impact of tax proposals on
different sectors of industry.
4.      The Committee also heard the presentations made by representatives of the respective PSEs and the constraints
faced by them.
5.      A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. Witnesses then withdrew.
6.         The meeting was adjourned at 6.30 P.M.
XI
ELEVENTH  MEETING
         The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 12
th April, 2005 in Room No. 139, First Floor, Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
   1.   Shri Santosh Bagrodia   —   Chairman
         RAJYA  SABHA
   2.   Prof. M.M. Agarwal
   3.   Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
   4.   Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   5.   Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
   6.   Shrimati Vanga Geetha
         LOK  SABHA
   7.   Shri Kailash Baitha
   8.   Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
   9.   Shri Subhash Deshmukh
10.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
11.   Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria
12.   Shri Sunil Khan
13.   Shri Rajnarayan
14.   Shri Badiga Ramakrishna
15.   Shri Suraj Singh
16.   Shri Chandramani Tripathi
         SECRETARIAT
         Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
         Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
         Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
1.   Shri K.M. Chandrasekhar, Revenue Secretary
2.   Shri A.K. Singh, Chairman, CBEC

160th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/160threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]
3.   Shri J.N. Nigam, Member, CBEC
Ministries of SSI and ARI
1.   Shri Anupam Dasgupta, Secretary (SSI and ARI)
2.   Shri Satyananda Mishra, Additional Secretary and DC
3.   Shri A.P. Padhi, Joint Secretary
4.   Dr. S. Rohini, Additional Development Commissioner
Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises
1.   Shri V.D. Vatwani, OSD
2.   Shri S.V. Bhave, J.S.
3.   Shri Sanjeev Ranjan, Director
2.      At the outset, the Chairman welcomed members of the Committee, the representatives of Department of Revenue,
Heavy Industry, Ministry of SSI and ARI and also the representatives of auto, SSI and other associations.
3.      The Committee deliberated on the impact of indirect tax proposals in the Union Budget (2005-06) on the various
segments of industry. The Committee sought clarifications from the Revenue Secretary about the certain duties
imposed/removed. Thereafter, the Committee asked the various associations to present their views on the issue.
4.      The Committee thereafter heard the views of Secretary, SSI on the points raised by the associations.
5.      The Committee also decided to present a Report on the tax proposals in the Union Budget affecting various
segments of industry.
6.      A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7.         The meeting was adjourned at 6.20 P.M.
XII
TWELFTH  MEETING
         The Committee met at 5.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 21
st April, 2005 in Committee Room 'B', Ground Floor, PHA,
New Delhi.
   1.   Shri Santosh Bagrodia   —   Chairman
         RAJYA  SABHA
   2.   Prof. M.M. Agarwal
   3.   Shri Surendra Lath
   4.   Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
   5.   Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   6.   Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
   7.   Shrimati Vanga Geetha
         LOK  SABHA
   8.   Shri Kailash Baitha
   9.   Shri Subhash Deshmukh
10.   Shri Rajnarayan
11.   Shri Gurjeet Singh Rana
12.   Shri Suraj Singh
13.   Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
         SECRETARIAT
         Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
         Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
         Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
2.      At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee.
3.      The Committee then took up the Draft 160th Report on tax proposals affecting the various segments of industries
for its consideration. After a brief discussion, the Report was adopted.
4.         The Committee adjourned at 5.30 P.M.

160th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/160threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:27]