80th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/80threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:43]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
EIGHTIETH -REPORT
 
ON
 
ACTION TAKEN  BY THE GOVERNMENT ON RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
COMMITTEE ' S  66TH   REPORT ON PERFORMANCE REVIEW OF JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
ALUMINIUM RESEARCH DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN CENTRE (JNARDDC)DEPARTMENT OF
MINES
(MINISTRY OF COAL AND MINES )
 
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON                ,  2002)
(LAID ON THE TABLE  OF THE  LOK SABHA ON             , 2002)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
AUGUST, 2002/SRAVANA, 1924  (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
                                                                                                                       
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
                                                     
2.         INTRODUCTION                                                                                    
3.         REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                  
4.         OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS  AND   RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE  COMMITTEE AT A
GLANCE
5.         MINUTES       (TO BE APPENDED AT THE TIME OF PRINTING OF REPORT ).......                       
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
(Date of Constitution - 1st January, 2002  )
           
            Shri T.N. Chaturvedi — Chairman @
RAJYA SABHA
Prof. M.M. Aggarwal
 @@3.   Dr . Abrar Ahmad
 $ 4.   Shri Jayantilal Barot
 @5.   Shri Prasanta Chatterjee 
Smt. Saroj Dubey
Shri Faguni Ram
  ☼ 8.   Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
Shri P.K. Maheshwari
Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil

80th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/80threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:43]
Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
Shri S. Sivasubramanian
 #13. Smt. Sushree Devi
14. Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
LOK SABHA
Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
Kumari Mamata Banerjee
Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
Shri Nepal Chandra Das
Shri Deepak Kumar
Shri Thomas Hansda
22. Dr. S. Jagathrakshakan
Shri A.C. Jose
Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
25. Shri Brijlal Khabri
26. Shri Sunil Khan
27. Shri Manjay Lal
Dr. K. Malaisamy
Shri A. Narendra
Shri Ananta Nayak
Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
 Ø 32. Shri Dharam Raj Singh Patel
@ Appointed Chairman and Member of the Committee w.e.f. 15
th April, 02 vice Sh Ramdas Agarwal who ceased to be
a member of the Committee w.e.f. 09th April, 02 consequent upon his cessation to be a Member of the Rajya Sabha
@@Nominated w.e.f. 22nd April, 02 vice Ms. Frida Topno who  ceased to be a  Member of the Committee w.e.f. 02 nd
April, 02 consequent upon her cessation to be a Member of  the Rajya Sabha
$ nominated w e.f 14
th May, 02
@nominated w.e.f. 22nd May, 02 vice Shri Jibon Roy ceased to be a Member of the Committee # nominated w.e.f. 14th
May, 02 vice Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 09 th April, 02 consequent upon
his cessation to be Member of  the Rajya Sabha
*nominated w.e.f.  15
th May, 02 vice Shri G. Mallikarjunappa ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  25 th
February, 02
Ø nominated  w.e.f. 10
th June, 02
☼ nominated w.e.f 11th June, 02
 
33. Shri Uttamrao Patil
34.Shri Malyala Rajaiah
35.Shri P. Rajendran
Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
Shri Tarachand Sahu
Shri Ramanand Singh
Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
Chowdhary Talib Hussain
Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari
Shri Beni Prasad Verma
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director

80th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/80threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:43]
Shri  D.P. Ahuja ,Under Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
Θ Ceased  to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  from 1 st July, 2002 consequent  upon induction into Council of
Ministers.    
I N T R O D U C T I ON
 
 
I,  the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry,  having   been authorised  by
the Committee, hereby present this Eightieth   Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in  the   Committee's  66
th   Report on Performance Review of Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminium Research
Development and Design Centre (JNARDDC ) which is under the administrative control of Department of Mines
(Ministry of Coal and Mines) .
 
2.         The Committee examined and  considered  the Action Taken note on recommendations contained  in the
Committee's  66
th  Report on Performance Review of Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminium Research Development and Design
Centre (JNARDDC) which is under the administrative control of Department of Mines (Ministry of Coal and Mines ) .
 
3.         The Committee at its meeting held on 9
TH August ., 2002 considered and adopted the Report.
                                               
 
NEW DELHI;
…………….,2002
 
 
          T .N. CHATURVEDI
            Chairman
Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on
Industry
REPORT
 
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Mines (Ministry of coal and Mines) on
the Recommendations contained in its 66
th   Report (of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Industry) on Performance Review of Jawaharlal Nehru  Aluminium Research Development and Design and Centre
(JNARDDC) which was presented /laid to  on the Table of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha on  8th March,  2002.
 
 Action Taken Notes have been received from the Department  of Mines in respect of the recommendations contained in
the Report.   These have been categorized as follows:
 
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry of Mines
(Chapter - I).
 
Recommendations:-   2.3 ,4.2 ,5.2 ,5.4 ,
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the government’s replies :
(Chapter - II)
 
Recommendations:-   3.2 ,12.2 ,15.2 ,,15.5 .
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies of the Ministry of Mines:.
(Chapter - III).
 
Recommendations:-   6.4 ,7.3 ,  8.2, 9.3 ,10.3 ,11.4 , 13 .4 ,14.3, 15.3,15.4, 15.6,

80th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/80threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:43]
 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the  Ministry of Mines   have not been received. (Chapter
– IV).
 
 
NIL
(Chapter - I)
 
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry of Mines
 
 
Recommendation       (Para    2.3)
 
Objectives of JNARDDC
 
The Committee while appreciating the objectives for setting up the Research Centre for Aluminium Industries has
noticed during its visit that the Centre is well equipped with modern analytical facilities and process development
monitoring and control facilities in order to carry out research work in the areas of bauxite, alumina and aluminium
smelting. The Committee recommends that the Centre should strive its best to achieve its cherished goal and make all
efforts towards removing the problems being faced by the Indian aluminium industry. 
 
Action Taken
 
JNARDDC has  assured that it will continue to strive its best to achieve its cherished goals. In consultation with the
Indian aluminium industry it will continue all efforts towards solving the problems being faced and referred to it by the
industry. 
 
Recommendation          (Para   4.2)
 
On-going projects of  JNARDDC
 
The Committee notes the projects undertaken by JNARDDC and hopes that the efforts made by the Centre would be
utilized as the store house of all aluminium related “experiments and observations” and the knowledge and experience
derived of the efforts would be helpful in removing the problems of aluminium industry. The Committee also hope that
each project under study by JNARDDC must involve the highest degree of intellectual honesty as far as the relevance
and the purpose of the projects are concerned.
 
Action Taken
 
JNARDDC has always stood by the need for showing exemplary intellectual honesty in choosing and executing projects
for the aluminium industry. The Centre will continue to act in the most responsible manner and enforce the highest
standards of discipline and honesty in its dealings with the Indian aluminium industry. Protecting intellectual property
rights as well as ensuring the highest level of confidentiality of the results of the work done for individual customers are
the very pillars of the Centre’s functioning. These will be maintained at all costs.
 
Recommendation          (Para   5.2)
 
Thrust areas for R&D
 
The Committee understands the significance of adopting the practice of process monitoring and modeling to carry out
the research work in a result -oriented manner. The Committee, while noting the steps taken by JNARDDC regarding
the process development and product development, recommends that JNARDDC should carry on such research work
which may help aluminium industry in developing new designs of products with the help of product mix. The research

80th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/80threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:43]
work should lead to the evolution of process development for cost reduction. JNARDDC should make a survey of the
market demand and engage itself in such research work which might lead to development of products in accordance
with market demands. The new initiatives being envisaged may be taken up at the earliest.
 
Action Taken
An entire new Division with the name “Process and Product Development” has been created for this purpose. The
Centre is well aware of its responsibility to come up with new processes and products for the benefit of the aluminium
industry and will continue to strive to achieve this goal to the best of its ability. Towards this end, the Centre will be
bringing out several technology capsules for transfer to the Aluminium industry both big and small.
 
Recommendation    (Para : 5.4)
           
The Committee desires that JNARDDC should involve itself in such research work which would provide better quality,
speed up design engineering and lead to cost  effective production for the ultimate survival and growth of indigenous
Aluminium industry in the changing scenario caused by globalisation and liberalization. The globally emerging trends
that need to be implemented in aluminium industry may be addressed on a emergency basis in collaboration with
aluminium industry.
 
Action Taken
 
The Centre is in continuous touch not only with the major aluminium producers but also a number of small industries
particularly in the Vidarbha region (through the Vidarbha Industries Association) to promote the use of aluminium in
the country in the form of new products and better quality of existing ones. The Centre is very conscious of the need to
bring to India globally emerging trends in the aluminium industry, particularly newer technologies such as inert anode
and wettable cathode.  Almost the entire R & D work taken up by the centre for the Aluminium Industry is concerned
with improving the efficiency and speed of processes, quality of the product,   material and energy conservation,
minimizing environmental hazards reduction in overall cost of production and related issues.  It  thus addresses all the
concerns  expressed by the Committee. 
 
(Chapter - II)
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE
IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES:
 
Recommendation  (Para : 3.2 )
 
Projects completed by JNARDDC
 
The Committee notes the projects undertaken and its participation in various modernization and upgradation projects .
 
Action Taken
 
No action required.
 
Recommendation (Para 12.2)
 
Formation of core group of Indian aluminium industry
 
The Committee is of the view that regular interaction of scientists of the Centre with the experienced professionals from
IIT, EIL, TISL etc. to enhance the knowledge and experience of Scientists of JNARDDC in developing various models
for aluminium industries. If necessary, working core group involving the Centre’s Scientists and academic institute may
be formed. The Committee also recommends that scientists of various institutions may be invited to the conference and
seminars for the exchange of views on a regular basis.
 

80th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/80threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:43]
Action Taken
 
The Centre has maintained continuous interaction with professionals of academic institutes, R&D organisations and
industry. Persons from the industry have earlier worked in the Centre for long periods on deputation. Persons from
academic and R&D institutes as well as industries are members of its Research Advisory Council, Project Monitoring
Cell, etc. which monitor the Centre’s research programmes. Person-to-person contact between the scientists of the
Centre and others from premier institutions in the country has been an ongoing process. The Centre has also been
inviting persons from the other organizations not only to participate in the conferences organized but also to deliver
lectures on relevant topics. These efforts will continue.
 
Recommendation (Para :15.2)
 
SWOT analysis of JNARDDC
 
The Committee acknowledges the unique position of JNARDDC oriented towards aluminium process metallurgy. The
Committee recommends that JNARDDC should take advantage of its opportunities and overcome its weaknesses by
expanding and diversify its activities and if necessary JNARDDC should induct trained experienced scientists from
various fields.
 
Action Taken
 
The Centre has been engaged in expanding and diversifying its activities
 
Recommendation          (Para  15.5 )
 
SWOT analysis of  JNARDDC
 
The Committee recommends that the Department of Mines should examine the issue of cheaper imports and get anti-
dumping duty imposed if dumping is found .
 
Action Taken
 
The landed cost of imported aluminium is more than the domestic price as on date.  So far instances of dumping have 
not come to the notice of Department of Mines.
 
 (Chapter - III).
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY OF MINES OR FURTHER RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMITTEE IS
REQUIRED
 
Recommendation   (Para  : 6.4   )
 
Diversification programmes of JNARDDC
 
The Committee feels that JNARDDC should chalk out its diversification programme in such a way as to benefit the
aluminium industry in the short as well as long term. Since technology for setting of such plants is not available in India,
JNARDDC can play a vital role in developing such technologies. The Committee recommends that research may be
undertaken to develop and adapt new technology which may help setting up of small and medium capacity alumina and
aluminium plants.
 
Action Taken
 
This is a major thrust area that the Centre is keen on developing. It has already initiated steps to find the factors

80th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/80threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:43]
responsible for the economic unviability of small capacity of alumina and aluminium plants.  Attempt will be made to
remove the bottlenecks that stand in the way of establishment of mini-aluminium plants in the country that would help
in improving the availability of aluminium in the country.
 
Further Recommendation
 
The Committee   is pleased to note that JNARDDC is keen on developing diversification programme in  such a way as
to benefit the aluminium industry in the   short as well as long  term.  JNARDDC has made its diversification
programme a major thrust  area and has also initiated  steps to find  factors responsible  for the economic viability of
small capacity of alumina and aluminium plants.  However, the Committee would like to know the  details   about the
steps taken to remove the bottlenecks that stand   in the  way of establishment of mini-aluminium plants  in the country.
 
Recommendation          (Para: 7.3  )
 
Seminar/Conferences
 
The Committee appreciates the efforts made by JNARDDC in conducting seminars and conferences and recommends
that JNARDDC should conduct such conferences and seminars more frequently. The Committee also recommends that
JNARDDC should make some nominal entry fee from all the participants in order to raise funds to meet its financial
requirements.
 
Action Taken
 
The Centre has already initiated steps for increasing the number of seminars and conferences that it proposes to hold
during the year 2002. The calendar of events planned includes short course / workshops and international conferences
practically every month of the year starting from April 2002. Adequate participation of industry in such courses is being
ensured and the registration fee collected is added to the fund generated by the Centre. The Centre gives the widest
possible publicity to these programmes by way of mailing circulars to over 250 industrial establishments, academic and
R&D institutes as well as through personal contacts and electronic means such as e-mail.
 
Recommendation (Para: 8.2  )
 
Training programmes and workshops
 
Conducting of training programmes and workshops provides a platform to scientists for productive interaction and
encourage them to gather knowledge and share experience. JNARDDC should charge a  nominal fee from the
participants for the training programme to generate revenue to meet JNARDDC’s non-plan financial requirements. The
Committee also recommends that JNARDDC should give wide publicity to its training programmes.
 
Action Taken
 
The Action Taken Notes  in respect of  Para 7.3  at  Sl. No. 7 may  please be seen        
 
Further Recommendation
 
The Committee  would like  to know the details of proposed  short  course/workshops and international  conferences  for
the  year 2002-03 and the likely outcome of  these workshop and conferences .  The Committee would  like  also to
know the amount of   fee collected as  registration amount upto  the date of such workshop and conference held.
 
Recommendation (Para : 9.3 )
 
Consultancy and testing services
 
The Committee while taking note of consultancy and testing services offered by JNARDDC, is of the opinion that

80th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/80threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:43]
JNARDDC should generate sufficient fund to meet its requirement of non-plan expenditure by opening avenues for
generating revenue by providing consultancy services. JNARDDC may stress on service mix and service endowment by
giving due importance to diversification in consultancy services and exploring new ideas for generation of new projects.
The Centre should try to provide consultancy services outside the country as well.
 
Action Taken
 
The Centre has been making all out efforts to increase the testing and consultancy services that it provides to many
industries. To this end, a profile of the Centre has been published and a quarterly Newsletter is being brought out .  The
Centre is all set to provide such services outside the country as well. It has already provided such services indirectly to
one of the aluminium majors of the world during March 2002. Negotiations are on with another of the major aluminium
producers of the world to provide testing services.
 
Further Recommendation
 
The Committee is of the opinion that the Department of  Mines  should have informed the committee as to whom
JNARDDC has provided consultancy and testing  services  during  March, 2002 and the amount of  consultancy fee
collected `against the service  rendered.  The  Committee would also like  to know the details of negotiation  by
JNARDDC with other major aluminium producers domestic as well as  international.
 
Recommendation  (Para : 10.3   )
 
Service to Downstream Sector
 
The Committee is of the opinion that JNARDDC with its experience can provide quality service to the down stream
sector. Efforts for establishing the downstream processing laboratory (DSP) may be accelerated and the staff be
imparted necessary training and expertise.
 
Action Taken
 
With regard to establishing a Downstream Processing laboratory, the Centre has taken many concrete steps such as
ordering of equipment and recruiting specialist staff. It has also initiated steps to send its scientists and staff on training
programmes to acquire expertise in this area as advised by the Committee. Experts from other organizations have been
invited to the Centre for interaction with its Scientists.
 
Further Recommendation
 
The Committee  desires to know the  outcome of  `concrete  step' taken by JNARDDC for establishing the 
downstream   processing laboratory (DSP) for providing quality  service to the down stream sector.  The Committee
desires to know   also the progress made in regard to setting up of downstream process  laboratory   and details of
training imported  to  scientists and staff and their   expertise acquired  during the course of training.  The Department of
Mines  in its ATN to the  present Report would also  furnish the details of outcome of interaction between the  scientists
of the centre and the representatives  of other organisations.
 
Recommendation          (Para: 11.4)
 
Pollution control and environmental impact assessment
 
The Committee observes that the problem of pollution is one of the threats being faced by human society. JNARDDC
can make significant contribution for environmental impact assessment. Central Government may consider to entrust
with JNARDDC to undertake study on various forms of pollution and develop mechanism for pollution/waste
management and control. The Centre should be regularly in touch with other related Ministries.
 
Action Taken

80th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/80threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:43]
 
JNARDDC is very keen to take up work related to assessment of environmental impact of the aluminium industry. The
Centre on its part has been negotiating with related institutes like NEERI, Nagpur and CPCB, Delhi in order to
undertake such work.
 
Further Recommendation
 
The Committee observes that the Department of Mines is, not taking the recommendations of   parliamentary standing
Committee in  the right light  and the Action Taken Note  is too general and benefit of  empirical  facts   figures.  In
regards  to the present recommendations made in the content   possible  role  of JNARDDC  pertaining to 
environmental Impact assessment (EJA)  the Department of Mines has  not informed the committee regarding the  steps
taken/being taken for assigning JNARDDC to  undertake study on various form of pollution and developing mechanism
for pollution/waste  management.  The committee  has not been informed in details the outcome of interaction between
JNARDDC and related institutes like NEERI, Nagpur and CPCB , Delhi in orders to undertake  research work
pertaining to  pollution control and environmental impact assessment.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that the
Department of Mines  should furnish  detailed Action Taken Note in  line with  recommendations made by the
committee.
 
Recommendation  (Para : 13.4  )
 
Annual Budgetary requirement of JNARDDC
 
The Committee is constrained to express its concerns over the languishing and pathetic condition of Centre like
JNARDDC due to lack of sufficient fund flow from the Government where all research work pertaining to aluminium
industry might be carried on successfully. The situation emerging out of the development is really pathetic and requires
immediate attention. JNARDDC has an excellent layout with required equipment and technology for research work in
aluminium industry, therefore, the Sub-Committee is of the view that such an extra-ordinary Research Centre should not
languish because of financial crunch. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Mines should take stock of
actual financial requirement of JNARDDC to meet its plan and non-plan expenditure. The Committee further
recommends that since JNARDDC is a research centre and does not generate substantial revenue of its own except from
consultancy and services, JNARDDC should be allowed budgetary support to meet at least its non-plan expenditure so
that the scientist should  remain in peace while doing research work and have not to bother for their future survival. The
Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Mines should explore the possibility to generate/appropriate funds
out of Aluminium Development Fund and also from Indian Aluminium companies to meet the plan-expenditure of
JNARDDC. At the same time, JNARDDC management and the Ministry of Mines should propagate the utility of
JNARDDC for aluminium industries. The aluminium industries can refer to the Centre for all of their R&D problems as
their involvement would definitely help in the development of technology packages for future expansion programmes. If
the Central agency like Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminium Research Development & Design Centre is involved in importing
technology for green field as well as brown field expansions there is a possibility of saving a lot of foreign exchange by
avoiding duplicate transfer of technology.
 
Action Taken
 
The Government has agreed to release 80% of the salary requirement of JNARDDC out of non-plan funds.  In addition,
the annual interest accrued on AMDF will also be passed on to the centre together with grants under S & T components
for projects.  However, JNARDDC has to establish its utility to the aluminium industry and generate resources for
continuing the R & D work.
 
Recommendation  (Para : 15.4  )
 
SWOT anylysis  of  JNARDDC
 
The Committee is of the view that JNARDDC has to inject sufficient competitive resilience to survive in the
competitive era. However, the Department of Mines should take care of sufficient budgetary support for R&D activities

80th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/80threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:43]
for aluminium industry.
 
Action Taken
 
JNARDDC is all set to enhance its activities in order to improve its chances of surviving in the emerging competitive
scenario.  Department of Mines is providing necessary budgetary support to the Centre.  The action taken notes in
respect of  Para 13.4 at  Sl .No. 13 may  please be seen.
 
 
Further Recommendation
 
The Committee is, in  fact  impressed  with the JNARDDC's layout and basic   infrastructure  (equipment and
technology)  for  research work in aluminium Industry and   therefore,  desires  strongly, that such  an  extra ordinary 
research centre shouldn't  languish because of financial  crunch.   The Committee is pleased  to note that  the
Government  has agreed  to release 80%  of the salary  requirement of JNARDDC   out  of non-plan  funds  and the rest
would  be taken care of by the income accorded   from annual interest an AMDF.  The Committee strongly recommends
that Government should continue to  support JNARDDC to  meet  its non-plan expenditure.
 
            The Committee  wants  to  know the steps taken/required to be taken for   propagating  the utility  of JNARDDC
for aluminium industries.  The Committee recommends that  the Department of Mines would extend all possible
assistance  to JNARDDC management for propagation of  utility of JNARDDC  and generating resources for continuing
the R&D work
 
Recommendation (Para : 14.3  )
 
Merger of JNARDDC with NALCO
 
The Committee understands that NALCO is a leading aluminium company with the status of Mini Ratna and spends
considerable amount of fund towards R&D in the field of aluminium. The Committee agrees that attaching JNARDDC
with NALCO would defeat the basic objectives of the Centre. Government should find ways to strengthen the Centre by
infusing sufficient fund apart from budgetary support after the projects are prepared. 
 
Action Taken
 
The Department of Mines has no proposal to attach JNARDDC  with NALCO.  Regarding infusing funds, the action
taken note in respect of  Para No. 13.4 at Sl. .No. 13 may be seen.  
 
 
Further Recommendation
 
The Committee while desires  that JNARDDC management and the  Department of Mines should take concrete steps
towards  strengthening  the   centre  by infusing  sufficient fund apart from budgetary support  but at the  same time the
Committee  is of the opinion that possibility of merger of  JNARDDC  with NALCO should be explored as the same
would not lead to  ensured sustenance  of JNARDDC but also add to strengthening of R&D   wing of NALCO.
 
Recommendation  (Para:15. 3)
 
During the course of oral evidence the Secretary, Department of Mines assured the Sub-Committee for proper utilization
of 100 acres land JNARDDC. The Secretary stated that National Institute of Rock Mechanics (NIRM) and National
Institute of Miner’s Health (NIMH) Kolar are to be shifted there. The Secretary further stated that vacant staff quarters
in the premises of JNARDDC would be allotted to the Scientists at the earliest and improvement with regard to house
keeping would also be made.
 
Action Taken

80th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/80threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:43]
 
Efforts to allot the vacant  quarters to scientists and staff are underway. All the vacant quarters as well as part of the
technical complex have been allocated to NIMH and NIRM on an initiative taken by the Department of Mines. Office
of  NIMH has already moved in.
 
Recommendation  (Para:  15.6  )
 
 SWOT analysis of  JNARDDC
 
The Department may ensure proper utilization of the large building.
 
Action Taken
 
The Centre has initiated steps for complete utilization of the large building space as mentioned in reply to Para 15.3   at
Sl. No. 16 above.
 
Further Recommendation
 
While the Committee is pleased to note that JNARDDC management has started to allot the  vacant quarters  to
scientists  and staff, however, the committee  would like to know the details of  response of staff, number of staff 
quarters stiff vacant , if any, and the status of house-keeping.  The Committee  welcome the shifting    of NIMH  to
JNARDDC's complex,  however, the committee desires know the progress made in regard to shifting of NIRM  office in
the campus of JNARDDC.
(Chapter – IV).
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the  Ministry of Mines   have not been received.
NIL
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE
 
 
            The Committee   is pleased to note that JNARDDC is keen in developing diversification programme in  such
way as to benefit the aluminium industry in the   short as well as long  term.  JNARDDC has made diversification
programme a major thrust  area and has also initiated  steps to final   factors responsible for the economic viability of
small capacity of alumina and aluminium plants.  However, the Committee would like to know the  details   about the
steps taken to remove the bottlenecks that stand   in the  way of establishment of mini-aluminium plants  in the country.
 
( Para: 6.4  )
 
            The Committee  would like  to know the details of proposed  short  course/workshops and international 
conferences  for the  year 2002-03 and the likely outcome of  these workshop and conferences.  The Committee would 
like  also to know the amount of  fee collected as  registration amount upto  the date of such workshop and conference
held.
( Para  7.3 )
 
            The Committee is of the opinion that the Department of  Mines  should have informed the committee as to
whom JNARDDC has provided consultancy and testing  services  during  March, 2002 and the amount of  consultancy
fee collected `against the service  rendered.  The  Committee would also like  to know the details of negotiation  by
JNARDDC with other major aluminium producers domestic as well as  international.
( Para 9.3 )
 

80th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/80threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:43]
            The Committee desires to know the outcome of concrete to know the outcome of  `concrete  step' taken by
JNARDDC for establishing the  downstream   processing laboratory (DSP) for providing quality  service to the down
stream sector.  The Committee desires to know   also the progress made in regard to setting up of downstream process 
laboratory   and details of training imported  to  scientists and staff for the prove and  their  expertise acquired  during
the course of training.  The Department of Mines  in its ATN to the  present Report would also  furnish the details of
outcome of interaction between the  scientists of the centre and the representatives  of other organisations.
( Para 10.3 )
 
            The committee observes that the Department of Mines is not taking the recommendations of   parliamentary
standing Committee    in   the right light  current and the Action Taken Note  is too general and benefit of  empirical 
facts   figures.  In regards  to the present recommendations made in the content   possible  role  of JNARDDC 
pertaining to  environmental Impact assessment (EJA)  the Department of Mines has  not informed the committee
regarding the  steps taken/being taken for assigning JNARDDC to  undertake study on various form of pollution and
developing mechanism for pollution/waste  management.  The committee  has not been informed in details of  the
outcome of interaction between JNARDDC and related institutes like NEERI, Nagpur and CPCB , Delhi in orders to
undertake  research work pertaining to  pollution control and environmental impact assessment.  Therefore, the
Committee recommends that the Department of Mines  should furnish  detailed Action Taken Note in  line with 
recommendations made by the committee.
( Para  11.4)
 
            The Committee is, in  fact,  impressed  with the JNARDDC's  layout and basic   infrastructure  (equipment and
technology)  for  research work in aluminium Industry and   therefore,  desires  strongly, that such  an o extra ordinary 
research centre shouldn't   languish because of financial  crunch.   The Committee is pleased  to note that  the
Government  has agreed  to release 80%  of the salary  requirement of JNARDDC   out  of non plan  funds  and the rest
would  be taken care of by the income accorded   from annual interest an AMDF.  The Committee strongly recommends
that Government should continue to  support JNARDDC to  meet  its non-plan expenditure.
( Para  13.4)
 
            The Committee  wills  to  know the steps taken/required to be taken for   propagating  the utility  of JNARDDC
for aluminium industries.  The Committee recommends that  the Department of Mines would extend all possible
assistance  to JNARDDC management for propagation of  utility of JNARDDC  and generating resources for continuing
the R&D work
( Para   )
 
            The Committee while desires  that JNARDDC management   and the  Department of Mines should take concrete
steps towards  strengthening  the   centre  by infusing  sufficient fund apart from budgetary support  but at the  same
time the committee  is of the opinion that possibility of merger of  JNARDDC  with NALCO should be explored as the
same would not lead to  ensured sustenance  of JNARDDC but also add to strengthening of R&D   wing of NALCO.
( Para  14.3 )
 
            While the Committee is pleased to note that JNARDDC management has started to allot the  vacant quarters  to
scientists  and staff, however, the committee  would like to know the details of  response of staff, number of staff 
quarters stiff vacant , if any, and the status of house-keeping.  The Committee  welcome the shifting    of NIMH  to
JNARDDC's complex,  however, the committee desires know the progress made in regard to shifting of NIRM  office in
the campus of JNARDDC.
 
( Para 15.3 )
 
MINUTES
XI
 
ELEVENTH MEETING

80th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/80threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:43]
 
                        The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday the 9th August, 2002 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
           
PRESENT
 
Shri T.N. Chaturvedi - Chairman         
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Dr. Abrar Ahmad        
3.         Shri Prasanta Chatterjee          
4          Smt. Saroj Dubey                    
5          Dr.  Faguni Ram                                  
6          Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
7          Sh. P.K. Maheshwari              
8          Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
9          Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
                                   
LOK SABHA
 
10        Smt. Jayashree Banerjee          
11        Shri Nepal Chandra Das          
12        Shri A.C. Jose
13        Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
14        Shri Sunil Khan
15        Dr. K.Malaisamy
16        Shri A. Narendra 
17        Shri P. Rajendran
18        Dr. B.B. Ramaiah
18        Chowdhary Talib Hussain
19        Shri Chunnilal Bhau Thakur
20        Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri  Tapas Das Gupta, Director
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
 
2.         Shri A.C. Jose, Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi and Dr. B.B. Ramaiah and other members of the Committee 
felicitated the Chairman of the Committee who had since been designated as the Governor of Karnataka.  In the
felicitation address, all the three Convenors and other members of the Committee appreciated the work done by the
Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri T.N. Chaturvedi.  They all were of the view that Shri Chaturvedi gave a new
thrust and orientation to the working of the Committee and gave inspiration to the Committee with his valuable
contribution and personal interest in the day-to-day working of the Committee and in a short span of four months, the
Committee could present a record number of ‘23’ reports.
            The Chairman, in response, observed that due to the hard work put in by the Sub-Committees it had been
possible to prepare such a large number of reports.  He thanked the Convenors of all the Sub-Committees, Members of
the Committee and the Secretariat for extending cooperation to him to discharge his duties as the Chairman of the
Committee.
3.         The Committee then took up consideration of the following draft reports:-
th rd

80th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/80threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:43]
76  Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee’s 53  Report on Modernization, Restructuring
and Expansion Programmes of NALCO.
77th  Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee’s 67 th Report on Organization, Structure and
Performance Review of Indian Bureau of Mines.
 78
th  Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee’s 68 th Report on Working and Performance
Review of Mineral Exploration Corporation Ltd. (MECL).
79
th  Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee’s   65 th Report on Modernisation,
Restructuring and Expansion Programmes of Hindustan Copper Ltd. (HCL).
80
th  Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee’s 66 th Report on Performance Review of
Jawahar Lal Nehru Aluminum Research Development and Design Centre.
81
st   Report  on Sickness in SSI Sector of Cement Industry in Uttar Pradesh.
82nd   Report on  MoU system in the Strategic Sector PSEs
83rd Report on  MoU system in the Allied Sector PSEs.
84th Report on Implementation of Prime Minister’s Rozgar Yojana (PMRY) in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Kerala.
85th Report on Implementation Status of Financial Assistance-cum-Restructuring Package and Revival of Hindustan
Steel Works Construction Ltd. (HSCL).
86
th Report on Performance Review of Metal Scrap Trade Corporation Ltd. (MSTC).
87th Report on Implementation status of Financial Assistance-cum-Restructuring Package and Revival of Bharat
Refractories Ltd. (BRL).
88
th Report on  Performance review of Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL).
89th Report on Modernisation, Restructuring and Expansion Programmes of Durgapur Steel Plant (DSP).
90th Report on Sickness in SSI Sector in the City of Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh.
91st   Report on Coir Board – A performance Review.
 
4.         The Committee adopted all the above stated reports and authorized its Chairman  to make corrections, if any, in
the reports.  The Committee decided to present/lay the above mentioned reports on the 13 th August, 2002.  The
Committee for this purpose authorized its Chairman to present the reports  in the Rajya Sabha and in his absence Shri
Khan Ghufran Zahidi and Prof. M.M. Agarwal to present the reports.  The Committee also authorized Dr. B.B. Ramaiah
to lay the reports in the Lok Sabha and in his absence authorized Shri A.C. Jose and Shri A. Narendra to lay the reports.
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 P.M.
 
 