 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON INDUSTRY 
  
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2022 / Magha, 1943 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in 
the 303rd Report of the Committee on Downturn in Automobile Sector – Its Impact 
and Measures for Revival pertaining to the Ministry of Heavy Industries  
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th February, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th February, 2022) 
 
  
  REPORT NO. 
313 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2022 / Magha, 1943 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in 
the 303rd Report of the Committee on Downturn in Automobile Sector – Its Impact 
and Measures for Revival pertaining to the Ministry of Heavy Industries 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th February, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th February, 2022) 
 

 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGES 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………………………………     (i) 
 
2.  INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………………….    (ii) 
 
3.  ACRONYMS………………………………………………………………………..    (iii) – (v) 
 
4.  REPORT…………………………………………………………………………………    1-25 
 
     
       CHAPTER – I Recommendations/observations, that  have been accepted 
by the Ministry………………………............................. 
 
2-6 
       CHAPTER–II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does 
not desire to pursue fur ther in view of the  replies of the 
Ministry……………………………….............................. 
 
 
7-17          
      CHAPTER–III Recommendations/Observations in respect of  which the 
Committee has not accepted  the replies of the 
Ministry……………………….............................................. 
 
18-20          
 
      CHAPTER – IV Recommendations/observations in respect of wh ich the 
final replies of the Ministry are still awaited......................... 
21-25          
 
    
4.    * Minutes…………………………………………………………………………….          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* To be appended later. 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2021-22) 
(Constituted  w.e.f. 13th September, 2021) 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 1. Dr. K. Keshava Rao         -       Chairman 
 2.  Shri Hardwar Dubey    
 3. Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
 4. Shri Shwait Malik 
 5. Shrimati Ranee Narah  
 6. Shri Sanjay Seth 
 7. Shri Abdul Wahab 
 8.  Dr. Amee Yajnik 
 9.   *Shri Luizinho Joaquim Faleiro 
 10.  &Vacant  
    LOK SABHA 
 11.   Shri Hanuman Beniwal 
 12.   Ms. Mimi Chakraborty 
 13.   Shri Bharatsinghji Shankarji Dabhi 
 14.   Shri Hemant Godse  
 15.     Dr. S. T. Hasan 
 16.   Shri Ravi Kishan 
 17.   Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanjibhai Kundariya 
 18.      Shri Ravinder Kushawaha 
 19.   Shrimati Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
 20.     Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
 21.   Shri Ramprit Mandal 
 22.      Shri Vincent H. Pala 
 23.   Shri Chirag Kumar Paswan 
 24.   Shri T. R. V. S. Ramesh 
 25.   Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy  
 26.   Ms. Jothimani S.  
 27.   Shrimati Gomti Sai 
 28.   Shri Sunil Soren 
 29.   Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare 
 30.   Shri Thirunavukkarasar S.U. 
 31.   Shri Vijay Kumar (alias) Vijay Vasanth 
    SECRETARIAT 
1.           Shri Jagdish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
2.      Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Secretary 
3.     Shri Narendra Kumar, Additional Director 
4.     Smt. Sreeja. V., Deputy Secretary 
5.      Shri Pratap Shenoy, Under Secretary 
6.      Miss Deepti Rana, Assistant Committee Officer 
 
____________________________________________________________________ 
*Nominated to the Committee w.e.f 24.01.2022 
&Vacancy caused due to demise of Dr. Mahendra Prasad on 27.12.2021.  
(i) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on  
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this  313th Report on 
Action Taken by the Ministry of Heavy Industries on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the Committee’s 303rd Report on Downturn in Automobile Sector – Its 
Impact and Measures for Revival pertaining to Ministry of Heavy Industries. 
 
2.  The 303rd Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 3 rd February, 2021 and laid on the Table of 
the Lok Sabha on 3rd February, 2021. 
 
3.  The Ministry of Heavy Industries  furnished the Action Taken Replie s on the 
303rd Report of the Committee on the 22nd November, 2021. 
 
4. The Committee considered the draft -Report and adopted the same at  its meeting 
held on 3rd February, 2022. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
3rd  February, 2022 
Magha 14, 1943 (Saka) 
 
Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (ii) 

 
ACRONYMS 
 
2W - Two Wheeler 
ARAI - Automotive Research Association of India 
AVSF - Automobile Vehicle Scrapping Facility 
BCD - Basic Custom Duty 
BPCL - Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited 
BS - Bharat Stage 
CBU - Complete Built Unit 
CC - Cubic Centimeters 
CEA - Central Electricity Authority 
CIBIL - Credit Information Bureau (India) Limited 
CKD - Completely Knocked Down 
CMVR - Central Motor Vehicles Rules 
COVID-19 - Corona Virus Disease 2019 
CPCB - Central Pollution Control Board 
CPSUs - Central Public Sector Undertakings 
CSR - Corporate Social Responsibility 
DHI - Department of Heavy Industry 
EESL - Energy Efficiency Services Limited 
EU - European Union 
EV - Electrical Vehicle 
FADA - Federation of Automobile Dealers Associations 
FAME- India - Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid &) Electric  
Vehicles in India 
FDI - Foreign Direct Investment 
FTA - Free Trade Agreement 
GDP - Gross Domestic Product 
GoI - Government of India 
GOM - Group of Ministers 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 

GST - Goods and Services Tax 
HPCL - Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited 
ICE - Internal Combustion Engine 
IOCL - Indian Oil Corporation Limited 
KYC - Know Your Customer 
LCVs - Light Commercial Vehicles 
LIB - Lithium Ion Battery 
M/o MSME - Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
MBBL - Model Building Bye-Laws 
MCA - Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
MHI - Ministry of Heavy Industries 
MNREGA - Mahatma Gandhi National Employment Guarantee Act 
MoEFCC - Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
MoHUA - Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
MoP - Ministry of Power 
MoRTH - Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
MSEs - Micro and Small Enterprises 
NATRIP - National Automotive Testing and R&D Infrastructure Project 
NBFC - Non Banking Financial Companies 
NCR - National Capital Region 
NPA - Non Performing Assets 
NSAP - National Social Assistance Programme 
NTPC - National Thermal Power Corporation Limited 
OEM - Original Equipment Manufacturer 
PCS - Public Charging Stations 
PGCIL - Power Grid Corporation of India 
PLI - Production-Linked Incentive 
PM - Particulate Matter 
PMGSY - Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana 
PMP - Phased Manufacturing Programme 
 
 
(iv) 
 
 

PSU - Public Sector Undertaking 
R&D - Research & Development 
RCEP - Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership 
RRTS - Rapid Regional Rail Transit 
RVSF - Registered Vehicles Scrapping Facility 
SIAM - Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers 
SKD - Semi Knocked Down 
SOP - Standard Operational Procedures 
SPCB - State Pollution Control Board 
TDC - Transport Development Council 
URDPFI - Urban and Regional Development Plans Formulation and 
Implementation Guidelines 
WDV - Written Down Value 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 
 

 1 
 
 
 
REPORT 
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the  Action Taken by the Ministry 
of Heavy Industries on the recommendations co ntained in the Committee‟s Three  Hundred and 
Third Report on Downturn in Automobile Sector – Its Impact and Measure s for Revival 
pertaining to Ministry of Heavy Industries. 
 
2.  Action Taken Replies  have been recei ved from the Ministry  of Heavy Industries  in 
respect of the recommenda tions contained in the 303 th Report. These have been categorized as 
follows: 
 
Chapter-I-      The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry. 
  Para: 30, 68, 69, 71, 80, 81 and 86 (Total: 07) 
 
Chapter-II-  The recommendations/ observations which the Committee does not desire to   
pursue further in view of the Ministry‟s replies. 
Para: 20, 35, 38, 39, 40, 41, 47, 54, 63, 70, 72, 73, 82, 84 and 85 (Total: 15) 
 
Chapter-III-  The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has not 
accepted replies of the Ministry.  
  Para: 49, 50, 51, 52 and 77 (Total: 05) 
 
Chapter-IV- The recommendations/observations in respect of which the  final replies of the 
Ministry are still awaited.  
 Para: 17, 19, 23, 42, 44, 45, 58, 59, 62, 65 and 83 (Total: 11) 
 
 
3. The details of the Action Taken Replies of the Ministry and fu rther 
recommendations/observations of the Committee thereon wherever found necessary are given in 
the succeeding pages. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 2 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY 
   
Recommendation/ Observation 
1. The Automobile Sector, due to its strong forward and backward linkages with 
several key segments of   the economy, occupies   a  prominent  place in   the fabric of 
Indian Economy. Since the number of vehicles exported in various segments is nowhere 
near the potential, exporting vehicles in a large scale would significantly contribute to 
employment generation, trade balance and economic growth of the country. The 
Committee therefore recommends that constructive steps should be taken by the 
Government to pro mote export of vehicles in various segments, particularly the BS -VI 
compliant vehicles, and their engine & spare parts to various countries across the globe, 
especially to Africa, Latin America, Southeast Asia and West Asia where there is still 
huge potential for the global automobile companies operating from India. The Committee 
also recommends that the Government in coordination with the automobile companies 
should take appropriate steps   to explore the rural markets, particularly in Two Wheeler 
and Three  Wheeler segments that would contribute substantially for the growth of the 
Auto Sector. 
        (Para 30) 
Action Taken Replies 
 With regards to providing support to auto industry for enhancing exports , the 
following steps have been taken in this direction. 
i)          PLI scheme for the auto sector has been notified with an outlay of Rs 25,938 
crore to enhance the competitiveness of the industry and will help it attain higher 
foothold in exports.  
A number of schemes such as Mahatma Gandhi National Rural E mployment 
Guarantee Act (MNREGA), PradhanMantri Gram SadakYojana (PMGSY), and National 
Social Assistance Programme (NSAP) have been launched for the development of rural 
markets.  It is imperative to recognise that infrastructure is a major driver of growt h for 
auto industry. Consistent allocation of enhanced budget greatly emphasised on the rural 
population, the underprivileged, infrastructure development and development of National 
Highways is significant to give boost to economy especially  with 
focus on rural infrastructure creating a robust business environment an d thus, helping 
auto industry to contribute positively towards National GDP.  
The Two wheeler companies (2W) have already traced the r ural sector, becoming 
the major contributor of automobile sales in this area, Apart from OEMs, Federation of 
Automobile Dealers‟ Association(FADA) may increase their rural penetration  and 
Automotive Skill Development Council need to made rural people   aware of the job 

 3 
opportunities that they might land into after training and show them the path from skill to 
entrepreneurship. 
In a way, COVID-19 has  also contributed in growth of automobile in rural areas as the 
migrants who have gone back duringCOVID-19 to their native villages require an 
alternative source of income enabling pickups, 3-wheelers and LCVs to sell faster in rural 
markets. 
Recommendation/ Observation 
2. The Committee is of the view that in addition to setting of Automotive Vehicle 
Scrapping Facility (AVSF) centres across the country, the government sho uld make 
provisions for upfront financial incentives in the Scrappage Policy to boost demand for 
purchase of new vehicles. The proposed financial incentives would encourage end users 
to discard their old and polluting vehicles and go in for purchase of the  new BS VI 
compliant vehicles.                (Para 68)                                                                                                                       
 
3. Further, the Committee also recommends that adequate transparency should be 
maintained while selecting the proposed AVSF centre, which should be based on 
adherence to pre decided parameters that have to be met by such centres. 
        (Para 69) 
Action Taken Replies For Para 3 & 4 
MoRT&H has undertaken following initiatives to phase out old and unfit vehicles:-  
1.Draft GSR Notification 190(E )dt 15.03.2021 -The Draft Notification provides Motor 
Vehicles (Registration and Functions of Vehicle Scrapping Facility) Rules, 2021 for 
establishment of Registered Vehicles Scrapping Facility (RVSF) to ensure transparency in 
the selection of RVSF.  
2.Draft GSR Notification 177(E) dt 12.03.2021 - The Draft Notification provides that 
Certificate of Registration of Government -owned Vehicles would be non -renewable on 
lapse of 15 years.  
3.Draft GSR N otification 191 (E) dt 15.03.2021 - The Draft Notification provides for 
revision of registration fee, fitness testing fee and fitness certification fee of vehicles. The 
initiative is towards creation of an ecosystem for phasing out of older polluting vehicles.  
4.Draft GSR Notification 220 (E) dt26.03.2021 - The Draft Notification provides for 
concession in the motor vehicle tax for the vehicle registered against submission of 
"Certificate of vehicle scrapping".  
5.Draft GSR Notification 278(E ) dt 08.04.2021 - The Draft Notification provides for 
recognition, regulation and control of Automated Testing Stations.  
All the above initiatives are to ensure transparency in the vehicle scrapping process. 
 
 

 4 
Recommendation/ Observation 
4. The Committee notes that the core objective of Automotive Mission Plan (2026) is 
to propel the Indian Automobile Industry to be the engine of the "Make in  India" 
Programme as it is among the foremost drivers of the manufacturing  sector. In this 
regard, the Committee was informed by the  Federation  of  Automobile Dealers 
Association that if Foreign Direct Investment is allowed in auto sector, it will allow 
Indian Auto Dealers to expand by attracting foreign investment and collaborate with 
dealership groups internationally, without compro mising their ownership. FADA also 
stressed the need to have a Franchise Act for Auto Dealers specifically in our country, on 
the lines of other countries in the world. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
aforesaid suggestions made by the FADA. 
        (Para 71) 
Action Taken Replies 
 The Government of India encourages foreign investment in the automobile sector 
and has allowed 100% foreign direct investment (FDI) under the automatic route except 
Note 3 of FDI Policy wherein GOI mandates that FDI would b e allowed from all 
neighbouring countries to India (with whom India shares a land border) only after 
obtaining approval of the GOI, even in sectors where “automatic” clearances were 
previously permitted.   
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
5. Given the characte ristic of the Covid -19 pandemic world over, the Committee 
understands that this disease is expected to exist for more time. The Committee 
appreciates the Government's decision of graded opening of the lockdown and restarting 
the economic activity for life to  move-on  along with  the Corona virus side by side. The 
Committee however recommends that with a view to protect life and livelihood, the 
economy  needs  to  be opened  up gradually  ensuring : the   safety  to life.    Therefore, 
the Committee, with re gard to Automobile Se ctor, recommends that the Government 
should issue guidelines and Standard Operational Procedures (SOP) that all the 
concerned stakeholders should prioritize employee protection and safety, regularly 
monitor and track health status of t he employees, follow disease control protocols, define 
travel guidelines, ensure quarantine facility, schedule for flexible working hours etc. 
        (Para 80) 
Action Taken Replies 
 Various government & autonomous bodies strictly followed the guidelines a nd 
Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) issued by Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry 
of Health & Family Welfare  to ensure safety of employees for resuming work post 
COVID-19 lockdown.  Various employee and customers‟ safety control measures were 
being taken. Some of them are as following:- 
 Social distancing at workplace 
 Sanitization of vehicles & premises, status of Aarogya Setu App 
 Mandatory wearing of face mask, contribution to PM care relief fund, working in 
shifts to ensure social distancing 

 5 
 Invested in safety initiatives, procurements of sanitizers, thermal scanners, 
oximeters etc. 
Recommendation/ Observation 
6. The Committee notes the recent announcement of relief package by the 
Government to reboot the economy to tide over the crisis and extend supp ort to the 
various stakeholders, like infusion of liquidity through Collateral Free Automatic Loans, 
Subordinate Debt Scheme, financial support to NBFCs etc. which will encourage new 
investments, promoting growth across the supply chain, including Automobi le Dealers, 
and safeguarding employment. Although the package has infused a fresh lease of life 
amid the gloom, but at the same time, the Committee however feels that this stimulus 
package in particularly, falls short of addressing the issues of the Automo tive Industry as 
the measures taken by the Government is targeted to boost only the supply side of the 
economy. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the government should focus on 
announcing a stimulus package  for demand generation for the automotive sector where 
the government spending could boost a faster revival of the economy. 
        (Para 81) 
Action Taken Replies 
In line with the clarion call of Hon‟ble Prime Minister towards AtmaNirbhar 
Bharat, the Union Cabinet has recently, given its approval to introduce the Production-
Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme worth up to INR 1.45 lakh crore in 10 key sectors t o 
 enhance India‟s Manufacturing Capabilities and Exports including PLI for Automobiles.   
Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Automobile and Auto Components 
Industry in India has been approved by Union Cabinet on 15.09.2021. Incentives worth Rs 
25938 crore will be provided to industry over period of five years  
i.e from FY 2022 -23 to FY 2026 -27. The Scheme and its Guidelines have been Notifi ed 
on 23.09.2021. 
 This Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Automobile and Auto components 
proposes financial incentives to boost domestic manufacturing of  
Advanced Automotive Technology products and attract investments in the automotive 
manufacturing value chain. Its prime objectives include overcoming cost disabilities, 
creating economies of scale and building a robust supply chain in areas of Advanced 
Automotive Technology products. It will also generate employment. This scheme will 
facilitate the Automobile Industry to move up the value chain into higher value added 
products. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
7. Further, to attract the foreign Companies to set shop pertaining to the Automotive 
Sector in the Indian soil , the prevalent land and labour  laws of the country may need an 
overhauling, so as to make it more investor friendly. The Committee,   accordingly,  
recommends  that  DHI  may  take  up  the issue  with  the appropriate Departments of 
the Government of India to facilitate the same. 
        (Para 86) 
 

 6 
Action Taken Replies 
 Ministry of Labour has intimated that the Government has notified four Labour 
Codes; namely, the Code on Wages, 2019, the Industrial Relations Code 2020, the Code 
on Social Security, 2020 and the Occupational Safety, Hea lth and Working Conditions 
Code, 2020 by simplifying, amalgamating and rationalizing the relevant provisions of 
Central Labour Laws.   Codification of the Labour laws will inter alia reduce 
multiplication of definitions & authorities facilitating implementa tion & use of 
technology in enforcement of labour laws and bring transparency,  , accountability in 
enforcement thereby promoting setting up of more enterprises.  Further, provisions of one 
registration for an establishment instead of multiple registration s, one license and one 
return in place of multiple licenses and returns would reduce rigidity of labour market 
and facilitate hassle free compliance.  
               The above law amendments are clearly indicative of the Government's intention 
to make the labour laws effective and less cumbersome and is likely to  transform our 
economy that is pro -business and investor friendly that can promote  Foreign Direct 
Investment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 7 
CHAPTER–II 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE FURTHER IN VIEW OF 
THE MINISTRY'S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee notes that in the year 2019, repo rate has come down by about 
1.1% and reduction in the repo rate means the consumers may be able to get loans at 
cheaper interest rates from the Banks. Therefore, there is likelihood of commodities 
becoming cheaper due to lower interest cost, benefitting the end consumers. However, 
banks have not passed on the reduced rates to customers. Instead many retail auto loan  
rates have increased by 0.05% to 0.4%. In this regard, the Auto Association have 
highlighted that even 1% reduction in rates would motivate small car buyers to go in for 
the purchase of a new vehicle. The Department of Expenditure in its written reply has  
stated that the Government has recently announced linking of repo rate to interest rates 
charges for vehicle purchase, to provide impetus to the local manufacturing including 
automotive industry. The Committee however, has been informed that on ground, th e 
reduction in repo rate by RBI has not been transferred to the customers by reducing 
interest rates. Therefore, the Committee is of the view that Department of heavy Industry 
should take up the matter with Ministry of Finance and the Reserve Bank of India  for 
issuing strict guidelines to all banks for linking repo rate to interest rates on loans to the 
consumers, to help revival of the Auto Industry Sector. 
(Para 20) 
Action Taken Replies 
It has been intimated that RBI has deregulated the interest rates on advances including 
housing loans sanctioned by scheduled commercial banks (excluding RRBs) subject to 
the regulatory instructions contained in Master Direction on interest Rates on Advances 
dated March 03, 2016. The interest rates are decided by banks as p er their Board 
approved policy.  
However, with a view to improve monetary policy transmission, banks have been advised 
to link floating -rate retail loans and loans to Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs) to an 
external benchmark such as RBI policy rate from October 01, 2019. Similar instructions 
have been issued for linking floating rate loans to Medium enterprises to external 
benchmarks w.e.f. April 1, 2020. 
 
 
 

 8 
 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
9. Further, the Committee feels that as a respite to the   already  stressed Automobile 
Sector, the DHI in collaboration with other concerned   Ministries may work out some 
measures to ensure that the surplus stock of non -BS-VI compliant vehicles left unsold, if 
any, is disposed off. Through a Review Petition, the Hon'ble Su preme Court may be 
convinced to consider the extension of period for disposal of surplus stock of BS -IV 
compliant vehicle particularly taking into account the unexpected national   lockdown  
imposed  due to Covid-19  Pandemic. The  Committee is of  the opinion  that this would   
provide the much needed   leeway of considerable time over and   above the mandated   
date of 1st   April, 2020 to   the  dealers  to dispose off their buffer stock of   vehicles.  
Besides,  the  recent  Coronavirus  outbreak  has taken its  toll on the Indian Auto 
Industry, which is dependent on its component supplies from China. However, the 
Committee feels that even in the pervading gloom of the Coronavirus scare, there is a 
silver lining owing to the fact that the supply disruption may fo rce manufacturers to look 
within and source their component parts locally. The Committee feels that such a de -
risking plan is expected to boost the Auto Components Industry. Further, the Committee 
is also of the opinion that the disruption in the supply chain should also be counted as a 
reason to extend the deadline of 1st April 2020, as in the absence of a robust and 
consistent supply chain of Auto Components, there is bound to be a lesser capacity 
utilisation in the manufacture of BS -VI vehicles. To fill in this temporary shortfall of BS -
VI vehicles, the inventory stock of BS IV vehicles, lying unsold with dealers can be 
utilised. 
        (Para 35) 
Action Taken Replies 
 The Ministry of Road Transport & Highways vide notification no. G.S.R. 889 (E) 
dated 16.09.2016 specified the BS-VI compliant norms for four wheeler, three wheelers 
and two wheelers vehicles with effect from 1st April 2020 providing lead time of more 
than 3-5 years.  
The Hon‟ble Supreme Court vide order dated 24.10.2018 passed WP(C) No. 
13029 of 1985 has directed that no motor vehicle conforming to the emission standard 
Bharat Stage -IV shall be sold or registered in the entire country with effect from 
01.04.2020. The Hon‟ble Supreme Court vide order dated 13.08.2020 and 18.09.2020 has 
already issued detailed directions with regards to registration of BS -IV vehicles. 
MoRT&H has also issued advisory to all the States/UTs vide letter dated 19.08.2020 to 
ensure compliance of the above directions of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court w.r.t. 
registration of BS IV vehicles. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee is of the view that while migrating to Electric Mobility, the whole 
system of manufacturing needs to be overhauled. Hence it would   be advisable for 
adopting phased manufacturing Programme rathe r than putting all the eggs in one 

 9 
basket and in case if the new technology does not yield the desired outcome, the existing 
established Auto Industry should be incentivised for better performance. 
        (Para 38) 
Action Taken Replies 
 This Ministry has notified a Phased Manufacturing Programme(PMP)   with the 
objective of domestic manufacturing of electrical vehicles, its assemblies/sub -assemblies 
and parts/sub -parts thereby increasing the domestic value addition and creating 
employment opportunities.  The PMP shall enable the manufacturers in the sector to plan 
their investments for establishment of a robust indigenious electric vehicles and related 
sub-assembly/components manufacturing base in India. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
11. The Committee also no tes that the current state of EV infrastructure in the 
country is not encouraging for switching over to Electric Mobility on a large scale. The 
Committee therefore expresses its concern over the proposal of the Government to move 
to 30% EV by 2030 which is  seemingly a big challenge amid lack of charging 
infrastructure and therefore a clear roadmap may be drawn up for achieving parity in 
terms of cost with fuel based engines to start going electric, so  that demands for EV is 
generated among the people. 
        (Para 39) 
Action Taken Replies 
 The Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid &) Electric Vehicles in India 
(FAME India) Scheme envisages support for setting up of adequate public charging 
infrastructure to instill confidence amongst EV users, throug h active participation and 
involvement of various stakeholders including Government agencies,industries, and 
Public Sector Enterprises (PSEs). A budget provision of Rs. 1000 Crore for a period of 3 
years [2019 -20 to 2021 -22] has been earmarked for establis hment of charging 
infrastructure under this Phase of FAME Scheme. 
In the first phase of the scheme, Department of Heavy Industry had sanctioned 520 
Charging Stations for Rs.43 Crore (approx.) in cities like Bangalore, Chandigarh, Jaipur 
and Delhi NCR. Furt her, the Department has sanctioned 2,877 Electric Vehicles (EVs) 
Charging Stations amounting to Rs 500 Crore (Approx.) in 68 cities across 25 States/UTs 
under FAME India scheme phase II. 
  
Further, the Department has sanctioned 1576   Electric Vehicles (EVs) Charging Stations 
across 9 expressways and 16 highways under FAME India scheme phase II.  
 
(ii) Ministry of Power (MoP) on 13.04.2018 has issued a clarification stating that 
charging EVs is considered a service, not a sale of electricity, meaning that no license is 
required to operate EV charging stations. 
  
(iii) Regarding Grid Connectivity and Safety of supply for Charging Stations, Central 
Electricity Authority (CEA) has issued amendments to following regulations of CEA. 

 10 
1. Central Electricity Authority (T echnical Standards for connectivity of the 
Distributed Generation Resources) Regulations 2019. (copy enclosed) 
2. Central Electricity Authority (measures relating to the Safety and Electric Supply) 
Regulations 2019.(copy enclosed) 
(iv) Guidelines and Standard s for Charging Infrastructure for Electric Vehicles were 
issued by Ministry of Power on 01.10.2019. An amendment has been issued on 
08.06.2020 (copy enclosed) regarding capping of Tariff for Supply of Electricity to 
Public Charging Stations (PCS) and Defin itions of Public Charging Station, Battery 
Swapping Stations, Battery Charging Stations and Electric Vehicle Charging Equipment.  
  
(v) Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs has issued following amendments for 
facilitation of Charging Infrastructure for Electric Vehicles: 
(i) Amendments in Model Building Bye -Laws (MBBL – 2016) for Electric 
Vehicle Charging Infrastructure. 
(ii) Amendments in Urban and Regional Development Plans Formulation and 
Implementation Guidelines (URDPFI – 2014) for Electric Vehicle Ch arging 
Infrastructure. 
  
(vi) Further, 475 Public Charging Stations installed by various Central Public Sector 
Undertakings (CPSUs) as on 7 th June, 2021 as informed by MoP. Out of these   475 
Public Charging Stations, 140 charging stations have been install ed by NTPC, 147 by 
EESL, 14 by PGCIL, 9 by BPCL, 40 by HPCL and 125 by IOCL. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
12. With regard to charging station infrastructure, the Committee recommends  that 
specific Rules/guidelines should be formulated, wherein it is ensure d that both, foreign 
companies as well as indigenous ones, desiring to set shop in the country, should adhere 
to the proposed stipulated guidelines. The  Committee also desires that the proposed 
guidelines invariably, should specify inter alia, the designat ed places, such as   parks, 
housing Society Complexes etc, wherein charging stations   can be set up. The Committee 
also deserves that it be apprised of the targets set in terms of members, for setting up of 
such charging stations. 
        (Para 40) 
Action Taken Replies 
 Ministry of Heavy Industries (MHI) is administering FAME India Scheme since 
01st April, 2015.   Under Phase-I of FAME -India Scheme, Ministry of Heavy Industries 
(MHI) sanctioned 520 Charging Stations/Infrastructure amounting to Rs. 43 Crore 
(approx.) across various cities and highways.   An amount of Rs 1000 Cr is allocated for 
establishment of Charging Infrastructure under the phase II of the FAME India Scheme 
for a period of three years with effect from 1st April,2019. A total of 2877 Public 
Charging Stations amounting to about Rs.500 crore have been sanctioned under the 
FAME II as on 17th May, 2021. 

 11 
2.0 Further, the Department has sanctioned 1576   Electric Vehicles (EVs) Charging 
Stations across 9 expressways and 16 highways under FAME India s cheme phase II.  
 
3.0  Guidelines and Standards for Charging Infrastructure for Electric Vehicles were 
issued by Ministry of Power on 01.10.2019. An amendment has been issued on 
08.06.2020 (copy enclosed) regarding capping of Tariff for Supply of Electricit y to 
Public Charging Stations (PCS) and Definitions of Public Charging Station, Battery 
Swapping Stations, Battery Charging Stations and Electric Vehicle Charging 
Equipment.   
4.0  Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs has issued following amendments for 
facilitation of Charging Infrastructure for Electric Vehicles: 
(a)  Amendments in Model Building Bye -Laws (MBBL – 2016) for Electric 
Vehicle Charging Infrastructure. 
(b)  Amendments in Urban and Regional Development Plans Formulation and 
Implementation Guid elines (URDPFI – 2014) for Electric Vehicle Charging 
Infrastructure. 
 5.0 It shall be noted that the aforementioned Guidelines and Standards by Ministry of 
Power and Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs shall be followed by both domestic 
and foreign companies. 
6.0 Para 3.5 of the Guidelines as issued by MoP mentions that “Charging Station may 
also be installed by Housing Societies, Malls, Office Complexes, Restaurants, Hotels etc. 
with provision to allow charging of visitor‟s vehicles which are permitted t o come in its 
premises. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
13. The Committee also recommends that the fee   to  be  charged  from the clientele, 
by the service provider should invariably be regulated and they should be allowed to 
charge as per laid down norms. 
        (Para 41) 
Action Taken Replies 
 As per the Para 8.2 of the “Charging Infrastructure for Electric Vehicles – 
Revised Guidelines and Standards” issued by Ministry of Power on 01.10.2019 (copy 
enclosed), “in such cases where the Public Charging Station/ Fast Charging Station has 
been installed with Government Incentives (financial or otherwise”, State Nodal 
Agency/State Government/Appropriate Commission shall fix the ceiling of Service 
Charges to be charged by such Public Charging Station/Fast Charging Station. 
  Further Para 11.3 of the guidelines and standards reiterate the aforementioned 
clause. 
 

 12 
Recommendation/ Observation 
14. The Committee is, however, not willing to buy the argument that the new trend of 
shared mobility through aggregator services li ke Uber, Ola etc. has to some extent 
reduced the purchase demand of new vehicles  as these aggregator services are available 
only in major cities and they also need to buy vehicles to run their business. Moreover, 
most of the users are already owners of pe rsonal vehicles, but they prefer to avail Uber, 
Ola etc. service to avoid irritant driving on   heavy  traffic roads and also to disengage 
themselves from the parking hassles. The Committee while appreciating 
carpooling/shared mobility recommends for better  Public Transport Services which 
would provide larger benefits in terms of emission reduction as well as increase in the 
demand for new heavy vehicles. 
        (Para 47) 
Action Taken Replies 
Urban transport, which is an integral part of urban development, is a state 
subject.Hence, respective state governments are responsible for initiating, developing and 
funding urban transport infrastructure including metro rail projects. The Central 
Government considers financial assistance for metro rail proposals in ci ties or urban 
agglomerates, on the basis of extant policy, feasibility of the proposal and availability of 
resources, as and when posed by concerned state Governments. 
ii). Further, realizing the rapidly growing challenges of Urban Transport, 
Government of India formulated  National Urban Transport Policy in April, 2006. The 
objective of the policy is to ensure accessible, safe, affordable, quick, comfortable, reliable 
and sustainable mobility at all. 
iii). Metro rail, in the recent years has been addressing the mobility requirements in 
major cities of India. In order to create an ecosystem for enhancement of metro rail 
network in the country, MOHUA has also formulated the metro Rail Policy 2017. The 
policy bridges the much needed gap for ascertaining and enhancing the feasibility of metro 
rail projects from economic, social and environmental perspective. 
iv) At present, about 721 km route length of metro rails is already operational in 18 
cities . In addition to the above, about 1000 kms route length (includ ing 82 kms of rapid 
regional rail transit (RRTS) of metro rail is under construction in 27 cities in the country. 
The operationalization of metro rail has resulted in reducing the congestion and pollution 
on road & also in reduction in travel time of passengers. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
15. The Committee is of the considered opinion that a thrust to increase automobile 
business would be to reduce GST on used cars from 12 -18% on value difference to flat 
4% so that this sector becomes organized and the us ed car market will grow manifold 
paving way to create a seamless market to the entire vehicle purchasing mechanism for 
smoother upgradation of existing vehicle owners to new vehicles. 
        (Para 54)                                                                                                 
 
 

 13 
Action Taken Replies 
Second hand cars attract the concessional GST rate of 12% -18% based on the size 
and CC. Further, GST applies only .on selling margin. This valuation reduces the GST 
incidence significantly 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
16. The Committee observes that the proposal of the Government to raise registration 
charges on new vehicles has been kept on hold. The   Committee recommends  that in the 
wake of introduction   of BS -VI vehicles in the country   w.e.f. 1st April, 2020 and 
subsequent increased cost due to upgraded technology, the Government may defer the 
proposed hiking  of Registration Charges till   the situation of Covid -19 crisis improves, 
to help revival of the stressed Automobile Industry. 
        (Para 63) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
 The government had proposed to hike registration charges on new vehicles and to 
exempt the registration fees for battery operated/electric vehicles in order to promote the 
use of eco -friendly vehicles in the country an d draft GSR 523 (E) dated 24 th July 2019 
was published to amend the rule 81 of the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989 for  
seeking comments   and objections. After receiving feedback from several quarters, the 
Government has inter alia decided to defer the said proposal.  
Recommendation/ Observation 
17. The Committee observed that the Apex Court mandated Scrappage Policy of 
scrapping Diesel  Vehicles that are 10 years old and   petrol vehicles  that are 15 years 
old in the NCR  is a welcome measure to contain pollution related issues to a substantive 
effect. However, the Committee is of the unanimous view that scrappage policy should be 
based on the fitness level, i.e., the road worthiness of the vehicle concerned and not on 
the exclusive parameter of the vehic le's age. It was also brought to the notice of the   
Secretary, DHI during the course of   the presentation that DHI had contested the   
decision  of the court  but unfortunately, the court had not found merit in their argument. 
The Committee recommends that DHI should continue its pursuit to impress upon the 
Apex Court, to consider the fitness of a vehicle, rather than its age, as a parameter for 
condemning it. 
        (Para 70) 
Action Taken Replies 
The policy has been framed by Ministry of Road Transport and Highways considering all 
the aspects. 
 
 

 14 
Recommendation/ Observation 
18. The Committee appreciates that Government has decided not to   sign Regional 
Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP). Sharing the views expressed by Auto 
Associations, the Committee is of the opinion that in any case the Completely Built Units 
(CBUs) i.e. Full Cars/Two   Wheelers etc. should  not  be a  part of the India -EU FTA as 
it will adversely impact the Indian Auto Sector. The Committee suggests that the 
Automobile Sector should be kept out of the India-EU FTA too. 
        (Para 72) 
Action Taken Replies 
 Any discussion on trade in Goods within India -EU,Free Trade Agreement (FTA) 
shall be done only in consultation with all stakeholders/concerned departments with a 
view to arrive at a mutually beneficial outcome.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
19. In its presentation before the Committee, the SIAM had suggested that duty levied 
on Completely Built Units (CBUs) should be kept high. The Committee is in agreement 
with the suggestion of SIAM and is of the opinion that such a move would encourage off -
shore investors to set up shop in India, which would have a ripple effect of more job 
creation and providing a decent livelihood   to the youth of the country. The Committee 
observed, that in case the duty is lowered, it would provide a fillip to foreign investors to 
export more from their countries to India, rather than 'Make them in India'. The 
Committee accordingly, recommends that duty on CBUs should be kept high and that 
DHI may convey the views of the Committee to the Ministry of Finance. 
        (Para 73) 
Action Taken Replies 
 The applicable Basic Custom Duty (BCD) rate on CBUs has already been kept 
higher than those imported in SKD (Semi Knocked Down) or CKD (Completely 
Knocked Down) form.   The rate trajectory of the automobile is designed in such a way 
that the CBUs attract the highest rate followed by SKD. CKD attracts the lowest rate. As 
such, duty rates on CBUs have been as high as 100% in certain cases.  
Recommendation/ Observation 
20. Further, in order to help the ailing Automobile Industries financially, the 
Committee after taking into consideration the inputs   given by  some  of  the Automobile 
Associations, recommends the following additional proposals for consideration of the 
Government: 
    •    the expenditure incurred by companies for making payments to temporary and 
contract labour during the lockdown period should be eligible as CSR expense; 
    •    the  condition to avail ITC (Input Tax Credit) requiring payment   of invoice to the 
supplier  within 180 days of invoice to be done away with   till situation returns to normal 

 15 
or at   least  provide  waiver  of  interest  which  is  charged from date of invoice of 
supplier, as most payments to the vendors will be deferred in the present scenario; 
    •    provision for acceptance of self certification by OEMs, instead of testing and 
approval by Government agencies for meeting regulatory requirements, prioritized 
attention to new approvals of alternate materials/parts identified for te sting for 
compliance and  validation  purpose and fast track approvals by testing agencies; 
    •    instead of 50%, 100% waiver on demurrage charges to be provided at the 
Airports/Seaports and rail yards until 1 month post resumption of full commercial 
production; 
    •    to make up the lost sales in March 2020, vehicles purchased till 30.05.2020 be 
permitted to enjoy 6 months depreciation in FY 2019 -2020 which will help in stimulating 
sales; and 
    •    Temporary exemption of import/export taxes on R&D/ testing vehicles and 50% 
discount in testing prices in NATRIP facilities. 
        (Para 82) 
Action Taken Replies 
i)  Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA) vide General circular no. 15/2020 dated 
10.04.2020 at point no. 5 of the „COVID -19 related (FAQs) on Co rporate Social 
Responsibility (CSR) had clarified that “Payment of salary/wages in normal circumstances 
is a contractual and statutory obligation of the company. Similarly, payment of 
salary/wages to employees and workers even during the lockdown period is  a moral 
obligation of the employers, as they have no alternative source of employment or 
livelihood during this period. Thus, payment of salary/wages to employees and workers 
during the lockdown period shall not qualify as admissible CSR expenditure. 
ii)  The said provision of requiring payment of invoices to the supplier within 180 days of 
invoice is a MSME friendly provision and has been widely appreciated by MSMEs. This 
provision has been incorporated in GST law as recommendation of GST council, a 
constitutional body under Article 279 A of the Constitution of India. The recipient would 
anyhow become eligible to claim ITC when he makes the payment to the supplier. 
Further, the said provision existed in pre-GST regime also for services.  
iii)  OEMs have th e liberty to decide upon the vehicle design, component selection, 
material selection etc and also have their own internal company standards which is to 
ensure that their products meet the regulatory requirements when tested by certification 
agencies like A RAI.Self-certification is pertinent for various other parameters like 
endurance, consistent performance, warranty etc (except for CMVR requirement) and it is 
being done by automotive industry. During the COVID -19 pandemic, ARAI had carried 
out virtual/remo te testing services for industry, wherever feasible. Hence, separate 
provision for self-certification by OEM is not required.    
v)  a)  Section 32 of the income -tax Act, 1961 provides for deduction on account of 
depreciation on tangible assets and intangible assets acquired on or after the 1st April 1998 
which are owned wholly or partially by the assesse which are used wholly or exclusively 
for the purpose of business and profession while computing the income under the head 
„Profits and gains of business or profession.‟ 

 16 
b)         under the Act, assets of similar nature are grouped together as Block of assets and 
depreciation can be claimed only on the basis of written down value (WDV) method 
(except undertakings engaged in power generation or power distribution) 
c)         Clause (ii) of sub -section (1) of section 32 provides for the calculation of 
depreciation on block of assets at the percentage specified in the second column of assets 
which are used for the business or profession of the assesse during th e previous year. 
Rates of depreciation on motor cars has been prescribed under the heading “machinery 
and plant” in the second column of the Table in New Appendix of Rules 5. 
d)         Section 32 also provides that if asset acquired by assesse during the previous year 
is put to use for the purpose of business or profession for the period less than one hundred 
and eighty days in that previous year, the deduction under section 32 shall be restricted to 
fifty per cent of the amount calculated at the percentag e prescribed for that asset in the 
second column of the Table in new Appendix I of rules 5. 
Further, to incentivize the automobile sector, additional depreciation allowance 
was provided in case of motor vehicle which were acquired on or after 23 rd August 2019 
and before 31st March 2020 and put to use before 31st March 2020. 
In view of the above, it is clear that depreciation on any asset including motor 
vehicle is allowed only when it is put up to use for the purpose of business or profession 
during the pre vious year. Accordingly, the above mentioned proposal to allow the 6 
months depreciation in FY 2019 -20 for the vehicles purchased till 30.05.2020 is not 
feasible. However, it may be noted that depreciation will be available to these vehicles 
when they are put to use for the purpose of business or profession during the relevant 
previous year. 
vi)        There already exist certain exemption notification which provide BCD exemption 
on the goods imported for R&D purpose subject to certain conditions, for examp le- 
notification no. 50/1996 -customs and 51/1996 -customs. Subject to the fulfillment of the 
conditions mentioned therein, automobile companies can also avail the benefit under the 
said notifications. 
Recommendation/ Observation 
21. The Indian Auto Industry is highly dependent on automotive spare parts imported 
(around 27%) from China. However, due to the outbreak of corona virus, the component 
manufacturing units were shuttered down in China stalling the imports and subsequently 
affecting the whole value ch ain in India. Keeping in view programme     of  "Make  in  
India"  and  localized    production,    the Committee recommends that the Government 
should encourage and promote setting up of new automotive component manufacturing 
units/MSMEs to strengthen the economy and become a self-reliant country. 
        (Para 84) 
22. In the current Global scenario, the Committee observes that many of the countries 
are planning to pull out their manufacturing units from China and are looking for 
alternate lucrative and pro spective countries for re -location. Since India could be a 
preferred destination for foreign investment due to its sustained GDP growth, expanded 
robust market, enabling environment and transparent open policy regime, the Committee 

 17 
desires that the Governm ent should take all out efforts to seize this opportunity and turn 
the present adversity to a blessing in disguise. 
        (Para 85) 
Action Taken Replies 
Production Linked Incentive on Automobiles and Auto Components will give 
philip to Auto Companies and related industries. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 18 
CHAPTER–III 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
23. The Committee notes that the GST rates on ICE based vehi cles are at the highest 
slab of 28%. GST on all electrically operated vehicles is fixed at 5% to promote electric 
mobility. The Committee, therefore, feels that if GST rebates for EVs could be given for 
creating Public demand, there is scope for reducing G ST on ICE Vehicles also to spur its 
demand to overcome the present slump in the Automobile Sector. The cost of BS -VI 
vehicles is expected to be higher by 10-15% due to upgraded technology. To mitigate this 
cost increase, the Committee is of the view that a  reduced GST rate to 18% will bring 
down a sizeable amount in vehicle price creating more demand for newer vehicles. The 
increased sale due to the reduction in GST rate, will cover up the loss in GST revenue. 
        (Para 49) 
 
24. Further, there has been a consistent drop in the International Crude   oil prices, 
which can prove to be advantageous to the Government as the expected loss to the 
exchequer,  due to the  proposed  reduction  in GST slab in the Auto Sector, can be offset 
by the  crude oil price fall. The Committee  feels  that the slump in the crude oil price will 
translate into huge savings on imports for the Government, besides benefitting the 
industries that are dependent on crude oil and its derivatives. 
        (Para 50) 
 
25. The Committee rec ommends that the DHI may bring these observations of the 
Committee to the notice of GST Council for a quick and expeditious action thereof.  
                  (Para 51) 
 
26. Further, the Committee recommends that the Government may consider 
rationalization in GST rates on ICE vehicles based on their size, CC, Price Brackets, 
Seating Capacity etc. rather than having a fixed slab on all categories without distinction 
of Standard, Popular, Luxury etc. in order to raise the demand for newer vehicles. 
        (Para 52) 
 
27. The Committee desires that the Government may take measures to promote more 
Public Transportation in various cities beyond what is being done under FAME -II 
Scheme, augment spending on infrastructure building, including Road & Highways, 
Airports, Railways etc., reduction in GST rate on ICE vehicles etc. to boost demand for 
new vehicles in all segments. 
        (Para 77) 
 

 19 
Action Taken Replies For Para 49, 50, 51, 52 and 77 
The rate of GST is prescribed on the recommendation of the GST council, 
consisting of representatives of both Union & States. The issue of the applicable GST 
rate on the internal Combustion Engine (ICE) Motor vehicles has been discussed in the 
GST council on several occasions. GST council has decided to continue the existing GST  
rate on such motor vehicles.               (Para 49) 
 
GST council recommends rates taking all relevant factor into account, including the pre -
GST incidence and the revenue consideration for the centre as well as states. Council has 
not recommended any reduction for GST rate for auto sector.           (Para 50) 
 
GST council has not recommended any GST rate reduction in auto sector.        (Para 51) 
 
Based on recommendation of GST council, GST rate structure on ICE Motor vehicles is 
graded. The detail of such graded duty structure is enclosed at annexure I.        (Para 52) 
 
          Annexure - I 
The graded GST rate structure of Motor Vehicle 
 
Segment of Motor Vehicle GST 
Rate 
Comp. Cess Total rate 
Small Cars (length<4m: Petrol<1200 CC) 28% 1% 29% 
Small Cars (length<4m: Diesel<1500 CC) 28% 3% 31% 
Mid Segment Cars (engine<1500 CC) 28% 17% 45% 
Large Cars (engine>1500 CC) 28% 20% 48% 
Sports Utility Vehicles 
(length>4m:engine> 1500 CC; ground 
clearance > 170 mm) 
28% 22% 50% 
Hybrid small cars (length < 4m; Petrol < 
1200 CC ) 
28% Nil 28% 
Hybrid small cars (length < 4m; Diesel < 
1500 CC ) 
28% Nil 28% 
Hybrid cars/Sports Utility Vehicles (other 
small hybrid cars) 
28% 15% 43% 
Buses (other than buses for public 
transport running exclusively on bio-fuels) 
28% Nil  28% 
Trucks (other than refrigerated trucks)  28% Nil 28% 
Special purpose motor vehicles 28% Nil 28% 
 
 
The rate of GST is prescribed on the recommendation of the GST council, consisting of 
representatives of both Union & States. The issue of the applic able GST rate on the 
internal Combustion Engine (ICE) Motor vehicles has been discussed in the GST council 
on several occasions. GST council has decided to continue the existing GST rate on such 
motor vehicles. 

 20 
MoHUA has proposed to launch a new scheme to support Augmentation of city 
Bus Service for promoting sustainable urban transport by extending support for 
implementation/augmentation of city bus service in various cities. 
Guidelines for environmentally sound facilities for handling, processing and recy cling of 
End-of-life vehicles have been developed by CPCB and circulated to all SPCBs/PCCs 
with the direction to ensure the implementation of the guidelines. It may be noted that the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways is the nodal ministry in this mat ter and 
MoEF&CC  provides support from time to time.              (Para 77) 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation for Para 49, 50, 51, 52 and 77 
The Committee notes from the written submission from the Ministry that the  
Compensation Cess on Internal Combustion Engine (ICE) vehicles are levied not on 
a fixed slab and it is based on the size of the engine of the vehicle in Cubic Capacity 
(CC). Therefore, the Committee reiterates that GST rates on ICE vehicles should 
also be levied on the basis of their sizes  i.e  CC rather than having a fixed slab on all 
categories which is currently taxed at the top slab of 28%  without any distinction of 
small, mid and luxury vehicles.  The Committee feels that the small and mid 
segment vehicles should be taxed at a comparative ly lower slab than the luxury 
vehicles in order to make small and mid vehicles more affordable which in turn 
create demand and boost sales.  The Ministry of Heavy Industries (MHI) being the 
nodal agency for drafting p olicies for the Auto Industry  should pursue this matter 
with the GST Council and also bring the observations of the Committee to the notice 
of GST Council. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 21 
CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
28. The Committee was informed by the Auto Industry Associations that the non  
availability of finance to consumers due to tightening of norms for retail financing by the 
Banks across the board in rural as well as urban areas has a ffected the growth of the 
Auto Industry Sector. This approach by banks has reduced the availability of finance to 
customers to go in for new vehicle purchase. Further, Banks are following CIBIL ratings 
in a very rigorous manner as a result of which the cus tomers are finding it difficult to get 
automobile loans. Most of the two wheeler customers are first time users and they don't 
have any CIBIL ratings or credit ratings. Moreover, the markets are shifting towards 
rural markets, where potential customers fin d in difficult for getting loans as they do not 
have any record of financial security, since they do not pay income tax. So with 
increasing stringent compliance measures, the rural customers find it difficult to avail 
finance from the banks for purchasing new vehicles. Earlier financing of about 85 -90 
percent was available but now it is limited to only 60 -70%. As per the submission 9f 
Department of Heavy Industry, amongst all the sectoral loans, NPAs are the least at 1.5 - 
2% for Auto Loans. The Committee n otes that majority of vehicle purchases are made 
through loans. The Auto loan is a secured loan as the vehicle itself is collateral. The 
Committee, therefore, finds no reason why the banks should be refusing auto loans to 
prospective consumers. The Committ ee, therefore, recommends that Department of 
Heavy Industry should take up the matter with Department of Financial Services for 
issuing required instructions to all banks throughout the country to adopt a liberal policy 
in sanctioning of vehicle loans subj ect to minimum regulations of fulfilling the eligibility 
condition. 
       (Para 17) 
Action Taken Replies 
Matter has been taken up with Department of Financial Services for their favourable 
consideration of the matter. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
29. The Ministry of Finance in their written submission has stated that funds worth 
Rs.70,000 crore have been released for PSU banks recapitalization to improve liquidity 
situation. The Committee is pleased to note the action taken by the Government to 
strengthen the bank liquidity and believes that such a move will help PSU Banks to boost 
lending and improve liquidity situation. Further, the NBFCs  will be allowed to use 
Aadhar authenticated KYCs to take up credit which would further help them to lend more 
Auto Loans. The Committee hopes that this move  by the Ministry of Finance would bring 
some respite to the Auto buyers   in the  country and help improve the downturn in the 
Automobile Sector.        
        (Para 19) 
 
 

 22 
Action Taken Replies 
Matter has been taken up  with Department of Financial Services for their favourable 
consideration of the matter. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
30. The Committee is therefore of the considered opinion that  as  far  as  the working 
capital requirement of Auto Dealers is   concerned,  collateral  norms  for regular loan 
products should be moderate for availing   required finance.   The Committee is of the 
view that though banks have been facing various   challenges because of bad loans, 
however, they should not look at all financial lend ings with the same eye as the recovery 
rate is very high in the auto sector. Therefore, all measures needs to be taken to ease the 
availability of finance to the stakeholders in order to help them contribute substantially 
for the revival of auto sector. 
        (Para 23) 
Action Taken Replies 
 
Matter has been taken up with Department of Financial Services for their favourable 
consideration of the matter. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
31. The Committee notes that the over impetus and aggressive targeting by th e 
Government on EV and its high  cost price, have created  confusion  in the  minds  of the  
consumer whether to go in for   purchase of EV or ICE   vehicle, who were already in the 
wait and watch mode in the wake of mandated transition from BS -IV to BS  VI w.e.f. 1st 
April, 2020. The Committee recommends that the MoRTH should comeout with clear 
picture on the future of ICE technology and adoption of Electric Mobility for a 
synergised co-existence. 
        (Para 42) 
Action Taken Replies 
The matter is under ac tive consideration with Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
32. The Committee is of the view that the Government should conduct a thorough 
study and incorporate necessary provision for eco -friendly management/disposal of u sed 
LIBs so that E-waste does not turn out to be environment hazard. 
        (Para 44) 
Action Taken Replies 
The Draft Batteries Waste Management Rules were notified in February 2020. The Rules 
will deal with the environmentally sound management of all type s of batteries including 
lithium-ion batteries 

 23 
Recommendation/ Observation 
33. The Committee also recommends that DHI should take initiatives to foray into 
new and emerging technological areas instead of concentrating solely on the expensive 
lithium ion ba sed battery operated electric vehicles. The Committee feels that other 
avenues such as hydrogen based fuel cell technology etc. may be tapped and explored. By 
adopting such multi -pronged approach, the Committee is of the opinion that the EV 
industry would not be constrained to depend on its survival solely on the imported lithium 
based ion cell battery. 
        (Para 45) 
Action Taken Replies 
To promote New/Clean Technology  & Vehicle fuel, Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy has drafted a National Hydrogen Energy Mission document which would inter-alia 
aim to scale up Green Hydrogen production and utilization across multiple sectors, 
including transportation. The Ministry has taken a pilot project for the said purpose. 
Recommendation/ Observation 
34. The Committee feels that the Government should work out a feasible measure to 
help these customers to own new Two Wheelers which would also help revival of the Auto 
industry.  Further the Committee, recommends that the Government should gear up the 
implementation mechanism to ensure that there is no defaulting in Insurance Renewal by 
the Vehicle Owners. 
        (Para 58) 
Action Taken Replies 
Matter has been taken up with Department of Financial Services for their favourable 
consideration of the matter 
Recommendation/ Observation 
35. Further, to offset the  burden  on the consumer  due to hike in the  amount as well 
as number of years of Insurance coverage, the Committee   recommends  that facility for  
provision of loan to meet the cost of Insurance coverage   be ma de,  by taking up the 
matter with the appropriate authorities by the DHI. 
        (Para 59) 
Action Taken Replies 
The matter is under consultation with Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Road 
Transport & Highways. 
 
 
 
 
 

 24 
Recommendation/ Observation 
36. The  Committee notes that the present system of transferring of vehicles from one 
state to other states is time consuming and cumbersome   because  it  involves manual 
interaction with   State Transport Authorities. Taking cue   from   this situation, the 
Committee in  its recent Report   on  the  Demands for   Grants (2020-21), in respect of 
DHI, which was presented to the House on 3rd March 2020, had recommended   for a  
uniform  Road Tax across all States. The Committee is   hopeful that Government will be 
able to get through the proposal  in  the  Transport Development Council for introducing 
One Nation-One Tax for benefit of the people. 
        (Para 62) 
Action Taken Replies 
 A Group of Transport Ministers of States (GOM) was constituted during the 38 th 
meeting of the Transport Development Council (TDC) held on 19.09.2017 at Vadodara, 
Gujarat. The first   meeting of GOM was held on 19.06.2018 at Guwahati and the GOM 
took cognizance of this matter of „One Nation -One Tax‟. The group was of the 
unanimous opinion that t he diverse road tax structure for motor vehicles was a major 
reason behind this long pending issue. There is an urgent need to harmonize the rates of 
road tax across the states. The group made several recommendations for implementation 
of the concept of on e-nation-one road tax. Accordingly, a concept paper has been 
prepared by MORT&H and has been shared with States for their views on the paper.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
37. The Committee is of the opinion that the decision of the Government to increase 
the depreciation rate for vehicles is a short term measure and therefore, recommends that 
the Government may consider introducing an effective depreciation rate as 25%, (Written 
Down Value) on a permanent  basis to have depreciation value equal to real useful life of 
the vehicles. 
        (Para 65) 
Action Taken Replies 
 Matter has been taken up with Department of Financial Services for their 
favourable consideration of the matter. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
38. Since the physical distancing is one of the pre-requisites to tackle the corona 
virus spread, it is expected that a large number of people would switch over to personal 
mobility from public transport to commute for safety reasons to avoid jostling with others 
on crowded buses and trains. As most of these people would be first time buyers, the 
Committee expects an immediate surge in the purchase of affordable two -wheeler or 
small and mid -sized cars. The Committee therefore, recommends that the Government 
should capitalize this trend for promoting sale  of small and midsize cars by ensuring 

 25 
availability of finance through easy vehicle loans at low interest rates to the prospective 
customers to create demand in the Automobile Sector. 
        (Para 83) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 Matter has been taken up with D epartment of Financial Services for their 
favourable consideration of the matter. 