 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
         RAJYA SABHA                  
                                                                                                                                               
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
THE REVIVAL AND RESTRUCTURING  
OF 
HINDUSTAN PHOTO FILMS MANUFACTURING COMPANY LTD  
 
PERTAINING TO 
 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
(DEPARTMENT OF HEAVY INDUSTRY) 
____________________________________________________________________________  
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA 2 ND  AUGUST, 2011 ) 
   (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 2ND  AUGUST,2011) 
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
2
ND  , AUGUST , 2011/SRAVANA, 1933 (SAKA) 
224  

 
 
                      
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
  
  
  
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
THE REVIVAL AND RESTRUCTURING  
OF 
HINDUSTAN PHOTO FILMS MANUFACTURING COMPANY LTD  
 
PERTAINING TO 
 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
(DEPARTMENT OF HEAVY INDUSTRY) 
____________________________________________________________________________  
 
PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA 2 ND  AUGUST, 2011) 
   (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 2 ND  AUGUST, 2011) 
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
2
ND  AUGUST, 2011/SRAVANA, 1933 (SAKA) 

 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …………………………………(i)  
 
 
2.  INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………..  (ii) 
 
 
3.  REPORT          
 
 
 
 4.     MINUTES ………………………………………………………………………………. 
                  
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Date of Constitution 31 st  August, 2010)  
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
    
 1.   Shri Tiruchi Siva                —                Chairman  
2.  Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy 
3.  Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4.  Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
5.  Shri K.B. Shanappa 
6.   Shri Natuji H. Thakor 
7.  Shri S.P. Singh Baghel 
8.  Shri  Nandamuri Harikrishna 
9.  Dr. Vijay Mallya  
10.  Vacant 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11.   Shri Suvendu Adhikari 
12.   Shri Badruddin Ajmal 
13.   Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
14.    Shri Bansagopal Chowdhury 
15.    Shri Sabbam Hari 
16.    Smt. Poonam Veljibhai Jat 
17.    Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
18.    Shri M. Krishnaswamy 
19.    Shri Pakauri Lal 
20.    Smt. Ingrid Mcleod 
21.    Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal 
22.    Shri Devendra Nagpal 
23.    Shri Gorakhnath Pandey 
24.    Shri Kishanbhai V. Patel 
25.    Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
26.    Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
27.    Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
28.    Shri Raju Shetti  
29.    Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware 
30.    Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
31.    Smt. Putul Kumari 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary 
Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Director 
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Assistant Director  
 
 
  
(i) 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
  
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliame ntary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having   been authorized by the Committee , hereby present this Two Hundred 
and Twenty Fourth Report on the Revival and Restruc turing of Hindustan Photo Films 
Manufacturing Company Ltd. pertaining to Ministry o f Heavy Industries and Public 
Enterprises (Department of Heavy Industry).  
 
2. The Committee held detailed discussion with the Management of Hindustan 
Photo Films Manufacturing Company Ltd., Employees a nd Officers Associations of the 
HPF at Ooty on 18 
th  May, 2011 and received inputs for this Report.   
 
3. I thank the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Pub lic Enterprises (Department of 
Heavy Industry) for furnishing the valuable inputs during the meetings.  
 
4. The Committee in its meeting held on 26 
th  May, 2011 considered and adopted the 
report. 
 
  
 
  
Tiruchi Siva 
Chairman                                                          
                          Department -related Parliamentary  
                                                                                       Standing Committee   on    Industry  
 
New Delhi 
May_______ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 

 
 
REPORT   
 
The Incorporation of the Hindustan Photo Films Manu facturing Co. 
Ltd. in 1960 in Ooty as a public sector enterprise heralded a new beginning 
for our country for production of photo sensitive material in the Government 
sector.  Its mission statement “To cater to the nee ds of imaging products in 
the health and industrial sector in India with inte rnational quality products” 
brings out its grand vision. It manufactures range of materials which are 
widely used in sectors such as health care, educati on, entertainment and 
defence.  Apart from pursuing the core objective of  manufacturing photo 
sensitive material, the HPF, like all other public sector enterprises, had the 
larger goal of stimulating and promoting the development of the hilly district 
of Neelgiris of Tamil Nadu 75 per cent of populatio n of which constitutes 
the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and backward  class communities. 
Thus, engaging itself in the challenging entrepreneurial and commercial task 
of making the country self-dependent in photo sensi tive material, it 
embarked on an arduous path to transform the social  and economic 
conditions of people and the region.  
 
2. The Hindustan Photo Films Manufacturing Co. Ltd.  (HPF) has the 
enviable status of being the first such unit in Ind ia and South East Asia.  It 
undertook commercial production in 1967 and establi shed the brand image 
in the whole country for manufacturing Indu film.  Apart from making 
medical X-ray films for health care sector, it served the infrastructural sector 
by producing industrial X-ray films.  Besides, it c atered to the 
printing/publishing sector by manufacturing graphic arts film and served the 
cause of defence establishments by making aerial fi lms.  Its wide range of 

 
 
activities also included measures to process chemic als which are key and 
essential components for developing photo sensitive material in laboratories.  
 
3. The HPF formed part of the grand vision of build ing our nation by 
establishing public sector enterprises in key secto rs and which were integral 
to the scheme of mixed economy for shaping modern I ndia’s destiny.  It has 
acquired the status of an ISO 9001:2008 certified C ompany the annual 
installed capacity of which is 33.64 Million Sq.m.  It has the following four 
units:- 
(i)  Fully integrated Production Unit of Black and White  
photographic products and conversion of imported co ated wide 
stock (colour products) at Ooty. 
(ii)  Magnetic Tape Division at Ooty. 
(iii)  Polyester X-ray Plant (State of the Art technology) set up in 1997 
at Ooty. 
(iv)  Conversion Unit/processing Chemical Plant at Ambattur.     
 
4. Functioning under the administrative control of Department of Heavy 
Industry, it has a modern and state of the art manu facturing plant and is 
acknowledged as a sophisticated and capital intensi ve industry employing 
proprietary technology from M/s Dupont, USA.  It is  noteworthy that the 
manpower employed by the Company was trained by Dup ont for equipping 
them with technical skills and developing their mental faculties to run such a 
modern and technology driven establishment.  The HP F claims that its 
facilities for promoting research and development c an be counted as 
excellent.  It also asserts that experienced scient ists are engaged in carrying 
out R & D work which is critical to such companies engaged in 
manufacturing films in a highly competitive and commercial environment.   

 
 
5. The HPF established its reputation for producing  INDU film which 
promoted its brand image by 1970s.  It was reckoned  with great deal of 
patriotic spirit and acquired importance equal to i nternational brands such as 
Kodak, Fuji, Konica and Agfa. 
 
6. India has a huge and bourgeoning market for phot ographic films.  It is 
estimated that the value of such market is Rs.1663 crores and the key and 
commercially competitive players are many multinational corporations.  The 
HPF maintains that “Market potential for existing p roducts manufactured by 
HPF is around Rs.240 crores which includes Governme nt purchase alone of 
Rs.85 crores per annum”.   
 
7. The Company was justly proud that it had a count rywide vibrant 
market since the beginning of its commercial produc tion and was generating 
profit till 1991-92.  The profit level plummeted wi th on set of economic 
reforms and decisive opening of our economy to glob al competition.  The 
HPF which was riding high due to its profit with a turnover of Rs.238 crores 
had enjoyed sound financial health which started declining during 1992-93. 
 
8. Actuated by the sustained loss suffered by the G overnment of India 
referred it to the BIFR on 14 October 1995, which d eclared it sick on 23 
January 1996. Subsequently, on 30 January 2003, the  BIFR recommended 
for its winding up.  However, the Trade Unions of H PF moved to Madras 
High Court which granted an interim stay on 26 June  2005 on the orders of 
the BIFR.   
 

 
 
9. It is a matter of anxiety to note that the Compa ny which had 
authorized capital of Rs.210 crores and paid up cap ital of Rs.205.87 crores 
as on 31 March 2011, had a negative net worth of (- ) Rs.7985 crores and a 
accumulated loss of (-) Rs.8232 crores. 
 
10. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing C ommittee on 
Industry was greatly exercised by the pitiable cond ition of the HPF and its 
employees.  On several occasions, it had taken up t he matter and actively 
considered the crisis confronted by the Hindustan P hoto Films.  Many 
Reports of the Committee on Demands for Grants did focus attention on the 
gathering and mounting problems afflicting the Company.  
 
11. While considering the issues faced by the HPF o n 30 November 2005, 
it recommended for appointment of a consultant for the purpose of 
submitting a revival plan for the Company.  Accordi ngly, M/s Ernst & 
Young was appointed on 10 May 2006 for studying the  HPF and presenting 
a plan for its revival.  The Committee understands that the report of the 
consultant was considered and the proposal for the revival of HPF was 
placed before the Board for Reconstruction of Publi c Sector Enterprises.  
The said proposal gained strength due to the stand taken by the Tamil Nadu 
Government that the closure of HPF is not acceptabl e to the State 
Government.  It maintained that the HPF has to be s een not only in terms of 
its inherent value as a public sector enterprise bu t in terms of its close 
linkages to the economic and industrial regeneratio n of the Neelgiris district 
of the State.  It is crystal clear that the revival and sustenance of the HPF has 
the backing of the State Government.      
 

 
 
12. Thus the keen interest evinced by the Governmen t of Tamil Nadu for 
the revival of the Company seems to have given a fr esh lease of life to it.  
The Committee notes that the Board of Reconstructio n of Public Sector 
Enterprises in its meeting held on 17 July 2009 and  later on 22 December 
2009 requested the Department of Heavy Industries a nd Hindustan Photo 
Films to submit a comprehensive proposal for the revival of the Company.  
13. The Department of Heavy Industry prepared a rev ival proposal for the 
consideration of the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs.  It included 
the following:- 
 
(i)  To provide Rs.200 crore in the form of equity for O ne Time 
Settlement of Creditors. 
(ii)  To provide for shortfall in salary & wages of the e mployees of 
the company by way of gap filling over and above th e internal 
business resources generated by the company for a p eriod of up 
to three years, if required, and subject to total a mount not 
exceeding Rs.20.00 crore for all the years put together.  
(iii)  To provide Rs.9 crore in the form of grant for Repa irs, R&D 
and Sales promotion. 
(iv)  To provide Rs.43crore in the form of loan for diver sification 
into IV Fluid and Colour Photo Paper. 
(v)  Permission for implementing DPE’s 1997 revised pay scales in 
the company prospectively.  The revised salary and wages for 
subsequent years will be paid by the company from t he 
resources generated from its operation.   
(vi)  Write off Government of India Plan and Non-Plan loa n of 
Rs.344.51 crore as on 31.03.2010. 
(vii)  Write off of accumulated interest of Rs.655.78 cror e as on 
31.03.2010 on GoI Plan and non Plan loans and freez ing of 
interest beyond 31.03.2010.  
  
 
14. The Committee on Industry took a decision to go  deep into the matter 
during its visit to Ooty from 18 to 20 May 2011 and wholeheartedly examine 
the issue of revival and restructuring of the HPF.  During the interaction of 

 
 
the Members of the Committee with the employees uni on and the 
management of the HPF, many startling facts concern ing the loss incurred 
by it were brought to the notice of the Committee.   
 
15. During its presentation before the Committee on  18 
th  May, 2011 the 
management explained that the Company which registe red profit worth 
Rs.2.92 crores during 1991-92 had to incur loss of Rs.117 crores during 
1992-93.  The Committee was eager to know as to how  the HPF which was 
justly proud of its profit making status suddenly s uffered loss of Rs.117 
crores in one year.   In the beginning, the managem ent maintained that 
diversion of working capital to complete the constr uction of new polyester 
X-ray plant caused such heavy and unprecedented los s.  The committee was 
eager to know the reasons behind such sudden and massive loss. The Annual 
Report of the Hindustan Photo Films for the period 1992-93 contained the 
Directors’ Report which attributed the crisis faced  by HPF to the changes 
taking place in the industrial arena in the country  and the internal 
mismanagement.  The Directors’ Report in the aforem entioned Annual 
Report also gave some more reasons for which the co mpany suffered losses 
and observed, “The operating results for the year h ad to also bear the heavy 
interest burden of Rs. 39.8 crores, much of which i s the result of part 
borrowings taken to finance the massive inventories  and the losses which 
were camouflaged as “current assets”.  Another fact or has been the 
restrictions imposed by the banks on cash-credit an d non-fund based limits 
in view of the substantial overdrawal in these acco unts.  They resorted to 
impounding 50% of all receipts.  These stringent me asures led to a cutback 
in production and sales during the second half of 1 992-93.  The lower 

 
 
production & sales resulted in under absorption of overheads contributing to 
the losses”. 
 
16. In the face of shortcomings and draw backs adve rsely affecting the 
Company and paralyzing its performance, the Committee notes that the HPF 
with its skilled manpower has sustained operations and to a great extent 
withstood pressures caused by recurrent sickness.  The physical and 
financial parameters flowing from the current perfo rmance of the Company 
also indicate a good future trend.  For instance, the capacity utilization of the 
HPF has gone up considerably during 2006-07 and 201 0-11.  The value of 
production showed a rising trend from the figure of  Rs.17.68 crores during 
2006-07 to Rs.25.50 crores during 2009-10.  The val ue of sales has also 
gone up from Rs.14.59 crores during 2006-07 to Rs.2 6.25 crores during 
2009-10.  It deserves to be noted that the HPF has exceeded the MOU target 
for the years 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10.  Of cou rse what matters in 
respect of MoU targets is not the completion of suc h targets alone, but the 
rating the company has got.  In this respect it has  to be appreciated that the 
HPF while exceeding the MoU target should also stri ve for a better rating.  
Another noteworthy feature is that the Company has rationalized its 
manpower and reduced from 3824 during 1991-92 to 73 1 to 2010-11.  Any 
public sector undertaking which is in complete red needs to take a hard look 
to streamline every aspect of its activities.  The Hindustan Photo Films has 
already done it.  The reduction of manpower is indi cative of the mind set of 
the management of the HPF to look forward and take it to a level where it 
would be once again profitable and vibrant.  It is important to be mindful of 
the fact that a company overstaffed and with enormous overhead expenses is 
a liability on itself.  Taking into account the sta ff strength of the HPF, one 

 
 
takes heart from the measures it has taken, over th e years, to downsize the 
manpower.  
 
17. In the documents supplied to the Committee, the  HPF outlined the 
reasons for its sickness.  These are:- 
1.  Lack of timely funding, cost escalation, diversion of working capital 
to complete New Polyester X-ray Plant. 
2.  Absence of adequate working capital for a long peri od till the year 
2010. 
3.  Accumulation of heavy interest. 
4.  Lack of investment for modernization. 
5.  Photographic goods brought under OGL in Liberalisation. 
6.  Undue advantage of duty/taxe exemption to MNCs and importers with 
conversion units in Tax Free Zones. 
7.  Treating conversion of Finished Coated Jumbo Films as 
manufacturing activity. 
8.  Drastic reduction in Import duties for Finished Films. 
9.  Low morale due to 1987 pay scales.   
 
18. It appears that liberalized and open economy ca used many difficulties 
for the HPF to successfully compete with many playe rs and upgrade its 
technological capability.  However, the measures ta ken by HPF to improve 
its functioning merits attention.  It has reconfirm ed the consent of creditors 
for one time settlement.  Its successful bid and ac hievement in getting the 
Director General Supply and Disposal rate contract 2011-12 is yet another 
step towards its recovery.  The ploughing of workin g capital of Rs.30 crores 
by the HPF has helped it to scale up its operations  and raise the turn over 
significantly.  It is worthwhile to note that measu res have been taken for 
product diversification which include launching of Red Laser Scanner Film 
and development of Medical Imaging Films and Inkjet  Paper.  The renewed 
confidence of the HPF for restoring its financial a nd productive ability is 
indicated by its efforts to pursue export enquiries .  Its engagement with 

 
 
Technova for new business opportunity and its discu ssions for establishing 
Floriculture Project testify to its commitment to i mprove its performance.  
The willingness of the Government of Tamil Nadu for  giving concessions to 
the HPF under the incentive package for its revival is a shot in the arm of the 
Company to restore its financial health.  Prominent among these concessions 
offered by the Government of Tamil Nadu are: 
Concession sought Status 
Waiver of 75% of VAT for 5 
years 
Waiver of 75% Electricity Tax 
for 5 years 
100% refund/exemption sanctioned for 
10 years from 2008-09 
Reduction of VAT of Medical 
X-ray to 4% 
Sanctioned 
Bringing IV Fluids in the 4% 
tariff schedule 
4% rate confirmed 
Directions for procurement of 
HPF products  
Orders being placed on HPF 
Waiver of accrued lease rent  Waiver of Rs.9.58 cro res sanctioned 
 
19. It is understood by the Committee that some of the banks which have 
released loans to the HPF have given undertaking to  it to waive the 
accumulated interest amounting to Rs. 6472.15 crore s and partially write off 
portion of the principal amount worth Rs. 337.78 cr ores.  The lessening of 
interest burden will go a long way in restoring the  financial health of the 
Company.  The HPF maintains that it has incurred li abilities not because of 
operational reasons but due to the new Polyester X-ray Project.  It is hopeful 
of the fact that operational loss can be addressed.   In fact, it maintains that 
with the induction of Rs.30 crores working capital which forms part of the 
revival package, the process of revival has already  taken place and must 
reach its logical conclusion.   

 
 
20. The Committee strongly recommends that all conc erned which 
include the Department of Heavy Industry and the Ca binet Committee 
on Economic Affairs must come forward to revive thi s enterprise which 
is first of its kind in the entire South East Asia.   
 
21. The Committee was pained to note that the emplo yees of the HPF 
are getting pay scales according to the recommendations of the 1987 Pay 
Committee Report.  The Committee strongly recommend s for 
immediate implementation of the 1997 Scale of Wages  for them with 
immediate effect without linking it to Revival Prop osal.   It also 
recommends that salary support be continued to them  till 
implementation of the revival of the Company.   
 
22. The Prime Minister of our country, Dr. Manmohan  Singh, recently 
stated that one of the factors behind India’s abili ty to withstand financial 
crisis was the resilience of public sector enterpri ses.  There is resurgence of 
faiths of the Government on the strength of our PSE s.  The Eleventh Five 
Year Plan document very clearly stated that “Despit e the privatization 
accomplished up to the middle of the Tenth Five Yea r Plan, when the policy 
changed, the role of the Central Public Sector Ente rprises and their 
contribution to the GDP has not diminished.”  It al so observed that “The 
profits of profit making Central Public Sector ente rprises (CPSEs) have 
increased from Rs. 36432 crore to Rs. 76240 crore a nd the losses of loss 
making ones has come down from Rs. 10454 crore to R s. 5752 crore during 
the same period”.  The positive image of the CPSEs available from the 
macro picture makes one hopeful that Public Sector Enterprises can be as 
competitive as private sector.  In case of the HPF the operating loss has 

 
 
come down to 9.50 crores in 2010-11 from 16.37 cror es in 2006-07 after 
many measures including cost cutting measures were taken by the Company.  
Therefore, the Company deserves supports from the G overnment for its 
revival because of the good work done by it in redu cing its operating loss to 
single digit.  
 
23. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Government of India is 
committed to strengthen public sector enterprises a nd is considerably happy 
that such enterprises have performed quite well and  generated their own 
resources for improving their financial and non-fin ancial performances.  
Against this background, the Committee strongly rec ommends for the 
extension of Government support to the HPF for its revival.  The 
Committee, while interacting with the employees of the Company in its 
meeting in Ooty on 18 May 2011, understood their ea rnest desire for its 
revival.  The management is equally determined to t ake the HPF forward to 
a brighter tomorrow.  All of them just wanted one chance to do so.  And they 
are quite confident that they can revive the HPF an d subsequently sustain it 
by generating their own resources.  The world is painfully realizing the crisis 
caused by excessive deregulation and harking back t o a system of judicious 
regulation.  It is important for the Government whi ch includes the 
Department of Heavy Industry, the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
and the Planning Commission to understand the loss suffered by HPF in a 
libralised economic environment which proved detrim ental to many our 
public sector enterprises.  It is in this context t hat the Committee strongly 
recommends for the revival of the HPF.     
    

 
 
24. The strength of an enterprise to a great extent  flows from the 
strength of the leadership whose vision matters a l ot to take it forward.  
The Committee understands that the HPF does not hav e a full time 
CMD.  There are many public sector enterprises in I ndia which have 
registered profit due to imaginative leadership of the CMDs.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommends for the appointmen t of a full time 
CMD who would be in a position to convert adversities to opportunities.   
 
25. The Committee also strongly recommends for intr oduction of a 
system for holding the management and the officers of the Department 
of Heavy Industry accountable for their lapses in m aking the Company 
unviable.  This must be part and parcel of the revi val project.   There 
must be a monitoring mechanism to ascertain the man ner in which the 
revival package will be implemented.  Strict vigila nce in this regard is 
necessary. 
 
26. The Committee during its visit to several parts  of the country to 
study some of the sick public sector enterprises fo und that the role of 
the management was a key factor in making such ente rprises sick.  It 
has, therefore, noted that measures should be taken  to make the 
management more accountable and committed.  The per sonal 
involvement and dedication of the management will s et an example of 
professionalism for making the company dynamic, via ble and 
profitable.  In the instant case of the Hindustan P hoto Films it is 
important for the Government of India to retain thi s Company and 
revive it.  In case this only public sector enterpr ise in the Neelgiris 
district of Tamil Nadu is done away with, then the region will forever 

 
 
lose it and the Government cannot assure people to set another public 
sector enterprise.  The Committee, therefore, stron gly recommends that 
it is wiser to retain what is already available and  revive and restructure 
it and adopt measures for its modernization.  
 
27. The Committee feels that the bulk purchase of p hoto sensitive 
material by the Government hospitals from the HPF m ay help the 
Company to improve its financial position.  This ma y be seriously 
considered and pursued.   
 
28. This is the age of digital technology.  In all sectors be it health 
care, defence, infrastructure, etc., the demand for  digital technology is 
growing.  Even hospitals have adopted digital X-ray .  In view of such 
changing profile of technology, it is important for  the HPF to go for 
introduction of new methods and innovations to make  it more 
competitive and viable.  It has noted that lack of investments for 
modernization resulted in massive loss for the Comp any.  Let this not 
happen yet again.  In replying to the question of C ommittee Secretariat 
concerning the R&D efforts being undertaken, the HP F stated that it 
has taken up projects for introduction of non-silve r digital imaging 
technology.  It is gratifying for the Committee to note that such steps 
have already been taken by the Company in associati on with M/s 
Technova and these have yielded job order revenue f or it. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends for the a doption of digital 
technology and modernization of all its functioning for making it a more 
profitable and socially useful Company.       
***** 
 