PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY

SEVENTY-SIXTH REPORT
ON

ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN COMMITTEE'S 5310
REPORT ON MODERNISATION, RESTRUCTURING AND
EXPANSION PROGRAMMES OF NALCO. DEPARTMENT OF
MINES (MINISTRY OF COAL AND MINES )

(PRESENTED TO HON’BLE CHAIRMAN , RAJYA SABHA ON 20" AUGUST, 2002)
PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 107" DECEMBER, 2002)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 10™ DECEMBER, 2002) ,

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2002/AGRAHAYANA, 1924 (SAKA)


fen

CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
INTRODUCTION
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE

OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A. GLANCE

MINUTES

PAGES
(Gi)
(iii)
1-14

15-17
19-23


COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
(Date of Constitution - 1* January, 2002 )

@ \.Dr. P.C Alexander — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Prof. M.M. Aggarwal

3. Dr. Abrar Ahmad

4, Shri Jayantilal Barot

5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
6. Smt, Saroj Dubey

7. Shri Faguni Ram

8. Smt. Sumitra Mahajan

9. Shri P.K. Maheshwari

10, Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
11, Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
12. Shri S, Sivasubramanian
13. Smt. Sushree Devi

14. Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
15. Vacant

LOK SABHA

16. Smt. Jayashree Banerjee

17. Kumari Mamata Banerjee
18. Shri Ajoy Chakraborty

19. Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
20. Shri Nepal Chandra Das

21. Shri Deepak Kumar

22. Shri Thomas Hansda

23. Dr, S. Jagathrakshakan

24, Shri A.C, Jose

25. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan

26. Shri Brijlal Khabri

27. Shri Sunil Khan

28. Shri Manjay Lal

29, Dr, K. Malaisamy

30. Shri A. Narendra

31. Shri Ananta Nayak

32, Shri Dayabhai ५. Patel

33. Shri Dharam Raj SinghPate _ | ##|ै|_|1|॥“३1“॒॒_ तहत Shri Dharam Raj Singh Patel

(@ Appointed Chairman and Member of the Committee ४०१ 12” November, 2002 vice Shri TN. Chaturvedi who ceased to be
the Member of Rajya Sabha wef 20" August, 2002.

(i)


. Shri Uttamrao Patil

. Shri Malyala Rajaiah

. Shri P, Rajendran

. Dr, Bolla Bulli Ramaiah

. Shri Tarachand Sahu

. Shri Ramanand Singh

. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh

. Chowdhary Talib Hussain
. Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
. Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari
. Shri Beni Prasad Verma

. Vacant

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary

Shri D.P. Ahuja |Under Secretary

Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer

(ii)



INTRODUCTION

1, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Industry, having been authorised by the Committee, hereby present this Seventy-sixth Report
on the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Committee 5

53" Report on Modernisation, Restructuring and Expansion Programmes of NALCO which is
under the administrative contro! of Department of Mines (Ministry of Coal and Mines).

2, The Committee examined and considered the Action Taken note on recommendations
contained in the committee's 53” Report on Modernisation , Restructuring and Expansion
Programmes of NALCO which is under the administrative control of Department of Mines
(Ministry of Coal and Mines ).

3; The Committee at its meeting held on 9" August, 2002 considered and adopted the
Report.
4, The Report was presented to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 20" August, 2002 by

the then Chairman Shri T.N.Chaturvedi.

NEW DELHI; DR. P.C. ALEXANDER
December 10, 2002 Chairman

Department -related Parliamentary

Standing Committee on Industry

(iii)


REPORT

The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Mines
(Ministry of Coal and Mines) on the Recommendations contained in the 53rd Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry on the Modernisiation,
Restructuring and Expansion Programmes of Nalco which is under the administrative control of
Department of Mines. The Report was presented /laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha and Lok
Sabha on the 30" August, 2001.

Action Taken Notes have been received from the Department of Mines in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as follows:

Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Department of Mines
(Chapter - I).
Recommendations:- 4.3 ,5.3 ,8.5 13.3 ,18.3 ,

Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
government's replies ; (Chapter - II)

Recommendations:- 19.1

Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies of
the Department of Mines:. (Chapter - ITI).

Recommendations:-5.6 ,6.3 ,7.2 ,12.1,14.2 ,15.2 19.3 ,19.5 ,19.7.

Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Department of Mines
have not been received. (Chapter - 1५).

NIL


CHAPTER -1

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
43 Recommendations/Observation of the committee
EXPANSION OF NALCO'S PORT FACILITIES:

The Committee recommends that immediate Steps to ensure expeditious completion of
the structural work be taken so that NALCO is able to derive full benefits of the expansion of Port
Facilities. के
Action Taken :

The actions on Port Facilities constitute the following packages :
(8) Construction of a new Silo
(b) New Power Distribution System
(c) New Blower House for Alumina Handling House
(d) New Wagon Unloading Pit
‘The procurement of the total project was done in three separate routes;
i. Turn-key packages
ii. Equipment procurement with and without erection

iii, Contracts for civil, structural, tank age and erection work

As of March. 2002 the progress of Activities are as follows:

| Activities Completion (As on 20.3,2002
toca uction & Commissioning | Completed
Overall progress Completed

The no-load test in Alumina Handling Package was conducted during August, 2001.
Successful load trial run of Silo No.3 filling and evacuation completed on 3rd March 2002 and
Sih March, 2002 respectively.

$3 Recommendations/Observation of the Committee
EXPANSION OF MINES & REFINERY

The Committee is not happy to note that the installation of third stream of Alumina
Refinery is being delayed, All efforts need to be taken for early installation.

Action Taken :

The expansion of Alumina Refinery was planned to be completed in two phases, i.e, de-
bottlenecking (from 8 lakh TPY to 105 lakh TPY) and third stream (from 10,5 lakh TPY to
15.75 lakh TPY). The third stream was to be a replica of one of the de-bottlenecked streams.
The atmospheric digestion technology of AP used in the existing plant was adopted for the


expansion, Reputed consultants (M/s Engineers India Ltd, M/s MECON, Ranchi ) had been
appointed for carrying out detailed engineering tendering and procurement services and
construction management for the various project segments. The original date of completion of
the third stream of Alumina Refinery was March,2001. However, the project was completed in
December,2001 and commercial production has started by January, 2002 There has been no cost
overrun on the project and approximate saving against M&R expansion project is Rs. 250 crore.

8.5 Recommendations/Observation of the committee
Shunting of Pots in Smeiter Plant:

The Committee recommends that adequate safeguards be bililt within to avoid such recurrence in
future,

Action Taken :

In the aftermath of Smelter debacle, several committees including one external finding
Committee were constituted. The Committee has broadly come to the conclusion that gradual
deterioration in the performance of pots over the years was mainly due to non-adherence to
standard operating practices, improper maintenance, poor werk culture, improper planning and
lack of team work. Based on the recommendations of the Committee. the following safeguards
were built within the system to avoid such failure in the future.

With a view to have effective utilization of manpower for a full eight hours, the gate
control system was reinforced with effect from 13.05.98 and workers in shifts are being retained
for the full eight hours, Workers are now being allotted sufficient work and more flexibility in
utilization of manpower has been enforced so that they are engaged in full shifts.

Commencing from Ist July, 1998, a system has been introduced to carry Out
inspection/surprise checking to check the attendance and physical presence of the employees
deployed in the respective shifts and mark absent those not found present in the place of work,

Instructions have been issued to implement the standard operating procedures,

The undeserved overtime has been completely stopped since 1st of July, 1998. A number
of committees headed by Dy, General Managers are inspecting different work areas to ascertain
the number of employees engaged on overtime, the reasons for such overtime, and the attendance
of the workmen during overtime hours, and, in case any of them is not found at work, spot they
are marked absent.

The incentive scheme has been revised. In the revised incentive scheme maximum
importance has been given to production and a cut off level of production has been provided
below which no incentive becomes payable to employees,

An effective strategy has been chalked out to enforce discipline, Any act of indiscipline is
being viewed seriously and action is being taken against the erring employees. Already three
workers of Smelter Plant have been shifted from Angul Sector to other Units, Employees
unauthorisedly occupying Company's accommodation at township were evacuated with the help
of the local police,


To improve 7 between shop floor workers/supervisors and front line executives
through meaningful dialogues, more experienced middle level executives are being deployed in

13.3 Recommendations/Observation of the committee

Research & Development 7

The Conimittee recommends that NALCO should explore means of using its R&D output
for finding viable means to commercially dispose of the fly ash. Besides, the Committee also
feels that R&D effort should be channelised to explore ways to improve the quality of alumina
and other secondary aluminium products. Efforts may be made to complete the Special Grade

would be successful,
Action Taken
E Disposal of fly ash:

i. In order to install High Concentration Selury Disposable (HCSD) system of ash
disposal, NALCO Board has approved appointment of National Thermal Power
Corporation (NTPC) as Consultant. NTPC has been entrusted with the Preparation of
Feasibility Report

ii. To utilise abandoned Coal Mine voids for disposal of Ash, NALCO has received
Centre for Mine Planning and Design Institutes (CMPDI) draft Report and the same
is being studied. A copy of the Report has been forwarded to Mahanadi Coal Limited
(MCL) for their acceptance.

Commercial exploitation of Technical Know-hows developed by NALCO in association
with other Government research organisations for utilisation of fly ash is being explored
through prospective entrepreneurs

2. R&D EFFORTS TO IMPROVE QUALITY OF ALUMINA:

Regarding channelising R& D efforts to explore ways to improve the quality of Alumina
and other secondary Aluminium products, as a matter of fact, Company's R&D facilities is being
regularly utilised since long for continuous improvement of process and product quality including
that of Alumina.Some of the activities Successfully accomplished are as under:-

(i) Conducted parallel studies on application of Synthetic Flocculent and Crystal Growth
Modifier (CGM)

(ii) Laboratory studies were concluded on development of Superfine Alumina Hydrate

(iii) Studies on Mechano-chemical activation of Bauxite has commenced in association
with National Mineral Laboratory NML, Jamshedpur of the District.

(iv) Development of Process Model under a Joint Research Programme with JNARDDC,
Nagpur/EIL, New Delhi is under consideration.



(v) Variety of Special Grade Alumina products is being produced regularly in 600 TPA
Pilot Plant and products are marketed successfully.

(vi) A Pilot Plant for quality improvement of Anodes is under consideration for
installation in the Smelter Plant, Angul.

3. Sga Project
The Special Grade Alumina Project is fast approaching completion.
4, Joint Research Project:

As informed , a Joint Research Project with ( Moscow Institute of Steel and Alloy
(MISA), Russia and Romselt SAIL India Limited (RSIL), New Delhi, for exploring possibilities
for commercial exploitation of Red Mud for Pig Iron Making has commenced from 8th
September,200] and is progressing as per schedule.

18.3, | Recommendations/Observation of the committee
Peripheral Development:

The Committee recommends that greater stress should be placed upon proper monitoring
of the peripheral area development programmes. The Committee strongly recommends that
higher allocation be made for peripheral area development. Besides, the Committee was
distressed to note that despite Angul area having a large number of ex-servicemen, adequate
representation in terms of employment in NALCO has not been given to them. The Committee
hopes that adequate representation be given to Ex-servicemen.

Action Taken :

As far as peripheral development activities are concerned, since its inception in the year
1981 following the guidelines of the Government, NALCO has actively explored the ways and
means to enrich the quality of life in the rural areas surrounding the place of its operation, 1.6.,
Koraput and Angul District of Orissa. The various peripheral activities undertaken by the
Company are :

i Drinking water facility

ii Road

iii Community Centre

iv Rural sports/games/cultural activities
v Health care & immunization

vi Agricultural assistance

vii Pisciculture programme

NALCO has spent around Rs. 61 lakh during the last three years in this direction. In the
previous three financial years a total amount of approximately Rs,11.77 crore approximately has
been incurred on the peripheral development activities,


bea of employment of ex-service man (ESM) in the peripheral activities of NALCO

The employment of ex-service men in NALCO is furnished below:

१2
jor |

(०) Operative Trainees
(d) Non-executive (Unskilled) | o2 |
Total:



CHAPTER —II

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE

Recommendations/Observation of the committee (Para 19,1)
Import Duty

The Committee recommends that the Government may consider enhancing the import
duty on such scraps to the same level as that of primary aluminium metal,

Action Taken Report

Enhancing the import duty on aluminium scrap would lessen its utilization, specially
when use of scrap is cost effective and energy efficient. Conversion of scrap into metal uses only
about 5% of the energy required to reduce alumina into metal, Moreover, recycling is
environmentally friendly as it does not release green house gases like CO2. Aluminium is also
fully recyclable, a process which can conserve a precious non-renewable resource like Bauxite.
For these reasons, about 30% of the global aluminium metal Production is scrap based, and the
duty on scrap is generally lower than that on primary metal. Since the use of scra,) is not
widespread in India, the Report of the Working Group on Non-ferrous Metals (Ninth Plan 1997-
2002), had specifically recommended that recycling of scrap requires less energy and is also
able to meet the gap between the domestic demand and supply. This can be achieved with import
of scrap. Thus, import needs to be promoted with low duty structure to make metal production
competitive. The global data on comparative customs duties does indicate that the duty on scrap
is generally lower, although there is not much difference in the tariffs on metal and scrap, the
tariffs on both being very low, both in deyeloped countries as well as in developing countries.
Keeping in view the above reasons, the Department of Mines had recommended to the Ministry
of Finance for low duty structure on import of aluminium scrap to make metal production
competitive (Union Budget 2002-2003). However, the basic import duty on aluminium serap has
been kept by Ministry of Finance at 15%.


Z|

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF MINES
OR FURTHER RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMITTEE IS REQUIRED.

5.6 Recommendations/Observation of the committee

Commercial sale of surplus power

The Committee recommends that NALCO should explore possibilities of commercial
sale of surplus power at competitive prices. Efforts may be made to complete the project in time
as per schedule.

Action Taken

NALCO had taken recourse to sell surplus power to third parties, In this connection, the
company issued an advertisement in May 1999 but this was contested by Grid Corporation of
Orissa (GRIDCO), However, NALCO filed a petition before Orissa Electricity Regulatory
Commission (OERC) for allowing sale of power to ferro alloy industries in the state, but OERC
also rejected NALCO's petition. NALCO has now gone in appeal to the Orissa High Court,

The appeal is still pending adjudication. The Department of Mines has also taken up the
issue with the Government of Orissa.

The installation of seventh unit of Captive Power Plant of NALCO is expected to be
completed by September, 2002. The project for installation of eighth unit of CPP is in progress.

Further Recommendation

While the NALCO management should keep on apprising the Committee about
development & taking place in this regard, the Department of Mines should continue to pursue
the matter with the Government of Orissa regarding commercial sale of surplus power at a
competitive price to other industries in and outside Orissa. The Committee feels that if Grid
corporation of Orissa (GRIDCO) and Orissa Electricity Regulatory Commission (OERC) allows
NALCO to sell surplus power to third parties ,it would not only give help to generate revenue but
also allow other industries in and outside Orissa to grow and develop.

6.3 Recommendations/Observation of the committee
Financial Restructuring
In view of the excellent performance of NALCO and its inherent competitive edge of

NALCO the Committee recommends that disinyvestments of NALCO may be avoided and every
possible assistance should be given to it to expand its presence in the International market.



Action Taken

The Government has taken a decision to disinvest 30% of it's equity in NALCO through
capital market route.

Further Recommendation

The Committee understands that disinvestment of Non-strategic PSUs has now become
Government policy. In this context, the Committee feels that if the capital sharing of NALCo is
unavoidable, the Government should consider the issue and accordingly take a decision in a
judicious manner,

72 Recommendations/Observation of the Committee
Technical know-how

Outside technology should be obtained only when really required, The Committee
recommends that NALCO should have a strong R&D set up and, wherever possible, in-house
expertise should be utilized instead of always depending on outside agencies.

Action Taken

A comprehensive plan for expanding Company's R&D facilities to cover most of the
areas to enhance Company's Technical Competence with the ultimate objective of discontinuing
its dependence on outside technical support is under way.

Further Recommendation

The Committee is constrained to express its anguish over furnishing of incomplete
information by the Department of Mines. The Committee feels that the Department should have
furnished the details of the comprehensive plan undertaken/envisaged by NALCO for expanding
its R&D facilities in order to enrich its technical competence.

The Committee feels that there should be close co-ordination and collaboration in the
area of mutual interest between NALCO and Jawaharlal Nehru Alumanium — Research
Development and Design Centre (INARDDC) so that NALCO should extract maximum benefits
as far as upgradation of technology is concerned, The Committee further feels that the possibility
of affiliation /merger of JNARDDC with NALCO may be explored which will ensure better
R&D facilities to the Company.

12.1  Recommendations/Observation of the committee
Production & Marketing:

The Committee recommends that NALCO should endeavor to become a major global
force in the Aluminium industry through of aggressive marketing. The Committee feels that
greater exposure and presence of NALCO in the global market is required for this a major thrust
in International marketing is required. After the expansion programme is completed, NALCO
should step up its marketing efforts to enhance export.


Action Taken

Appropriate Strategies 3 being adopted to enhance exports after the expansion
Programme is completed,

Further Recommendation

aggressive marketing, so “its is felt in global market, if would have served the purpose of
furnishing Action Taken Note on the recommendation in a meaningful manner, In that way the
Committee could had a better understanding of the actual steps taken by NALCO. management
for promotion of export.

14.2 Recommendations/Observation of the Committee
Take -over of [APL

The Committee Fecommends that NALCO should make full use of takeover of the IAPL
by making a Strong thrust in the area of secondary aluminium Products and the result should
reflect in NALCO's overall financial performance so as to justify the takeover of IAPL. The
commissioning of IAPL may be completed as soon aS possible,

Action Taken

The IAPL project was taken over by NALCO on 16.03.2000 and is being implemented in
two phases:-

* Commissioning of Cold Rolling Mill and Finishing Line Equipments- Commissioned
on 31.3.2002.

* Commissioning of Casters for Strip Casting.-Scheduled for completion in stages by
31,7.2002

Action taken for speedy implementation of the Project in brief are as given below:

Civil Work : Civil work for Cold Rolling Mill and auxiliaries as at (a) above completed fully.
Civil work for caster, furnaces and auxiliaries completed as at (b) above xcept fuel storage and
nitrogen plant, Civil work for Fuel Oil Storage and Nitrogen Plant completed 80% and
60%recspectively,

= Electrical Work : Power Distribution System ; Erection of the electrical power
distribution system has been completed and offered to CEA for inspection.

4, The second and final phase commissioning of the project is scheduled to be completed by
31.7.2002 ,



Further Recommendation

The Committee hopes that all civil work including Fuel oil storage and Nitrogen plant
and other Mechanical works pertaining to first phase of commissioning of IAPL by NALCO
would be completed without further delay. The Committee further hopes that the second phase of
commissioning of cortex for strip which is scheduled for commissioning by 31* July, 2002)
would be completed without delay. The Committee recommends that the Department of Mines
would furnish the details of completion of commissioning of [APL in the Action Taken Note of
the present Report. The Committee further recommends that NALCO's management should take
all possible steps for making full use of taking over of IAPL. It is expected that the Department of
Mines would apprise in its Action Taken Note to the present report the details regards the benefits
accruing of NALCO's financial performance due to taking over of IAPL.

15.2 Recommendations/Observation of the committee
Breach of fly ash pond in CPP, NALCO:

The Committee recommends that adequate safeguards be built within the system to check
recurrence of such incidents in future. The Committee also recommends that stringent action be
taken against the officials responsible for the breach of fly ash pond.

Action Taken
To prevent recurrence of such incidents in future, following actions have been taken:

i. An Ash Management Group has been formed for regular maintenance, record
keeping ete.

ii, Experts from Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore are being called regularly for
inspection of dams, guidance and training of NALCO engineers.

A detailed manual for operation and maintenance, for attending distress locations of the
ash dyke is under preparation by College of Engineering and Technology (CET) under Orissa
University of Agriculture and Technology (QUAT) in line with the manual in use by State
Government Water Resource Department Disciplinary action has already been initiated by
NALCO against the officials responsible.

Further Recommendation

The Committee has already been communicated vide Action Taken Note on Committee's
550 Report as furnished by Department of Mines regarding the disciplinary action taken by
NALCO management against the officials responsible for breach of fly ash pond. The Committee
feels that such stringent action taken by NALCO and the Ministry would act as. bulwark against
recurrence of such incident.

The Committee feels that the Department of Mines should furnish details of manual for
operation and for proper maintenance, for attending distress location of the ash dike which is
under preparation by college of Engineering and Technology (CET), The Committee further
recommends that the ‘Ash Management Group’, which has been formed for recycler maintenance,
record keeping, etc. must function and remain alert to its entrusted duty and assigned
responsibility.



19.3 =| of the committee
Non-uniform sales tax policy in states;
The Committee recommends that the matter may be looked into and be taken up with state
governments.
Action Taken

The Ministry has taken up the matter with Ministry of Finance.
Further Recommendations

The Commitee is of the view that the Department of Mines should furnish, in its Action
Taken Note of. Present report the details of follow-up action taken by the Department of Mines
with the Ministry of Finance and Tesponse of Ministry of Finance as the issue of non-uniform
Sales Tax Policy in states has an impact through out the country.
19.5 Recommendations/Observation of the committee
Incentive for use of ZEOLITE-A (detergent ~constituent )

The Committee takes a Serious view of this and recommends that keeping in view our
concern for environmental Protection, use of Fall form would be given ( STPP) may be banned
by the Government through an appropriate legislation, Besides, incentives may kindly be given
for use of Zeolite -A by exempting Excise Duty on this product for a period of at least five years.

Action Taken

Further Recommendations

While the Committee is pleased to note that NALCO has taken up the issue of banning

the use of STPP in household detergents, banning, import of zeolite in the country, banning

er setting up of STPP plants in the Country and reduction of excise duty but at the same time,

the Committee would like to know the net Outcome of efforts undertaken and the response of

Ministry of Environment & Forest Ecomark Technical Committee, and Central Pollution control

Board, The Committee would also like to know about details of communication between
Department of Mines and MOEF and the response of MOEF on the subject.

19,7 Recommendations/Observation of the Committee

Availability of Locos:

12



The Committee
Railways.
Action Taken

recommends that Ministry of Mines may take up the matter with

The matter has been taken up with Ministry of Railways.

Further Recommendations

The Committee hopes that the De
communication made between Department
availability of locos.

partment of Mines would furnish the details of
of Mines and Ministry of Railways on the issue of

13


(CHAPTER - rv)

RECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV.

ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF MINES HAV

E NOT BEEN RECEIVED,

NIL

i4



—— tT

<= AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT
A GLANCE

5.6 Commercial Sale of Surplus Power

While the NALCO management should keep on apprising the Committee about
developments taking place in this regard, the Department of Mines should continue to pursue the
matier with the Government of Orissa regarding commercial sale of surplus power at a
competitive price to other industries in and outside Orissa. The Committee feels that if Grid
Corporation of Orissa (GRIDCO.) and Orissa Electricity Regulatory Commission (08२0)
allows NALCO to sell surplus power to third parties, it would not only give help to. generate
tevenue but also allow other Industries in and outside Orissa to grow and develop.

* 63 Financial Restructuring

The Committee understands that disinvestment of non-strategic PSUs has now become
Government policy, In this context, the Committee feels that if the capital restructuring of
NALCo is unavoidable, the Governments Should consider the issue and take its decision in a
judicious manner,

7.2 Technical Know-how

The Committee is constrained to express its anguish over furnishing of incomplete
information by the Department of Mines. The Committee feels that the Department should have
furnished the details of the comprehensive plan undertaken/envisaged by NALCO for expanding
its R&D facilities in order to enrich the its technical competence.

The Committee feels that there should be close co-ordination and collaboration in the
area of mutual interest between NALCO and JNARDDC so that NALCO can extract maximum
benefits as far as upgradation of technology is concerned. The Committee further feels that the
possibility of affiliation /merger of INARDDC with NALCO may be explored which will ensure
better R&D facilities of the company.

12.1 Production & Marketing

The Committee feels that had the Department of Mines furnished the details of strategies
being adopted by NALCO management to enhance the Company's export through aggressive
marketing, so that its is felt in the global market, it would have served the purpose of furnishing
Action Taken Note on the recommendation in a meaningful manner. In that way the Committee
could have had better understanding of the actual steps taken by NALCO management for
promotion of export,

15


= Take -over of IAPL

The Committee hopes that all civil work including Fuel oil storage and Nitrogen plant
and other Mechanical works pertaining to first phase of commissioning of [APL by NALCO
would be completed without further delay. The Committee further hopes that the second phase of
commissioning of cortex for strip which is scheduled for commissioning by 31” July, 2002):
would be completed without delay. The Committee recommends that the Department of Mines
would furnish, the details of completion of commissioning of IAPL, in the Action Taken Note of
present Report. The Committee further recommends that NALCO's management should take all
possible steps for making full use of taking over of IAPL. It is expected that the Department of
Mines would apprise in its Action Taken Note to the present report the details regards the benefits
accruing of NALCO's financial performance due to taking over of IAPL.

15.2. Breach of Fly Ash Pond In CPP, NALCO:

The Committee has already been communicated vide Action Taken Note on Committee's
550 Report as furnished by Department of Mines regarding the disciplinary action shifted by
NALCO management against the officials responsible for breach of fly ash pond, The Committee
feels that such stringent action taken by taken the NALCO and the Ministry would act as bulwark
against recurrence of such incident,

The Committee feels that the Department of Mines should furnish details of manual for
operation and proper for maintenance attending distress location of the ash dyke which is under
preparation by college of Engineering and Technology (CET). The Committee further
recommends that the ‘Ash Management Group’, which has been formed for recycler maintenance,
record keeping, etc. must function and remain alert to its entrusted duty and assigned
responsibility.

19.3. NON-UNIFORM SALES TAX POLICY IN STATES:

The Committee is of the view that the Department of Mines should furnish, in its Action
Taken Note of present report the details of follow-up action taken by the Department of Mines.
with the Ministry of Finance and response of Ministry of Finance as the issue of non-uniform
Sales Tax Policy in states has an impact through out the country,

19.5 Concern for environmental protection
Incentive for use of ZEOLITE-A (detergent -constituent)

While the Committee is pleased to note that NALCO has taken up the issue of banning
the use of Sodium Tri-poly phosphate ( STPP) in house hold detergents, banning, import of
zeolite in the country, banning further setting up of STPP plants in the country and reduction of
excise duty but at the same time , the Committee would like to know the net outcome of efforts
undertaken and the response of Ministry of Environment & Forest Ecomark Technical
Committee, and Central Pollution control Board. The Committee would also like to know about
details of communication between Department of Mines and MOEF and the response of MOEF
on the subject.



19.7 Availability of Locos:

The Committee hopes that the Department of Mines would furnish the details of
communication made between Department of Mines and Ministry of Railways on the issue of
availability of locos,


——_—————

MINUTES



XI
ELEVENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday the 9" August, 2002 in Committee Room ‘A’,

Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Shri T.N. Chaturvedi —Chairman
RAJYA SABHA :

Dr. Abrar Ahmad

Shri Prasanta Chatterjee

Smt. Saroj Dubey

Dr, Faguni Ram

Smt. Sumitra Mahajan

Sh, P.K. Maheshwari

Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi

Coen AnPwy

LOK SABHA

10 Smt, Jayashree Banerjee
11 Shri Nepal Chandra Das
12 Shri A.C. Jose

13 Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
14 Shri Sunil Khan

15 Dr. K.Malaisamy

16 Shri A. Narendra

17 Shri P, Rajendran

18 Dr. 8.8. Ramaiah

18 Chowdhary Talib Hussain
19 Shri Chunnilal Bhau Thakur
20 Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari

SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director

Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer

21


2; Shri A.C. Jose, Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 4 Dr. 8.8. Ramaiah and other members of
the Committee felicitated the Chairman of the Committee who had since been designated as the
Governor of Karnataka. In the felicitation address, all the three Convenors and other members of
the Committee appreciated the work done by the Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri T.N.
Chaturvedi, They all were of the view that Shri Chaturvedi gave a new thrust and orientation to
the working of the Committee and gave inspiration to the Committee with his valuable
contribution and personal interest in the day-to-day working of the Committee and in a short span
of four months, the Committee could present a record number of ‘23° reports.

The Chairman, in response, observed that due to the hard work put in by the Sub-
Committees it had been possible to prepare such a large number of reports. He thanked the
Convenors of all the Sub-Committees, Members of the Committee and the Secretariat for
extending cooperation to him to discharge his duties as the Chairman of the Committee.

3, The Committee then took up consideration of the following draft reports:-

(a) 76" Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee’s 53 Report on
Modernization, Restructuring and Expansion Programmes of NALCO.

(b) 77" Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee’s 67" Report on
Organization, Structure and Performance Review of Indian Bureau of Mines.

(०) 780 Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee's 68" Report on
Working and Performance Review of Mineral Exploration Corporation Ltd. (MECL).

(a) 79" Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee’s 657 Report
on Modernisation, Restructuring and Expansion Programmes of Hindustan Copper Ltd,
(HCL).

(e) 80" Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee's 66" Report
on Performance Review of Jawahar Lal Nehru Aluminum Research Development and
Design Centre.

(f) 81" Report on Sickness in SSI Sector of Cement Industry in Uttar Pradesh,
(8) 82" Report on MoU system in the Strategic Sector PSEs
(h) 83" Report on MoU system in the Allied Sector PSEs.

(i) 84" Report on Implementation of Prime Minister's Rozgar Yojana (PMRY) in
Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Kerala.

(0) 850" Report on Implementation Status of Financial Assistance-cum-Restructuring
Package and Revival of Hindustan Steel Works Construction Ltd. (HSCL).

(k) 86" Report on Performance Review of Metal Scrap Trade Corporation Ltd. (MSTC).

(1) 87" Report on Implementation status of Financial Assistance-cum-Restructuring
Package and Revival of Bharat Refractories Ltd. (BRL).

(m) 88" Report on Performance review of Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL).
P 8

(n) 89" Report on Modernisation, Restructuring and Expansion Programmes of Durgapur
Steel Plant (DSP).

(0) 90" Report on Sickness in SSI Sector in the City of Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh.
(9) 91" Report on Coir Board - A performance Review.

22



4, The Committee adopted all the above stated reports and authorized its Chairman to make
corrections, if any, in the reports, The Committee decided to present/lay the above mentioned
reports on the 13 August, 2002. The Committee for this purpose authorized its Chairman to
present the reports in the Rajya Sabha and in his absence Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi and Prof,
M.M. Agarwal to present the reports. The Committee also authorized Dr. B.B. Ramaiah to lay
the reports in the Lok Sabha and in his absence authorized Shri A.C. Jose and Shri A. Narendra
to lay the reports,

4, The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 P.M,

23


4. The Committee adopted all the above stated reports and authorized its Chairman to make
corrections, if any, in the reports. The Committee decided to present/lay the above mentioned
reports on the 13" August, 2002. The Committee for this purpose authorized its Chairman to
present the reports in the Rajya Sabha and in his absence Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi and Prof.
M.M. Agarwal to present the reports. The Committee also authorized Dr. B.B. Ramaiah to lay
the reports in the Lok Sabha and in his absence authorized Shri A.C, Jose and Shri A. Narendra
to lay the reports,

5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 P.M,

23