RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
FIFTH REPORT 
MINISTRY OF STEEL - STATUS OF SPONGE IRON 
INDUSTRIES 
Presented on 22nd February, 1994 
/ 
RAJY A SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
February, 1994/Phalguna, 1915 (SAKA) 

CONTENTS 
PAGES 
I. Composition of the Committee. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (iii) 
II. Report ... 1-6 
III. Annex ure 
(Minutes of the meetings of the Committee). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 - 16 

CONTENTS 
PAGES 
I. Composition of the Committee. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (iii) 
II. Report ... 1-6 
III. Annexure 
(Minutes of the meetings of the Committee). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7-16 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
l. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Rao - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri Ani! Kumar 
4. Shrimati Chandrika Abhinandan Jain 
5. Shri J.P. Javali 
6. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
7. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mody 
8. Shri V. Rajeshwar Rao 
9. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
10. Shri K.K. Veerappan 
11. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav 
12. Shri Nyoclek Yonggam 
13. Sbri Jibon Roy 
LOK SABHA 
14. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
15. Shri Guruclas Kamat 
16. Shrimati Kesharbai Sonajirao Kshirsagar 
17. Shrimati Pratibha Devisingh Patil 
18. Shri Ratna Krishna Konathala 
19. Shri K. Ramamurthy 
20. Shri Balin Kuli 
21. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
22. Shri Vishveshwar Bhagat 
23. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
24. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
25. Shri Uclayasingrao Gaikwad 
26. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
27. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
28. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan 
29. Shri R<1jendra Agnihotri 
30. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
31. Shri S.N. Vekaria 
32. Shri Ramdew Ram 
33. Shri Prabu Dayal Katheria 
34. Shri Satyanarayan Jatiya 
35. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
36. Shri Naval Kishore Rai 
37. Slui Manjay Lal 
38. Shri Rasheed Masood 
39. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
40. Shri Purna Chandra Malik 
41. Shri Tcj Narayan Singh 
42. Shri P.G. Narayanan 
43. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri G.K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri Shamsher Singh Rana. Under Secretary 
3. Shri Jagmohan SundriyaL Committee Officer 

FIFTH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
I, the Chairman of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry. 
having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf , do hereb y present this Fifth 
Report of the Committee on the Status of the Sponge Iron Industri es und er the Ministry of Steel. 
2. The Committee in its sitting held on 28th June , 1993 considered a note receiv ed from the 
Ministry of Steel on Sponge Iron and decjded to send a questionnaire to the Ministr y on the 
subject for their replies. In its sitting held on 29th September , 1993, the Committe e heard the 
views of the Secretary of the Ministry of Steel by way of clarifications to the repl ies sent by the 
Ministry to the said questionnaire. 
3. The Committee considered in depth the problems prevailing in sponge iron industr y and 
Government's efforts to protect its interests. The Committee had deliberations on the overall 
present scenario with a view to project the possible ways in salvaging the sponge Iron Indust ries. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the report at its sitting held on the lOth February. 
1994. 
5. Based on the papers and other relevant material on the subject and also the evidence of 
the Secretary, the Committee had noted the following picture of the Sponge Iron indu stry in the 
country. 
5.1 Sponge iron is a partial substitute for steel melting Scrap. It is a met allic product 
produced by direct induction of high grade iron ore or pellets in the solid stat e i.e. without the 
material going into the liquid phase as in the blast furnace. It is also known as Direct Reduced 
Iron (DRI) or Hot Briquetted Iron (HBI). This reduction of iron ore can be achieved by using 
either carbon bearing material such as non-coking coal or a suitable redu cing gas produced by 
reforming of natural gas. On the other hand sponge iron can also be used in the integrated steel 
plants to replace steel melting scrap to some extent as a coolant in the LD convertors and as a 
part of the change mix in the basic oxygen furnace and open hearth furnace. 
5.2 Non-coking coal and natural gas are the two main ingredients in spong e iron technology. 
Earlier the technology was limited upto use. of non-coking coal but with the technological 
innovation gas based sponge iron plants have also been set up. While coal based technology 
involves reduction of iron ore in a rotary kiln using non-coking coal as a reduct ant, gas based one 
uses Hydrogen or Carbon Mono Oxide or a mixture of both as reductant s. Gas based sponge iron 
manufacturing process requires high-grade iron ore with around 65%. At present non-coking coal 
is imported for sponge iron industry. Less availability of high grade of iron ore and Jack of 
required allocation of natural gas have proved to be impediments in proper development of 
sponge iron industries. 
5.3 According to Government 's report , a number of steps have been taken to promote the 
sponge iron industry as a major thrust area. Broadly, the sponge iron industr y was delicensed in 
March, 1985. Then under the new industrial policy the requirement of obta ining registration for 
setting up new plants was dispensed with in 1991. Sponge iron is also includ ed in the list of "High 
Priority Industries" in the new policy. The production capacity of first coal based plant which was 
set up in 1981, has been doubled from 30,000 tpa to 60,000 tpa. Governm ent have also set up a 
Linkage Committee in the Ministry of Steel to assist the enterpreneures , inte rested in setting up 
sponge iron plants, by way of providing single window clearance for linkage in the production of 
coal and movement of coal and iron ore by the Railways. The Committee has been given to 
under stan d that the Ministry of Steel has been successful in pursuading the Ministry of Petroleum 

and Natural Gas with regard to allocation of natural gas for gas based sponge iron plants of a 
capacity of 4 million tonnes per annum. 
5.4 During the course of his evidence the Secretary, Ministry of Steel informed the Committee 
that at present Government have allocated natural gas to five sponge iron plants. These plants are 
namely (i) Essar Gujarat Ltd., Gujarat (ii) Grasim Industries Ltd., Maharashtra (iii) Nippon Demo 
!spat Ltd., Maharashtra (iv) Kalyani Steels Ltd ., Maharashtra and (v) Usha Rect ifire Ltd., U.P. He 
further informed that the Petroleum Ministry has got a priority list and gas is allocated mainly to 
the power and fertilizer sector. There is no surplus gas available for further allocat ion to any of 
steeVsponge iron plants. If an industrialist wants to set up a plant he approac hes the Ministry of 
Steel by way of filling up a memorandum opting for v~rious available linkages such as coal, gas, 
railways etc. and for such purpose a Linkage Committee has been set up in the Ministry to liaison 
on his behalf with the concerned authorities. 
5.5 The installed production capacity of sponge iron has increased. from 30,000 tones in 1980-81 
to about 18 lakh tonnes in 1992-93. The production during last 4 years has increased from 
1.9 lakh tonnes in 1988-89 to 12.8 lakh tonnes in 1991-92 as per the details given below:-
Name of the Unit 
(A) Coal-based 
(i) Sponge Iron India Ltd. 
(ii) Orissa Sponge Iron Ltd. 
(iii) IPITATA Sponge Iron Ltd. 
(iv) Bihar Sponge Iron Ltd. 
Location 
Koth<~gudem, Distt. Khamman, 
A.P 
Palaspanga, Distt . Keonjhar, 
Orissa. 
Joda, Distt. Keonjhar, Orissa. 
Chandial. Distt. Singhbhum. 
Bihar 
(v) Sunflag Iron and Steel Co. Ltd. Bhandara. Maharashtra 
(vi) Jindal Strips Ltd. Raigarh, M.P. 
(vii) HEG Ltd. Durg. M.P. 
(viii) BL·llary Steels and Alloys Ltd. Bellary, Karnataka 
(ix) Goldstar Steel and Alloys Ltd. Vizianagaram, A.P. 
(8) Gas-based 
(i) Essar Gujarat Ltd. Hazira Gujarat. 
Total (A+B) 
Installed Production 
capacity (1991-92) 
(in lakh tonnes) (in lakh tonnes) 
per annum 
0.6 
1.0 
(De-rated 
capacity) 
1.2 
1.2 
1.5 
0.48 
1.00 
0.89 
1.23 
0.92 
1.0 Commissioned 
in 1991-92 
0.6 Commissioned 
in 1992-93 
0.6 -do-
2.2 -do-
9.9 4.52 
8.0 8.28 
17.9 12.80 
·· .. 
At present two existing units have undertaken expansion projects and 10 new units are under 
implementation. The total additional capacity under implementation is around 45 lakh tonnes. 

The Committee, as a test case , has noted the following details of the production and 
financial performance in respect of Sponge Iron Indi a Ltd. during last three years: -
1990-91 
Production (t) 47,600 
capacity 79 
utilisation(%) 
Sales (t) 49,035 
Sales turnover 1,801 
(Rs. in Lakhs) 
Generation of 356 
internal resources 
(Rs. in Lakhs) 
Net profit 180 
(Rs. in lakhs) 
19991-92 
48,095 
80 
44,485 
2,081 
579 
477 
1992-93 
51.000 
85 
52,000 
2,244 
462 
255 
According to Government's estimate the annual production of company in 1992-93 was 
expected to be around 49,000 tonnes against the fixed target of 51,000 tonnes due to 
deterioration in the quality of coal supplied by Singareni Collieries, lower ash carbon contents in 
coal and adverse conditions of transportation of iron ore. 
5.6 The Committee has been informed by the Secretary that an installed capacity of 6 million 
tonnes of sponge iron would be created by the end of the Ylllth Five Year Plan. as against the 
Present installed capacity of 2.49 million tonnes. Various units are coming into operation from 
time to time while some other units are at different stages of completion. A majority of them will 
come into operat ion in the year 1994-95. Some units are likely to come into operation in the year 
1995-96. One unit will come into operation in 1996-97. All these projects were given linkages 
during Seventh Five Year Plan. The target so fixed is not a restrictive target and the same can go 
beyond that depending on dynamics and demand of the situation in the years to come. However 
he added that no investment is proposed to be made by Government in achieving the projected 
production targets and the entire additional capacity is expected to be set up in the private sector. 
Government would welcome the proposals from private enterpreneurs in that regard. According 
to the Secretary, Government have no information about expansion of capacity utilisation being 
undertaken, if any, by a specific private unit. The Committee has been given to understand that 
one lndustrial Enterpreneur's Memorandum has been filled for a sponge iron plant of 15,000 
tonnes per annum capacity in Goa. Government presumes that this would be coal based project 
but no request for coal linkage has been received by it from the ente rpreneur. Accordin g to the 
Secretary in such cases it is presumed that those who do not follow up their proposals , it mea ns 
they are not serious about their proposals. 
5. 7 The high cost of production has severely affected the capacity utilisati o n of sponge iron 
plants for which the present duty structure in mainl y responsible. Sponge Iron Manuf acturers 
Association and some sponge iron producers have repres ented against present dut y structur e with 
following requests:-
(i) reduction of customs duty on iron ore, iron ore pellets and non-coking coal in order to 
reduce the cost of raw material; 
(ii) keeping customs duty on imported scrap at a level that would allow sponge iro n 
producers to get a remunerative prices. 
According to Government's reports customs duty on iron ore has been brought down from 
90% to 20% and on iron ore pellets from 35% to 15% in the current year's budget. 
During the course of oral evidence the Secretary informed the Committee that their 
recommendations about providing non-coking coal facility to the producers is under consideration 

of the Finance Ministry. Another recommendation regarding reduction of import duty on scrap 
from 12% to 5% is also pending for considerat ion of the Ministry of Finance. According to the 
Secretary any proposal which goes from any Ministry to the Ministry of Finance for giving reliefs to 
the various industries is looked into by the Finance Ministry from the point of view of their effect 
on the overall revenue and resource position. Government are supporting the sponge iron industry 
to come up and its policies are attuned to see that sponge iron industry in India grows and at the 
same time to ensure that mini steel plants do not suffer. To maintain such balance a set of packages 
has been taken up with Finance Ministry so that the cost of production also comes clown. 
The Committee has noted that the following average production cost of sponge iron worked out 
in 1992:-
Gas based (old plants) Rs. 5102 per tonne 
Gas based (new plants) Rs. 5402 per tonne 
Coal based (old plants) Rs. 4150 per tonne 
Coal based (new plants) Rs. 5150 per tonne 
While clarifying the reasons for difference in production of new and old plants, the Secretary 
informed the Committee that old plants generally get fully depreciated and their fixed cost goes 
clown as a result of which cost of production becomes cheaper. On thf' ::::i1er hand the newer plants 
have got a heavy investment and their servicing cost is much higher which raises the cost of 
production. However, performance-wise new plants are better. 
5.8 ln the note furnished to the Committee the Ministry has informed that no study has been 
conducted to compare our production costs with production costs in other countries. The Secretary 
informed the Committee that as per the information available to them, sponge iron in the 
developed countries is generally produced for captive consumption. Information or data on 
international price of sponge iron is not even available with Sponge Iron Manufacturers' Association 
a~ nobody is importing spong iron from abroad, However. Government would make an attempt to 
conduct a study about it. About the quality of sponge iron of new plants the Secretary informed the 
Committee that the same is comparable to international level because of availability of good quality 
iron ore in the country. 
6.0 On the basis of the documents and other material made available and also the oral evidence 
of the Secretary of the Ministry of Steel before it the Committee notes that rhe manufacturing 
process of the sponge iron has not been 'technologically sound and cost effective. The Committee 
has noted the requirement of high grade iron ore in sponge iron manufacturing process but good 
quality iron ore is not being extracted due to unscientific methods being used for this purpose. For 
example out of the total recoverable reserves of 76.1 million tonnes of iron ore in Goa only 13.5 
million tonnes is high grade and these deposits are rather scattered. The Committee feels that the 
available deposits of iron are in Goa are most valuable in terms of qual ity and if the same are 
extracted in a more scien tific way dependence in terms of import could be reduced to some extent. 
Though expensive but there is possibility of extracting iron ore of good qual ity in Goa by tak ing out 
the water out of the deposites which have otherwise remained unexplored clue to water level. 
The Committee observes that import of non-coking coal has been quite expensive. No serious 
efforts have been undertaken so far to ensure availability of good quality coal for sponge iron sector 
from the coal reserves available within the country and this had Jed to dependence on imports. The 
Commitree feels that the Ministry of Steel should urgently take up the matter with the Ministry of 
Coal so that good quality coal is made available to sponge iron industry at cheaper rates 
indigenously. 'Alternatively it would be cheaper if only coa l is imported and the non-coking process 
of the same is done in the country itself. The Committee expresses its concern over slackness and 
indifferent attitude of Government in not allotting gas to sponge iron industry despite the fact that 
sponge iron is included in the list of "High Priority Industries" in the new Ind ustrial Policy. The 

Committee is not convinced with Ministry's plea about non-availability of the same. The Committee 
feels that a lot of natural gas which is wasted everyday by way of flaring up could be utilised by 
allocating to sponge iron sector. Needful pursuasion with the Petroleum Ministry should be initiated 
in this direction. The Committee recommends that immediate steps be taken by the Ministry in 
getting the allocation of required natural gas to sponge iron industry for better productivity on the 
lines of power and fertilizer sectors. Implementation of certain units I projects would otherwise be 
jeopardisecl due to delay in supply of natural gas which will be a national Loss. 
6.1 The Committee is not satisfied with the growth of sponge iron production in the country. 
As per Government's own submission the production has been far below the installed capacity in 
most of the coal as well as gas based plants. The Committee feels that crucial areas like supply of 
better quality of coal and transportation of iron ore have been neglected to a large extent. Such lack 
of proper monitoring and feed back bas resulted into less capacity utilisation of the plants. The 
Committee is particularly not happy with the actual production figures in respect of Sponge Iron 
India Limited which is a PSU where the production has not reached the expected level despite of 
Government's efforts since the installation of the unit. The company has not only failed in achieving 
the production target but its performance in generating its internal resources has also been far from 
satisfactory during 1992-93 in comparison to 1991-92. The Company is thus in urgent need of 
protection in terms of supply of good quality of coal and favourable transportation conditions of 
iron for maintaining its viability. The Committee is not convinced with the Government's steps for 
achieving the proposed production targets of 6 million tonnes of sponge iron as projected at the end 
of Ylllth Five Year Plan. The Committee feels that the Ministry has no clear cut perception in 
achieving the target as no investment is proposed to be made by Government during the current 
plan and the entire additional capacity is expected to be set up in the private sector. The 
Government have downgraded its priorities towards the sponge iron industry by conceding the fact 
that it has no information about expansion of capacity utilisation being undertaken, if any, by 
private units. The Committee notes that Government have failed to intimate the Committee about 
the definite proposals which have come from the private sector which may enhance the production 
of sponge iron in future . The Committee observes that Government has by doing so left much to be 
desired by staking its claim for achieving the projected production target either in the absence of 
any Government investment or definite private proposals about setting new plants during VII Ith 
Plan period. The Committee therefore , recommends that Government should review its production 
targets and reschedule its priorities as per the available infrastructure vis-a-vis planning on ground 
realities. 
6.2 In the present conditions private enterpreneurs have a major role to play in contributing 
towards growth of sponge iron production in the country and a time has come when suitable 
package of incentives be given to them. The Committee has noted that as per present procedure an 
industrialist who wishes to set up a plant is required to fill up an Industrial Enterprenuer . 
Memorandum which is processed by a Linkage Committee in the Ministry. The Committee finds 
that follow up of the proposal is left to the enterpreneur. A system is required to be devised in the 
Ministry where the processing of private proposals could be expedited with constant and proper 
coordination with the concerned authorities and regular intraction with the enterpreneur should be 
maintained till a final decision is taken on his proposal. The Committee impresses upon the 
Government to immed iately process the proposals pending before it and devise an effective 
mechanism for their time bound implementation. 
6.3 The Committee is conscious about the factors responsible for increase in the production 
cost of sponge iron. It has been given to understand that the cost of production of sponge iron with 
present duty structure is very high. Suggestions of the manufacturers regarding reduction of customs 
duty on iron ore, iron ore pellets and non-coking coal are pending for clearance with Ministry of 
Finance. The Committee feels that the import duty of 35% on sponge iron is on the high side. This 
has increased a great burden on the sponge iron producers who have passed the same to the 

consumers by incre asing the prices five times since the last budger. This rising trend of prices would 
severely affect the industry as a whole . The Committee feels that budget relief annoui1ced this year 
have passed neither to the manufacturers nor the consumers. Consequently the steel industry in 
general and spon gl.! iron sector in particular is at the brink of disaster due to discriminatory 
approach of the Government. The Committee recommends that urgent remedial steps should be 
taken to revive the units I plants which have become sick and also those likely to be affected and 
appropriate duty reli"ef be given to the industry. 
6.4 The Committee finds that the no study has been conducted by Government to compare our 
production costs with production costs in other countries. The Committee is unhappy to note that 
such information is not available with any of the manufacturers. The Committee takes a serious 
note of such lack of foresightedness and initiative particularly in the present juncture when the 
country is to go global and accelerate the process of liberlisation and the required information could 
be more effect ive in the world scenerio. The Committee would like Government to conduct a 
comparative study of production cost of sponge iron in other countries so that the same could be a 
guiding factor while projecting <I balanced and well planned approach in arresting the rising cost of 
indigenous production on the basis of the experience of other wuntries in the matter. 
6.5 The Committee reitrates its concern for the urgent need for promotion of sponge iron 
industry , which has to play a vital role in secondary sector of steel production in the country. There 
is much scope for improvement in the planning so as to ensure capacity utilisation. The Committee 
is confident that practical and result oriented mechanism would be adopted by Government keeping 
in view the fact that the industry is exposed to favourable and positive options under the new 
Industrial Policy and it is included as ''High Priority Areas". If not given the requ ired protection at 
the juncture, the Committee foresees a bleak future for the industry which would be a tremendous 
national loss to economic regeneration and industrial growth. 
6.6 The Committee trusts that its observations and recommendations as mentioned above will 
receive serious consideration for implementation. 
MOTURU HANUMANTHA RAO 
Chairman 
Department Related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry. 

ANNEXURE 
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITIEE ON INDUSTRY 
(See paras 2, 3 and 4 of the Report) 
*VIII 
EIGHTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. to 1.00 P.M. and 3.00 P.M. to 5.00 P.M. on 15th June, 
1993 m Committee Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Rao-Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri J.P. J avali 
3. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4. Shri K.K. Yeerappan 
5. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav 
6. Shri Nyodek Yonggam 
LOK SABRA 
7. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
8. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
9. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala 
10. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
11. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
12. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
13. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
14. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan 
15. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri 
16. Shri Ramdew Ram 
17. Shri Satyanarayan Jatiya 
18. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
19. Shri Naval Kishore Rai 
20. Smt. Suseela Gopalan 
21. Shri Puma Chandra Malik 
22. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
*Minutes of the Ist to Vllth Meetings of the Committee relate to other matters. 

23. Shri P.O. Narayanan 
24. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri G .K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Under Secretary 
3. Shri Sham Sher Singh, Committee Officer 
2. 
:~ 
3. The Committee, there~tfter reconsidered its future programme of sittings and decided to 
meet on 28th, 29th and 30th June, 1993 to examine in detail the following subjects relating to the 
Ministry of SteeP** 
A. Ministry of Steel 
B. 
(i) 
(ii) 
* 
* 
(iii) Sponge Iron 
* 
* * 
* * 
* 
4. The Committee directed the Secretariat to obtain from the Ministries the detailed notes 
on the above mentioned subjects for its consideration in the next series of meetings. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 P.M. 
*"*Relates to other matters. 

IX 
NINTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 28th June, 1993 m Committee Room 
No. 63, First Floor, Parliam ent House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Rao-Chairm.an 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shrimat i Chand rika Abh inandan Jain 
3. Shri J.P. Javali 
4. Shri Rajend ra Prasad Mody 
5. Shri Y. Rajeshwar Rao 
6. Shri Santos h Kumar Sahu 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
8. Shri Rama Krishna Konathata 
9. Shri Balin Kuli 
10. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
11. Shri Chir anj i Lal Sharma 
12. Shri Udaysinghrao Gaikwad 
13. Shri Barish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
14. Shri Rajendra Agnihot ri 
15. Shri Mohan Singh (D eoria) 
16. Shri Manjay Lal 
17. Shri Puma Chandra Malik 
18. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
19. Shri P.G. Narayanan 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri G .K. Saksena , Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri Tapas Das Gupt a, Under Secreta ry 
3. Shri Sham Sher Singh, Comm ittee Officer 
2. The Committee conside red the note s received from the Ministry of steel and the'~ * * 
relating to the following subjects:-
>*hRc latcs to other matters. 

A. Ministry of Steel 
(i) * * * 
(ii) * * * 
(iii) Sponge Iron 
B. * * * 
In this connection the Committee also considered the background note prepared by the 
Secretariat on the subject. The Committee felt that the issues/points identified in the background 
note need further comments from the Ministry. After some discussion the Committee decided 
that members may send their questions on the subjects so that comprehensive questionnaires may 
be prepared for obtaining further comments of the Ministry. 
A Summary of the discussion was kept. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 4.45 P.M . to meet again at 11.00 A.M. 
on 29th June. 1993. 
***Relates to other matters . 

*XIV 
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met from 11.00 A.M to 1.20 P.M. and aga in from 3.00 P.M. to 5.20 P.M on 
Wednesday, the 29th September, 1993 in Committee Room No. 63, First Floor Parliament 
House , New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Slui Moturu Hanumantha Rao-Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shrimati Chandrika Abhinandan 
3. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mody 
4. Shri v. Rajeshwar Rao 
5. Shri Santosh Kumar Saint 
6. Shri K.K. Veerappan 
7. Shri lsh Dutt Yadav 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Balin Kuli 
9. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
10. Shri Chir anji Lal Sharma 
11. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
12. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
13. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
Jain 
14. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
15. Shrim at i Sum itra Mahajan 
16. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri 
17. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
18. Shri S.N. Yekaria 
19. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
20. Shri Manjay Lal 
21. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
22. Shri Puma Chandra Malik 
· Minutes of tenth to thirteenth meetings of the Committee relate to other matters. 

23. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
24. Shri P.G. Narayanan 
25. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri G .K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Under Secretary 
3. Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
Reprt!sentatives of the Ministry of Steel: 
1. Shri Moosa Raza, Secretary 
2. Shri S. Nautiyal, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri K. Kipgen, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri M. K. Moitra, Joint Secretary 
5. Shri J. Mehra, CMD, RINL 
2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses by way of 
clarifications to the replies to the questionnaire on the (i)*** (ii) Sponge Iron and (iii) ***. The 
Committee directed the witnesses to send a note on the points raised during the discussion for its 
consideration within a month. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 5.20 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 30th 
September, 1993 . 
.. • Relates . to other matters. 

*XXIX 
TWENTY NINTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the lOth February, 1994 in Committee 
Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Rao - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shrimati Chandrika Abhinandan Jain 
3. Shri J.P. Javali 
4. Shri V. Rajeshwar Rao 
5. Shri K.K. Yeerappan 
6. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav 
7. Sluf Jtbon Roy 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri K. H. Muniyappa 
9. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
10. Shri Balin Kuli 
11. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
12. Shri Vishveshwar Bhagat 
13. Shri Chiranj i Lal Sharma 
14. Slui Mullappally Ramachandran 
15. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
16. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
17. Shri S.N. Yekaria 
18. Slui Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
19. Shri Naval Kishore Rai 
SECRETARIAT 
Slui G.K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
Shri S.S. Rana, Under Secretary 
Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer 
2. * * 
3. The Committee also considered the draft Fifth Report of the Committee on the Status of 
Sponge Iron Industries and adopted it unanimously. The Committee decided to present the 
Report on the 22ncl February, 1994 and authorised the Chairman of the Committee to present 
*Minutes of XVth to XXYIIlth meetings relate to other matters. 
*"*Reli1les to other matters. 

the Report to the Rajya Sabha. In case of his absence Shrimati Chandrika Abhinandan Jain or 
Shri Jibon Roy were authorised to present the Report. The Committee authorised Shri 
Monorajan Bhakta , Shrimati Suseela Gopalan and Shri Gurudas Kamat to lay a copy of the 
Report on the Table of Lok Sabha on behalf of the Committee. 
4. * * ,, 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
5. The Committee then considered its future programme and decided to meet on 21st, 22nd 
and 23rcl February , 1994, respectively to consider its pending business. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 12.40 P.M. 
''"'' Relates to other matters. 