REPORT NO. 
254  
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
         December, 2013/ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY FOURTH REPORT 
ON  
 
ACTION TAKEN ON THE 248 th  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
          ON  
 
CAPACITY ADDITION AND EXPANSION OF MANUFACTURING FACILITIES 
OF THE MADRAS FERTILIZERS LTD. 
 
 ( Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10 th  December, 2013)  
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10 th  December, 2013 ) 

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
         December, 2013/ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY FOURTH REPORT 
ON  
 
ACTION TAKEN ON THE 248 th  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
          ON  
 
CAPACITY ADDITION AND EXPANSION OF MANUFACTURING FACILITIES 
OF THE MADRAS FERTILIZERS LTD. 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10 
th  December, 2013)  
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10 th  December, 2013 ) 

 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………………………………..      (i) 
 
2. INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………………………        (ii) 
 
3. REPORT …………………………………………………………………………………..        1 
 
(i)  CHAPTER – I 
 Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry …………... 
 
(ii)  CHAPTER–II 
  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view 
  of the Government's replies……………………………………………………………... 
 
(iii)  CHAPTER–III 
   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  the Committee has not                        
accepted the replies of the Ministry and has asked the Ministry to review its                
replies…………………………………………………… …………………………….. 
 
(iv)  CHAPTER – IV 
  Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry have 
not been received…………………………………………………………………….. 
 
4. * Minutes……………………………………………………………………………..     ……   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
* to be appended at printing stage. 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Date of Constitution 31 st  August, 2013)  
 
RAJYA SABHA  
     
 1.  Shri K.C. Tyagi —       Chairman  
       2.  Shri M.P. Achuthan  
 3.  Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel  
 4.  Shri Narendra Budania 
    5.  Shri Vivek Gupta  
 6.  Dr. V. Maitreyan   
 7.  Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar  
 8.  Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
 9.  Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
10. Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor  
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
11.   Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala 
12.   Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
13. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
14. Shrimati Poonamben Veljibhai Jat 
15. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
16. Shri Hassan Khan 
17. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
18.   Shrimati Ingrid Mcleod  
19.   Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal 
20    Shri Somen Mitra 
21    Shri P. R. Natarajan 
22    Shri Gorakhnath Pandey 
23. Shri Jayaram Pangi 
24.    Shri R. K. Singh Patel 
25.    Shri B. Y. Raghavendra 
26.    Shri Ramsinh Rathwa  
27.    Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
28.    Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
29.    Ch. Lal Singh 
30.    Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
31.    Shri E.G.Sugavanam 
 
Secretariat  
 
1.      Shri A.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
2.      Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
3.      Shri Roshan Lal, Joint Director 
4.      Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 (i) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliame ntary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred 
and Fifty-fourth Report on Action Taken Notes furni shed by the Department of 
Fertilizers, Ministry of Chemicals and  Fertilizers on the recommendations contained in 
the Committee’s Two Hundred and Forty-eighth Report  on the Capacity Addition and 
Expansion of Manufacturing Facilities of Madras Fertilizers Ltd.  
 
2.  I, thank the Department of Fertilizers (Ministr y of Chemicals and Fertilizers) & 
Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy  Industries and Public Enterprises) 
for furnishing the Action Taken Notes on the recomm endations contained in the 
Committee’s Two Hundred and Forty-eighth Report. 
 
3.  The Committee in its meeting held on the 20 
th  November, 2013 considered and 
adopted the report. 
 
 
 
 
 
Shri K.C. Tyagi 
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
New Delhi 
November, 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 

REPORT 
 The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals wit h the Action Taken by the 
Department of Fertilizers, Ministry of Chemicals an d Fertilizers on the recommendations 
contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred and Forty-  eighth Report on the Capacity 
Addition and Expansion of Manufacturing Facilities of Madras Fertilizers Ltd.  
 
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Department of Fertilizers, 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. in respect of the recommendations contained in the 
Report. These have been categorized as follows: 
 
Chapter I -  The recommendations/observations, which have bee n accepted by the 
Ministry. 
 The Committee is pleased to observe that the Minis try has accepted its 
recommendations as mentioned in the Chapter – I of the Report. 
 
Chapter -II -  The recommendations/observations which the Commi ttee does not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government's replies. 
 In respect of these recommendations the Committee is convinced with the logic 
and explanations advanced by the Ministry and there fore do not want to pursue them for 
the present. 
 
Chapter -III -  The recommendations/observations in respect of w hich the Committee has 
not accepted replies of the Ministry and has asked the Ministry to review its reply. 
 The Committee expresses its concern over the non-i mplementation of 
recommendations contained in Chapter – III and desi res that the Ministry should furnish 
logical explanations thereof. 
 
Chapter -IV - The recommendations/observations in respect of wh ich final replies of the 
Ministry have not been received. 
 In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either 
furnished the interim replies or couched its langua ge in vague terms therefore; the 
Committee desires that the Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in respects of 
recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention 
and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee. 
 
 
3. The details of the ATR are being discussed in the succeeding pages. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER – I 
The Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry 
 
 
 
Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER–II 
The Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
The Committee notes that MFL, which had R&D activit ies in its early years, has 
stopped R&D activities due to consistent losses.  T he fact that Bio fertilizers of MFL 
were developed through in house R&D underlines the importance of R&D.  As the 
company has been making profits since 2009-10, the Committee is of the strong view that 
resumption of R&D activities should be one of the priorities of MFL. 
Para No. 22 
 
 
Action Taken Reply 
 
Company has informed that they would examine the fe asibility of restarting R&D 
activities . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER–III 
The Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not 
accepted the replies of the Ministry and has asked the Ministry to review its replies. 
 
 
 
Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER – IV 
Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry 
have not been  received 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee notes that MFL was a profitable vent ure until 1996-97, 
barring the year 1993-94.  It is given to understan d that the Company went into the red 
owing to the problems attributed to the capacity en hancement and technology 
upgradation carried out between 1993 and 1998.  Onc e the Company stabilized its 
operations, the introduction of New Pricing Scheme for Urea Price Concession Scheme 
for complex fertilizers are said to have gone again st the interests of the MFL.  Such 
persistent problems led the Company to getting decl ared sick in April 2009.  However, 
the Committee is pleased to see MFL returning to pr ofit from 2009-10 onwards with the 
amendment of NPS-III.  It has been further noted th at a Rehabilitation Scheme, after 
taking into consideration of the inputs from Minist ries concerned, Planning Commission 
and other stakeholders has now been submitted to SB I (Operating Agency).  The 
Committee is also of the considered opinion that si nce MFL is back to making profits 
now through their efforts, it is imperative that th e Government extends a helping hand 
through a favorable approach to the Company.  Accordingly, it strongly recommends that 
the Government should expeditiously finalize the Re habilitation Scheme of MFL.  The 
Committee also expects the Government and MFL to fo cus attention on measures and 
implement them so that MFL is not allowed to slip b ack to become another sick CPSE.  
A resurgent CPSE, especially, one working in the fertilizer sector is of crucial importance 
for agricultural and economic growth of the country .  It is, therefore, necessary to 
encourage and support MFL in every way possible. 
Para No. 10 
Action Taken Reply 
MFL submitted a draft BRPSE proposal for financial restructuring seeing 
following dispensation: 
 
(i)  Write off of 40% of the GoI loan worth Rs. 221.70 Cr as on 31.03.2012 and 
the balance loan of Rs 332.54 Cr to be repaid in 10  annual installments from 
2013; 
(ii)  Waiver of GoI loan interest amounting to Rs. 234.8 5 Cr as on 31.03.2012 
along with penal interest; 
(iii) Continuation of special dispensation in prici ng mechanism under the New 
Pricing Scheme Stage-III (NPS-III) beyond 31.03.201 0 and upto conversion 
to Natural Gas; 
(iv) Continuation of additional subsidy for sourcin g “Nitrogen” through Naphtha 
based Captive Ammonia under NBS upto conversion to Natural Gas;  
(v) Exemption from applicability of Sec 41 (1) & 11 5 (j) of the Income Tax Act 
in respect of waiver granted by Banks/Institutions/ Others under revival 
scheme; 

(vi) Enhancement of retirement age from 58 years to  60 years. 
 
 The rehabilitation proposal of MFL was jointly rev iewed by Secretary 
(Fertilizers) and Secretary (BRPSE) on 4.9.2013 in order to identify a workable solution 
which would ensure long term viability of MFL. Duri ng the meeting it was brought out 
that the existing proposal of waiver of 40% GOI loa n and 100% waiver of interest on 
GOI loan may not be workable option since even thou gh it brings the company out of 
BIFR and the plant is converted to process R-LNG, i t would not be able to compete with 
new plants being set up under New Investment Policy  (NIP-2012) as its specific energy 
consumption would be much high, 7.0 Gcal/MT urea against that of 5.0 Gcal/MT Urea of 
new plants. 
 
 The company was advised to put up the alternate pr oposal of: 
  (a)  Permission to use Naphtha as feedstock till 2016-17 when Ennore 
LNG  Terminal is commissioned  
  (b) Extension of NPS –III benefits till commissio ning of Ennore Terminal  
  (c) 100% waiver of GOI loan, interest and penal i nterest (d) permission to 
invest in new large capacity Brownfield ammonia/ure a complex with the latest 
technology under NIP-2012. 
 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee observes that MFL is currently not in  a financial position to 
plan any further capacity addition or expansion sch emes.  But, it remains an indisputable 
fact that the Company could survive the slump in pe rformance in the mid-nineties solely 
due to the Revamp-cum-Modernization and Capacity En hancement of its plants.  
Accordingly, the Committee views that it is extreme ly important to take measures as 
suggested by the rehabilitation study carried out through PDIL in the year 2009.  It would 
help extend the life of plant and equipment for ano ther 15 years.  It is noted that the 
Report of PDIL suggested a capital investment of Rs . 376 crore spread over a period of 5 
years for the said technical measures.  However, it  is given to understand that the revised 
Plan Scheme for MFL envisages only on expenditure o f Rs. 150 crore during the 12 
th  
Plan Period with which the work is being executed.  In this light, it is recommended that 
MFL and the Government should take care that the te chnical measures suggested by the 
rehabilitation study conducted by PDIL in 2009 be e xecuted without fail.  It has to be 
ensured that financial constraints should not be al lowed to stand in the way of it 
implementation.  
Para No. 15 
 
Action Taken Reply 
 Against the capital investment of Rs.376.00 Crore s uggested by PDIL for 
implementing 124 schemes, MFL has already implement ed 66 schemes with an 
investment of Rs. 260.44 Crore that were sanctioned  through Plan funds during 2009-10 
to 2011-12. For the remaining 58 schemes an estimat ed amount of Rs. 150 crore needed 
and the company sought support from Department of F ertilizers for sanctioning of this 
amount through Plan funds. During 2012-13, Planning  Commission allocated an amount 

of Rs. 87.62 crore to MFL and schemes to the tune o f Rs. 87.62 crore were submitted by 
the company. But Ministry of Finance in September 2 012 imposed financial restriction 
on releasing of loan to defaulter companies and ask ed FAs of all Ministries/Departments 
to ensure that further budgetary support to default ers PSUs be considered only under 
Revival/Rehabilitation or any other scheme approved  by Cabinet. Accordingly, no funds 
were released to MFL during 2012-13. Department of Fertilizers in June 2013 also made 
a request to M/o Finance to reconsider the decision  on release of plan funds to the 
company without insisting on repayment of past loan s. However Ministry of Finance 
informed that any further assistance/releases to the PSUs will be considered only as a part 
of the revival package approved by the Cabinet. 
 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee understands that conversion of feed stock from Naphtha to 
Natural Gas is inevitability for the long-term sust ainability of Madras Fertilizers Limited.  
It is understood that cost of production of urea fr om Naphtha is very high.  While Rs. 
40,000 is required to produce one tone of urea Rs. 18,000 to Rs.19,000 required to import 
same quantity of urea.  It is in this context that conversion from Naphtha to Gas is 
essential to cut down cost of production and make t he production process more 
environments friendly.  It is understand that the M FL is almost ready for operation by 
using gas.  But it is disturbing to find that thoug h the major components of fuel switch 
over were also incorporated during the capacity enh ancement and technology up 
gradation carried during 1993 to 1998, the switch o ver has not yet materialized.  The 
initial deadline of 2009 has passed without any ach ievement as the Company relied only 
on KG D6 gas for the conversion.  The Company is su pposed to switch over to gas by 
Dec 2013.  However, it would not be possible to do so by this date.  In view of this, the 
Committee recommends that till the company switches  over to gas, it much be supplied 
with Naphtha at the rate at which gas is available.   This will help the company to 
smoothly transit from Naphtha to gas.  Therefore, t he Committee recommends that MFL 
to be proactive in this front and switch over to Na tural Gas as feedstock in the least 
possible time.  It is also recommended that the Gov ernment also has to accord priority to 
MFL in providing access to Natural Gas as the chang eover is critical to the sustainability 
of the Company itself.  The Committee is of the opi nion that the conversion of feed stock 
to Natural Gas is made part of the Rehabilitation Scheme of MFL. 
Para No. 20 
 
Action Taken Reply 
 Company has requested Indian Oil Corporation Limite d (IOCL) and Chennai 
Petroleum Corporation Limited to revisit pricing of  Naphtha, so as, to enable MFL to 
sustain operation with naphtha as feed stock till commissioning of Ennore LNG Terminal 
in 2016-17. MFL has also signed Heads of Agreement with IOCL for supply of Natural 
Gas from its Ennore LNG Terminal, when commissioned  in 2016-17. The company has 
been advised to put up a revised rehabilitation scheme taking into consideration feedstock 
conversion also. 
 
 

Further Recommendation/ observation  
 
 The Committee expects to be informed of the progres s made in the revised 
rehabilitation scheme, as submitted by the Company for the approval of the 
Cabinet.  
************** 
 