181st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/181streport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:50]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INDUSTRY
ONE HUNDRED  EIGHTY-ONE  REPORT ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON RECOMMENDATIONS
CONTAINED IN THE COMMITTEE’S 171ST  REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR
GRANTS
(2005-6)
(MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES)
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON  22ND May , 2006)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON   22ND   May, 2006)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May ,2006/VAISAKHA 1928 (SAKA)
CONTENTS
 
1.                  COMPOSITION OF  THE COMMITTEE
2.                  INTRODUCTION
3.                  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
4.                  OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS  AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
5.                  MINUTES                                                                                                                        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
Shri Santosh Bagrodia              —        Chairman
 
 RAJYA SABHA
Shri Surendra Lath       
Shri Suresh Bhardwaj  
Dr. K. Malaisamy
Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
Dr. Vijay Mallya          
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan        
Vacant
Vacant
Vacant
 LOK SABHA
Shri Guharam Ajgalle
Shri Kailash Baitha
Shri Rajnarayan                       
Shri Swadesh Chakraborty                  
Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
Shri Subhash  Deshmukh         
Shri Ram Singh Kaswan          
Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria
Smt. Susmita Bauri

181st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/181streport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:50]
Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato         
Shri Prakash Paranjpe             
Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel           
Shri Badiga  Ramakrishna
Shri  Gurjeet Singh Rana          
25  Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana           
Smt. Rubab Sayeda                 
Kunwar  Manvendra Singh                  
Shri Ganesh Singh                    
Shri Suraj Singh
Shri Girdhari Yadav                             
Shri Chandramani Tripathi
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri  A.K. Singh, Deputy  Secretary
Shri  K.P. Singh, Under   Secretary
Shri Girja Shankar Prasad, Committee Officer
I N T R O D U C T I ON
I,  the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee  on Industry,  having   been   authorized 
by the  Committee, hereby present this   181
st Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Committee’171st  Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) pertaining to Ministry of Small Scale
Industries.
2. The Committee examined and considered the Action Taken Notes furnished  by the Ministry of Small Scale
Industries on the recommendations contained 171st    Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) pertaining to Ministry of
Small Scale Industries and this report is based on the outcome of such examination. 
3. The Committee in its meeting held on 16
th  May,2006 considered and adopted the Report.
 
NEW DELHI;
16
th  May,2006
SANTOSH  BAGRODIA
Chairman Department -related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry
                       
REPORT
1.         This report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Small Scale Industries on the
Recommendations contained in the 171
st Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing committee on
Industry of Demands for Grants (2005-06) pertaining to the Ministry of Small Scale Industries.  The Report was
presented/laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha on the 5
th May, 2006.
 
2.         Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Small Scale Industries in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report.  The have been categorized as follows:
 
Chapter – I – The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry :- Paras : 1.4, 3.2, 3.4, 3.6,
6.3, 9.8, 10.2, 15.3, 34.3, 36.2, 40.3, 42.10, 44.3, 51.2, 51.4, 51.7, 52.12, 54.4, 55.4, 57.2, 58.2, 59.2, 60.2, 61.2, 62.3,
67.4, 68.3, 71.2, 72.3, and 74.2.
 
Chapter – II-  The recommendations/observations, which the Committee doesn’t desire to pursue in view of the
government’s replies:- Paras :- 2.3, 3.5, 4.3, 4.8, 6.4, 8.2, 9.7, 11.2, 13.3, 15.5, 16.2, 17.4, 19.2, 21.5, 22.3, 24.2, 25.1,
26.2, 33.6, 35.6, 38.3, 39.2, 41.5, 42.8, 47.4, 49.2, 51.7, 52.12, 54.5, 55.4, 57.2, 58.2, 59.2, 60.2, 61.2, 67.4, 68.3, 72.3,
and 74.2.
 
Chapter – III- The recommendations/observations in respect of which the committee has not accepted replies of the
Ministry:- Paras: 12.3, 14.2, 18.5, 20.9, 23.3, 50.3 and 70.3.

181st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/181streport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:50]
 
Chapter – IV – The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry have not been
received :- 40.4, 41.4, 41.6, 42.3, and 42.5.
 
Chapter – V-  Observations/Conclusions and Recommendations of the  committee at A Glance.
 
3.         The Committee is pleased to observe that the Ministry of  Small Scale Industries has accepted its
recommendations as mentioned in Chapter-I of this Report.
 
4.         In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-II, the committee is convinced with the logic and explanations
advocated by the Ministry of Small Scale Industries and therefore do not want to pursue them further.
 
5.         The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of recommendations contained in Chapter-III
and, therefore, the committee desires that the Ministry of Small Scale Industries would furnish logical explanations in
respect of these recommendations.
 
6.         In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV, the Ministry of Small Scale Industries has either furnished
the interim replies or couched its language in vague terms like noted for compliance/guidance etc. therefore, the
Committee desires that the Ministry of Small Scale Industries should furnish Action Takien Note in respect of
recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention and spirit of the
recommendations of the Committee.
 
7.         Observations/recommendations of the Committee at a glance are given in Chapter-V.
 
8.         The Details of the ATR is being discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.
CHAPTER – I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
 
Recommendation
 
Small Scale Industries on the move
1.1       The Committee understands that the Small Scale Industries is today on the move world wide, therefore, Small
Scale Industries in India should be given top priority by the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance in plan
allocation so that small scale units may get adequate space for maturing into medium enterprises to catch the global
trend.  The Ministry of SSI should provide the logistic support to the SSI sector to enable it to remain competitive in
market-led economy and generate additional employment opportunities.  The Ministry should assist the SSI sector in
accessing (or provide) proper and timely inputs like adequate credit from financial institutions/banks; funds for
technology up-gradation and modernization; adequate infrastructural facilities; modern testing facilities and quality
certification laboratories; modern management practices and skill up-gradation through suitable training facilities;
marketing assistance; and level playing field at par with the large industries sector.
(Para 1.4)
Action Taken/Comments
 
1.2       The schemes and programmes being implemented by the m/o SSI provide the requisite support for the
development and promotion of small scale sector in the form of infrastructure development, technology upgradation,
human resource development, better credit availability, market development etc.  The small scale sector has great
potential for growth in production, employment and exports.  In view of this, the observation of the Committee that the
small scale sector should receive top priority both by the Planning Commission and M/o Finance in allocation of funds
is very valid, so that the M/o SSI is able to strengthen and facilitate the SSIs to remain competitive.  The Planning
commission and M/o Finance shall be apprised of the concern of the committee, so that the allocation of funds for the
year 2006-07 could be made as per the projected requirements.
 
1.3       The Committee is constrained to observe that the Planning Commission has not accorded the financial
requirement as projected by the Ministry of SSI to the tune of Rs. 793.94 crore (inclusive of Rs. 3.35 crore for work

181st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/181streport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:50]
outlay provided in the Demands of M/o Urban Development for the year 2005-06) against which a plan outlay of Rs.
412.26 crores (inclusive of Rs. 3.35 crores of Ministry of Urban Development) has been accorded as a result of which
reduced plan allocation would be made  to  the  schemes like Credit Guarantee  Trust  Fund  Scheme (76%)  Credit
 
Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (80%) Technology Up-gradation (16%) and Tool room (10%) of their financial
requirement causing a serious implication to the promotion and consolidation of Small Scale Industries.   The reduced
allocation may already affect the implementation of these schemes.
(Para 3.2)
Action Taken/Comments
 
1.4       Ministry of SSI has taken up the matter with M/o Finance for enhancing the allocation at Revised Estimates
(RE) stage in the plan schemes of Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS) and Technology Upgradation
Scheme.  Besides, substantial increase has been sought in BE 2006.07 for Credit Guarantee Trust Fund Scheme, CLCSS
AND Technology Upgradation.
 
1.5       The Committee however understands the financial crunch with the Government and the consequent problems
being faced by the Planning Commission in judicious and equitably allocation among various Departments/Ministries as
per their requirement.
(Para 3.4)
Action Taken/Comments
 
1.6       As observed by the committee, the reduced allocation is due to financial crunch with the government and the
consequent problems faced by the Planning commission in judicious and equitable allocation amongst various
Departments/Ministries as per their requirement.  As stated in the above para, the Ministry of Finance has been
requested to enhance allocation of funds at RE stage.
 
1.7       The Committee is also of the opinion that there is a need for better coordination between the Ministry of SSI, the
Ministry of Finance, and Planning commission so that the financial requirement of SSI sector is well communicated to
the Planning commission as per the actual requirement of SSI sector.  The committee strongly recommends that the
Ministry of SSI should take up the matter with the Planning commission and the Ministry of Finance at the RE State for
plan allocation as per the basic needs of SSI sector.
(Para 3.6)
Action Taken/Comments
 
1.8       The Planning Commission conducts the review of the implementation of various schemes and programmes
through quarterly review meetings (now proposed to be held half-yearly) and is well aware of the vital role assigned to
this small scale sector.  Further, the concept of  “outcome budget” has been introduced in the current year and outlays
have been linked with the outcome.  The achievements under various schemes are reported to the Planning
Commission.  Thus the Planning Commission is fully aware of the plan budget requirements of this sector and it is
expected that the allocation of funds for the year 2006-07 will match the requirements.
 
Appropriation of fund under Revenue Section for the year 2005-06
 
1.9       The Committee takes note of the appropriation of fund under Revenue Section for the year 2005-06 which has
been earmarked to the tune of Rs. 390.71 crore (exclusive of Rs.3.75 crore of works outlay provided in the Demands of
Ministry of Urban Development)  as compared to Revenue Plan outlay of Rs. 347.25 crore in 2004-05.  The Committee
is in agreement with the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance for enhancing allocation to implement the
schemes of SIDO like Tool Rooms (by Rs. 1.80 crore); Integrated Infrastructure Development Scheme (by Rs. 13.94
crore) Micro Finance Programme (by Rs. 2.70 crore); Credit linked capital subsidy for Technology up-gradation (by Rs.
12.51 crore); Technology Up-gradation (by Rs. 4.05 crore).
 
Action Taken
 
1.10     The increased allocation in these schemes would further contribute the development of SSI Sector in the

181st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/181streport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:50]
country.  Under Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme, Rs. 838.52 lakh have already been sanctioned to the ASIDBI
out of the total budget allocation of Rs. 2000 lakh during FY 2005-06, till end October, 2005.  Depending on the
progress of the Scheme, efforts will be made to get more funds for the CLCSS at the RE stage for the current financial
year.  It is expected that the enhanced Budget allocation during 2005-06 (by Rs. 12.51 crore) will help in extending
capital subsidy to more number of eligible small and tiny units under CLCSS.
 
1.11     The scheme of Tool Room is on-going Plan scheme and the budget allocation made for the year 2005-06 shall be
utilized fully for upgrading the facilities of the tool rooms during the year to keep them in tune with technological
development in the field and needs of the industry.  In case of the IID scheme an amount of Rs. 16.24 crore utilized
including Rs. 3.24 crore for NE during 2004-05.  The provision has been increased for Rs. 30.00 crore for 2005-06.  Till
the end of October, 2005 Rs. 766.76 lakh has already been sanctioned to 10 IID centers.
 
1.12     The Committee would like to know as to the progress made in regard to the strategic decision for phasing out of
short-term financial scheme by NSIC under its Business Restructuring plan and its implication on the balance sheet of
the corporation.(Para 9.8)
 
Action Taken
 
1.13     NSIC is gradually reducing its exposure under its financing activities.  It is pertinent to mention that the
corporation is no longer providing any unsecured assistance so as to circumvent the occurrence of any further defaults. 
The corporation is making tie-ups with various banks towards loans syndication arrangement for financing the proposals
of small scale units with a view to gradually taper off the financing activities to  restrict the fresh exposure within the
amount of recoveries being made.
 
Secretariat Economic Services (Establishment related Expenses etc. for the Ministry of SSI & ARI)
 
1.14     The Committee is of the view that in order to motivate the officers and staff working in the Ministry, training in
reputed institutions in India and the concerned official may provide abroad, in addition to financial incentives for
outstanding achievements.
 
Action Taken/Comments:
 
1.15     Officers and staff of the Ministry are already undergoing need based training in reputed institutions in India and
abroad.
Role and relevance of the office of DC(SSI)
 
1.16     The Office of DC (SSI) maintain liaison with the Central Ministries, planning commission, state Governments
and Financial institution.  DC (SSI) is on the Board of Directors of the SIDBI.  Each Director, SISI in the State is a
member of the State Level Inter-Institutional Committee, which deals with the revival of sick SSI UNITS.  Steps may be
undertaken to strengthen and streamline the liaison mechanism of office of SSI for the furtherance of Small Scale
Industries.
 
Action Taken
 
1.17     Ministry of SSI maintains liaison with the Central Ministries, Planning commission, State Governments and
Financial Institutions directly, as per requirement.  Secretary (SSI) is a member of the Standing Advisory committee of
the RBI, which deals with the credit policy for small scale sector.  Field Offices & different divisions of Office of the
Development Commissioner (SSI) submit monthly, quarterly and annual progress reports, which are compiled and
reviewed at the headquarters.  The above system is working satisfactorily.
 
Non-plan allocation under Major Head 2851
 
1.18     While agreeing with the allocation of projected non-plan expenditure to the tune of Rs. 38.01 crore in BE 2005-
06 as compared to Rs. 37.70 crore in RE 2004-05 under Major Head 2851, the Committee recommends that effort

181st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/181streport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:50]
should be made to undertake austerity measures so that supplementary demands may be asked only in exceptional
circumstances.(34.3)
 
Action Taken/Comments:
 
The instructions and guidelines issued by the M/o Finance from time to time are being strictly being followed.
 
Rural Infrastructure Development Fund
 
1.20     The Committee understands that the corpus of Rs. 8000 crore for Rural Infrastructure Development Fund has
been placed with the Ministry of Rural Development, however, it is because that the basic infrastructural development
in the rural areas would also going to benefit the Small Scale units in the rural areas, the committee desires that the
Ministry of SSI should co-ordinate by mulling out the “Areas of Mutual Co-operation” with the national Bank for
Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) and Ministry of Rural Development.  Supply of electricity and
construction of roads particularly in the backward states like Bihar, Orissa and Jharkhand under RIDF would also
promote SSI sector, as these states suffer from basic infrastructure like road and supply of regular power despite the
working of the IID Scheme implemented by the DC (SSI) which is well within the organizational set up of the Ministry
of Small Scale Industries.(Para 36.2)
Action Taken
 
The said corpus of Rs. 8,000 crore will be helpful in creating infrastructure in the rural area.  The RIDF is routed
through the National Bank for Agriculture and rural Development (NABARD) to the State Governments for creating
rural infrastructure such as electricity, water resources for irrigation and roads.  These funds are not available for
creating industrial infrastructure like the IID projects.  The IID Scheme being implemented by the DC (SSI) is locations
specific and aims at creation of basic infrastructure at such locations for setting up small and tiny units.  The location for
IID Centers is selected by the concerned State/UT.
 
Problems being faced by SIDO in the implementation of schemes/programmes encouraging Small Scale Industries
 
1.22     The Committee understands that most of the schemes/programmes s implemented by SIDO aims at augmenting
the credit flow to the SSI sector and are linked with the banks/financial institutions.  To enhance the credit flow to the
SSI sector and at the same time improve the comfort level of the banks to extend more credit to the SSI
units/entrepreneurs, there is a need to encourage SSI  units for obtaining credit rating and setting up of exclusive credit
rating agencies for the SSI sector.  There is also a need for wider and effective dissemination of information on the
schemes/facilities being provided by the banks to the SSI sector at the branch level and among the entrepreneurs.(Para
40.3)
Action Taken/Comments:
 
1.23     The Ministry of SSI has launched the ‘Performance and Credit Rating Scheme for Small Industries’ being
implemented through the National Small Industries Corporation 9NSIC).  The NSIC is playing a proactive role in
implementing the scheme.  To create awareness of the scheme amongst the SSI units, 33 open houses and exclusive
sessions on the rating scheme have been organized by involving various Industry Associations up to 31 March 2005. 
The representatives of Rating Agencies have also attended these open houses to explain the benefits of the scheme to the
participants.  Similarly, the open houses and exclusive sessions on the rating scheme are being organized during the
current financial year also.  So far, more than 275 SSI units have applied for rating under the Rating Scheme and rating
has been assigned to 50 units by the various rating agencies.
 
1.24     With a view to providing credit enhancement and comfort to the bank officials at the field level in their taking
credit decisions, SIDBI, in association with select public sector banks, has taken an initiative to launch a dedicated
credit rating agency for SMEs.  The proposed agency would have partnership with leading rating and information
dissemination agencies of the country.  The agency aims at providing affordable, credible and independent ratings to the
SMEs, which would help enhancing their credibility and standing.  It is felt that with the setting up of the agency, banks
would be provided with an impendent external assessment for quicker decisions in extension of credit to the SME
sector.  The agency is likely to become operational shortly.

181st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/181streport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:50]
 
1.25     In line with the ‘Policy Package for Stepping up Credit to Small and Medium Enterprises’ announced by the
government, the RBI has advised the banks that for wider dissemination and easy accessibility, the policy guidelines
formulated by Boards of banks
as well as instructions/ guidelines issued by the RBI may be displayed on the respective web sites of banks.  The banks
may also prominently display all the facilities/schemes offered by them to small entrepreneurs at each of their branches. 
Further, the Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Small Industries (CGTSI) has also been propagating among the member
banks to extend more and more collateral- free loans to the eligible borrowers and covering the same under the Credit
Guarantee Scheme.  As on 31 August 2005, 31,576 proposals involving credit amount of Rs.  672.10 crore have been
approved under the scheme.
 
1.26     the committee hopes that modification introduced in Credit guarantee Scheme and implemented with effect from
1
st February 2005 would prove instrumental in making the scheme.
(Para 42.10)
Action Taken/Comments:
 
1.27     The modifications recently introduced in the Credit Guarantee scheme are expected to make the scheme more
popular and the CGTSI has been making efforts to disseminate information about the modifications in various fora.
 
National commission on enterprises in the Unorganized/Informal Sector
 
1.28     The committee is in agreement with the provision made under Major Head 2851 for footing the expenditure for
National Commission on Enterprises in the Unorganized/Informal Sector.  As the commission was constituted in
September 2004 it is too short period to comment upon its performance.  The committee hopes that the findings of the
commission will be helpful in regulating the SMEs in informal/un-organized sector.
(Para 44.3)
Action Taken/Comments:
 
Ministry of SSI also thinks in tandem with the observation of the committee.
1.29     The committee is constrained to note that the plan outlay of Rs. 1.50 crore as reflected in the year 2004-05
Under Major Head 4552 is by way of equity participation by the government is yet to be released by the government. 
The Committee would like to know the reasons for non-release of earmarked fund.
(Para 51.2)
Action Taken/Comments:
 
In 2004-05, Rs. 1.5 crore had been released by way of equity participation.
 
130      The Committee recommends that the business restructuring programme of NSIC should be completed with the
stipulated timeframe and fund earmarked for the propose be released as per originally conceived schedule.
(Para 51.4)
 
Action Taken
 
The above recommendation is being implemented.
 
1.31     The Committee feels that the Ministry has to play proactive role in pursuing and motivating the NE states to
send proposals so that funds are utilized in time.  The committee is accordingly, of the view that the Ministry of SSI
should have resilient monitoring mechanism for implementation of schemes / programmes in NE region as the region
counts for strategic economic and diplomatic reasons.(Para 51.7)
 
Action Taken
 
1.32     The Ministry already plays a proactive role in motivating North Eastern States for seeking assistance under

181st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/181streport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:50]
various scheme /programmes.  The attached offices have branches in the NE states, which facilitates and monitors the
development of SSI sector in these regions.  Also senior officers frequently visit the NE states for monitoring the
development work.
 
Investments in Public Enterprises
 
1.33     The Committee hopes that the budgetary support to the tune of Rs. 13.50 crore in 2004-05 and to the tune of Rs.
14.00 crore in 2005-06 by way of equity infusion by the Government and raising fund through IEBR to the tune of Rs.
62.00 crore in 2004-05 and 2005-06 as well would go a long way in making NSIC self-sufficient through implementing
business restructuring programme and NSIC would be in a position to serve large number of SSI units and guarantying
consumer’s satisfaction.(Para 52.12)
 
Action Taken
 
1.34     The equity infusion by the government would make NSIC self-sufficient by the end of financial year 2006-2007
as per the Business Restructuring Plan.
 
Tiny and Micro Enterprises
 
1.35     Indian tiny sector’s competitive resilience to face the challenges of free imports and intense competition
 
1.36     The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in its report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to
Ministry of SSI that effective efforts shou7ld be made for (i) better importing of entrepreneurs skills and training, (ii)
acquiring marketing techniques  (iii) Access to appropriate technology  (iv) strengthening capital base and institutional
credit and (v) providing Infrastructural facilities and the tangible progress made in this regard may be communicated to
the Committee in the Action Taken Note of the present report.(Para 54.5)
Action Taken/Comments:
 
1.37     The various measures which have been initiated by the government through its various plan schems and their
progress are mentioned under para 1.4 and para 33.6
 
Technology upgradation of SSI units
 
1.38     The Committee recommends that activities like buyer-seller meets and vendor development programmes must
regularly be organized all over India, including the economically backward region to establish linkages between large
and small enterprises to accelerate and strentgthen the partnership approach to develop linkages between large and small
enterprises.  Apart from Government Departments like Defence, Railways, coal, steel, Petro-chemical, food and food-
processing etc., Public Undertakings and Private Sector Industries should also be invited to participate in these events. 
Moreover, following course of action must be taken for
 
revitalization and regeneration of existing organization and revamping of existing organization and revamping of the
mechanism for technological up-gradation;
R&D in technology up-gradation further steps required for designing;
Measures towards cost-reduction; and
Steps towards avoidance of waste and non-value adding activities.
(Para 55.4)
Action Taken
 
1.39     Vendor Development Programmes including national level programmes are being organized by our Field
Institutes located in every corner of the country in every year in order to establish business linkages between large and
small enterprises.  Central Govt. Organization such as Defense, railways, coal, Steel, Petro-Chemical, Food & Food
Processing, Public Sector Undertakings, Private Sector Industries are also participating in our Vendor Development
Programmes, buyer Seller Meet/Group discussion are being held for R&D Technology Technology upgradation, further
steps required for designing the new products including cost reduction or the products which are being developed by

181st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/181streport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:50]
small scale units.  The action points as suggested by Parliamentary Standing Committee shall be taken care of in Vendor
Development Programmes in future.
 
1.40     Ministry of SSI operates two schemes for technology upgradation of SSI units.  These are: (a) Credit linked
capital subsidy scheme (CLCSS) (b) Small industry cluster development programme (SICDP).  The former provides a
subsidy maximum upto Rs. 1.5 lakh to an SSI unit for induction of improved technology @ 15% on purchase price of
plant and machinery.  However, the latter does not focus on technology upgradation of an individual SSI unit for but
aims at technology upgradation in the cluster as a whole under the holistic approach of development of a cluster.  The
scheme applies to any cluster of industries for technology upgradation where industries for technology upgradation
where there is a commonality in the method of production, quality control and testing, energy conservation, pollution
control etc.  among the units of the cluster.  The scheme aims to take care of the modernization and the technological
needs of the cluster.  It covers a comprehensive range of issues related to technology upgradation, improvement of
productivity, energy conservation, pollution control, product diversification and training needs etc.
 
1.41     Technical institutions, CSIR laboratories and other R&D institutions are involved in the work of research and
development.  There are schemes with Department of scientific and industrial research (DSIR), which promote and 
facilitate R&D activities taken up by the industry.  Ministry of SSI remains in close contact with these institutions and
DSIR and utilize their services for implementing the SICDP.  Efforts are made to bring Government, Industry and
technical Institutions together to implement technology upgradation of SSI sector under the Programme.  The issues
pertaining to waste minimization/utilization and non-value adding activities are addressed during the implementation of
the Programme.
 
Promotion of Technology Banks and encouragement to Technology Parks.
 
1.42     The Committee hopes that the de-reservation of 108 items, as announced in the Budget (2005-06) would help the
small scale sector to meet the demand for technological up-gradation, encourage research and development and make
the sector competitive to face the domestic and global competition.  A status report on the practical implication in this
regard may be furnished to the Committee in its Action Taken Notes of the present Report.(Para 57.2)
 
Action Taken/Comments:
 
1.43     Through an order dated 28
th March 2005, 108 items were deleted from the list of items reserved for exclusive
manufacture in the SSI sector.  However, the impact of this deletion on technological up-gradation, attainment of
economies of scale and rise in competitiveness of the industrial sector cannot be assessed for the short interregnum.  A
detailed empirical study on the long term of such de-reservation of items (effected earlier) is being conducted through a
professional institution.  The government will be able to share the results with the Committee as soon as the same are
made available to it.
 
Fair Practices code for Lenders”,
 
1.44     The Committee understands that the adoption of “Best Practices code” for large corporate dealing with the SME
Sector on the line of the code for payments for large industries/corporate” would greatly help the sector regarding timely
payment to SMEs. Despite RBI’s Guidelines on Fair Practices code for Lenders”, nothing has practically been
achieved.  No initiative has been taken to address the issue of delay payment in the General Budget 2005-06.  Under the
circumstance, the Committee feels that Government should come out with alternative arrangement i.e. securitisation law
to provide relief to the SSI sector from the delayed payments.(Para 58.2)
Action Taken
 
1.45     The issue relating to delayed payments to the SSI sector has been addressed in the draft SMED Bill and the same
has been duly considered by the Committee already.
 
Enactment of Limited Partnership Act
 

181st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/181streport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:50]
1.46     The Committee is in agreement with the opinion of the Ministry of SSI that the Limited Liability Partnership
will provide higher flow of capital in to the Sector, especially to the upcoming sections like IT, Bio-technology,
Pharama, etc and would also encourage venture capital.  The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of SSI
should take up the matter of Enactment of Limited Partnership Act with the Ministry of company Affairs.(Para 59.2)
 
Action Taken/Comments:
 
1.47     The provisions of Limited Liability Partnership were dropped from the SMED Bill 2005 at the instance of the
Ministry of Company Affairs who assured that the interest of the small enterprises will be taken care of by framing
general LLP Act.  This Ministry is in touch with the Ministry of Company Affairs for early enactment of the Act and is
constantly pursuing the matter with them for inclusion of Small Industries (just as it would cover selected professional
services ) in their proposed Limited Liability Partnership Bill and also for an early enactment.
 
Specific Export Thrust/Policy measures
 
1.48     The Committee feels that there is a need for the formulation of sector specific export thrust/policy measures and
establishment of more Export promotion zones to promote international trade of select SSI items especially ready made
garments, Leather products, basic chemicals, Marine and processed foods and engineering goods which account for
3/4
th of the total export from SSI sector.  This is required to promote international trade.
(Para 60.2)
 
Action Taken/Comments:
 
1.49     The National Manufacturing Competitiveness Council is shortly expected to formulate the competitiveness
Enhancement Programme for SMEs as announced by Finance Minister in his Budget Speech.  The NMCC has already
held detailed consultations with the Ministries and stakeholders for suggesting specific steps for export promotion in
selected sectors with the highest potential for export.  Certain other initiatives for export promotion are also being
considered by the government for inclusion in the comprehensive Promotional Package for the SSI sector.
 
Abid Hussain committee Report
 
1.50     The Committee was given an understand that recommendations of Abid Hussain committee Report are still
relevant for the promotion of small and medium enterprises, as it has provided a road map for making the small
enterprise able to grow on its own and graduate in to medium enterprise.  It recommended for single law of small
enterprise, limited partnership act and removal of regulatory barriers to the technological progress of the Sector are quite
relevant.  The committee therefore, strongly recommends that the Government in its proposed Small and medium
Enterprises bill, 2005, should incorporate the provisions pertaining to recommendations Abid hussain Committee.(Para
61.2)
 
Action Taken/Comments:
 
1.51     The SMED Bill 2005 which has already been introduced in the Parliament on 12
th May 2005 inter alias aims to
provide a single legislation for the development and promotion of small enterprises and its smooth graduation to
medium enterprise.  It further aims to have minimum regulations with simplified inspection procedures, however, the
Limited Liability Partnership is being attempted by the Ministry of Company Affairs.
 
Concept of factoring services for SSI Sector
 
1.52     The Committee endorses the viewpoint of the Ministry of SSI that factoring services would provide instant
liquidity to industries, particularly to small scale and tiny sectors, prior to the maturity period of various instruments
drawn for supply or purchase of goods or services by assignment of debts or receivables to a factor.  Since the Factoring
services had played an effective role as an alternate mode of working capital finance for the past three decades in some
of the countries.  The committee feels that the Factoring Services Legislation would also help to mitigate the problem of

181st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/181streport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:50]
delayed payments to SSI units and augment the flow of funds to the SSI  Sector.  The committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry of SSI should also pursue the proposed Act on “The Factoring of Debts due to Industrial
and commercial undertakings” with Ministry of Finance (Banking Division).(Para 62.3)
 
Action Taken
 
1.53     Recommendations of the committee has been noted.
 
Trends of sickness in SSI sector
 
154.     The Committee desires that RBI’s guidelines in regard to credit flow to SSI sector must be observed by public
sector Banks to facilitate additional capacity generation, expansion of existing units and improving capacity utilization
diversification and to enhance competitiveness of SSI sectors.            (Para 67.4)
 
Action Taken/Comments:
 
1.55     The RBI monitors the flow of credit to SSI sector by means of periodical returns, which give data on the
quantum of credit disbursed, number of specialized SSI branches opened, details of collateral free and composite loans
given.  Lending to SSI sector is treated as priority sector advances for both domestic and foreign banks.  Further, in line
with the ‘Policy Package for Stepping up Credit to Small and Medium Enterprises’ announced by the Government, the
RBI is constituting empowered committees with the Regional Director of the RBI as the Chairman to review the
progress in SME financing and to coordinate with other banks/financial institutions and the State Government in
removing bottlenecks, if any, to ensure smooth flow of credit to the sector.
 
Venture capital funding to SSI units
 
1.56     The Committee desires that suitable and adequate steps must be undertaken for popularization of venture capital
funding to SSI units.  Banks should feel encouraged in this regard as RBI has already announced that investment in
venture capital would be eligible for inclusion in priority sector lending.(Para 68.3)
 
Action Taken
 
1.57     venture Capital Scheme was launched by SIDBI in October, 1992 and a separate VC fund with an initial corpus
of Rs. 10 crore was set up for the purpose.  Further allocations to the corpus have been made on an annual basis from
the profits of the SIDBI.  The fund was initially utilized for dired VC assistance to SSI units.  Over the years, the focus
changed and in order to enlarge the reach for extending VC assistance to small scale units, SIDBI  assumed the role of
“Fund of funds” by contributing to the corpus of National/Regional VC Funds for extending assistance to SSI units.  So
far, SIDBI has committed an aggregate contribution of Rs. 450.82 crore to 14 All India Funds, 9 Regional Funds, I
International Fund and Asset Management companies/Trustee Companies (AMC/TCs of 5 VCFs.
 
1.58     The venture capital strategy of SIDBI has been to create a 3-tier venture capital structure viz., at the Regional,
National and International levels so as to effectively integrate and enhance the opportunities for the SMEs Besides, in
order to keep a close watch on the functioning of the Asset Management companies (AMCs), SIDBI  started retaining
rights to take up equity stake in the AMCs and Trustee companies (TCs).  Further, SIDBI also extends venture capital
assistance to SSI units directly and by way of subscription to the corpus of other Venture Capital Funds. SIDBI has also
extended assistance for setting up of two incubation centres at IIT, Kanpur and BIT, Mesra, Ranchi.
 
1.59     In September, 1999, SIDBI created SIDBI Venture Capital Ltd. (SVCL) and SIDBI Trustee Company Ltd.
(STCL), as wholly owned subsidiaries of SIDBI primarily to be the Investment Manager and Trustee of the National
Venture Fund for Software and IT Industry (NFSIT) respectively.  SVCL currently manages the Rs. 100 crore NSFIT,
 
1.63     The Committee recommends that for streamlining and strengthening the contribution of small enterprises sector
in the national economy, the government should focus the following strategy:
Providing full credit, technology up-gradation, modernization and marketing support to the SSI sector.

181st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/181streport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:50]
Infrastructure up-gradation in general and particularly in the major small enterprise clusters; these would include road
connectivity, regular supply of power, common effluent treatment facility and water supply, etc.
Reducing the rigors of complying with the plethora of rules and regulations applicable in the small enterprises sector,
which is know as Inspector Raj.
Full support to the service industry to fulfill its true growth and employment generation potential.
Training of existing and potential entrepreneurs and workers on a large scale in modern management practices and skill
up-gradation through advanced training facilities for capacity building in the small enterprises sector.
Action Taken
 
1.65     As recommended by the Committee, Government is focusing and would focus on the following strategies:-
 
Adequate credit/loans from financial institutions/banks.
Funds for technology and modernization.
Adequate infrastructural facilities.
Modern management practices and skill spgradation through advanced training facilities.
End of Inspector Raj.
Small Scale Service & Business (Industry Related) Enterprises (SSSBEs) have been made eligible for coverage under
the Credit Guarantee Scheme.
 
Action Taken
 
1.65     The Committee desires that as a precautionary measure to achieve the Action Plan for the year 2005-06, the
Ministry of SSI should review and monitor the progress of the work closely.  The functioning of organizations under the
Ministry, implementation of Plan schemes and various developmental activities should be reviewed at various levels
regularly.  The Monitoring mechanism to oversee the functioning of various organizations under the Ministry of Small
Scale Industries should be made more effective.(Para 74.2)
 
Action Taken
1.66     Regular (fortnightly) monitoring of various schemes/programmes under the Ministry is being done at the level of
Secretary (SSI & ARI)
CHAPTER - III
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE HAS NOT
ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT OR THE COMMITTEE WANTS TO MAKE FURTHER
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
Recommendations
 
Development Commissioner for Small Scale Industries (including library)
 
3.1       The committee takes note of the enhancement of plan outlay under Major Head 2851 from Rs. 6.69 crore in BE
2004-05 to 5.74 crore at RE stage during the same year and further to Rs. 6.41 crore in BE 2005-06 to meeting the rising
expenditure on the publications and advertisement and SENET project.  The Committee is in agreement with the
projected plan expenditure and hopes that the Committee is in agreement with the projected plan expenditure and hopes
that the earmarked plan outlay would be judiciously utilized for dissemination of information and successful
implementation of SENET projects in economically backward states like Bihar, Orissa, Jharkhand and West Bengal.
(Para 12.3)
 
Action Taken
 
3.2       The enhancement of B.E. 2005-06 is due to rising expenditure mainly on advertisements made in the newspapers
through DAVP issued by our Small Industries Service Institutes (SISIs), which is also on account increase in the
number of courses of Entrepreneurship Development Programmes and Management Development Programmes being
conducted by our SISIs.  SENET project is being implemented in all the field institutes of SIDO including Bihar, Orissa,
Jharkhand and West Bengal.  All out efforts are being made to utilize the outlay judiciously.  It is proposed to install 28

181st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/181streport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:50]
Touch Screen Kiosks in all Br. SISIs during 2005-06 so that information is disseminated in backward areas where
internet connectivity is not available properly.
 
Further recommendation
 
3.3       The Committee considered the reply of the Ministry of SSI but it would like to further emphasize that mere 28
touch screen kiosks are insufficient and recommends that the number should be increased further to disseminate the
information in backward areas.
 
Establishment bill of Library and its utility in proliferation of Small Scale Industries
3.4       The Committee is of the view that measure should be undertaken for dissemination of information and
knowledge nationwide in regard toi SSI and setting up of the SSI units through this library.
(Para 17.2)
 
Action Taken
 
3.5       Every effort will be made to follow the recommendations of the committee.
 
Further recommendation
 
3.6       The Committee is pleased to observe that Ministry of SSI is acting on the lines suggested by it but recommends
that the progress and status made in this regard until now should be placed before the committee for further cons
ideation.
 
Third Census of SSIs (2001-02) and need for National Policy for Small Industries
 
3.7       The Committee is of the view that the national policy and programmes/schemes should be suitable, and effective
for supporting the promotion and development of small scale industries.  The main emphasis should be on easy credit
availability, technological Upgradation and modernization, Infrastructural development, marketing support, etc. 
Moreover, for uniform and sustainable growth of small scale industries with an objective for greater employment
creation and equitable distribution of wealth all over the country, there is a need for a national policy for small
industries.  To address the needs in the changed economic scenario, the government must come out with a promotional
policy package at the earliest.  The findings of the Third Census can be used for policy formulation as follows:-
 
Liberalize credit policy to make institutional credit more accessible to SSI units, including the unregistered units.
Identify industries requiring technological up-gradation, which can be assisted either under the on-going
programmes/schemes or new appropriate schemes for the same.
Target sub-sectors, which have high employment potential, for assistance under different schemes.
Assistance for improving quality and productivity, especially of registered units which account for bulk of the output.
Identify high-tech industries, which can be promoted in the SSI sector.
Formulate schemes of assistance for the growing service sector (SSSBEs).
Evolve a system for regular collection of data through sample surveys at shorter intervals.
Evolve a mechanism for reaching the benefits of Government assistance to unregistered units.
(Para 18.5)
 
Action Taken/Comments
 
3.8       As mentioned earlier (para 17.4), EFC proposal for promotion Package has been prepared and being circulated
among the members of the committee and other departments concerned.
3.9       The M/o the DC (SSI) has set up a Team of Experts from CSO to suggest a suitable methodology for conducting
sample survey on periodic basis to collect data in respect of important schemes implemented by the SIDO.
 
Further recommendation]
3.10     The Committee is pleased to note that its suggestions are considered by the Government from time to time but

181st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/181streport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:50]
recommends that the progress made by the team of experts from CSO for conducting sample survey in respect of
schemes implemented by SIDO should be brought before the Committee as soon as possible.
 
Efforts of DC (SSI) on Development of Accredited clusters
3.11     The Committee welcomes the proposal for selection for 60 clusters by DC (SSI) and which has been forwarded
to RBI for clearance and instructing Public Sector banks for providing adequate credit flow.  It is hoped that Rbi would
expedite the process at the earliest.  The Committee is of the strong view that the cluster development initiatives would
lead to technology up-gradation design development, up-gradation of skills, increased production and export and
enhancement of competitiveness of the clusters.  A resilient monitoring mechanism is required to achieve the desired
success on cluster approach.(Para 20.9)
 
Action Taken/Comments
 
3.12     Monitoring mechanism is a support tool which helps to manage the clusters and is a source of self-reflection,
i.e., where do we stand.  In Cluster Development Programme, Cluster Development Executive (CDE) conducts
diagnostic study, prepares action plan and implementation of various time based activities of action plan.
 
3.13     As a post-entry monitoring it is expected that within 3 to 4 months after the beginning of a Cluster Development
Programme, the following actions have taken place:
 
The diagnostic team has been selected and sent to the clusters
All field interviews have taken place
Diagnostic study have been completed
A general for a has been organized to present cluster vision to all relevant cluster actors
A table to prioritize actions has been completed
The preliminary version of the initial action plan has been drafted by the CDE
3.14     For the purpose of monitoring, CDE prepares a progress report for each of the activity plans implemented. 
Activity reporting is done on monthly, quarterly and annual basis.  These reports prove very useful in case of problems
emerging as they can highlight the areas where the expected results have failed to materialize.
 
Further reformation
 
3.15     The Committee is in agreement with the views expressed by the Ministry of SSI about monitoring mechanism
and the action taken but it further recommends that the outcome of the field interviews diagnostic study along with the
final version of the initial action plan drafted by the CDE should be made known to the Committee.
 
Appropriation of non-plan expenditure for NSIC in the year 2004-05
 
 The Committee is of the considered view that the financial requirement of NSIC for implementing the Voluntary
Retirement Scheme to rationalize the manpower must be assessed and accordingly sufficient budgetary support may be
earmarked for the purpose.(Para 23.3)
 
Action Taken
 
3.17     Ministry of SSI vide its letter no.8/13/2004-SSI(P)-I dated. 4
th April, 2005 has informed NSIC that Ministry of
Finance did not agree to provide Non-Plan grant to NSIC for Voluntary Retirement Scheme and opined that only loan
should be provided for this purpose.
 
Further reformation
 
3.18     The Committee considered the reply of Ministry of SSI and further recommends that the matter of budgetary
support to NSIC to meet out expenses on VRS must again be taken up with Ministry of Finance so that the NSIC is
given opportunity to rationalize the manpower.

181st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/181streport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:50]
 
Institutional arrangement made in North Eastern Areas for promotion of SSI in the region
 
3.19     The Committee is of the view that in order to increase its reach in the region, NSIC should open more offices in
North Eastern Region.  NSIC and take up programmes jointly with Indian Institute of Entrepreneurship,  Guwahati and
with other organizations like NEDFI and NEC.(Para 50.3)
Action Taken/Comments
 
3.20     NSIC would initiate necessary steps in implementing the above observations.
 
Further reformation
 
3.21     The Committee recommends that the progress in opening of offices of the NSIC in NER should be geared up by
the Ministry so that it should take up the programmes to increase its reach in the region.
3.22     Strengthening of Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) for extending financial and support
services to SSIs.
 
3.23     The Committee appreciates the role of SIDBI in taking various strategic initiatives to improve the flow of credit
to the SSI sector by broad basing certain schemes in tune with changing requirements of the sector, however, SSI sector
remains for want of adequate credit flow.  Therefore, in order to extend financial and support services to SSI s, SIDBI
should also get into direct landing in a big way apart from refinance. For this, it is necessary that SIDBI is permitted to
offer a total package of services including opening up accounts, cheque book facilities and other fund based and non-
fund based services to the SSI units like other banks rather than giving only term loans.(Para 70.3)
Action Taken
 
3.24     The SIDNI has been extending direct credit to SSI units and it is the focus of SIDBI  to disperse credit to the
sector.  SIDBI has been making efforts to provide integrated services to SMEs by board basing the schemes and
rationalizing the systems and procedures./  In order to extend comprehensive credit and other facilities ((including
cheque book facility) required by the SME sector, SIDBI had requested RBI  to authorize SIDBI to take up the aforesaid
activities.  However, the efforts of SIDBI  to get permission from RBI for offering integrated services to its SSI
customers have not fructified so far.  The proposal was made by SIDBI  to RBI on two occasions (including in June
2005), but the requests have not been acceded to by RBI.
 
Further reformation
 
3.25     The Committee suggests that SIDBI should pursue the mater with RBI and apprise the committee of the progress
made.
CHAPTER – IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
OF SSI HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
 
Recommendation
 
4.1       The Committee is of the considered view that State Governments need to provide an enabling environment for
development and promotion of the SSI sector through provision of fiscal concessions/incentives to the sector, better
infrastructure facilities etc.  for facilitating smooth implementation of the schemes of SIDO.  The Ministry of SSI may
take up these issues with the State Governments regularly and effectively.(Para 40.4)
 
Action Taken
 
4.2       The promotion and development of small scale industries (SSI) in primarily the responsibility of the respective
State Governments.  The Central Government, however, support and supplements the efforts of the State Governments
through implementation of various schemes relating to fiscal and credit support, infrastructural development  technology
upgradation, marketing, entrepreneurial development, etc.  These are implemented across the country.  The State/UTs

181st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/181streport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:50]
Governments also provide various concessions and incentives for the promotion of small scale industries in their
respective States/UTs.  The problems etc.  being faced the States/UTs are discussed in various forums.
 
Further recommendation
 
4.3       The Committee considered the views expressed by the Ministry and comes to the conclusion that the issues and
problems being faced by the states/UTs should be taken up by the Ministry of every possible forum.  The Committee
strongly feels that Ministry should make concerted efforts and coordinate with the concerned State/UT Government so
as to promote and develop SSIs there.
 
Other Schemes
 
4.4       The Committee in agreement with reduction of plan allocation under Major Head 2851 earmarked for “Other
Schemes” from Rs. 9.25 crore in BE 2004-05 to Rs. 7.35 crore at RE state during the same year and further to the tune
of Rs. 5.20 crore in BE 2005-06.  In so the reduction is the resultant of lesser requirement of grants-in aid for the
Training Institutes like NISIET, NIESBUD & EDIS, as their reckoning to self sufficiency is a matter of pleasure.(Para
41.4)
 
Action Taken
 
4.5       The Ministry shall make further efforts to make the Training Institutes viz. NISIET, NIESBUD & EDIs  totally
self sufficient and generate revenue.
 
Further recommendation
 
4.6       The Committee welcomes the decision taken by the Government but desires to know the steps taken in this
regard for making training institute self sufficient and revenue generating.
 
Recommendation
 
4.7       However, the Committee desires that adequate survey, study and policy research must be conducted for
generation of large scale employment opportunities on a sustainable basis in rural areas of Bihar, Orissa, Rajasthan,
Jharkhand, M.P. U.P., Uttranchal and Chhatisgarh.  The Committee is of the strong view that there is immediate need
for enhancing the competitiveness of Ssi sector in these states (as observed by the Committee during its study visit to
Patna, Bhubaneshwar, Ranchi, Ahmedabad and Lucknow) by setting up of institutional framework in areas such as
credit, raw-material, infrastructure, technology up-gradation, marketing and formulation of suitable arrangement for
skill development.
(Para 41.5)
Action Taken
 
4.8       Under “Survey, Studies & Policy Research” Scheme, various studies/survey have been assigned to the reputed
academic institutions/Research institutes to conduct study on the problems relating to Small Scale Industries and Agro
& Rural Industries.  During the last three years various studies have been assigned to the states of Orissa, U.P.
Uttaranchal and North East etc.  The suggestions of the Committee have been noted for conducting studies in other
backward regions/states.
 
4.9       Under National Entrepreneurship Development Board (NEDB) scheme incubator has been set up in the North
East Region to promote Small Scale Industries.
 
Further recommendation
 
4.10     The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of surveys conducted by them and what
chemes/projects were prepared & implemented on the basis of those survey.  The status reports may be given to the
Committee.

181st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/181streport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:50]
 
4.11     The committee recommends that an all out efforts should be made by the National Entrepreneurship
Development Board for encouraging First generation entrepreneurs in economically backward regions so that
substantial investment may be made in these region for improving standard of living of common man wages.  The
selection of key areas for massive action to promote and proliferate SSI units in these areas would go a long way in
employment generation and poverty alleviation.   The Ministry of SSI and its attached office should take initiatives in
this regard and accordingly requirement of budgetary support be projected.(Para 41.6)
 
Action Taken
 
4.12     In order to promote the entrepreneurship development particularly in the North-Eastern region, a new initiative
has been  taken under the NEDB scheme under which the financial assistance has been provided to IIE.  Guwahati for
setting up an incubator on gems and Jewellery .  One such Center viz.  Comprehensive Entrepreneurship Development
Programme (CEDP) has already become operational at Guwahati, and one more Center is proposed to be set up at
Mizoram.  In addition the IIE, Guwahat has set up a Business facilitation and Development Center (BFDC) under
NEDB scheme to provide hand holding and escort services and counseling to the first generation and the existing
entrepreneurs to promote entrepreneurship and self employment opportunities in the North Eastern region.  Such
activities will also be undertaken under the NEDB scheme in the other regions/states.
 
Further recommendation
4.13     The incubator scheme set up by NEDB appears to be a good example.  The Committee may like to have details
and also the progress made in that scheme.  The Ministry may also inform if such schemes have been set up in other
regions or state.  If so the details may be provided.
 
4.14     The Committee understands that one of the main objectives of the scheme is to generate more employment
opportunities by facilitating collateral free loans to small enterprises.  However, despite the provision of the loans up to
25.00 lakh without collateral/third party guarantee and the guidelines of the Reserve Bank of India thereto, banks are
reported to insist on the collateral security and the third party guarantee.  The committee has repeatedly recommended
for a change of the mindset of the Branch Manager, nothing fruitful has come out so far.  The committee directs all the
Banks who are Members of this scheme to  implement the scheme so as to make it success.(Para 42.3)
 
Action Taken
 .`1. The banks have been advised by the RBI to consider increasing the           exemption limit for abstention of
collateral security for all SSI borrower accounts based on good track record and financial position of the units from Rs.
15 lakh to Rs. 25 lakh, with the approval of their Board of Directors.
 
2.   The CGTSI  is making all efforts to change the mindset of the branch level Bank   Managers to consider the loan
applications on merits rather than on the strength of collaterals and/or third party guarantee.  Further, changes in the
scheme are introduced from time to time, to make it more user friendly.  Workshops for branch level managers of banks
are being held regularly to apprise them of the procedural details of the Credit Guarantee Scheme and address any
apprehensions they may have regarding the scheme.  The efforts of CGTSI and member banks ae bearing results, which
can be viewed from the fact that more and more member banks are extending credit facilities without collateral
security/third party guarantee and covering under the scheme.  During FY 2004-05, 11,559 proposals were approved for
guarantee cover for credit facilities of Rs. 326.77 crore as against 6,965 proposals for credit facilities of Rs. 115.43 crore
during FY 2003-04.
 
Further recommendation
4.16     The Committee expresses its satisfaction over the progress made after the frequent meetings with the bankers in
presence of CGTSI      but still feels that much more remains to be done to gear up the machinery to bring out good
results.  The Committee feels that there is need for aggressive awareness campaigning to popularize such a useful
scheme.
 
Recommendation
4.17     The Committee takes note that under Major head 2851 Credit Guarantee Scheme the Plan Outlay has been

181st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/181streport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:50]
increased to the tune of Rs. 180.00 crore in BE 2005-06 in comparison to Rs. 176.29 crore in RE 2004-05.  The
provision made under the scheme is for contribution to th        e Corpus Fund.  The envisaged level of corpus at the end
of Tenth Five Year Plan is of Rs. 2500 crore.  But with a Plan outlay of Rs. 900 crore in the Tenth Plan and Rs. 200
crore released during the Ninth Plan, the envisaged level of Rs. 2500 crore cannot be achieved.  The Committee is
anguished to observe that plan allocation is not made as originally conceived under the scheme.  Therefore, in order to
enhance the comfort level of MLIs participating in the scheme, it is desirable that the corpus is enhanced to the
envisaged level.  With the building of adequate corpus fund, the fears of MLIs could be allayed as still some of the
banks have reservations about the scheme because of their bad experience in the past with a similar scheme operated by
the RBI.
 
Action Taken/Comments:
4.18     The Government of India (GoI) and SIDBI contribute to the corpus fund of the Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for
Small Industries (CGTSI), operating the Credit Guarantee Scheme, in the ratio of 4:1.  In order to increase the comfort
level of the Member Banks/Lending Institutions (MLIs) and encourage them to extend more collateral-free credit
facilities to the SSIs/SSSBEs under the Credit Guarantee Scheme, it is necessary to build the corpus fund of the Trust. 
Taking into account the progress under the scheme, the initial corpus of the Trust of Rs. 125 crore has been gradually
enhanced with contribution by the GoI and SIDBI.  As on 31 march 2005, the corpus fund under the scheme has been
enhanced to Rs. 931.55 crore with contribution of Rs. 745.25 crore from the GoI and Rs. 186.30 crore from SIDBI. 
During the financial year 2005-06, a budgetary provision of Rs. 200 crore has been made under the scheme for
contribution towards the corpus of the Trust.  The issue of enhancing the corpus under the Credit Guarantee Scheme to
the level of Rs. 2,500 crore is being taken up in the proposed package for promotion of micro and small enterprises.
 
Further recommendation
4.19     The Committee recommends that the package for promotion of micro and small enterprises should be accorded
high priority.  The corpus has to be substantially enhanced to allay the fears of MLIs and also to make the scheme a
success.
CHAPTER – V
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE
 
Recommendation (Para 12.3)
 
DEVELOPMENT COMMISSIONER FOR SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES (INCLUDING LIBRARY)
 
The Committee considered the reply of the Ministry of SSI but it would like to further emphasize that mere 28 touch
screen kisks are insufficient and recommends that the number should be increased in sufficient to disseminate the
information in backward areas.
 
Recommendation (Para 14.2)
 
Establishment bill of Library and its utility in proliferation of Small Scale Industries.
 
The Committee is pleased to observe that Ministry of SSI is acting on the lines suggested by it but recommends that the
progress and status made in this regard uptil now should be placed before the committee for further action.
 
Recommendation (Para 18.5)
 
THIRD CENSUS OF SSIS (2001-02) AND NEED FOR NATIONAL POLICY FOR SMALL INDUSTRIES
 
The Committees pleased to note that its suggestion are considered by the Government time to time but recommends that
the progress made by the team of experts from CSO for conducting sample survey in respect of schemes implemented
by SIDO should be brought befoe the Committee as soon as possible.
 
Recommendation (Para 20.9)
 

181st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/181streport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:50]
EFFORTS OF DC (SSI) ON DEVELOPMENT OF ACCREDITED CLUSTERS
 
The Committee is in agreement with the views expressed by the Ministry of SSI about monitoring mechanism and the
action taken but it further recommends that the outcome of the field interviews diagnostic study along with the final
version of the initial action plan drafted by the CDE should be made known to the Committee.
 
Recommendation (Para 23.3)
 
APPROPRIATION OF NON-PLAN EXPENDITURE FOR NSIC IN THE YEAR 2004-05
 
The Committee considered the reply of Ministry of SSI and further recommends that the matter of budgetary support to
NSIC to meet out expenses on VRS must again be taken up with Ministry of Finance so that the NSIC is given
opportunity to rationalize the manpower.
 
Recommendation (Para 50.3)
 
Institutional arrangement made in North Eastern Areas for promotion of SSI in the region
The Committee recommends that the progress in opening of offices of the NSIC should be geared up by the Ministry so
that it should take up the programmes to increase its reach in the Region.
 
Recommendation (Para 70.3)
 
STRENGTHENING OF SMALL INDUSTRIES DEVELOPMENT BANK OF INDIA(SIDBI) FOR
EXTENDING FINANCIAL AND SUPPORT SERVICES TO SSIS
 
The Committee is in agreement with whatever steps have so far been taken by the SIDBI though Ministry or itself for
extending direct credit to SSI but at the same time it recommends that RBI should be approach again forcefully and
implementation in this direction if any can be shared with the Committee so that the issue could be taken with higher
ups of RBI/Ministry of Finance.
Minutes of the Meeting
 
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 16
th May, 2006  in the Committee Room  ‘A’  Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
 
Shri Santosh Bagrodia              —        Chairman
     
Rajya Sabha
 
Shri Surendra Lath
Suresh Bhardaj
Dr. K. Malaisamy
Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
 
Lok Sabha
 
Shri  Guharam Ajgalle
Shri Rajnarayan
Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
Smt. Susmita Bauri
Shri Suraj Singh
 
SECRETARIAT

181st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/181streport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:50]
 
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Committee Officer
 
2.         The Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members of the Committee.
 
2/-
 
-2-
 
3.         The Committee then took up the following reports for   consideration and adoption:-
 
(i) One Hundred Seventy-ninth Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations contained in
Committee's One Hundred Sixty-eighth  Report on Demands for Grants             (2005-06) of the Department of Public
Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
                        (ii) One Hundred Eightieth  Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations
contained in One Hundred Sixty-ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Heavy Industries 
(Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
           (iii) One Hundred Eighty- first  Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations contained
in One Hundred Seventy-first  Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)  of the Ministry of  Small Scale Industries;
            (iv) One Hundred Eighty- second Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Sixtieth Report on  the Tax Proposals affecting various segments of industries  of  the
Ministry of Small Scale Industries;
                         (v) One Hundred Eighty- third  Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Seventieth  Report  on  the Demands for Grants                 ( 2005-06) of the Ministry of 
Agro and Rural Industries;
           (vi) One Hundred Eighty- fourth  Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred  Seventy- second Report on Demands for Grants           (2005-06) of the Ministry of 
Agro and Rural Industries ;
            (vii)  One Hundred Eighty- fifth  Report  on Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Seventy-third Report on Inter-Sectoral  Strategic Co-operation to Promote Small Scale
Industries of the Ministry of  Small Scale Industries; 
             (viii) One Hundred Eighty- sixth   Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Seventy-fourth   Report on  Operational Effectiveness of PMRY, REGP and KVI 
Schemes  in Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal and Maharastra of the Ministry of  Agro and Rural Industries ;
 
3/-
 
-3-
(ix) One Hundred Eighty-seventh Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations contained in
the One Hundred Seventy-fifth Report on Key concern areas  of SSI in select states of the Ministry of  Small Scale
Industries;
(x) One Hundred Eighty-eighth Report  on Demands for Grants (2006-07)   Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries;
(xi) One Hundred Eighty-ninth   Report  on Demands for Grants (2006-07)  Ministry of Small Scale Industries.
(xii) One Hundred Ninetieth  Report  on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of  Department of Heavy Industries ( Ministry
of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);  and
(xiii)  One Hundred Ninety - first Report on   Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Department of Public Enterprises
(Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises).
 
4.         The Committee, after a brief discussion, adopted all the above reports without any modification.
 
  5.       The Committee authorized Shri Surendra Lath  and in his absence Dr. Malaisamy  to present the Report in Rajya

181st Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/181streport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:50]
Sabha and Shri Ram Singh Kaswan and in his absence Shri  Guharam Ajgalle to ley a copy of the Report in Lok Sabha.
 
  6. The meeting was adjourned at 4.25 pm.
 
New Delhi
16
th May, 2006
K.P. Singh
Under Secretary
 