PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYASABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMM ITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
FIFTY-FIFTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
RECOMMENI>ATlONS CONTAINED IN ITS 50TH REPORT ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2001-2002) 
MINISTRY OF MINES 
(I'HESI::NTED TO Ri\JYA SABHA ON 21'' ~OVF.:MBER, 200 I) 
(LAID ON TilE TABLf. Or TilE LOK SABIIA ON 21sT NOVEMBER, 2001) 
RA.I\ A SAIJHA SECRETAIHAT 
:'-lEW DELHI 
1\0VEI\. Iflr:R . ~001 / KARTIKA . 19~3 (SAKA) 

CONTENTS 
l't\GES 
COMPOSITION Or THE COMMmEE (i)-(ii) 
• I 2 . INl RODUCTION (i ii) 
3 RIPOR f OF Till COMMiliH 1-16 
4. O!lSciWATIO~StCO NCLUSIO~~ AND 17-18 
RrtOMMENDt\1 IO~S 01· THE COMMI 1"1 1-.1: AT A Gl-ANCE 
5 . MINUlT.S 19-22 
• 

t 
' 
COMPOSffiON OF THE COMMITlCE 
I. Shri Rarndas Agarwal -cltainrtmt 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
3. Dr. Faguni Ram 
4. Shri P.K. Maheshwari 
S. Dr. Mahesh Chandra Shanna 
6. Shri Jibon Roy 
7. Shri Somappa R. Bommai 
8. Smt. Saroj Dubey 
9. Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhundar 
I 0. Shri S. Sivasubramanian 
II. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha 
12. Prof. M.M. Aggarwal 
13. Shri Bangaru Laxman 
LOKSABHA 
14. Shri Chunnilal Thakur 
IS. Shrl Ramanand Singh 
16. Shri R. Basanagouda Palil 
I 7. Shri G. Mallikarjunappa 
18. Shri Tarachand Sahu 
19. Shri A nan! Nayak 
20. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
21. Shri A. Narendra 
22. Shri A.C. Jost 
23. Shri U!tamatao Oeorao Patil 
24. Shri K.P. Singh Oeo 
2S. Shri Thomas Hansda 
26. Shri Nepal Chandra Oas 
27. Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary 
28. Shri Sunil Khan 
29. Shn-, . Rajendran 
30. Dr. B.B. Rarnaiah 
31. Shri M. Rajaiah 
32. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh 
33. Shri Deepak Kumar 
(i) 

34. Shri Manjay lal 
35 Shri Anant Mahadeoappa Gudhe 
36. Shri Ram Saj1van 
37. Shri K Malaisamy 
38. Shri Nagmani 
39. Shri Ramdas Athawale 
40. Shri Rizwan Zaheer 
41. Shn K.H. Muniyappa 
42. Shri G.J. Javiya, 
43. Smt Renu Kumari 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar. Additional Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Direetor 
Shri P.P.K. Rarnacharyulu, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Rakesh Naithani. Committee Officer 
(ii) 

I N T R 0 D U C T I ON 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry. 
having been authorised by the Comminee, hereby present this Fifty-Fifth Report on the Action 
Taken by the Government on observations/conclusions and recommendations contained in its 
50'1' Report on Demands for Grants (200 1-2002) pertaining to the Ministry of Mines . 
. 2. The Comminee examined and considered the Action Taken Note of the Ministry of 
Mines on the Committee's 50"' Report pertaining to Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Mines 
for 2001-2002. 
3. The Comminee at its meeting held on 10'" September, 2001 considered and adopted the 
Report. 
NEW DELHI; 
September I 0. 200 I 
(Iii) 
RAMDAS AGARWAL 
Cltairmar. 
Departmerrl -nlaltd Porliamerrlary 
Slanding Comlfl/nee Ofl/rrdustry 

REPORT 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Minisuy of Mines on 
the Recommendations contained in its 50111 Report of the Department Related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on lndusuy on the Demands for Grants ( 2(!01-2002) pertaining to Minisuy 
of Mines which was presented to Hon'ble Chainnan, Rajya Sa!>ha on 24"'May 2001, and laid on 
the Table of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha on the 811> August , 200 I. 
Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Mines in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the Report These have been categorized as follows: 
Recomm~ndatiou/Observatiou, which have beea accepted by th~ Ministry of Miaes 
(Chapter- 1). 
Recommendations:- 3.5.2, 3.5.3, 4.8, 4.9, 6.4, 8.1, 9.5, 10.4, 12.2, 12.5, 14.2, 16.2, 17.2 
Recommeodations/Observatious which the Comminee does not desire to parsue in view of 
the eovemmnt's replies : (Chapter- II) 
Recommendations:- 3.5.1, 4.7, 12.4, 15.4, 
Recommendatimn/Observatioo.s ia respect of wllich the Comminee hu not aa:epted replies 
of tbc Miaistry of Mines:. (Cbapttr - 01). 
Recommendations:-5.6, 5.7, 7.6, 12.3, 13.4, 13.5. 
Recommendatiou/ObservatioD.J ~ respect ofwllida replies of the Mlaistry of Mines have 
not been re«ived. (Chapter- IV). 
. ND... 

CHAPTER -I 
RECOMMENDA TIONSIOBSERVA TIONS ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Non-Ferrous Mining and Metallurgkallndu!tries 
).5.2 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Committee is also of the opinion that Fon:ign Investment Promotion Board (FIPB) 
5hould play pro-active role in allowing foreign direct in\estment in Mining Sector in a subsl.antial 
manner The Ministry of Mines should also ensu"' that the approved proposals for foreign direct 
investment get rruuerialized at the earliest . 
REPLY 
The Foreign Investment Promotion Board (FIPB) confiders the proposals of Foreign 
Direct Investment (FDI) into the country including the mining sector The proposals of the 
foreign companies for investment in mining sector received by the Secretariat of FIPB a"' sent by 
FIPB to the Ministry of Mines for comments. In the Ministry of Mines the proposals arc 
examined in detail and comments sent within the stipulated time. A Foreign Investment 
Implementation Authority (FnA) has also been set up in the Depanment of Industrial Policy and 
Promotion (DIPP) to facilitate quick translati9n of mega FDJ proposals into implementation . The 
mega project'S are the projects costing Rs.100 crom or mo"'. 
The FilA reviews and monitors cases at the implemeniAtion level, i.e. projects up to the 
stage of achreving commereial productiort. 
A Fast Tract Committee (FTC) under the chairmanship of a Joint Secretary level officer 
in the Ministry of Mines 'makes quarterly revie"''S of the implementation of the mega projects and 
reports to the FilA. The meetinp of FTC are held regularly in the Ministry of Mines and 
bottlenecks comin& in the -y of project implementation are SOfted out. Besides. meetings are 
also held with foreign rnvestors separately from time to time to son out the problems towards 
implementation of their projects . 
3.5.3. 
RECOMMENDATION 
However. while inviting privstc entrepreneurs and ForeiBJI Direct investment in Mining 
Sector. the protection of N81ional Interest should remain the prime c:onsideration and review 
should b<! made from time 10 time. Similarly the interests of indiaenous industry should be 
protected by the Government. 
REPLY 
The protection of national interest is always tile pritary consideration of the 
Government. Section 5(1) (a} of the MMOR Act stipulates that ll!e State Government shall not 
grant a reconnaissance pemtit. prospectin& licence or mininJ '-to any person unless suc:h 
person is an Indian national IX' a company as defined in Sub Section (I) of Section 3 of the 
2 

I 
Companies Act, 1956 Recently clarification has been issued by the Go,cmm~nt on the 
restriction under Section 6{ I) (u) of MMDR Act, 1957 applicable to the Reconnaissance Permits 
obtained by different wholly owned subsidiaries of a company. It has been clarified that m case 
of a holding company which has flouted wholly owned subsidiaries for the sole purpose or 
undertaking reconnaissance operations, it should deemed to be acquiring the reconnaissance 
permit(s) for itself and the provision of Section 6(2) would become applicable for deciding the 
maxtmum area that can be held under mineral concessioos a., provtded in Section 6{ I) of the 
MMDR Act . Hence the review of the Rules and RegulatiOn~ nrc mad~ from time to time and 
guidelines issued to protect the interests of indigenous indu~t•) 
Geolo&ical Survey of India (GSI) 
8.8 __ 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Committee is hoY.evcr, perturbed to note that GS! had to deter prn<;urcmcnt of 
laboratory equipments, drill machines and accessories in the financial vcar 2000-21)0 I to the neXI 
financial year :oo 1-2002 due to financial constraints wtth the Go• em. enl Keepmg. m view the 
immense role of GSI, the Committee feels, GSI should not he ;UbJcCtcd to redu~m g •ts plan 
out Ia) The Cl1tnmincc hopes that the estimated plan outlay carm.ukod m ~00 1-200: would nul 
be reduced at RE so that GSI may cart)' on tiS set tar&ets witltour lime ml:l co~l o,·errur. The 
Commtttee notes the step~ !Uen by GSJ for rationalization of non-plan expenditure and hopes 
that it will commue to economise non-plan expenditure. 
REPLY 
The plan outlay during tbc tul'mlt financial year 200 I .200~ " 1. accommodate the 
procurement of laboratory equipmems, drill machines and acces<orios. ":ffons will b<: made to 
ttonomi>.: non-plan expenditure . 
R£COMMENDA TION 
The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry of Mines IS giving due con;ideration 10 
the recommendations made by expert panel coostituted on modemt7.atton of GSJ. Repla.:ement 
of outlived cquipmcnts and modernization of tools and technology i' the need of the hour for 
resuh-oriented and timely investiption of prioritiz.ecl field. The Ct•mmittec, while tak mg note nf 
the proposed plan oflction for procurement of prioritized equipmenl3 cluring 2001-2002 and Xth 
Five Year Plan, recommends that the Ministry of Mines should take the objoctive asse!ISment of 
financial requirement of GSI and the Ministl)' sbould take up the matter, eft'eo:tively, with the 
Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission eo ensure that GSJ would not face financial 
constraints for modernization purpose. 
REPLY 
Ministry of Mines is in the process of coostitution of a High Power Committee to review 
the charter of GSI and its requiremems for raodomization. The equijWI•ots required for 
modernization/ up-gradation of the <:«ff&bilitiee of GSI in the fields of Geophysical 
instrumentation, Chemical Labonltories/ Geo-cl!ronologicaJ. PetroJosjcal and Mineral Phystcs 
3 

laboratories as per the reeommendatiOI\5 of the expert panel have been examined. The 
identificatton of the equtpmentlinstrument has been made after evaluation of the ongoing 
projects, capabilities and expected increase in the workload of GSI during the current year and in 
the I 0'" Plan Period. Accordingly the cquipments to be procured for the ,year 2001-2002 and first 
phase of the Xth five-year plan period have been identified. Action has also been tnitiated for 
procurement of these equipments under bilateral agreement from BRGM under French Protocol 
and indigenously. 
The report of the expert Committee on Research Vessel to replace R.V. Samudra anthan 
is being examined and action will be initiated for its procurement. 
The recommendations of the Hon'ble Committee have been sent to Ministry of Finance 
and Planning commission. 
ludian Bureau ofMiues (lBM) 
6.4 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Committee notes the works undertaken by Indian B.ureau of Mines during 2000-2001 
and appreciates the efforts made by IBM in the field of study of Minerals and Minerals research. 
However, the Committee is constrained to express its displeasure over the reduction in pla.n 
expenditure under major head 2853 on the ll)ere plea of resource crunch with the government. 
Since IBM is a premier organization engaged in inspection and study of Mines, henceforth, 
adequate budgetary provision should be made for IBM for carrying out its aims and objectives. 
The Committee hopes that works envisaged to be undertaken by IBM during 2001-2002 would 
not suffer due to constraints of funds and efforts undertaken by IBM would prove a mile stone in 
the promotion conservation and scientific development of mineral resources. 
REPLY 
This Ministry would ensure that activities should not suffer due to constraint of funds 
Co• troller of Minint; Leases (CML) 
8.1 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry of Mines has taken approvrlate step by 
abolishing the office bf the Controller of Mining Leases particularly in a changed set up 
unleashed by liberalization process. The abolition of the office of the Controller of Mining 
Leases will lead to economisation of non-plan expenditure. But at the same time the Committee 
hopes that the work carried on by CML.. should be properly handled by Indian Bureau of Mines 
and no activity should suffer due to abo! it ion of CML. 
REPLY 
After abolition of CML, the activities are being looked after by IBM. 
4 

• 
NON-PLAN LOAN TO PUBLIC SECTOR ENTERPRISES 
Mlaeral Exploration Corporation Ltd. (MECL) 
9.S 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Committee wishes that MECL would striv~;. for improvement in the physical. and 
financial and performance ofMECL by effecting diversification programmes and strict adherence 
to rationalization of manpower in order to lessen the dependence of MECL on non-plan loan. 
The Committoe hopes that the provision t>f Rs.S.OO crore as non-plan loan oriainally aimed at to 
meet the cash losses but oow intended to meet the cxpendillli'O for separation of manpower would 
be effectively utilizled for the purpose. 
REPLY 
The provision ofRs.S.OO crorc as non plan loan would be fully utilized for separation of 
mnnpower. 
RiadQICAn Copper Ltd. (llCL) 
10.4 
RECOMMENDATION 
The ll:ommittce is constrained to express its deep concern over dwindling financial health 
of Hindustl!n opper Ltd The Committee feels that strict adherence to the strateg)i of rightSIZins 
of manpower may lead to rationalization of non-plan expenditure. The Committee feels that HCI 
managemeru S!IOUid leave non-stone untumcd tn achtevmg the t.arget of optimal manpower 10 
HCL. The Comm1ttce further feels that the provision of Rs.114.00 cron: as non-plan loan 
earmarked for sepMBting surplus manpower (3400) would be properly and effectively utilizled 
during the 2001-2002 . The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Mines may fumilh the 
details of impact of rationalization of manpower on the financial perfonnance of HCI in penal 
and productivity of labour factor in panicular . 
REPLY 
HCL has reduced the manpower throuah Voluntary Retirement Scheme (VRS) from 
18500 in 1997 to 11900 as on 30" June 2001 afte-r utilizing Rs.414 crores provided to them under 
Capital Restructuring during the period 1998-99 to 2001-2002. Presently, the company is in the 
process of separating those surplus employees who have applied for VRS for which the 
Government IS provtding Rs.26 crore through farst batch of supplementary. With this reduction 
the salary bill from the existing level of Rs 12 crore monthly has come down by around Rs.2.S 
crores. For this reduction in the: manpower, the productivity of labour will also go up and value 
addition per rupee of wages will also go up. 
5 

1'\VtSnn::H ~ PUBUC ENTERPRISES 
Hindu~tan Copper ltd. (HCL) 
jl2.2------ ----------------------------------------------, 
RFCOMMENDATJON 
The Mmistr\ of Mines 10 tt~ Action Taken )l;otcs on the recommendations contained in 
the Comm tt1ce 's 38il Report on Ocmands lor Grant~ (2000·200 I) stated that HCI management 
ha\c taken all the neec~sary steps to ensure timel) completion of restructuring programme of 
HCL to reduce fi:tcd cost of the company to enable the compan} to face c rnpetition a:;J tmprov~ 
tt> net renlitation. The Committee is happy to note that as a result of the steps taken, the 
mmpany has been able to reduce its recurring expenditure by Rs.l6.00 crorc per year. The 
C •>mmittee further appreciates steps taken 10\\ards 'trcngthening the mar~cting d :partment of 
: ll'L which inter-alta include t.C tncrea~ed planned int"''ction with consumers: lmpro,·ernen 
qual it) rc;ultmg into Ie-ser custl>mcr complamts·, Introduced pricing mechanism more respe"ivc 
:u changing Ll\fE price, Product diver~tfication , !he C\~tnmincc i~ of the view that 
Httplement:ltton of C ottal restn•ctunng backed b) ~uccessful c\ccutit •n 'lf rnodcrr.;•.ation •nd 
c~pansion JH<>grummcs would lead to bcner phystcat and financtal perfor nance " !CL ~~~ 
Committee rcwmmend~ that the Ministry of Mines shuuld have constant watch on the strategic' 
undcnakcn ll\ I!Cl management for impro•cment in the perfom1ance of the Company 
REPlY 
Minislr) of Mines is keeping constant watch or1 Physical and Financial Perfom1ance of 
the Compan) and discu<~rng the same at length in the Quarterly l'crfonnance Review Meetings . 
I~VESTME'H IN PUBLIC ENl F:RPlUSES 
l!industan <.upper Ltd. (RCL) 
I~.S 
- -----
RttOM MJ:;:\DA TION 
I he Commincc !eels that the reduction rn budgetary ~upport from Rs.JO.OO crores to 
Rs.:!7.00 crorc' for fiCL due to overall availabilil) of funds wnh the Go"1 and the postponement 
of expansion scheme ol KCC Smelter and Refinery in view of proposed disinvcstments is a 
reluctant approach towards alrea\ly suffering Public Sector Undertaking under the Ministry uf 
~lanes. fhc Commincc os of the <~pinion of that either \lisinvestment process in HCL should be 
accelerated or GovL should provide adequate budget at) support for modernization, restructunng 
and expanSilltt programme so that HCL sho uld not suffer further for want of financi;~l 
requirement 
REPLY 
lmplcmcmation of Pha'c ·I of Disin,.estment of HCI. b at an advanced stage. Four 
Qua lified Interested l'arttcS (Qli'~J have completed the due diligence el\ercise and the Compan)' 
has se t up a Data aan[... to furnish desired tnfonnati on as and when asked by QIPs. The draft 
6 

• 
• 
copies of Investment Agreement. Slump Sale Agreem~nt and Shareholders Agrcemcm have been 
circulated to QIPs for their comments. 
fludgetary support to the tune of Rs.25 crorcs(Rs.l 0 crorc as Equity and Rs.15 cr(or<! a;. 
Plan Loan) has been provided to the Company dunng 2001-2002. fhis budgetary <upport woll he 
spent for ~cplacemem & Renewals to maontain a good level of producti,,n. 
Keeping on view of implementation of Phase-I of Disinvestment and as commented b} 
Planning Commi' .ion it is not considered prudent to provide fund for moclerni7.ation. 
restructuring and expansion programme and this ~hould bo left to the strategic partner 
Hindu~tan Zinc Ltd. (HZL) 
11~.1 ---- ------------ ----- · 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Commonce hopes that Hindu,tan Zone Ltd would utolize the capual motla) on the 
Intended manner und without any time and ..:ost overrun. rhc Commitlcc hopes tlwt 1171 
management would omplemenl its envis.~gcd plan/actoon in a resuh o oented mannc· 
REPLY 
Hindu,tun Zinc Ltd .. 1s an MoU >igning Company is committed to implement all11s ong<llng 
proJects "ilhout any time and cost overrun. This is also ensured through rc~ular monitoring of 
these ~chemes in QPR meetings in the Ministry as well ~sat the level of the compan) 
Sikkim Mining Corporation (SMC) 
16.2 
RECOMME!'\DA TJON 
The Commmee is of the \'ie" that the Mini~! I) of Mines and the managem~nt of 'iil.l.iu• 
Mintng Corporatoon should take up the mat1cr with the Sikkim Oovcmment requesting to ,Jw" 
due diligence for contributong stale share in the equity of JOint \enture so that SMC rna} •un ivc 
and make lasung contnbutton on the love> of state people. A> a matter of f<tCI, Sikkom Monon~t 
Corporation requires recuperative introspection through cost benefit analysos and pro,pcctive 
overhauling taking into accounlthe objective assessment 
REPLY 
Ministry of Mines and management of Sikkim Mining Corporation hnvc rcque;tcd the 
Sikkim Government to contribute their share of cquot) in the joint vemure. /l.s a result the S•l.ldm 
Government has released Rs.68 lakhs during the last financial year against the release "' 01• I> 
Rs.23 lakhs and Rs.l9 lakhs during 1998-99 and 1999-2000 respective!}. 1he Sikknn 
Government has been requested to release a sum of Rs.ll9 lakhs during the current financial year 
as against the proposed release of R~.42 lakhs b) the Central Govemment so as to bring the 
equity ratio to 51 :49 (Sikkim Government Central Government). 
7 

Recen1ly SMC engaged the servoces of a consultant who revoe"ed the entore functoonong 
of SMC A tum-around strategy has also ~>ten prepared The major problems identified are: 
(i) Obsolete method of operatoon (mooing and refining) 
(ii) Frequent power failures. 
ro overcome the problems of operations Indian Bureau of Mmcs has already imtiated 
necessary measures and the process circuit has been improved and the chemicals used and the ir 
doses have been modified 
. 
rhe State Government of Sikkim has been requested to provide a separate feeder for 
SMC so thai the po-..er problem can bt overcome The State Government has infonned that the 
extension of power transmission of 66 KVA from Melli to Maturing is under process . Therefore 
a separate feeder connection from Mamring to SMC sub-station of 11 K VA will bt provoded 
[nvironmenllll Cleara11ce for Mininc Open~tioo 
17.2 
R.ECOMMENDA TlON 
fhe Committee observed that the tome &llP between grant of mining lease and 
environmental clearance is too large and because of this dilly-dally process the rate of mining 
lfOWlh in the country will ao slower and· slower. The Committee, therefore, strong ly 
recommend~ that there should be coordination between the Ministry of Mines and Ministry of 
Environment and Forests and these two Ministr~es should inter-act on a regular basis to allay the 
elernenl of delay in the entire proee~s 
REPLY 
MinosiT) of Mines holds regular onteraction with Ministry of Environment and Forests 
Representatives of Ministry of Environment and Forests arc invited in the meetings of the 
Mineral Advisory Council and Conference of Minmg Ministers to apprise them of the problems 
faced by the mining industry and to allay the problems faced by the mine owners 
Recently. as an outcome of such continuous interaction, the Ministry of Environment and 
Forests has sought objections and suggestions from public in rcs~t of the proposal that the 
mining projects (major minerals) with lease area up to twenty-five hectares would be exempted 
!Tom the requirement of public hearing under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. 
8 

CHAPTER- II 
RECOMMI:NDA TIONS/OBSERVA TIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
Non-Ferrous Minioc and Melallurgicallndustrtes 
3.5. 1 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Comminee is of the views that the MiniSII]' of Mines should invite the potential 
private entrepreneurs for participation in the commercial exploitation of untapped mineral 
resources . The Comminee appreciates the steps taken by the Government so far. 
REPLY 
In the federal structure, mineral concessions are granted by the State Governments . While 
prior to recem amendment in Dec. l999 State Governments did not directly invite application for 
mmeral concessions , in December. 1999 Section 11(2) ofMMDR Act. 1957 has been amended to 
provide for the State Governments to invite applications for minera l concessions. 
The liberalization of mining policy and the recent am.-ndll)ents in the MMDR Act and 
Mineral Concession Rules in tune with the policy have incr<'&Sed private participation in the 
exploitat ion of untapped mineral resources . This can be inferred by the fact that 114 Large Area 
Prospecting Licences/ Reconnaissance Permits involvi ng an area of more than one lakh fifty 
thousand sq. kms have been granted till 14'h July, 200 I in the States of Rajasthan, Kamataka, 
Bihar. Uttar Pradesh. Haryana. Gujarat. Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh. 
Geological Survey of India (GSI) 
4.7 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Commiltee appreciates the contribution of Geological Survey of India during the 
period spread over 150 years. GSl has not only c·ontributed in discovering major mineral 
deposits and thus enabling formation of pres tigious PSUs like Coal and Lignite Corporation. 
NMDC. NALCO, HCL. HZL, BALCO. ONGC etc . but also made its presence fell in the life of 
common people. The Comrninee recognizes and endorses the role and relevance ofGS!. 
REPLY 
The Minislry is thankful to the Hon'ble comminee for recognizing the contribution, role 
and relevance of Geological Survey of India 
9 
, 

• 
I 
I 
I 
INVESTMENT IN PUBI.IC ENTERPRISES 
Hindustan Copper Ltd. (HCL) 
1~.4 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Committee hos noted that th~ Finance Mtnistcr in hi~ Budget speech slated that an 
amount of Rs. 7000 crores have been provided for restructunng assistance to central PSUs The 
Commmee recommends that Minrsll') of Mines ma)· ta~e up wtth the Ministry of Finance tor 
relcastng adequate furd; to HCL from this package for its restructuring. Steps may also be taken 
to :ind a suitable joint venture 
REPLY 
The financtal rcstructurtng proposal of HCL is already under tmplementation Besides, 
an addttional amount of Rs.26 crores ts bern£ provided through first batch of supplement~ I') fM 
VRS. 
Mineral Explorntion Corporation Ltd. (MECL) 
1154 ------------------. 
L. ------------------------ __ J 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Committee is conVInced by the reasons advocated by the Mints!!) of Mncs 
regarding the ~urtailmcnt ,,f Budgetary support from Rs.4 50 crorcs in BE to R$.3.46 crore in RE 
2000-200 I and the Comn11!tcc is pie,> ~d h ll<)tC thatlhc curtailment in the budgetary suppnrt did 
not have an) ad,crse impact 'ln the >erfmmancc of the Company Th<· Comrnillee notes t~3t 
MECL would be abk to g~nerate its own resources and IEDR from tbe year 200 1·2002 tt> no 
provision has been mat.le fur this ;car 
REPLY 
MECL eJ.pects w generste its own r.:sources and IESR in the year ~00 I 2002 te> ensure 
that there is no adverse impact on the pcrfom1ance of the company. 
10 

CHf\Pl £R ·Ill 
Rt:C0'-1MENDATIONSIOBSERVATIO:'iS IN RESPECT OF WHICH ...... -
II al ...._.. 
C0\1MITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Mineral Exploration Corporotion Ltd. (MECL) 
'·6 
RF.CO\tME'iD.-\ TIO:O. 
rht Comm rllcc ;, plca;cd to note that .'vli:'.CL ha~ been cnu•ustcd "ith srgnlficant task of 
hridgrng the gap bct\\ccn rrclimrnar: c'plornuon of mineral prospects nnd 1ts conunerc1al 
c\phutution but c\prc~ses its concern ,,ver financi:tl performance of the company. The 
commmee is concerned to no1c 1ha1 reviva l oi'MEC'l. got ,uffcrcd due Ill dda} in sanc 1ion to coal 
c~plpralion "ork in non-CII. block l he Comnri11ce rs ,,f I he •iew thai the Minislr) pf \lines tn 
~cneral and \lECl. managcmcnl 111 panicular should ha'e sho"n due dtligcncc 111 the ltmely 
ob1ainrng of san.:tion uf coal exploratiOtl \\Ork I' 1he "un-C'IL block Had 11 been done at the 
.tppmpndle time \IFCI ~ould hJ\e he~n march1ng on1hc rc\l•al path.lhe Comm11tcc f··ds. The 
l <>mm1ttce re.:omrncnd' thai such dela~ should be avoided rn fu1ure 
RFPI.\' 
Mmistry of Mines would lilkC s1cps to Cll\ure that there 1s no dela} in sunctiuntng of Coal 
Exp loratio n work 
Fl'RTHER RECOJ1.1~1ENOATION 
The Committee ''constrained to e:-.press its concern o'er • 100 shon rcphcs of M1mstry 
of \hnes The Cornmrttee feels !hat repl) of Mtni'll') 'hould be self contamed and <elf· 
c\planiltol) coverin!! all aspects of act ton taken on the ltnes of recommendation made b~ the 
CotJumttc-e. For instance, in 1hc present case 1he replies of the M1ntSII) should contain act1on 
ta~en for avoiding the delay 111 sanctioning of coal exploration work in non·CIL block and 
impacl of undertak1ng coa l explorat ion work in the non-Cil. blo~k by MECL on 1he 
pcrfortnancc of the company I he Ministry of Mines should have replied 1hc ,lCttnn laken by 1he 
M1nrs1r~ for umelv oblatntng of coal exploration wor~ rn Ol>n·C'IL bloc and how tar the gap 
hc1wccn prelim ina!) c'plora1ion of mrneral pro,pcch and tts commerctal e'plottalron have been 
de a!: and their impac1 on the financial performanc~ of I he ~ompan). 
S7. ____ _ 
!~£COMMENDATION 
The commii\CC is of 1he opinion 1ha1 suggestion of the Ministry of Mine~ to MECI to Ia~ 
cmpha~rs on the diversilica1ion programmes. ration<1IW1t1on of manpowe r, coal bed methane 
exploration. Join! -.mturc etc ha'e the sound elerncnt-.latttrbutcs lor the sustenance and survival 
uf MFCI Ho\\e~er. the MiniS!!) of \1incs should kecr con,tant vigil for actual implementation 
of the~"' isaged stralcg> 10 cn>Urc the wrv·ival of :\11:.CL rimcly execution of survival package 
backed b) modcrniLatioll of equipments. tools \\ould ensure umel} surv'i\'al of MECL. 
II 

REPLY 
The Ministry of Mines would keep constant vigil on MECL for implementation of the 
strategy of laying emphasis on the diversification programmes, rationalization of manpower, Coal 
Bed Methane exploration and joint venture. etc. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
The Commince expresses its displeasure over the tendency of Ministry of Mines' 
efforts to furnish action taken in half hearted manner. It is being felt tlu.t the Ministry of 
Mines is taking the recommendations/observations of the Committee rather casually. The 
replies of the Minislry should be details of the actual implementation of diversification 
programmes, coal bed methane exploration, joint venture and rationalisation of manpower etc., 
if the Ministry is serious at all in monitoring the actual implementation/timely execution of 
several package envisaged for MECL. 
Graat to Bllant Gold Milia Ltd. (BGML) 
,7.6, 7.7, 7.8. 
RECOMMENDATION 
Para No.7.6. 
Tbe Committee is constrained to note that the fate of the company is stili hanging fire. 
Tbe Committee has learnt that a proposal for forming a cooperative and running the unit was 
mooted besides a joint venture proposal Since the judicial process is going to take a long time, 
Government may meanwhile consider all possible alternatives. Until the case is pending. 
Government may continue to suppon the Company for payment of salaries/ VRS benefits etc 
The employee may be regularly paid salaries and to compensate the salaries, production acti' ;tic> 
may be continued. Production of any amount of gold after payment of salaries will add to the 
company's revenues. 
Para No.7.7 
he Commince also suggests that the assets of the company should not spoil owing to 
inadequate/lack of maintenance. Regular maintenance rna) be kept Government should take a 
sympathetic vie\lf in regard to this compan) 
Para No.7 .s. 
In csse winding up/liquidation of the Company is inevitable, Committee is of the view 
that interests of the workers/employees should be protected in all respects. Moreover, the large 
track of land/other as~ets should be properly utilized 
REPLY 
Since BIFR and Ministry of Labour have J.lready accorded pennission for winding 
uplclosureofBGML and issue of winding up/closure is sub-judice in High Court ofl<amataka, it 
is not feasible to resurt production. As regards payment of salary, the HiJh Court has ordered for 
payment of salary as stopgap arrangement and a review petition was filed before the High Court 
12 

of Kamataka The High Court of Kamataka rejected the review petition on 8.6.2001 and ordered 
that the ~alary shall be paid within 21 days. A Special Leave Petition was field in Supreme C.vu •. 
against the decision dated 8.6.200 I of High Court. The Special Leave Petition was beard on 
18.6.2001 and the Supreme Court granted stay. The follow up .ction would be taken m 
accordance with the final out come of the court case. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
The Commiltee observes that the Ministry of Mines is silent with regard to the 
Committee's recommendations pertaining to maintenance of the assfls of the company (BGML) 
and steps taken '" this regard for proper and regular maintenance of the assets. The Ministry 
should have given the de!aib of asset of BGMI.. and how BGML management utilize and 
maintain all the assets The conspicuous silence of the Ministry over proper utilisation of the 
large track of land/other assets 1s testimony to fact that Ministry is not taking a S)'tnpathetic 
view in regard to this Company . 
INVESTMEJ'IIT IN PUBUC ENTERPRISES 
Hindustan Copper Ltd. (HCL) 
12.3 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Committee also stresses that the Minist.ry of Mines should help HCL in getting lOfli­
term work orders from Government Departments like the Mint, Ordnance Factories, Hindustan 
Cables Ltd. etc. 
REPLY 
Mmistry of Mines corresponds with the concerned organizations to help HCL in getting 
long term work orders whenever requesred by the Company. In future also, Ministry of Mines 
will help the Company in this regard. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
The Committee feels that the Ministry of Mines should have furnished the details of long 
term work order from Yarious Govt. Department like MINT, Ordinance Factories, Hindustan 
Cable etc. assigned to HCL w1th the good offices of Mmistry of Mines.' The Ministry should also 
have reqursite information Tegarding the actual quantum of work order as required by HCL and 
things should not be left to HCI.. management to drift away. The Commi:tee notes that the 
Ministry of Mines will help HCL in seeking long term work order from various Oovemment 
Departments like the "'int, Ordnance Factories, Hindustan Cables Ltd. etc 
National Aluminium Company Ltd. (NALCO) 
13.4 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Comminee appreciates the physical and financial performance ofNAI..CO, which is· 
a flagship company and deserves applause from all quarters. NALCO IS a really model Public 
13 

I 
I 
----- ---- ~ ----~--------._ __ _ 
Sector Undertaking deservin& the status of NA VRA "Th!A. The Committee congratulate the 
management and employee of NALCO for their tireless efforts made for the glorious 
performance of the Company. The Committee will however be dealing with the NALCO in 
detail in a sepante repon. 
REPLY 
Ministry of Mines hu been laking up the matler with rep!d to upgradation of NALCO 
from Miniratna PSU to NIVI'ItnG since Augll1t 1997. Tho 1111tter has been taken up with OPE 
afresh in view of the recent cin:ular of OPE in this Nprd. The observations of the Parliamentary 
Slanding Committee on Industry his also been~ to the notice of OPE 
Minrsuy is grateful to the Committee for lll'P"CCiating the management and employees of 
N~LCO. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
The CorTlmittee while 11pprociatin; tbc p!Jy5ical and fll\ll\cia\ performance uf N,\l CO, 
observes that human aspect should not be lost aiaJrt of. While SUJ!ained industnal growt should 
be promo1ed adequ3te safeguards for avoiding di~~~SterS and environmental hazacds • <-uld also 
be taken fo· reap c resrding in or around industrilll inuall:ttions. 
m 5 an-d m---~-------------- ------
RECOMMENDATION 
During the course of oral evidence on Demands for Grants, the Chairm~n enquJTed about 
the cum:nt status em recent fly ash pond breach inei<knt, which took place on 3 I" Dc<.embe: 
2000 The CMD ofNALCO informed that the Government of India had conslll ted a Committee 
to mvestigate the inddent. Th..: repon has already been submrned on 20'
1 
febn:lf) 2UU' rn~ 
CMD further informe<l that be had also constituted 111 internal Commiltec. which had 'lh<• 
submitted its repon on Ia March 2001. The CMD ai'O IAformed that pro-active steps to rarse lhc 
height of ash pond by about 4 mcll'eS had alrudy been taken before the b~ch took plaee. ~ 
CMD infomted that the work on the breach haa been completed and t"" ash pond would be 
commissioned soon 
JU:COMMENDA TION 
The Committee recommends that NALCO 5hould take all possible steps to ensure that 
such incidences do not recur in future. The Committee also suggests that action may be taken on 
the proper suggestions as recommended by the two conuruttccs constituted to investigate the fly 
ash incident 
REPLY 
The recommendatrons of Enquiry Comm inee ~ by Ministry of Mines to enquire 
into fly ash pond breach incident are under examinatioo ill COOJUltation with NALCO. Immediate 
steps for relief to the affected people and repair of the ash pond has been taken up by NALCO. 
All possible steps to ensure that such lncidenca do not rtcur in future will be talcen. The 
recommendation~ of Internal Committee Report ofNALCO are~so under implementation. 
14 

FURTHER RECOMMENDAnON 
The Committee feels that too much time has been spent an examining the reports of 
Enquiry Committee constituted by the Ministry of Mines for enquiring into fly ash pond breach 
incident. The Ministry should furnish the details of relief to the aft'ected people lllld status of 
progress made in die repair of the ash pond. The M inisrry should have replied also with regard 
to steps taken ro ensure that fly ash pond breach incidem do not recur in future . The 
Committee also feels that Government should have replies in details the action taken while 
impleme!\ii"& the recommendations of internal Committee report of NALCO. 
' 
I S 

CHAPTER-I V 
RECOMMENOA TIONSIOBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY OF MINES !lAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED. 
Nil 
, 
16 

OBERV A TION /CONCLUSION /RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMJTTEE 
AT A GLANCE 
MINERAL EXPLORATION COIU'OitA TION LTD. (MECL) 
5.6 
The Committee is constrained to express its concem OVCf • too short rq~lies of Miniruy 
of Mines. The Committee feels that reply of Ministry .bould be s.elf contained and s.elf· 
explanatory coverina all aspects of action lllk.en on the lines of recommendation made by the 
Committee. For instance, in the prescm «:.- the replies of the Ministry should contain action 
taken for avoiding the delay in sanction•na of c:oel exploration work in non-CIL block and 
impact of undcrtaltina coal exploration wortt in the non-CIL bloc:tt by MECL on !be 
performance of the company. The Miniruy of Mines should have replied the action taken by !be 
Mtnistry for timely oblainina of coal npknlion work in npn-ClL bloc and how far the pp 
between preliminary explontion of mineral prosp<:cts and itS commercial exploitation have been 
dealt and their impact on the financ:ial pafvn~e of the eompany. 
5.7 
The Committee expresses its di~lcasure over 1he tendency of Ministry of Mines' 
efforts to furnish action taken in half heaned manner. It is being felt that the Miniruy of 
Mines IS taking the recommendationslobecrvauons of the Committee rather casually. The 
replies of the Ministry should be details of the actual implementation of diversification 
programmes, coal bed methane exploration. joint venture and ra.tiottalisation of manpower etc., 
if the Ministry is serious al all in monitonng the act111l tmplcmcntati0f1/timely execution of 
several package cnvisqed for MECL. 
GRANT TO BHARA T GOLD MINIS LTD.(BGML) 
176, 7.7,7.8 
The Committee observes that the Ministry of Mines is silent with reprd to the 
Committee's recommendations penaining to maintenance of the asxts of the company (BGML) 
and steps taken in this reprd for proper and reaular maintenance of the assets. The Ministry 
should have given the details of auet of BGML and how BGML m~ment utilize and 
maintain all the assets. The conspicuow siletw:e of the Ministry over proper utilisation of the 
large track of land/other assets is testimony to fact thlt M111istty is noc taking a sympathetic 
view in reprd to this Company. 
INVESTMINT lN PUBLIC ENTEJU'IUKS 
Hindwtaa Cop~r Ltd. (HCL) 
12 . .3 
The Committee feels that the Ministry of Mines should have fumilbed the deuils oflong 
term work order from various Govt. Oepertment like MINT, Ordinanec Factories, HindUSWl 
Cable etc. assigned to HCL with the good ofrtees of MiniS;try of Mines.' The Ministry should also 
have requisite information regarding the actual quantum of worit onlct' as required by HCL and 
17 

I 
-
things should not be left to HCL management to drift a"ay . The Comminee notes that the 
Ministry of Mmes "ill help HCL m seel.mg long term "0"-order from various Government 
Departments like the Mont. Ordnan.:e Fa"ories. Hindustan Cables Ltd etc. 
National Ahaminium Com pan) Ltd. (NALCO) 
13 4 I 
The Committee "hilc appreciating the ph)~ical and financial performance of NALCO. 
observes that human aspect should not be lost sig.ht of While sustained industrial gro"1h should 
be promoted. adequate safeguards for avoading disasters and" environmental hazards should also 
be taken for people resading in or around industrial installations . 
National Aluminium Company Ltd. (NALC()) 
; 13.5 and 13.6 
The Committee feels that too much time has been spent 10 e~<amining the repon~ of 
Enquacy Committee constatuted b) the Minastry of Mines for enquiring into fly ash pond breach 
mcadent The Minastry should fum ash the details of relaef to the affected people and status of 
progress made in the repatr of the ash pond . The Minastry should have replied also with regard 
to steps taken to ensure that fly ash pond breach incadent do not recur in future The 
Committee also feels that Government should have replies in details the action taken while 
amplementmg the recommendations of mtemal Comminee report ofNALCO . 
18 

XI 
ELF.VENTH \lf.ETI NG 
I he Depan ment-related Parl1amental') Stand1ng Commmee on Industry met at 4.00 P \1 
on Monday. the 10'" September, 2001 in Room No:S1. First Floor, Parliament llt1usc, \!c" 
Deihl 
'· I , 
5 
(, 
' 
PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
!>hn (...han Ghufran Zahid1 
Or F ag.un1 Ram 
<;hn P K \lahesh\\ari 
<;1111 'oarc>J Dube~ 
'>hn 'agc ndra Nath Ojha 
l'r<•l i\1 l'vl Aggamal 
'>Ill I 0311!(3fll l.axman 
LO K SABHA 
9. Sl1r1 A. Narcndra 
10 <;(1, 1\epal Chand ra Das 
I I "hn I\ I' 'imgh Del' 
11 '>hn A11a111 Mahadeoappa Gudhe 
I) 'ohn t..J Jan~ a 
1-l 'ohn \ C Jow 
I' \hn Occpal. Kumar 
I 6. <;hn \lan1a~ l.al 
I • 'ohn "- Mnlui,am~ 
I X 'ohn I namarao Deora<> Pa 
Ill 'ollll 1'. R.l(CIIdi3U 
~ll. '\hn RamananJ ';1ngh 
~ £C H £TA H IAT 
lhc l\•mnHit\'l' llh.:ctmg. ''ho ,,a.., fiC\\h thtl11U1;th •. '\llu he: ;tmcmhcr oflhc Commlllcc 
3 I hc < hauma1 appnsed the 1:1cmbcr-th;nthc t\,mmlllce had <~>wmhlcd "' e<•ll\ld,·r <;J 
R.:r-•n on the ,\-tl<>n I a"en '•He ,,f "'""'I') ul '>m<~ll 'o~ak Indus! ric' ,md \gro •'- R111.1l 
lndll\tric' ,,, the -13 Rqx>rt on t red II I '"" t<> \S" ;Hld ~1>" Kcpon on \-:11nn l.1l.c11 h 1" 
(n>\cnuncnt llll n.'Ct'llllllCIH.hHinn' ~.;nntmn\.!d m 11, "itl Rcp('Tl on [kmamf, l11r (jl,lllh. •100 I 
::o01) pcr1aini11g I<' I he \lini'll) ,,r \line' 
~I 

I 
I 
~ The Commmec. thereafter. consodercd and adopted the 54 and 56"' Repons ""h 
sloght modifications. 
5 • • • 
56• Repon on Actoon Taken b~ the GoHmment on Recommcndatton contained in ol> SO'" 
Repon on r>emands for Grants (1001-10011 pen a onong to \liniStl} of\!ones 
l'ollowing rna) be added as fun her re.:ommendauonto para 13.4 .· 
The Commouec "hilc apprecoaung the ph)socal and financial perfonnance of 1'\ALCO. 
ohS<:f\e' that human aspect should not be lost soght of While ~u~ r aoned ondustnal gro101h should 
be promoted. adequate safeguards for a'oiding di~srcrs and environmental hazards should also 
be tal..en for people resoding in or around ondustrial IO>tallatoon>. 
6 • • • 
7 • • • 
A ,·erbaum record of the proceedongs "as l..ept. 
8 fhe Commouce then adJourned at 5.00 P ~~ 
:!2 