PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
TWO HUNDRED NINETY FOURTH REPORT
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development
(Amendment) Bill, 2018
Pertaining to the Ministry of Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 28th December , 2018 )
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 28th December , 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2018/Pausa, 1940 (Saka)
REPORT NO.
294

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
TWO HUNDRED NINETY FOURTH REPORT
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development
(Amendment) Bill, 2018
Pertaining to the Ministry of Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 28th December , 2018 )
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 28th December , 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2018/Pausa, 1940 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................ 1-20
4. R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE.................................................. 21-23
5. M INUTES .............................................................................................................. 25-38
6. A NNEXURES ........................................................................................................... 39-48

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2018-19)
(Constituted on 1st September , 2016)
1. Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri G . C. Chandrashekhar
3. Shri Ram Narain Dudi
4. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque
5. Shri Shwait Malik
6. Shri Sanjay Seth
7. Shri Amar Singh
8. Shri Tiruchi Siva
9. Shri T. G. Venkatesh
10. Dr. Amee Yajnik
LOK SABHA
11. Shrimati Ranjanben Dhananjay Bhatt
12. Shri Birendra Kumar Chaudhary
13. Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi
14. Shri S. P. Muddahanume Gowda
15. Shri G . Hari
16. Shrimati Darshana Vikram Jardosh
17. Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena
18. Shrimati Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam
19. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato
20. Shri Mutthamsetti Srinivasa Rao (Avanthi)
21. Shri Ramsinh Pataliyabhai Rathwa
22. Shri Konda Vishweshwar Reddy
23. Shri Raj Kumar Saini
24. Shri Rajveer (Raju Bhaiya) Singh

(ii)
25. Shri Rameswar Teli
26. Shrimati Savitri Thakur
27. Shrimati Dev (Moon Moon Sen) Varma
28. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare
29. Vacant*
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Director
Shri J.K. Mallick, Additional Director
Shrimati Sreeja. V ., Deputy Secretary
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Deputy Secretary
Shri Ajin J.R., Under Secretary
Shrimati Renu Sreekanth, Committee Officer
Shri Devinder Singh Bisht, Committee Officer
Shri Anuj Verma, Assistant Research Officer
* Vacancy caused due to demise of Shri Asrarul Haque Mohammed.

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having
been authorised by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred Ninety Fourth Report on Micro,
Small and Medium Enterprises Development (Amendment) Bill, 2018 pertaining to the Ministry of Micro,
Small and Medium Enterprises.
2. In pursuance of Rule 270 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the Council of
States relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha
referred the MSMED (Amendment) Bill, 2018 (Annexure-I) on the 01st October, 2018 as introduced in
the Lok Sabha on the 23rd July, 2018 for examination and Report within 3 months.
3. The Committee in its meeting held on the 09th October, 2018 decided to invite the Experts on the
subject and the Stakeholders/Associations concerned to hear their opinion/views/suggestions on the
proposed Amendment.
4. The Committee heard the views of Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises and the
Ministry of Law & Justice (Legislative Department) on the Amendment Bill.
5. The Committee held four sittings during the course of examination of the Bill i.e., on 01st, 09th
& 16th November and 27th December, 2018. The list of witnesses heard by the Committee is at
Annexure-II.
6. The Committee has relied on the following documents in finalizing the Report:
(i) The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development (Amendment) Bill, 2018;
(ii) Presentation, clarification and oral evidence of Secretary, M/o MSME;
(iii) Oral evidence and written submissions by various Stakeholders/Experts on the Bill;
(iv) Replies received from the M/o MSME to the Questions/Queries raised by the Members
during the course of the meetings on the Bill; and
(v) Clarifications received from Legislative Department, (M/o Law & Justice).
7. The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same on 27th December, 2018.
8. On behalf of the Committee, I would like to acknowledge with thanks the contributions made by
those who deposed before the Committee and also those who gave their suggestions to the Committee
through their written submissions.
9. For facility of reference and convenience, the recommendations of the Committee have been
printed in bold letters in the Contents of the Reports.
  N
EW D ELHI; RAM CHANDRA PRASAD SINGH
27th December, 2018 Chairman,
Pausha 6, 1940 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Industry,
Rajya Sabha.

REPORT
BACKGROUND
1.1 The MSMED Act, 2006 provides the regulatory framework for MSMEs. Prior to coming into effect
of the Act, the sector was known as Small Scale Industries Sector. With the advent of the Act, the
concept of 'Enterprises' as against 'Industries' was brought in. It thus added 'Services' into the framework
in addition to 'Manufacturing'.
1.2 In the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 (the MSMED Act), there is
a provision for classifying micro, small and medium enterprises. Over a period of time, it was felt
necessary to change the definition/ classification criteria to align them with needs of the current times
and the changing business ecosystem.
1.3 The Section 7 of the MSMED Act classifies the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs)
on the basis of investment in plant and machinery for manufacturing units, and investment in equipment
for service enterprises. The relevant provision of Section 7 (1) of the MSMED Act is reproduced below:
"7. Classification of Enterprises — (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 1 IB of
the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, (65 of 1951) the Central Government
may, for the purposes of this Act, by notification and having regard to the provisions of sub-
sections (4) and (5), classify any class or classes of enterprises, whether proprietorship, Hindu
undivided family, association of persons, co-operative society, partnership firm, company or
undertaking, by whatever name called,
(a) in the case of the enterprises engaged in the manufacture or production of goods pertaining
to any industry specified in the First Schedule to the Industries (Development and
Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951), as-
(i) a micro enterprise, where the investment in plant and machinery does not exceed
twenty-five lakh rupees;
(ii) a small enterprise, where the investment in plant and machinery is more than
twenty-five lakh rupees but does not exceed five crore rupees; or
(iii) a medium enterprise, where the investment in plant and machinery is more than five
crore rupees but does not exceed ten crore rupees;
(b) in the case of the enterprises engaged in providing or rendering of services, as-
(i) a micro enterprise, where the investment in equipment does not exceed ten lakh
rupees;
(ii) a small enterprise, where the investment in equipment is more than ten lakh rupees
but does not exceed two crore rupees; or
1

2
(iii) a medium enterprise, where the investment in equipment is more than two crore
rupees but does not exceed five crore rupees.
1.4 A Group of Secretaries examined the issues relating to Commerce and Industry and in their Report,
recommended that the Ministry of MSME may examine and work out suitable criteria involving additional
parameters such as turnover and employment which could be used in combination for classification of
firms as MSMEs.
1.5 As per the submission of the Ministry of MSME, they had consulted various stakeholders and the
predominant view that emerged was that the criterion of investment in plant and machinery stipulates
self declaration, which entails verification, if deemed necessary, and associated transaction costs. Similarly,
employment as a criterion has problems associated with factors such as seasonality and informal nature
of engagement. This may also entail verification/inspection with avoidable transactions costs for MSMEs.
Taking annual turnover as a criterion overcomes all these shortcomings as it can be pegged with reliable
figures available in GST Network and other important methods of ascertaining.
1.6 The Ministry has stated that the following are the other important observations that came forth
during the course of their consultations with the stakeholders:
(i) There is a need to put in place a non-discretionary, transparent and objective definition of the
MSMEs to further promote the ease of doing business.
(ii) There is a need to put in place a classification framework which incentivizes the enterprises
to grow continuously.
(iii) There is a need to align the classification of MSMEs to annual turnover pegged with reliable
figures available e.g. in GST Network and other methods of ascertaining which will result in
an automatic and unambiguous classification of enterprises.
(iv) There is a need to provide certain flexibility to the Government to modify the definition criteria
specified under the MSMED Act to cater to the need of aligning them with the changing
business ecosystem.
1.7 Accordingly, the Ministry of MSME, therefore proposes to amend sub-section (1) of Section 7 of
the MSMED Act, 2006 to read as under:
"(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 1 IB of the Industries (Development and Regulation)
Act, 1951, (65 of 1951) the Central Government may, for the purposes of this Act, by notification
and having regard to the provisions of sub-sections (4) and (5), classify any class or classes of
enterprises, whether proprietorship, Hindu undivided family, association of persons, co-operative
society, partnership firm, company or undertaking, by whatever name called, engaged in the
manufacture or production of goods pertaining to any industry specified in the First Schedule to
the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, or engaged in providing or rendering of
services, as-
(i) a micro enterprise, where the annual turnover does not exceed five crore rupees;
(ii) a small enterprise, where the annual turnover is more than five crore rupees but does not
exceed Seventy -five crore rupees;

3
(iii) a medium enterprise, where the annual turnover is more than seventy-five crore rupees but
does not exceed two hundred and fifty crore rupees";
(1A) The Central Government may, by notification, vary turnover limits, which shall not exceed
thrice the limits specified in sub-Section (1) for the purposes of development of micro, small and
medium enterprises."
THE MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES DEVELOPMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018-
AN INTRODUCTION
2.1 The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development (Amendment) Bill, 2018 was introduced
in Lok Sabha on 23rd July, 2018 (Annexure-I), (hereinafter referred to as the Bill) and referred to the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry by the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha
in consultation with the Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 01st October, 2018 for examination and report
thereon within 3 months.
2.2 The Bill seeks to amend Sections 7 (1), (9) and 14 (2) of the Principal Act. The Bill also proposes
to introduce a new clause as Section 7(1A) in the Principal Act which empowers the Government to vary
the turnover limits not to exceed thrice the limits for the purpose of development of Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises.
THE STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS TO THE BILL
3.1 The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 was enacted to provide for
facilitating the promotion and development and enhancing the competitiveness of micro, small and
medium enterprises. The said Act, inter alia, provides for classification of the enterprises as micro, small
or medium based on their investment in plant and machinery or equipment for manufacturing and service
sectors respectively. Over a period of time, it has been felt necessary to change the criteria for the
classification in order to align it with the need of current times and changing business ecosystem.
3.2 In the course of consultation with various stakeholders, it has been noted that the criterion of
investment in plant and machinery or equipment entails physical verification having associated transaction
costs. It also incentivises the tendency in the promoters of the enterprises to keep the investment size
restricted in a particular business entity in order to retain the benefits associated with micro or small
enterprises category. While evaluating various alternatives, it has been considered appropriate that if the
annual turnover is taken as a criterion for classification, the information available with goods and services
tax network and other sources can be used for determination and classification of the category of the
enterprises. Overall, the turnover based clasification will promote the ease of doing business and will put
in place a non-discretionary, transparent and objective classification system. Besides, it will bring an end
to the physical verification system and Inspector Raj.
3.3 In view of the above, it is proposed to amend section 7 of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
Development Act, 2006 and to achieve the following objectives:
(a) provide for change in the criterion of classification of micro, small and medium enterprises
from the existing criterion of investment in plant and machinery or equipment to a new
criterion based on annual turnover of the enterprises; and

4
(b) confer power upon the Central Government to vary, the turnover limits, by notification which
shall not exceed thrice the limits specified in sub-section (1) of section 7 for the purpose of
development of micro, small and medium enterprises.
4.1 As per the information provided by the Ministry of MSME, the objectives of the Bill are
(i) To have a non-discretionary, transparent and objective criteria of classification and to eliminate
the need for inspections and avoidable associated transaction cost;
(ii) To make the classification system progressive, dynamic and adaptable to prevailing business
ecosystem;
(iii) To overcome the uncertainties associated with the classification based on investment in plant
& machinery/equipment and employment;
(iv) To improve the ease of doing business; and
(v) To provide flexibility to the Government to fine-tune the classification of MSMEs in response
to changing economic scenario without resorting to the amendment of MSMED (Micro, Small
& Medium Enterprises Development) Act.
4.2 The facts narrated above laid the justifiable ground for bringing an amendment in the criterion of
classification.
EXAMINATION OF THE BILL BY THE COMMITTEE
5.1 Considering the implications involved in the proposed amendment and its impact on the entrepreneurs
at large, the Committee decided to hear the views and suggestions of Experts on the subject, stakeholders,
concerned associations and the Ministry of MSME. The Committee invited the representatives of various
organisations/associations and renowned experts and held extensive interactions with them. These included
Dr. Prabhat Kumar, Ex-Cabinet Secretary & Ex-Governor Jharkhand who was also the Chairman of the
One-Man Committee appointed by the Ministry of MSME to study MSME Policy; Dr. H.P. Kumar,
Ex CMD, NSIC & Advisor PHD Chamber of Commerce & Industry and the representatives from
(i) Laghu Udyog Bharati (LUB); (ii) The Coimbatore District Small Industries Association (CODISSIA);
(iii) Confederation of Women Entrepreneurs (COWE); and (iv) Chamber of Indian Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises (CIMSME).
6.1 The Secretary, M/o MSME in his presentation before the Committee stated that India has improved
its global ranking in Ease of Doing Business in the last four years from the rank of 142 to the rank of
77. Earlier MSMEs used to be in the informal economy. Now after demonetisation and GST, they are
gradually coming to the formal economic framework. More than one crore MSME units, approximately
1.16 crore units have registered under the GSTN, which is a paradigm shift. Therefore, there is a
requirement to make the classification criterion transparent, objective and non-discretionary. Today,
MSME being an aspirational sector, it needs to be encouraged and nurtured carefully for its proper
growth and development. He stated that, accordingly, many rounds of discussions were held with various
stakeholders and Industry Associations before proposing the MSMED (Amendment) Bill.

5
6.2 In their presentation, M/o MSME apprised that the MSMED Act came into force in the year 2006.
As per the existing provisions, service providing & manufacturing sectors were categorized as two
different sectors and accordingly the enterprises in the Manufacturing Sector as well as Service Sector
were classified in three categories viz. Micro, Small and Medium based on their investment in plant,
machinery and equipment. However, as per the new proposed MSMED (Amendment) Bill, 2018, both
Services and Manufacturing Sectors have been integrated as one common sector.
6.3 The Secretary, M/o MSME further added that in the present investment criterion, the land and
buildings are not included in both manufacturing and service sector.
6.4 The Secretary, M/o MSME further stated that the purpose and benefit of classification of MSMEs
is that the Ministry runs various schemes/programmes like Credit, Technology, Infrastructure, Marketing
and Skill Development and the classification enables the micro and small enterprises to enjoy the major
share of benefits of such schemes/programmes. It also helps to achieve the long-term objective of large-
scale employment generation. However, the problem with the present classification criterion is, there is
lack of a transparent and online system of verification of MSMEs. The present system involves physical
inspection leading to increase in transaction costs and it inhibits investment, scale-up, modernization and
growth of enterprises. Moreover, there has been significant price rise since the adoption of MSMED Act,
2006, which has made the current threshold level irrelevant.
6.5 Further, it was stated that globally the classification of enterprises is done on the basis of number
of employees in the countries like UK, USA, Republic of Korea, China etc. In South Africa classification
is done in combination of turnover and employment criteria. But the problem with employment criteria
in Indian context is non-availability of reliable/verifiable sectoral data and the seasonal variance in labour
engagement. The employment system, if taken into consideration, will increase the need for inspection,
which will involve huge transaction cost and could place a question mark on the veracity of the figures
given by the Enterprises in different Sectors. Moreover, it will also lead to large number of litigations.
The Ministry has therefore, opted for turnover criterion and proposed amendment through MSMED
(Amendment) Bill, 2018. The turnover criterion will bring an unambiguous, transparent, non-discretionary,
objective and online framework for classification. The data can be easily verified from the reliable
information available with the GST network. Provision of 'Notarized Statement' is also made available
to enterprises that are not registered in GST Network. Further, turnover criterion will encourage investment
in modernization and scaling up and will also simplify the procedure and promote the ease of doing
business. Necessary safeguards shall also be put in place by adopting suitable policy measures to counter
the possibility of MNCs cornering the incentives meant for MSMEs etc. Besides, the turnover as on 1st
April of a particular financial year will be taken as the turnover of a particular entity in that Financial
Year. Regarding regulation of the investment of MNCs, it was informed that it is a matter of Foreign
Direct Investment and has to be dealt with the concerned authorities such as Foreign Investment
Promotion Board and that change of classification criteria has no role in this.
6.6 The Secretary stated that in the present scenario, the turnover criterion is the best formula. As
regards the determination of limits of each slab, there is flexibility for change, which could be deliberated
upon, however the main objective is to change the classification criteria from investment to turnover.

6
7. The Committee while examining the Amendment Bill had made certain observations, which were
forwarded to the M/o MSME for their response.
7.1 The Committee was given to understand that an amendment was proposed regarding upward
revision of investment in plant and machinery and equipment in the MSMED (Amendment) Bill, 2015.
However, the Ministry informed that the amendment did not come into force and the MSMED Amendment
Bill, 2015 was withdrawn and, in its place, the MSMED Amendment Bill, 2018 has been introduced in
the Parliament regarding change in the criteria of classification of MSMEs from investment in plant and
machinery to annual turnover. The Ministry of MSME also had consultations with various MSME
Associations and other Stakeholders in the National Board for MSME and this necessitated the withdrawal
of the previous Amendment Bill of 2015.
7.2 The Committee inquired about the impediments that are stalling the growth of MSMEs in the present
criterion of classification based on investment in plant and machinery/equipment to which the Ministry
of MSME stated that they consulted various stakeholders and the predominant view appeared to be that
the criterion of investment in plant and machinery stipulates self declaration which entails verification and
associated transaction costs. There is no online and transparent system to verify the data/figures regarding
such investment. Moreover, it hinders investment as the MSMEs like to stay under the ceiling for
remaining eligible to access benefits under various Government Programmes and priority sector lending.
Thus, it inhibits growth and modernization. Similarly, employment as a criterion has problems associated
with factors such as seasonality and informal nature of engagement/employment for which no data/
records exist and also entails verification/inspection with avoidable transactions costs for MSMEs. On
the other hand, the annual turnover criterion overcomes these shortcomings as it can be pegged with
reliable data available in GST Network and other methods of ascertaining. This would be rather transparent,
non-discretionary and verifiable method for ascertaining.
7.3 The Committee also took note of the provisions of Section 7 (4) of the MSME Development Act,
2006, which stipulates that the Central Government shall obtain the recommendation of the Advisory
Committee prior to classifying any class or classes of enterprises. The Committee, therefore, desired to
know about the details of reports/recommendations of the Advisory Committee constituted for the
purpose. In response, the Ministry of MSME stated that recommendations of the Advisory Committee
were not obtained, as the classification for change in criteria was referred directly to the National Board
for MSME in its meeting held on 26.02.2018. None of the Members opposed in particular to the change
in criteria to turnover basis. Besides, the matter was also placed before an informal Group of Ministers
and the Group recommended to adopt the criterion of annual turnover.
7.4 The Committee further desired to know the rationale and underlying principle based on which the
proposed turnover limits have been arrived at in the MSMED (Amendment) Bill, 2018. It was stated by
the Ministry of MSME that the limit of ` 5 crore has been arrived at by multiplying the earlier limit with
a factor of 20. As this sector is growing and needs large-scale investment, higher limits of annual
turnover, have been suggested for Small and Medium Enterprises, so that they can grow without
worrying about the limits.
7.5 The Committee noted that as per the existing provisions, separate classification or investment limit
is earmarked for manufacturing enterprises and service rendering enterprises. However, no justification

7
has been given by the Ministry of MSME for the proposed amendment setting the common annual
turnover limit for both manufacturing and service enterprises. The Ministry of MSME submitted before
the Committee that the extant MSMED Act, 2006, encompasses in its scope both manufacturing and
services. The proposed amendment doesn't differentiate between manufacturing and services sector
since turnover is supposed to be an activity-neutral criterion unlike investments in plant and machinery
or equipments in which manufacturing and services enterprises differ greatly from each other. There is
a need to keep the criterion very simple which will have no scope for interpretation (whether manufacturing
or service unit) or inspection.
7.6 The Committee also noted that the One-Man Committee on the MSME Policy had viewed that a
change in the criteria of defining MSMEs would not add any value to the development, sustenance and
growth of the enterprises. Even, no entrepreneur, federation of associations of MSMEs has demanded
change in the criterion. In response, the M/o MSME informed that GST had not been launched when
the One Man Committee considered the matter. This digital platform would help immensely in having a
transparent, online, non-discretionary system. The Ministry of MSME is of the view that change in the
criteria of defining MSMEs will add value to the existing system. There are Associations/units who have
supported and requested the Ministry of MSME to expedite issuing the notification of change in the
criteria on turnover basis. Some of them are: The Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry,
Delhi; Chamber of Indian Trade and Industry, Delhi; Calcutta Chamber of Commerce, Kolkata; Apex
Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Punjab; Focal Point Industries Association (Regd), Amritsar, etc.
7.7 The Committee observed that the Laghu Udyog Bharati, New Delhi and Jharkhand Small and Tiny
Industries Association have objected to the proposed classification on the turnover basis on the plea that
turnover may change on year to year basis but after the clarification given by the M/o MSME on cut
off date i.e. 1st April of a particular financial year, for arriving at turnover and inclusion of Scheme-
Specific safeguards, their objections seem to be mitigated.
7.8 The Committee also inquired about the yardstick for registration under different categories for new
entrepreneurs since the turnover of an MSME can be ascertained with GST Network and other sources
only after completion of more than one year in operation to which the Ministry replied that the enterprise
can estimate its turnover at the initial stage of setting up of an enterprise and the selling price of the
product and accordingly register itself.
7.9 To a query about the introduction of the employment criterion along with turnover for classification
purpose of MSMEs entailing further associated transaction cost, the Ministry stated that if the employment
criterion is also included in the definition for MSMEs, the enterprise would start taking all precautions
to restrict/limit their numbers to ensure that various laws/regulations are not applicable and such a
situation would act as a barrier in their growth and would encourage Inspector Raj.
7.10 The Committee took note of the observation made by the Department of Expenditure that no
financial implication is involved. Further, the Committee desired to know what necessitated to change
the criteria of MSMEs from investment in plant and machinery to annual turnover. The Ministry of
MSME clarified that the turnover criteria for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises have been suggested
keeping in view the need to ensure continued inclusion of the maximum number of Micro and Small
Enterprises in the respective categories even in the changed classification framework. Simultaneously, the

8
scope for encouraging transition of Micro Enterprises to Small and Medium Enterprises and eventually
as large enterprises has also been factored in while making the proposed change in the criterion.
7.11 The Committee considered the apprehensions existing in the MSME Sector that if the upper/limit
of annual turnover for micro enterprises is earmarked as ` 5 crores, particularly the manufacturing
entities on the lower end with annual turnover of a few lakhs would get totally crowded out by the larger
firms. The Ministry of MSME submitted before the Committee that the proposed classification shall not
only increase number of enterprises in the MSE sector but there will be shifting of enterprises also from
small and medium sectors and hence the budget allocation for MSME Sector by the Government has
to be increased. Moreover, due safeguards would be taken in various schemes by the Ministry of MSME
to provide help to the micro enterprises on the lower end.
7.12 The Committee has taken note of the observations made by the Department of Economic Affairs
to consider creating separate sub-categories for manufacturing and services sectors as both the sectors
follow different business models. On the issue of sub-categories, it was stated by the M/o MSME that
the separate sub categories for manufacturing and services sectors in the existing arrangement, were
based on the criterion of investment in plant and machinery/equipment. As the scale of investments in
the manufacturing and services sectors varied significantly hence separate limits were prescribed. As it
is proposed now to move on to annual turnover as the sole criterion, the aforesaid sub-categories have
been done away with.
7.13 The Committee noted that the proposed amendment has been opposed by some associations on the
ground that it will ruin the small entrepreneurs who are surviving on the little incentives they gain under
the umbrella of MSMEs. However, with this change in definition, they stand to lose even that advantage.
The Ministry of MSME informed that even though some associations have represented against the
change in the classification of MSMEs but at the same time large number of associations have also
supported the new definition. The necessary adjustments can be made in due course in the policy and
schemes for incentives to the Micro and Small enterprises so that no segment gets adversely affected.
7.14 The Committee is given to understand that Karnataka State Small Scale Industries Association
(KASSIA) has protested against the proposed amendment to change the definition of MSME claiming that
amendment based on turnover is allegedly designed to help large entrepreneurs and would negatively
impact the small enterprises. Explaining the situation, the Ministry stated that KASSIA has protested
against the proposed amendment to change the definition of MSMEs by their representation dated
01/08/2018, addressed to Hon'ble PM. In the same representation the Association has also appreciated
the need for adopting a scientific definition of SMEs keeping in view the global trends. Further, in a joint
representation dated 22/02/2018 by TANSTIA, KASSIA, KSSIA, FSME-FNDIA, FETSIA, FAPSIA
addressed to Hon'ble MoS (IC) for MSME, these Associations had demanded to reduce the turnover
limit.
7.15 The Committee observes that some associations had apprehensions that the amendment would
affect MSME entrepreneurs negatively, as they will lose Government benefits that they are getting and
big entrepreneurs will grab all the benefits thus affecting the Make in India Programme, manufacturing
sector and creation of jobs. The Ministry informed that its every scheme benefiting the MSMEs would
have adequate safeguards against big enterprises grabbing benefits. Due safeguards would be put in place

9
in various scheme guidelines to ensure that even within the category of the MSMEs, the maximum
benefits of such schemes accrue to the smaller segments within the Micro and Small Sectors. The
Committee was given to understand by the M/o MSME that while considering the issue of extending the
benefits of Government schemes and programmes to those MSME units providing employment to more
and more people, the absence of reliable data in this count is major impediment as significant section of
people are not in the ambit of ESIC/EPPO who could be relied upon for such data maintenance.
7.16 The Committee queried about the enhancement of employment, reducing poverty and rural-urban
migration in view of the new classification and the Ministry stated that the proposed classification of
MSMEs is progressive, which would add to the growth of MSMEs and shall pave the way for increased
investment, employment generation and reducing poverty and rural-urban migration. The proposed systems
of classification is based on consultation with stakeholders and other relevant Ministries, Department/
Agencies of the Government.
7.17 The Committee sought clarification if the new definition/classification could see a paradigm shift
towards trading and will ignore manufacturing sector. The Ministry of MSME stated that the new
definition/classification will not ignore manufacturing sector as the Government is focusing on
manufacturing sector. Programmes such as Make in India, Startup India, Standup India, Schemes of
NMCP etc. are focused to increase the manufacturing sector.
8.1 The Ministry stated that the basic objective of keeping a provision of varying- the turnover limit
upto 3 times is to keep the criteria current and effective in the context of changing economic and other
factors influencing the enterprise ecosystem.
8.2 The Ministry of MSME on the issue of classification and differentiation for composite/aggregator
units in Small and Medium Sector, stated that turnover as a criteria is independent of nature and
characteristics of enterprises, be it aggregator or supplier or supporting unit or product sectors like
textiles, diamond or jewellery industries. On the contrary, it would classify them only on consideration
of turnover.
VIEWS OF THE STAKEHOLDERS
9. The Committee had invited various stakeholders to present their views and suggestions regarding
the MSMED (Amendment) Bill, 2018 before the Committee. Few of the stakeholders could not appear
in person and preferred to send their written views for consideration of the Committee.
9.1 Federation of Indian Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (FISME) in their written submission
stated that the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) are defined under the MSMED Act, 2006
on the basis of capital investment made in plant and machinery. The proposed turnover based criterion
resolves many of the ills of earlier regime. It is transparent, as authorities could always cross check the
turnover through platforms such as GSTN. No CA certificate would be required to justify the turnover
criteria. The new criterion would open level playing field for new and old enterprises as the comparison
is not between historical investments and current investments but between current turnovers. Besides
being realistic, there is a flip side too. There are few sectors where investment is low but turnover is
high. For example gems and jewellery units, units producing Aluminium conductor steel-reinforced cable

10
(ACSR) among others. Many of the units have been under small category owing to investment criteria
but having high turnover ranging from ` 100 to 300 crore. They enjoy benefits under Public Procurement
Policy for MSEs, which mandates 20% set-aside for Micro and Small Units in all Central Government
purchases. Suddenly, the reserved pie of the cake is out of their reach. The Public Procurement Policy
would not be available for MSE Units having more than ` 75 crore annual turnover. Keeping in view that
in the proposed thresholds, there would be hardly any Micro and Small unit that could participate in high
volume Government tenders, it has been proposed by FISME that where smaller units have not bid, the
reserved category benefits could be passed on to Medium enterprises.
9.2 The Indian Banks' Association (IBA) also submitted its written views to the Committee. In their
written submission, they concurred with the views of doing away with the criterion of investment in
plant and machinery, and supported the annual turnover criterion for classification of MSMEs. In its
opinion turnover limit for micro enterprise may be enhanced from five crore rupees to twenty crore
rupees. This is in view of the fact that the banks have been given target to achieve under Priority Sector
Lending (PSL) for Micro Enterprises up to 7.5 per cent of ANBC or Credit Equivalent Amount of Off-
Balance Sheet Exposure, whichever is higher, as per RBI guidelines. In order to augment the lending and
increasing importance of service sector, RBI vide circular no. FIDD.CO.Plan.BC.18/04.09.01/2017-18
dated March 01, 2018 removed the applicable loan limits of ` 5 crore and ` 10 crore per borrower to
Micro/ Small and Medium Enterprises (Services) respectively, for classification under priority sector.
Accordingly, all bank loans to MSMEs, engaged in providing or rendering of services as defined in terms
of investment in equipment under MSMED Act, 2006, shall qualify under priority sector without any
credit cap. It also feels that, implementing change in the definition of classification from asset based to
annual turnover based could temporarily disrupt the MSME units. Finally, IBA opined that implementing
the turnover-based definition in a phased manner say one, two or three years could give big relief to
banks as well as MSME units.
9.3 All India Manufacturers Organisation (AIMO) an apex body for MSME in its written submission
stated that it feels if the Government implements the proposed turnover criteria, it will really help MSMEs
to survive in the market. AIMO also requested to reconsider the monthly payment of GST as most of
the Small Scale Units are struggling to pay GST owing to the prevailing payment cycle in the market
which is 90 - 120 days. Even large industries and Government agencies practice this payment cycle.
Whereas the Government policy of GST payable in the following month terribly affects the cash flow
and the MSME find it tough to cope with this situation and are unable to survive in the market.
9.4 In their submission, the Self Employed Women Association (SEWA) stated that SEWA, registered
as a central trade union is organising women workers of the informal economy since 1972 with the twin
goals of Full Employment and Self-Reliance. Currently, SEWA has organised 1.5 million workers in the
18 states of India. It favored the criteria for applicability of the Act to the economic enterprises of the
informal economy workers like cooperatives, associations, for / not for profit companies etc. should be
different than the proposed criteria as their investment is quite low and their annual turnover also is
uncertain in the growing stages. The provisions of Act should provide to protect this informal worker
economic enterprise and support them in their growth and achieving their development by making
changes in the current tax structure and eliminating them from GST. Exemption OR separate limits
should be set for the enterprises of informal workers. Furthermore, the clarification is required on the

11
time period for considering the limit of calculating turnover and there is a need for the clarification on
the newly incorporated enterprises and for which financial year, the turnover will be calculated. The
exclusion from the turnover needs to be specified clearly. Further, SEWA stated that it is difficult for
the economic enterprises of the poor workers of the informal sector to survive in this competitive world
as they lack capital, technology, marketable skills to survive. Moreover, the current structures/framework
are framed keeping in mind the formal sector enterprises. The informal sector enterprises find it difficult
to comply with and fit in the structures of the formal sector and are not able to develop due to these.
But at the same time such enterprises in informal economy are very important to benefit from economies
at scale, standardization, reach market and compete with the main stream and brand building etc. In the
formal sector enterprises the profit gets concentrated in the hands of few, whereas in the economic
enterprises of the informal sector like cooperatives, for / not for profit companies, associations etc. the
profit gets distributed in all the worker members. Thus, the economic enterprises in informal economy
are the surest way to empower them and to make them economically independent. The economic
enterprises need long-term investment in the sense of capital, technology and skills to thrive. SEW A
made the following suggestions:
(a) Financial Support as loan or invest at affordable rate with Bank guarantee by MSME.
(b) Long term capacity building on Marketing, Business/Institutional Management, to sustain their
business.
(c) Increase the annual sales slab up to ` 2 crores from the current slab of ` 20 lakhs, on GST
exemptions for the small and micro enterprises owned by the informal economy workers as
well as for those making procurement from the SHGs and Producers Group in order to benefit
themselves and groups from the economies at scale.
(d) The informal economy enterprise should not limit to enterprise employing less than 10 workers
but should also consider the constitution of the enterprises e.g. ownership and management
with the informal economy workers, shareholding among the workers, procurement / services
taken from the informal economy workers etc. The registration of such enterprises could be
done in consultation with the national level CBOs working in the said area.
9.5 Chamber of Indian Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (CIMSME) in their written submission
have stated that the existing method of classification of MSMEs based on investment in Plant and
Machinery disincentivises entrepreneurs to invest in modern, upgraded machinery in order to remain
classified as an MSME unit affecting quality and competitiveness of the product. With the turnover based
classification, the disincentive against modernization/upgradation of plant and machinery would be removed
as it also incentivises splitting up the manufacturing/service unit into more units to retain the MSME
character which would be more difficult under the turnover based classification which can be verified
from the GST Returns.
These loopholes in classification based on investment in plant and machinery allow entities, not
otherwise a MSME, to be classified as MSME and enables them wrongly to claim the benefit of self-
bidding under section 240-A of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, which is prohibited for non-
MSMEs under section 29A of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code. The new method of classification

12
would put a stop to this misuse also. Units with turnover of upto `250 crores generally fall under the
Small Scale category or the lower end of the Medium Scale category. Under the present system, such
units which may have an investment of more than `10 crores in plant and machinery, are unable to get
unrelated parties as bidders for their companies under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code. The turnover
based classification would enable such units to self bid for their assets under the Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code, thereby helping in mitigating the banks' NPAs to that extent. CIMSME favoring the
turnover-based classification clarified that turnover-based sanction of credit limits by banks and other
financial institutions would be more transparent as these can be verified with the GST returns of the
borrowing entity and this classification would encourage units to get GST registered and thereby help
in a more extensive formalization of the economy.
9.6 Many of the micro enterprises may not be GST registered today. However, assessment of credit
requirements of micro enterprises by banks primarily based on turnover method. So, identifying and
classifying micro enterprises on turnover basis would not therefore involve any more cumbersome
processes. Finally, in case there is no agreement on the changes, the Act could provide the entrepreneur
the option to have his unit classified under the old or the new method. CIMSME was of the view that
the classification method chosen by a particular unit should be allowed to be changed only in the 6th
financial year from the financial year in which the particular mode of classification was chosen. After
a few years, based on the experience gained, the option of the Plant and Machinery method could be
dropped altogether as it would ensure minimum dislocation and dissatisfaction.
9.7 The Chamber of Indian Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (CIMSME) in its deposition broadly
agreed with the suggestion of shifting from plant and machinery investment criteria to turnover criterion.
So far as the limits are concerned talks could be held for reducing and increasing turnover limits, though
it is felt, by and large, that the limits or the ceilings, are fine for micro, small and medium industries
in line with the insolvency and bankruptcy code.
9.8 During their deposition before the Committee the Coimbatore District Small Industries Association
(CODISSIA) welcomed the proposal of changing the criterion for classification of Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises from the existing criterion of investment in plant and machinery or equipment to a
new criterion based on annual turnover of the enterprises. However, CODISSIA suggested that people
engaged in manufacturing or production of goods pertaining to any industry and/or engaged in providing
and rendering of services should be placed in the category of Micro and Small Industries. They also
suggested that special attention should be paid and there should be a separate package and provision for
the development of Micro and Small Industries. It further stated that most of the Job Working Industries
fall under Micro and Small Industries category. The Micro & Small Industries are already burdened with
requirement of additional working capital due to higher slab of 18% GST, since most of the large
industries have credit period, ranging from 90 to 120 days. Therefore, it was further suggested that the
rate of GST for Job Order be brought down from 18% to 5% as it is done for textile industries with
ITC. If this is not done, then the Job Order Industries would be very badly hit due to working capital
shortage.
9.9 In their deposition before the Committee, Laghu Udyog Bharati (LUB) acknowledged and appreciated
the importance of Micro and Small Industry as the same has become more significant in the present

13
scenario with the increasing population and unmatched opportunities of employment. Further LUB added
that the proposal for change in classification was considered by a One Man Committee constituted by
the then Government to give recommendation for national policy for MSME. After having wide consultation
with stakeholders, it recommended that the redefining of MSMEs will not add any value to the development,
sustenance and growth of the enterprise or anything worthwhile over the present system. The One-Man
Committee was also of the view that the criterion in vogue may be continued. The representative of the
LUB also apprised the Committee about the turnover on an average in MSME Sector in all three
categories for the registered units vis-a-vis unregistered units. It also raised apprehensions about the
crowding away of benefits and incentives by large and medium units after the reclassification. This
apprehension had been highlighted by the One-Man Committee as stated by LUB that:
(i) The moment the upper limit is raised for small manufacturing to say 15 crores. a small group
of medium enterprise will henceforth become Small and will corner all the benefits meant for
MSEs in the credit and procurement;
(ii) At the end of FY 2011-12, the total credit supply was meeting only 38% of the total credit
leaving 62% credit gap; and
(iii) In terms of percentage, the share of finance gap in the three sub groups of MSMEs worked
out to: Micro 77%. Small 19% and Medium 4%.
9.10 Further, LUB stated that most of the countries in the world use a combination of investment in plant
and machinery along with number of persons employed by respective unit. According to LUB, the new
criterion does not take into account the type of activity whether manufacturing or trading and if trading
is registered as industrial enterprise then it will encourage trading only and manufacturing will be
disrupted. This will be against the objective of making India a manufacturing hub and Make in India
scheme. Since there is no limit on plant and machinery investment, the units will tend to procure costly
automatic machines thereby reducing job opportunities further. There are chances that once registered
as Micro or Small Enterprise, any MNC can produce product worth thousands of rupees and then market
it through various subsidiaries all registered as Micro/Small under GSTN. The criterion is dynamic in
nature and may change from one quarter to another quarter and this will create more confusion. The
basic objective of creating a separate Ministry for MSMEs to promote, support and protect them will
be defeated. MSEs not only provide maximum job opportunities but also ensure equitable and inclusive
growth. The future of India Micro and Small Industry, which is 2nd largest contributor to National GDP
and employment is at stake if the Definition Criterion is changed as proposed.
9.11 LUB urged for careful and judicious consideration and suggested that:
(a) The definition criterion of Micro and Small Industry should be based on threshold limits of
less than ` 50 lakhs for Micro and more than ` 50 lakh and less than ` 500 lakh for Small.
(b) It supported formulating a separate policy for Micro and Small Industries and exclude the
Medium sector from the purview of current MSMED Act, 2006 and make it as "Micro and
Small Industry Act".
(c) It also favored the applicability of MSI status "Indian Ownership and Management" Industries
only.

14
9.12 The Representatives from the Confederation of Women Entrepreneurs (COWE) stated before the
Committee that the Confederation of Women Entrepreneurs was formed in 2004 with the idea of
upliftment of women and promoting women entrepreneurs and now there are about one thousand women
who are strongly growing and helping each other in their different businesses and entrepreneur ship. The
first suggestion from COWE is not to consider the machinery as the part of criterion of turnover, since
a person with minimum investment could build up a turnover in crores. The procurement cost of raw
materials etc. of an enterprise of 250 crore turnover and 5 crore turnover would be extremely different.
The procurement cost of raw material for a firm with 5 crore turnover goes very high, Therefore, when
the raw material is bought at a higher cost, it is not possible to sell the product at a cost which is lower
than the bigger corporate or even the medium enterprise. It was pointed out that the turnover gap is very
huge and the small scale sector can never match with it and the biggest challenge faced by Micro and
Small units is to match the rates of bigger corporate. The second important point put forth before the
Committee was about skill development and industry wise knowledge as every industry has its own
specific problems. In tea industry the specifications would be different, in NGO it would be different.
The industries in their opinion today lacked the right knowledge and approach to the right department
where one can go and take their business to the next level.
10.1 Besides Dr. Prabhat Kumar, Ex-Cabinet Secretary and Ex-Governor, Jharkhand also appeared before
the Committee. The Committee invited him to hear the views as he headed the One-Man Committee
appointed by the Government to report on the problems that prevailed in MSME Sector. He stated that
being Chairman of the One-Man Committee on MSME, he interacted with a large number of associations
of Small, Medium and Micro Enterprises but did not find any consolidated or reasoned demand for such
a change in classification. Surprised on the proposed Amendment Bill, he stated that as in this age when
the small scale sector, the MSME sector is struggling with a number of problems - there is a stressed
economy, shrinking employment, liquidity crunch, marketing problems, depressed markets, depressed
exports, the government would bring a more comprehensive package for the whole sector. But only an
Amendment Bill have been preferred, which mainly deals with the method of classification of Micro,
Small and Medium enterprises. He feels that the method of classification may apparently appear to be
simple and innocent but it has wide implications and further added that there was no major reasoned
demand for such a change in classification. Moving on the discussion further, he also stated that there
were various suggestions and recommendation in his report, which could have been considered by the
government and brought in the form of different bills. Clarifying his statement, he also quoted few
examples viz. delayed payments, which should be dealt with urgently, problem of liquidity in the banking
sector for lending to the MSMEs, nurturing the Micro and Small Industries etc. He moved on to state
that objects and reasons say that the Amendment Bill, 2018 is to promote and develop the sector but he
feels that there is no value in this amendment which will develop or promote the sector. In fact it might
create some more difficulties, not major difficulties, because hundreds of thousands of small and micro
units will have to undergo this process of redetermination of their classification. Commenting on the
amendment proposed in the Bill before the Committee, he expressed his apprehension over the transition
that may take place in MSME Sector and added that it is not clear how the classification will be done
from year to year because if the turnover fluctuates due to market conditions, then the classification
would also change accordingly. The major concern which came up before the Committee from him was
on account of employment as MSME Sector has the greatest strength in providing the bulk of employment

15
outside the agriculture sector, at lesser investment than the organised sector. Therefore, he views the new
proposal of turnover criterion as an anti-employment measure. Therefore, his suggestion is that in a
country like India where the capital is scarce, it should continue to be with investment criterion.
10.2 Dr. H. P. Kumar, Ex-CMD, NSIC and Advisor appeared before the Committee and complimented
the Ministry of MSME for bringing out these amendments/changes in the definition of MSME. He further
stated that over the last decade, he has been associated with the MSME sector and it was observed that
there are great difficulties in certifying and identifying the Micro, Small and Medium enterprises based
on the definition which exist today i.e. investment in plant and machinery. He further stated that
sometimes the branch head or the implementing officers are not able to certify themselves as to whether
it is a micro, small or medium enterprises based on the investment criterion, in which case, they ask
for certificate by the Chartered Accountant or Audited Accounts or Audit Report inviting additional
expenditure on the part of the enterprise. Internationally, some countries classify on the basis of turnover,
some classify on the basis of employment, while some on the basis of the size of balance sheet and some
combine two or three criterion. However it is felt combining two or three criterion again becomes a
challenge for the dispensing authority to identify the accurate nature of the enterprise. Regarding the
employment criterion it has been a general observation that the moment the employment is restricted to
10 for micro or 20 for small enterprises, people may stop recruiting more people and they may try to
keep the number below 10 or 20 so that they do not start losing the advantages of a micro or small
enterprise. The other problem with the employment criterion as stated is seasonal nature of Industries.
Quoting the example of food processing industry, he added that during peak season, the employment
goes up and during lean season, employment may decrease. Additionally, the question of contractual
employment also comes up. So the uniformity in employment figures throughout the year becomes a
difficulty. Therefore, in his opinion, it is felt that the best way to classify is the turnover criterion and
especially with the introduction of GST. It is easy to understand and link it with the turnover, which
has been filed in the GST returns. In their written submission also PHD Chamber of Commerce and
Industry supported the proposed changes in the criteria of classification of MSMEs and complement the
Ministry of MSME, for bringing in a simple criteria which is easy to understand and apply and which
will not require any certification of Chartered Accountants or experts to identify the MSMEs. It was also
stated that the new criteria will promote ease of doing business as the process of identification and
dealings with MSMEs will become simpler and faster.
CLAUSE BY CLAUSE EXAMINATION OF THE BILL
11.1 During the course of the examination of the bill, the Committee took note of the concerns,
suggestions, views and opinions expressed by various experts and stakeholders and considered the
amendments proposed in the bill clause by clause, which is detailed in the succeeding paragraphs:
Clause 2 (a)
Clause 2(a) reads as under:
In the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), in section 7,-
(a) For sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely —
"(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 11B of the Industries (Development and
Regulation) Act, 1951, (65 of 1951) the Central Government may, for the purposes of this Act, by

16
notification and having regard to the provisions of sub-sections (4) and (5), classify any class or
classes of enterprises, whether proprietorship, Hindu undivided family, association of persons, co-
operative society, partnership firm, company or undertaking, by whatever name called, engaged in
the manufacture or production of goods pertaining to any industry specified in the First Schedule
to the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, or engaged in providing or rendering
of services, as-
(i) a micro enterprise, where the annual turnover does not exceedfive crore rupees;
(ii) a small enterprise, where the annual turnover is more than five crore rupees but does not
exceed Seventy-five crore rupees;
(iii) a medium enterprise, where the annual turnover is more than seventy-five crore rupees but does
not exceed two hundred and fifty crore rupees";
(1A) The Central Government may, by notification, vary turnover limits, which shall not exceed
thrice the limits specified in sub-Section (1) for the purposes of development of micro, small and
medium enterprises."
11.2 The Committee while taking oral evidence heard the views of the experts on the subject and
stakeholders and got the mixed views, while some were for change in the present investment criterion
to turnover criterion while some others wanted to continue with the present investment in plant and
machinery criterion with a change in the investment limits prescribed for Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises. Few of them also preferred to include the employment criteria in combination with turnover
criteria for classification of the MSMEs. Their assertion is that MSMEs being the largest employer next
to the agriculture with highest potential of generating large-scale employment in future, the MSME should
be classified on the basis of number of employees.
11.3 The M/o MSME while clarifying the query raised by the Members of the Committee as well as
stakeholders stated that post GST, there is a need to put in place a non-discretionary, transparent and
objective definition of the MSMEs to further promote the ease of doing business. Therefore, turnover
criterion would result in an automotive and unambiguous classification of enterprises. There was a need
to provide certain flexibility to the Government to modify the definition criteria specified under the
MSMED Act to cater to the need of aligning them with the changing business ecosystem. The problems
with employment criteria in Indian context is non-availability of reliable/verifiable sectoral data and the
seasonal variance in labour engagement. The employment system will also increase the need for inspection
as in the case of investment criterion, which will involve huge transaction cost. He apprised the Committee
that the turnover criterion will encourage investment in modernization.
11.4 Further, the Committee got the feedback from various stakeholders that due to the ceiling of
investments in the definition of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, such enterprises have the tendency
to keep the investment in plant and machinery restricted, so as to ensure that they continue to get the
benefits that accrue to their respective categories. This, in turn, hampers the process of their modernization
and also competitiveness, by keeping capital formation industries at a low level. Hence, the turnover-
based classification will encourage MSME to reap benefit by moving to a higher category, which is an

17
automotive process linked to the GST Network. As a matter of fact, higher limits of turnover would
incentivise the MSMEs, to invest and grow, without worrying about inspections etc.
11.5 During the examination of MSMED (Amendment) Bill, 2018, the Committee has come across
different views of experts and stakeholders with regard to re-classification of MSMEs based on their
annual turnover instead of the existing investment in plant and machinery/equipment, as well as consideration
of employment along with the annual turnover for re-classification of MSMEs.
11.6 The Committee was given to understand by the views expressed by the Ministry of MSME that
in case employment is factored along with turnover to make a composite criterion for classification, the
major impediment will be the absence of a reliable/verifiable and updated data on employment. Moreover,
in India, the manpower engaged in MSMEs has a significant seasonal variance and there is always a
possibility of continuous inter-sectoral mobility i.e. from agriculture to manufacturing or service sector
and vice-versa depending on the demands and supply of registered manpower. Inspection and certification
of employees engaged would be required as in the case of investment criteria, which will also involve
huge transaction cost.
11.7 The Committee notes that the present classification of MSMEs based on investment in plant
and machinery is effective since the adoption of the MSMED Act, 2006. Therefore, the extant
financial limits fixed in 2006 for MSMEs are no longer relevant given the impact of inflation.
Most of the Industry Associations and stakeholders have, therefore, expressed the need for
changing the present criteria of investment in plant and machinery to annual turnover as
criterion for classification of MSMEs.
11.8 The Committee notes that the present classification based on investment in plant and
machinery also has a number of disadvantages as it prevents MSMEs to become competitive in
the market, inhibits investment to modernize, upscale, improve productivity and technology
upgradation due to rigor of investment thresholds. On the other hand, taking turnover as a
criteria shall overcome the said shortcomings as it can be pegged with reliable data available in
GST Network and other methods of ascertaining, which will
(i) help in having a non discretionary, transparent and objective criteria and will eliminate
the need for inspections;
(ii) make the classification system progressive and evolutionary;
(iii) help in overcoming the uncertainties associated with the classification based on
investment in plant and machinery/equipment and employment;
(iv) improve the ease of doing business; and
(v) provide flexibility to the Government to fine-tune the classification of MSMEs in response
to changing economic scenario without resorting to the amendment of MSMED Act.
11.9 The Committee, however, feels that wide gap in turnover limits i.e. upto ````` 5 crore for a
Micro unit and between ````` 5 crores and 75 crores for a Small unit is exorbitantly high because
a unit with a turnover of ````` 6 crores and a unit with a turnover of ````` 75 crores would both be

18
categorized as 'Small' which seems to be incongruous. The Committee accordingly desires that
the Ministry may consider this aspect while finalizing the Amendment Bill.
The Committee accordingly adopted the above Clause 2(a) of the Bill, subject to the aforesaid
recommendation.
Clause 2 (b)
Clause 2(b) reads as under:
(b)in sub-section (9), –
(i) for the words "criterion of investment", the words "criterion of annual turnover" shall
be substituted;
(ii) for the words "as part of small enterprises", the words "as part of small and medium
enterprises" shall be substituted.
Clause 3
Clause 3 reads as under:
4. In section 14 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the words, brackets and figure "sub-
section (1)of" shall be omitted.
11.10 As the amendments proposed in clause 2 (b) and clause 3 are only consequential changes
in the provisions of the Principal Act, the said clauses does not call for any examination or
comments and hence the same are adopted by the Committee.
Section 2 (Definitions) of the MSMED Act, 2006.
11.11The Committee while examining the Bill observed that the proposed amendment in Section 7 (1)
also entails consequent amendment in clause (g), (h) and (m) of Section 2 (definitions) of the MSMED
Act, 2006. However, there was no mention in the Amendment Bill for subsequent amendments in the
definition under Section 2.
11.12 The Ministry of MSME clarified that the basic objective of changing the Act is in Section 7(1).
The changes in definitions under clause (g), (h) and (m) of Section 2 of the MSMED Act, 2006 will
be taken up consequently. The Committee further sought clarification on this issue from Legislative
Department (M/o Law and Justice) and the Legislative Department was in agreement with the observation
made by the Committee and proposed draft Amendment as under:-
In the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006, (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), in Section 2,-
(i) In clause (g), for the words, brackets, letters and figures "sub-clause (iii) of clause (a) or
sub-clause (iii) of clause (b) of sub-section (1)", the words, brackets and figures "clause
(iii) of sub-section (If shall be substituted;

19
(ii) In clause (h), for the words, brackets, letters and figures "sub-clause (i) of clause (a) or sub-
clause (i) of clause (b) of sub-section (1)”, the words, brackets and figures "clause (i) of sub-
section (1)" shall be substituted;
(iii) In clause (m), for the words, brackets, letters and figures "sub-clause (ii) of clause (a) or
sub-clause (ii) of clause (b) of sub-section (1)", the words, brackets and figures "clause
(ii) of sub-section (1)” shall be substituted.'
11.13 The Committee recommends that as agreed to by both Ministry of MSME and Ministry of
Law and Justice, the amendments in clause (g), (h) & (m) of Section 2 (definition) of the MSMED
Act, 2006 be carried out simultaneously to ensure complete consequential amendment.
11.14 Taking into consideration the views of majority of the stakeholders and the arguments put
forth by the M/o MSME, the Committee feels that instead of the current classification based on
investment in plant & machinery/equipment, the MSMEs could be classified based on their
annual turnover as proposed in the Bill.
General Observations/Recommendations
12.1 With the proposed change in the classification of MSMEs, it is more likely that large
number of Enterprises would come under the Ministry of MSME. The Committee, therefore,
desires that the Ministry may make all-out efforts to obtain increased Budget Allocation for the
MSME Sector. It accordingly desires that the Ministry may take up the issue with Ministry of
Finance in right earnestness.
12.2 To allay the apprehensions of some of the stakeholders, in view of the proposed change in
definition of MSMEs, the Ministry has stated that necessary adjustment to safeguard the interests
of MSEs would be done. The Committee notes the flexibility adduced by the Ministry to make
necessary course corrections in the policy and schemes for incentives to the MSEs, so that they
do not get adversely affected.
12.3 The Committee is of the opinion that there is some weightage in the apprehensions expressed
by the stakeholders as the Committee too feels that possibilities do exist for the large corporates
or the MNCs to corner the incentives meant for the MSMEs, which has in fact, been explicitly
exhibited in the Research Study conducted by the One-Man Committee, wherein the share of
finance gap amongst the three sub-groups of MSMEs in itself is exorbitant. The Committee,
therefore, desires that the Ministry may put in place suitable policy interventions to avert such
situations, which may prove to be catastrophic to the Indian Industry and Economy as a whole.
The Committee hopes that scheme-specific measure to safeguard the MSME Sector wherever
necessary will be taken up soon after provisions of the Bill are made operational.
12.4 The Committee acknowledges the fact that Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises (MSME)
Sector plays a significant role in the growth of Indian Economy. It also provides the 2nd largest
employment next to Agriculture Sector. MSME also contribute enormously to the socio-economic
well-being and progress of our country. It is therefore, imperative to groom and nurture the
MSME sector .

20
12.5 The Committee is unable to fathom the argument adduced by the Ministry that in the case
of employment criteria in the Indian context, there is non-availability of reliable data and that
there is problem of seasonal variance in labour engagement. The Committee feels that in a
labour-intensive country like India, appropriate focus is required to be concentrated on employment
generation and the best and most accurate platform for this is the MSME Sector, which provides
the greatest employment opportunities, next only to the Agricultural Sector. Therefore, the
Committee recommends that the Government should take up the exercise to assess the number
of persons employed in MSME Sector and consider employment too as a criteria while classifying
MSMEs.
12.6 The Committee notes that the turnover as on 01st April of a particular financial year will
be taken as the turnover of that enterprise for the whole financial year. The turnover of some
enterprises may fluctuate depending on their business, which may result in the change of the
classification of the enterprise. The Committee recommends that in order to address the issue,
scheme-specific safeguards should be adopted by the Ministry so that large enterprises do not
grab the benefits meant for MSEs.
12.7 The Committee feels that with the adoption of new criteria, large number of Micro Enterprises
will benefit from various Government schemes. Mor eover, complicated calculations for paperwork
and requirement of certification by CAs or experts would be settled once for all.
12.8 During the examination of MSMED (Amendment) Bill, 2018, the Committee has come
across different views of experts and stakeholders with regard to re-classification of MSMEs
based on their annual turnover instead of the existing investment in plant and machinery/
equipment, as well as consideration of employment along with the annual turnover for re-
classification of MSMEs.
12.9 However, the Committee feels that the definition/classification based on employment criteria
may not help MSMEs to generate more employment as it appears only an enabling provision and
not an instrument in itself to create more employment. The proposed new criterion based on
Turnover will encompass all enterprises with turn over upto ````` 250 crore.

21
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
1. The Committee notes that the present classification of MSMEs based on investment in plant
and machinery is effective since the adoption of the MSMED Act, 2006. Therefore, the extant
financial limits fixed in 2006 for MSMEs are no longer relevant given the impact of inflation.
Most of the Industry Associations and stakeholders have, therefore, expressed the need for
changing the present criteria of investment in plant and machinery to annual turnover as
criterion for classification of MSMEs. (Para 11.7)
2. The Committee notes that the present classification based on investment in plant and
machinery also has a number of disadvantages as it prevents MSMEs to become competitive in
the market, inhibits investment to modernize, upscale, improve productivity and technology
upgradation due to rigor of investment thresholds. On the other hand, taking turnover as a
criteria shall overcome the said shortcomings as it can be pegged with reliable data available in
GST Network and other methods of ascertaining, which will
(i) help in having a non discretionary, transparent and objective criteria and will eliminate
the need for inspections;
(ii) make the classification system progressive and evolutionary;
(iii) help in overcoming the uncertainties associated with the classification based on
investment in plant & machinery/equipment and employment
(iv) improve the ease of doing business; and
(v) provide flexibility to the Government to fine-tune the classification of MSMEs in response
to changing economic scenario without resorting to the amendment of MSMED Act.
(Para 11.8)
3. The Committee, however, feels that wide gap in turnover limits i.e. upto ````` 5 crore for a
Micro unit and between ````` 5 crores and 75 crores for a Small unit is exorbitantly high because
a unit with a turnover of ````` 6 crores and a unit with a turnover of ````` 75 crores would both be
categorized as 'Small' which seems to be incongruous. The Committee accordingly desires that
the Ministry may consider this aspect while finalizing the Amendment Bill. The Committee
accordingly adopted the above Clause 2(a) of the Bill, subject to the aforesaid recommendation.
(Para 11.9)
4. As the amendments proposed in clause 2 (b) and clause 3 are only consequential changes
in the provisions of the Principal Act, the said clauses does not call for any examination or
comments and hence the same are adopted by the Committee. (Para 11.10)
5. The Committee recommends that as agreed to by both Ministry of MSME and Ministry of
Law and Justice, the amendments in clause (g), (h) & (m) of section 2 (definition) of the MSMED
Act, 2006 be carried out simultaneously to ensure complete consequential amendment.
(Para 11.13)
21

22
6. Taking into consideration the views of majority of the stakeholders and the arguments put
forth by the M/o MSME, the Committee feels that instead of the current classification based on
investment in plant & machinery/equipment, the MSMEs could be classified based on their
annual turnover as proposed in the Bill. (Para 11.14)
7. With the proposed change in the classification of MSMEs, it is more likely that large
number of Enterprises would come under the Ministry of MSME. The Committee, therefore,
desires that the Ministry may make all-out efforts to obtain increased Budget Allocation for the
MSME Sector. It accordingly desires that the Ministry may take up the issue with Ministry of
Finance in right earnestness. (Para 12.1)
8. To allay the apprehensions of some of the stakeholders, in view of the proposed change in
definition of MSMEs, the Ministry has stated that necessary adjustment to safeguard the interests
of MSEs would be done. The Committee notes the flexibility adduced by the Ministry to make
necessary course corrections in the policy and schemes for incentives to the MSEs, so that they
do not get adversely affected. (Para 12.2)
9. The Committee is of the opinion that there is some weightage in the apprehensions expressed
by the stakeholders as the Committee too feels that possibilities do exist for the large corporates
or the MNCs to corner the incentives meant for the MSMEs, which has in fact, been explicitly
exhibited in the Research Study conducted by the One-Man Committee, wherein the share of
finance gap amongst the three sub-groups of MSMEs in itself is exorbitant. The Committee,
therefore, desires that the Ministry may put in place suitable policy interventions to avert such
situations, which may prove to be catastrophic to the Indian Industry and Economy as a whole.
The Committee hopes that scheme-specific measure to safeguard the MSME Sector wherever
necessary will be taken up soon after provisions of the Bill are made operational. (Para 12.3)
10. The Committee acknowledges the fact that Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises (MSME)
Sector plays a significant role in the growth of Indian Economy. It also provides the 2nd largest
employment next to Agriculture Sector. MSME also contribute enormously to the socio-economic
well-being and progress of our country. It is therefore, imperative to groom and nurture the
MSME sector. (Para 12.4)
11. The Committee is unable to fathom the argument adduced by the Ministry that in the case
of employment criteria in the Indian context, there is non-availability of reliable data and that
there is problem of seasonal variance in labour engagement. The Committee feels that in a
labour-intensive country like India, appropriate focus is required to be concentrated on employment
generation and the best and most accurate platform for this is the MSME Sector, which provides
the greatest employment opportunities, next only to the Agricultural Sector. Therefore, the
Committee recommends that the Government should take up the exercise to assess the number
of persons employed in MSME Sector and consider employment too as a criteria while classifying
MSMEs. (Para 12.5)
12. The Committee notes that the turnover as on 01st April of a particular financial year will
be taken as the turnover of that enterprise for the whole financial year. The turnover of some

23
enterprises may fluctuate depending on their business, which may result in the change of the
classification of the enterprise. The Committee, therefore, recommends that in order to address
the issue, scheme-specific safeguards should be adopted by the Ministry so that large enterprises
do not grab the benefits meant for MSMEs. (Para 12.6)
13. The Committee feels that with the adoption of new criteria, large number of Micro Enterprises
will benefit from various Government schemes. Mo reover, complicated calculations for paperwork
and requirement of certification by CAs or experts would be settled once for all. (Para 12.7)
14. During the examination of MSMED (Amendment) Bill, 2018, the Committee has come
across different views of experts and stakeholders with regard to re-classification of MSMEs
based on their annual turnover instead of the existing investment in plant and machinery/
equipment, as well as consideration of employment along with the annual turnover for
re-classification of MSMEs. (Para 12.8)
15. However, the Committee feels that the definition/classification based on employment criteria
may not help MSMEs to generate more employment as it appears only an enabling provision and
not an instrument in itself to create more employment. The proposed nev criteria based on
Turnover will encompass all enterprises with turn over upto ````` 250 crore. (Para 12.9)

MINUTES

III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 12.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 01 st November, 2018 in Committee Room 'A',
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri G.C. Chandrashekhar
3. Shri Ram Narain Dudi
4. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque
5. Shri Shwait Malik
6. Shri Sanjay Seth
7. Shri Amar Singh
8. Shri T. G. Venkatesh
9. Dr. Amee Yajnik
LOK SABHA
10. Shri Birendra Kumar Chaudhary
11. Shri G . Hari
12. Shrimati Darshana Vikram Jardosh
13. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato
14. Shri Ramsinh Pataliyabhai Rathwa
15. Shri Konda Vishweshwar Reddy
16. Shri Raj Kumar Saini
17. Shri Rajveer (Raju Bhaiya) Singh
18. Shrimati Savitri Thakur
19. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare
SECRETARIAT
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Director
27

28
Shri J.K. Mallick, Additional Director
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Deputy Secretary
Shri Ajin J.R., Under Secretary
Shrimati Renu Sreekanth, Committee Officer
Shri Devinder Singh Bisht, Committee Officer
Ministry of MS&ME
Dr. Arun Kumar Panda, Secretary
Shri Ram Mohan Mishra, AS & DC
Shri Bandla Srinivas, Joint Secretary (ARI)
Shri Sudhir Garg, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Alka Nangia Arora, Joint Secretary
Legislative Department, M/o Law and Justice
Shri Udaya Kumara, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
Shri Diwakar Singh, Additional Legislative Counsel
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee, Secretary, M/o MSME and
officers from the Legislative Department (Ministry of Law & Justice). The Chairman informed about the
referring of Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises Development (Amendment) Bill, 2018 by the Hon'ble
Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consultation with the Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha, to this Committee for
examination and report thereon within 3 months. The Chairman then gave a brief introduction of the
proposed Amendment Bill, which seeks to change the criterion of classification of Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises from the existing criterion of investment in plant and machinery or equipment to a
new criterion based on annual turnover of the enterprises, with a view to promote ease of doing business
and to put in place a non-discretionary and transparent system in alignment with the current economic
scenario of the country.
3. Thereafter, the Chairman invited the Secretary, M/o MSME to apprise the Committee about the need
to introduce the Amendment Bill proposing a change in classification of MSMEs. The Secretary, M/o
MSME explained that as far as the global ranking of Ease of Doing Business is concerned, India has
improved its ranking in the last four years considerably and is now ranked at 77 instaed of 142. Further,
after the implementation of demonetisation and GST, MSMEs are registering under GSTN and are
shifting from informal economic framework to formal economic framework. Therefore, the classfication
criterion required to be made more transparent, objective and non-discretionary. Thereafter, the Secretary
asked his colleague to make a brief Powerpoint presentation about the proposed Amendment Bill.

29
4. A brief presentation was then made by Shri Ram Mohan Mishra, AS & DC. He explained various
problems and hindrances that are being encountered with the present provisions of classifcation of
MSMEs such as difficulty in verification of the MSMEs leading to increased transaction cost, Inspector
Raj etc. Also, it is being regarded as anti-growth, anti-investment and anti-modernisation and the way
out to all these difficulties was to introduce the proposed Amendment Bill, which shall put in place a
transparent, non-discriminatory and online system of verification of MSMEs. It requires no physical
verification at all because the annual turnover data is readily available on GSTN.
5. After the presentation, Secretary, M/o MSME apprised the Committee about the various criteria
prevailing in different countries and the non-feasibility in including employment as criteria due to seasonal
employment variations and various other factors. The Secretary stressed upon the suitability of annual
turnover based criteria for Indian MSMEs.
6. Thereafter, the Members raised queries such as fluctuation in turnover leading to confusion in
classification of the enterprises in which a micro can become small and small can become micro over
a period of time. The Secretary M/o MSME clarified that the turnover data as on 01st April of the
corresponding year shall be taken as bench-mark for classification of enterprises. Majority of the
Members stressed upon including the employment parameter also as one of the criteria besides turnover,
based on the fact that most of the western countries have adopted employment as one of the criteria
for classification of MSMEs.
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Meeting was kept.
8. The Committee adjourned at 01.42 
P.M.

30
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 12.00 noon on Friday, the 9 th November, 2018 in Committee Room 'A',
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri G.C. Chandrashekhar
3. Shri Ram Narain Dudi
4. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque
5. Shri Shwait Malik
6. Shri Amar Singh
7. Shri Tiruchi Siva
8. Dr. Amee Yajnik
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Birendra Kumar Chaudhary
10. Shri Asrarul Haque Mohammad
11. Shri Ramsinh Pataliyabhai Rathwa
12. Shri Raj Kumar Saini
SECRETARIAT
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Director
Shri J.K. Mallick, Additional Director
Shrimati Sreeja. V ., Deputy Secretary
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Deputy Secretary
Shri Ajin J.R., Under Secretary
Shri Devinder Singh Bisht, Committee Officer
30

31
WITNESSES
PHD Chamber of Commerce & Industry
Dr. H.P. Kumar, Ex-CMD, NSIC & Advisor
Chamber of Indian Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (CIMSME)
Shri S. K. Gagroo
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed all the Members of the Committee and informed the Committee
that representatives from the PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry and Chamber of Indian Micro,
Small and Medium Enterprises, New Delhi would submit their views and opinion on the Micro, Small
& Medium Enterprises Development (Amendment) Bill, 2018. The Chairman then invited the witnesses
to put forth their views.
3. Dr. H.P. Kumar, Ex-CMD, NSIC & Advisor to PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry thanked
the Committee for giving him the opportunity to express his views on the Amendment Bill. He then
complimented the M/o MSME for bringing the proposed Amendment Bill to rectify the difficulties that
are being encountered with the current criteria in certifying and identifying the Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises. He mentioned about the difficulties they faced in certifying and identifying the enterprises
and the need of the Chartered Accountants for that purpose, which involved additional expenditure on
the part of the enterprises. He apprised that in many western countries, including Europen Union, the
criterion of classification is either employment or turnover and in some countries even both the criterion
are considered. But the combination criterion sometimes poses challenge for the authorities to ascertain
properly about the enterprise(s). He also apprised the Committee about the difficulties likely to be
encountered in adopting the employment criterion like enterprises refraining to recruit more employees
for fear of losing the benefits meant for micro and small enterprises and complexity involved due to
seasonal nature of many employments. He concluded that the turnover criterion is best suited for the
current scenario, especially after the introduction of GST because it is easy to understand and apply,
easily verifiable, and it also promotes ease of doing business.
4. Sh. S.K. Gagroo from Chamber of Indian Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises too agreed to the
new proposed criterion of shifting from plant and machinery to the annual turnover-based criteria and
also with the views expressed by Dr. H.P. Kumar about the suitability of the proposed annual turnover
criterion, especially after the introduction of GST, which made the verification of MSMEs simpler and
easier. About changing the current turnover limits, he said that this would be the best method and is in
line with Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code. He further added that under the present investment criteria,
enterprises were incentivised not to invest in plant and machinery for fear of losing the benefits and
remain in the same bracket but under the turnover criterion, enterprises would be encouraged to invest
in plant and machinery and upgrade them to become more competitive. The new criteria will also
promote transparency and easy verification of enterprises. Further, he said that employment criterion will
disincentivise the labour-intensive industries.
5. Thereafter, Members made suggestions for considering employment as one of the criteria besides
turnover, on variable basis like the models of western countries as the MSME Sector is meant for

32
providing employment to people in large number. A Member had pointed out that there is a huge gap
between the turnover limits for Micro and Small enterprises and therefore suggested for bringing down
the upper limit of turnover of Small Industries to ` 50 crores as against the suggested limit of ` 75 crore
in the proposed Amendment Bill. Most of the Members expressed their strong views for employment
generation to ensure social justice and in larger public interest.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Meeting was kept.
7. The Committee adjourned at 01.03 P.M.

33
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 12.00 noon on Friday, the 16 th November, 2018 in Committee Room
No. 4, Parliament House Annexe Extn. Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Amar Singh
3. Shri Tiruchi Siva
4. Dr. Amee Yajnik
LOK SABHA
5. Shrimati Ranjanben Dhananjay Bhatt
6. Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena
7. Shri Ramsinh Pataliyabhai Rathwa
8. Shrimati Savitri Thakur
SECRETARIAT
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Director
Shri J.K. Mallick, Additional Director
Shrimati Sreeja.V., Deputy Secretary
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Deputy Secretary
Shri Ajin J.R., Under Secretary
Shrimati Renu Sreekanth, Committee Officer
Shri Devinder Singh Bisht, Committee Officer
Ministry of MS&ME
Shri Piyush Srivastava, Addl. Development Commissioner
Expert
Dr. Prabhat Kumar, Ex-Cabinet Secretary
Laghu Udyog Bharati
Shri Jitendra Gupta, National President
Shri Govind Lele, National General Secretary
33

34
Coimbatore District Small Industries Association (CODISSIA)
Shri Ramamurthy Ranganathan, President
Shri Ramesh Babu MV, Vice-President
Confederation of Women Entrepreneurs (COWE)
Ms. Meenu Maggon
Ms. Payal Agarwal
Ms. Ruchi Rastogi
2. The Committee expressed its grief and sorrow on the demise of the Parliamentary Affairs Minister
Sh. Anant Kumar and prayed for the peace of the departed soul. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the
Members, Expert/Representatives from various Associations and officer from the M/o MSME. The
Chairman recalled the last meeting held on 9th November, 2018 wherein views and suggestions of some
stakeholders were heard on the MSMED (Amendment) Bill, 2018.
3. The Chairman then invited Dr. Prabhat Kumar, Ex-Cabinet Secretary and Ex Governor, Jharkhand
for giving his views on the subject. Dr. Prabhat Kumar thanked the Committee for inviting him. He
apprised the Committee about his association with the MSME Sector as Cabinet Secretary. He, however,
expressed surprise over the proposed Amendment Bill pointing out the major challenges that MSME
sector is facing today i.e., stressed economy, shrinking employment, liquidity crunch, marketing problem,
depressed market etc. He opined that there should have been a more comprehensive package for the
whole MSME Sector by the Government instead of this Amendment Bill. He mentioned about the One-
Man Committee appointed by the then Government which was chaired by him. He specifically mentioned
about nurturing of small and micro enterprises on priority and the problems being faced by them such
as delayed payments, liquidity problem etc. which should have been dealt with on urgent basis. Referring
to the Statement of Objects and Reasons, which inter alia  claims to promote and develop the sector,
he pointed out that the Amendment will create difficulties instead, because of redetermination of many
of the micro and small units where micro may become small and medium might become small and start
availing benefits meant for the small sector. As far as employment is concerned, he termed it as an anti-
employment measure. He concluded that while dealing with the policy as Chairman of One-Man Committee
and having spoken to the representatives of various Associations, he did not find any demand for change
in classification criteria and felt that there was a need to re-look the entire matter again, especially from
employment point of view. In an answer to a Member's query, he clearly said that in a country like India
where capital is scarce, we should continue with the current investment criteria and also expressed his
apprehension on the turnover criteria as this may undergo changes with the passage of time. He further
stressed on the development of MSME clusters in rural areas with all the facilities and need of establishing
Entrepreneur Development Institutes to provide facilities at the village level. He also stressed the need
to conduct a holistic study for classification based on investment, employment and turnover.

35
4. Thereafter, the Chairman invited representatives from Laghu Udyog Bharati. The Representatives
from Laghu Udyog Bharati concurred with the views expressed by Dr. Prabhat Kumar mentioning about
their written submission containing many observations from One-Man Committee Report of Dr. Prabhat
Kumar. They stated that with turnover criteria, there would be no investment and if at all, it will be large
investment in which no one will give employment. Laghu Udyog Bharati was in favour of investment
criteria with only Indian ownership of MSMEs with removal of medium units from the existing criteria.
It stated that if the turnover is taken as criteria then there will be no investment and consequently there
will be no employment. It further added that second Labour Commission had suggested to have a
separate Small Factories Act for small units and also expressed their apprehensions about international
companies operating as micro and small enterprises and reaping the benefits meant for them after the
Amendment is adopted.
5. Thereafter, the Chairman invited representatives from Coimbatore District Small Industries Association
(CODISSIA) to express their views. The representatives of CODISSIA expressed gratitude for giving
them an opportunity of being heard and present their views on the Amendment Bill. It stated that there
should be separate package for Micro and Small Industries because this sector is a large employment
provider of the country and untrained people are getting trained by working in this sector. It specifically
mentioned about the problems being faced by the micro and small units such as taxation, procurement
under PPP, etc. Besides, CODISSIA emphasised on treating micro and small units as separate entities for
their development. It stated that micro and small units are surviving on their own working capital and
they have to pay heavy interest and therefore, their profit margin is very low. Some interest subvention
scheme and other beneficial schemes should be devised for these units. The CODISSIA was of the view
that the 25% reservation in Government purchases should be restricted to the Micro and Small Enterprises
and that Medium Enterprises should be excluded from this. Further, it also viewed that identification or
classification of any Enterprise or Industry is compulsory from the day it starts operating, contrary to
the provisions proposed in the Amendment Bill i.e. 'turnover' criteria, which in fact can be assessed only
after completion of a year. It also raised the need for implementation of Small Factories Act besides
Apprenticeship Act and Skill Development Act.
6. The representatives from Confederation of Women Entrepreneurs (COWE) were then invited by the
Chairman to present their views on the Bill. They supported the turnover criteria with a suggestion that
proper weightage should be given to employability, turnover as well as investment without considering
machinery as a part of the criteria. They pointed out the huge gap between the turnover of small unit
and medium unit in the proposed new criteria and also laid stress for making entrepreneurship and
industry specific skill development provisions.
7. After listening to the views of the representatives from various Associations, the Chairman asked
the officer from M/o MSME to clarify the queries raised during the discussion. The officer reiterated
the submission made by the Secretary and Addl. Secretary, M/o MSME in the Committee's meeting held
on 1st November, 2018 and further added that there was a demand from Industry Associations for
changing the criteria as the scenario has drastically changed after the introduction of MSMED Act in
2006. He also stated about the difficulties being faced in the verification process of the enterprises with
the current criteria of investment in plant and machinery and the resolution of the difficulties with the
new proposed turnover criteria along with its benefits. It was also assured before the Committee to bring

36
in certain safeguards to remove apprehensions of the entrepreneurs in MSME Sector and also to bring
in a policy for 25% procurement of the PSUs from Micro and Small Sector.
8. Thereafter, Members raised queries and made suggestions. A Member queried about increasing the
current limit of ` 25 lakh to ` 50 lakh for micro units in the current criteria and also asked whether
this proposed amendment has been consulted with the Advisory Committee or not and to inform the
Committee in this regard. Another Member raised the issue of fast emerging Chinese threat and the
measures to be taken to tackle the threat. Some Members laid emphasis on inclusion of employment
generation in the proposed Amendment Bill in the MSME sector.
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Meeting was kept.
10. The Committee adjourned at 01.16 P.M.

37
VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 5.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 27th December, 2018 in Room No. 62, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
Shri Tiruchi Siva — In Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri G.C. Chandrashekhar
3. Shri Ram Narain Dudi
4. Shri Sanjay Seth
5. Dr. Amee Yajnik
LOK SABHA
6. Shrimati Ranjanben Dhananjay Bhatt
7. Shri Birendra Kumar Chaudhary
8. Shri G . Hari
9. Shrimati Darshana Vikram Jardosh
10. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato
11. Shri Ramsinh Pataliyabhai Rathwa
12. Shri Konda Vishweshwar Reddy
13. Shri Rameshwar Teli
14. Shrimati Dev (Moon Moon Sen) Varma
15. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare
SECRETARIAT
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Director
Shri J.K. Mallick, Additional Director
Shrimati Sreeja. V ., Deputy Secretary
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Deputy Secretary
37

38
Shri Ajin J.R., Under Secretary
Shrimati Renu Sreekanth, Committee Officer
Shri Devinder Singh Bisht, Committee Officer
Shri Anuj Verma, Assistant Research Officer
In the absence of the Chairman, DRPSC on Industry, Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh, Shri Tiruchi Siva,
MP, Rajya Sabha and Member of the Committee was authorised to chair the meeting.
2. At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members of the Committee to the
meeting and apprised about the agenda of the meeting in brief. The Committee then considered and
discussed the draft 294th Report on Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development (Amendment)
Bill, 2018. After a brief discussion, the Committee unanimously adopted the said draft report. The
Committee also authorised Sh. Tiruchi Siva, Member of the Committee to sign the Report on behalf of
the Committee.
3. The Committee, thereafter decided to present 294th Report in both the Houses of Parliament on the
28th December, 2018. The Committee also decided to present 291st, 292nd and 293rd Reports of
Committee on the same day. These Reports were adopted by the Committee on 21st December, 2018.
The Committee authorised Shri Tiruchi Siva, MP Rajya Sabha and Member of the Committee and in his
absence Dr. Amee Yajnik, MP , Rajya Sabha, to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Birendra
Kumar Chaudhary, MP Lok Sabha and in his absence Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena, MP Lok Sabha, to lay
the Reports in the Lok Sabha.
The Committee then adjourned at 5.15 P.M.

39
ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-I
AS I NTRODUCED IN L OK S ABHA
THE MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES
DEVELOPMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
A
BILL
to amend the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development
Act, 2006.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises Development (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development
Act, 2006 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section
7,—
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 11B
of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, the
Central Government may, for the purposes of this Act, by
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 102 of 2018
Amendment
of section 727 of 2006
65 of 1951
41

42
notification and having regard to the provisions of sub-sections
(4) and (5), classify any class or classes of enterprises, whether
proprietorship, Hindu undivided family, association of persons,
co-operative society, partnership firm, company or undertaking,
by whatever name called, engaged in the manufacture or
production of goods pertaining to any industry specified in the
First Schedule to the Industries (Development and Regulation)
Act, 1951, or engaged in providing or rendering of services,
as—
(i) a micro enterprise, where the annual turnover does
not exceed five crore rupees;
(ii) a small enterprise, where the annual turnover is more
than five crore rupees but does not exceed seventy-five
crore rupees;
(iii) a medium enterprise, where the annual turnover is
more than seventy-five crore rupees but does not exceed
two hundred and fifty crore rupees.
(1A) The Central Government may, by notification, vary the
turnover limits, which shall not exceed thrice the limits, specified
in sub-section (1) for the purposes of development of micro,
small and medium enterprises.";
(b) in sub-section (9),—
(i) for the words "criterion of investment", the words
"criterion of annual turnover" shall be substituted;
(ii) for the words "as part of small enterprises", the
words "as part of small and medium enterprises" shall be
substituted.
3. In section 14 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the words,
brackets and figure "sub-section (1) of" shall be omitted.
Amendment of
section 14.

43
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act,
2006 (the said Act) was enacted to provide for facilitating the
promotion and development and enhancing the competitiveness of
micro, small and medium enterprises. The said Act, inter alia, provides
for classification of the enterprises as micro, small or medium based
on their investment in plant and machinery or equipment. Over a
period of time, it has been felt necessary to change the criteria for
the classification in order to align it with the need of current times
and changing business ecosystem.
2. In the course of consultation with various stakeholders, it has
been noted that the criterion of investment in plant and machinery
or equipment entails physical verification having associated transaction
costs. It also incentivises the tendency in the promoters of the
enterprises to keep the investment size small in a particular business
entity in order to retain the benefits associated with micro or small
enterprises category. While evaluating various alternatives, it has
been considered appropriate that if the annual turnover is taken as
a criterion for classification, the information available with goods
and services tax network and other sources can be used for
determination of the category of the enterprises. Overall, the turnover
based clasification will promote the ease of doing business and will
put in place a non-discretionary, transparent and objective classification
system.
3. In view of the above, it is proposed to amend section 7 of the
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 to—
(a) provide for change in the criterion of classification of
micro, small and medium enterprises from the existing
criterion of investment in plant and machinery or equipment
to a new criterion based on annual turnover of the
enterprises; and
(b) confer power upon the Central Government to vary, the
turnover limits, by notification which shall not exceed
thrice the limits specified in sub-section (1) of section 7
for the purpose of development of micro, small and medium
enterprises.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW D ELHI; GIRIRAJ SINGH
The 22nd March, 2018.
43

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (a) of clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert sub-
section (1A) in section 7 of the Micro. Small and Medium Enterprises
Development Act, 2006, so as to confer power upon the Central
Government to vary the turnover limits relating to the classification
of micro, small and medium enterprises by way of notification.
2. The matters in respect of which the notification may be issued
under the proposed legislation are matters of procedure or
administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for them in
the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a
normal character.
44

EXTRACTS FROM THE M ICRO, S MALL AND M EDIUM E NTERPRISES
DEVELOPMENT A CT, 2006
(27 of 2006)
* * ***
CHAPTER III
CLASSIFICATION OF E NTERPRISES, A DVISORY C OMMITTEE AND
MEMORANDUM OF M ICRO, S MALL AND M EDIUM E NTERPRISES
7. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 11B of the
Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, the Central
Government may, for the purposes of this Act, by notification and
having regard to the provisions of sub-sections (4) and (J), classify
any class or classes of enterprises, whether proprietorship, Hindu
undivided family, association of persons, co-operative society,
partnership firm, company or undertaking, by whatever name called,—
(a) in the case of the enterprises engaged in the
manufacture or production of goods pertaining to any industry
specified in the First Schedule to the Industries (Development
and Regulation) Act, 1951, as—
(i) a micro enterprise, where the investment in plant
and machinery does not exceed twenty-five lakh rupees;
(ii) a small enterprise, where the investment in plant
and machinery is more than twenty-five lakh rupees but
does not exceed five crore rupees; or
(iii) a medium enterprise, where the investment in
plant and machinery is more than five crore rupees but
does not exceed ten crore rupees;
(b) in the case of the enterprises engaged in providing or
rendering of services, as—
(i) a micro enterprise, where the investment in
equipment does not exceed ten lakh rupees;
(ii) a small enterprise, where the investment in
equipment is more than ten lakh rupees but does not
exceed two crore rupees; or
(iii) a medium enterprise, where the investment in
equipment is more than two crore rupees but does not
exceed five crore rupees.
45
Classification of
enterprises.65 of 1951
65 of 1951
ANNEXURE

46
Explanation 1.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified
that in calculating the investment in plant and machinery, the cost of
pollution control, research and development, industrial safety devices
and such other items as may be specified, by notification, shall be
excluded.
Explanation 2.—It is clarified that the provisions of section
29B of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, shall
be applicable to the enterprises specified in sub-clauses (i) and (ii)
of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of this section.
* * ***
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 11B of the
Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 and clause (h)
of section 2 of the Khadi and Village Industries Commission Act,
1956, the Central Government may, while classifying any class or
classes of enterprises under sub-section (1), vary, from time to
time, the criterion of investment and also consider criteria or standards
in respect of employment or turnover of the enterprises and include
in such classification the micro or tiny enterprises or the village
enterprises, as part of small enterprises.
* * ***
14. (1) * * * *
(2) The Fund or Funds shall be utilised exclusively for the measures
specified in sub-section (1) of section 9.
* * ***
65 of 1951
65 of 1951
65 of 1956
Administration
and utilisation of
Fund or Funds.

47
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to amend the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006.
(Shri Giriraj Singh, Minister of State for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises)
MGIPMRND—5190LS(S3)—28.03.2018.
47

48
ANNEXURE-II
LIST OF WITNESSES
1. EXPERTS
(i) Dr. H.P. Kumar, Ex-CMD, NSIC & Advisor from PHD Chamber of Commerce & Industry
(ii) Dr. Prabhat Kumar, Ex-Cabinet Secretary & Ex-Governor Jharkhand.
2. STAKEHOLDERS/REPRESENTATIVES
Chamber of Indian Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (CIMSME)
(i) Shri S. K. Gagroo from
Laghu Udyog Bharati
(ii) Shri Jitendra Gupta, National President
(iii) Shri Govind Lele, National General Secretary
Coimbatore District Small Industries Association (CODISSIA)
(iv) Shri Ramamurthy Ranganathan, President
(v) Shri Ramesh Babu MV , Vice-President
Confederation of Women Entrepreneurs (COWE)
(vi) Ms. Meenu Maggon
(vii) Ms. Payal Agarwal
(viii) Ms. Ruchi Rastogi
48