149th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/149threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:47:19]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
ONE HUNDRED FORTY-NINTH REPORT
 
ON
 
MoU PERFORMANCE IN RESPECT OF PUBLIC
SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS IN CIVIL AVIATION SECTOR
(MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES)
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 26TH AUGUST, 2004)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 26TH AUGUST, 2004)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2004/BHADRAPADA, 1926 (SAKA)
 
E-mail: rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
 
 
CONTENTS  
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2. INTRODUCTION
3 REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
4. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
5. MINUTES
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
(Date of Constitution 5th August, 2004)
   1.  Shri Santosh Bagrodia–    Chairman
        RAJYA SABHA
   2.  Prof. M.M. Agarwal
   3.  Shri Surendra Lath
   4.  Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
   5.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
   6.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   7.  Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
   8.  Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
   9.  Dr. Vijay Mallya
10.  Vacant
        LOK SABHA

149th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/149threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:47:19]
11.  Shri Guharam Ajgalle
12.  Shri Kailash Baitha
13.  Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
14.  Shri Subhash Deshmukh
15.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
16.  Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria
17.  Shri Sunil Khan
18.  Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato
19.  Shri Prakash Paranjpe
20.  Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel
21.  Shri Rajnarayan
22.  Shri Bagida Ramakrishna
23.  Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
24.  Shrimati Rubab Sayeda
25.  Shri Rana Gurjeet Singh
26.  Shri Manvendra Singh
27.  Shri Ganesh Singh
28.  Shri Suraj Singh
29.  Shri Chandramani Tripathi
30.  Shri M. Anjan Kumar Yadav
31.  Shri Girdhari Yadav
        SECRETARIAT
        Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
        Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
        Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
        Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
        Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
(Date of Constitution – lst January, 2004)
   1.  Dr. P.C. Alexander     ––     Chairman
        RAJYA SABHA
   2.  Prof M.M. Agarwal
   3.  Shri Jayantilal Barot
   4.  Dr. M.N. Das
   5.  Shrimati Saroj Dubey
   6.  Dr. Faguni Ram
   7.  Shri Lajpat Rai
   8.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   9.  Shri P.K. Maheshwari
10.  Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
11.  Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
12.  Shri S. Sivasubramanian
13.  Shrimati Sushree Devi
14.  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
15.  Shri K. Chandran Pillai
        LOK SABHA
16.  Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
17.  Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
18.  Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
19.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das

149th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/149threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:47:19]
20.  Shri K Francis George
21.  Shri Thomas Hansda
22.  Md. Anwarul Haque
23.  Shri A.C. Jose
24.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
25.  Shri Mansoor Ali Khan
26.  Shri Sunil Khan
27.  Shri Deepak Kumar
28.  Shri Manjay Lal
29.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
30.  Shri A. Narendra
31.  Shri Ananta Nayak
32.  Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
33.  Shri Uttamrao Patil
34.  Shri Malyala Rajaiah
35.  Shri P. Rajendran
36.  Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
37.  Shri Tarachand Sahu
38.  Shri Ramanand Singh
39.  Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
40.  Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
41.  Shri V. Vetriselvan
42.  Shrimati D.M. Vijaya Kumar
43.  Shri Radha Mohan Singh
44.  Shri Vijay Sankeshwar
        SECRETARIAT
        Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
        Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
        Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
        Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
        Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
 
SUB-COMMITTEE-III
MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES
(OF PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY)
1.   Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah      ––        Convenor
       RAJYA SABHA
2.   Shri P.K. Maheshwari
3.   Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
4.   Shri S. Sivasubramanian
       LOK SABHA
5.   Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
6.   Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
7.   Shri Deepak Kumar
8.   Shri Thomas Hansda
9.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
10.  Shri Sunil Khan
11.  Shri Manjay Lal
12.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
13.  Shri A. Narendra
14.  Shri Uttamarao Deorao Patil

149th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/149threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:47:19]
 
INTRODUCTION
 
         I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having been authorised
by the Committee, hereby present this One Hundred Forty-ninth Report on MoU Performance in respect of Public
Sector Undertakings pertaining to the Department of Public Enterprises.
2.      The Sub- Committee-III for Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (of Department -related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry) heard the CMDs of Air India, Indian Airlines, Airports Authority of
India and other officials and representatives of the respective administrative Ministries on their MoU performance on
13th October, 2003. The present report is based on the deliberations of the meeting held that day.
3.      The Committee in its meeting held on 25th August, 2004 considered and adopted the Report.
 
NEW DELHI
25th August, 2004
SANTOSH BAGRODIA
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry
 
 
REPORT
CHAPTER - I
MoU System
         The Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) is a negotiated document between the Government, acting as the
owner of Public Sector Enterprise (PSE) and a specific PSE. It contains the intentions, obligations and mutual
responsibilities of the Government and the PSE. Further, MoU makes an attempt to move the management of PSEs from
management by controls and procedures to management by results and objectives.
1.2    The genesis of the policy of Memorandum of Understanding can be traced to the report of the Arjun Sengupta
Committee. One of the recommendations of this Committee was for the introduction of the system of MoU for
measurement of performance of public enterprises.
Objectives of the MoU System
1.3    The objectives of the MoU system are to improve the performance of public enterprises by increasing autonomy
and accountability of the management; to remove the fuzziness in the goals and objectives of the enterprise to pursue
through clearly laid down performance targets in the MoU and to enable the evaluation of managerial performance
through objective criteria and provide a mechanism to reward good performance through performance incentives to
stimulate improved performance.
1.4    Under the agreement the enterprises undertake to achieve the targets set in the agreement at the beginning of the
year. Thus the MoU covers both financial performance as well as non-financial performance. Under this system
performance of the Company is ­categorized into five categories namely: excellent, very good, good, fair, and poor.
Preparation of MoU
1.5    Based on the guidelines issued by the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) in the month of October/November,
the draft MoUs are prepared by PSEs and forwarded to the Administrative Ministry and DPE by December. The draft
MoUs indicate the performance targets on a five point scale as proposed by the PSE for the ensuing financial year for all
crucial parameters like production, sales, profits, etc. The PSEs are also expected to include dynamic parameters of
significance for strengthening the future potential of the enterprise, such as project implementation, R&D, Human
Resource Development, etc. Appropriate weights are assigned to each of these parameters. The draft MoU are discussed
with the PSE Administrative Ministries at the Adhoc Task Force (ATF) negotiation meetings arranged in DPE in the
month of March/April, soon after the presentation of the Union Budget. Since the Budget has implications on the
performance targets, the timing of the negotiation meetings is deliberately scheduled after the budget presentation. The
appropriateness of the parameters and weights and the soundness of the targets as also the commitments of the
Government are examined in detail at the negotiation meetings. The draft MoUs as finalised thereafter are placed before
the High Power Committee (HPC) comprising the Cabinet Secretary as Chairman, Secretary, Finance, Planning
Commission, Programme Implementation, Chairman Public Enterprises Selection Board, Chief Economic Adviser and

149th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/149threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:47:19]
Secretary Public Enterprises as Members, for approval. After approval, the respective Chief Executives and Secretaries
sign them.
Evaluation of MoU
1.6    The evaluation of the MoU signing enterprises is done at the end of the year by the Adhoc Task Force (ATF) on
the basis of actual achievement vis-a-vis the MoU targets. Where the performance exceeds the target by the
predetermined stipulated level the enterprise is ranked as ‘excellent’ and when the target is just met, the enterprise is
ranked as ‘very good’ . In other cases, where the targets are not met the enterprise is ranked either ‘ good’ or ‘ fair’ or ‘
poor’ . Ranking depends on how the performance has been as compared to MoU targets.
1.7    The performance criteria should be assigned appropriate weights corresponding with their stated priorities in the
objectives. It should be ensured that they also reflect the perceived relative importance of the various criteria in the
judgement of the PSE/Ministry. The weight for physical criteria should be kept as low as possible. Instead, Efficiency
and Dynamic criteria should get higher weights. The weight for profit-related financial parameters would be 60 % in
case of PSEs operating under free market mechanism. The weight of 60 % would be distributed to, Gross Margin, Gross
Profit/Capital Employed and Net Profit/Net Worth, each having a weight of 20 % each. For PSEs operating under
administered prices, PSEs where Government is sole; almost sole customer & Trading, Consultancy, Engineering and
Financial PSEs, the weight would be
40 % . The weight of 40 % would be distributed to, Gross Margin and Net Profit/Net Worth, each having a weight of 20
% each. The PSEs which have been specially set up for implementing certain Government policy directives will have no
pre-determined financial parameters.
1.8    The targets set should be realistic and growth oriented. It should be ensured that the MoU targets flow from the
Corporate Vision/Plans formulated by the PSEs and there is linkage between them. In case there is any variation,
reasons thereof should be clearly specified. For qualitative indicators, the targets for each of the points on the 5-point
scale should be indicated in the performance matrix itself. If these targets are on a time scale, only such target, which
falls within the MoU year, is included.
1.9    The MoU should contain the past five years performance data on criteria included in the MoU in an appendix. It
should also indicate the projections for the next five years, as far as possible consistent with the corporate plan.
Civil Aviation Sector
1.10  The Committee had a derailed study on the MoU system in respect of various PSUs . The Civil Aviation Sector in
India is a striking example of the progress made in the ongoing liberalization process of the Indian Economy, which
began a decade ago. The last few years have seen a tremendous change in this sector with major policy initiatives
having been taken and implemented vigourously. Considering the importance of the Civil Aviation Sector in the
development of the country, the Committee decided to examine the MoU Performance in respect of the Civil Aviation
Sector of the country.
1.11  Before the induction of the private airlines in this sector, Air India (AI), Indian Airlines (IAL) and Airports
Authority of India (AAI) played a major role in the industry. Indian Airlines normally operates domestic flights in the
country including few neighbouring  countries, Air India mainly operates internationally and the Airports Authority of
India is concerned with the upkeep of the domestic as well as international airports and terminals of the country.
1.12  The Committee, in order to examine the performance of MoU system of the various airlines and conditions of the
airports in the country as also to suggest improvements therein, held a meeting on
15th October 2003 and had detailed discussions with Air India (AI), Indian Airlines (IAL), Airports Authority of India
(AAI) apart from the private airlines which included the Sahara and the Jet Airlines to draw a line of comparison as their
performance with the PSUs  in the sector. The Committee deliberated upon the subject, which is enumerated in the
following chapters.
 
CHAPTER - II
AIR INDIA LIMITED
2.      Air-India is India’s national flag carrier. Although air transport was born in India on February 18, 1911 when
Henri Piquet, flying a Humber bi-plane, carried mail from Allahabad to Naini Junction, some six miles away, the

149th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/149threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:47:19]
scheduled services in India, in the real sense, began on October 15, 1932. It was on this day that J.R.D. Tata , the father
of Civil Aviation in India and founder of Air-India, took off from Drigh Road Airport, Karachi, in a tiny, light
single-engined de Havilland Puss Moth on his flight to Mumbai (then known as Bombay) via Ahmedabad. He landed
with his precious load of mail on a grass strip at Juhu, Mumbai.
Mr. Neville Vincent, a former Royal Air Force (RAF) pilot who had come to India from Britain  in 1929 on a brain-
storming tour, during which he had surveyed a number of possible, air routes. He saw the immense potential for aviation
in India. He along with J.R.D Tata  worked out a scheme for air service from Karachi to Mumbai, which heralded birth
of Tata Airlines.
Tata Airlines
2.1    Tata  Airlines, as Air-India was then known, consisted of one Puss Moth, one Leopard Moth, one palm- thatched
shed, one whole time pilot assisted by Tata  and Vincent, one part-time engineer, two apprentice- mechanics and
unlimited optimism. In 1933, the first full year of its operations Tata  Airlines flew 160,000 miles , carried 155
passengers and 10.71 tonnes of mail. Tata Airlines was converted into a Public Company under the name of Air-India in
August 1946. Going Global by the beginning of 1947, Air-India turned its attention to the international scene. Towards
the end of the 9th year, an agreement was reached with the Government of India for the formation of Air-India
International Limited to operate international services.
2.2    At Air-India’s request, the Government agreed to limit their capital participation to 49 per cent, subject to an
option to acquire, at any time, a further two per cent from Air-India. Air-India International, which was registered on
March 8, 1948, inaugurated its international services on June 8, 1948, with a weekly flight from Mumbai to London via
Cairo and Geneva with a Lockheed Constellation aircraft.
Nationalisation
2.3    The early’50s saw the financial condition of various airlines operating in India deteriorate to such an extent that
the Government decided to step in and nationalise the air transport industry and accordingly two autonomous
Corporations were created on August l, 1953. Indian Airlines was formed with the merger of eight domestic airlines to
operate domestic services, while Air-India International was established to operate the overseas services. The word
‘International’ was dropped in 1962. Effective March l, 1994, the airline has been functioning as Air-India Limited.
From a total of three stations served at the time of nationalisation , Air-India’s worldwide network today covers 44
destinations by operating services with its own aircraft and through code-shared flights.
New Thrust
2.4    At present there are 43 aircrafts in its fleet Air-India has expanded its fleet by inducting 14 aircrafts during the
years 2000-04 out of which three Boeing 747-400s and eleven Airbus 310s are on dry lease during the years 2000-04.
Induction of these dry leased aircraft has enabled Air-India to enhance frequencies to many existing destinations and
introduce several new flights. This includes introduction of a daily service on the India-Paris-New York sector; three
terminator flights to Frankfurt; three ­ flights to Chicago  via Frankfurt. Flights to Shanghai from Mumbai via Delhi-
Bangkok Twice weekly direct services between Ahmedabad and London. Air-India is further proposing to take two
more Boeing 747-400s on dry lease - one in June 2004 and the other in October 2004. These aircraft are being dry
leased for commencing flights to Los Angeles on the West Coast of United States. While initially, effective June 2004,
flights will be started on a thrice-weekly basis, the frequency would be increased to five per week in October 2004. Air-
India has incidentally, since December 2002, already doubled its capacity on the India-US sector - from ten to twenty
flights per week. Introduction of flights to Los Angeles would help increase services to US to 23 per week in June 2004
and to 25 per week in October 2004. Expansion of fleet through the dry-leasing route, pending acquisition of aircraft,
has also enabled Air-India to improve its ranking amongst world airlines on the basis of revenue earned and number of
passengers carried. According to a review published in September 2003 in Airline Business, an international magazine,
while Air-India’s ranking on the basis of revenue in 2002 has gone up to 51 from 54 in the preceding year, Air-India
stands at 54 (up from 61 in 2001) on the basis of passengers carried.
Network
2.5    In its ever-growing quest for providing direct services from various points in India, Air-India currently operates
flights from Mumbai, and 11 other Indian cities, viz. Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Chennai, Delhi, Goa, Hyderabad, Kochi,
Kolkata, Kozhikode, Lucknow and Thiruvananthapuram. Commencement of international operations from these cities

149th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/149threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:47:19]
has obviated, to a very large extent, the need for passengers from these regions to necessarily travel to Mumbai and
Delhi, the traditional main gateways, for taking international flights . Passengers boarding or deplaning in these cities
can now complete their immigration and custom formalities at their city airport, both at the time of departure and
arrival. Air-India has simultaneously introduced fixed time departures for flights to the Gulf from Mumbai, Delhi and
Kochi. In the past two years, the number of flights operated to the Gulf has increased from 75 to 104.
Air India’s objectives
2.6    Air India’s objectives are stated to take effective steps to provide a high level of customer satisfaction; enhance its
competitive market standing and image as an international carrier; optimize its share of the air market to/from the
objectives of long­term  financial viability and sustainable growth; optimise the utilisation  of its resources ­aircraft
fleet and employees; achieve the highest level of safety of operations; increase the productivity and optimise the number
of employees through the expansion of capacity and the implementation of an attractive Voluntary Retirement Scheme
and assist in the Disinvestment in Hotel Corporation of India; develop global standards of efficiency through
benchmarking. Based on these above objectives, Air India is evaluated on three categories of parameters - Physical,
Financial and Other parameters.
MoU Performance
2.7    Air India has been signing the MoU with the Ministry of Civil Aviation since 1988 - 1989. Air India’s MoU
ratings based on audited results since 1998 - 1999 are as follows:
Year Score based on audited results Remarks
1998-1999 1.89 VERY GOOD
1999-2000 1.53 VERY GOOD
2000-01 MoU not signed —
2001-02 3.15 GOOD
2002-03 2.44 VERY GOOD
 
2.8    The Physical parameters include Air India’s Passenger Load Factor, Growth in Capacity, Market Share to/from
India, On-time Performance, Aircraft Utilisation and Productivity per employee. For 2003-04, a weightage of 22% has
been assigned to Physical Parameters.
2.9    The Financial Parameters include, Gross Margin, Unit Operating Revenue, Unit  Operating Cost, Sundry Debtors,
Net Profit/(Loss) and Net Profit/(Loss) to Net Worth  Ratio. For 2003-04, a weightage of 60% has been assigned to
Financial Parameters.
2.10  The Other Parameters include Reportable Incident Indicator (Safety); Other Marketing/Planning Initiatives and
mandatory DPE parameters relating to MoU submission and performance evaluation. For 2003-04, a weightage of 18 %
has been  assigned to Other Parameters.
2.11  The Committee during the course of the interaction with the representatives of Air India was informed that during
the year 2000-2001, the MoU was not signed due to delay in the process of finalizing the MoU for the year. It was also
informed that the poor performance during the year 2001-2002 was due to the
11th September, 2001 incident which had world wide effect on the airline industry. During that year, the score was 3.15.
The main reason for the erosion in the composite score was due to the reductions in the Gross margin and Net profit
which are the parameters assigned highest weightage pushed down, the composite score to ‘Good’.
Steps taken to improve the performance
Physical
2.12  Air India has generally been able to achieve a Very Good rating based on audited results - even in
2001-02 and 2002-03, when world airlines incurred huge losses totaling USD 25 billion. Air India has in recent times
taken several steps to improve its physical and financial performance, including aggressive expansion of its capacity,
through the dry lease of aircraft; Supplementing Air India's core network (i.e. physical operations) with a secondary
network of code-shared services through alliances with selected airlines; improving its product offering - installation of

149th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/149threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:47:19]
flat beds/slumberettes in First/Executive Class, improved passenger amenities, etc; Rationalising Schedules to offer
more direct, high frequency services with standardised arrival/departure timings as  far as possible. Other remedial
measures taken to improve Air India’s operating results include emphasis on total schedules integrity and high on-time
performance; improvement in in-flight service; marketing initiatives to increase loads and yields; focus on route
profitability and preference to higher yield stations in allocation of passenger cargo capacity; implementation of more
vigorous space management techniques to maximise capacity utilization and revenues; focus on cost reduction and
rationalisation in all major areas of the Company’s functioning; action is also being taken to dispose off Air India’s non-
performing assets which also include land at Nerul, Turbhe, Gurgaon, etc; reduction in staff strength in India and abroad
through, rollback of retirement age to 58 Years and implementation of schemes such as Shorter Working Week, Leave
Without Pay, Staff redeployment to operational areas; VRS etc; computerization of various activities to tone up
efficiency so as to produce a given value at a minimum essential cost; hedging of fuel; Economic Tankering; and
Passenger Agency Commission has been reduced from 9 % to 7%.
Financial
2.13  Air-India’s total issue and paid-up Capital is Rs.l, 538.4 million. The airline has been profitable in most years
since its inception. In the financial year ending March 31, 2003, the Company carried 3.39 million passengers and made
a net profit of Rs. 1338.5 million on operating revenue of Rs.5,658 billion. The success on the financial front was
achieved despite the global economic recession and the adverse impact of the September 11th incident in New York on
the aviation industry globally. The strength of profitability has continued in financial year 2003-04 as well -
notwithstanding the effect of SARS on the aviation industry in April - July 2003. As per provisional estimates, Air-India
is expected to end the financial year with a profit of over Rs. 100 crores. Air-India is, in fact, proposing to increase
passenger revenue by almost ten per cent in financial year 2004-05, as compared to the financial year 2003-04. The
airline has also budgeted a net profit of Rs. 125 crores in financial year 2004-05, as compared to provisional profit of
about Rs.100 crores achieved in the financial year 2003-04. 180-degrees flatbed seats are being gradually installed in the
First Class of Boeing 747-400 aircraft. The plush, new seats, offering highly innovative standards in design, safety,
reliability and appearance, are equipped for work, sleep or rest in accordance with the passengers’ preference. The re-
configured First Class seats only 12, instead of 16.
Safety
2.14  Air India maintains a high standard of flight safety. The safety and security of the passengers and aircraft has
always been of vital importance. There were no incidents resulting in any significant injury to passenger/crew or any
major damage to aircraft/equipment.
Security
2.15  Air India’s Security Department ensures that the instructions and guidelines issued by the Bureau of Civil Aviation
Security (BCAS), the Government of India, IATA and International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) are
implemented scrupulously and without any compromise. The department has been entrusted with the task of preventing
unlawful interference in Civil Aviation. The Security Department is the first Aviation Security Organisation to be
certified under ISO 9002 - 1994. Within a span of less than 9 months, the Security Department enhanced its service
levels and has acquired the status of ISO-9001: 2000 standards.
Human Resource Development (HRD) and Training
2.16  Air India has the excellent facilities for training of its staff in the Engineering, Operations, Commercial, Customer
Care Training Programme for Front Line Staff, and RVSM and ETOPS training programmes for Pilots and Engineers.
The Company in addition to above also imparts training in the various fields depending upon the need to technical and
general categories of officers / staff.
Suggestions for Modification in MoU Format
2.17  The Committee asked the representatives of the Air India to suggest modifications in the MoU format. Air India
Limited has requested the following with regard to modification in MoU format at present, PSE performance targets are
based on the assumption that the Government will provide assistance to the PSE as agreed to in the MoU. However, the
current MoU format only provides for an evaluation of the performance of the PSE vis-a-vis the MoU targets. Air India
Limited, therefore, feels that there is a need for adjusting the ratings obtained by the PSE the level of actual assistance
provided by the Government vis-a-vis the agreed items in the MoU.

149th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/149threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:47:19]
CHAPTER – III
INDIAN AIRLINES LIMITED
3.1    Indian Airlines Limited was incorporated under the Companies Act w.e.f. lst May 1992 with the main objective to
provide safe, efficient, adequate, economical and properly coordinated air transport services. As per the Air
Corporations (Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal) Ordinance 1994, the entire undertaking of Indian Airlines was
transferred and vested in the said company i.e. Indian Airlines Ltd w.e.f. 1st March 1994. The Company for the
purposes of functional convenience has been divided into four regions having their regional headquarters at the four
metros. The aircraft fleet of IA consists of a mix of aircraft including A300, A320, B737 and DO228, which operate on
domestic, as well as short/medium haul international sectors. At present the strength fleet of Indian Airlines is 62
including 11 dry leased Aircrafts inducted during the years
2001-04.
3.2    A wholly owned subsidiary of IAL styled as Airlines Allied Services Limited was formed on 13th September 1983
under the Companies Act. The total investment in this company stands at Rs.2.25 crores as on 3lst March 2003
comprising of 2,25,000 equity shares of Rs.100 each fully paid up. During the year 1996-97 IAL made available to this
subsidiary the entire fleet of 12 Boeing 737 aircraft for its operations under the banner of Alliance Air.
3.3    IAL, over the past many decades of its operations, has developed a modernized aircraft maintenance infrastructure,
which includes the Jet Engine Overhaul Shop at Delhi where overhauling as well as repairs of V-2500 and JT8O
engines as per international norms are carried out. Further, comprehensive inhouse repair facilities are also available for
repairs of airframe and components of various types of aircraft in maintenance workshops at Delhi, Mumbai, Hyderabad
and Kolkata. Besides, there is a full-fledged APU Overhaul Center at Kolkata for APUs of all types of aircraft.
3.4    Indian Airlines also has an in-house training establishment at Hyderabad, which has the latest equipment including
aircraft simulators for training of pilots/engineers. The Company also has a Real Time Reservation System to cater to its
wide network of operations.
3.5    The Company basically operates in a highly sensitive industry, which is extremely susceptible to the socio-
economic environment prevalent in the country as well as internationally. As the state carrier of India it is also entrusted
with the responsibility of operating on financially unviable routes much in excess of its requirements as per the
Government’s route dispersal guidelines.
3.6    The network of IAL spans over 61 stations in India and 16 stations abroad. IAL is operating 112 flights
constituting of over 300 departures per day (including Alliance Air). Over the past few years the market share of the
company has been on a steady decline. This is due to the fact that there has been a growth in the domestic capacity
which has been largely due to the additional aircraft inducted by the private airlines whereas the capacity offered by
Indian Airlines has remained almost constant. This, coupled with the increased cost of maintenance of an ageing fleet
has made a dent in the company’s profitability. Moreover, the financials of the company are very much dependent upon
various uncontrollable factors such as the price of Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF), Insurance costs, and landing & parking
charges etc.
MoU Performance
3.7 Indian Airlines has been signing the MoU with the Ministry of Civil Aviation since 1988 - 1989. The parameters
included in the Indian Airlines MoU may be broadly categorized into two heads (a)Financial  and (b) Operational and
others. As per the details supplied to the Committee financial parameters have been assigned 60 % weightage  whereas
operational and other parameters have been given 40% weightage.
 
Year MoU Score (%) MoU Rating
1998-1999 2.13 Very Good
1999-2000 1.94 Very Good
2000-2001 2.25 Very Good
2001-2002 1.78 Very Good

149th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/149threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:47:19]
2002-2003 1.73 Very Good
 
3.8    During .the last four years i.e. from 1998-99 to 2001-02 IAL has been constantly rated in the “Very Good” bracket
by the MoU Division of the Department of Public Enterprises. As per the Balance Sheet of the Company, Total Net
Worth of the company rose from Rs. 401.97 crores in March 2000 to Rs. 482.12 Crores in March 2003.
3.9    The Company’s Profitability in 2002-03 has been severely hit by the spiraling increase in-cost of inputs most of
which are in the nature of uncontrollable costs. The price of Air Turbine Fuel (ATF) increased by almost 20 % during
the year and touched an all time high of Rs. 25, 200 per kilolitre in March’03.
3.10  Despite the increase in various input costs IA has managed to contain its losses to a large extent. In fact the
anticipated loss for the year 2002-03 was estimated to be Rs. 245.50 crores as per the revised estimates as compared to
the loss of Rs.246.75 crores in 2001-02.
3.11  In view of the continuing losses suffered by the Company for the last three years, Indian Airlines had been taking
various measures and working out strategies from time to time and on an on going basis to improve its financial
performance. Like any commercial organization it continuously endeavors for optimum utilization of its resources to
achieve improved productivity and profitability.
3.12  Indian Airlines has taken several marketing initiatives in the recent past to increase its revenue. The various
initiatives/steps undertaken include Flyaway Packages; IAL - Taj Offer; On Board Food Festival; The Executive Class
Bonanza; Wings of Freedom; Bharat Darshan; Apex Fares; Super Saver Scheme; and
E-Auction and E-­Booking. Many value-added products like better in-flight services, check-in facilities and a re-
furbished Frequent Flyer Programme have also been introduced to attract incremental traffic.
3.13  A very close monitoring was done to improve the on-time performance to ensure the availability of reliable
passenger service. For this purpose, a Core Committee at each of the metro and a Central Coordinating Cell was set up
to monitor the on-time performance and take decisions on this matter. The concerted efforts yielded good results as the
on-time performance during 2002- 03 was at the level of
77 % on the whole network. The Technical Dispatch reliability during 2002-03 was 98.76 % as compared to 98.55 %
last year.
3.14  The Financial Discipline in the Company is being closely monitored and strengthened to control the costs and
expenses in the following areas like strict monitoring of expenses and Budgetary control; efficient inventory
management; fuel tankering and monitoring; route rationalization and efficient aircraft capacity deployment; curtailment
of SOD Travel, Hotel/Crew lay over expenditure etc; rationalization of catering upliftment and menus.
3.15  Indian Airlines has submitted a Proposal to the Government for the acquisition of 43 new aircraft at a net project
cost of Rs. 10,089 crores to replace its ageing A300 / B737 fleet and to cater to its annual growth. The project is
awaiting approval of the government. In the meantime, Indian Airlines has taken 11 A320 aircraft on dry lease to meet
its short-term capacity requirements. Till now, with the induction of these aircraft on lease the number of A320 aircraft
in the fleet of Indian Airlines has gone upto 41 from 30.
3.16  It is expected that due to the above initiatives IAL’s financial performance for the financial year 2003-04 will be
substantially better than that for the year 2002-03 and the year will end with substantially reduced losses as-per the
Budget Estimates.
Safety and Security
3.17  The safety and security of passengers and aircraft has always been of utmost importance to Indian Airlines
operations and has been accorded the highest attention by the Security Department by ensuring meticulous
implementation of all anti sabotage and anti hijacking security functions, prescribed by the Bureau of Civil Aviation
Security (BCAS), all over Indian Airlines network within and outside India. Keeping in view the hijacking of Indian
Airlines flight IC 814 on 24th December 1999, the BCAS has enforced the additional security measures like Secondary
ladder point check of passengers and their hand baggage at the step ladder of the aircraft at all airports; and deployment
of NSG Sky Marshals on selected routes. Apart from the above, Indian Airlines is taking all the steps for strengthening
security of its flights on its entire network and has equipped the aircrafts various sophisticated gadgets and machineries
also. It has also set up various control rooms, which are also equipped with the latest state of the art security check
devices.

149th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/149threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:47:19]
Human Resource Development (HRD)
3:18  In the field of HRD, Indian Airlines’ objectives include to develop capabilities of Human Resource for better and
effective service delivery; to develop competencies of its manpower so as to attain world-class standards and to meet
future challenges; to identify and further individual potential and create inter-departmental synergy to achieve
organisational goals; and to create a mind set for accepting and adapting to changes. Various types of trainings and
developmental activities being undertaken by Indian Airlines include induction and ab-initio course; mandatory training,
functional training, behavioural training and soft skill training; subjects specific training; Generic Management training;
exposure to functioning of service departments for line functionaries; management training of Executives of Line
Departments; training for newly promoted officers; supervisory / development training; training for trainers; computer
literacy programmes; on-line training and nomination to outside training programmes.
Suggestions for Modification in MoU Format
3.19  The Committee asked the representatives of Indian Airlines to submit suggestion for modification in MoU unit.
Indian Airlines then requested for the following with regard to modification in MoU Format.
3.20  MoU should continue to be signed every year based upon various financial/physical parameters. Increasing the
periodicity of MoU from one to three or four years may hold good for manufacturing concerns because of long gestation
period but . it may not be useful for service industries.
3.21  It needs to be considered whether MoU should be signed for PSEs whose main area of operations can be
characterized as that of a service industry. It is felt that signing of the MoU is more relevant for PSE’s in the
manufacturing / production areas.
3.22  In case, MoU is to be signed for service industries, the nature of business of Indian Airlines (IAL) demands that
more physical parameters should be included as MoU performance indicators as compared to financial parameters:
Physical parameters should also be provided with more weightage  as ,performance of the companies in the service
sector can be more minutely monitored in terms of physical achievements.
CHAPTER - IV
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA LIMITED (AAI)
4.      Airports Authority of India was formed on .lst April 1995 by merging the erstwhile International Airports
Authority of India and the National Airports Authority with a view to accelerate the integrated developments, expansion
and modernization of the operational areas, terminals and cargo facilities at the airports in the country conforming to
international standards. The Authority completed eight years of successful operation ori 3lst March 2003 and has
recorded progress in all areas of its activities. Major improvements have also been brought in Communications,
Navigation and Surveillance and Air Traffic Management facilities with the installation of modern Landing Aids and
State-of-art Radars at the major airports. .These initiatives are bringing benefits .to airports users. The mission of
Airport Authority of India is “Progress through excellence and customer satisfaction with world-class airport and air
traffic services fostering economic development”. The Authority manages 124 airports in the country, (11 International
Airports, 85 Domestic Airports and 28 Civil Enclaves at Defence AirPorts).
Main functions of Airports Authority of India
4.1    The main functions of AAI are control and management of the Indian air space (excluding special user air space)
extending beyond the territorial limits of the country, as accepted by the ICAO; provision of Communication and
Navigational aids viz. , ILS, DVOR, DME, Radars etc; Provision, Expansion and Strengthening of operational areas viz.,
Runways, Aprons, Taxiways, etc. and provisions of visual aids; Design, Development, Operation and Maintenance of
passenger terminals at International, Domestic Airports and Civil Enclave; Development and Management of Cargo
Terminal at International and Domestic Airports; and Provision of passenger facilities and information systems in the
passenger terminals at the airports.
MoU Performance
4.2 Airports Authority of India signed its first Memorandum of Understanding with Ministry of Civil Aviation in the
very first year of its formation i.e., 1995-96. Since then, AAI is signing the MoU every year. Overall performance of
AAI for the past three years is as given under:                

149th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/149threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:47:19]
Year MoU Score MoU Rating
2000-2001 2.51 Good
2001-2002 2.53 Good
2002-2003 1.77 Very Good
 
         The performance reports highlights the performance of Airports Authority in all key areas like finance, projects
implementation, air safety, efficiency parameters, customer satisfaction, human resource development etc.
Steps taken to improve the performance
4.3    Various measures have been taken by the AAI for increasing the Non-traific  sources of revenues at the various
airports especially those small airports; which are operating at a loss with a view to make them economically viable.
The passenger traffic during the period 1999-2000 to 2002-03 rose with a compound growth rate of 3.8 % p.a. The
passenger traffic is expected, to grow @ 5.3 % in the coming years. The expected growth of international and domestic
passenger traffic is 6.0% & @ 5.0% p.a. respectively.
Cargo
4.4    The Cargo traffic during the period 1999-2000 to 2002-03 rose with a compound growth of 7.1 % p. a. The cargo
traffic is expected to; grow @ 6.6 % in the coming years. The expected growth of international and domestic cargo
traffic is 7.50% and @ 5.0% p.a. respectively.
Infrastructural Development
4.5    As per the decision of Government the two metro airports at Delhi and Mumbai are proposed to be restructured by
adopting the joint venture route: The joint venture company(s) set up for this purpose will comprise of the strategic joint
venture partner(s)  holding 74% and AAI holding 26% equity in the joint venture companies. The air traffic
management and security functions will continue to be performed by AAI.
4.6    For development of tourism, infrastructure at the airports having tourist potentials is being provided with adequate
facilities to handle charter flights. The main objectives for infrastructures development at airports are expansion of
passenger terminals facing capacity constraints; modification/replacement of old terminals / buildings to provide
adequate quality of facilities / services at the operational airports; Development of Civil Enclaves at specific airports;
development of runway for operation of B747-400 type of  aircraft at newly declared international airports;
development of runways for operation of A/300 type of aircraft at major domestic airports having restricted
international traffic; development of runways for operation of A320 type of aircraft at airports having scheduled flights;
and Automation / facilities up-gradation to ensure speed and efficiency in passenger baggage and cargo handling.
Air Traffic Services
4.7    Air India occupies a strategic position vis-à-vis international air traffic between the west .and east. A number of
busy ATS routes pass through Indian airspace along with a large no. of domestic ATS routes. This makes airspace
management more complex.
4.8    AAI provides Air Navigation Services (ANS) over 2.8 million square nautical miles of air space, which extends
far beyond over territorial airspace in to the Arabian Sea, Indian Ocean & Bay of Bengal. Besides Aerodrome control
and approach control services are provided at 62 airports spread over the whole country. Provision of communication;
Navigation & Surveillance Information to support to ANS is one of the major tasks of the authority. While there has
been a period of stagnation in the development of ANS infrastructure up to 80s, a thrust has been given to this aspect
with the adoption of Satellite Based CNS / ATM system by ICAO for global implementation.
Passenger Facilities and Customer Satisfaction
4.9    AAI is continuously striving to upgrade its facilities at its airports to meet the passenger’s expectations. In the
process, AAI is carrying out surveys at its top 30 airports to get the passengers / users feed back on the services being-
provided by Airports Authority of India. The deficiencies brought out, in the surveys are used to prioritise the corrective
actions. As a result of these initiatives the customer satisfaction is on the rising trend (increased from 55 % from 1995-

149th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/149threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:47:19]
96 to 73 % in the recently conducted survey in June-July 2003).
Financial Performance
4.10  During the year 2000-01, AAI incurred additional expenditure of Rs. 37.24 crore on induction of CISF. Taking
this into account, the performance of AAI on financial parameters is given below: -
(Rs: in Crores)
Parameters Performance as Performance
 Per Accounts Based on
  Assumption
Gross Margin 680.00 717.24
Net Profit 214.08 251.32
Capital Employed 2047.89 2047.89
Net Profit / Capital Employed — 12.27
Non Aeronautical Revenue 811.39 811.39
Operating Cost 1193.18 1155.94
Revenue 1873.44 1873.44
Operating Cost / Revenue — 61.70
 
Safety
4.11  Provision of safe airspace and ground operations at airports is at the top of the AAI’s agenda. In tune with global
approach to Navigational services, AAI has been progressing with its plan for transition to satellite based
communication, navigation, surveillance and air traffic management. AAI has signed memorandum of cooperation with
US Federal Aviation Administration; US Trade and Development Agency and European Union and cooperative projects
has been initiated. AAI executives are being exposed to latest technology under development, modern practices and
procedures being adopted to improve the overall performance through these activities. State-of art equipments are being
introduced at the airports and in the air. Replacement of Old Crash fire tenders, Instrument Landing System equipment
with modern generation equipment and provision of MSASR are the major initiatives taken by AAI.
Security
4.12  The continuous threat perception at airports has brought in focus the need and urgency to strengthen security of
vital installations. There was thus an urgent need to revamp the security at airports not only to thwart any misadventure
but also to restore confidence of the traveling public on the security of air travel as a whole. With this in view, a number
of steps have been taken including deployment of CISF on airport security duty and induction of security equipment like
CCTV surveillance system, perimeter surveillance system. Smart cards for access control to vital installations at airport
would be introduced as part of airport security system to supplement efforts of security personnel.
Human Resource Development (HRD) and Training
4:13  Skill up-gradation through continuous training is one of the thrust areas for AAI. Development & Technological
advancements and consequent refinement of operating standards and procedures, new standards on safety and security,
improvement in management techniques calls for continuing training programmes to update the knowledge and skill of
officers and staff. AAI has a number of training institutes, viz., NIAMAR in Delhi, CATC in Allahabad, Fire Training
Centre at Delhi and Kolkata for in house training of its engineers, air traffic controllers; management personnel and
Rescue & Fire Fighting Staff.
Suggestions for Modification in MoU Format
4.14  Airports Authority of India stated that the existing MoU Format has the necessary features to give an index of the
overall performance of the organization. Even in the changing scenario; no changes in the format are envisaged as the
parameters and the targets could be modified, if required, within the existing system to suit the prevailing conditions.
 

149th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/149threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:47:19]
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
         At the outset the Committee appreciates the services of the PSUs in the Civil Aviation Sector and observes that the
infrastructure, passenger service and the duty structure are the areas of great concern.
5.1    As regards the MoU performance of the three PSUs in the Civil Aviation Sector the Committee expresses its
concern on the problems being faced by them particularly the Air India and Indian Airlines, leading to fall in their
physical and financial performance  which have direct bearing on their MoU performance as these parameters have been
given more weightage. The Committee, therefore, urges upon the Government to look into the problems being faced by
the Civil Aviation Sector to improve their performance.
5.2    The Committee takes note of the suggestions made by the PSUs with regard to changes in the MoU format. The
Air India submitted that the MoU format only provides for an evaluation of the performance of the PSE vis-a-vis the
MoU targets and there is a need for adjusting the ratings obtained by the PSE to be reckoned with the level of actual
assistance provided by the Government vis-à-vis the agreed items in the MoU. The Committee, therefore, is of the view
that the Government should take into account the suggestion of Air India while signing MoU.
5.3    The Indian Airlines Limited have submitted that the MoU format for the service sector PSE should include more
physical parameters as compared to financial parameters and it should be given more weightage as the performance of
the companies in the service sector can be more minutely monitored in terms of physical achievements. The Committee
also appreciate it and recommends that appropriate weightage should be assigned to the physical parameters so as to
make it more effective in terms of the performance.
5.4    Committee is also of the view that the MoU system is to give more freedom to the PSE in their core functions in
order to enhance their performance thereby resulting in better service and contribution to the national economy. The
Committee therefore, recommends that the MoU system should be followed in true spirit.
5.5    The Committee is of the view that there has been under utilization and poor project implementation on the part of
the Air ports Authority of India which has added to the poor infrastructure. The Committee therefore, recommends that
the more weightage should be given to the parameters on project implementation in the MoU rating.
5.6    The Committee observes that the projects may be split into a number of works and awarded to several contractors
which could be completed well in time thereby avoiding the delay in implementation of the project which is a major
parameter.
5.7    During the course of interaction with the representatives of the PSEs the Committee was informed that the
Airports are not developed in a way as they have been in many developed countries, especially passenger amenities at
the Airports which have resulted in poor Aeronautical Revenue. The Committee takes serious note of the situation
prevailing in the airports and recommends that the Government should take necessary steps and report the same to the
Committee in their Action Taken Note on this Report.
5.8    The Committee has been informed about the state-of-the-art Instrument Landing System lying idle in the Delhi
Airport. It has also been informed that the pilots have been demanding extra pay to undergo training in the system
resulting in delay in utilization of the facility available with the AAI. The Committee takes serious note of the situation
and would like to be apprised of the latest position in this regard and the steps taken by the Government to resolve the
deadlock. The Committee further recommends that the Government should initiate inter- PSUs cooperation in a service
sector like Civil Aviation Sector so as to meet the quality in service as well as customer satisfaction.
5.9    The Committee has also taken note of the safety and security measures taken in the Civil Aviation Sector and
appreciates the efforts made by the Government in this regard.
5.10  The Committee has also taken note of the HRD activities under taken by PSUs and would like to impress upon the
Government that the constraints like age of the crew and deployment of the crew should be addressed properly which is
an important factor in the improvement of the performance of the PSEs in the Sector. The Committee therefore, would
like to be apprised of the position regarding these issues.
5.11  The Committee was apprised that the duty structure has direct bearing on the cost of Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF)
thereby resulting in service implication on the performance of the sector. It was informed that if the cost is not brought

149th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/149threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:47:19]
down affordability will not be there, which will seriously affect the sector already incurring losses. The Committee,
therefore, recommends to the Government to rationalize the duty/tax structure with regard to the Aviation Turbine Fuel
and other services so as to give relief to the Civil Aviation Sector which is reeling under severe losses, resulting in poor
financial performance.
 
MINUTES
IV
FOURTH MEETING
         The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry met at 4.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 25
th
August, 2004 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
         PRESENT
   1.   Shri Santosh Bagrodia      —       Chairman
         RAJYA SABHA
   2.   Shri Surendra Lath
   3.   Dr. K. Malaisamy
   4.   Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   5.   Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
         LOK SABHA
   6.   Shri Kailash Baitha
   7.   Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
   8.   Shri Subhash Desmukh
   9.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
10.   Shri Sunil Khan
11.   Shri Rajnarayan
12.   Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
13.   Shri Chandramani Tripathi
         SECRETARIAT
         Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
         Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
         Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
         Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
2.      The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the Meeting and apprised them of the agenda of the
Meeting.
3.      Thereafter, The Committee took up the following Reports for consideration:
(i)    146
th Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in Maharashtra (Ministry of Small Scale Industries);
(ii)    147th Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in the Region of Bulandshahar , Uttar Pradesh (Ministry of Small
Scale Industries);
(iii)   148 th Report on MoU performance in respect of select Public Sector Undertakings, Department of Public
Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
(iv)   149 th Report on MoU performance in respect of Public Sector Undertakings in Civil Aviation Sector,
Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises);
(v)   150th Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to the Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry
of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
(vi)   151st Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to the Department of Heavy Industries (Ministry of
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);

149th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/149threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:47:19]
(vii)  152nd Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Ministry Agro and Rural Industries; and
(viii)153rd Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Ministry of Small Scale Industries.
3.1    After a brief discussion, all the Reports were adopted by the Committee with some modifications in the 151 st
Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to the Department of Heavy Industries (Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises).
4.      *                                                                  *                                                                      *
4.1    *                                                                  *                                                                      *
5.      *                                                                  *                                                                      *
6.      *                                                                  *                                                                      *
7.         The Committee then adjourned at 4.35 P.M. to meet again on 1
st September, 2004.