PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/121streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:06]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
ONE HUNDRED TWENTY- FIRST REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
RECOMMENDATIONS OBTAINED IN COMMITTEE'S
100TH REPORT ON PERFORMANCE REVIEW OF NATIONAL MINERAL DEVELOPMENT
CORPORATION (NMDC)
MINISTRY OF STEEL
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON  8TH   MAY, 2003)
(LAID ON THE TABLE  OF THE  LOK SABHA ON  8TH  MAY, 2003)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2003/ VAISAKHA, 1925  (SAKA)
 
               
C O N T E N T S
 
1. COMPOSITION OF  THE COMMITTEE
2. INTRODUCTION
3. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
4. OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS  AND RECOMMENDATIONS
OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE
5. MINUTES
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
(Date of Constitution - 1st January, 2003  )
 
 Dr. P.C. Alexander            —Chairman
                      
                        RAJYA SABHA
 
2.
      Prof. M.M. Agarwal
3.      Shri Jayantilal Barot
4.      Shri K. Chandran Pillai
5.      Dr. M.N. Das
6.      Smt.  Saroj Dubey
7.      Shri Faguni Ram
8.      Shri Lajpat Rai
9.      Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
10.  Shri P.K. Maheshwari
11.  Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
12.  Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
13.  Shri S. Sivasubramanian
14.  Smt. Sushree Devi

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/121streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:06]
15.  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
 
LOK SABHA
 
16.  Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
17.  Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
18.  Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
19.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das
20.  Shri K Francis George
21.  Shri Thomas Hansda
22.  Md. Anwarul Haque
23.  Shri A.C. Jose
24.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
25.  Shri Mansoor Ali Khan
26.  Shri Sunil Khan
27.  Shri Deepak Kumar
28.  Shri Manjay Lal
29.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
30.  Shri A. Narendra
31.  Shri Ananta Nayak
32.  Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
33.  Shri Uttamrao Patil
34.  Shri Malyala Rajaiah
35.  Shri P. Rajendran
36.  Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
37.  Shri Tarachand Sahu
38.  Shri Ramanand Singh
39.  Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
40.  Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
41.  Shri V. Vertiselvan
42.  Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari
43.  Shri Ram Prasad Singh
44.  Shri Radha Mohan Singh
45.  Shri Vijay Sankeshwar
 
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
Shri  A.K. Singh, Deputy  Secretary
Shri  K.P. Singh, Under   Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
 
 
I N T R O D U C T I ON
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having   been authorized 
by the Committee, hereby present this One Hundred Twenty First  Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Committee's 100
th Report on Performance review of National Mineral Development
Corporation (NMDC)
2.         The Committee examined and considered the Action Taken notes on recommendations contained in the Committee's
100th Report on Performance review of National Mineral Development Corporation (NMDC).
3.         The Committee at its meeting held on 6th May, 2003 considered and adopted the Report.
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/121streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:06]
NEW DELHI;
6th May, 2003
DR.P.C. ALEXANDER 
Chairman
Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Industry
 
 
REPORT
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Steel  on the Recommendations contained
in the  100th  Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry Report on Performance
review of National Mineral Development Corporation.
2.         Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Steel   in respect of the   recommendations contained in
the Report.   These have been categorized as follows:
 
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry of Steel  
 
(Chapter - I).
Recommendations:- 3.3, 5.4, 5.6, 6.3, 7.21.2, 7.21.3, 7.21.4, 7.21.5, 7.21.6, 8.4, 9.5, 9.6, 10.4, 11.2, 13.3, 14.2, 19.3, 19.4,
19.5
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies  :
(Chapter - II)
Recommendations:- 18.2
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies of the Ministry of Steel    :.
(Chapter - III).
Recommendations:- 12.3, 17.2, 17.3, 21.11.4, 22.4, 25.1.12, 25.2.2
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  final replies of the  Ministry of Steel   have not been received. (Chapter
- IV).
Recommendations:-  15.2, 16.1, 19.5, 20.5, 21.8, 21.9, 24.2, 24.3, 24.4, 25.3.2
3.         The Committee is pleased to observe that  the   Ministry of Steel has accepted its  recommendations  as  mentioned in
Chapter –I of the  Report. 
4.
                              In respect of the recommendation made in Para 18.2 as contained   in Chapter-II  the Committee is  convinced 
with the logic and explanation  advocated by the Ministry of  Steel  and therefore   does not want to  pursue  further .
5.         The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementations  of recommendations contained in  Chapter-III 
and therefore  the Committee desires that the Ministry of Steel should furnish  logical  explanation  in respect of these
recommendations.
6.         In respect  of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV, the Ministry of Steel has  either   furnished the interim replies
or couched its language in  vague terms like  noted for compliance/guidance therefore, the Committee desires  that the
Ministry of Steel would furnish Action Taken Notes in  respects of recommendation categorized   in Chapter-IV  in detail
and to the point, as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee.
7.            Observations/recommendations of the Committee  are given in Chapter (V)
8.         The Details of the Action Taken Notes is being discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.
CHAPTER - I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
 
Recommendation
 
1.1 Objectives
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/121streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:06]
            In order to translate the Mission of the company into actual performance NMDC has chalked out elaborate macro
and micro objectives. It is but natural that to be global player one has to outperform the others and for doing so laying of
clear-cut objective is the first and foremost requirement. So has done the NMDC. It has set the objectives of increasing its
turnover (to the tune of Rs.2000.00 crore by the year 2005), productivity, cost effectiveness in the areas of mining. NMDC
has set the objectives of obtaining growth by expanding the existing mines in self-enterprise or joint venture, exploration of
high value minerals and production of value added items, extending consultancy services and impetus to HRD and
adherence to safety norms. While noting the macro and micro objectives of NMDC, the Committee hopes that NMDCwould
have a resilient strategy and feasible plan and course of action to achieve the set objectives.
                                                                                    (PARA 3.3)
Action Taken
 
 The micro objectives are further split into annual targets and action plans are laid down to achieve those targets in the
annual plan meetings. The progress is continuously monitored at Project and Corporate levels.
 
RECOMMENDATION
 
1.2 Assets Of NMDC
 
      The Committee expresses its happiness to note that NMDC is a zero debt company. It has the cumulative reserve &
surplus of Rs.1244.89 crore and net worth of Rs.1331.78 crores .The committee reposes its belief and faith that NMDC has
the potential to become a global leader.
                                                                                                            (PARA 5.4)                                                                 
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
            The audited balance sheet Figures of cumulative Reserves & Surplus and Net worth as on 31-3-2002 are 1245.27
Crores and 1332.16 Crores respectively.
 
Recommendation
 
1.3 Return on Investment (ROI)
 
              While the Committee is pleased to note the ratio of profit (PBT-55.0%) and PAT 26.10% in comparison to capital
investment, the committee desires that effort may be undertaken by NMDC management to enhance return on investment
(ROI).
                                                                                                (PARA 5.6)
Action Taken
 
To increase the return on investment in future years, NMDC is taking following action:
(i)                  More Efforts to Increase production and sale or iron ore and diamonds.
(ii)                Commencing the commercial production of new projects in addition to
 diversification activities.
(iii)               Cost control Measures.
(iv)              Minimizing inventory holding, etc.
 
 Recommendation
 
1.4  Mines and production of NMDC
 
    The Committee, while noting the production Mines and investigation/expansion activities, hopes that NMDC has the
latest tools and technology for carrying out mining operation not only in cost-effective manner but leaving least scope for
waste. The Committee recommends that NMDC management would take all care for Commercial and optimum utilization
of Mines.
 (PARA 6.3)
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/121streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:06]
Action Taken
 
NMDC has adopted cost reduction as one of its prime objectives.    Apart from reducing waste the company has of
late given importance to optimization of manpower which contributes a major factor towards cost of production.  Hand in
hand it has taken different measures for automation by way of computerization of Financial, Inventory and Human
Resources management.  In order to improve the effectiveness of its manpower the company has introduced Multi-skill and
high performance work systems.  Programme Logic Control system (PIC System) has been installed in all sections of Ore
Processing Plant and Closed circuit TVs are being installed for better monitoring at reduced manpower.
 
Recommendation
 
1.5 Future Growth Plans
 
            The Committee, while noting the future business plan and growth of NMDC expresses its satisfaction over the wide
spread activities of NMDC in India and abroad. And believes that effective implementation of NMDC’s future business plan
in India and abroad would prove a milestone in bettering not only the physical and financial performance of the company but
also the economic growth development of nation as a whole. 
(PARA 7.21.2)
The Committee observes that NMDC is definitely embarking upon its mission towards a global leader in its spread of
activities as NMDC is successfully making its impression in NAMIBIA, Tanzania and Madagascar in mineral exploration of
precious metal.
(PARA 7.21.3)
            The Committee hopes that NMDC’s activities in terrorist hit state like J&K would bring economic growth and
development with peace in the state. Similarly, the Committee hopes that NMDC’s project in states of lesser economic
growth would bring forth the economic prosperity and growth in these states.
(7.21.4)
            The Committee recommends that NMDC should continue to give impetus to auxiliary activities like support to
ancillary industry viz Pig Iron Industry and Sponge iron Industry. NMDC’s every bit of contribution in the lives of these
ancillary Industries would give a boost and encouragement to these industries. The Committee believes so.
(7.21.5)
 Action Taken
 
NMDC is meeting the entire requirement of RINL from its Bailadila mines. NMDC is also feeding many domestic
units like SIIL, Lanco, ESSAR, Ispat Industries Limited, Vikram Ispat, Jindal Vijaynagar etc.
 
            The company supplies iron ore to as many as 16 Pig iron and Sponge Iron industries.
55% of NMDC sales are in the Domestic Market. 
           
Recommendation
 
1.6 Production diversification
 
            The Committee recommends that NMDC management may take up mining & processing of raw materials to expand
its business horizon. Production diversificationwould give new opportunities to NMDC. Volume of production should be
such as to make the production cost-effective.
 (PARA 7.21.6)
Action Taken
 
            NMDC has gone for diversification in value added areas like Pig Iron, beneficiated Silica Sand, Gold, Mineral Sands
etc. to expand its business activities. Wherever required, the company takes following action for keeping cost-effectiveness
in volume of production:
(i)                  The company set target for production at the beginning of the year, taking in
 to account the market demand and capacity of the mines.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/121streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:06]
(ii)                The company restricts volume of production in case of low market demand
 due to recession in the market.
(iii)               Standard cost are fixed for each activity and actual are monitored and
 controlled to optimize the overall cost of production.
(iv)              Rationalization of manpower.
(v)                Induction of higher capacity equipment.
(vi)              Dynamic stockpiles are operated at the mines to balance the volume of
       production.
(vii)             Strict vigilance on expenditure at unit level and Corporate level.
(viii)           In Central workshop at Bailadila, overhauling of equipment is done to
       improve the life of equipment and thereby achieving economy in operation.
(ix)              Production in three shift has been started. 
 
RECOMMENDATION
 
1.7 Status of equipment and technology employed in NMDC
 
            The Committee hopes that NMDC management would make continuous efforts to up-grade the technology and
equipment capacity so as to increase the production which can result in better financial results.
(PARA 8.4)
 ACTION TAKEN
 
NMDC is constantly striving to improve its technology and methods of working. Some of the steps taken by Company to
upgrade the technology and capacity utilization are given below:
(i)
                  All section of the ore processing plant in all the operating mines are provided with PLC system for effective
monitoring.
(ii)                Close circuit camera & TV has been provided at T.C. Plant of BLD-14.
(iii)               Introduction of higher performance work system and multi-skilling.
(iv)              Introduction of high Capacity equipment. 50 T dumpers are being replaced by 85 T dumpers. The company
plans to introduce 120T dumpers in upcoming project. Tertiary crusher of Dep.5 has been replaced with heavy duty
crushers. Capacity of Diamond Mines at Panna has been enhanced from 24000 carats to 84000 carats by introducing
two modules of heavy media operation in addition to enhanced plant treatment capacity. X-ray sorting techniques
have been introduced to pick Diamonds in place of manual labourers.  
(v)
                Iron ore slimes which so far have been discarded as waste and non-cooking coal, now with the help of latest
technology, will be used in Pig iron making in the Romelt Pig Iron Plant (presently  under construction).
(vi)              Research & Development center is coming out with superior value added products like Ferric Powder and
carbon free iron power.
RECOMMENDATION
 
1.8 R&D cell in NMDC 
 
            The Committee is of the opinion that the conclusions arrived at through research projects leads the development of
new technology and efficient systems of working. That is to say research and development are inter-related As a matter of
fact. Research projects gives lot of information regarding technology development and product development. Therefore,
investment on R&D projects should be aimed at removing the problems being faced by the Industry, around which R&D
projects are being carried out.
(PARA 9.5)
 
            The Committee is pleased to note that NMDC has R&D Cell established at Hyderabad and this R&D cell established
at Hyderabad and it has been declared as a center of excellence by UNIDO in the fields of Mineral Processing. The 
Committee While nothing the major activities of the center (to achieve optimum utilization of mineral resources,
development of value added products from mine waste) recommends that R&D mission should also give impetus to further
development of methodology for undertaking mining operation in cost effective manner. Due weightage should also be
given to safety aspects in mining operation.
(PARA 9.6)

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/121streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:06]
 ACTION TAKEN
 
 The company has noted the recommendation of committee with regard to R&D mission. The suggestion would act as
guiding principle in the R&D mission of the company. The safety measures undertaken by company are given below:
 
(a)
    Corporate level internal safety organization has been established at Head quarter. This will co-ordinate all the
activities relating to safety and health in Mines and is headed by a Senior Executive in the rank of Executive
Director.
 
(b)
   In NMDC Vocational Training Centers are provided in each Project for imparting initial / basic training to new
entrants. This training is on the job training and concerned with enhancing the skills and safe working practices. 
Every year 1 / 5th of persons are given refresher training.  Apart from this, special training and development training
is being given to the required persons, whenever job content changes.  First aid and fire fighting training is being
conducted regularly at the Projects.
 
(c)    In each mining projects of NMDC sufficient number of Workmen Inspectors are nominated / appointed for Mining,
Mechanical and Electrical installations as per statute requirements.
 
(d)   Safety Committees have been formed in all the projects comprising of equal number of representatives of workmen
& management.
 
(e)    Regular Safety Committee meetings are conducted once in a month at each Project.  In the meetings, Accident
Analysis is done .Remedial measures are implemented thereafter.  Also periodically Tri-partite safety committee
meetings comprising of DGMS, Management & workmen are held at projects and corporate office.
 
(f)
     Occupational Health Centers have been provided in all the projects and are functioning properly.
 
(g)    Specialized training has been given to Doctors at   Occupational Health Safety Centers.
 
(h)    All the periodical medical examination and other additional tests required under statute are carried out as per
schedule. It covers all the mining employees. 
 
(i)      All the required safety appliances such as Safety Shoes, Helmet, Rain Suits and Goggles etc. are provided to mining 
workers periodically.
Recommendation
 
 1.9 Cost components of products produced by NMDC
 
            The Committee is pleased to note that NMDC management has introduced the muli-skilling concept to reduced the
fixed cost. The Committee also notes that various managerial controls measures are at work to reduce the cost of production.
The Committee desires that the Ministry of Steel, in its action Taken Note of the present Report, would furnish the detail as
to what extent the cost reduction measure entailed tangible result.
(PARA 10.4)
 Action Taken
 
The cost reduction measure undertaken by company is given below:
 
(a)
    fixing of standard cost at the beginning of the year for internal target production
(b)   comparison of actual cost with the standard cost monthly at project level
(c)    remedial measures to contain the cost at project level.
(d)   Monthly review of cost at Head Office by the management
 
Standard Cost per unit of iron ore / diamonds is prepared at the beginning of the year on the basis of production and
dispatch / sales targets finalized in the Corporate Plan meeting.  Project wise standard cost is projected considering the bench
marks in respect of each element of expenditure.  The bench marking is done considering the best of the physical parameters
achieved in the previous year, the average of previous five years or the standard set for the previous year, whichever reflects

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/121streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:06]
efficiency, economy and effectiveness.  These physical parameters are regularly monitored by concerned departments viz
Production, Industrial Engineering and Finance  at the project as well as at Head Office.  The physical norms thus
established, for consumption such as ‘powder factor’ for explosives, ‘consumption per tonne of excavation’ for drill bits,
tyres & tubes, stores/spares , power etc., and the latest landed cost of the materials at the time of preparation of standard cost
are taken into account to project the expenditure for the target production quantity.  
 
The standard cost as estimated above are reviewed at HO by Directors and approved by the Chairman for
communicating the same to the units for monitoring the actual cost periodically.
 
There after, the actual cost of production is compared with the standard cost periodically at the project level.  The said
procedure of fixing standard costs is being followed consistently and wherever required, the same is being suitably modified
so that effective cost control can be made by the Corporation.
 
At the projects, during monthly review meetings of all HOD’s, the cost of production is discussed for minimizing the 
costs keeping in view the standard cost envisaged for that year.   At Head Office also, every month, the actual cost up to the
month is reviewed with previous year cost as well as standard cost and deviations are brought to the notice of the
management.   The actual cost of production vis-à-vis the standard cost, is also discussed and reviewed in the Annual / Mid-
Term Corporate Meetings.
 
            In addition, the units prepare cost sheets periodically covering all the cost centers and circulate to the respective
departments.   The same is reviewed in the project review meetings for taking remedial action wherever necessary.
           
The above cost reduction measure has helped the company in reporting positive financial results as enumerated
below.
(Rupees in Crores)
Indicator 2001-02 2000-01 99-2000 1998-99
Profit before Tax 343.94 316.04 207.72  171.99
Net worth 1,332.16 1,123.95 929.08  794.46
Book value per share (Rs.) 100.80 85.05  70.30 60.11
Earning per share (Rs.) 19.38 17.87  12.30 11.03
Operating expenses to sales(%) 77.34 71.75 75.23 79.61
 
During the year 2002-03 (upto December, 2002) Company has reported profit before tax at Rs. 282.08 Crores. The
Company has reduced its operative expensive to 66.79%.
 
Recommendation
 
1.10 Physical and financial performance of NMDC
 
The Committee, while nothing the physical production of Iron-Ore and Diamonds by NMDC, recommends that
efforts should be made on the part of NMDC management and attain the economy of scale. 
The Committee expresses its pleasure over the excellent financial performance of NMDC. It is being hoped that
NMDC management would continue with its concerted efforts to make the financial performance of NMDC better.
(PARA 11.2)
Action Taken
 
            NMDC is taking various measures to attain economy of scale i.e. improvement in physical terms and financial
terms.   The likely physical as well as financial achievement during 2002-03 will be higher than the actual for the year 2001-
02 which is already a record.  
 
             The Committee may like to note that the operating results of the Corporation are increasing year after year which
shows crossing of break-even point.   This is due to continuous efforts of the management by increasing its sales volume and
containing the costs.
                       
            NMDC is always striving hard to minimize the production cost and improving the profitability position.
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/121streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:06]
Recommendation
 
1.11 Key Areas for Massive action
 
            The Committee notes that NMDC management has selected Key areas for Massive action, with the twin objective of
excellence and growth. And in the overall planning, due importance has been given to human factor. That is the unique
feature of NMDC’s planning and the committee hopes that this impetus to the human factor would definitely lead to
realization of growth with excellence. The Committee hopes that NMDC management would act upon properly in all select
areas with effective and efficient organizational intervention for generating commitment and sense of belongingness in
employees and promoting them to adapt to the change being brought forth by technological advancement and globalization
and liberalization.
(PARA 13.3)
 Action Taken
 
HRD is given utmost importance by NMDC. Apart from the various training programme designed for different
levels of employees, the company has introduced High Performance Work Systems, Multi skilling and programmers such as
Focussed Development Scheme for senior level executives, “Jeevan Yatra” for workmen etc.
 
Recommendation
 
1.12 AMR (Additions, Modifications and Replacement) scheme of NMDC.
 
            The Committee understands that AMR schemes are intended to keep the operation continuing by adding
modernizing and replacing the existing equipments as per the requirement. It is but natural that a profit making concern like
NMDC would have no budgetary problems for AMR purpose. However, care should be taken that AMR scheme should not
suffer time and cost-over run.
(PARA 14.2)
 ACTION TAKEN
 
            AMR Schemes are reviewed continuously under BE & RE. Some times the activities planned under AMR scheme
are deferred/ modified based on the necessity.
            There is no time/cost over run in the AMR scheme operated under Capital Expenditure.
 
Recommendation
 
1.13 Legal framework for the growth and development of mining operation
 
            The Committee is anguished to note the  submission of NMDC management that State Government are imposing
their own conditions in granting of mining lease and this is causing hindrance in the systematic development of mineral
industry and asking for sweet equity, additional royalty etc.
(PARA 19.3)
            The Committee is of the view that procedural hurdles and bureaucratic red- tapism should not come onto the way of
systematic development of mineral industry.
(19.4)
            The Committee is of view that the Ministry of Steel should approach the Department of Mines for organizing across
the table interaction of representatives of mineral enterprises and officials of state Government to form uniform mineral
policy as per the canons of National Mineral Policy 1993 and sort out problems relating to granting of mining/prospecting
lease etc. The Committee feels that the department of Mines should issue direction to GSI and IBM for identification of
‘Exclusion Mineral Zones’ for systematic exploration and exploitation of mineral resources. Having been given due weight
are to environmental aspects, exclusive Mineral zones may be taken out from the purview of Forest Conservation Act.
(PARA 19.5)
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/121streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:06]
  Action Taken
 
            The Mineral Advisory council has suggested Ministry of Environment and Forest to frame a guideline for grant of
early clearance for diversion of forest land for mining purposes and recommended to consider grant of such clearance under
Forest conservation Act 1980 for a period equal to the tenure of mining lease. This issue was discussed in the conference of
State Minister of Mining & Geology held on 23
rd December, 2002 and it is expected that a decision will be taken on the
issue at an early date. The Ministry of Environment and Forest has issued guidelines on 16.10.2002 to allow continuance of
mining in case of application for renewal of mining lease filed one year before expiry of lease, till a decision on the
application is conveyed.
 
Government has taken following steps to rationalize the procedure for renewal of mining lease:
A new rule 63A has been incorporated in the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 vide GSR21(E) dated 11
th
January,2002 which stipulate time limit of six months for Reconnaissance Permit, time limit of nine months for Prospecting
license and time limit of 12 months for Mining lease.
 
A new sub Rule 4B has been incorporated in rule 22 of the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 vide G.S.R. 21(E) dated
11th January,2002 which provides a time limit of 90 days for approval of mining plans submitted by prospective applicants.
 
Rule 22 (4A of Mineral concession Rule 1960 ) has been amended for allowing Director or Additional Director or
Joint Director (Mining & Geology) of a State, with essential educational qualifications & professional experience as
prescribed, to approve the mining plan irrespective of the pay scale.
 
The recent procedural simplification provided that in case of renewal of mining lease, the entrepreneur could
approach Central Government directly for necessary clearance and get a time bound decision,  if  State Government did not
take a decision on the application in prescribed time.
 
(Chapter - II)
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies :
 
Recommendation
 
2.1 Sustained Development for present generation and the scope for “Sustainable Development” keeping in view the general
interest of future generation.
 
            The Committee is pleased to note that the country has a vast reserve of Iron Ore (10052 million tones of hematite and
3407 million tones of magnetite) which will go for 150 year if the present rate of exploitation continues.  However, the
Committee desires that the rate of exploitation volume of exports of mineral should be as such that is adequate for sustained
development for present generation and leaves the scope for sustainable development keeping in view the general interest of
future generation.
(18.2)
 
 Action Taken
 
NMDC, while expanding the capacity of existing mines is also planning to develop new mines either as replacement
to existing mines or to build additional capacity for the sustainable development of the area.
(Chapter - III)
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies of the Ministry of Steel
 
Recommendation
 
3.1 MOU rating of NMDC
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/121streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:06]
            The Committee hopes that since MOU system is an instrument for improvement of performance NMDC would
improve financial ratios further to be a genuine claimant for the status of NAVARATNA. The Committee hopes that the
Government would give due consideration to the request of NMDC management for giving NAVRATNA Status to NMDC.
(PARA 12.3)
Action Taken
 
            The proposal for grant of Navratna Status to NMDC is under consideration.
 
Further Recommendation
 
The Committee is of the view that the NMDC management should reflect various financial ratios and expression to
stress its claim for being conferred the status of Navratna.  It is expected that the Ministry of Steel would advocate with the
Department of Public Enterprises for giving the status of Navratna to NMDC .  The Committee is of the considered view
that conferring the status of Navratna to NMDC would encourage the management and workers for improving upon the
physical and the financial performance of the company further.
 
 
Recommendation
 
3.2 Formation of Council of Mining enterprises
 
            The Committee understands that ONGC, MECL, GSI, IBM, NMDC and GAIL etc., have their separate charter of
function, but, since they are engaged in the development of Mineral Industry, therefore, the Committee think it pertinent that
a co-ordination and cooperation among them would lead systematic and planned exploration and exploitation of Mineral
resources available in the country.  Therefore, a council of these organizations is required.  Such ground may also
includemineral enterprises such as coal, copper, Zinc etc.
(17.2)
            The Committee desires that the Ministry of Steel would furnish brief status note on the organizational structure and
functions of Federation of India Mineral Industries (FIMI).
(17.3)  
 
Action Taken
 
               Government has already constituted Mineral Advisory Council which is the apex body in the country. It gives
broad directions and guideline regarding mineral policy and legislation. This council considers the issues raised by mining
community. The council invites representatives of Central Government, State government and federation etc. in its meetings
to decide the issues after consultation and deliberation.
 
            The Ministry of Steel furnished brief status note on the organizational structure and functions of Federation of India
Mineral Industries (FIMI).  The Committee went through the brief note.
 
Further Recommendation
 
The Committee understands that Mineral Advisory Council has been set up by the Department of Mines chaired by
Union Minister for Mines and it meets once in a year to discuss the problems being faced by Mining Industry.  Intention of
the Committee behind recommending  the formation of Council of ONGC, MECL, IBM, GSI, GAIL and NMDC is to
provide a platform for frequent formal and informal discussion on various issues to solve the problems of mining operation
and going beyond the jurisdiction of Department of Mines and covering to the areas of coal, steel, petroleum and mines as
well.  Moreover, the formation of the proposed Council would provide a platform for inter PSUs co-operation and through
mutual discussions the mutual problems could be solved.
While FIMI is an association of various mining associations, which gathers data and information regarding mining
operation and interface, interact with the government bodies for reddeming of grievances pertaining to mining operations. 
Therefore, neither the FIMI nor the Mineral Advisory Council is the substitute for the proposed council of ONGC,
MECL, IBM, GSI, GAIL and NMDC.
 
Recommendation

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/121streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:06]
 
3.3 Major customers of NMDC in domestic and foreign market and need of autonomy for NMDC in export promotion i.e.
direct export by NMDC
 
            The Committee notes that NMDC sells 55% of its production for the domestic market while 45% is being sold out to
international market. The Committee wonders that even in the age of liberalization and globalization the Government
continues with policy of allowing the service of canalizing agency. De-canalization should have followed theliberalization
policy. While de-canalisation applies with one of PSUs under the Ministry of steel i.e. Metal Scrap Trade Corporation
Limited (MSTC) and the same principle has not been applied in the case of NMDC. As per the existing system, Iron-Ore is
to be exported through canalizing agency i.e. MMTC. MMTC finds out market to Iron ore with 65% Fe content and above
whereas NMDC has got more quantity of Iron Ore lying in its pit head with less than fifty  five percent Iron content for
which international market is available but the same is not explored by NMDC. Therefore, the Committee feels that, it
would be in the fitness of things that NMDC is given complete autonomy in the best-interest of the Company. The
Committee feels NMDC be allowed to direct export to the countries other than the purchaser from MMTC i.e. Japan, Pak
and South Korea, NMDC has already exported directly to its foreign buyers 1.27 Lakh tones in 1999-2000, 9.65 Lakh tones
in 2000-01, and thus experience so gained, would proved handy to NMDC in direct export of Iron-ore. 
(PARA 21.11.4)
 
    Government is aware of the need for de-canalization of iron-ore. However, in view of the Long Term Agreement for
export of iron ore by MMTC, Govt. has decided that the existing arrangement for export of high quality iron –ore (with Fe
content of 645 and above) through MMTC may continue.
 
            After government intervention, an agreement was reached as per which NMDC has been entrusted with more
responsibility for all operational matters, including rail handling up-to loading into the ship. MMTC also agreed to reduce
the service charge from 5-6% of FOB to 3% on FOB value. This agreement has given NMDC a large role in export
operations.
 
             For the year 2002-03, NMDC has now been permitted to export 30  LMT (15 LMT from Bailadila and 15 LMT
from Donimalai). NMDC has also been granted export license for the following quantities:
 
Year Bailadila Donimalai Total
2003-04 17 LMT 18LMT 35 LMT
2004-05 17LMT 23LMT 40 LMT
 
Further Recommendation
 
The Committee is of the view that NMDC should be allowed to direct export to the countries rather than through
MMTC to the order of substantial quantity.  Time frame for how long export of iron ore through MMTC would continue has
not been indicated.  The Committee feels that functional autonomy given to NMDC in regard to direct export would enhance
the operational efficiency of the company in direct marketing.
 
Recommendation
 
3.5 Key concern Areas of Mining Industry in general and problems being faced by NMDC in particular and help required
from the Government.
 
Inflated mileage on Kirandul-Kottavalasa line
 
The Committee recommends that the Railways should give due consideration to the request of RINL/NMDC
management. The Committee feels that railways, NMDC management, RINL management and Ministry of Steel should
resolve the issue of inflated railways freight on K.K. line through mutual interactions and discussion. Railways may think of
transferring the KK line to NMDC, if railway is not in a position to run the line in the rationalized freight

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/121streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:06]
regime.                             (PARA 25.1.12) 
 Action Taken
  It has now been reduced from 30% to 20%  w.e.f. 9-7-02
 
Further Recommendation
 
The Committee welcomes the reduction of inflated freight on k.k. line by 10% i.e. from 30% to 20% it is being
hoped that the Ministry of Steel could make effort for rationalization of railway freight further so that it could further come
down.  
 
 
Recommendation
 
3.6 Problems at Chennai Port
 
            The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Steel should facilitate NMDC management for approaching
Ministry of Shipping for providing basic tippling facilities to NMDC.
(PARA 25.2.2)
 Action Taken
 
            So far Ministry of Steel has not received any request from NMDC for approaching Ministry of Shipping to provide
basic tippling facilities etc. to NMDC. Ministry of Steel has noted the suggestion /advice of the Committee for taking
necessary action whenever it receives such request from Company.
 
Further Recommendation
 
The Committee feels that the Ministry of Steel should have constant interaction with the management of NMDC and
accordingly resolve their problems at the first instance.  Therefore, it is reiterated that the Ministry of Steel should facilitate
NMDC management for approaching Ministry of Shipping for providing basic tippling facilities to NMDC.
 
Chapter - IV)
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  final replies of the  Ministry of Steel   have not been received.
 
Recommendation
 
4.1 Existing Rate of Royalty
 
The Committee recommends that the Government may like to examine the request of NMDC management for
linking the royalty with the value of the mineral on Advalorum basis.
(PARA 15.2)
 Action Taken
 
            The Government has constituted a Study group to study the revision in the rates of royalty on measure mineral (other
than coal, lignite and sand for stowing). The request of NMDC management for linking the royalty with the value of the
mineral on Advalorum basis is one of the subjects of study of this Study group. The report of this Study Group is awaited.
 
Recommendation
 
4.2 Co-operation and co-ordination between NMDC and Geological survey of India
 
            The Committee understands that GSI is the First agency to collect information on any mineral occurrence in the
country and NMDC, thereafter, being an exploiting agency, develop the promising/economically viable deposits for
exploration. And that is the reason, the Committee recommends for co-ordination and co-operation between GSI and
NMDC. GSI has proved in past ‘a factor’ in NMDC’s transaction of business as Iron –Ore deposits of Bailadila, Domimalai
and Kumaraswamy etc. is the contribution of GSI . The Committee hopes that GSI would continue to play a pivotal role in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/121streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:06]
NMDC’s life by collecting information on raw materials and providing new opportunities to NMDC to expand the volume
of business.
(PARA 16.1)
ACTION TAKEN
 
            Observation noted for necessary action.
 
Recommendation
 
4.3 Uniform Mineral Policy
 
            The Committee is of view that the Ministry of Steel should approach the Department of Mines for organizing across
the table interaction of representatives of mineral enterprises and officials of state Government to form uniform mineral
policy as per the canons of National Mineral Policy 1993 and sort out problems relating to granting of mining/prospecting
lease etc. The Committee feels that the department of Mines should issue direction to GSI and IBM for identification of
‘Exclusion Mineral Zones’ for systematic exploration and exploitation of mineral resources. Having been given due weight
are to environmental aspects, exclusive Mineral zones may be taken out from the purview of Forest Conservation Act.
(PARA 19.5)
 
 Action Taken
 
            The Mineral Advisory council has suggested Ministry of Environment and Forest to frame a guideline for grant of
early clearance for diversion of forest land for mining purposes and recommended to consider grant of such clearance under
Forest conservation Act 1980 for a period equal to the tenure of mining lease. This issue was discussed in the conference of
State Minister of Mining & Geology held on 23
rd December, 2002 and it is expected that a decision will be taken on the
issue at an early date. The Ministry of Environment and Forest has issued guidelines on 16.10.2002 to allow continuance of
mining in case of application for renewal of mining lease filed one year before expiry of lease, till a decision on the
application is conveyed.
 
Government has taken following steps to rationalize the procedure for renewal of mining lease:
(i)
                  A new rule 63A has been incorporated in the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 vide GSR21(E) dated 11 th
January,2002 which stipulate time limit of six months for Reconnaissance Permit, time limit of nine months for
Prospecting license and time limit of 12 months for Mining lease.
 
(ii)
                A new sub Rule 4B has been incorporated in rule 22 of the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 vide G.S.R. 21(E)
dated 11 th January,2002 which provides a time limit of 90 days for approval of mining plans submitted by
prospective applicants.
 
(iii)               Rule 22 (4A of Mineral concession Rule 1960 ) has been amended for allowing Director or Additional Director
or Joint Director (Mining & Geology) of a State, with essential educational qualifications & professional experience
as prescribed, to approve the mining plan irrespective of the pay scale.
 
(iv)              The recent procedural simplification provided that in case of renewal of mining lease, the entrepreneur could
approach Central Government directly for necessary clearance and get a time bound decision,  if  State Government
did not take a decision on the application in prescribed time.
 
            Recommendation
 
4.4 Measures for reducing the time gap between Mining lease and environmental clearance or mining lease and actual
mining operation.
                                    .
            The Committee is of the considered view that. Government should develop mechanism for reducing the time gap
between the grant of Mining lease and environmental clearance to minimize the times gap between the grant of mining lease

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/121streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:06]
and actual mining operation. In this regard, the request of mining enterprises for ‘simplification of procedures’ and single
window clearance mechanism may be evolved
 
(PARA 20.5) 
 Action Taken
 
              Ministry of Steel has noted the recommendation, to approach the Department of Mines for organizing across the
table interaction of representatives of mineral enterprises and officials of state Government to form uniform mineral policy,
for necessary action.
 
            Government is taking necessary action to frame the guideline on early clearance for diversion of forest land for
mining purposes.
 
Ministry of Environment & Forest in the meeting of Mineral Advisory Council held on 30.08.2000 agreed that
separate classification of mineral land would be in the national interest. For important minerals maps could show mineral
and forest area on a compatible scale. Indian Bureau of Mines in conjunction with Ministry of Environment and Forest have
initiated the work of identification of mineral bearing land and have prepared 77 maps in which mineral bearing areas have
been  superimposed .
 
Recommendation
           
4.5 Pricing policy of NMDC
 
            The Committee notes the ‘pricing policy’ and mechanism of price-determination of Iron-Ore in domestic and global
market. The prices for export of Iron Ore are determined by the global demand and supply position on year to year basis
while in domestic market the prices of Iron-ore is determined by mutual agreement between buyers (Iron –ore market is a
buyer’s market) and seller taking into consideration market resilience, ground reality of steel sector, global demand/supply
position and trends of iron-ore prices in the international market.
(PARA 21.8)
 
            The Committee hopes that NMDC should prove itself a factor/mettle in the global market of Iron-Ore.
(PARA 21.9)
 
Recommendation
 
4.6Recent recovery in steel industry and financial performance
of NMDC
 
            The Committee understands that, since the Iron Ore is an important and major raw material for production of steel, it
is but natural, the existence of inter-dependence of steel production and the quality of Iron-Ore traded. The Committee is
pleased to note that NMDC’s sales have a direct relation to production of steel in the country. That is so, because Steel
Scenario is gaining momentum and is recovering fast, which, the Committee feels, would lead to increase in NMDC’s sales.
(PARA 22.4)
Action Taken
 
Appropriate reply  has not been furnished.
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/121streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:06]
 
Recommendation
 
4.7 SWOT (Strength Weakness Opportunities and Threats) analysis of NMDC.
 
            The Committee is of the opinion that SWOT analysis should act as an instrument for boosting the physical and
financial performance further.  NMDC management should keep on analyzing and reviving its SWOT-chart as per changing
domestic and international market and thereafter, chalk out its future business plan as per the outcome of SWOT – analysis.
(PARA 24.2)
            The Committee hopes that NMDC strength and make efforts for taking advantage of its strength i.e. excellent R&D
facilities, vast reserves of high grade Iron –Ore, well experienced and trained manpower. The fact that NMDC is a high
dividend paying company, would lead to brand endowment for NMDC.
(PARA 24.3)
            The Committee recommends that NMDC management should chalk out special programmers to overcome
weaknesses. The Committee is surprised to observe that profit making organization like NMDC lack the latest system of
automation. Immediate steps are required in this regard. The Committee further recommends that the managerial
methodology of organizational  Intervention should be adopted for organizational change and better managerial pre practices
NMDC management may come forward to support change in rules and guidelines which provide a level playing field to
compete with private enterprises.
The Committee further recommends that NMDC management should sort out problems of mining leases through
mutual interaction with State Government and by seeking help from Ministry of Steel.
(PARA 24.4)
 Action Taken
 
 The company keeps close liaison with the State Govts. and Forest Depts. for sorting out the ML and Forest clearance.
However, at times due to external constraints the materialization of the same gets delayed.   Ministry Of Steel helps the
company whenever required for expediting the process at MOEF and state level.
 
 
 
 
Recommendation
 
4.8 Amendment to Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition)
Act 1970
 
            The Committee recommends that NMDC management should come forward with concrete proposal of amendment
to contract labour Act and other labour legislation and labour and social welfare. The Committee hopes that the labour
reforms on the cards will take care of things.
 (PARA 25.3.2)
 Action Taken
 
            As desired by committee,  proposal for  amendment in contract labour Act  , other labour legislation and labour and
social welfare as formulated by Company is enclosed as under:-
 
Proposed amendments to the Contract Labour(Regulations & Abolition) act, 1970
 
EXISTING PROPOSED
 
1.  Sec.1(4).  It applies -
to every establishment in which twenty
 or
more workmen are employed or were
employed on any day of the preceding twelve
 
     Sec.1(4).  It applies -
to every establishment in which fifty
 or more
workmen are employed or were employed on
any day of the preceding twelve months as

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/121streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:06]
months as contract labour;
 
to every contractor who employs or who
employed on any day of the preceding twelve
months twenty or more workmen;
 
Provided that the appropriate Government
may, after giving not less than two months
notice of its intention so to do, by
notification in the Official Gazette, apply the
provisions of this Act to any establishment or
contractor employing such number of
workmen less than twenty as may be
specified in this notification.
 
2.   Sec.1 (5)(B)
It shall not apply to Establishments in which
work only of an intermittent or casual nature
is performed.
3.   Sec.2(1)(c) - CONTRACTOR
“Contractor” in relation to an Establishment
means a person who undertakes to produce a
given result for the Establishment other than
a mere supply of goods or articles of
manufacture to such Establishment, through
Contract Labour or who supplies contract
labour for any work of the Establishment and
includes a Sub-Contractor.
 
4. Sec. 2(1)(c) – ESTABLISHMENT
     means
any office or department of the Government
or a local authority or
any place where any industry trade, business,
manufacture or occupation is carried on.
 
5.  Sec.7
 
 
 
6. Sec.10(2)
Before issuing any notification under sub:
section (1) in relation to an establishment the
Appropriate Government shall have regard to
the conditions of work and benefits provided
for the contract labour in that establishment
and other relevant factors such as
a) whether, the prodess, operation or other
work is incidental to, or necessary for the
industry, trade, business, manufacture or
occupation that is carried out in the
establishment.
b) whether it is of perennial nature, that is to
say, it is so of sufficient duration having
regard to the nature of industry, trade,
business, manufacture or occupation that is
carried out in the establishment.
c)  whether it is done ordinarily through
contract labour;
 
to every contractor who employs or who
employed on any day of the preceding twelve
months fifty
 or more workmen;
 
Provided that the appropriate Government
may, after giving not less than two months
notice of its intention so to do, by
notification in the Official Gazette, apply the
provisions of this Act to any establishment or
contractor employing such number of
workmen less than fifty
 as may be specified
in the notification.
 
 
It shall not apply to Establishments in which
work only of an intermittent, seasonal or
casual nature of specialized nature is
performed.
 “Contractor” in relation to an Establishment
means a person who undertakes to provide a
given result for the Establishment other than
a mere supply of goods or articles of
manufacture to such Establishments through
Contract Labour or who supplies contract
labour for any work of the Establishment and
includes a Sub-Contractor but also does not
include a Company registered under the
Company Act, 1956 and Cooperative Labour
Societies formed under the State Cooperative
Societies Acts.
any office or department of the Government,
local authority or
any place where any Industry, Trade
Business.  Manufacture or Occupation is
carried on but does not cover the residential
colony/apartments/sports complex/public
gardens/canteens etc., provided by the
Company to its employees.
To add the Following Provisio to Section 7
It is expressly made clear that a breach of
this Section shall not result in the workmen
becoming the direct employees of the
Principal Employer.
 
Sec.  10(2) To Add 
the Following Proviso;
 
Provided that the Contract Labour System
shall not be abolished in case of peripheral
activities which are incidental or connected
or related to the main business and core
activities of the Principal Employer which is
specialized in nature.
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/121streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:06]
regular workmen in that establishment or an
establishment similar there to.
d)  whether it is sufficient to employ
considerable number of whole-time
workmen.
7.  Sec.12
 
8.  Sec.16
Canteens – (i) The appropriate Government
may make rules requiring that in every
establishment
to which this Act applies,
 
 
wherein work requiring employment of
contract labour is likely to continue for such
perioid as may be prescribed, and
wherein contract labour numbering one
hundred or more is ordinarily employed by a
contractor,
one or more canteens shall be provided and
maintained by the contractor for the use of
such contract labour.
 
9.  Sec.31 Power to Exempt in Special
     Cases:
     The Appropriate Government may in the
case of emergency, direct, by Notification in
the Official Gazette, that subject to such
conditions and restrictions, if any, and for
such period or periods, as may be specified
in the Notification, all or any of the
provisions of this Act or the Rules made
there under shall not apply to any
establishment or class of establishments or
any class of contractors.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To add the Following Proviso in Section 12:
It is expressly made clear that a breach of
this Section shall not result in the workmen
becoming the direct employees of the
Principal Employer.
 
 
Canteens – (i) The appropriate Government
may make rules requiring that in every
establishment-
 
 
(a) to which this Act applies,
 
 
(b) wherein work requiring employment of
contract labour is likely to continue for such
period as may be prescribed, and
 
(c) wherein contract labour numbering two
hundred fifty or more is ordinarily employed
by a contractor.
 
 
One or more canteens shall be provided and
maintained by the contractor for the use of
such contract labour.
 
 
 
 
 
The Appropriate Government may in case of
an Industry which is a Public Utility Service
within the definition of Section 2(n) of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, and/or an
essential service under Essential
Commodities Act direct, by Notification in
the Official Gazette, that subject to

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/121streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:06]
conditions and restrictions, if any, and for
such period or periods, as may be specified
in the Notification, all or any of the
provisions of this Act or the Rules made
there under shall not apply to any
establishment or class of establishments or
any class of contractors.
 
Chapter V
Observations /Conclusions/ Recommendations of the Committee at a glance
 
3.1 MOU rating of NMDC
 
The Committee is of the view that the NMDC management should reflect various financial ratios and expression to
stress its claim for being conferred the status of Navratna.  It is expected that the Ministry of Steel would advocate with the
Department of Public Enterprises for giving the status of Navratna to NMDC .  The Committee is of the considered view
that conferring the status of Navratna to NMDC would encourage the management and workers for improving upon the
physical and the financial performance of the company further.
 
3.2 Formation of Council of Mining enterprises
 
             The Committee understands that Mineral Advisory Council has been set up by the Department of Mines chaired by
Union Minister for Mines and it meets once in a year to discuss the problems being faced by Mining Industry.  Intention of
the Committee behind recommending the formation of Council of ONGC, MECL, IBM, GSI, GAIL and NMDC is to
provide a platform for frequent formal and informal discussion on various issues to solve the problems of mining operation
and going beyond the jurisdiction of Department of Mines and covering to the areas of coal, steel, petroleum and mines as
well.  Moreover, the formation of the proposed Council would provide a platform for inter PSUs co-operation and through
mutual discussions the mutual problems could be solved.
While FIMI is an association of various mining associations which gathers data and information regarding mining
operation and interface interact with the government bodies for redeeming  of grievances pertaining to mining operations. 
Therefore, neither the FIMI nor the Mineral Advisory Council is the substitute for the proposed council of ONGC,
MECL, IBM, GSI, GAIL and NMDC.
 
3.3 Major customers of NMDC in domestic and foreign market and need of autonomy for NMDC in export promotion i.e.
direct export by NMDC
 
The Committee is, however, of the view that NMDC should be allowed to direct export to the countries rather than
through   MMTC to the order of substantial quantity. Time frame how long export of iron ore through MMTC would
continue has not been indicated.  The Committee feels that functional autonomy given to NMDC in regard to direct export
would enhance the operational efficiency of the company in direct marketing.
 
3.5 Key concern Areas of Mining Industry in general and problems being faced by NMDC in particular and help required
from the Government.
 
Inflated mileage on Kirandul-Kottavalasa line
 
The Committee welcomes the reduction of inflated freight on k.k. line by 10% i.e. from 30% to 20% it is being
hoped that the Ministry of Steel could make effort for rationalization of railway freight further so that it could further come
down. 
 
3.6 Problems at Chennai Port
 
The Committee feels that the Ministry of Steel should have constant interaction with the management of NMDC and
accordingly resolve their problems at the first instance.  Therefore, it is reiterated that the Ministry of Steel should facilitate

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/121streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:06]
NMDC management for approaching Ministry of Shipping for providing basic tippling facilities to NMDC.
 
 
 
MINUTES
MINUTES OF THE MEETING
 
 
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday the 6 th May, 2003 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
1.
                  Dr. P.C. Alexander  --  Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.                  Prof. M.M. Aggarwal
3.                  Dr. Abrar Ahmed
4.                  Shrimati Saroj Dubey
5.                  Dr. Faguni Ram
6.                  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
7.                  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
 
LOK SABHA
8.
                  Shri Deepak Kumar
9.                  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
10.              Shri Sunil Khan
11.              Dr. K. Malaisamy
12.              Shri P. Rajendran
13.              Dr. B.B. Ramaiah
14.              Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
15.              Shri Chunnilal Bhau Thakur
 
SPECIAL INVITEE
Shri Jibon Roy
 
SECRETARIAT
            Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
            Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
            Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
 
 
 
WITNESSES
 
Ministry of Steel
Shri J.S. Gill, Secretary
Shri D.V. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Neel Kamal, Director
Ms. Anita Parveen, Deputy Secretary
Shri Navin Soi, Deputy Secretary
Steel Authority of India Ltd. (SAIL)
Shri V.S. Jain, Chairman
Shri S.C.K. Patne, Director (Project)
Shri A.K. Singh, Director (Commercial)
Shri Ashis Das, Executive Director (Corporate Planning)

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/121streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:06]
Shri U.P. Singh, Executive Director, Vc(Operation)
Shri M. Usman, Joint Director (P&C)
Alloy Steel Plant
Shri R.K. Singhal, REsident Manager
Durgapur Steel Plant
Dr. S.K. Bhattacharya, Managing Director (DSP)
 
2.         At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members of the cm, Secretary, Ministry of Steel, Chairman of SSAIL  and
representatives of DSP, ASP and Salem Steel Plant to the meeting of the day. Apprising them the agenda of the meeting i.e.
examination of the implementation status of modernizations, expansion and restructuring-cum-financial & business
programmes of SAIL, the Chairman commenced the meeting by stated that SAIL had undertaken ajor Modernizations
Programmes at Durgapur, Rourkela and Bokaro Steel Plants and made the total investment to the tune of Rs. 12,65.00 crore. 
Although the Modernisation Programmes suffered time and cost-overruns, the Modernisation Programmes have been
completed and are now on the course of stabilisation, Financial Restructuring of SAIL, comprises of waiver of loan
advanced to SAIL from Steel Development Fund (SDF) and Government of India, Government guarantee to raise fund for
VRS purpose and for meeting repayment obligations on the past loans.  While the Business Restructuring Programmes of
SAIL envisages divestment of non-core assets while protecting jobs of existing employees and conversion of IISCO, into a
joint venture with SAIL holding minority share holding.
 
3.            Thereafter, the Chairman asked the Secretary, Ministry of Steel to deliberate upon the implementation status of
modernization, expansion and restructuring-cum-financial and business programmes of SAIL.  After the presentation of the
Secretary, Ministry of Steel on the select subject, the Chairman and the members of the cm raised some queries which were
solved by the Secretary, Ministry of Steel and the Chairman of SAIL.
 
4.         The Committee  then adjourned at 1.30 p.m.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 