73rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/73rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:38]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INDUSTRY
 
SEVENTY THIRD REPORT
 
ON
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2002-03) OF THE  DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
(MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES)
 
(PRESENTED ON THE TABLE OF RAJYA SABHA  ON  THE 14TH MAY, 02)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON  THE 14TH MAY, 02)
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
MAY, 2002/JYAISTHA, 1924  (SAKA)
 
 
C O N T E N T S                              
1.            COMPOSITION OF  THE  COMMITTEE                                                                                       
                                                                                                                        
2.                PREFACE                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                         
3.                REPORT                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                
4.            OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND  RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE – AT AGLANCE                                                            
 5.            ANNEXURE                                                                                                                       
6.                MINUTES
                                                                                                                                                         
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
 
1.   Shri T.N. Chaturvedi  - Chairman
 
      RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Prof. M.M. Aggarwal
         3.   Dr . Abrar Ahmad
     4.   Shri Jayantilal Barot
5.   Shri Prasanta Chatterjee 
6. Smt. Saroj Dubey

73rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/73rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:38]
7. Shri Faguni Ram
       8.   Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
9. Shri P.K. Maheshwari
10. Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
11. Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
12. Shri S. Sivasubramanian
   13.  Smt. Sushree Devi
1. Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
 
      LOK SABHA
 
15.    Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
16.    Kumari Mamata Banerjee
17.    Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
18.    Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
19.    Shri Nepal Chandra Das
20.    Shri Deepak Kumar
21.    Shri Thomas Hansda
22.  Dr. S. Jagathrakshakan
23.    Shri A.C. Jose
24.    Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
25.  Shri Brijlal Khabri
26.  Shri Sunil Khan
27.  Shri Manjay Lal
28.
   Dr. K. Malaisamy
29.    Shri A. Narendra
30.    Shri Ananta Nayak
31.    Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
      32.  Shri Dharam Raj Singh Patel
33.   Shri Uttamrao Patil
34.   Shri Malyala Rajaiah
35.   Shri P. Rajendran
36.
    Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
37.    Shri Tarachand Sahu
38.    Shri Ramanand Singh
39.    Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
40.    Chowdhary Talib Hussain
41.   Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
42.    Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari
43.   Shri Beni Prasad Verma
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani,  Committee Officer
 
P R E F A C E 
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry having been authorised by the
Committee, hereby present this Seventy Third  Report on the Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of  the Department of Public
Enterprises  (Ministry of  Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises).
 
2.         The Committee heard the oral evidence of the Secretary and other representatives of the Department of Public Enterprises
(Ministry of Heavy Industries and  Public Enterprises) on the  4
th April, 2002.
 
3.         The Committee in its meeting held on  the 8 May, 2002 considered and adopted the Report.  
                                 T.N. CHATURVEDI   

73rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/73rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:38]
      Chairman
NEW DELHI
8th  May, 2002
Department-related Parliamentary
                                                                                                                  Standing Committee on Industry
 
 REPORT
 
            The Department of Public Enterprises acts as a nodal agency for all PSEs and assists in policy formulation pertaining to the
policy guidelines on performance improvement and evaluation, financial accounting, personnel management and in related areas. It
also collects, evaluates and maintains information on several areas in respect of PSEs. In fulfilling its roles  it associates itself with
other Ministries and Organizations.
 
1.1               The important role and tasks of the Department of Public Enterprises are: -
 
(i)                 General policy relating to Public Sector Enterprises;
(ii)               Matters relating to issue of Presidential Directives and Guidelines to    Public Sector Enterprises;
(iii)              Formulation of Policy Guidelines pertaining to Public Sector Enterprises (PSEs) in areas like performance
improvement and evaluation, financial   management, personnel management, board structures, wage settlement,
training, industrial relation, vigilance, performance appraisal, etc.;
(iv)
             All matters relating to Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the    Public Sector Enterprises and the
Administrative Ministries/ Departments.;
(v)                Matters relating to  the delegation of powers   to the  Board of Directors;
(vi)             To undertake in-depth studies in respect of significant areas of functioning             of central PSEs.;
(vii)            Matters relating to International Centre for Promotion of Enterprises (ICPE);
(viii)          Matters relating to Standing Conference of Public Enterprises (SCOPE);
(ix)             To monitor and evaluate the performance of PSEs and to act as a repository of data and to bring out an Annual
Survey for the Parliament; and
(x)               Permanent Machinery of Arbitrators for settlement of disputes among             Public             Sector Enterprises and
Government Departments except disputes relating to tax             matters.
 
1.2       The Department has five constituent Divisions, viz, the Financial Policy Division, the Management Policy Division, the
MoU Division, the Administration & Coordination Division and Permanent Machinery of Arbitration. The Financial Policy
Division comprises the Public Enterprises Survey Unit, the Policy Planning Unit and the Wage Policy Unit. The Management
Policy Division comprises the Personnel Policy Unit, Training Unit, Performance Indicator and Work Norms Unit (PIWN Unit) and
SC & ST Cell. The MoU Division comprises MoU Unit, Data Bank and Computer Cell. The Administration & Coordination
Division comprises the Administration, Library, Parliament and Coordination Wings and Hindi Cell. The Permanent Machinery of
Arbitration (PMA) provides a forum for settlement of commercial disputes between two or more PSEs as well as between a
Government Department and PSEs. 
 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
 
             DEMAND NO. 53
                               ( Rs. in crore )
                            Budget 2001-02                        Revised 2001-02                          Budget 2002-03
MAJOR
HEAD
PLAN NON-
PLAN
TOTAL PLAN NON-
PLAN
TOTAL PLAN NON-
PLAN
TOTAL
REVENUE 8.00 2.86 10.86 8.00 2.86 10.68 10.00 2.63 12.63
CAPITAL … … … … … … … … …
TOTAL 8.00 2.86 10.86 8.00 2.86 10.68 10.00 2.63 12.63

73rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/73rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:38]
 
 
2.         In Demand No. 53, a budgetary allocation of  Rs.12.63  crore  has been made  for  the financial year 2002-03.Under the
Demand, the Plan and Non-Plan allocations is  Rs.10.00 crore and 2.63 crore respectively.
2.1        The details of the Demands for the  current  fiscal  are as follows :-
(i)                   Rs. 2.24 crore  for  the  Secretariat Economic Services;
(ii)                 Rs.0.39 crore for International Co-Operation;
(iii)               Rs.8.50 crore for the plan expenditure in respect of retraining and redeployment of rationalized workers of CPSEs.
(iv)              Rs.1.00 crore for the Projects/Schemes for the benefits of  North Eastern Region including Sikkim.
2.2          The Department informed the Committee  that major provision of the budget outlay for DPE for the year 2002-03 relates to
an amount of Rs.10.00 crores under Plan Head for the expenditure connected with Counseling, Re-training and Re-deployment (CRR)
of rationalized employees of Central PSEs.
2.3                 As against Rs. 6.75 crores  allocated in R.E. 2001-02, in BE 2002-03  Rs. 8.50 crores had been allocated for  counseling,
retraining and redeployment of rationalized workers of Central PSEs which was  taken up by the Department of Public Enterprises
since  1st April, 2001. Earlier, the counseling, retraining and redeployment activities was dealt by Department of Industrial Policy and
Promotion (IP&P) up to the financial year 2000-01 which have been transferred to the  Department of Public Enterprises  since the
financial year 2001-02 .
 
2.4  The Committee is of the view that the work relating to retraining and redeployment of rationalised employees of Central PSEs is a
major task recently assigned to the Department of Public Enterprises. The Committee, therefore, recommends that additional
funds may be allocated at RE stage to fill the gap of the requirements of the Department.
 
            PLAN INVESTMENT IN DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES
 
3.         The major provision of the budget outlay for DPE for the year 2002-03 relates to an amount of Rs.10.00 crores under Plan
Head for the expenditure connected with Counseling, Re-training and Re-deployment (CRR) of rationalized employees of Central
PSEs. The work relating to CRR was assigned to DPE only during the fiscal 2001-02 and after formulating the scheme in this regard,
the actual work started sometime in November, 2001. Against a provision of Rs.8 crores provided in 2001-02, an amount of Rs.10
crores has been provided for the financial year 2002-03.
 
3.1        An amount of Rs.20.00 lakhs  was allocated for the Department of Heavy Industries for annual plan in the financial year 
2001-02  out of which Rs. 10.00 lakhs had been kept for DPE and remaining Rs. 10.00 lakhs for DHI. The amount is meant to
implement the Information Technology Plan. This amount has been included in the Demands for Grants of DHI. In year 1999-2000,
being a first year of implementation of the plan, the expenditure was more than the subsequent year 2000-01. The increase in RE
2001-02 & BE 2002-03 was due to the implementation of the scheme of Counseling, Retraining, and Redeployment of the
rationaliosed employees of Central PSEs.
 
3.2        Taking into consideration the major works done by the Department relating to the Central PSEs, the plan allocation of
Rs.10.00 crore seems to be inadequate. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the plan allocations may be reviewed at RE stage.
 
 
NON-PLAN INVESTMENT FOR THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES
 
4.         In BE for the year 2002-03, Non-Plan Budget of Rs.2.24 crores has been allocated for the Economic Services to meet the
Office and Administrative expenses. As far as the provision for Secretariat Economic Services is concerned, Rs.2.24 crores  provided
in BE 2002-03 seems to be adequate keeping in view of the expenditure pattern over the years. The Department has stated that in case
of any additional requirement, the same will be sought at RE stage keeping in view the trend and requirement.
 
4.1        The lower expenditure in 2000-01 as compared to 1999-2000 was due to implementation of strict economy measures. And
also the lower provision in RE 2002-03 as compared to RE 2001-02 was due to strict economy measures and abolition of some posts
consequent upon the recommendation of Expenditure Reforms Commission (ERC).
 
4.2        The Committee feels that though it is good on the part of the Department to minimize non-plan expenditure, yet the
decreasing non-plan investment should not hamper the important functions of the Department. The Committee, therefore,

73rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/73rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:38]
recommends that additional requirements of the Department, if any, may be considered at the RE stage.
4.3        The Government has already taken initiatives so as to strengthen the Department.  The Department monitors the
performance   of the PSEs and submits its reports  periodically to the Cabinet. It reviews  performance of these PSEs and specific 
objectives in the light of MoU signed by them.   The  Department  has  been performing  these functions ever since it was established
as the   Bureau   of    Public    Enterprises  in   the    sixties.  However, the role of  DPE with  regard to  Disinvestment  has  been
limited after the creation of separate Department of  Disinvestment (DoD). The only significant change that has taken place is that all 
the parliamentary  matters which were earlier being    handled either by DPE or Ministry of Finance  with regard to disinvestments are
now being dealt by  DoD.  It was also stated that even after  the creation of separate Department of Disinvestment, the Department of
Public Enterprises would  continue to be the nodal Department  for formulating general policy  relating to Public Sector Enterprises
(PSEs) and for finalisation of the Memorandum of Understanding signed  between the Public Sector Enterprises and the
Administrative Ministries.
4.4        Since DPE is an important Agency of the Government to make policies and review performance of the central PSEs through
MoUs  signed by them, the Committee is, therefore, of the firm view that the Government should strengthen this Department.
 
SEARCH COMMITTEE AND NAVRATNAS & MINIRATNAS
 
5.         The Search Committee is set up with the approval of the Cabinet for selecting   non-official part time Directors for Navratna
and Miniratna PSEs. The Search Committee selects non-official part time Directors of impeccable stature and background for
induction of at least 4 non-official Directors in the case of Navratna  PSEs and  three Non-Official Directors in the case of Miniratna 
PSEs.  Non-Official part time Directors are drawn from Public men, Technocrats, Management Experts & Consultants and
Professional Managers in Industry & Trade with high degree of proven ability.  They play a complimentary role in providing
professional and managerial advice to the Board and are appointed with the approval of ACC on part time basis.
5.1            Professionalisation of the Boards of Public Enterprises  is one of the thrust areas of Public Sector Reforms as it is vital to
the functioning of the Board and in achieving high standards of performance. Detailed instructions in this regard were issued vide
DPE O.M. No.18(6)/91-GM dated 16
th March, 1992. Non-official Directors can play an important role in formulation of a Company’s
strategy and inensuring that the Board sets its sights high enough. Their contribution to strategy is often through asking well directed
questions, critically but constructively. They also take with them an external set of standards against which to assess the aims and
targets, which the functional directors have set for themselves.
5.2        The Committee  was informed by the Department that the induction of Non-Official part-time Directors has enabled the
Boards of PSEs to exercise the enhanced powers and also to constitute various sub-committees, like the Audit Committee. The
induction of non-official Directors, who are eminent persons from various disciplines, has also resulted in the Boards becoming truly
professional. The non-official Directors have been making substantial contributions towards the decision making process at Board
level.
5.3        It was also revealed by the Department that during the financial year 2001-02 the Search Committee held five meetings and
selected 71 persons for appointment as non-official part-time Directors on the Boards of 21 PSEs.
5.4        The Committee notes that Non-Official Directors for Navratna and Miniratna PSEs have benefited immensely due to the
status assigned to them. The Committee feels that the Department of Public Enterprises should undertake all possible steps to
introduce professionalism in these Public Enterprises Sector Enterprises  so that they are able to face challenges of changing  times
and  able to develop competitive edge.
5.5        The Committee, however, proposes to undertake a study to know how far Directors of MoU signing PSEs are given sufficient
power to enable them to take quick decisions in their business related matters and formation of joint venture etc.  in India and abroad.
 
5.6        At present there are 10 Navratna and 41 Miniratna PSEs and their names are given in the Annexure-I.  The Navratna status
was conferred to the PSEs that have comparative advantages and support them in their drive to become global giants by grant of
enhanced autonomy and delegation of powers. 
5.7        The Government have also granted enhanced financial, managerial and    operational autonomy to other profit-making
enterprises, called Miniratnas  Miniratna PSEs are selected by the concerned administrative Ministry/Department with reference to the
eligibility criteria and guidelines laid down in DPE O.M. No.11/36/97-Fin. dated the 9 th October, 1997.  These PSEs are also given
enhanced financial and operational autonomy in respect of incurring capital expenditure, setting up joint ventures/subsidiaries and
overseas offices, technology joint ventures and strategic alliances and schemes for HRD.
5.8             Regarding qualifications of a PSE to claim the status of Miniratna, the Department stated that these enterprises should have
earned profits continuously for the last three years, have positive net worth, did not seek budgetary support or guarantees from the
Government and   have not   defaulted in the   repayment of   loans/interests to the Government. These enterprises can incur capital
expenditure, enter into joint ventures, set up technological and strategic alliances, formulate schemes of human resources

73rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/73rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:38]
management, etc. subject to certain stipulations and guidelines.
5.9           The Committee is of the opinion that the grant of Navratna and Miniratna status should not be a one time affair. The
Committee is of the view that the Navratna/Miniratna status should be reviewed periodically and those PSEs, which underperform as
compared to their targets   should be denied Navratna/Miniratna status.
5.10        The Committee  also recommends that greater financial, operational and managerial autonomy should be given to the
Navratnas/Miniratnas PSEs  so  as to enable them to take independent decisions.  
 
 
COUNSELING, RETRAINING/ REDEPLOYMENT, SETTING UP OF NEW CENTERS/ ADDITION OF NODAL
AGENCIES
 
6          The work relating to Counseling, Retraining/ Redeployment was assigned to the Department of Public Enterprises during the
year 2001-02. After formulating the scheme, the actual work started sometime in November, 2001. Against a provision of Rs.8 crores
provided in 2001-2002, an amount of Rs.10.00 crores has been provided for the year 2002-03.
 
6.1        Further, a provision of Rs. 50.00 lakhs has been made for the year 2002-03 towards project monitoring for the Department.
The sum is for the centrally sponsored scheme, viz., Counseling, Retraining and Redeployment of the rationalised employees of the
CPSEs.
6.2        The Committee feels that  the initiatives taken by the DHI to counsel, retrain and  re-deploy  the employees of CPSEs are
laudable. The Committee, therefore, recommends that greater focus on proper implementation and regular monitoring of the above
scheme is required to make it more effective at the ground level.
 
6.3        It was informed by the Department that as per the existing norms in vogue, the Nodal Training Agencies after counselling of
the rationalised employees impart the need based training/ reorientation to the employees. The agencies are paid for office and
training expenses which is inclusive of cost for counselling. However, for the employees opting for VRS, a provision of three days
counselling camp as a sensitization programme, prior to their release, has been made in the scheme and the agencies are paid Rs. 300/-
per head for this counselling programme. For the year 2002-03, of the allocated fund of     Rs. 10.00 crores, Rs. 8.50 crores (excluding
Rs. 1.00 crore for North East Region including Sikkim) has been earmarked for imparting the retraining and redeployment facilities to
the ratioanlised employees of CPSEs. However, considering the amendments in the compensation payable under VRS and likely
increase in the number of employees to be released under VRS, the requirement of the fund for the programme may go up and be
accordingly taken up at the Revised Estimates stage. 
6.4        During the oral evidence, the Secretary, DHI, stated that the  idea is to rehabilitate workers who retired under the Voluntary
Retirement Scheme or retrenchment. The Department  has identified training agencies all over the country.  Many of these agencies
are Government or Semi-Government institutions like NSIG. SISI, etc.
 
6.5        It was also informed by the Department that the  selection of nodal agencies has been made by a Committee under the
Chairmanship of Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industries having representatives from Banking Division (Ministry of
Finance), Department  of Industrial Policy & Pormotion, Ministry of Small Scale Industries and Agro & Rural Industries, Ministry of
Labour  and Department of Public Enterprises. In the first phase 17 Nodal Agencies have been selected to carry out the programme all
over the country. A list of these 17 agencies is enclosed for ready reference. The criteria adopted for selection related to the past
experience of these agencies, their status as legal entity, expertise, infrastructural facilities, and capacity.
 
6.6        The Committees of the opinion that with the increase in the number of employees opting for VRS, the programme for
retraining and redeployment of these employees requires tremendous technical expertise. The committee has been informed that
training agencies have been identified throughout the country to rehabilitate workers who have retired under the VRS scheme. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department of Public Enterprises should exercise greater monitoring over the working of
these agencies and ensure that effective training depending on the actual job market conditions is imparted. 
 
6.7        The Committee was informed by the Department that for regular monitoring of the programme, a Monitoring Cell has been
set up within the Department exclusively to liaise with the Nodal Agencies selected for the purpose and to monitor the progress of the
programmes through correspondence and field visits. At the field levels also mechanism has been devised to constitute Coordination
Committee involving the central PSEs, the Nodal Agencies and representative of lead banks. Prescribed proformae have been devised
for obtaining periodical information from all the Nodal Agencies in order to evaluate their performance and to have close monitoring
of the programme. However, being the first year of introduction of the scheme, a number of formalities had to be observed and as a
result the programme could effectively take off since November, 2001. However, with the constant endeavour of the Department and
the efforts made by the agencies, the scheme devised expected to have the desired impact.  It is further expected to achieve the
physical target of 8000 trainees under the programme.
 
6.8        The expenditure norms of Rs. 9000 per head, as was in vogue under the programme administered by Department of IP & P,

73rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/73rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:38]
have since been reviewed while introducing the scheme by Department of Public Enterprises. Now the present norms are separate for
employees already released and employees yet to be released. For the employees yet to be released under VRS/ VSS, a new element
of three days sensitization programme has been introduced so as to counsel the employees prior to their leaving the organization,
assess their needs and accordingly the reorientation can be adopted once they are released from the organization. In both the cases,
three modules of 20 days/30 days/ 40 days are available which the employee may take up  through the Nodal Agencies. The module-
wise expenditure norms for the re-orientation of the employees already released and the employees being released and going through
sensitization programme are different ranging from Rs. 5300 to Rs.7900 in the first case and Rs.4600 to Rs.7200 in the later. The
agencies have not reported any problem in regard to the above norms so far. However, the expenditure norms  are open to review in
accordance with the exigencies.
 
6.9        The Committee is happy to note that the methodology adopted for retraining of workers availing VRS is laudable. The
Committee hopes that the target of 8000 trainees should not only be achieved but the Department of Public Enterprises should surpass
it.
 
6.10      The Committee, however, observes that  there may be cases where V.R.S. opteers  are in the age group of 50-57 and by
human nature they stop learning any new trade and imparting training to them would only result in waste of time and Government 
money. The Committee, therefore, recommends that provision may be made for giving training to the sons/daughters of such persons
and that too before they are retired.
 
THE PURCHASE PREFERENCE POLICY
 
7.         It has been recognized that the Public Sector Enterprises has played a pivotal role in the industrial and economic development of the
country.  The growth in Public Sector Enterprises has been noteworthy.  Keeping in view of the importance of the Central  PSEs,  the
Government is committed to reform and restructure the Public Sector Enterprises so that they stand poised with the best of their kind in the
world.
 
7.1        The Government on the 14
th  September, 2000 decided to extend the Purchase Preference Policy for products and services of central
PSEs for two years i.e. up to 31st March, 2002.
 
7.2        The main rationale of continuing Purchase Preference Policy and its objectives are as under:
                                       i.            Some of PSEs are still passing through a period of transition;
                                     ii.         Restructuring and adjustment with new economic environment is in  process;                              and
                                    iii.            The turnaround of many sick and loss making PSEs and survival of marginally    profit making PSEs is dependent on
their securing adequate order book. 
7.3        Under the Purchase Preference Policy, a PSE that submits a bid higher by up to 10 per cent than the lowest bid (L-1) for a tender is
provided the option of matching L-1 on a preferential basis.
 
7.4        The Department has  informed the Committee that  this policy  of Purchase Preference has been of immense assistance for the
Central PSEs. The Purchase Preference Policy has greatly assisted PSEs in withstanding the competition in the market.  Central PSEs to a
great extent have been able to avail the benefit of Purchase Preference Policy by utilising their capacities. The Notice Inviting Tender in each
case is  required  to  specify  provisions  of  purchase  preference  as per DPE’s OM dated 14 th September, 2000 . The Secretary agreed that
some Public Sector Enterprises are not following guidelines and are not specifying this provision in their Notice Inviting Tenders.  
7.5        On the recommendation of the Committee on Industry, the Cabinet approved the extension of the 10 per cent purchase
preference for products and services of Central Public Sector Enterprises for two more years with effect from 31 st March,  2002 for
tenders valued over Rs. 5 lakh. In a statement the Hon’ ble Minister of the Ministry of Heavy industries and Public Enterprises said
that “the benefit would not be available to joint ventures where government equity or equity held by another PSE is below 51 per
cent.” He added “privatized PSEs that have a special dispensation from the Government (clearance from the Cabinet Committee on
Disinvestments) will also get the benefit for the period specified. The benefit, however, would not be provided to already privatized
PSEs on a retrospective basis.”
 
7.6        The D.P.E.  further informed the Committee the major Policies of the DPE  on the Purchase Preference Policy, which is as
under:-
 
·
                     Purchase Preference Policy extended for two more year, i.e., upto 31st March,  2004;
·                     Policy is applicable to CPSEs registered under the Companies Act, Statutory CPSEs  and JV with 51% or more
holding of the Govt. and/or CPSEs;
·                     Minimum Purchase limit for availing Preference raised to the erstwhile level of Rs.5.00 crore and above;
·                     Ministries/Departments to obtain prior approval of the Cabinet in consultation with DPE for any deviation of the

73rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/73rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:38]
Policy, including exclusion of the Purchase Preference Clause from the Notice Inviting Tenders (NIT); and
·                     In case of `zero’ duty project imports, Price Preference of 15% not available in World Bank, ADB funded projects.
Matter taken up with Ministry of Finance.
7.7            However, the Hon’ble Minister has said that Exemption from the Policy to Ministries, Departments and Autonomous
Bodies under the Central Government will require specific clearances from the Cabinet. Justifying the extension of the policy, the
Minister said that even the multilateral agencies give price preference to domestic companies over foreign companies.
7.8        The Committee is happy to note the extension in the Purchase Preference Policy up to 31 st March, 2004. However, the
Committee is very much concerned to note that some PSEs are not following the Purchase Preference Guidelines and are not
specifying this provision in their NITs. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the DPE should scrupulously monitor the
compliance of the Purchase Preference Policy and all the administrative Ministries/Departments should issue necessary instructions to
the PSEs under their jurisdiction to comply with the Purchase Preference Policy.
 
7.9        On the query raised by  the  Committee that certain Central PSEs/Central Government Agencies are not including the
Purchase Preference  clause in their Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) depriving the other Central PSEs to avail the benefit of the
Government policy, the Department  informed the Committee that the Ministry had issued an OM dated 19
th November, 2001 to all
Ministries/ Departments and CPSEs for compliance clarifying that there is no option to any Department/PSE to deviate from the
Purchase Preference Policy currently in force till 31 st March 2002. The PSEs being disinvested would also continue to avail the
benefit of the policy if provided in the agreement at the time of disinvestment. In case any deviation is considered necessary, it is
obligatory to obtain exemption from the competent authority. The Department further informed that Implementation/compliance of
the Govt. policies including the guidelines issued on purchase Preference Policy by this Department is the responsibility of the
respective Ministries/Departments/CPSEs. However, the concerned Ministries/Departments can seek exemption of the Purchase
Preference Clause from NIT by taking prior approval from the Govt. in consultation with the DPE.
 
7.10      The Committee in its 62
nd Report had recommended that a monitoring cell should be set up in D.P.E.  which would submit a
status note to the Cabinet Secretariat every quarter in this regard with a copy to the Department related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Industry for effective monitoring of the Policy by the Department of Public Enterprises.  In reply, the Department of
Public Enterprises have stated that implementation of the Policy is the responsibility of the concerned Ministry/Department. The
Committee feels that Department of Public Enterprises  should not run away from its duty and responsibility. The Committee
reiterates its recommendation made in the 62nd Report.
 
7.11      The Committee fully understands the role and responsibility of maintaining of  allied executive authority of  the
Ministry/Department and in no way wants it be diluted. The Committee only wants itself to be kept informed of changing position in
this important area so as to be of positive help to the Ministry.
 
7.12      On the query of creating synergies amongst the PSEs, the Department informed the Committee that a Committee may be
constituted to monitor adherence to inter-PSU cooperation by all PSEs is one way to achieve the inter-PSU cooperation. Perhaps
amalgamations, mergers and strategic alliances could be equally effective way to bring about synergies among the PSEs and to
improve their competitive strength to become global players especially in the present competitive environment. A number of small
companies in the same discipline which if amalgamated could substantially show better operational efficiency and growth
possibilities. Therefore, a policy of mergers and amalgamations of bringing together PSEs working in the same area of activities
would improve their global competitive strength.
 
7.13      The Committee is of the view, that the very existence of several Central PSEs is at stake and if they do not bring in
synergies amongst themselves by resorting to inter-PSE cooperation, the possibility of their survival appears dim. The
Committee, therefore strongly recommends that strategic alliances may be made amongst PSEs in a mutually beneficial
manner and for that DPE should be an initiative by devising suitable mechanisms on a priority basis.  The Committee,
therefore, recommends that Department of Public Enterprises should appoint a Task Force to devise a mechanism early.
             
 
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING (MoU)
 
8.         The New Industrial Policy, 1991 laid greater emphasis of the MoU system requiring all PSEs to be brought under the ambit of
the MoU system. With the advent of the privatization and globalisation in Indian Economy mainly after the implementation of  New
Industrial Policy, 1991, the Central PSEs have been exposed to the domestic and international competition. Now, these  PSEs  have  
to   compete  with  the    private  sector  in   the   consumer  economy. In such a stiff competitive environment, it is essential for a PSE
to have an edge of both cost and quality over its competitors. MoU system has been accepted by the PSEs as a panacea since it has
given them more freedom to take decisions independently  and operate more effectively and proficiently.
 
8.1        The MoU system is based on the principle of increased autonomy and accountability.  The commitments of the Managements

73rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/73rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:38]
and the Government are decided before the beginning of the financial year.  In order to achieve the targets as indicated in the MoU the
management is delegated certain financial and administrative powers to take effective decisions in their day-to-day operations.  Thus,
the PSEs have been enjoying much more autonomy while taking crucial decisions in their operations. Under the MoU system the
financial performance of the PSEs is evaluated mainly through the gross margin.
8.2        The main purpose of the MoU system are to :
 
(i)                  Measure the performance of PSEs taking into account the complexity of fusing social and financial objectives and
translating them into measurable parameters:
(ii)                Ensure simultaneous increase in autonomy as well as accountability;
(iii)               Set up new institutions and administrative & personnel systems;
(iv)              Replace `multiple principles with multiple objectives’ with clarity in goals and objectives; and
(v)                Break the vicious circle of NOT ME syndrome.
 
8.3        The main objective of the MoU system was to improve the performance of the PSEs through the mechanism of increased
autonomy and accountability and also to provide a uniform method of evaluation of the performance of the managements of the PSEs
in an objective and transparent manner. Further, it was also envisaged to provide a clarity of goals/objectives to be achieved by PSEs.
 
8.4        The objectivity, neutrality and transparency are the inbuilt features of the MoU system.  The performance of the managements
of the PSEs is evaluated with respect to the pre-determined targets and the performance evaluation reports are prepared by the PSEs
themselves at the end of the year. There is a body of experts called Ad-hoc Task Force (ATF), which is constituted every year by the
Department of Public Enterprises. The ATF acts as a third party neutral body during the MoU negotiation meetings to ensure that the
targets decided during these meetings are realistic.
 
8.5        On the recommendation of the Arjun Sengupta Committee Report, the MoU system was first implemented during the year
1987-88 with 4 PSEs signing the MoU.  For the financial year 2001-02 a total of 105  PSEs signed the MoU with their respective
Ministries.  If we take into account the subsidiaries of these MoU signing PSEs then the total number of PSEs covered under the MoU
system will work out to 163.  Every year the PSEs are shortlisted for signing the MoU and efforts are made to bring all significant
PSEs under the ambit of MoU system.  For the year 2002-03, new PSEs like Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd,  Konkan Railways
Corporation Limited,  Semi Conductor Complex Ltd. etc. have been shortlisted for signing the MoU.  
 
8.6        The MoU signing PSEs are delegated certain financial and administrative powers such as power to incur capital expenditure
up to Rs. 50.00 crores and Rs. 100.00  crores on replacement/renewal of assets,  freedom to finalize wage revision, transfer of
functional Directors, etc.
8.7        The Committee is happy to note that the MoU system has enabled the DPE to undertake objective assessment of CPSEs. The
Committee recommends for further strengthening of the MoU system and hopes it will be able to adopt itself to the requirements of
PSEs in a globalised economy.
 
8.8        It was informed by the Department that the Department of Public Enterprises issued the guidelines to all the Public Sector
Enterprises and the administrative Ministries emphasising that while preparing the MoUs for the year 2002-03, it should be ensured
that the MoU targets flow from the corporate/vision plan and these targets should be linked to the corporate plan of the organisation.
Sometimes, it may not be possible to exactly link the MoU targets with the corporate plan of the PSE due to fast changing economic
environment in such an eventuality the PSEs are required to indicate the reasons for any such variation. As regards coverage of more
number of PSEs under the MoU system it is clarified that at present more than 100 central PSEs are signing MoU and if the
subsidiaries are also taken into account the number of PSEs covered under the MoU will be around 163. Administratively it may not
be feasible to cover the PSEs referred to BIFR. At present only few small and insignificant PSEs are left out of the purview of MoU
system. However, this Department will continue its efforts to bring all the PSEs under the MoU system.
           
8.9        The Committee is happy to note that over 100 Central PSEs have signed the MoU. The Committee is of the view that
effects to bring more PSEs under the ambit of MoU system be made in the right earnest.
 
8.10      The Committee recommends that Department of Public Enterprises should separately submit a status note to the Committee
highlighting the benefits reaped by MoU signing P.S.Us and citing the probable reasons which presented other profit making P.S.Us
from signing MoU so as to enable the Committee  to take a more in front view on the efficacy of the system.
 
8.11            However, the Department revealed to the Committee that at present the MoU Division is not fully equipped to meet the
challenges of the dynamic situation. However, this Department has made an effort to avail the best available expertise in a cost
effective manner by availing the services of professionals, management experts and senior retired Government Officers through the
Ad-hoc Task Force (ATF). While it is true that actual achievements in bringing together the PSEs are far from satisfactory, the
Department of Public Enterprises will continue to explore further such possibilities through the MoU negotiation meetings.
 

73rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/73rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:38]
8.12      The Committee is concerned to note that the MoU Division is not fully equipped to meet the challenges of the present day
situation. The Committee recommends that consultants/specialists from the private industry be hired to make the implementation of
the MoU system more effective and realistic.
 
8.13      The Department informed the Committee that in the context of the recommendations of the Expenditure Reform Committee, 
an internal review was made of the role and functions of the Department of Public Enterprises and it was decided to abolish 15 posts
at various levels reducing the sanctioned strength of DPE from 136 to the present strength of 121. One of the recommendations of the
ERC is to merge Department of Public Enterprises with Department of Heavy industry and the Staff Inspection Unit has been
requested to undertake a comprehensive study for staff requirement. The position will be reviewed based on the report of the SIU.
 
8.14      The Department further stated that as mentioned earlier, the present strength of the MoU Division is not adequate to
accomplish the task and in order to complete the exercise of finalising the MoUs a few Resource Persons are drawn from the Public
Sector Enterprises for a very short period. But it would certainly improve the effectiveness of the MoU system if an adequate number
of professionals are posted in the MoU Division on a regular basis to handle this work.
8.15      During the oral evidence the Secretary stated that presently the size of this Department is far less than what it used to be
before. Also, as per the recent recommendation of the Expenditure Reforms Commission, we have further given up 15 posts. And,
there is also a proposal to merge the two Departments and have only one Department which will affect the functioning of the
Department.
8.16      The Committee is of the view that hiring or taking people on deputation from other PSEs can neutralize the impact of the
recommendation of ERC on the MoU Division. The Committee recommends that the views of organizations like CII, FICCI,
ASSOCHAM, PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry, etc.  may be taken to make the MoU system more effective and rational.
 
8.17      The Committee  while visiting the PSEs located in various parts of the country noted that Saturdays are observed as holidays
in the Head Offices, Registered Offices and Regional Offices on the pattern of the Central Government Offices. In a business-oriented
environment such a practice is not a healthy sign. In a way this practice amounts to loss of man-hour. The Committee feels that
department of Public enterprises should examine  the matter and come out with a proposal for six day week for the PSEs.
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
 
The Committee is of the view that the work relating to retraining and redeployment of rationalised employees of Central PSEs
is a major task recently assigned to the Department of Public Enterprises. The Committee, therefore, recommends that additional
funds may be allocated at RE stage to fill the gap of the requirements of the Department.
(Para 2.4)
              
Taking into consideration the major works done by the Department relating to the Central PSEs, the plan allocation of
Rs.10.00 crore seems to be inadequate. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the plan allocations may be reviewed at RE stage.
(Para 3.2)
           
            The Committee feels that though it is good on the part of the Department to minimize non-plan expenditure, yet the decreasing
non-plan investment should not hamper the important functions of the Department. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
additional requirements of the Department, if any, may be considered at the RE stage.
(Para 4.2)
            Since DPE is an important Agency of the Government to make policies and review performance of the central PSEs through
MoUs  signed by them, the Committee is, therefore, of the firm view that the Government should strengthen this Department.
(Para 4.4)
 
            The Committee notes that Non-Official Directors for Navratna and Miniratna PSEs have benefited immensely due to the status
assigned to them. The Committee feels that the Department of Public Enterprises should undertake all possible steps to introduce
professionalism in these Public Enterprises Sector Enterprises  so that they are able to face challenges of changing  times and  able to
develop competitive edge.
(Para 5.4)
           
The Committee, however, proposes to undertake a study to know how far Directors of MoU signing PSEs are given sufficient
power to enable them to take quick decisions in their business related matters and formation of joint venture etc.  in India and abroad.

73rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/73rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:38]
(Para 5.5)
The Committee is of the opinion that the grant of Navratna and Miniratna status should not be a one time affair. The
Committee is of the view that the Navratna/Miniratna status should be reviewed periodically and those PSEs, which underperform as
compared to their targets   should be denied Navratna/Miniratna status.
(Para 5.9)
             
The Committee  also recommends that greater financial, operational and managerial autonomy should be given to the
Navratnas/Miniratnas PSEs  so  as to enable them to take independent decisions.  
(Para 5.10)
           
The Committee feels that  the initiatives taken by the DHI to counsel, retrain and  re-deploy  the employees of CPSEs are
laudable. The Committee, therefore, recommends that greater focus on proper implementation and regular monitoring of the above
scheme is required to make it more effective at the ground level.
 (Para 6.2)
 
 
The Committees of the opinion that with the increase in the number of employees opting for VRS, the programme for
retraining and redeployment of these employees requires tremendous technical expertise. The committee has been informed that
training agencies have been identified throughout the country to rehabilitate workers who have retired under the VRS scheme. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department of Public Enterprises should exercise greater monitoring over the working of
these agencies and ensure that effective training depending on the actual job market conditions is imparted. 
(Para 6.6)
 
             
The Committee is happy to note that the methodology adopted for retraining of workers availing VRS is laudable. The
Committee hopes that the target of 8000 trainees should not only be achieved but the Department of Public Enterprises should surpass
it.
 
(Para 6.9)
 
 
The Committee, however, observes that  there may be cases where V.R.S. opteers  are in the age group of 50-57 and by
human nature they stop learning any new trade and imparting training to them would only result in waste of time and Government 
money. The Committee, therefore, recommends that provision may be made for giving training to the sons/daughters of such persons
and that too before they are retired.
(Para 6.10)
            The Committee is happy to note the extension in the Purchase Preference Policy up to 31
st March, 2004. However, the
Committee is very much concerned to note that some PSEs are not following the Purchase Preference Guidelines and are not
specifying this provision in their NITs. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the DPE should scrupulously monitor the
compliance of the Purchase Preference Policy and all the administrative Ministries/Departments should issue necessary instructions to
the PSEs under their jurisdiction to comply with the Purchase Preference Policy.
(Para 7.8)
 
            The Committee in its 62 nd Report had recommended that a monitoring cell should be set up in D.P.E.  which would submit a
status note to the Cabinet Secretariat every quarter in this regard with a copy to the Department related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Industry for effective monitoring of the Policy by the Department of Public Enterprises.  In reply, the Department of
Public Enterprises have stated that implementation of the Policy is the responsibility of the concerned Ministry/Department. The
Committee feels that Department of Public Enterprises  should not run away from its duty and responsibility. The Committee
reiterates its recommendation made in the 62nd Report.
(Para 7.10)
 
 
            The Committee fully understands the role and responsibility of maintaining of  allied executive authority of  the
Ministry/Department and in no way wants it be diluted. The Committee only wants itself to be kept informed of changing position in

73rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/73rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:38]
this important area so as to be of positive help to the Ministry.
(Para 7.11)
 
 
            The Committee is of the view, that the very existence of several CPSEs is at stake and if they do not bring in synergies
amongst themselves by resorting to inter-PSE cooperation, the possibility of their survival appears dim. The Committee, therefore
strongly recommends that strategic alliances may be made amongst PSEs in a mutually beneficial manner and for that DPE should be
an initiative by devising suitable mechanisms on a priority basis.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that Department of Public
Enterprises should appoint a Task Force to devise a mechanism early.
             (Para 7.13)
 
            The Committee is happy to note that the MoU system has enabled the DPE to undertake objective assessment of CPSEs. The
Committee recommends for further strengthening of the MoU system and hopes it will be able to adopt itself to the requirements of
PSEs in a globalised economy.
(Para 8.7)
 
 
            The Committee is happy to note that over 100 Central PSEs have signed the MoU. The Committee is of the view that effects
to bring more PSEs under the ambit of MoU system be made in the right earnest.
(Para 8.9)
 
 
            The Committee recommends that Department of Public Enterprises should separately submit a status note to the Committee
highlighting the benefits reaped by MoU signing P.S.Us and citing the probable reasons which presented other profit making P.S.Us
from signing MoU so as to enable the Committee  to take a more in front view on the efficacy of the system.
(Para 8.9)
 
           
The Committee is concerned to note that the MoU Division is not fully equipped to meet the challenges of the present day
situation. The Committee recommends that consultants/specialists from the private industry be hired to make the implementation of
the MoU system more effective and realistic.
(Para 8.12)
 
            The Committee is of the view that hiring or taking people on deputation from other PSEs can neutralize the impact of the
recommendation of ERC on the MoU Division. The Committee recommends that the views of organizations like CII, FICCI,
ASSOCHAM, PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry, etc.  may be taken to make the MoU system more effective and rational.
(Para 8.16)
 
 
8.17      The Committee  while visiting the PSEs located in various parts of the country noted that Saturdays are observed as holidays
in the Head Offices, Registered Offices and Regional Offices on the pattern of the Central Government Offices. In a business-oriented
environment such a practice is not a healthy sign. In a way this practice amounts to loss of man-hour.    The Committee feels that
department of Public enterprises should examine  the matter and come out with a proposal for six day week for the PSEs.
(Para 8.17)
 
ANNEXURE-I
 
LIST OF NAVRATNA & MINIRATNA PSEs
 
Navratna PSEs
 
1.                  Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd.
2.                  Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd.
3.                  Gas Authority of India Ltd.
4.                  Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd.
5.                  Indian Oil Corporation Ltd.
6.                  Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Ltd.

73rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/73rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:38]
7.                  Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Ltd.
8.                  National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd.
9.                  Oil & Natural Gas Corporation Ltd.
10.              Steel Authority of India Ltd.
 
Miniratna PSEs – Category- I
 
1.                  Bharat Dynamics Ltd.
2.                  Bharat Electronics Ltd.
3.                  Bongaigaon Refineries & Petrochemicals Ltd.
4.                  Central Warehousing Corporation.
5.                  Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd.
6.                  Container Corporation of India Ltd.
7.                  Dredging Corporation of India Ltd.
8.                  Engineers India Ltd.     
9.                  Fertilizers & Chemicals Travancore Ltd. (Status frozen by the Ministry)
10.              Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd.
11.              Hindustan Newsprint            Ltd.
12.              Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd.
13.              Hindustan Zinc Ltd.
14.              India Tourism Development Corporation Ltd.
15.              IRCON (International) Ltd.
16.              Kochi Refineries Ltd. 
17.              Kudremukh Iron Ore Company Ltd.
18.              MMTC Ltd.
19.              National Aluminium Company Ltd.
20.              National Fertilizers Ltd.
21.              National Mineral Development Corporation Ltd.
22.              Oil India Ltd.     
23.              Power Finance Corporation Ltd.
24.              Power Grid Corporation Ltd.
25.              Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers Ltd.
26.              Shipping Corporation of India Ltd.
27.              STC Ltd.
28.              Telecommunication Consultants India Ltd.
 
Miniratna PSEs – Category- II
 
1.            Educational Consultants India Ltd.
2.            Ferro Scrap Nigam Ltd.
3.
                  HMT (International) Ltd.
4.                  Hospital Services Consultancy Corpn. (I) Ltd.
5.                  Indian Medicines Pharmaceuticals Corpn. Ltd.
6.                  M S T C Ltd.
7.                  Manganese Ore India Ltd.
8.                  M E C O N Ltd.
9.                  National Film Development Corpn. Ltd.
10.              P E C Ltd.
11.              Rajasthan Electronics & Instruments Ltd.
12.              RITES Ltd.
13.              Water & Power Consultancy Services (I) Ltd.
ANNEXURE—II
 
LIST OF SELECTED AGENCIES
 
1.                  Institute of Labour Development, Jaipur
2.                  Indian Council of Small industries, Calcutta.

73rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/73rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:38]
3.                  Madhya Pradesh Consultancy Organisation, Bhopal.
4.                  ASSOCHAM
5.                  National Productivity Council
6.                  U.P. Industrial Consultants Ltd., Kanpur.
7.                  NICIET, Hyderabad
8.                  Indian Institute of Entrepreneurship, Guwahati
9.                  Small Industries Service Institute, Indore
10.              Small Industries Service Institute, Mumbai
11.              Small Industries Service institute(SISI), Calcutta
12.              Small Industries Service Institute(SISI), Guindy, Chennai
13.              Small Industries Service Institute, Bangalore
14.              Small industries Service Institute, Coimbatore
15.              Central Institute of Plastic Engineering  and Technology, Guindy, Chennai
16.              National Small Industries Corporation  Ltd., New Delhi.
17.              Directorate General of Employment & Training, Ministry of Labour, New Delhi.
 
 
 
IV
 
FOURTH   MEETING
 
 
            The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on 4th   April, 02   in Committee Room `A’,  Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New
Delhi.
 
      PRESENT
 
1.         Shri Ramdas Agarwal - Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.                 Prof. M.M. Aggarwal
3.                 Smt.  Saroj Dubey
4.                 Shri Faguni Ram
5.                 Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
6.                 Shri Nagendra  Narth Ojha
7.                 Shri Jibon Roy
8.                 Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
9.                 Shri S. Sivasubramanian
10.             Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
 
LOK SABHA
 
11.             Smt. Jayashree  Banerjee
12.             Shri Thomas Hansda
13.             Shri A.C. Jose
14.             Shri Sunil Khan
15.             Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari
16.             Shri Manjay Lal
17.             Shri A. Narendra
18.             Shri Ananta Nayak
19.             Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
20.             Shri Tarachand Sahu
21.             Shri Ramanand Singh
22.             Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
23.             Shri Beni Prasad Verma
 
SECRETARIAT
 

73rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/73rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:38]
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
 
 
WITNESSES
 
I.            Representatives of Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises
 
1.
       Shri Ravindra Gupta, Secretary
2.       Shri K.K. Jaswal, AS&FA
3.       Shri M.C. Rao, CCA
4.       Shri Pradeep Kumar,  Joint  Secretary
5.       Shri Ajoy Acharya, Joint Secretary
6.       Shri S. Bhave, Joint Secretary
7.       Shri V.K. Muteraja,  Advisor
8.       Shri B.K. Tripathi, Director
9.       Shri  Mukul Kumar, Director
10.  Shri Pritam Singh, Director
 
II.         Representatives   of  Department  of Public Enterprises
 
1.
       Shri Ravindra Gupta,  Secretary
2.       Shri A.K. Rath, Joint Secretary
3.       Shri B.D. Virdi, Director
4.       Shri C.C. Unnikrishnan, Deputy Secretary
5.       Shri Anish Madan, J.A
6.       Shri M.P. Fulzele, Dy. Director
7.       Shri  M.R. Nair,  Dy. Director
 
2.         In the absence of the Chairman, the convener of Sub-Committee-III, Dr. B.B. Ramaiah presided over the meeting.  At the
outset he  welcomed the Members of  the  Committee and apprised  them of  the agenda for the meeting.
 
3.         The Chairman, then welcomed the Secretary and representatives of Department of Heavy Industries and Department of Public
Enterprises and requested the Secretary to give his presentation on the various provisions of the budget (2002-03).  The Secretary 
requested the Convenor Dr. B.B. Ramaiah to permit him  to show some slides depicting the organisational structure of both the
department alongwith their functional aspects.  The slides covered an overviews of PSUs in the categorisation of operating PSUs,
profit making loss making, total employment,  investment , performance and policy announced in the Parliament time to time,
strategies for restructuring, Government of India's inputs for 12 PSUs where revival plan sanctioned by BIFR, and also Government
inputs for  AY and Co., HPC, Nepa Ltd. HCL, PTL and HMT Ltd. where restructuring undertaken by Government on its own; status
of disinvestment/Joint venture formation for PSUs  of the Department of Heavy Industries.  The Audio-Video slides further
highlighted   the 9
th plan outlay and budgetary support, plan budgeted outlay and actual expenditure in last 3 years, MOU
performance rating for PSUs under DHI, Plan and Non-Plan application of the budgetary support along with the trained support and
Status of VRS/VSS during 1999-00 and 2000-01.  The slides also covered the role and functions of Department of Public Enterprises,
functional aspects of autonomy to CPSUs, functioning of MOU system and rating, status of voluntary retirement scheme under NRF
and Rehabilitation programmes.
 
 
23
4.            Participating in the discussion the Chairman and Members raised  some questions  pertaining to   the  taking  over of  Burn
Standard and the Lalkooti  by the  employees,  disinvestment of  non-strategic PSUs, Government policy  on pay revision  in the case
of loss making company/sick company;  revival, restructuring and joint venture formulation in PSUs   purchase preference, counsel ,
re-training   and re-employment,  budgetary provision in regard to heavy Engineering Sector and Electrical Sector, Liquidation 
process in regard to MAMC ,  revival package for HEC and BOGL, Hindustan News Print in Kerala and  problems being faced by 
Rajasthan Instruments and Engineering Ltd.   The Secretary furnished the replies  accordingly.  He  further  stated that his proposal 
with regard to  the duty structure in photo goods industries  has not been  accepted. Replying to the chairman' query regarding the
securitisation of  the dues by the State Electricity Board  as per the  recommendations  the Ahuliwalia  Committee  and  its  non-
compliance by  BHEL,  the Secretary maintained that  under the  large power projects policy the price preference  should not be
converted into purchase preference.
 
5.       The Committee then adjourned  for lunch  and re-assembled  at 3.00 p.m. to resume the discussions

73rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/73rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:38]
with the representatives of   Ministry of Steel.
 
6.                 *                            *                            *
 
7.                 *                            *                            *
 
8.         A verbatim record of the meeting was kept.
 
9.       The Committee then adjourned at  5.20 p.m.
 
 
_____________________________________________________________________________ *** Relates to other matters.
  
VI
 
SIXTH MEETING
 
          The Sub-committee for Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Industry) met at 4.00 PM on Monday, the 8th May 2002 in Room 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1.         Dr. B. B. Ramaiah – Convenor
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Shri P.K. Maheshwari
 
LOK SABHA
 
3.
                   Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
4.                   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
5.                   Shri Deepak Kumar
6.                   Shri Manjay Lal
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Executive Officer
 
 
WITNESSES
 
I.            Department of Heavy Industry (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises)
 
1.   Shri B.N. Jha, Secretary
2.
       Shri Ajoy Acharya, Joint Secretary
3.       Shri Pradeep Kumar, Joint Secretary
4.       Shri S.V. Bhave, Joint Secretary
5.       V.K. Mutreja, Advisor (Tech.)
 
II.            Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
 
Shri S. Narayan, Secretary
 
III.            Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)

73rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/73rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:38]
 
Dr. Adarsh Kishore, Additional Secretary
 
IV.            Central Board of Excise and Customs
 
Shri K.L. Verma, Chairman
 
V.            Ministry of Power
 
       1.  Shri R.V. Shahi, Secretary
2.
       Shri R. Ramanujam, Joint Secretary
 
VI.       Office of Director General of Foreign Trade
 
              Shri N. L. Lakhanpal, DGFT
 
VII.      Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd.
 
              Shri K. G. Ramachandran, CMD
 
VIII.     Confederation of Indian Industries
 
1.
       Shri M.S. Krishnamoorthy, Head (Engg. Business)
2.       Dr. K. C. Ravi, Director
3.       Shri K.S. Ghai, Adviser
4.       Ms. Charu Mathur, Deputy Director
5.       Shri Kuldip Goel, DGM(Projects)
6.       Shri Sarosh J. Ghandy, Chairman, IECIAL and MD (TELCO)
7.       Shri J.C. Mongia, Deputy Manager(ISGEC)
8.       Shri A.C. Sharma, AGM(ISGEC)
 
IX.       Indian Electrical & Electronics Manufacturers’ Association
 
             Shri B. S. Bhadaura
 
2.         At the outset, Convenor welcomed the Secretaries and other officers of the ministries and representatives of industries’
associations.  Convenor apprised the committee that in its last meeting held on 16
th April 2002, discussion could not be concluded and
he requested CII to prepare a note regarding imports at zero customs duty against World Bank/Asian Development Bank’s financed
projects.  The Convenor summarised the viewpoints of CII and informed the committee that World Bank as well as Asian
Development Bank had been financing various kinds of projects for over two decades in India.  There was an established procedure
for inviting tenders and for evaluating them.  The primary features of the guidelines were as follows:-
 
(i) Evaluation of tenders submitted by foreign bidders would be evaluated without  including customs duty; and
 
(ii) Price preference of 15% to domestic bidders was allowed with the stipulation that it would be admissible if in the
total package, there was value addition of 30% or more and the price preference was not more than applicable customs duty.
 
 
3.         The Central Board of Excise and Customs Duty issued a notification No. 85/99 amending an earlier customs notification
exempting customs duty on import of goods for execution of projects financed by loan or grant by World Bank, Asian Development
Bank or any other international organisation.  The World Bank had allowed 15% Price Preference to domestic bidders to offset the
domestic duty /levies such as sales tax, octrois, etc. and certain disadvantages due to inadequate infrastructure and higher cost of
finance.  With zero customs duty from 6
th July 1999 for direct import by project authorities, the effect of price preference of 15% had
automatically been reduced to zero.
 
4.            Secretary, Ministry of Power, Secretary, Department of Revenue, Director General of Foreign Trade raised the following
objections:-
 
(i)  World Bank/ ADB had stopped funding power generation projects in India, the    rescinding of the aforesaid

73rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/73rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:38]
customs notification had no practical significance.
 
(ii)   If the domestic price preference is restored, the project cost will go up.
 
(iii)  If domestic price preference was restored, overseas bidders would not be interested   in competing for projects
funded by the World Bank/ADB.
 
5.            As regards point number 1 above, CMD, BHEL, drew attention to the press report appearing in the Financial
Express dt. 7.5.2002 where Minister of Power was reported to have stated that Government of India would seek financial
assistance of around $ 4 billion from ADB for implementation of various power projects.  If this was true, domestic
companies would be placed at a considerable disadvantage in the absence of domestic price preference.  Also, the power
transmission sector continued to avail of multilateral funding for its projects and domestic companies including BHEL were
already at a disadvantage while bidding for these projects.  In view of this, it would not be correct to conclude that the issue
had no practical significance.
 
6.            In so far as point number two was concerned, he stated that although the project cost may have the potential of
increasing to this extent, this may not happen in all cases, as this would depend upon the pricing strategies adopted by various
bidders in specific projects.  However, in the absence of domestic price preference and the consequent disadvantage suffered
by domestic industry, it was likely that more and more contracts would be won by the overseas bidders who would quote their
price in foreign currencies.  These companies would tend to adopt a different pricing strategy in the absence of effective
competition from capable domestic companies.  Also, as these projects got executed over a time frame of 3 to 4 years and
given the propensity of the Indian rupee to depreciate (past experience shows that, on the average, rupee depreciated @ 5 to 6
% p.a.), the completed cost of power projects was likely to go up by more than 3 to 4% on this account alone.  Also, if it was
considered that in all such cases, the spares and services for after-market maintenance of the equipment would have to be
imported, there was the likelihood of life time cost of the project going up by a factor much more than the perceived benefit to
domestic industry on account of domestic price preference.  Moreover, the overall economic cost involved in costly facilities
set up by domestic capital goods industry could not be ignored and the workers being rendered idle as a result of the domestic
price preference being denied to local industry.  India was one of the few developing countries (apart from China) to have
built up a capable capital equipment industry.
7.            Regarding point number 3, he stated that during the period from mid 70’s when multilateral funding of power
projects started upto July 1999, when domestic price preference was available to local industry in the case of projects funded
by the World Bank/ADB in the power sector, there have been 43 international competitive bids in all of which overseas
bidders competed.  Out of these, BHEL was able to win as many as 37 contracts registering a success rate of 86% without
availing itself of domestic price preference.  In any case, in the case of World Bank/ADB funded tenders, for evaluation, the
CIF cost of imported equipment was compared with the ex-works cost of domestic suppliers and the impact of customs duty
for imports as also excise duty for locally manufactured equipment were ignored.  In such a case, even if domestic price
preference were to be restored by withdrawal of zero customs duty regime, the overseas bidders should have no concern, as
the import duty attracted by their equipment would any way not be considered for evaluation of their bid.  As such, it was not
correct to say that restoration of domestic price preference by rescinding the aforesaid customs notification would affect the
overseas bidder’s interest in competing for World Bank funded power projects in India.
 
8.         The committee also heard Secretary, Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises, Dr. Adarsh Kishore, Additional
Secretary, Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs), Shri M.S. Krishnamoorthy, Head (Engg. Business), CII, Shri
Sarosh J. Ghandy, Chairman, IECIAL and MD (TELCO), Shri J.C. Mongia, Deputy Manager (ISGEC). 
 
9.            Chairman, IECIAL, also apprised the committee that the domestic companies were facing difficulties due to imports on zero
duty.  Representative of CII pleaded for more time to adjust to zero duty regime.

73rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/73rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:38]
 
10.        After going into the details of the problems, the committee observed that a mechanism should be found so that
competitiveness of the domestic companies was not affected due to zero duty on imports.  The committee accordingly decided that a
Group of Secretaries under the chairmanship of Secretary, Department of Revenue, may be constituted to examine the issue of Duty
Free Goods and Services under the International Competitive Bidding with reference to Customs Notification No. 85/99 CUS dated
6th July 1999.  The Group would comprise Secretary, Department of Revenue as Chairman, and Secretary Department of Heavy
Industries, Secretary, Ministry of Power, Secretary, Commerce/DGFT, as members.  The committee also authorised Revenue
Secretary to associate other persons if the necessacity was felt.  The Committee desired that a report might be furnished within one
month for consideration of the committee.
 
11.        The committee recalled that at its last meeting it decided to visit Bangalore  and Mumbai in June and July 2002 respectively. 
The committee now decided that it would visit Bangalore from 9-13 June and Mumbai in the first week of July 2002.
 
12.        The committee then adjourned at 6.15 PM.