PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
TWO  HUNDRED  NINETY  REPORT
Professionalisation of Boards of CPSEs
Pertaining to
The Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises
(Department of Public Enterprises)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th August, 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th August, 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2018/ Sravana, 1940 (Saka)
290
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rs-ind@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 DEPARTMENT-RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY  STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON  INDUSTRY
TWO  HUNDRED  NINETY  REPORT
Professionalisation of Boards of CPSEs
Pertaining to
The Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises
(Department of Public Enterprises)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th August, 2018 )
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th August, 2018 )
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2018/ Sravana, 1940 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE  C OMMITTEE ............................................................................. (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ........................................................................................................... (iv)-(v)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................ 1-33
5. R ECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE ..................................................... 34-42
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................. 43-46
7. A NNEXURES ........................................................................................................... 47-73

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 1st September, 2017)
RAJYA  SABHA
1. Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh    — Chairman
* 2. Shri Tiruchi Siva
**3. Dr. Amee Yajnik
4. Shri Ram Narain Dudi
**5. Shri G. C. Chandrashekhar
6. Shri Shwait Malik
7. Shri Sanjay Seth
8. Shri Amar Singh
** 9. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque
10. Shri T. G. Venkatesh
LOK  SABHA
11. Shrimati Ranjanben Bhatt
12. Shri Birendra Kumar Choudhary
13. Shri S. P . Muddahanume Gowda
14. Shri Mohd. Asrarul Haque
15. Shri G. Hari
16. Shrimati Darshana Vikram Jardosh
17. Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena
18. Shrimati Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam
19. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato
20. Shri Tapas Paul
21. Shri Mutthamsetti Srinivasa Rao
22. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa
23. Shri Konda Vishweshwar Reddy
* Nominated w.e.f. 21st February, 2018 in place of Ms. Anu Aga, MP, Rajya Sabha
** Nominated w.e.f. 2nd June, 2018.

(ii)
24. Shri Raj Kumar Saini
25. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya)
26. Shri Rameshwar Teli
27. Shrimati Savitri Thakur
28. Shrimati Dev Varma
29. Shri Rajan Vichare
##30.
##31.
SECRETARIAT
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Director
Shri J. K. Mallick, Additional Director
Shrimati Sreeja V ., Deputy Secretary
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Renu Sreekanth, Committee Officer
Shri Devender Singh Bisht, Committee Officer
Resigned from the Lok Sabha w.e.f. 18.07.18 and 20.06.18 respectively
## Vacant

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having
been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred Ninety Report on the Professionalization
of Boards of CPSEs pertaining to the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of
Public Enterprises).
2. The Committee took up the subject for detailed examination and as part of its examination, spanning
over a series of meetings, the Committee heard the views of Secretaries of Department of Public Enterprises
(DPE), Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA), representatives of Public Enterprises Selection Board (PESB),
Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI), Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) and
Institute of Company Secretaries of India (ICSI) and also had interactions with certain CPSEs.
3. The Committee while drafting the report has mainly relied upon the following documents:-
(i) Background Notes from the DPE, MCA, PESB, SEBI, ICAI, ICSI and various CPSEs; (ii) Oral Presentation
made before the Committee by the DPE, MCA, PESB, SEBI, ICAI, ICSI and various CPSEs; and
(iii) Replies furnished by the DPE, MCA, PESB, SEBI, ICAI and ICSI on the points/issues raised by the
Members during the meetings of the Committee and to the questionnaire sent by the Secretariat.
4. I, thank DPE, MCA, PESB, SEBI, ICAI, ICSI and various CPSEs for furnishing inputs during the
meetings and thereafter.
5. The Committee in its meeting held on the 6th August, 2018 considered and adopted the Report.
   N
EW DELHI; RAM CHANDRA PRASAD SINGH
16th August, 2 018 Chairman
Sravana 15, 1940 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry
Rajya Sabha

ACRONYMS
ACC : Appointments Committee of Cabinet
AOA : Articles of Association
ASSOCHAM : Associated Chambers of Commerce of India
BPE : Bureau of Public Enterprises
CMD : Chairman-cum-Managing Director
CA-13 : Companies Act, 2013
CII : Confederation of Indian Industry
CPSEs : Central Public Sector Enterprises
CSR : Corporate Social Responsibility
CVC : Central Vigilance Commission
DPE : Department of Public Enterprises
DoPT : Department of Personnel and Training
DIN : Director Identification Number
EARC : Economic Administration Reforms Commission
e-MOA : e-Memorandum of Association
FICCI : Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry
ICAI : Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ICSI : Institute of Company Secretaries of India
IDs : Independent Directors
IICA : Indian Institute of Corporate Affairs
IPR : Industrial Policy Resolution
KMP : Key Managerial Personnel
LODR : Listing Obligations and Disclosure Requirements
MCA : Ministry of Corporate Affairs
MoU : Memorandum of Understanding
OECD : Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development
PSCF : Parliamentary Standing Committee on Finance
(iv)

(v)
P AN : Permanent Account Number
PESB : Public Enterprises Selection Board
PHD : Progress Harmony Development
RD : Regional Directors
ROC : Registrar of Companies
RUN : Reserve Unique Name
SEBI : Securities and Exchange Board of India
SPICE : Simplified Performa for Incorporating Company Electronically
TAN : Tax Deduction and Collection Account Number

REPORT
1. Introduction
1.1 The Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) were envisaged as the vehicles of economic
development and nation building during the protected mixed economy days of the country. Equitable
regional development, creation of basic infrastructure and employment generation were the other fruits
borne by these CPSEs. Many of them were Green Field projects built from scratch and some were
nationalized private entities or sick private companies taken over by the Government. Over the years,
many initiatives were taken by the Government to improve the Governance of CPSEs. Efforts to provide
greater autonomy to CPSEs were first visible in the Industrial Policy Resolution (IPR) of 1956. The
formulation of the Bureau of Public Enterprises (BPE) which later on became the Department of Public
Enterprises (DPE) in the mid 1960's and the introduction of the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)
System in the second half of the 1980's for performance evaluation and enterprise accountability, etc.
are notable milestones of early reforms.
1.2 Thereafter, consequent to the economic liberalization ushered in by the New Economic Policy of
1991, the protectionist economic measures that hedged the CPSEs from business risks and competition
were withdrawn. Further, to equip the CPSEs to perform well in the face of competition from the private
players more functional autonomy was allowed to the Boards of the larger and better performing CPSEs,
hailing the era of the 'Ratnas'. Simultaneously, outright sale, right sizing the number of employees,
disinvestment, etc. continued at a fervent pace. Along with all these measures, attention was also drawn
to the need to improve efficiency and performance of the CPSEs through modern techniques of Corporate
Governance.
1.3 Corporate Governance is the core concept with definitive influence on the performance of a
company. Good Corporate Governance shall ensure transparency, integrity, responsibility, accountability,
effective long-term strategic and risk management plans and community sensitive corporate social
responsibility. The Board of a company acts as the pivot in Corporate Governance. The Board has the
responsibility to chalk out corporate strategies and also act as an intercessor between the Government
as a shareholder and the management of CPSEs.
1.4 Good Boards are well constituted, appropriately populated, encourages divergent ideas with candor,
ensures effective leadership, evaluates its members periodically and defines clear, strong and transparent
business strategies. Since a Board consists of people, their qualities, skills and professionalism as a group
and as individuals will directly impact the competence and overall quality of Corporate Governance. Here,
the importance of the need to professionalize the Board practices comes into play.
1.5 Taking into cognizance the importance attributed towards Professionalization of Board of Directors
of CPSEs and the positive results it can bring in the performance of the companies, the Committee
decided to take up the subject for examination. While the Companies Act, 2013 (CA-13) administered

2
by Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA) applies to companies in general, DPE as the nodal Department
of CPSEs in India has the responsibility to come out with facilitative guidelines for CPSEs considering
their uniqueness, especially on areas where CPSEs have been granted exemptions from various provisions/
sections of CA-13. The DPE Guidelines on Corporate Governance for CPSEs, 2010 addresses many
aspects in this regard. The fact that the said Guidelines predate the CA-13 shows the importance
attributed by DPE to the subject even before the Act came into force. So, the Committee felt that the
coordination between MCA and DPE is crucial and heard the Secretaries of both, MCA and DPE, on the
subject. Further, it was also felt that although formulating of a legal/regulatory framework was the
preliminary step, it would yield favourable results only if the implementation was appropriate. In this
regard, the roles of Public Enterprises Selection Board (PESB) and Securities and Exchange Board of
India (SEBI) as implementing and administrative bodies and roles of the institutions like Institute of
Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) and Institute of Company Secretaries of India (ICSI) as facilitative
and enabling bodies become important. The Committee also had interactions with a few CPSEs in order
to gauge the impact of the efforts put in by the aforesaid Ministries, Departments, Institutions, etc.
2. The Companies Act, 2013 (CA-13)
2.1 The Companies Act, 2013, prescribes the essential requirements with regard to the structure and
functioning of a company, including the manner of constitution of Board of Directors and its various
committees, remuneration of directors and their disclosures; powers of Board of directors and shareholders;
accountability of independent and other directors, etc.
2.2 The definition of Government company is given under section 2(45) of the Companies Act, 2013,
which means any company in which not less than 51% of the paid-up share capital is held by the Central
Government, or by any State Government or Governments, or partly by the Central Government and
partly by one or more State Governments and includes a company which is a subsidiary company of
such a Government company.
2.3 Corporate Governance requirements in case of a Government Company are regulated under the
following laws/guidelines:
1. Companies Act, 2013 and the rules made thereunder.
2. SEBI Act, 1992 and regulations for listed companies.
3. Department of Public Enterprises Guidelines on Corporate Governance.
4. Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) Guidelines.
2.4 With a view to ensure that the Boards of Directors and Committees of the Board of a company
play an effective role in the governance of a company, the following provisions have been made in the
Companies Act, 2013:
(a) Every company to have at least one director who is resident in India. (Section 149(3))

3
(b) Requirement of appointment of Independent Directors for listed companies provided. (Section
149(4))
(c) Requirement of compulsory appointment of a woman director in certain classes of companies
has also been prescribed. (Section 149(1))
(d) Directors of a company, which has defaulted in payment of interest or in repayment of
deposits, shall be disqualified for appointment as directors. (Section 164)
(e) Restrictions on number of companies in which a person may function as director also been
prescribed; (Section 165)
(f) For the first time the duties of directors have been elaborately specified:
• A director of a company shall act in good faith in order to promote the objects of the
company for the benefit of its members as a whole, and in the best interests of the
company, its employees, the shareholders, the community and for the protection of
environment.
• A director of the company shall exercise his duties with due and reasonable care, skill
and diligence and shall exercise independent judgment.
• Further a director of a company shall not involve in a situation in which he may have
direct or indirect interest that conflicts, or possibly may conflict with interest of the
company.
• Besides, the Act further states that a director of the company shall not achieve any undue
gain or advantage, either to himself or to his relatives, partners or associates and if such
director is found guilty of making any undue gain he shall be liable to pay an amount
equal to that gain to the company.
• A director of a company shall not assign his office and any assignment so made shall
be void.
(g) Requirement of constitution of Audit Committees, Nomination and Remuneration Committees
and Stakeholders Relationship Committee of the Board has been mandated. Duties and
responsibility of the above stated Committees have also been specified (Sections 177/178)
(h) Vigil Mechanism (whistle blowing) for certain class of companies. There should be a written
policy on Vigil mechanism in the company and that policy is required to be uploaded on the
website of the company for stakeholder's knowledge. (Section 177(9))
3. Evolution of structure and composition of Boards of Directors of CPSEs.
3.1 The background note furnished by the DPE has given an overview of the evolution of the structure
and composition of Board of Directors of CPSEs since its inception. According to them, the issue of

4
composition of Board of Directors of CPSEs was initially addressed in BPE O.M. No. 2(158)/70-BPE
(GM) dated 13th October, 1972 which laid down the following broad principles:
(i) For large multi-unit enterprises and large trading organizations, the typical structure of a Board
could be a full-time Chairman-cum-Managing Director assisted by at least two functional
Directors, one of whom would be in-charge of Finance, and part-time Directors.
(ii) A typical structure of a Board for the smaller enterprises could be a Chairman-cum-Managing
Director with one, and possibly even two senior officers of the undertaking itself as functional
Directors together with some part-time Directors. One of the functional Directors could, if
necessary, be designated as Executive Director or Director (Co-ordination), should the burden
on the Chairman-cum-Managing Director be too heavy.
(iii) In the cases referred to in (i) and (ii) above, there should be no bar to the appointment of
a part-time Chairman, if in particular cases this course appears desirable. In such cases, a
suitable whole-time Managing Director should invariably be appointed.
(iv) The number of part-time non-official Directors on the Boards of multi-unit and multi-regional
Public Enterprises may be about l/3rd of the total strength, which may be of the order of 12
to 15. In relatively smaller enterprises, the Board strength should be between 8 and 12,
including official and non-official part-time Directors, the number of the latter being about l/
3rd of the total.
(v) The policy regarding appointment of full-time Chairman/Managing Directors/Functional Directors
from out of the "panels" being prepared by the Empanelment Selection Board in accordance
with the Prime Minister's directive, should be followed without exception to ensure maximum
utilization of the panels. The aim should be for the enterprises themselves to generate their own
top executives at this level also, who should, therefore, be screened by the Empanelment
Selection Board before considering empanelment of Government servants and men from
private enterprises.
(vi) Appoint ment of Government representatives on the Boards should ordinarily be restricted to
the dealing Joint Secretary/Director, but in the case of some Ministries, other officials within
it might be chosen so as to constitute a Management Coordination Cell, as proposed to be done
in the Ministry of Industrial Development and Internal Trade or to meet the conditions about
the number or directorships held by each of ficer. While Finance Ministry representatives may
be appointed to the major Public Enterprises, the relatively smaller enterprises may do without
representatives of the Finance Ministry.
(vii) W ith regard to part-time Directors, as an interim measure, the services of those from the
private sector, who have volunteered for full-time appointment in Public Enterprises and
considered fit and empanelled to hold such top level posts in Public Enterprises may be
advantageously utilized.

5
(viii) The policy decision in regard to the exclusion of Members of Parliament in the Boards of
Public Enterprises, which is based on the recommendations of the Krishna Menon Committee,
should remain unchanged.
3.2 Through BPE O.M. No. 2(4)/75-BPE(GM-I) dated 22nd May, 1975, it was clarified that as long
as the company is located in one State only, it would be desirable to have the representative of the State
Government on the Board of Directors of the enterprise concerned. It was also clarified that in the case
of multi-unit enterprises operating in many States, it would neither be desirable nor practicable to have
a representative of the State Government from all States and it would be discriminatory to select only
from a particular State. In other words, in such multi-unit enterprises, there is no need to include any
representative of the State Government on the Board of Directors of the related enterprise.
3.3 BPE O.M. No. 2(9)/80-BPE (GM) dated 20th April, 1982 clarified that the policy of not appointing
sitting Members of Parliament to the Boards of Directors of Central Government Public Enterprises
should continue. It was also intimated that the Government has taken the decision that the policy of
combining the post of Chairman and Managing Director of a public enterprise should be decided on the
merits of each type of enterprise and the availability of a competent person to hold the post of part-time
Chairman.
3.4 On the basis of recommendations of Economic Administration Reforms Commission (EARC) in
their report on "Government and Public Enterprises - Top Management and the Boards" and decisions
of the Government thereon, BPE O.M. No. 18/1/84-GM dated 19th September, 1984 was issued which
prescribed the following guidelines regarding the organization and functioning of the Boards of the public
sector enterprises.
(i) Appointment of Part-time Chairman or CMD:- The recommendation of EARC that the general
policy of appointing a single Chairman-cum-Managing Director (CMD) should continue was
accepted by the Government. It was also decided that the practice of appointing the Secretary
of the administrative Ministry as Part-time Chairman of a Public Enterprise, even for short
period, should be discouraged.
(ii) Number of Government Directors on the Board of Directors: - The Government accepted the
recommendations of EARC for keeping down the number of Government officials on the
Boards of public enterprises, minimizing number of directorships reflecting special concerns
or interests and for considering the possibility of drawing suitable persons from non-Government
sources. It was also recommended that an officer should not have too many directorships on
the Boards of public enterprises so that he can do adequate justice to his role as a Government
Director.
3.5 The DPE examined the issue of Professionalization of the Boards of PSEs in pursuance of the New
Industrial Policy Statement made in the Parliament on 24th July, 1991 and the composition of the Boards
of Directors in PSEs was prescribed vide DPE O.M. No. 18 (6)/91-GM dated 16th March, 1992. It was

6
prescribed that the Boards of CPSEs should have three categories of Directors, namely, Functional,
Government and Non-official, with following composition.
• Functional Directors: It was prescribed that the number of such full time Functional Directors
should not exceed 50% of the actual strength of the Board.
• Government Directors: It was prescribed that the number of the Government Directors on the
Board of Directors of an enterprise should not exceed one-sixth of the actual strength of the
Board and that it would be preferable to have only one Government Director from the
concerned Administrative Ministry on each Board. In case of PSEs where it is considered
essential to give representation on the Boards to other concerned Government agencies/
Ministries/State Governments, only one representation from the Group could also be appointed
on the Board as part-time Government Director. However, the number of Government Directors
on a Board should in no case exceed two.
• Non official Directors: It was prescribed that the number of Non-official part-time Directors
on a Board should be at least one-third of its actual strength.
3.6. Consequent to notification of Clause 49 of Listing Agreement by SEBI (since replaced by SEBI
Listing Obligations and Disclosure Requirements (LODR) Regulations, 2015), DPE O.M. No. 18(6)/
2000-GM dated 26th November, 2001 prescribed that in case of the listed CPSEs with non-Executive
Chairmen at least one-third of their Board should comprise Independent (non-official) Directors and in
the cases of listed CPSEs with Executive Chairmen at least half of their Board should comprise Independent
(non-official) Directors.
4. Relevant changes/initiatives under the new Companies Act, 2013
4.1. As part of the examination of the subject, the Committee sought to know about the relevant
changes/initiatives that have been incorporated with the objective to attain Professionalization of Board
of CPSEs in the Companies Act, 2013 as compared to the Companies Act, 1956. In reply, MCA the stated
as under-
(i) The new Companies Act, 2013 [CA-13] inter-alia contains many new provisions which aim
to ensure professionalization of Board of Directors (including those of CPSEs) viz. duties of
directors under section 166, appointment of requisite number of Independent Directors (IDs)
on Boards of certain Companies [Section 149(4)] etc. It also provides for constitution of
Nomination and Remuneration Committee [Section 178] which shall select suitable and competent
persons for the post of directors in companies and specify the manner of effective evaluation
of performance of directors.
(ii) Further, as per Section 149(8) of CA-13, relevant company and IDs have to comply with the
provisions of Schedule IV to the CA-13 which contain the Code for IDs. The said Code inter-
alia contains provisions for guidelines of professional conduct by IDs. The said Code also
provides that IDs shall undertake appropriate induction and regularly update and refresh their

7
skills, knowledge and familiarity with the company. All such provisions aim towards
professionalization of institutions of Board of Directors of companies.
(iii) Provisions of Section 177 of CA-13 requiring constitution of Audit Committees (AC) by
relevant classes of companies also aim at attaining professionalization in Board processes.
Majority of Directors of AC and its Chairman need to be IDs with ability to read and
understand financial statements.
(iv) The CA-13 [Section 2(51] read with Section 203] has also recognised the term "key managerial
personnel" (KMP) to refer inter-alia to MD or CEO or whole-time director with a view to
ensure accountability in the Board.
(v) The CA-13 has also strengthened the provisions w.r.t. approval/monitoring of related party
transactions to ensure accountability w.r .t. such matters.
4.2. During the oral evidence, the Secretary, MCA stated that there was a paradigm shift from the
Companies Act, 1956 to the Companies Act, 2013. One of which was the 'Ease of Doing Business' -
for establishing a company, for operating a company and for exiting companies with less regulatory
controls. While pursuing this aspect further the Committee sought to know whether the Ease of Doing
Business and Professionalization of Board of CPSEs can be correlated. The Committee also wanted to
know whether the Ease of Doing Business could enhance the performance of a CPSE.
4.3. In reply, MCA submitted that the aim of 'Ease of Doing Business' under the CA-13 was to ensure
ease of operations/ease of compliance for the companies while the aim of Corporate Governance principles
and provisions is to ensure accountability, transparency and integrity in the functions of the company.
Ease of doing business initiatives of the Ministry are meant to facilitate business processes of corporates
by simplifying applicable Laws and Rules for conducting business in India. A number of steps have been
taken by the Ministry in this regard, for example, process of obtaining Director Identification Number
(DIN) has been simplified and it can now be obtained within a day. Similarly, procedure for obtaining
name of a company has been simplified and a Web based service, Reserve Unique Name (RUN) has been
introduced. Integration of Permanent Account Number /Tax Deduction and Collection Account Number
(PAN/TAN) applications and e-Memorandum of Association/ Articles of Association (e-MOA/AOA) have
been introduced within integrated incorporation e-form SPICE (Simplified Performa for Incorporating
Company Electronically) to ensure that company is incorporated in a day and five services required to
start a business are provided through one form. However, emphasis on Ease of Doing Business does not
mean a compromise on Corporate Governance standards. Board structure of a company and its
Professionalization was governed by provisions of Companies Act namely Section 149, 165 of Companies
Act, 2013 and Companies (Appointment and Qualification of Directors) Rules, 2014.
4.4 Thereafter, MCA shared their view that "ease of business" and "corporate governance" were two
related objectives and both need to be focused upon at all times. MCA is of the view that "ease of
business" should not be at the cost of any compromise on essential corporate governance norms/

8
principles. At the same time, ease of entry, operations and exit promote better compliance. CPSEs also
stand to benefit from the Ease of Doing Business initiatives of the Government. MCA also suggested that
further information on this matter may be obtained from Department of Public Enterprises as the matter
relates to Boards of CPSEs.
4.5 The Committee observes that CPSEs benefit from the push by the Government for enhancing
the 'Ease of Doing Business' in the country. It is further noted that conducive environment with
ease of entry, operation and exit would ensure better compliance with good Corporate Governance
principles. Accordingly, the Committee is of the opinion that DPE should keep watch for the
initiatives of the Government for the Ease of Doing Business, collate them in a manner which
is of functional/operative utility to CPSEs and appropriately communicate the same to the
administrative ministries oft the CPSEs directly.
5. Exemptions (from CA- 13) given to Government Companies
5.1. During the oral evidence, the Secretary, MCA submitted that there were 11,72,839 active companies
in the country. Out of these companies, 1,943 are Government companies and within this, 539 are private
companies. There may be another thousand companies which may be deemed Government companies.
In the Central Sector, there are 494 Government companies, including six statutory companies and 192
Government-controlled entities. Accordingly, the Government-controlled entities and Government companies
put together are about 686 companies.
5.2. Thereafter, the matter of exemptions provided to CPSEs under Section 462 of the Companies Act,
2013 were placed before the Committee. According to MCA, in Companies Act, 1956, Section 620 gave
a general power to the Central Government to give certain exemptions to certain class or classes of
companies. When Companies Act, 2013 came into force, the exemptions under Section 620 of the
erstwhile Act of 1956 were more or less replicated under Section 462. The list of such exemptions as
notified by MCA on 05/06/16 has been placed at Annexure-1. Some of the relaxation/exemptions given
to Government Companies are as under:-
5.2.1 In case of a Government Company, the Ministry administratively in charge of such company and
not the Board will have to form an opinion of the integrity and relevant expertise and experience of a
person who is supposed to be appointed as an Independent Director. A person having pecuniary relationship
with the company, its holding, subsidiary or associate company, or their promoters, or Directors during
two immediately preceding financial years is also qualified for being appointed as an Independent Director
of such Government Company. (Section 149(6)).
5.2.2 Audit Committee is constituted to recommend appointment, remuneration and terms of appointment
of the auditor and to scrutinize certain financial transactions. The Committee should have atleast 3
independent directors forming a majority. However, in case of a Government company, the Audit Committee
cannot recommend appointment/terms of the appointment of an auditor as this function lies in the domain
of CAG. So, Audit Committee's role would be restricted to recommend remuneration for the auditor.
(Section 177).

9
5.2.3 Nomination and Remuneration Committee is constituted to identify and recommend to the Board the
persons qualified to become directors and who may be appointed in the senior management. The
committee should have atleast one-half of its directors as independent directors. However, in case of a
Government company, the Nomination and Remuneration Committee cannot recommend persons qualified
to be directors. (Section 178).
5.2.4 Unlike other companies, a Government company is exempted from providing the following items
in its Board's report (Section 134):
(a) Company's policy on directors' appointment and remuneration including criteria for determining
qualifications, positive attributes, independence of a director.
(b) A statement indicating the manner in which formal annual evaluation has been made by the
Board of its own performance and that of its committees and individual directors, in case the
directors are evaluated by the Ministry or Department of the Central Government which is
administratively in charge of the company, or, as the case may be, the State Government, as
per its own evaluation methodology.
5.2.5A Government company is allowed to advance loans to directors or to any other person in whom
the director is interested or give any guarantee or provide any security in connection with any loan taken
by him or such other person without the requirement of a special resolution of its members, provided
approval of the Ministry/Department administratively in charge of the company has been taken. (Section
185).
5.2.6A Government company is allowed to give any loan to any person or other body corporate, or give
any guarantee or provide security in connection with a loan to any other body corporate or person and
acquire by way of subscription, purchase or otherwise, the securities of any other body corporate even
if the amount exceeds 60% of its paid-up share capital, free reserves and securities premium account
or 100% of its free reserves and securities premium account, whichever is more, provided that Government
company engaged in defence production or it is an unlisted Government company which has taken
approval of the Ministry/Department administratively in charge of the company. (Section 186).
5.2.7In certain cases related party transactions are required to be approved by an ordinary resolution of
the members. However, in case of Government companies transactions entered into with other Government
companies or where an unlisted Government company transacts with any other related party after
obtaining approval of the Ministry/Department administratively in charge of the company, the requirement
of obtaining approval of the members by way of an ordinary resolution has been dispensed with. (Section
188).
5.2.8 The provisions relating to overall maximum Managerial Remuneration and Managerial Remuneration
in Case of Absence or Inadequacy of Profits is not applicable in case of Government companies. (Section
197).

10
The representatives of MCA felt that certain exemptions may have become redundant while some may
still be valid.
5.3. Regarding the exemptions provided to CPSEs under Section 462 of the Companies Act, 2013, the
Committee wanted to know whether these exemptions could be considered as antithetical to the concept
of Professionalization of Board of CPSEs. In reply, DPE submitted that these exemptions have been
provided to Government companies, which in addition to CPSEs includes companies with shareholding
as defined in Section 2(45) of Companies Act, 2013, including State Level Public Enterprises. Thus,
exemption was not limited to CPSEs alone but to a wide spectrum of companies in which Central
Government or State Governments have majority stake. These exemptions have been notified by the
Ministry of Corporate Affairs after following due process and with the approval of the Parliament. Since
these exemptions were granted to smoothen the working of Government companies, such exemptions
cannot be considered as antithetical to the concept of Professionalization of Boards of CPSEs.
5.4 Further, the Committee sought the details of the process followed by the Government regarding
granting of these exemption under the said section to CPSEs and also sought the Ministry to furnish the
instances, till date, wherein the Government has actually granted such exemptions to CPSEs and whether
there had been any instances wherein such grant of exemption has been refused by the Houses of the
Parliament. The MCA replied that the Section 462 of the CA, 2013 provides for the requirement of laying
of draft notification in both the Houses of Parliament for a period of 30 days. Before laying such draft
notification, the MCA and DPE hold discussions and agree on the exemptions/modifications for Government
companies. After the above consultations, the draft notification was prepared by MCA which was sent
to Legislative Department for vetting and thereafter, approval of Hon'ble Minister of Corporate Affairs
was obtained. Thereafter, draft notifications are laid in both the Houses and after the requisite period was
completed, confirmation from both the Houses was obtained w.r.t. requirement under Section 462 of the
CA, 2013. After such confirmation final notification was published in the official gazette and copies are
laid down in both the Houses u/s 462 (4) of the CA, 2013. However, the reply of the Ministry was silent
on the instances wherein the Government has actually granted such exemptions to CPSEs and instances
wherein such grant of exemption has been refused by the Houses of the Parliament.
5.5 During the examination of these exemptions, the Committee found that CPSEs enjoy exemption
from performance evaluation of the Board and Independent Directors under Section 144 (3) of the
Companies Act, 2013 compared to their counterparts in private sector. The objectives behind allowing
this exemption were sought from DPE and MCA as well as their opinion regarding the merits and
demerits of this exemption. As part of their written submission, MCA claimed that the exemption to
Government companies were provided in view of the reference received from DPE in which it was
stated by the said Department that Para VIII [Evaluation mechanism] of Schedule IV of the Act is not
relevant for CPSEs as Government will lay down the guidelines for selection and appointment, re-
appointment, resignation/removal and evaluation of performance of Independent Directors on the Boards
of CPSEs.

11
5.6. Whereas on the same issue, DPE's reply stated that the Board of Directors of CPSEs comprised
of functional, Government and non-official Directors. The Government has already laid down procedure
and guidelines for annual performance appraisal of functional directors of CPSEs which is linked to MoU
system. In respect of Government directors, who were generally serving officers of the Government,
there was already a well-defined mechanism for their annual performance appraisal. Therefore, adding
one more layer of performance evaluation would not serve any purpose and might even be counterproductive.
Further, the Government has also laid down guidelines and procedure for selection and appointment of
non-official Directors on the Boards of CPSEs. Considering the above position, DPE had requested
Ministry of Corporate Affairs to exempt Government companies from this provision and DPE was of
the view that the exemption was useful as it was in line with extant procedure approved by Appointments
Committee of Cabinet (ACC).
5.7 Regarding the provision for Independent Directors to meet alone, apart from the rest of Board
Members of the Company, to evaluate the performance of the CPSE concerned, DPE submitted that the
extant DPE provision provides that the non-official Directors of CPSEs shall hold at least one meeting
in a year, without the attendance of Functional and Government directors and members of management.
It has also been provided that the meeting shall assess the quality, quantity and timeliness of flow of
information between the company management and the Board that is necessary for the Board to effectively
and reasonably perform their duties.
5.8 The Committee notes that exemptions from certain provision of the Companies Act, 2013
have been granted to the CPSEs to smoothen their functioning. DPE informs the Committee that
exemptions cannot be considered as antithetical to the concept of Professionalization of Boards
of CPSEs. Further, it has been placed before the Committee that all exemptions have been
notified with the approval of the Parliament. Ministry of Corporate Affairs has informed the
Committee that the exemptions have been provided based on the reference received from DPE
which inter-alia stated that the provision relating to Schedule IV of the Act was not relevant to
CPSEs as Government would lay down guidelines for appointment/selection, reappointment,
resignation/removal and evaluation of performance of Independent Directors.
5.9 Regarding the performance evaluation of Directors of the Boards of CPSEs the Committee
finds that performance evaluation of Functional Directors has been hinged on the MoU system.
Here, the Committee is of the considered opinion that a broad based evaluation mechanism
dependent on the MoU performance of a CPSE will only provide a macro level assessment of the
performance of a Functional Director. It is the view of the Committee that this mechanism has
to be appropriately reviewed in a time bound manner and a more micro level evaluation of the
performance of the Functional Directors which would bring out their individual contributions
towards the actual performance of the Company has to be put in place. The Committee recommends
accordingly, taking into consideration the fast changing and complex requirements of the economy
the CPSEs cater to.

12
5.10 The performance evaluation of the Government Directors, who are serving officers of the
Government, is based on their annual performance appraisal, regarding which the Committee
recommends that their annual performance appraisal should be adequately modified to reflect
their execution of their designated roles on the Board of a CPSE. In the opinion of the
Committee this step is essential as the Government Nominee Directors are the guardians of the
majority Stakeholder's (Government) interest which could translate into protecting public
interest.
5.11 Coming to Independent Directors, the Committee finds that nothing has been brought
before it which suggests that the Government has laid down a well designed evaluation mechanism
for the Independent Directors. Therefore, the Committee suggests that any mechanism, currently
in place, to evaluate the performance of the Independent Directors should be submitted to the
Committee in detail. In case, such a mechanism is not in vogue, the Committee considers this
as a serious lapse from the side of the Government and a lukewarm response to the need for
professionalizing the Boards of CPSEs. Under such circumstance, the Committee recommends
that a scrupulous mechanism for performance evaluation of Independent Directors has to be
brought in with urgent priority. Further, the Independent Directors may be accorded an increased
role in the overall evaluation of the management of a CPSE by amending the extant DPE
Guidelines to make their yearly meeting, apart from the rest of Board Members of the Company
to evaluate the performance of the CPSE concerned, mandatory.
5.12. Going into the specific exemptions granted to CPSEs from the provisions contained in CA, 2013,
the Committee identified that the Act prescribes a limit of 15 in respect to the number of Directors on
the Board of a private company, which can be increased through a special resolution, whereas in a
Government company there is no limit to the number of Directors on the Board and sought the
justification for providing such an exemption. While MCA maintained that in case of Government
companies, the guidelines/criteria for composition of Board/appointment of directors were laid down by
Government (DPE)/administrative Ministry which inter-alia include maximum number of directorships
that a director may hold. The said exemption was also provided to Government companies under the
erstwhile Companies Act, 1956 and therefore has been retained under CA-13. The said exemption has
been accorded in consultation with Nodal Department (DPE). As far as DPE is concerned they remained
silent to the Committee's query seeking the justification for the exemption.
5.13.In connection with the above exemption, the Committee sought to know whether the Government
has any proposal to reduce or put a limit (as in the case of private company) to the number of
Independent Directors as well as Government Nominee Directors on the Boards of CPSEs. For which
DPE replied that there was no proposal to reduce or put a limit on the number of Independent Directors
required to be appointed on the Boards of CPSEs as the same will be governed as per relevant sections
of the Companies Act, 2013, SEBI (LODR) Regulations, 2015 and DPE Guidelines. Further, they also
informed that they have initiated inter-ministerial discussions on a proposal to restrict number of Government
Directors on the Boards of CPSEs to one.

13
5.14. From the oral and written submission made before the Committee as part of the examination
of the subject, the Committee comprehends that the maximum limit of 15 Directors on the Board
of a Company, applicable for a private Company, is not applicable to Government Companies.
This is one of the exemptions granted to CPSEs w.e.f. from 5.06.2015, the date on which it has
been notified by Ministry of Corporate Affairs. However, it has been brought to the knowledge
of the Committee that the Government is considering the feasibility of bringing down the
number of Government nominee Directors on the Boards of CPSEs to one. In this exercise,
number of other Directors are also supposed to be rationalized to achieve optimum sized CPSE
Boards of Directors. The Committee holds the view that larger Boards may be unwieldy and
consensus building may be difficult to attain which in turn could impinge timely decision making.
Therefore, the Committee recommends that this exercise should be pursued in all earnestness
and can be perceived as a definite step towards the professionalization of the Boards of CPSEs.
The Committee notes that an inter-ministerial discussion on a proposal to restrict the number
of Government Directors on the Board of CPSEs is on going. The Committee desires that as and
when the proposal is finalised the Committee may be apprised.
5.15. While going through the Companies Act, 2013, it came to the notice of the Committee that many
of the guidelines in the Code of Conduct of Independent Directors as available in the Schedule IV to the
Companies Act, 2013 (Annexure-2) were not applicable to Government companies, in case such
requirements are specified by the Ministries or Departments concerned of the Central or the State
Government and such requirements are complied with by the Government companies. The rationale for
allowing such exemptions to a Government company along with the instances of such exemptions that
has been availed by CPSEs on account of their administrative Ministry or Department having made
provisions in place of such exemptions were sought by the Committee. Also, the existing safeguards to
prevent dilution of efficiency of Independent Directors due to the operation of these exemptions were
asked for.
5.16. MCA in their reply stated that the exemption to Government companies from certain paragraphs of
Schedule IV was provided in view of the reference received from DPE in which it was stated by the
said Department that Para II (2) and (7), Para IV, V and VI, Para VII(3)(a) and (b) and Para VIII of
Schedule IV of the Act is not relevant for CPSEs in view of the following rationale:-
(i) Para II (2) and (7)-Role of IDs:- In CPSEs, the Independent Directors do not have any role
in the performance evaluation of other Board members as Government has laid down the
guidelines for performance evaluation of Functional and Government Directors. The Government
fixes the remuneration of executives of CPSEs and Independent Directors are not expected
to play any direct role in the process of appointment/removal of executives of CPSEs.
(ii) Para IV , V , VI and VIII-Manner of appointment, Re-appointment, Resignation or removal,
Evaluation Mechanism:- The Government will lay down the guidelines for selection and
appointment, re-appointment, resignation/removal and evaluation of performance of IDs on the
Boards of CPSEs.

14
(iii) Para VII:- In CPSEs, the IDs do not have any role in the performance evaluation of other
Board Members including Chairperson of CPSEs as Government has laid down the guidelines
for performance evaluation of functional and Government Directors.
5.17. The Committee, at this juncture, asked DPE to ascertain from them as to whether they had issued
any guidelines to regulate those aspects of the Companies Act, 2013 wherein the CPSEs are allowed
exemptions along with the details of the system in place that governs the operation of areas wherein
CPSEs enjoy exemptions. DPE submitted in their written reply that they had issued a number of
guidelines on matters relating to working of CPSEs. Government companies have been exempted from
certain provisions of Companies Act, 2013 and these exemptions relate to miscellaneous matters. The
Government has issued guidelines on some of these matters such as performance evaluation of Directors,
appointment of Directors, etc. for which reference has been made in the notification issued by the MCA.
5.18 The Committee notes that one of the important features of the Company Act, 2013 is
Schedule IV to the Act which contains the Code of Conduct of Independent Directors. There, it
finds that on the reference received from DPE, MCA has given exemptions to CPSEs from
various provisions as contained in the Code. The Committee also finds that these exemptions are
subject to the condition that the requirement in respect of matters specified in these exemptions
are specified by the Ministries or Departments of the Central Government or as the case may
be, the State Governments concerned and such requirements are complied with by the Government
companies. The Committee is in agreement with the fact that certain exemptions are undoubtedly
needed to be given to CPSEs owing to the peculiarities of their structure, functioning and
objectives for which they have been set up. However, the Committee is surprised to note that
DPE has termed these exemptions be on "miscellaneous matters". The Committee cannot but
take exception to this stand of DPE and does not agree in toto. Accordingly, it is of the strong
opinion that the areas in which the exemptions have been granted have to be invariably addressed
appropriately by DPE, either through their guidelines or through other definite measures and it
needs periodical reviewing so that it is in sync with related SEBI Regulations and other similar
statutory stipulations applicable.
5.19. Regarding the relevance of the exemptions to CPSEs from the provisions of the Companies Act,
2013, the representatives of MCA submitted before the Committee as part of the oral evidence that:-
"...... Certain exemptions may have become redundant. Certain exemptions may be still valid.
What should be the carve-out for a public sector where it is the natural choice because market
failures could be there, and welfare considerations could be there. The Kotak Committee actually
had a separate chapter for Governance aspects of public enterprises........................................
The Committee actually came up with some good recommendations. What does it say about the
mandate of a public sector enterprise? That  should be the differentiating factor, not ownership.
If a private industry and a public sector company are manufacturing bread or running hotels, why
should there be any difference just because there is a private sector company and a public sector
company? But if it is a railway corporation running railways for a large country like ours, may

15
be there are real issues of pricing, etc., and public sector may be required. They have given us some
examples of good practices. Norway is generally rated as one of the top countries in the world on
all parameters including corporate governance. They say that the precise rationale for having a
public sector undertaking should be overwhelming. It should come out very clearly why there should
be a public sector company to handle a particular activity. They say that you specifically define
the objectives. If other than commercial objective is there, commercial objective is understood, you
have to clearly indicate and also ring-fence it..."
5.20 Culminating the discussion on the exemptions to CPSEs from the provisions of the Companies Act,
2013, the Committee wished to know whether DPE or MCA had ever considered having a relook at the
said exemptions as compared to private companies along with the details thereof. Further, the Committee
sought whether they had received any proposals/representations from any quarter regarding the need to
revise/re-visit the exemptions provided to CPSEs in the Companies Act, 2013. According to DPE, they
have not received any proposal from administrative Ministries/CPSEs for revising the exemptions already
available to Government companies. Whereas, the MCA replied that they had granted exemptions to the
Government companies u/s 462 of the CA, 2013 vide Notification No. 463(E) dated 05.06.2015 after
holding detailed discussion with DPE. Subsequently, requests were received from certain Government
companies and also DPE and the matter was discussed. After following the procedure under Section 462
of the CA, 2013 another notification was issued on 13.06.2017. Thereafter, no further request has been
made for exemptions to the Government companies. MCA has informed that in case any other request
was made same shall be considered after due examination and consultation.
5.21.  The Committee finds that the exemptions granted to CPSEs from certain provisions of the
Companies Act, 2013 have been based on the reference from DPE. It has also been given to
understand that some of these exemptions have been continued as they were in force as part of
Companies Act, 1956. Regarding having a review or relook at the exemptions, both MCA and
DPE have submitted that no demand to that effect have been received from any stakeholders.
In this direction, the Committee is of the opinion that the Government, especially DPE, does not
need any proposal from the administrative Ministries of CPSEs or any other quarter to initiate
a review of these exemptions. As already expressed by the Committee earlier, it is very much
in favour of providing appropriate exemptions to CPSEs. However, too many exemptions to
CPSEs, vis-a-vis, their private counterparts would not augur well for the Professionalization of
the Boards of CPSEs. Hence, care should be taken to keep such exemptions in alignment with
the SEBI (LODR) Regulations and other statutory requirements that the CPSEs has to comply
with, so as not to hinder them from taking full advantage attached to such compliance. Further
more, the exemptions should also be in the light of the current international practices, the
Indian context and also keeping in view the Government's push to recast CPSEs as independent,
competitive, self reliant corporate entities who can be at par with the private companies to the
extent possible. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that DPE should undertake a
comprehensive review of the exemptions granted to CPSEs under the Section 462 of the CA-2013
and weed out redundant ones. Further, the Committee also recommends an overhaul review of
the entire Guidelines on Corporate Governance for the CPSEs, 2010 of DPE which predates the
CA-2013 and covers for the exemptions granted to CPSEs.

16
5.22. On exemptions to CPSEs, the Committee also wishes to bring on record the feasibility of
the recommendation of the Kotak Committee set up by SEBI to review the Corporate Governance
norms in the country wherein it has been preferred that the differentiating factors between
CPSEs and the private companies shall be based on the objective for which a CPSE has been set
up. This means the exemptions shall not be by virtue of the fact that one is a Government
company and the other, a private entity but based on factors like the social objective, balanced
regional development and similar goals proposed to be addressed and other factors peculiar to
Government being in business. The Committee observes that the Government shall take
appropriate action on the above mentioned aspect.
6. Audit Committee
6.1. Section 177 (1) of the Companies Act, 2013 provides that the Board of Directors of every listed
public company and following class of companies shall constitute an Audit Committee:—
(i) the Public Companies having paid up share capital of ten crore rupees or more; or
(ii) the Public Companies having turnover of one hundred crore rupees or more; or
(iii) the Public Companies which have, in aggregate, outstanding loans, debentures and deposits,
exceeding fifty crore rupees:
The Audit Committee shall consist of a minimum of three directors with independent directors
forming a majority:—
Provided that majority of members of Audit Committee including its Chairperson shall be persons
with ability to read and understand, the financial statement.
Every Audit Committee shall act in accordance with the terms of reference specified in writing by
the Board which shall, inter alia, include, —
(i) the recommendation for appointment, remuneration and terms of appointment of auditors of
the company;
(ii) review and monitor the auditor's independence and performance, and effectiveness of audit
process;
(iii) examination of the financial statement and the auditors' report thereon; and
(iv) approval or any subsequent modification of transactions of the company with related parties.
6.2. During the oral evidence it was pointed out that in a considerable percentage of companies, there
was no Independent Director in the Audit Committee. Such a situation may lead to the very sanctity of
the Audit Committee getting questioned because they do not have independence. Taking into cognizance
the seriousness of the matter, the Committee wished to know about the importance of an Audit Committee
in a CPSE and the responsibilities of Independent Directors in such a Committee along with the information

17
whether all the CPSEs in India have an Audit Committee as mandated by the Companies Act, 2013.
Further, the Committee also wanted the list of the CPSEs that do not have an Audit Committee as well
as the list of the CPSEs that do not have Independent Directors in their Audit Committee in sufficient
numbers as mandated by the Companies Act, 2013.
6.3 As reply to this, DPE submitted that the importance of Audit Committee and its role and functions
have been enunciated in Section 177 of the Companies Act, 2013 as narrated above and DPE guidelines
on Corporate Governance for CPSEs. The relevant extracts of DPE guidelines on Audit Committee are
enclosed at Annexure 3. However, DPE informed that the information regarding setting up of Audit
Committee by CPSEs as per provisions of Companies Act, 2013 was being collected from MCA and
CPSEs and would be submitted separately. This information, however, is awaited.
6.4. Regarding the exemption under Section 462 on the Audit Committee, MCA submitted that in case
of a Government company, the Audit Committee cannot recommend appointments/terms of the appointment
of an auditor, as this function lies in the domain of C&AG. So, Audit Committee's role would be
restricted to recommend remuneration for the auditor.
6.5. Giving weightage to the importance of the Audit Committee in the transparent functioning of a CPSE
and the role of Independent Directors in contributing to the credibility of the actions of the Audit
Committee, the Committee enquired about the steps taken by the Government/CPSEs to ensure that
Independent Directors in a CPSE were competent enough to carry out the specialized functioning of an
Audit Committee. Further, DPE was also asked to provide details of the training, if any, provided to the
Independent Directors in this regard. Clarifications were also sought whether the help of the Institute
of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI)/Institute of Company Secretaries of India (ICSI) could be
taken in this direction.
6.6. In reply, DPE submitted that Section 177 of the Companies Act, 2013 provides that majority of
members of the Audit Committee including the Chairperson shall be persons with ability to read and
understand the financial statements. Further, DPE reported that they organize orientation programmes for
Directors of CPSEs in which special emphasis was being given to the working of Audit Committee. It
was also informed that two programmes devoted only on the issue of effective functioning of Audit
Committee for Directors of CPSEs were organized by DPE. According to DPE, 'the experts from 1CA1/
ICSI could be engaged as faculty for such programmes as they have the requisite domain knowledge.
6.7 The Committee perceives that Audit Committee of a company has inalienable importance
in ensuring economic efficiency, prudence, transparency and vigilance. In case of CPSEs, the
Audit Committee has a reduced role limited to recommending remuneration of auditors, reviewing
the annual financial statements, performance of internal auditors, functioning of the whistleblowers
mechanism and similar review functions related to financial operations of CPSEs. However, in
the Committee's opinion, the credibility of the Audit Committee of a company may have a
linkage to the fiduciary responsibility of the Board and its members and hence can be perceived
to have an impact on investor confidence in the Company. The truncation of role of the Audit

18
Committee of a CPSE, in comparison to the roles laid down in CA- 2013, is due to the involvement
of the Controller and Auditor General of India in auditing of CPSEs. However, the Committee
finds that the role of the Audit Committee in CPSEs is currently governed by the provisions of
CA-2013 and DPE guidelines on Corporate Governance 2010, which covers for the exemptions
granted from certain provisions of CA-2013, to CPSEs. In the opinion of the Committee taking
into account the essence and sprit of the said Act, it will be prudent to have a review of the
provisions related to Audit Committee as contained in the guidelines of Corporate Governance
2010. It is felt that such a review shall concentrate on lending the Audit Committee a more
effective profile akin to the provisions of CA-2013 applicable to companies, in general. The
Department shall also refer the matter for the expert advice of Controller and Auditor General
of India. Further, the Government shall ensure that the Audit Committees are constituted and
functioning in all CPSEs and they are adequately populated with Independent Directors as per
extant provisions/guidelines.
6.8 The skilling of the members of the Audit Committee to equip them to effectively essay their
roles shall also be of primary importance. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that DPE
may requisition the expertise of domain specialist institutions like Institute of Chartered
Accountants of India (ICAI) and Institute of Company Secretaries of India (ICSI) in this
endeavour.
7. Eligibility Criteria for Directors of CPSEs.
7.1. As part of their initial submission before the Committee, DPE furnished the existing provisions
regarding eligibility criteria of Directors on the Boards of CPSEs which is as under:–
• Functional Directors:- The selection of Functional Directors of CPSEs is undertaken by Public
Enterprises Selection Board (PESB) which is under the administrative jurisdiction of Department
of Personnel & Training (DoPT). The requisite information as received from PESB/DoPT will
be forwarded in due course by DPE.
• Government Directors:- As Government Directors are generally senior officers of the Government
of India, State Government(s) or other Government agencies, so separate criteria have been
prescribed.
• Non-official Directors:- The Government has laid down the following criteria for persons to
be considered for appointment as Non-official Directors on the Boards of CPSEs.
7.1.1 Criteria of Experience
(i) Retired Government officials with a minimum of 10 years' experience at Joint Secretary level
or above.
(ii) Persons who have retired as CMD/CEOs of CPSEs and Functional Directors of the Schedule
'A' CPSEs. The ex-Chief Executives and ex-Functional Directors of the CPSEs will not be

19
considered for appointment as Non-official Director on the Board of the CPSE from which
they retire. Serving Chief Executives/Directors of CPSEs will not be eligible to be considered
for appointment as non-official Directors on the Boards of any CPSEs.
(iii) Academicians/Directors of Institutes/Heads of Department and Professors having more than
10 years teaching or research experience in the relevant domain e.g. management, finance,
marketing, technology, human resources, or law.
(iv) Professionals of repute having more than 15 years of relevant domain experience in fields
relevant to the company's area of operation.
(v) Former CEOs of private companies if the company is (a) listed on the Stock Exchanges or
(b) unlisted but profit making and having an annual turnover of at least ` 250 crore.
(vi) Persons of eminence with proven track record from Industry, Business or Agriculture or
Management.
(vii) Serving CEOs and Directors of private companies listed on the Stock Exchanges may also be
considered for appointment as part-time Non-official Directors on the Boards of CPSEs in
exceptional circumstances.
7.1.2 Criteria of Educational Qualification:- Minimum graduate degree from a recognized university.
7.1.3 Criteria of Age:- The age band should be between 45-65 years (minimum/maximum limit). This
could, however, be relaxed for eminent professionals, for reasons to be recorded, being limited to 70
years.
7.2 With a view to assess the measures taken by the Government to refine the selection of Independent
Directors in CPSEs, the Committee asked for information in this regard along with the feasibility of
prescribing sector-wise/domain-wise/specialization specific eligibility conditions for selecting Independent
Directors to each CPSEs. According to DPE, the Government has been refining the process of selection
and appointment of Non-official Directors on the Boards of CPSEs by taking steps such as (i) laying
down specific criteria in terms of age, educational qualifications and experience for persons to be
considered for such appointment, (ii) prescribing well-defined procedure for selection and appointment,
and (iii) including non-official experts in the selection committee. On domain experts, DPE opined that
the criteria laid down for persons to be considered for appointment as Non-official Directors on the
Boards of CPSEs adequately covers different domain experience required for the post.
7.3 Adding to this, MCA informed the Committee that (i) Section 149 and 150 of the Companies Act,
2013 provide for various requirements with regard to appointment of IDs. Section 149(6) provides for
various attributes for a person who may be appointed as an ID in relevant companies. Clause (c) thereof
provides that ID would possess such other qualifications as may be prescribed. Rule 5 of the Companies
(Appointment and Qualifications of Directors) Rules, 2014 provides that an ID shall possess appropriate
skills, experience and knowledge in one or more fields of finance, law, management, sales, marketing,

20
administration, research, corporate governance, technical operations or other disciplines related to the
company's business. Further, it was also submitted that in view of the importance of role of IDs, MCA
was examining the issue of prescription of certain educational qualifications as well as passing/qualifying
a test from an Institute, preferably Indian Institute of Corporate Affairs (IICA).
7.4 The Committee finds that the extant provisions regarding eligibility criteria of Independent
Directors on the Boards of CPSEs are largely broad based and can be more condensed and
streamlined in tune with the best corporate practices. It should be kept in mind that in the
current competitive market economy, the Government has decided to support only the best
performing CPSEs. Under these circumstances, there can not be any compromise on the quality
of Independent Directors picked up to perform active Board room roles. The Committee accordingly
recommends that DPE shall initiate an exercise to contemporarily recast the eligibility conditions
for Independent Directors.
7.5 It is further recommended that the criteria of educational qualification has to be enhanced
from the current 'minimum graduation degree' to atleast a professional degree in the domain
concerned keeping in mind the high expectations from a Board member in the current corporate
world.
7.6 To gauge the understanding of the Independent Directors about their duties and liabilities
in relation with the CPSE to which they belong, the Committee is in favour of introducing an
aptitude test as one of the mandatory selection criteria. This idea gains importance especially in
the light of recent scams that have taken place in reputed companies. In this regard the
Committee takes into cognizance the suggestion of MCA to entrust Indian Institute of Corporate
Affairs (IICA) to conduct such a passing/qualifying test and accordingly recommends that the
Government shall take into account the feasibility of such a move. The Committee accordingly
would also like to know the status of the proposed move to notify IICA as nodal institution to
create and maintain to database of Independent Directors and also the fall out of the consultation
process initiated with DPE, SEBI, CII, FICCI, Assocham, etc. The Committee also wishes to
recognize the initiatives from the part of ICSI on the issue, as brought before the Committee,
and hopes that they can also be roped in to contribute in formulating such an aptitude test.
8. Appointment and Vacancies of Directors on the Boards of CPSEs
8.1. Regarding the existing provisions of appointment and remuneration of Directors on the Boards of
CPSEs the following was submitted by DPE:–
• Functional Directors: - The Functional Directors are appointed on the Boards of CPSEs by the
administrative Ministry concerned on the basis of recommendations of Public Enterprises
Selection Board (PESB) after obtaining approval of competent authority and completing due
formalities in this regard. The Functional Directors are eligible for salary as per the schedule
of CPSE in which they are appointed, perks and allowances, PRP and other benefits as
admissible under DPE guidelines.

21
• Government Directors:-  The Government Directors who are generally senior officers of the
Government of India, State Government(s) or other Government agencies are appointed by the
administrative Ministries concerned themselves. The Government officers do not receive any
monetary benefit by virtue of their nomination as Directors on the Boards of CPSEs.
• Non-official Directors:- The Non-official Directors are appointed by the administrative Ministries
concerned on the basis of recommendations of Search Committee after obtaining approval of
competent authority and completing due formalities. The Non-official Directors receive sitting
fees and expenditure incurred by them for attending meetings of Boards.
8.2 During the deliberations regarding the appointment of IDs as part of the oral evidences of DPE and
MCA, the Committee expressed concern regarding the non-compliance of statutory provisions by the
Government/Administrative Ministries. One of the main issues highlighted in this connection was the
delay in filling up the post of IDs on the Boards of various CPSEs. Accordingly, DPE was asked to
explain in detail the process of filling up the vacancies of Independent Directors in the Board of CPSEs,
specifying the parts played by DoPT and the administrative Ministry concerned as well as the average
time taken to effect an appointment after a vacancy of Independent Director in Board of CPSEs was
generated. Further, the Committee pointed out that despite the efforts taken by DPE to fill up the posts
of Independent Directors in Boards of CPSEs, vacancies still existed on the Boards of certain CPSEs.
The Committee sought from DPE the reasons for this scenario. It was also enquired whether any
leniencies on the part of DoPT and the administrative Ministry concerned contributed to such delays.
8.3. DPE answered by stating that the proposals for appointment of Non-official Directors on the Boards
of CPSEs were initiated by the administrative Ministries concerned. Thereafter, DPE processes these
proposals for obtaining the recommendations of the Search Committee. The recommendations of Search
Committee are conveyed by DPE to the administrative Ministry concerned. The administrative Ministry
then makes the appointment of Non-official Directors after obtaining the approval of Appointments
Committee of Cabinet (ACC). The Secretary, DoPT is the chairperson of the Search Committee and
convenes the meeting of Search Committee. DPE further stated that the appointment of Non-official
Directors on the Boards of CPSEs is a continuous process and during last three years (2015, 2016 and
2017), Search Committee has recommended names of around 509 persons for appointment as
Non-official Directors on the Boards of CPSEs. During the current year (2018), Search Committee has
already recommended names of 85 persons for appointment. The reasons for delays in appointment of
requisite number of Non-official Directors on the Boards of CPSEs include delay in initiation of the
proposals by the administrative Ministries concerned, resignation of incumbent Non-official Directors,
etc.
8.4 In this context, the Committee would like to place on record the submission made by BHEL before
it, in August, 2017 that since the grant of "Maharatna" CPSE status to BHEL in February, 2013, the
Company has not been in a position to exercise the enhanced delegated Maharatna powers mainly due
to not having the requisite number of Non-official (Independent) Directors on the Board as per SEBI

22
Guidelines. Thereafter, in their submission before the Committee in the context of examination of
Professionalization of Boards of CPSEs, it is found that there still existed two vacancies of Independent
Directors on the Board of BHEL, which is a special status Maharatna CPSE.
8.5. Regarding the filling up of vacancies of IDs in CPSEs, the Committee was of the opinion that there
should not be even a day's delay in their appointment unless the vacancies arise due to unforeseen
circumstances. So, the Committee wished to know whether the Government has any proposal to
comprehensively review the current succession plans of appointment of Independent Directors in Board
of CPSEs which would ultimately aim at eliminating any delay in filling up the same. To the query, DPE
replied that there was no such proposal to review the current process of selection and appointment of
Non-official Directors of CPSEs.
8.6 The Committee further sought more information about the Search Committee system to select
Independent Directors on Board of CPSEs that is in vogue and also sought to know whether the Search
Committee has always been headed by the Secretary, DoPT, right from the inception of this mechanism.
It also sought to know if there has been any change in the mechanism during the course of its existence
till now alongwith the reasons for changes effected, if any. The Department responded by stating that
in 1997, the Government had introduced Navratna and Miniratna Schemes and it was provided that the
selection of Non-official Directors in the case of Navratna and Miniratna CPSEs would be made by a
Search Committee comprising of the Chairman (PESB), Secretary of the administrative Ministry concerned,
Secretary, DPE and eminent person(s). In 2007, it was decided that Chief Executive of the Navratna and
Miniratna CPSE concerned will also be a member of Search Committee. Subsequently, in 2010 it was
decided that the selection of Non-official Directors in all CPSEs will be done by a Search Committee,
comprising of Chairman (PESB), Secretary of administrative Ministry concerned, Secretary (DPE) and
2 non-official Members - one of whom would be a professor from a well-known management institute.
It was also provided that, in addition, for Maharatna/Navratna CPSEs, Chairman may invite a domain
expert. Thereafter, in 2014, it was decided that the Search Committee would have Secretary (DoPT) as
Chairman, with Secretary of the administrative Ministry concerned, Secretary (DPE) and 2 non-officials
as members.
8.7 To have a measure of the extent of compliance with the requisite provisions of the CA,2013 relating
to appointment of IDs, the CPSE-wise vacancies of Independent Directors for the last three years and
the current year alongwith the duration of the vacancies, the reason for the delay in filling the vacancies,
the expected date, if any, within which the vacancies were likely to be filled up and the measures taken
by the DPE towards the filling up of these vacancies in case of each CPSE were sought. DPE responded
to the query by informing that as the appointment of Non-official Directors on the Boards of CPSEs is
a continuous process and Non-official Directors were appointed for tenure of three years, the vacant
positions of Non-official Directors changes frequently. DPE also furnished the following information
regarding vacant positions of Non-official Directors on the Boards of CPSEs to Parliament during last
three years:–

23
Month & Year No. of vacant positions of NoDs
April, 2015 490
August, 2015 530
December, 2015 470
May, 2016 440
July, 2017 380
8.8 According to the Department, presently, there are about 250 vacant positions of Non-official
Directors on the Boards of various CPSEs. CPSE-wise details of these vacant positions are enclosed at
A
NNEXURE 4.  It was also informed that the Search Committee has already made recommendations for
filling 61 positions which are being processed for approval of the competent authority. The delay in filling
up vacant positions of Non-official Directors, as per DPE, is mainly on account of non-submission of
the proposals by the administrative Ministries concerned in time. DPE has been regularly reminding the
administrative Ministries concerned to furnish the proposals for filling up vacant positions of Non-official
Directors on the Boards of CPSEs.
8.9 Further, on being asked, DPE furnished the data regarding the number of incumbent Independent
Directors as against their prescribed numbers as mandated by the Companies Act, 2013 on the Boards
of each Miniratna, Navratna and Maharatna CPSEs. The information is enclosed at A
NNEXURE 5. Considering
the special status such CPSEs have been accorded to, the Committee wished to know whether it would
not be prudent to prescribe stringent norms for them on issues relating to Corporate Governance,
especially, regarding Professionalization of their Board. However, DPE submitted that all CPSEs are
governed under provisions of Companies Act, 2013 and come under the ambit of DPE guidelines. It
might not be practical to prescribe a separate set of Corporate Governance norms for a select group of
CPSEs.
8.10 DPE, as part of their submission stated that it maintains a databank of persons desirous of being
considered for appointment as Non-official Directors on the Boards of CPSEs. The applications in the
prescribed format received from such persons are included in this data bank which is available on public
domain. This service is provided free of charge to the individuals. The proposals for appointment of Non-
official Directors are initiated from the administrative Ministries concerned, who may or may not include
the names from DPE data bank in the panel furnished to DPE.
8.11 Regarding the data bank, it was brought before the Committee that the Government intends to have
a 'Registry' for Independent Directors. The details of the same as submitted by MCA is as under:-
'Section 150, inter alia, provides that an ID may be selected from a data bank, maintained by any
body, institute or association, as may by notified by the Central Government, having expertise in
creation and maintenance of such data bank and put on their website for the use by the company
making the appointment of such directors. Sub-section (4) of Section 150 empowers the Central

24
Government to prescribe the manner and procedure of selection of independent directors who fulfil
the qualifications and requirements specified under section 149.
It was also proposed to notify IICA as the nodal Institute under section 150(1) to create and
maintain the databank of IDs. Consultation in this regard has been initiated with DPE, SEBI,
Industry chambers viz. CII, FICCI, ASSOCHAM, PHD, Professional Institutes viz. ICAI, ICSI and
ICoAI and their comments are being examined. A comprehensive view would be taken in due course
keeping all relevant aspects in view.'
8.12 Further, regarding the selection/appointment of Independent Directors, the Committee wanted to
know whether individual CPSEs have any role in the selection process on their Boards and if they had
no role, whether the Government proposed to introduce measures to allow the CPSEs to have a role in
such appointments. As per DPE's reply, the CPSEs concerned do not have a direct role in selection and
appointment of independent Directors on their Boards. The Department clarified that there was no
proposal to introduce measures to provide a role to CPSEs in such appointments.
8.13 While hearing the other stakeholders like PESB, as part of the oral evidence before the Committee,
it was submitted by the representatives of PESB, that the PESB was constituted to evolve a sound
managerial personnel policy and to advise the Government on top level CPSE appointments. Further, the
role of PESB was primarily to recommend candidates for appointment to the posts Chairman, Managing
Director or Chairman-cum-Managing Director and other Functional Directors in CPSEs based on the
Guidelines as contained in the Compendium issued by the DoPT and as far as IDs were concerned PESB
did not play any role. The Committee wanted to know the rationale adopted to restrict PESB from
recruiting only top level functionaries and Functional Directors, leaving out the appointment of Independent
Directors to the administrative Ministries of CPSEs concerned. In reply, it was submitted by DPE that
as advised by PESB, DoPT had been requested to furnish their reply in this regard. However, the
Committee is in receipt of no further replies thereafter.
8.14 While considering the continued delay in filling up of vacancies of IDs in CPSEs, the main reasons
for which has been attributed to laxity on part of their respective administrative Ministries, the Committee
sought the opinion of PESB and SEBI about separating the administrative and regulatory powers enjoyed
simultaneously by the respective administrative Ministries of CPSEs concerned. The PESB replied by
saying that this matter would require larger consultation. However, SEBI came up with the reply that
as decided by the SEBI Board in its meeting on March 28th, 2018, the recommendations of the Kotak
Committee pertaining to 'Governance aspects of Public Sector Enterprises' (A
NNEXURE-VI) including on
independence of the PSEs from the administrative ministry was forwarded to Ministry of Finance and
DPE vide letter dated May 10th, 2018 since it fell under their purview. Thus, it is for the Government
to take a view in the matter. Further, SEBI has placed before the Committee that vide their circular dated
May 3, 2018, they have issued a Standard Operating Procedure wherein fine of INR 5000 per day shall
be imposed (and on continued non-compliance, other penal provisions) on the listed entities not complying
with provisions pertaining to composition of the Board (including Independent Directors). The circular
shall come into force with effect from compliance periods ending on or after September 30th, 2018.

25
8.15 The Committee finds that it remains a fact to be dwelt upon that vacancies of Independent
Directors remain in the Boards of almost all CPSEs and the total vacancies as on 2017 stand at
380. It is noted that when Maharatna, Navaratna and Miniratna companies are compared the
vacancies of Independent Directors are the least in Maharatnas and they increase when it comes
to Navaratnas and Miniratnas. The primary reason for this situation has been brought before the
Committee, time and again, as the delay on the part of administrative Ministries concerned in
taking necessary actions. As the Committee perceives, consequent to the coming into force of
Companies Act, 2013, great emphasis has been placed on the role of Independent Directors on
the Boards of companies in general. The role played by Independent Directors is central to many
aspects relating to efficient Corporate Governance. CPSEs have entered a phase wherein they
are not anymore immune to the latest corporate practices and also find themselves in a situation
that can be described as 'perform or perish'. Here, the Committee observes that the vacancies
of Independent Directors on the Boards of CPSEs is a serious threat to the efforts to
professionalize their Boards which in turn is required to shore up their performances. Major
international organizations like Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)
who specialize in the field of Corporate Governance have highlighted the need for establishing
well-structured, merit-based and transparent board nomination processes which the Committee
endorses.
8.16 Further, the Committee feels that it is time to take some decisive steps with regard to the
timely appointment of Independent Directors. As a preliminary step, the Committee welcomes
the penal initiative that has come from the side of SEBI. But as one goes further into the matter,
it remains a fact that placing the onus of initiating the selection on the administrative Ministry
has proved to be a failure. Accordingly, an alternative has to be sought urgently. In this regard,
the Committee feels that the levels involved in the selection of Independent Directors can be
brought down. Currently, it is initiated by the administrative Ministries concerned. Thereafter,
DPE processes these proposals for obtaining the recommendations of the Search Committee. The
recommendations of Search Committee are conveyed by DPE to the administrative Ministry
concerned. The Administrative Ministry then makes the appointment of non-official Directors
after obtaining the approval of Appointments Committee of Cabinet (ACC). This involves six
different steps. The Committee recommends that the process should be initiated by the CPSE
concerned, who should make the recommendation directly to the Search Committee under
intimation to Administrative Ministry and DPE. Thereafter, the Search Committee should convey
their decision to the DPE who should place it before ACC, in a time-bound manner, under
intimation to Administrative Ministry and convey the final appointment to CPSE directly.
8.17 Another recommendation in this regard is that the process of filling up the regular Board
level vacancies should be initiated by the CPSE at least one year before the vacancy actually
occurs so that there is no gap between the anticipated vacancy and the recruitment. In case of
unforeseen vacancies like resignation or death, the time period as prescribed in the Companies

26
Act, 2013 should be scrupulously followed. DPE can ensure this by adequately making it a part
of the evaluation of performance of a CPSE.
8.18 The Committee has been made aware of the recommendations by the Kotak Committee set
up by SEBI on review of Corporate Governance norms of the country. One of the important
recommendations of Kotak Committee is that:-
'The Government should aim at ensuring independence of the PSEs from the Administrative
Ministry to ensure speedy decision making, functional and operational autonomy in pursuit of
their stated objectives, for better commercial goals and to attract talent in a competitive market
place.'
The Committee finds that this recommendation is of cardinal importance in the efforts to
professionalize the Boards of CPSEs. As discussed above, the Administrative Ministry has failed
in making timely decisions thus impinging the Corporate Governance aspects of CPSEs and
thereby affecting their functional autonomy. Accordingly, the Government should endeavour to
make CPSEs independent from the Administrative Ministry as recommended by the Kotak
Committee. The first step in this direction could be that of disassociating the Administrative
Ministry in matters regarding the filling up of vacancies of Independent Directors in the Boards
of CPSEs as recommended earlier.
8.19. The Committee finds that Section 150 of CA-2013, inter alia, provides that an Independent
Director may be selected from a data bank, maintained by any body, institute or association, as may be
notified by the Central Government.............
The Committee is also aware that DPE maintains a Data Bank of persons desirous of being
appointed as Independent Directors in Board of CPSEs. However, as informed to the Committee,
currently the Administrative Ministries may or may not include the name from the DPE data
bank in the panel for prospective candidates for the post of Independent Directors furnished to
DPE. To the Committee's reading, this situation has to change. The CPSEs should directly be able
to recommend names solely from the data bank of DPE. In this scenario, the role of DPE will
be amplified in terms of the authenticity and dependability of the data bank of potential
Independent Directors which they maintain. Giving such a responsibility to CPSEs will be in tune
with the current international practices of Corporate Governance intended to safeguard the
independence of Independent Directors. It would also be in consonance with the recommendations
of the Kotak Committee which has suggested that the Government should aim at ensuring
independence of CPSEs from their Administrative Ministry.
8.20 The Committee takes into cognizance the submission of Ministry of Corporate Affairs about
a proposal to make IICA the nodal institution to create and maintain a data bank of Independent
Directors for companies in general. While welcoming and endorsing this proposal of MCA, the
Committee recommends that DPE should update and maintain their own data bank of Independent
Directors for the Boards of CPSEs in consultation with IICA.

27
9. Training/Orientation programme
9.1 Importance of regular training/orientation programmes to ensure the quality of the manpower that
is to occupy Board level posts of CPSEs were much discussed as part of the examination of the subject
of professionalization of the Board of CPSEs. Both ICSI and ICAI were heard by the Committee in this
connection. Both the institutions placed before the Committee that they were updating their curriculum
modules to keep abreast of the requirements of changing times. ICSI stated that the Institute has post-
membership qualification on governance for Board level people and they along with the Ministry of
Corporate Affairs are designing a module for the Independent Directors. Further they also mentioned that
they have been recognized by the World Bank as one of the institutes in India which is involved in
corporate governance. On their revised syllabus, coming into effective from 1st July, 2018, ICAI stated
that the topics of "Audit Committee and Corporate Governance" and "Audit of Public Sector Undertakings"
have been extensively covered.
9.2 Considering the importance of having trained persons at Board level posts of CPSEs the Committee
sought to know the details of training/orientation programmers conducted by DPE for Independent
Directors/Functional Directors/Government nominee Directors on the Board of CPSEs. Also, details of
the measures taken by DPE to continuously improve the training imparted to them as well as the
feedback of the participants, administrative ministries, etc. to formulate/improve the training modules.
The Committee also wanted to know whether any evaluation of the participants was carried out on the
basis of such of training/orientation programmes and if not, the reasons as to why such an evaluation
mechanism cannot be put in practice.
9.3. In reply DPE stated that they have been conducting orientation programmes for Directors of
CPSEs. The details of such programmes conducted during last three years as submitted by DPE is as
under:
Y ear No. of Programmes held No. of Directors covered
2016 4 94
2017 7 209
2018 4 (till date) 135
In these programmes, Directors are sensitized about their roles and responsibilities in the context
of newly enacted Companies Act, 2013 and important issues related to better functioning of Boards.
Topics such as Understanding Financial Statements, CSR, Risk Management, Functioning of Audit
Committee, etc. are also covered in these programmes. After completion of each programme, feedback
from participants was taken to improve the structure and contents of future programmes. There has been
no evaluation of participants after such programmes as the objective was to introduce and orient the non-
official Director to important regulations, functions and responsibilities related to CPSE and its Board.
Further capacity building in relevant areas of Board functioning was also done through the programmes
conducted by respective CPSEs.

28
9.4. Regarding the opportunities provided to Independent Directors in CPSEs to keep themselves updated
to perform their duties efficiently and professionally, DPE stated that after their appointment as non-
official Directors, the CPSEs concerned give them a brief about the functioning of the CPSE and hold
orientation programme(s) for them. Further, according to DPE, the non-official Directors can ask the
CPSE concerned for information or formal exposure in any area which they feel would be useful in better
discharge of their responsibilities.
9.5. The Committee further wanted to understand the feasibility of introducing an induction training
course for Independent Directors with a mandatory passing criterion to qualify in order to enable them
to become eligible for appointment on the Board of CPSEs. For which MCA replied that the Section
149(6) of CA-2013 provides for various attributes for a person who may be appointed as ah ID in
relevant companies. Clause (c) thereof provides that ID would possess such other qualifications as may
be prescribed. Para III of the Schedule IV of the CA-13 provides that the Independent Directors shall
undertake appropriate induction and regularly update and refresh their skills, knowledge and familiarity
with the company. Rule 5 of the Companies (Appointment and Qualifications of Directors) Rules, 2014
provides that an ID shall possess appropriate skills, experience and knowledge in one or more fields of
finance, law, management, sales, marketing, administration, research, corporate governance, technical
operations or other disciplines related to the company's business.
9.6 As part of the examination of the subject, the Committee felt that the role of the Independent
Directors was being overwhelmingly discussed; and rightfully so, as they bring in independent points of
view to a Board and thus directly contribute to professionalization. A need was felt to also explore
whether it was only the Independent Directors who can make an impact on the Professionalization of
Boards of CPSEs. Accordingly, a query was put forth to DPE, who replied that all categories of Directors
including functional, government and non-official Directors can equally contribute in Professionalization
of Boards and that DPE places equal importance to all categories of Directors of CPSEs as part of
initiatives for Professionalization of Boards of CPSEs.
9.7 In the Committee's opinion, training and orientation programmes which help to enhance
the skills of the Members of Boards of Directors will be a decisive factor in the endeavour
towards the Professionalization of Boards. This belief stems from the fact that the Directors,
individually and as part of the Board, will be heavily dependent on their already acquired abilities
and the specific knowledge and skills imparted to them about their respective CPSEs as part of
their training. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that training should be a continuous
process for the Directors of the Boards of CPSEs, especially for the Independent Directors.
Capacity building and skill enhancement sessions should be made mandatory in a periodic
fashion and fulfilling of mandatory training hours shall be ensured in an appropriate manner.
Further, the Committee also recommends that an evaluation of the up-scaling of skills attained
through such training programmes and sessions shall be included within the framework of a
structured programme. For formulating effective capacity building programmes for Directors,
talent pools available with the leading management institutions like IIM, domain specialist

29
institutions like ICSI, ICAI and Government Institutions like IICA may be utilized. The Committee
also favours exposure of Independent Directors to the best international Corporate Governance
practices as devised and followed by institutions like Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) and the World Bank.
10. Compliance with respect to regulatory provisions
10.1. While deliberating on the regulatory provisions aimed at enabling the Professionalization of Board
of CPSEs it was brought before the Committee that compliance of CPSEs with such provisions was an
area of concern. Accordingly, DPE was asked to give in writing the steps taken by the Government to
ensure compliance by CPSEs on the various regulatory measures. DPE gave written submission that the
Board of Directors of CPSEs are already empowered to decide on HR matters of below Board level
employees of CPSEs. DPE undertakes annual evaluation of compliance of CPSEs with Guidelines on
Corporate Governance, 2010 and also monitors compliance of CPSEs with other guidelines issued by
DPE. Such compliance is being taken into account while finalizing MoU score of CPSEs by penalizing
CPSEs which report non-compliance.
10.2 Further the Committee sought the mechanism of the Government to keep watch on the violations
by CPSEs on aspects relating to Corporate Governance as provided in the Companies Act, 2013,
especially, those related to the Professionalization of Board of CPSEs and explain the role played by
Administrative Ministry in this regard. Responding to this DPE reiterated the above mentioned steps taken
by them to ensure compliance by CPSEs and added that the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
undertakes regular review of compliance of CPSEs with Corporate Governance norms and brings out
annual reports on this matter. The administrative Ministries ensure that CPSEs under their jurisdiction
comply with prevalent rules, regulations and guidelines.
10.3 As submitted to the Committee, under Section 172 and 178(8) of the Companies Act 2013, in case
of non compliance regarding inclusion of Independent Directors, Women Directors in the Board of
CPSEs and Independent Directors in their Audit Committee 'the company and every officer of the
company in default shall be punishable.' The Department was asked to explain for enforcing the said
punishment and the level of officers who can be held liable for such punishment. The reply of DPE stated
that for appointment of Independent Directors, Women Directors in the board of CPSEs, the respective
Administrative Ministry/Department take the decision and intimate the same to the Board for filing the
same in the prescribed format with the Register of Companies (ROC) concerned in the MCA 21 Portal.
Generally, the said practice was continuing for all the CPSEs, even if the penal provision was there,
generally no penal action have been taken by ROC. For violation in this regard as per practice ROC/
Regional Directors (RD) write to the Administrative Ministry/Department and pursue them to comply
with the provisions of the Companies Act. For constitution of Audit committee etc. it was the responsibility
of the board of the CPSE concerned. However, no penal action for the said violation has been initiated
as on date.
10.4 SEBI submitted to the Committee that 70% of CPSEs do not comply with the provision to have

30
a mandated number of Independent Directors on their Board. Following which the Committee asked to
furnish the facts regarding this situation and the reasons for such a situation having arisen and also the
measures available to ensure compliance in this direction, reasons for failure of the mechanism and
measures taken/proposed to address/resolve the lacuna by the Government. According to SEBI, as per
information submitted by the stock exchanges, as on March 31st, 2018, 43.37% and 40.54% of PSEs
listed on BSE and NSE, respectively are compliant with the provision pertaining to minimum number of
Independent Directors (IDs) on their Board. SEBI was of the view that since IDs are critical to ensure
good governance in the listed entities, all efforts must be taken to ensure the minimum required number
of IDs on the Board of such entities. Further, SEBI stated that vide their circular dated May 3, 2018,
SEBI has issued a Standard Operating Procedure wherein fine of INR 5000 per day shall be imposed
(and on continued non-compliance, other penal provisions) on the listed entities not complying
with provisions pertaining to composition of the Board (including Independent Directors). The
circular shall come into force with effect from compliance periods ending on or after September
30th, 2018.
10.5 The Committee notes that the greatest threat to Professionalization of Boards of CPSEs lie
in the rampant non-compliance by CPSEs with provisions aimed at good Corporate Governance
practices as enshrined in the CA-2013, and other such regulations. It is disturbing to find that
not even 50 % of listed CPSEs are compliant with provisions of Independent Directors on the
Board of CPSEs. Here, since the appointment of Independent Directors is the responsibility of
the administrative Ministries and other Government entities involved, individual CPSEs are by
and large helpless spectators. Less than adequate number of Independent Directors can lead to
situations where Audit Committee and other Committees of the Board are not able to meet. Even
CPSEs which have been granted 'Maharatna' status are not in a position to exercise their
enhanced delegated powers. The Committee infers that the situation reached this magnitude due
the lack of effective penal provisions and no penal action being effected. In this regard, the
Committee is aware of the latest step taken by SEBI to introduce a fine of INR 5000 per day
for continued non-compliance on the listed entities not complying with provisions pertaining to
composition of the Board. However, the Committee feels that since CPSE has no role in filling
up the vacancies of Independent Directors, it will be unjustified to impose the penal provision
and fine on them. Or else the onus of filling up the post of Independent Directors should rest
with the CPSEs concerned, as already recommended by the Committee and in that scenario the
penal provision being applicable to CPSEs is justified. Further, the Committee wishes that MCA
and DPE may bring in more suitable penal provisions for non compliance of other provisions
under CA-2013 and other Corporate Governance regulations/guidelines.
11. Ownership Neutrality
11.1 During the oral evidence, the representatives of MCA submitted before the Committee that Corporate
Governance should be ownership neutral. They brought before the Committee that the Kotak Committee
also mooted the idea as under:-

31
"They (Kotak Committee) basically said that in the present structure we have an administrative
Ministry and the Department of Public Enterprises. It is perceived that there is a conflict between
the regulatory oversight and ownership. The DPE has advisory functions and laws anyway will
apply, whereas the administrative Ministry is both the owner and the regulator. So, when you are
both the owner and the regulator that means that there is a problem. In Singapore, there are so many
public-sector undertakings. The Ministry of Finance does what the DPE does. So, whether the
Ministry of Finance does it or the DPE does it that is our own architecture. They should function
like the regulator. The owner should not have much say. They have an overarching holding company
which has sectoral vertical. All the PSUs will come there. The PSU as such will be under the
Ministry concerned, but board level oversight, governance and everything will be done by the nodal
Ministry. This is one example where professionalism is not compromised. This is what I wanted to
submit. "
11.2 DPE was asked by the Committee to comment on the possibility of having a separate nodal Ministry
entrusted with regulatory or oversight functions of PSEs as well as their views on separating the
ownership and regulator functions now performed by the respective administrative Ministries for CPSEs
in India. DPE replied that in India CPSEs fall under the administrative jurisdiction of respective Ministry/
Department which discharges ownership functions. The issue of administrative Ministry discharging both
ownership and regulatory functions and separation of these functions is a larger policy issue and requires
holistic examination. It is, however, mentioned that being majority shareholder in the CPSEs, it is
imperative that the Government of India protects its interests in the CPSEs while granting sufficient
autonomy to the Boards of CPSEs to run the company in line with the extant policies, laws, rules,
regulations and guidelines. Over the years, independent regulators have been put in place in various
sectors such as Telecommunications, Petroleum and Natural Gas, Warehousing, Airports, etc. to ensure
transparent working of these sectors.
11.3 While following this idea further, the Committee approached DPE for their views about an ecosystem
of CPSEs based on ownership neutral Corporate Governance. DPE gave a written submission stating the
concept of ownership neutral Corporate Governance may not be practical in respect of CPSEs as the
Government of India being majority shareholder of CPSEs would continue to discharge ownership
functions. Being Government owned entities, the CPSEs also have to fulfill responsibilities towards the
welfare of the society which is not applicable to private sector.
11.4 About the feasibility of the separation of the administrative and regulatory powers enjoyed
simultaneously by the respective administrative Ministries of CPSEs concerned SEBI informed that as
decided by the SEBI Board in its meeting held on March 28, 2018, the recommendations of the Kotak
Committee pertaining to 'Governance aspects of Public Sector Enterprises' including on independence of
the PSEs from the administrative Ministry, was forwarded to Ministry of Finance and DPE vide letter
dated May 10, 2018 since it fell under their purview. Thus, SEBI felt that it was for the Government
to take a view in the matter. The PESB however informed the Committee that the matter would require
larger consultation.

32
11.5 While analyzing the various aspects of Professionalization of Boards of CPSEs as part of its
examination of the subject, the Committee has been exposed to the idea of Ownership Neutrality.
The Committee feels that this is an idea worth pondering over. Many issues like delay in
appointment of Board Members, non-compliance with Corporate Governance practices/regulations,
rationalization of exemptions, etc., that have a direct bearing on the Professionalization of
Boards, may be areas that could benefit from the separation of regulatory powers from the
administrative Ministry i.e. the owner. To the Committee's understanding, while the administrative
Ministry pursues the interest of shareholders and fulfill other statutory as well as social obligations
of the CPSE, the regulatory/co-coordinating agency could play its role independently.
11.6 The Committee observes that countries like Singapore which have a successful eco-system
of PSEs with proven track record follows the system of Ownership Neutrality in Corporate
Governance. The Kotak Committee set up by SEBI to review the Corporate Governance norms
of the country has analyzed and recommended the idea that the Government should aim at
ensuring independence of the PSEs from the administrative Ministry to ensure speedy decision
making, functional and operational autonomy in pursuit of their stated objectives. The Committee
is given to understand that this recommendation of the Kotak Committee has been forwarded
to Ministry of Finance and DPE for consideration. The Committee also finds that international
organizations in the realm of Corporate Governance like Organization of Economic Cooperation
and Development (OECD) has been in favour of clear cut identification of ownership rights of
State Administration, which can be inferred as separation of ownership rights and regulatory
powers. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the Government shall initiate expedient
action on the said recommendation of the Kotak Committee.
11.7 Further, in this regard the Committee would like to recommend that since the country
already has a nodal Department for all CPSEs, which is Department of Public Enterprises, they
should be entrusted with the responsibility for playing the role of the regulatory agency to all
CPSEs. The Committee has no doubts about the competency of DPE in this area, with their vast
repertoire of domain experience. Moreover, DPE is already into regulatory functions through
issue of various guidelines on a variety of aspects governing the CPSEs. But, the Committee
reckons that the current role of DPE is restricted to being advisory in nature. To implement the
recommendation of the Committee on ownership neutrality, DPE has to be endowed with executive
functions related to regulations and should be able to enforce the regulations, which may extend
to new areas like Board level oversight.
12. International Practices and Studies
12.1 The Committee wanted to know from the Department the details of study that has been undertaken
regarding various international practices in vogue related to Professionalization of Board of Companies
as part of the review of the Corporate Governance of CPSEs or at the time of shift from Companies
Act, 1956 to Companies Act, 2013 and follow up action thereon. Reply from DPE stated that they have
not undertaken any study regarding international practices in vogue related to Professionalization of Board

33
of companies. However, MCA's reply stated that an expert Committee, namely, the Irani Committee was
constituted in the year 2004 by MCA to examine and make recommendations on Corporate Governance
aspects relating to the Company Law. This Committee gave its report in May, 2005. The Irani Committee
had met on a number of occasions and had consulted all concerned stakeholders viz. Sectoral Regulators
like SEBI and Reserve Bank of India, Industry chambers like Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) and
Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) and Professional Institutes like ICAI,
ICSI, legal experts, Investor associations etc. International practices on various company law aspects
were also considered by the Committee. Based on the report of the said expert Committee, Companies
Bill, 2009 was introduced in the Lok Sabha. The said Bill was examined in detail by the Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Finance which also had wide range of consultation with stakeholders. The PSCF
gave two detailed reports i.e. 21st Report and 57th report based on which Companies Act, 2013 got
enacted by the Parliament. The PSCF, while examining the Bill had kept in mind the prevalent international
practices on the company law. SEBI has also submitted that the best global practices of Corporate
Governance are given by Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) principles
and submitted a copy of the OECD Guidelines on Corporate Governance of State-Owned Enterprises to
the Committee.
12.2 The Committee observes that realm of Corporate Governance always remains in a flux
owing to dynamic generation of ideas and concepts. Cutting edge developments are continuously
followed by international organization like OECD, World Bank, etc. Accordingly, the Committee
suggests that DPE should endeavour to continuously analyse the latest trends that are in place
in the international arena and look for their adoptability in Indian context.

34
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — AT A GLANCE
1. The Committee observes that CPSEs benefit from the push by the Government for enhancing
the 'Ease of Doing Business' in the country. It is further noted that conducive environment with
ease of entry, operation and exit would ensure better compliance with good Corporate Governance
principles. Accordingly, the Committee is of the opinion that DPE should keep watch for the
initiatives of the Government for the Ease of Doing Business, collate them in a manner which
is of functional/operative utility to CPSEs and appropriately communicate the same to the
administrative ministries or the CPSEs directly. (Para 4.5)
2. The Committee notes that exemptions from certain provision of the Companies Act, 2013
have been granted to the CPSEs to smoothen their functioning. DPE informs the Committee that
exemptions cannot be considered as antithetical to the concept of Professionalization of Boards
of CPSEs. Further, it has been placed before the Committee that all exemptions have been
notified with the approval of the Parliament. Ministry of Corporate Affairs has informed the
Committee that the exemptions have been provided based on the reference received from DPE
which inter-alia stated that the provision relating to Schedule IV of the Act was not relevant to
CPSEs as Government would lay down guidelines for appointment/selection, reappointment,
resignation/removal and evaluation of performance of Independent Directors. (Para 5.8)
3. Regarding the performance evaluation of Directors of the Boards of CPSEs the Committee
finds that performance evaluation of Functional Directors has been hinged on the MoU system.
Here, the Committee is of the considered opinion that a broad based evaluation mechanism
dependent on the MoU performance of a CPSE will only provide a macro level assessment of the
performance of a Functional Director. It is the view of the Committee that this mechanism has
to be appropriately reviewed in a time bound manner and a more micro level evaluation of the
performance of the Functional Directors which would bring out their individual contributions
towards the actual performance of the Company has to be put in place. The Committee recommends
accordingly, taking into consideration the fast changing and complex requirements of the economy
the CPSEs cater to. (Para 5.9)
4. The performance evaluation of the Government Directors, who are serving officers of the
Government, is based on their annual performance appraisal, regarding which the Committee
recommends that their annual performance appraisal should be adequately modified to reflect
their execution of their designated roles on the Board of a CPSE. In the opinion of the Committee
this step is essential as the Government Nominee Directors are the guardians of the majority
Stakeholder's (Government) interest which could translate into protecting public interest.
(Para 5.10)
5. Coming to Independent Directors, the Committee finds that nothing has been brought
before it which suggests that the Government has laid down a well designed evaluation mechanism
for the Independent Directors. Therefore, the Committee suggests that any mechanism, currently
34

35
in place, to evaluate the performance of the Independent Directors should be submitted to the
Committee in detail. In case such a mechanism is not in vogue, the Committee considers this
as a serious lapse from the side of the Government and a lukewarm response to the need for
professionalizing the Boards of CPSEs. Under such circumstance, the Committee recommends
that a scrupulous mechanism for performance evaluation of Independent Directors has to be
brought in with urgent priority. Further, the Independent Directors may be accorded an increased
role in the overall evaluation of the management of a CPSE by amending the extant DPE
Guidelines to make their yearly meeting, apart from the rest of Board Members of the Company
to evaluate the performance of the CPSE concerned, mandatory. (Para 5.11)
6. From the oral and written submission made before the Committee as part of the examination
of the subject, the Committee comprehends that the maximum limit of 15 Directors on the Board
of a Company, applicable for a private Company, is not applicable to Government Companies.
This is one of the exemptions granted to CPSEs w.e.f. from 5.06.2015, the date on which it has
been notified by Ministry of Corporate Affairs. However, it has been brought to the knowledge
of the Committee that the Government is considering the feasibility of bringing down the
number of Government nominee Directors on the Boards of CPSEs to one. In this exercise,
number of other Directors are also supposed to be rationalized to achieve optimum sized CPSE
Boards of Directors. The Committee holds the view that larger Boards may be unwieldy and
consensus building may be difficult to attain which in turn could impinge timely decision making.
Therefore, the Committee recommends that this exercise should be pursued in all earnestness
and can be perceived as a definite step towards the professionalization of the Boards of CPSEs.
The Committee notes that an inter-ministerial discussion on a proposal to restrict the number
of Government Directors on the Board of CPSEs is on going. The Committee desires that as and
when the proposal is finalised the Committee may be apprised. (Para 5.14)
7. The Committee notes that one of the important features of the Company Act, 2013 is
Schedule IV to the Act which contains the Code of Conduct of Independent Directors. There, it
finds that on the reference received from DPE, MCA has given exemptions to CPSEs from
various provisions as contained in the Code. The Committee also finds that these exemptions are
subject to the condition that the requirement in respect of matters specified in these exemptions
are specified by the Ministries or Departments of the Central Government or as the case may
be, the State Governments concerned and such requirements are complied with by the Government
companies. The Committee is in agreement with the fact that certain exemptions are undoubtedly
needed to be given to CPSEs owing to the peculiarities of their structure, functioning and
objectives for which they have been set up. However, the Committee is surprised to note that
DPE has termed these exemptions be on "miscellaneous matters". The Committee cannot but
take exception to this stand of DPE and does not agree in toto. Accordingly, it is of the strong
opinion that the areas in which the exemptions have been granted have to be invariably addressed
appropriately by DPE, either through their guidelines or through other definite measures and it

36
needs periodical reviewing so that it is in sync with related SEBI Regulations and other similar
statutory stipulations applicable. (Para 5.18)
8. The Committee finds that the exemptions granted to CPSEs from certain provisions of the
Companies Act, 2013 have been based on the reference from DPE. It has also been given to
understand that some of these exemptions have been continued as they were in force as part of
Companies Act, 1956. Regarding having a review or relook at the exemptions, both MCA and
DPE have submitted that no demand to that effect have been received from any stakeholders.
In this direction, the Committee is of the opinion that the Government, especially DPE, does not
need any proposal from the administrative Ministries of CPSEs or any other quarter to initiate
a review of these exemptions. As already expressed by the Committee earlier, it is very much
in favour of providing appropriate exemptions to CPSEs. However, too many exemptions to
CPSEs, vis-a-vis, their private counterparts would not augur well for the Professionalization of
the Boards of CPSEs. Hence, care should be taken to keep such exemptions in alignment with
the SEBI (LODR) Regulations and other statutory requirements that the CPSEs has to comply
with, so as not to hinder them from taking full advantage attached to such compliance.
Furthermore, the exemptions should also be in the light of the current international practices,
the Indian context and also keeping in view the Government's push to recast CPSEs as independent,
competitive, self reliant corporate entities who can be at par with the private companies to the
extent possible. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that DPE should undertake a
comprehensive review of the exemptions granted to CPSEs under the Section 462 of the CA-2013
and weed out redundant ones. Further, the Committee also recommends an overhaul review of
the entire Guidelines on Corporate Governance for the CPSEs, 2010 of DPE which predates the
CA-2013 and covers for the exemptions granted to CPSEs. (Para 5.21)
9. On exemptions to CPSEs, the Committee also wishes to bring on record the feasibility of
the recommendation of the Kotak Committee set up by SEBI to review the Corporate Governance
norms in the country wherein it has been preferred that the differentiating factors between
CPSEs and the private companies shall be based on the objective for which a CPSE has been set
up. This means the exemptions shall not be by virtue of the fact that one is a Government
company and the other, a private entity but based on factors like the social objective, balanced
regional development and similar goals proposed to be addressed and other factors peculiar to
Government being in business. The Committee observes that the Government shall take
appropriate action on the above mentioned aspect. (Para 5.22)
10. The Committee perceives that Audit Committee of a company has inalienable importance
in ensuring economic efficiency, prudence, transparency and vigilance. In case of CPSEs, the
Audit Committee has a reduced role limited to recommending remuneration of auditors, reviewing
the annual financial statements, performance of internal auditors, functioning of the whistleblowers
mechanism and similar review functions related to financial operations of CPSEs. However, in

37
the Committee's opinion, the credibility of the Audit Committee of a company may have a
linkage to the fiduciary responsibility of the Board and its members and hence can be perceived
to have an impact on investor confidence in the Company. The truncation of role of the Audit
Committee of a CPSE, in comparison to the roles laid down in CA- 2013, is due to the involvement
of the Controller and Auditor General of India in auditing of CPSEs. However, the Committee
finds that the role of the Audit Committee in CPSEs is currently governed by the provisions of
CA-2013 and DPE guidelines on Corporate Governance 2010, which covers for the exemptions
granted from certain provisions of CA-2013, to CPSEs. In the opinion of the Committee taking
into account the essence and sprit of the said Act, it will be prudent to have a review of the
provisions related to Audit Committee as contained in the guidelines of Corporate Governance
2010. It is felt that such a review shall concentrate on lending the Audit Committee a more
effective profile akin to the provisions of CA-2013 applicable to companies, in general. The
Department shall also refer the matter for the expert advice of Controller and Auditor General
of India. Further, the Government shall ensure that the Audit Committees are constituted and
functioning in all CPSEs and they are adequately populated with Independent Directors as per
extant provisions/guidelines. (Para 6.7)
11. The skilling of the members of the Audit Committee to equip them to effectively essay their
roles shall also be of primary importance. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that DPE
may requisition the expertise of domain specialist institutions like Institute of Chartered
Accountants of India (ICAI) and Institute of Company Secretaries of India (ICSI) in this
endeavour. (Para 6.8)
12. The Committee finds that the extant provisions regarding eligibility criteria of Independent
Directors on the Boards of CPSEs are largely broad based and can be more condensed and
streamlined in tune with the best corporate practices. It should be kept in mind that in the
current competitive market economy, the Government has decided to support only the best
performing CPSEs. Under these circumstances, there can not be any compromise on the quality
of Independent Directors picked up to perform active Board room roles. The Committee accordingly
recommends that DPE shall initiate an exercise to contemporarily recast the eligibility conditions
for Independent Directors. (Para 7.4)
13. It is further recommended that the criteria of educational qualification has to be enhanced
from the current 'minimum graduation degree' to atleast a professional degree in the domain
concerned keeping in mind the high expectations from a Board member in the current corporate
world. (Para 7.5)
14. To gauge the understanding of the Independent Directors about their duties and liabilities
in relation with the CPSE to which they belong, the Committee is in favour of introducing an
aptitude test as one of the mandatory selection criteria. This idea gains importance especially in
the light of recent scams that have taken place in reputed companies. In this regard the

38
Committee takes into cognizance the suggestion of MCA to entrust Indian Institute of Corporate
Affairs (IICA) to conduct such a passing/qualifying test and accordingly recommends that the
Government shall take into account the feasibility of such a move. The Committee accordingly
would also like to know the status of the proposed move to notify IICA as nodal institution to
create and maintain to database of Independent Directors and also the fall out of the consultation
process initiated with DPE, SEBI, CII, FICCI, Assocham, etc. The Committee also wishes to
recognize the initiatives from the part of ICSI on the issue, as brought before the Committee,
and hopes that they can also be roped in to contribute in formulating such an aptitude test.
(Para 7.6)
15. The Committee finds that it remains a fact to be dwelt upon that vacancies of Independent
Directors remain in the Boards of almost all CPSEs and the total vacancies as on 2017 stand at
380. It is noted that when Maharatna, Navratna and Miniratna companies are compared the
vacancies of Independent Directors are the least in Maharatnas and they increase when it comes
to Navaratnas and Miniratnas. The primary reason for this situation has been brought before the
Committee, time and again, as the delay on the part of administrative Ministries concerned in
taking necessary actions. As the Committee perceives, consequent to the coming into force of
Companies Act, 2013, great emphasis has been placed on the role of Independent Directors on
the Boards of companies in general. The role played by Independent Directors is central to many
aspects relating to efficient Corporate Governance. CPSEs have entered a phase wherein they
are not anymore immune to the latest corporate practices and also find themselves in a situation
that can be described as 'perform or perish'. Here, the Committee observes that the vacancies
of Independent Directors on the Boards of CPSEs is a serious threat to the efforts to
professionalize their Boards which in turn is required to shore up their performances. Major
international organizations like Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)
who specialize in the field of Corporate Governance have highlighted the need for establishing
well-structured, merit-based and transparent board nomination processes which the Committee
endorses. (Para 8.15)
16. Further, the Committee feels that it is time to take some decisive steps with regard to the
timely appointment of Independent Directors. As a preliminary step, the Committee welcomes
the penal initiative that has come from the side of SEBI. But as one goes further into the matter,
it remains a fact that placing the onus of initiating the selection on the administrative Ministry
has proved to be a failure. Accordingly, an alternative has to be sought urgently. In this regard,
the Committee feels that the levels involved in the selection of Independent Directors can be
brought down. Currently, it is initiated by the administrative Ministries concerned. Thereafter,
DPE processes these proposals for obtaining the recommendations of the Search Committee. The
recommendations of Search Committee are conveyed by DPE to the administrative Ministry
concerned. The administrative Ministry then makes the appointment of non-official Directors
after obtaining the approval of Appointments Committee of Cabinet (ACC). This involves six

39
different steps. The Committee recommends that the process should be initiated by the CPSE
concerned, who should make the recommendation directly to the Search Committee under
intimation to Administrative Ministry and DPE. Thereafter, the Search Committee should convey
their decision to the DPE who should place it before ACC, in a time-bound manner, under
intimation to Administrative Ministry and convey the final appointment to CPSE directly.
(Para 8.16)
17. Another recommendation in this regard is that the process of filling up the regular Board
level vacancies should be initiated by the CPSE at least one year before the vacancy actually
occurs so that there is no gap between the anticipated vacancy and the recruitment. In case of
unforeseen vacancies like resignation or death, the time period as prescribed in the Companies
Act, 2013 should be scrupulously followed. DPE can ensure this by adequately making it a part
of the evaluation of performance of a CPSE. (Para 8.17)
18. The Committee has been made aware of the recommendations by the Kotak Committee set
up by SEBI on review of Corporate Governance norms of the country. One of the important
recommendations of Kotak Committee is that:-
'The Government should aim at ensuring independence of the PSEs from the administrative ministry
to ensure speedy decision making, functional and operational autonomy in pursuit of their stated
objectives, for better commercial goals and to attract talent in a competitive market place.'
The Committee finds that this recommendation is of cardinal importance in the efforts to
professionalize the Boards of CPSEs. As discussed above, the administrative Ministry has failed
in making timely decisions thus impinging the Corporate Governance aspects of CPSEs and
thereby affecting their functional autonomy. Accordingly, the Government should endeavour to
make CPSEs independent from the administrative Ministry as recommended by the Kotak
Committee. The first step in this direction could be that of disassociating the administrative
Ministry in matters regarding the filling up of vacancies of Independent Directors in the Boards
of CPSEs as recommended earlier. (Para 8.18)
19. The Committee finds that Section 150 of CA-2013, inter alia, provides that an Independent
Director may be selected from a data bank, maintained by any body, institute or association, as may
by notified by the Central Government...
The Committee is also aware that DPE maintains a Data Bank of persons desirous of being
appointed as Independent Directors in Board of CPSEs. However, as informed to the Committee,
currently the administrative Ministries may or may not include the name from the DPE data
bank in the panel for prospective candidates for the post of Independent Directors furnished to
DPE. To the Committee's reading, this situation has to change. The CPSEs should directly be able
to recommend names solely from the data bank of DPE. In this scenario, the role of DPE will
be amplified in terms of the authenticity and dependability of the data bank of potential

40
Independent Directors which they maintain. Giving such a responsibility to CPSEs will be in tune
with the current international practices of Corporate Governance intended to safeguard the
independence of Independent Directors. It would also be in consonance with the recommendations
of the Kotak Committee which has suggested that the Government should aim at ensuring
independence of CPSEs from their Administrative Ministry. (Para 8.19)
20. The Committee takes into cognizance the submission of Ministry of Corporate Affairs about
a proposal to make IICA the nodal institution to create and maintain a data bank of Independent
Directors for companies in general. While welcoming and endorsing this proposal of MCA, the
Committee recommends that DPE should update and maintain their own data bank of Independent
Directors for the Boards of CPSEs in consultation with IICA. (Para 8.20)
21. In the Committee's opinion, training and orientation programmes which help to enhance
the skills of the Members of Boards of Directors will be a decisive factor in the endeavour
towards the Professionalization of Boards. This belief stems from the fact that the Directors,
individually and as part of the Board, will be heavily dependent on their already acquired abilities
and the specific knowledge and skills imparted to them about their respective CPSEs as part of
their training. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that training should be a continuous
process for the Directors of the Boards of CPSEs, especially for the Independent Directors.
Capacity building and skill enhancement sessions should be made mandatory in a periodic
fashion and fulfilling of mandatory training hours shall be ensured in an appropriate manner.
Further, the Committee also recommends that an evaluation of the up-scaling of skills attained
through such training programmes and sessions shall be included within the framework of a
structured programme. For formulating effective capacity building programmes for Directors,
talent pools available with the leading management institutions like IIM, domain specialist
institutions like ICSI, ICAI and Government Institutions like IICA may be utilized. The Committee
also favours exposure of Independent Directors to the best international Corporate Governance
practices as devised and followed by institutions like Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) and the World Bank. (Para 9.7)
22. The Committee notes that the greatest threat to Professionalization of Boards of CPSEs lie
in the rampant non-compliance by CPSEs with provisions aimed at good Corporate Governance
practices as enshrined in the CA-2013, and other such regulations. It is disturbing to find that
not even 50 % of listed CPSEs are compliant with provisions of Independent Directors on the
Board of CPSEs. Here, since the appointment of Independent Directors is the responsibility of
the administrative Ministries and other Government entities involved, individual CPSEs are by
and large helpless spectators. Less than adequate number of Independent Directors can lead to
situations where Audit Committee and other Committees of the Board are not able to meet. Even
CPSEs which have been granted 'Maharatna' status are not in a position to exercise their
enhanced delegated powers. The Committee infers that the situation reached this magnitude due

41
the lack of effective penal provisions and no penal action being effected. In this regard, the
Committee is aware of the latest step taken by SEBI to introduce a fine of ````` 5000 per day for
continued non-compliance on the listed entities not complying with provisions pertaining to
composition of the Board. However, the Committee feels that since CPSE has no role in filling
up the vacancies of Independent Directors, it will be unjustified to impose the penal provision
and fine on them. Or else the onus of filling up the post of Independent Directors should rest
with the CPSEs concerned, as already recommended by the Committee and in that scenario the
penal provision being applicable to CPSEs is justified. Further, the Committee wishes that MCA
and DPE may bring in more suitable penal provisions for non compliance of other provisions
under CA-2013 and other Corporate Governance regulations/guidelines. (Para 10.5)
23. While analyzing the various aspects of Professionalization of Boards of CPSEs as part of its
examination of the subject, the Committee has been exposed to the idea of Ownership Neutrality.
The Committee feels that this is an idea worth pondering over. Many issues like delay in
appointment of Board Members, non-compliance with Corporate Governance practices/regulations,
rationalization of exemptions, etc., that have a direct bearing on the Professionalization of
Boards, may be areas that could benefit from the separation of regulatory powers from the
administrative Ministry i.e. the owner. To the Committee's understanding, while the administrative
Ministry pursues the interest of shareholders and fulfill other statutory as well as social obligations
of the CPSE, the regulatory/co-coordinating agency could play its role independently.
(Para 11.5)
24. The Committee observes that countries like Singapore which have a successful eco-system
of PSEs with proven track record follows the system of Ownership Neutrality in Corporate
Governance. The Kotak Committee set up by SEBI to review the Corporate Governance norms
of the country has analyzed and recommended the idea that the Government should aim at
ensuring independence of the PSEs from the administrative ministry to ensure speedy decision
making, functional and operational autonomy in pursuit of their stated objectives. The Committee
is given to understand that this recommendation of the Kotak Committee has been forwarded
to Ministry of Finance and DPE for consideration. The Committee also finds that international
organizations in the realm of Corporate Governance like Organization of Economic Cooperation
and Development (OECD) has been in favour of clear cut identification of ownership rights of
State Administration, which can be inferred as separation of ownership rights and regulatory
powers. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the Government shall initiate expedient
action on the said recommendation of the Kotak Committee. (Para 11.6)
25. Further, in this regard the Committee would like to recommend that since the country
already has a nodal Department for all CPSEs, which is Department of Public Enterprises, they
should be entrusted with the responsibility for playing the role of the regulatory agency to all
CPSEs. The Committee has not doubt about the competency of DPE in this area, with their vast

42
repertoire of domain experience. Moreover, DPE is already into regulatory functions through
issue of various guidelines on a variety of aspects governing the CPSEs. But, the Committee
reckons that the current role of DPE is restricted to being advisory in nature. To implement the
recommendation of the Committee on ownership neutrality, DPE has to be endowed with executive
functions related to regulations and should be able to enforce the regulations, which may extend
to new areas like Board level oversight. (Para 11.7)
26. The Committee observes that realm of Corporate Governance always remains in a flux
owing to dynamic generation of ideas and concepts. Cutting edge developments are continuously
followed by international organization like OECD, World Bank, etc. Accordingly, the Committee
suggests that DPE should endeavour to continuously analyse the latest trends that are in place
in the international arena and look for their adoptability in Indian context. (Para 12.2)

43
MINUTES

XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 04.00 P.M. on Monday, the 6th August, 2018 in Committee Room 'A', First
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi
MEMBERS  PRESENT
1. Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Amee Yajnik
3. Shri G. C. Chandrashekhar
4. Shri Shwait Malik
5. Shri Sanjay Seth
6. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque
LOK  SABHA
7. Shri Birendra Kumar Choudhary
8. Shri Mohd. Asrarul Haque
9. Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena
10. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato
11. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa
12. Shri Rameshwar Teli
13. Shrimati Savitri Thakur
14. Shrimati Dev Varma
15. Shri Rajan Vichare
SECRETARIAT
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Director
Shri J. K. Mallick, Additional Director
Shrimati Sreeja V ., Deputy Secretary
45

46
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Renu Sreekanth, Committee Officer
Shri Divender Singh Bisht, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members of the Committee to the
meeting. Then, the Committee took up the consideration and adoption the Draft 289th and 290th Reports
on Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS) and Professionalization of Boards of CPSEs pertaining
to the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises and Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry
of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises), respectively. Thereafter, the Committee adopted the Draft
289th and 290th Reports without any change.
3. Thereafter, the Committee also decided to present the Reports in both the Houses of Parliament on
the 8th August, 2018. It authorised the Chairman of the Committee and in his absence Shri G. C.
Chandrasekhar, M. P. and in the absence of both, Shri Md. Nadimul Haque, M. P. to present the Reports
in the Rajya Sabha. Similarly, the Committee authorised Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena, M. P. and in his
absence Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato to lay the Reports in the Lok Sabha.
The Committee then adjourned at 04.25 
P.M.

47
ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE -I
MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 5th June, 2015
G .S.R. 463(E).—In exercise of the powers conferred by clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (1) of
Section 462 and in pursuance of sub-section (2) of said Section of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of
2013) and in supersession of notifications issued under Section 620 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of
1956), except as respect things done or omitted to be done before such supersession, the Central
Government, in the interest of public, hereby directs that certain provisions of the Companies Act, 2013,
as specified in column (2) of the Table, shall not apply or shall apply with such exceptions, modifications
and adaptations, as specified in colum n (3) of the said T able, to a Government company, namely:–
Sl. No. Chapter Number/Section        Exceptions, Modifications and Adaptations
number/Sub-section(s) in
the Companies Act, 2013
( 1 )       ( 2 )                  ( 3 )
1. Chapter II, Section 4. In Section 4, in sub-section (1), in clause (a), the
words 'in the case of a public limited company, or
the last words "Private Limited" in the case of a
private limited company' shall be omitted.
2. Chapter IV, Section 56. In sub-section (1), after the proviso, the following
provisos shall be inserted, namely:—
Provided further that the provisions of this sub-
section, in so far as it requires a proper instrument
of transfer, to be duly stamped and executed by or
on behalf of the transferor and by or on behalf of
the transferee, shall not apply with respect to bonds
issued by a Government company, provided that an
intimation by the transferee specifying his name,
address and occupation, if any, has been delivered to
the company along with the certificate relating to the
bond; and if no such certificate is in existence, along
with the letter of allotment of the bond:
Provided also that the provisions of this sub-section
shall not apply to a Government Company in respect
of securities held by nominees of the Government.
49

50
( 1 )       ( 2 )                  ( 3 )
3. Chapter VII, Section 89. Shall not apply.
4. Chapter VII, Section 90. Shall not apply.
5 Chapter VII, sub-section (2) of In sub-section (2), for the words "some other place
Section 96. within the city , town or village in which the registered
office of the company is situate", the words "such
other place as the Central Government may approve
in this behalf" shall be substituted.
6. Chapter VIII, second proviso to Shall not apply to a Government Company in which
sub-section (1) of Section 123. the entire paid up share capital is held by the Central
Government, or by any State Government or
Governments or by the Central Government and one
or more State Governments.
7. Chapter VIII, sub-section (4) Shall not apply to a Government Company in which
of Section 123. the entire paid up share capital is held by the Central
Government, or by any State Government or
Governments or by the Central Government and one
or more State Governments or by one or more
Government Company.
8. Chapter IX, Section 129. Shall not apply to the extent of application of
Accounting Standard 17 (Segment Reporting) to the
companies engaged in defence production.
9. Chapter IX, clause (c) of sub Shall not apply.
section (3) of Section 134
10. Chapter IX, clause (p) of sub- Shall not apply in case the directors are evaluated by
section (3) of Section 134. the Ministry or Department of the Central Government
which is administratively in charge of the company,
or, as the case may be, the State Government, as per
its own evaluation methodology.
11. Chapter XI, Section 149(1)(b) and Shall not apply.
first proviso to sub-section (1)
of Section 149.
12. Chapter XI, clause (a) of sub- In Section 149, in sub-section (6), in clause (a), for
section (6) of Section 149. the word "Board", the words "Ministry or Department
of the Central Government which is administratively
in charge of the company, or, as the case may be,
the State Government" shall be substituted.

51
( 1 )       ( 2 )                  ( 3 )
13. Chapter XI, clause (c) of sub- Shall not apply.
section (6) of Section 149.
14. Chapter XI, sub-section (5) of Shall not apply where appointment of such director
Section 152. is done by the Central Government or State
Government, as the case may be.
15. Chapter XI, sub-sections (6) and Shall not apply to —
(7) of Section 152. (a) A Government company in which the entire
paid up share capital is held by the Central
Government, or by any State Government or
Governments or by the Central Government and one
or more State Governments;
(b) A subsidiary of a Government company,
referred to in (a) above, in which the entire paid up
share capital is held by that Government company.
16. Chapter XI, Section 160. Shall not apply to —
(a) A Government Company in which the entire
paid up share capital is held by the Central
Government, or by any State Government or
Governments or by the Central Government and one
or more State Governments;
(b) A subsidiary of a Government company,
referred to in (a) above, in which the entire paid up
share capital is held by that Government company.
17. Chapter XI, Section 162. Shall not apply to —
(a) A Government company in which the entire
paid up share capital is held by the Central
Government, or by any State Government or
Governments or by the Central Government and one
or more State Governments;
(b) A subsidiary of a Government company,
referred to in (a) above, in which the entire paid up
share capital is held by that Government company.

52
( 1 )       ( 2 )                  ( 3 )
18. Chapter XI, Section 163, Shall not apply to—
(a) a Government Company in which the entire
paid up share capital is held by the Central
Government, or by any State Government or
Governments or by the Central Government and one
or more State Governments;
(b) a subsidiary of a Government company,
referred to in (a) above, in which the entire paid up
share capital is held by that Government company.
19. Chapter XI, sub-section (2) of Shall not apply.
Section 164.
20. Chapter XI, Section 170. Shall not apply to a Government Company in which
the entire share capital is held by the Central
Government, or by any State Government or
Governments or by the Central Government or by
one or more State Governments.
21. Chapter XI, Section 171 Shall not apply to a Government Company in which
the entire share capital is held by the Central
Government, or by any State Government or
Governments or by the Central Government or by
one or more State Governments.
22. Chapter XII, clause (i) of sub- In clause (i) of sub-section (4) of the section 177,
section (4) of Section 177. for the words "recommendation for appointment,
remuneration and terms of appointment" the words
"recommendation for remuneration" shall be
substituted.
23. Chapter XII, sub-sections (2), Shall not apply to Government company except with
(3) and (4) of Section 178. regard to appointment of 'senior management' and
other employees.
24. Chapter XII, Section 185. Shall not apply to Government company in case such
company obtains approval of the Ministry or
Department of the Central Government which is
administratively in charge of the company, or, as the
case may be, the State Government before making
any loan or giving any guarantee or providing any
security under the section.

53
( 1 )       ( 2 )                  ( 3 )
25. Chapter XII, Section 186. Shall not apply to —
(a) a Government company engaged in defence
production;
(b) a Government company, other than a listed
company, in case such company obtains approval of
the Ministry or Department of the Central Government
which is administratively in charge of the company,
or, as the case may be, the State Government before
making any loan or giving any guarantee or providing
any security or making any investment under the
section.
26. Chapter XII, first and second Shall not apply to —
proviso to sub Section (1) of
section 188.
(a) a Government company in respect of contracts
or arrangements entered into by it with any other
Government company;
(b) a Government company, other than a listed
company, in respect of contracts or arrangements
other than those referred to in clause (a), in case
such company obtains approval of the Ministry or
Department of the Central Government which is
administratively in charge of the company, or, as the
case may be, the State Government before entering
into such contract or arrangement.
27. Chapter XIII, sub-sections (2), Shall not apply.
(4) and (5) of Section 196.
28. Chapter XIII, Section 197. Shall not apply.
29. Chapter XIII, sub-sections (1), After sub section (4), the following sub-section shall
(2), (3) and (4) of Section 203. be inserted, namely
"(4A) The provisions of sub-sections (1), (2), (3)
and (4) of this section shall not apply to a managing
director or Chief Executive Officer or manager and
in their absence, a whole-time director of the
Government Company."

54
( 1 )       ( 2 )                  ( 3 )
30. Chapter XXIX, sub-section (2) In sub-section (2), the words "the Registrar, a
of Section 439. shareholder of the company, or of" shall be omitted.
2. The Government companies, while complying with such exceptions, modifications and
adaptations, as specified in column (3) of the aforesaid Table, shall ensure that the interests of their
shareholders are protected.
3. A copy of this notification has been laid in draft before both Houses of Parliament as required
by sub-section (2) of section 462 of the Companies Act, 2013.
[F. No. 1/2/2014-CL.-V]
AMARDEEP SINGH BHATIA,
Jt. Secy.

55
ANNEXURE -II
SCHEDULE IV TO THE COMPANIES ACT, 2013
CODE FOR INDEPENDENT DIRECTORS
I. Guidelines of professional conduct:
An independent director shall:-
(1) uphold ethical standards of integrity and probity;
(2) act objectively and constructively while exorcising his duties;
(3) exercise his responsibilities in a bona fide manner in the interest of the company;
(4) devote sufficient time and attention to his professional obligations for informed and balanced
decision making;
(5) not allow any extraneous considerations that will vitiate his exercise of objective independent
judgment in the paramount interest of the company as a whole, while concurring in or dissenting
from the collective judgment of the Board in its decision making;
(6) not abuse his position to the detriment of the company or its shareholders or for the purpose of
gaining direct or indirect personal advantage or advantage for any associated person;
(7) refrain from any action that would lead to loss of his independence;
(8) where circumstances arise which make an independent director lose his independence, the
independent director must immediately inform the Board accordingly;
(9) assist the company in implementing the best corporate governance practices.
II. Role and functions:
The independent directors shall:
(1) help in bringing an independent judgement to bear on the Board’s deliberations appointments and
standards of conduct;
(2) bring an objective view in the evaluation of the performance of board and management;
(3) scrutinise the performance of management in meeting agreed goals ami objectives and monitor the
reporting of performance;
(4) satisfy themselves on the integrity of financial information and that financial controls and the
systems of risk management are robust and defensible;
(5) safeguard the interests of all stakeholders, particularly the minority shareholders;
55

56
(6) balance the conflicting interest of the stakeholders;
(7) determine appropriate levels of remuneration of executive directors, key managerial personnel and
senior management and have a prime role in appointing and where necessary recommend removal
of executive directors, key managerial personnel and senior management;
(8) moderate and arbitrate in the interest of the company as a whole, in situations of conflict between
management and shareholder's interest.
III. Duties : The independent directors shall —
(1) undertake appropriate induction and regularly update and refresh their skills, knowledge and
familiarity with the company;
(2) seek appropriate clarification or amplification of information and, where necessary, take and
follow appropriate professional advice and opinion of outside experts at the expense of the
company;
(3) strive to attend all meetings of the Board of Directors and of the Board committees of which he
is a member;
(4) participate constructively and actively in the committees of the Board in which they are chairpersons
or members;
(5) strive to attend the general meetings of the company;
(6) where they have concerns about the running of the company or a proposed action, ensure that
these are addressed by the Board and to the extent that they are not resolved, insist that their
concerns are recorded in the minutes of the Board meeting;
(7) keep themselves well informed about the company and the external environment in which it
operates;
(8) not to unfairly obstruct the functioning of an otherwise proper Board or committee of the Board;
(9) pay sufficient attention and ensure that adequate deliberations are held before approving related
party transactions and assure themselves that the same are in the interest of the company;
(10) ascertain and ensure that the company has an adequate and functional vigil mechanism and to
ensure that the interests of a person who uses such mechanism are not prejudicially affected on
account of such use;
(11) report concerns about unethical behaviour, actual or suspected fraud or violation of the company's
code of conduct or ethics policy;
(12) act within their authority, assist in protecting the legitimate interests of the company, shareholders
and its employees;

57
(13) not disclose confidential information, including commercial secrets, technologies, advertising and
sales promotion plans, unpublished price sensitive information, unless such disclosure is expressly
approved by the Board or required by law.
IV. Manner of appointment:
(1) Appointment process of independent directors shall be independent of the company management;
while selecting independent directors the Board shall ensure that there is appropriate balance of
skills, experience and knowledge in the Board so as to enable the Board to discharge its functions
and duties effectively.
(2) The appointment of independent director(s) of the company shall be approved at the meeting of
the shareholders.
(3) The explanatory statement attached to the notice of the meeting for approving the appointment
of independent director shall include a statement that in the opinion of the Board, the independent
director proposal to be appointed fulfils the conditions specified in the Act and the rules made
thereunder and that the proposed director is independent of the management.
(4) The appointment of independent directors shall be formalised through a letter of appointment,
which shall set out:
(a) the term of appointment;
(b) the expectation of the Board from the appointed director; the Board-level committee(s) in
which the director is expected to serve and its tasks;
(c) the fiduciary duties that come with such an appointment along with accompanying liabilities;
(d) provision for Directors and Officers (D and O) insurance, if any;
(e) the Code of Business Ethics that the company expects its directors and employees to
follow;
(f) the list of actions that a director should not do while functioning as such in the company;
and
(g) the remuneration, mentioning periodic fees, reimbursement of expenses for participation in
the Boards and other meetings and profit related commission, if any.
(5) The terms and conditions of appointment of independent directors shall be open for inspection at
the registered office of the company by any member during normal business hours.
(6) The terms and conditions of appointment of independent directors shall also be posted on the
company's website.

58
V. Re-appointment
The re-appointment of independent director shall be on the base of report of performance evaluation.
VI. Resignation or removal:
(1) The resignation or removal of an independent director shall be in the same manner as is provided
in sections 168 and 169 of the Act.
(2) An independent director who resigns or is removed from the board of the company shall be
replaced by a new independent director within three months from the date of such resignation or
removal, as the case may be.
(3) Where the company fulfils the requirement of independent directors in its board even without
filling the vacancy created by such resignation or removal, as the case may be/the requirement
of replacement by a new independent director shall not apply.
VII. Separate meetings:
(1) The independent directors of the company shall hold at least one meeting in a financial year,
without the attendance of non-independent directors and members of management;
(2) All the independent directors of the company shall strive to be present at such meeting;
(3) The meeting shall:
(a) review the performance of non-independent directors and the Board as a whole;
(b) review the performance of the Chairperson of the company, taking into account the views
of executive directors and non-executive directors;
(c) assess the quality, quantity and timeliness of flow of information between the company
management and the board that is necessary for the Board to effectively and reasonably
perform their duties.
VIII. Evaluation mechanism
(1) The performance evaluation of independent directors shall be done by the entire Board of Directors,
excluding the director being evaluated.
(2) On the basis of the report of performance evaluation, it shall be determined whether to extend
or continue the term of appointment of the independent director.
Note:- The provisions of sub-paragraphs (2) and (7) of paragraph 11, paragraph IV, paragraph V, clauses (a) and (b)
of sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph VII and paragraph VIII shall not apply in the case of a Government company
as defined under clause (45) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013), if the requirements in respect
of matters specified in these paragraphs are specified by the concerned Ministries or Departments of the Central
Government or as the case may be, the State Governments and such requirements are complied with by the
Government companies.

59
ANNEXURE -III
RELEV ANT EXTRACTS FROM DPE GUIDELINES ON
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FOR CPSEs
CHAPTER 4 - AUDIT COMMITTEE
4.1 Qualified and Independent Audit Committee
A qualified and independent Audit Committee shall be set up, giving the terms of reference.
4.1.1 The Audit Committee shall have minimum three Directors as members. Two-thirds of the members
of audit Committee shall be Independent Directors.
4.1.2 The Chairman of the Audit Committee shall be an Independent Director.
4.1.3 All members of Audit Committee shall have knowledge of financial matters of Company, and at
least one member shall have good knowledge of accounting and related financial management
expertise.
Explanation 1: The term "knowledge of financial matters of Company" means the ability to read
and understand basic financial procedures and statements i.e. balance sheet, profit and loss
account, and statement of cash flows.
Explanation 2: A member will be considered to have accounting and related financial management
expertise if he or she possesses experience in finance or accounting, or requisite professional
certification in accounting, or any other comparable experience or background which results in the
individual's financial sophistication, including being or having been a chief executive officer ,
chief financial officer or other senior officer with financial oversight responsibilities.
4.1.4 The Chairman of the Audit Committee shall be present at Annual General Meeting to answer
shareholder queries; provided that in case the Chairman is unable to attend due to unavoidable
reasons, he may nominate any member of the Audit Committee.
4.1.5 The Audit Committee may invite such of the executives, as it considers appropriate (and particularly
the head of the finance function) to be present at the meetings of the Committee. The Audit
Committee may also meet without the presence of any executives of the company. The Finance
Director, Head of Internal Audit and representative of the Statutory Auditor may be specifically
invited to be present as invitees for the meetings of the Audit Committee as may be decided by
the Chairman of the Audit Committee.
The management:-
- The adequacy of internal controls including computerized information system controls and
security, and
59

60
- Related findings and recommendations of the independent auditor and internal auditor, together
with the management responses.
4.2.19 Consider and review the following with the management, internal auditor and the independent
auditor:
- Significant findings during the year, including the status of previous audit recommendations
- Any difficulties encountered during audit work including any restrictions on the scope of
activities or access to required information,
Explanation: If the company has set up an Audit Committee pursuant to provision of the Companies
Act, the said Audit Committee shall have Such additional functions/features as contained in these
guidelines.
4.2.20 Carrying out any other function as is mentioned in the terms of reference of the Audit Committee.
4.3 Powers of Audit Committee
Commensurate with its role, the Audit Committee should be invested by the Board of Directors
with sufficient powers, which should include the following:
(i) To investigate any activity within its terms of reference.
(ii) To seek information on and from any employee.
(iii) To obtain outside legal or other professional advice, subject to the approval of the
Board of Directors.
(iv) To secure attendance of outsiders with relevant expertise, if it considers necessary.
(v) To protect whistle blowers.
4.4 Meeting of Audit Committee
The Audit Committee should meet at least four times in a year and not more than four months
shall elapse between two meetings. The quorum shall be either two members or one third of the
members of the Audit Committee whichever is greater, but a minimum of two independent
members must be present.
4.5 Review of information by Audit Committee
The Audit Committee shall review the following information:
(i) Management discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations;
(ii) Statement of related party transactions submitted by management;
(iii) Management letters/letters of internal control weaknesses issued by the statutory
auditors;

61
(iv) Internal audit reports relating to internal control weaknesses;
(v) The appointment and removal of the Chief Internal Auditor shall be placed before the Audit
Committee; and
(vi) Certification/declaration of financial statements by the Chief Executive/Chief Finance Officer.

62
ANNEXURE-IV
INDEPENDENT DIRECTORS VACANCY IN CPSEs
Sl. No. PSU Name V acant
1 Air India Limited 3
2 Airports Authority of India Ltd. 2
3 Andrew Yule and Company Ltd. 3
4 Artificial Limbs Mfg. Corporation of India 3
5 Balmer Lawrie and Co. Ltd. 5
6 BEML LTD. 4
7 Bengal Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals Ltd. 1
8 Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. 1
9 Bharat Dynamics Ltd. 1
10 Bharat Electronics Ltd. 2
11 Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd. 2
12 Bharat Petro Resources Ltd. 2
13 Bharat Pumps and Compressors Ltd. 2
14 Bharat Wagon and Engineering Co. Ltd. 1
15 Brahmaputra Crackers and Polymer Ltd. 1
16 Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation Ltd. 2
17 Braithwaite and Co. Ltd. 1
18 Bridge and Roof Co.(lndia) Ltd. 2
19 Broadcast Engineering Consultants India Ltd. 2
20 Burn Standard Company Ltd. 2
21 Cement Corporation of India Ltd. 1
22 Central Coalfields Ltd. 3
23 Central Cottage Inds. Corpn. of India Ltd. 2
24 Central Electronics Ltd. 2
25 Central Mine Planning and Design Institute Ltd. 3
26 Central Railside Warehousing Co. Ltd. 3
62

63
Sl. No. PSU Name V acant
27 Central Warehousing Corporation 3
28 Certification Engineers International Ltd. 2
29 Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd. 5
30 Container Corporation of India Ltd. 2
31 Dedicated Fright Corridor Corp. of India Ltd. 2
32 Dredging Corporation of India Ltd. 3
33 Eastern Coalfields Ltd. 4
34 EDCIL (India) Ltd. 2
35 Electronics Corporation of India Ltd. 4
36 Engineering Projects (India) Ltd. 1
37 Terro Scrap Nigam Ltd. 1
38 Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore Ltd. 1
39 Food Corporation of India 3
40 SAIL (India) Ltd. 1
41 Gordon Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Ltd. 1
42 Goa Shipyard Ltd. 2
43 Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd. 2
44 Hindustan Antibiotics Ltd. 1
45 Hindustan Copper Ltd. 1
46 Hindustan Fluorocarbons Limited 3
47 Hindustan Newsprint Ltd. 3
48 Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd. 3
49 Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd. 1
50 Hindustan Photo Films Manufacturing Co. Ltd. 1
51 Hindustan Prefab Ltd. 1
52 Hindustan Salts Ltd.+ Sambar Salts Ltd. 1
53 Hindustan Shipyard Ltd. 2
54 HLL Lifecare Ltd. 2
55 HMT (International) Ltd. 2

64
Sl. No. PSU Name V acant
56 HMT Ltd. 3
57 HMT Machine Tools Ltd. 1
58 Hotel Corporation of India Ltd. 2
59 India Tourism Development Corpn. Ltd. 3
60 India Trade Promotion Organisation 2
61 Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Ltd. 1
62 Indian Medicines and Pharmaceutical Corpn. Ltd. 3
63 Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. 2
64 Indian Railway Finance Corporation Ltd. 1
65 Indian Rare Earths Ltd. 3
66 ITI Ltd. 5
67 Jute Corporation of India Ltd. 2
68 Kamrajar Port Ltd. 2
69 Karnataka Antibiotics and Pharmaceuticals Ltd. 2
70 KIOCL Ltd. 4
71 Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd. 3
72 Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd. 1
73 Mangalore Ref. and Petrochemicals Ltd. 1
74 Manganese Ore (India) Ltd. 3
75 MECON Ltd. 2
76 Mineral Exploration Corporation Ltd. 1
77 MMTC Ltd. 3
78 MSTC Ltd. 1
79 Mum.bai Railway Vikas Corporation Ltd. 1
80 Nagaland Pulp and Paper Company Ltd. 2
81 Mational Fertilizers Ltd. 2
82 Mational Film Development Corporation Ltd. 2
83 National Handicapped Finance and Devpt. Corpn. 1

65
Sl. No. PSU Name V acant
84 National Handloom Development Corpn. Ltd. 1
85 National Jute Manufactures Corporation Ltd. 1
86 National Minorities Dev. and Finance Corp. 2
87 National Projects Construction Corporation Ltd. 1
88 National Research Development Corporation 1
89 National Safai Karamcharis Fin. and Devpt. Corpn. 1
90 National Scheduled Castes Fin. and Devpt. Corpn. 2
91 National Seeds Corporation Ltd. 1
92 National Textile Corporation Ltd. 1
93 NEPA Ltd.
94 Neyvcli Lignite Corporation Ltd. 2
95 NHPC Ltd. 1
96 Northern Coalfields Ltd. 2
97 NTPC Ltd. 1
98 Numaligarh Refinery Ltd. 2
99 Oil India Ltd. 3
100 ONGC Videsh Ltd.
101 Orissa Minerals Development Co. Ltd. 4
102 PEC Ltd. 3
103 Pawan Hans Helicopters Ltd. 1
104 Power Finance Corporation 3
105 Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd. 4
106 Power System Corporation Ltd. 2
107 Projects and Development India Ltd. 1
108 Rail Vikas Nigam Ltd. 1
109 Railtel Corporation India Ltd. 2
110 Rajasthan Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Ltd. 2

66
Sl. No. PSU Name V acant
111 Rajasthan Electronics and Instruments Ltd. 2
112 Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Ltd. 3
113 Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. 1
114 Richardson and Cruddas(1972) Ltd. 1
115 Rural Electrification Corporation Ltd. 1
116 Scooters India Ltd. 3
117 Security Printing and Minting Corpn. India Ltd. 1
118 Shipping Corporation of India Ltd. 3
119 SJVN Ltd. 3
120 South Eastern Coalfields Ltd. 1
121 Steel Authority of India Ltd. 2
122 Telecommunications Consultants (India) Ltd. 2
123 W APCOS Ltd. 1
124 Western Coalfields Ltd. 1
T
OTAL 251

67
ANNEXURE-V
Maharatna CPSEs
Sl. No. Name of CPSEs Required In Position V acant
1 Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd. 8 6 2
2 Bharal Petroleum Corporation Ltd. 7 7 0
3 Coal India Ltd. 7 7 0
4 GAIL (India) Ltd. 8 8 1
5 Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. 10 8 2
6 NTPC Ltd. 9 8 1
7 Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Ltd. 9 9 0
8 Steel Authority of India Ltd. 9 7 2
T
OTAL 67 59 8
Navratna CPSEs
1 Bharat Electronics Ltd. 9 7 2
2 Container Corporation of India Ltd. 7 5 2
3 Engineers India Ltd. 7 7 0
4 Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd. 7 5 2
5 Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd. 7 6 1
6 Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Ltd. 6 6 0
7 National Aluminium Company Ltd. 8 8 0
8 National Building Construction Corporation Ltd. 6 6 0
9 Neyveli Lignite Corporation Ltd. 8 6 2
10 NMDC Ltd. 8 8 0
11 Oil India Ltd. 7 4 3
12 Power Finance Corporation 5 2 3
13 Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd. 7 3 4
67

68
Sl. No. Name of CPSEs Required In Position V acant
14 Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. 6 5 1
15 Rural Electrification Corporation Ltd. 4 3 1
16 Shipping Corporation of India Ltd. 8 6 2
T
OTAL 110 86 24
Miniratna-I CPSEs
1 Airports Authority of India Ltd. 4 2 2
2 Anttix Corporation Limited - - -
3 Balmer Lawrie and Co. Ltd. 7 2 5
4 BEML LTD. 7 3 4
5 Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. 5 4 1
6 Bharat Dynamics Ltd. 6 5 1
7 Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. 4 4 0
8 Bridge and Roof Co.(India) Ltd. 3 1 2
9 Central Coalfields Ltd. 5 2 3
10 Central Warehousing Corporation 4 1 3
11 Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd. 7 2 5
12 Cochin Shipyard Ltd. 6 6 0
13 Dredging Corporation of India Ltd. 5 2 3
14 EdCIL (India) Ltd. 4 2 2
15 Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Ltd. 5 4 1
16 Goa Shipyard Ltd. 3 1 2
17 Hindustan Copper Ltd. 7 3 4
18 Hindustan Newsprint Ltd. 3 0 3
19 Hindustan Paper Corporation Ltd. 3 0 3
20 HLL Lifecare Ltd. 3 1 2

69
Sl. No. Name of CPSEs Required In Position V acant
21 Housing and Urban Development Corpn. Ltd. 5 5 0
22 HSCG (India) Ltd. 0 0 0
23 India Tourism Development Corpn. Ltd. 5 2 3
24 India Trade Promotion Organisation 3 1 2
25 Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corp. Ltd. 6 6 0
26 Indian Railway Finance Corporation Ltd. 4 3 1
27 Indian Rare Earths Ltd. 4 1 3
28 Indian Renewable Energy Dev. Agency Ltd 5 5 0
29 IRCON International Ltd. 6 6 0
30 Kamrajar Port Ltd. 3 1 2
31 KIOCL Ltd. 6 2 4
32 Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd. 4 3 1
33 Mangalore Ref. and Petrochemicals Ltd. 6 5 1
34 Manganese Ore (India) Ltd. 6 3 3
35 Mazagon Dock Ltd. 6 6 0
36 Mishra Dhatu Nigam Ltd. 4 4 0
37 MMTC Ltd. 8 5 3
38 MSTC Ltd. 5 4 1
39 National Fertilizers Ltd. 6 4 2
40 National Seeds Corporation Ltd. 3 2 1
41 National Small Industries Corporation Ltd. 3 3 0
42 NHPC Ltd. 7 6 1
43 North Eastern Electric Power Corporation Ltd. 6 6 0
44 Northern Coalfields Ltd. 5 3 2
45 Numaligarh Refinery Ltd. 4 2 2

70
Sl. No. Name of CPSEs Required In Position V acant
46 ONGC Videsh Ltd. 4 3 1
47 Pawan Hans Helicopters Ltd. 3 2 1
48 Projects and Development India Ltd. 3 2 1
49 Rail Vikas Nigam Ltd. 7 6 1
50 Railtel Corporation India Ltd. 4 2 2
51 Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Ltd. 6 3 3
52 RITES Ltd. 6 6 0
53 Security Printing and Minting Corpn. India Ltd. 2 1 1
54 SJVN Ltd. 7 4 3
55 South Eastern Coalfield Ltd. 4 3 1
56 State Trading Corporation of India Ltd. 8 8 0
57 Telecommunications Consultants (India) Ltd. 3 1 2
58 THDC India Limited 3 3 0
59 W APCOS Ltd. 3 2 1
60 Western Coalfields Ltd. 5 4 1
T
OTAL 279 183 96
Miniratna-II CPSEs
1 Artificial Limbs Mfg. Corporation of India 3 0 3
2 Bharat Pumps and Compressors Ltd. 2 0 2
3 Broadcast Engineering Consultants India Ltd. 3 1 2
4 Central Mine Planning and Design Institute Ltd. 5 2 3
5 Central Railside Warehousing Co. Ltd. 3 0 3
6 Engineering Projects (India) Ltd. 3 2 1
7 FCI Aravali Gypsum and Minerals India Ltd. 2 2 0
8 Ferro Scrap Nigam Ltd. 2 1 1

71
Sl. No. Name of CPSEs Required In Position V acant
9 HMT (International) Ltd. 2 0 2
10 Indian Medicines and Pharmaceutical Corpn. Ltd. 3 0 3
11 MECON Ltd. 3 1 2
12 Mineral Exploration Corporation Ltd. 3 2 1
13 National Film Development Corporation Ltd. 3 1 2
14 PEC Ltd. 3 0 3
15 Rajasthan Electronics and Instruments Ltd. 3 1 2
T
OTAL 43 13 30

72
ANNEXURE-VI
KOTAK COMMITTEE EXTRACTS
Chapter IX: Governance Aspects of Public Sector Enterprises
Public Sector Enterprises (PSEs) play a prominent role in the economic development of our country,
and their importance can not only be gauged from their size but also their leadership position in sensitive
and strategic sectors of the economy. Further, the role of PSEs in generation of employment opportunities,
welfare initiatives, balanced regional development, undertaking long-term capital intensive projects and
other initiatives for the general public welfare is well acknowledged. Some of them are also listed,
allowing them access to public markets for funds. These have a broader range of stakeholders. The
Committee discussed various issues to enhance governance concerning PSEs and consequently improve
shareholder value. This may also set the stage for more PSEs to list.
The Committee acknowledged that PSEs also face unique challenges that make their governance
more complex than in the private sector, given that (i) most PSEs pursue multiple and diverse objectives
in line with their broader social welfare objectives (unlike private enterprises which may focus on value
maximization for their shareholders); (ii) PSEs may also have certain structural issues arising due to
conflicts of interest that are inherent in cases where the same entity is both the owner and regulator;
(iii) protracted decision making in PSEs owing to accountability at multiple levels. Nonetheless, there is
a need for moving to enhanced governance standards.
The Committee debated several mechanisms in addressing these challenges and was of the view that
all listed entities, Government or private, should be treated at par on governance standards. Therefore,
all listed PSEs should be compliant with the SEBI LODR Regulations. In case there is any inconsistency
between the relevant legislation, if any, under which the respective PSE has been established and the
SEBI LODR Regulations, appropriate harmonization of the legislation to bring the same in line with the
requirement of SEBI LODR Regulations should be undertaken.
During the course of detailed deliberations, the Committee reviewed international examples on PSE
governance and ownership structures (as set out in Annexure 6) and had broad consultations with
different stakeholders to understand the issues in the Indian context. The Committee came to the
conclusion that while this issue would require more consideration and detailed analysis, the following key
guiding principles must be kept in mind for such assessment on this subject:
1. Establish a transparent mandate for PSEs and disclose its objectives and obligations:  The
Government, as owner, must set clear objectives and mandates for the PSEs, and, where there are non
commercial objectives, these should be clearly articulated, quantified and transparently disclosed to the
shareholders on a regular basis so that investors can take informed investment decisions.
2. Ensure independence of the PSEs from the administrative ministry: The Government should
aim at ensuring independence of the PSEs from the administrative ministry to ensure speedy decision
72

73
making, functional and operational autonomy in pursuit of their stated objectives, for better commercial
goals and to attract talent in a competitive market place.
3. Consolidate the Government stake in listed PSEs under holding entity structure(s): As a sustainable
and optimal solution for minimizing conflicts arising from the ownership and regulatory dichotomy in
PSEs, the Government should consider consolidating its ownership and monitoring of PSEs into independent
holding entity structure(s) by April 1, 2020. An independent board with diversified skill set of the holding
entity(s) would also facilitate operationalizing a consistent and high quality process on significant issues
such as strategy, performance monitoring, mergers and acquisitions, and recruitment of best talent.
Recommendations:
The Committee recommends that the listed PSEs fully comply with the provisions of SEBI LODR
Regulations and the same be suitably enforced. Additionally, the Government should assess and examine
the broader issues referenced above inter alia concerning ownership structure for the Government stake,
removal of conflicts and creating a more autonomous environment for PSEs to function in the best
interest of all stakeholders. The Committee believes that this will significantly enhance value of the
national assets. This should be done in a time-bound manner.