PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
  
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
  
ONE HUNDRED – THIRTY THIRD REPORT  
  
ON 
  
  
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN COMMITTEE ' S 117Th  REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR   GRANTS 
(2003-2004) PERTAINING TO THE MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES  
  
  
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 22nd DECEMBER, 2003) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 22nd DECEMBER, 2003) 
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
DECEMBER, 2003/PAUSA, 1925  (SAKA) 
C O N T E N T S 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                   
INTRODUCTION                                                                                           
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE        
MINUTES                                                                                                      
                                   
                                                                        COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON 
INDUSTRY 
  
 Dr. P.C. Alexander      —Chairman 
                        
                        RAJYA SABHA 
  
2.      Prof. M.M. Agarwal 
Page 1 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

3.      Shri Jayantilal Barot 
4.      Dr. M.N. Das 
5.      Smt.  Saroj Dubey 
6.      Shri Faguni Ram 
7.      Shri Lajpat Rai 
8.      Smt. Sumitra Mahajan 
9.      Shri P.K. Maheshwari 
10.  Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil 
11.  Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy 
12.  Shri S. Sivasubramanian 
13.  Smt. Sushree Devi 
14.  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
15.  Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
  
LOK SABHA 
  
16.  Smt. Jayashree Banerjee 
17.  Shri Ajoy Chakraborty 
18.  Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary 
19.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das 
20.  Shri K Francis George  
21.  Shri Thomas Hansda 
22.  Md. Anwarul Haque 
23.  Shri A.C. Jose 
24.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
25.  Shri Mansoor Ali Khan 
26.  Shri Sunil Khan 
27.  Shri Deepak Kumar 
28.  Shri Manjay Lal 
29.  Dr. K. Malaisamy 
30.  Shri A. Narendra 
31.  Shri Ananta Nayak 
32.  Shri Dayabhai V. Patel 
33.  Shri Uttamrao Patil 
34.  Shri Malyala Rajaiah 
35.  Shri P. Rajendran 
  
(i) 
  
  
36.  Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
37.  Shri Tarachand Sahu 
38.  Shri Ramanand Singh 
39.  Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh 
40.  Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur 
41.  Shri V. Vetriselvan 
42.  Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari 
43.  Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
44.  Shri Vijay Sankeshwar 
  
  
Page 2 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

SECRETARIAT 
  
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary 
Shri  A.K. Singh, Deputy  Secretary 
Shri  K.P. Singh, Under   Secretary 
Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer 
I N T R O D U C T I ON 
  
  
I,  the Chairman of the Department-related Parl iamentary Standing Committee on Industry,  having   
been authorised  by the Committee, hereby presen t this One Hundred – Th irty Third Report on the 
Action Taken by the Government on the recommenda tions contained in  the  Committee ' s  117 th
Report  on Demands for   Grants (2003-2004) pertaining to the Ministry of Small Scale Industries.   
  
2.         This Report has been prepared on the basis of the Action Taken No tes furnished by the Ministry
of Small Scale Industries on the observations/r ecommendations containe d in the Committee's 117 th
Report on Demands for   Grants ( 2003-2004) pertaining to the Ministry  of Small Scale Industries. The 
Committee adopted the analytical approach and after assessing the  Action Taken Notes of the Ministry
and judging the same, the Committee prepared this ATR.   The Action Taken  Notes  were analyzed  and 
suitably categorized in four chapters as dealt in ATR.   
  
3.                  The Committee at its meeting held on  22 nd December,  2003 consid ered and adopted the 
Report.  
  
  
REPORT 
  
This Report of the Committee deals with th e Action Taken by Minist ry of Small Scale
Industries  on the Recommenda tions contained in the  117 th  Report (of the Department-relate d 
Parliamentary Standing Committ ee on Industry) on Demands for Grants (2003-2004)pertaining to 
Ministry of Small Scale Industrie s.  The Report was presented /lai d on the Table of Rajya Sabha and
Lok Sabha on the 8th May, 2003. 
2.         Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Small Scale Industries in respect of
the   recommendations contained in that Report.   These have been categorized as follows: 
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted b y the Ministr y of Small Scale
Industries 
  
(Chapter - I). 
  
Recommendations:- 3.6, 4.7, 4.8, 6.15, 7.9, 8.3, 12.8,  12.9, 12.10, 12.11, 13.4, 15.6, 17.3, 17.5,17.6,
NEW DELHI; 
December22nd, 2003      
                                     
DR.P.C. ALEXANDER 
Chairman 
Department -related Parlia mentary Standing Committee 
on Industry
Page 3 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

19.2, 21.3, 22.5, 22.6, 24.2, 25.2 and 27.3. 
  
(Chapter - II) 
  
Recommendations:- 4.6, 6.13, 6.14, 7.8, 9.8, 11.4, 12.2, 16.4, 18.4, 20.7, 22.4, 26.5, and 28.2. 
  
 (Chapter - III). 
  
Recommendations:- 3.5, 5.4, 6.8, 14.3 and  18.3. 
  
Chapter-IV 
  
Recommendations:- 10.4, 11.3 and 11.5. 
  
Further Recommendations:- 3.1.3, 3.2.3, 3.3.2, 3.4.3 and 3.5.2 
  
3.         The Committee is pleased to observe that the Ministry of Small Scale Industries 
has accepted its recommendations as mentioned in Chapter –I of the Report.   
4.         In respect of the recomme ndations made in Paras 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.6, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9, 2.10,
2.11, 2.12 and 2.13.  in Chapter-II the Committee is convinced with the logic and explanation advocated 
by the Ministry of Small Scale Industries and therefore   does not want to  pursue  further .  
5.         The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of recommendation contained 
in Chapter-III and therefore  the Committee desires th at the Ministry of Smal l Scale Industries  should 
furnish  logical  explanation  in respect of these recommendations. 
6.         In respect of recommendations placed in  Chapter-IV, the Ministry of Small Scale Industries has 
furnished the interim replies, th erefore the Committee desires that  the Ministry of Small Scale
Industries  should furnish Action Ta ken Note in respect of recommenda tions categorized   in Chapter-
IV  in detail and to the point, as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee. 
7.         The details of the Action Taken are being discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.
 
Page 4 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

CHAPTER-I 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
  
  
DEVELOPMENT COMMISSIONER FOR SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES 
  
1.1       RECOMMENDATION  
  
            The Committee further observes that it has become extremely essential to create awareness about
India’s obligations under the WTO regime and their impact on vari ous sectors.  Having heard the
representatives of Powerloom, R eadymade garment, Pan Masala A ssociations, the Committee draws an
inference that there is some communication gap between the SIDO and SSI Associations.  Therefore, the
Committee recommends that there should be regul ar interaction between th e Government and Small
Scale Industries.  A Committee at local level should also be formed between Bankers and local chapters
of SSI Associations to sort out th eir problems relating to credit relate d issues at local level in all the
States. The local committee should give quarterly report to the Ministry of Small Scale Industries,
Ministry of Finance (B anking Division) and Department Rela ted Parliamentary Standing Committee
onIndustry.  
(Para No. 3.6)
 
Action Taken 
  
             
1.1.1    In order to have greater interaction, the Ministry of SSI is always in touch with SSI Associations/
entrepreneurs through its c ountrywide network of fiel d formations.  The Minist ry of SSI also has an
interactive portal, which is amongst the most visited websites.  The Ministry also consults stakeholders
in SSI Sector for taking any policy decision.  The consultations with Industry Associations are also held
for preparation of Pre-Budget proposals, for effecting dereservation, raising the investment limit, etc.  In 
SSI Board, a large number of SSI Associations are me mbers.  Recently, the Mini ster of SSI has written
to all the Members of Parliament  to interact with  the prospective SSI entrepreneurs to encourage them
to set up new SSI units in their re spective constituencies and also identify five Sick SSI Units fo r
rehabilitation.  
  
1.1.2    The performance of the ba nks is critically reviewed in different fora such as District
Coordination Committee/ Di strict Level Review Committee/ St ate Level Bankers’ Committee, where 
besides the representatives of RBI,  financing banks, concerned Stat e Governments participate in the
discussions.  In these fora SSI Associations are invited by the C onvenor banks.  Further, in DLRC
meetings public representatives such as local MLAs, MPs also participate in th e deliberations.  Besides,
all the above fora, issues re lating to credit flow to SSI Sector ar e also critically revi ewed at the highest
level in the Standing Advisory Committee(SAC) on flow  of institutional credit  to SSI Sector under the
chairmanship of the concerned Deputy Governor of RBI.  In the SAC, one all India and four State level
SSI Associations are members.  In addition to these, a State Level Inter-Institutional Committee (SLIIC) 
has also been set up in each State to deal with the problems of coordination for rehabilitation of sick SSI
units.  A Sub-Committee of SLIIC has also been set up wherein borro wers and concerned bankers are 
invited to discuss the concerned issues.  An institut ional mechanism also exists  at the dist rict level in
some of the States.  State Governments have formed  Sick Units’ Rehabilitation Committees headed by 
Deputy Commissioner/ District  Collector of the District to look into the reasons for sickness and
deliberate on the measures.  These Committees are expected to bri ng  in general awareness to the
problems and to curtail the growth of sickness. 
Page 5 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

  
GRANTS TO NATIONAL SMALL INDUSTRIES CORPORATION FOR DEVELOPENT OF 
SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES 
  
1.2       RECOMMENDATION  
  
            The Committee hopes and recommends that Nati onal Small Industries Corporation would 
be able to restart its discounting of bill to help SSI Units whose dues have been stuck up with their
clients.  
(Para No. 4.7)
 
Action Taken 
  
1.2.1    NSIC earlier provided short-term financial assistance to SSIs under various financing schemes,
which also included the Bill Discounting Scheme. Unde r this scheme, bills pert aining to supplies made
by small scale units to eligible purchasers were discounted by NSIC upto specified limits.  During the
last two years, several parties to whom Bill Discounting facility  was granted became irregular in
repayment of their dues mainly due to non-payment of bills by the buyer’s organizations some of which 
were State Enterprises like Electrici ty Boards etc.  While finalizing the Business Restructuring Plan o f
NSIC, Govt. had directed the Corporation to phase  out the financial scheme s of the Corporation by
01.4.2007 except those for Technology Upgradation and Marketing Promotion.  
  
1.2.2    In view of the above reasons, as a first step  in this direction, the Corporation discontinued the
business of Bill Discount ing Scheme w.e.f. 01.4.2003.  However,  as desired by the Parliamentary
Standing Committee, the proposal to restart the disc ounting of bills to help SSI units whose dues have
been stuck up with their clients, will be evaluated again.   
  
  
  
  
  
  
1.3       RECOMMENDATION  
  
            The Committee recommends that more emphasis should be laid on research studies to 
know the lacunae hinderin g the growth of National Sma ll Industries Corporation so as to stop its
declining influence. 
(Para No. 4.8)
  
Action Taken 
  
1.3.1    M/s A.F. Ferguson (AFF) conducted a Dia gnostic Study to formulate realistic and relevant
recommendations for NSIC.  AFF had carried out detailed scheme-wise and financial performance 
assessment of NSIC and accordingly suggested certain role options fo r NSIC.  Based on the
recommendations of AFF and discu ssions with the stakeholders, th e Govt. has approved the Business
Restructuring of NSIC.  
  
  
CREDIT TO SSI SECTOR 
 
 
1.4       RECOMMENDATION  
Page 6 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

  
            The Committee further observes that the implementation and enhancement in the limit for 
guaranteeing loans under the Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme should include the following: - 
  
(a)               Time bound and effective implementation, 
(b)               Increase of corpus to Rs.1250 crores over the next one year, 
(c)                Enhancement in the maximum availing credit limit to Rs. 50 lakhs. 
 
(Para No. 6.15)
  
Action Taken 
  
 (a)       The operations of the Credit Guarantee Scheme are fully computerized to deliver time bound and
prompt services to the lenders. The Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Small Industries (CGTSI) has taken
various steps to popularize the scheme by giving ade quate publicity and enhancing awareness about the
Scheme.  The Board of Trustees of  CGTSI and the Ministry  of SSI review and monitor the progress o f
implementation of the Scheme regularly.  
  
(b)               The CGTSI was set up in 2000-01 wi th an initial corpus of Rs. 125 crores shared by the 
Government of India and SIDBI in the ratio of 4:1. With further contributions made by the Government
of India and SIDBI during financia l years 2001-02 to 2003-04, the cor pus fund of the Trust has been 
enhanced from Rs. 125 crore to Rs. 614.52 crore so fa r. The corpus fund would be enhanced further on
year to year basis. 
  
(c)        The limit of Rs. 25 lakhs for coverage under the Scheme has been se t to provide smaller loans
normally availed by the Tiny units which constitute 99%  of the entire SSI Sector .  The analysis of the
loans covered under the Scheme till March, 2003 reveal s that majority of the loans are below Rs. 10
lakhs and the coverage of loans a bove Rs. 10 lakhs is low.  Therefor e, the loan limit upto Rs. 25 lakhs
may continue for the time being.  The Scheme is still at an early  stage of implementation and any
enhancement in the limit on quantum of credit could be considered later. 
  
CREDIT GUARANTEE FUND SCHEME FOR SMALL INDUSTRIES 
  
1.5       
RECOMMENDATION  
  
            The Committee further observ es that credit facilit y is one of the basic inputs that have to 
be provided to SSIs if the y have to enhance their competitiveness in the era of globalisation.  The
Committee, therefore, recommends that banks should come forward in extendin g a helping hand
to the small and tin y sector in sanctionin g collateral free loan to  SSIs.  The Committee also
reiterates that Income Tax exemption may be provided to the Credit Guarantee Fund Trust of the
Small Industries to make it self-sustainable. 
(Para No. 7.9)
  
Action Taken 
  
1.5.1    The RBI has issued necessary instructions to banks to give collateral free loans upto Rs. 5 lakh to
SSI units and upto Rs. 15 lakh to those SSI borrowers with good past  record and financial position. 
Besides this, the Credit Guaran tee Scheme provides guarantee cove r to loans upto Rs. 25 lakh.  The
Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Sm all Industries (CGTSI) has been granted Income Tax exemption in
2002-03 for five years.  
  
Page 7 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

VENTURE CAPITAL FUND 
  
1.6       RECOMMENDATION  
  
            The Committee recommends that more Venture funds should be set up for information
technology, biotechnology and food processin g.  The Committee feels that  Venture Capital could
be a successful concept in brin ging out the latent entrepren eurship spirit of the youth of the
country.  In this context, the Committee recommends that a suitable polic y framework ma y be
designed expeditiousl y to promote settin g up of such funds in the p ublic as well as the private
sector.  Banks should be encouraged to entertain Venture Capital funding to SSI units.  
 
(Para No. 8.3)
  
Action Taken 
  
1.6.1    To encourage Venture Capital funding to SSI units banks have been a dvised that investment in
venture capital will be elig ible for inclusion in prio rity sector lending.  This is subject to the condition
that the venture capital funds/compani es are registered with SEBI.  Investment in venture capital if any,
is required to be reported separately in the half yearly return on priority sector lending, submitted to
RBI.   
  
  
ANTI DUMPING MEASURES 
  
1.7       RECOMMENDATION  
  
            The Committee observes that the major option for limiting imports that remains for use by
policy-makers in a QR-free regime is that of higher tariffs.  The Committee recommends that QRs
may be converted into tariff and non-tariff equivalents to give an adequate protection to the
domestic SSIs.  While this measure would be a discouraging factor for foreign producers to export
their cheap goods to India, it would also mean increasing revenue for the Government of India.  
 
(Para No. 12.8)
  
Action Taken 
  
  
1.7.2    Protection to the industrie s is available in the form of raising custom du ties upto the bound
levels, imposing anti-dumping duties, taking safeguards measures in case of surge in imports, etc. 
  
1.7.3    Under the WTO Agreements, QRs have b een abolished on many pr oducts. These have been
converted into tariffs. Some of the Non-tariff equivalents exercised by India are:  
  
1. All consignments of edible oils and processed f ood products, containing beef  in any form are not 
allowed.  
  
2.      Imports of meat and poultry pr oducts, all primary agricultural products, textile and textile
articles, alcoholic beverages, all such edible/food products, dom estic sale and manufacture o f
which are governed by Prevention of Food Adu lteration Act, 1954, Meat and Meat Products o f
all kinds etc. would be allowed under the compliance of specific Laws/Orders. 
  
Page 8 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

3. A Notification has been issued by the Ministry of Commerce & Industry on 24.11.2000, regarding 
compliance of all the conditions of the St andards of Weights and Measures (packaged 
commodity) Order, 1977, on imports  as applicable to domestic pr oducers.  The Notification also 
makes the import of 133 products su bject to comply with the mandatory Indian quality standards 
as applicable to domestic goods.   
  
  
1.8       RECOMMENDATION  
  
            The Committee recommen ds that on account of al most all products comin g under Open 
General License (OGL) list, the Government may further strengthen the anti-dumpin g 
mechanism so that remedial measures ma y be initiated expeditiousl y.  Countervailing duties and
safeguard duties may be imposed in order to protect domestic producers from cheap imports. 
(Para No. 12.9)
  
Action Taken 
  
  
1.8.1    The Anti-Dumping Authority in the Minist ry of Commerce & Industry monitors imports an d
recommends anti dumping action s on complaints made  by the Industry.Till date, the Designated
Authority has recommended to impose anti-dumping final duty in 120 cases, preliminary duty in 22
cases and 8 cases are stil l under investigation.  The Director General of Safegua rds takes action fo r
safeguard duties.  Till date action has been taken up in respect of 15 products fo r investigations.  So far,
safeguard duties in respect of 8 cases have been imposed. The Ministry of SSI has a scheme to assist SSI
Association upto Rs. 1.00 lakh for an anti-dumping investigation.   
  
  
1.9       
RECOMMENDATION  
  
            The Committee, therefore,  recommends tariff and non-tariff barriers ma y be imposed in 
the form of higher safety standard s, and sanitary and phyto-sanitar y measures as are permissible 
within the WTO framework.  
 
(Para No. 12.10)
  
            Action Taken 
  
1.9.1    Higher safety standards and sanitary & phyto sanitary measures in place are as follows: 
  
1. All consignments of edible oils and processed food products, containing beef in any form are not 
allowed.  
  
2.      Import of meat and poultry products  will be subject to the comp liance of conditions regarding
manufacture, slaughter, packing, labeling and qua lity conditions as laid down in Meat Food
Products Order, 1973.   
  
3.      Import of all primary agri cultural products will be subject to  a Bio Security & Sanitary -Phyto 
Sanitary import permit, to be issued by Depa rtment of Agriculture and Co-operation, as pe r 
conditions of Plants, fruits and Seeds (Regulation of Import into India) Order, 1989.   
  
4.      Import of textile and textil e article is permitted sub ject to the condition that the y shall not 
Page 9 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

contain any of the haza rdous dyes whose handling, production, ca rriage or use is prohibited by the
government of India under the provi sions of clause (d) of subsect ion (2) of section 6 of the
Environment (Protection) Act,  1986 (29 of 1986) read with the relevant rule(s) framed
thereunder.   
  
5. Import of alcoholic beverages as classified under Chapter 22 of ITC(HS) Classifications of Export 
and Import Items, 1997-2002, shall be subject to compliance of various mandatory requirements
as stipulated by various State Governments.  
  
6. Import of all such edible/food pr oducts, domestic sale and manufact ure of which are governed by 
Prevention of Food Adulteration Act,  1954 shall also be su bject to the condition  that, at the time 
of importation, the products are ha ving a valid shelf life of not le ss than 60% of it s original shelf 
life.   
  
7. Import of Meat and Meat  Products of all kinds including fresh, chilled and frozen meat, tissue o r 
organs of poultry, pig sheep, goa t; egg and egg powder; milk an d milk products, bovine, ovine 
and caprine embryos, ova or semen;  and pet food products of animal  origin shall be subject to a 
sanitary import permit to be issued by De partment of Animal Husbandry and Dairying, 
Government of India, as per S ection 3A of Live-stock Importa tion Act, 1898, as incorporated by 
Live Stock Importation (Ame ndment) Ordinance, 2001 date d 05.07.2001 and as notified on 
07.07.2001.  
  
8. A  Notification has been issued by the Ministry of Commerce & Industry on 24.11.2000, 
regarding compliance of all the conditions of th e Standards of Weights and Measures (packaged 
commodity) Order, 1977, on imports  as applicable to domestic pr oducers.  The Notification also 
makes the import of 133 products su bject to comply with the mandatory Indian quality standards 
as applicable to domestic goods.   
  
  
1.10     RECOMMENDATION  
  
            The Committee further reco mmends that compulsor y printin g of manufacturin g date,
maximum retail price (in Indian rupees) and compos ition of the products, b y forei gn exporters
should be introduced.  This would, of course, be compat ible with the national obli gation under
WTO, as domestic manufacturers are already required to comply with these requirements.  
(Para No. 12.11)
 
Action Taken 
  
  
1.10.1  A Notification has been issued by th e Ministry of Commerce & Industry on 24.11.2000,
regarding compliance of all th e conditions of the Standards of  Weights and Me asures (packaged
commodity) Order, 1977, on imports as  applicable to domestic producers.   In addition, the importers o f
packaged commodities have to comply with the following conditions: 
  
a)      Name and address of the importer, 
b)      Generic or common name of the commodity packed; 
c)      Net quantity in terms of standa rd units of weights and measur es, if the net quantity in the
imported package is given to any other unit, its equivalent in te rms of standard units shall be
declared by the importer; 
d)      Month and year of packing in which the commodity is manufactured or packed or imported;
Page 10 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

e)      Maximum retail sale price (MRP) at which the co mmodity in packaged form may be sold to the 
ultimate consumer.  This price shall include all taxes, local or  otherwise, freight transport
charges, commission payable to dealers and all charges towards advertising, delivery, packing,
forwarding and the like as the case may be. 
  
The Notification also makes the im port of 133 products subject to co mply with the mandatory Indian
quality standards as applicable to domestic goods.   
  
  
SICKNESS IN SSI SECTOR 
  
1.11     RECOMMENDATION  
  
  
            In order to revive sick industries, the Committee recommends that 
  
I.                    A special fund may be created for rehabilitation of sick SSIs and the commercial banks may 
earmark a portion of loans to ailing SSIs.  
II.                 The State Level Inter Instituti onal Committees (SLIICs) need to be revitalized and DICs 
may be used as a forum to redress the grievances regarding delays in rehabilitation. 
III.               Local Committees should be formed between the State Government and SSI Association
and Banks to sort out the credit related issues at local level.  
IV.              The Committee reiterates its observations given in its 75th Report that an Arbitration Clause 
may also be included in all borrower-lender arra ngements in terms of I ndian Arbitration Act 
to avoid protracted litigation and costs.  Although Entrepreneurship Development through
small enterprises is basicall y owner-managed, a significant  number of them do employ 
persons for performing manageri al functions.  The SSI unit s on the growth path should
encourage their key personnel to think and work more as entrepreneurs than as mere
employees.  
(Para No. 13.4)
  
Action Taken 
  
  
1.11.1  For rehabilitation of sick SSI units, RBI had set up a Work ing Group on Rehabilitation of such
units under the Chairmanship of Shri S.S.Kohli, the then Chairman of Indian banks’ Association. Based 
on the accepted recommendations of the Working Group, the RBI has drawn up the Revised Guidelines
for Rehabilitation of sick SSI units, which were ci rculated to all Scheduled Commercial banks on 16 th
January, 2002.  
  
I.          These Guidelines include broad parame ters for grant of relief an d concessions for revival o f
potentially viable sick SSI units.  The  loans extended to the ailing SSI units carry various concessions 
as given below: 
  
(a)                Working Capital – Interest 1.5% below the prevailing fixe d/prime lending rate, whereve r 
applicable. 
(b)               Funded Interest Term Loan – Interest free. 
(c)                Working Capital Term Loan – Interest to be  charged 1.5% below the prevailing fixed/prime
lending rate, wherever applicable. 
(d)               Term Loan – Concessions in the interest to be given not more than 2% (not more than 3% in
Page 11 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

the case of tiny/decentralized sector units) below the document rate.
(e)                Contingency Loan Assistance – The conces sional rate allowed for Working Capital 
Assistance. 
(f)                 Additional Working Capital – Interest rates now exceeding PLR. 
  
II.         To make SLIIC more effective various measures have been taken su ch as  a  Sub-Committee o f 
SLIIC has been set up wherein borrowers and concerned bankers are invited to discuss the issue.   
  
III.       An institutional mechanism also exists at the district level in so me of the States.  State
Governments have formed Sick Units Rehabilitation Committee headed by Deputy
Commissioner/District Collector of the District.  Th e reasons for sickness in the sector are also being
deliberated in those for these meas ures are expected  to bring general awaren ess to the problems and to
curtail the growth of sickness.  The above mentioned meetings take place on a regular basis. 
  
IV.       The Banking Ombudsman Scheme , 2002 which has come into effect from 14 th June, 2002 
provides for the Banking Om budsman to act as an arbitrator in  any dispute between a bank and its
constituents or between a bank and another bank, if both the parties agree for such a reference and the
value of the claim in such disput e does not exceed Rs. 10 lakh. Howeve r, insertion of an arbitration
clause in the borrower lende r arrangement in terms of  Indian Arbitration Act will require examination
from legal angle.  
  
EXCISE DUTY EXEMTION 
  
1.12     RECOMMENDATION  
  
            The Committee hopes that the above  incentives announced by the Government would to a great
extent benefit the small scale indus try units engaged in powerloom an d readymade garment sector.  The
Committee recommends that the Mi nistry of Small Scale Industry s hould make a study of the impact o f
the above incentives on the Small Scale Industry uni ts and inform the Department related Standing
Committee on Industry about the same.  
(Para No 15.6)
Action Taken 
  
  
1.12.1  The impact of the revision in tax structure is too early to be assessed as the announcements were
made at the time of passing the Finance Bill 2003 in  April 2003 and subsequently vide Notification o f
Ministry of Finance dated 17 th May, 2003.  Meanwhile, the Small Indus tries Services Institutes (SISIs) 
at Mumbai, Chennai, Bangalore, Ahmedabad, Ludhiana, New Delhi, Indore, Jaipur, Kolkata and Kanpur
have been requested to undertak e the study in consultation with c oncerned Industry Associations and
State Directorate of Industries.  The results of the Studies would be duly intimated to the Committee,
when available.  
  
1.12.2  In the Budget Speech 2003-04, the Hon’ ble Finance Minister announced that it is necessary to 
give a helping hand to the Power Loom s.  For this decentralized sector, it is proposed to strengthen the
existing programme for induction of  Technology in the Weaving Sect or further by offering a ‘Powe r 
Loom Package for Modernisation’.  This package wi ll have three features, viz., first, the Technology
Upgradation Fund Scheme will be enlarged to cover modernization of power looms.  Second, to create a
better working environment and obt ain higher productivity a new Powe r Loom Workshed Scheme will
be introduced by the Ministry of Textiles together with the State Government s.  Improvement of othe r
infrastructure of existing power  loom clusters will be taken up under the revised Textile Secto r
Infrastructure Developmen t Scheme.  Third, as a welfare measur e, all power loom workers will be
Page 12 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

covered under the Special In surance Scheme which will provide them insurance cover against death,
accident and disability.  
  
TECHNOLOGY UPGRADATION 
  
1.13     RECOMMENDATION  
  
            For effective technological upgradation in Indian SSI units, the Committee recommends that the
partnership approach to develop linkages between large and small enterprises be strengthened. 
(Para No. 17.3)
  
Action Taken 
  
  
1.13.1  Field Institutions of SIDO in association with State/Regi onal Level Small Scale Industries
Association, State Industries Department and others.  Development agencies are organizing a number o f
Vendor Development Programme-cum-Buyer Seller Me et and Exhibition to promote development o f 
business linkages between Bu yers, i.e., Large Industries, Central Govt./State Government Department,
Public Sector Undertakings, Defe nce establishments, railways etc. and Sellers who are mainly Small
Scale Units.  The Vendor Development Programmes- cum-Buyer Seller Meet and Exhibition provide a 
common platform to Buyers and Se llers to interact with each othe r to establish long-term business 
linkages.  
  
1.13.2  The events also help the Sellers, the Smal l Scale Entrepreneurs to really see the Quality
standards required by buyer organiza tions.  This helps them in upgrading their quality by way o
f
modernization of their plant and machinery, process, inspection and quality assurance measures. 
  
  
1.14     RECOMMENDATION  
  
            The Committee observes that Govern ment has set up a number of organizations for the purpose
of technological upgradation and quali ty improvement in the SSI units.  However, the impacts of these
facilities are not adequately felt.  The Committee feels that there is an urgent need to revamp the whole
system and make it effective and beneficial to the small industries. 
 
(Para No. 17.5)
             
Action Taken 
  
1.14.1   To enable NSIC to meet the emerging need s of the SSI sector in  the globalised economic
environment, the Business Restructuring study of NS IC has recently been car ried out, in which, the
Government had also consulted the various stakeholde rs of NSIC and envisaged the future role of the
Corporation which inter-alia in cluded the activities of Techno logy Upgradation and Marketing 
Promotion.  Based on the deliberati ons with the Ministry, NSIC subm itted its Business Restructuring
Plan, which has been approved by the Government. The focus of NS IC’s activities in future woul d 
primarily be on Technology Upgradation and Marketing Promotion.  
  
1.14.2  The Modernisation of SIDO Workshop Scheme is an ongoing plan scheme with the allocation of
Rs. 500 lakhs during the 10 th Plan for the workshops attached to SISIs/ Branch SISIs.  Under this 
scheme, the Government provides f unds to SISIs for replacing their outdated/out of order machines.
Funds are also provided for purchas e of accessories, equipments that are required on these machines fo r
Page 13 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

developing jigs, fixtures , dies, tools etc. On these machines, training is provided to the workers
sponsored by SSI units and unemplo yed youths.  After getting the trai ning, these trainees are absorbed
by the large/SSI units and some of them undergo the training to upgrade their skills and to set up thei r
own units. All 30 SISIs have been converted into Technology Resource Centres (TRCs). 
  
1.14.3  The UPTECH Scheme was launched in Februa ry, 1998, with the object ive of facilitating
technology upgradation of small scale industries based on cluster approach. So far, 27 clusters have been
taken up for technology upgradation under the scheme, out of them 6 are Nati onal Programmes on Toy,
Machine Tools, Stones, Lock, Hand Tools and Glass being implemente d in collaboration with UNIDO.
SIDO is pursuing Cluster Development Programme vigorously by taking up more number of clusters for
development under UPTECH scheme.  During last few months, 10 cl usters have been taken up fo r
development.  
  
1.14.4  The Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme was launched in  the year 2000 with the aim to
facilitate technology upgradation of SSI units in the specified produ cts/sub-sectors, by providing 12% 
capital subsidy for induction of approved proven tec hnologies. 21 Sub-sectors are eligible for assistance 
under the scheme.  The scheme is gradually being made broad base d by adding more number of sub-
sectors and new technologies for assistance.  
  
1.14.5  Under the Tool Room Programme, Government have set up a number of Tool Rooms, to assist
small scale industries in quality improvement by providing technical servic es in the area of tool
designing, tool manufactu ring and conducting training in tool an d die making and related areas. The
Tool Room services are well received by Industry and there is  near 100% placement  of its diploma
trainees. The State Governments have  been persuaded to set up Tool Rooms of smaller size (Mini Tool
Room and Training Centres) with Central assistance, which is equal to 90% of the cost of machinery, in
case of new projects and 75% of  the cost of machinery in ca se of existing projects to be
upgraded/modernized. The balance cost of machinery, the cost of land, buildings and the recurring cost
are to be borne by the State Government/State Agencies.   
  
1.14.6  The Institute for Design of Electrical Measuring Instruments (IDEMI), Mumbai was set up in
1969 with the objective to render techni cal services to Instrument Indus tries in general and Small Scale
Industries in particular.  The main  areas of activities both in servi ces and training are calibration and
testing Electrical Measuring Instruments, Process control instruments, Technical Consultancy in Design
Development and proto-type fabric ation of various instruments and also conducting shor t term training 
courses in the field of Instrumentation & Quality Control. IDEMI has taken up number of activities fo r
Technology Upgradation & Quality Improvement in SSI units and a large number of SSI units are being
benefited by such activities. IDEMI has rendered ex cellent services to the Industry during the last 30
years and the Institute has earne d a name amongst the instrument  manufacturers, its users and
Government organizations.  
  
1.14.7  The Electronics Service & Training Centre (EST C), Ramnagar (Uttranchal) was set up in April,
1986 to meet the essential requirement for transf er of technology in asse mbly and manufacturing o f
Electronic items and parts to promot e growth of Electronics Industry in the small scale sector.  The
Institute also provides Technical consultancy and guidance to the Industries in product development,
provides CAD/CAM facilities, PCB Design & manufacturing.  ESTC has been identified as one of the
Centre of Excellence for setti ng up of model faciliti es for computer hardware under Technology
Management Programme of UNDP through Department of Science & Technology, Government o f
India. 
  
  
1.15     RECOMMENDATION  
Page 14 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

  
            The Committee further recommends that training to significantl y improve quality by creating
awareness among personnel about meet ing customer requirements, sta ndardizing processes, training
operatives and enforcing tech nical discipline should be institutiona lized.  There is a need to conduct a
comprehensive research study of SSI units to determine areas of wast e and non-value adding activities 
and develop methodology for quality improvement and cost reduction programmes.  Further, ISO 9000
certification, may be made mo re attractive to introduce quality-consciousness among small 
entrepreneurs.  BIS standards may al so be upgraded from time to time in tune with the developments in
quality worldwide.  
(Para No.17.6)
  
  
  
Action Taken 
  
  
1.15.1  There are three national level tr aining institutions viz. Indian Institute of Entrepreneurship (IIE),
Guwahati, National Institute of Small Industry Extensi on Training (NISIET), Hyderabad and National
Institute for Entrepreneurship & Small Busine ss Development (NIESBUD ), New Delhi under the
administrative control of this Ministry. These are aut onomous bodies under the Mi nistry.   Primarily
their main focus is entrepreneurship development,  consultancy, research, se lf-employment etc. They 
impart training to the SSI entrep reneurs, workers and technicians for raising awareness and improving
their skills, technical knowledge-base etc.  
  
1.15.2  The scope of the ISO-9000 Ce rtification Reimbursement Sche me has been extended to cove r
ISO 14001 Certification also. Furt her, Awareness and Motivationa l programme on ISO-9000 Quality 
Management Systems (Q MS)/ISO-14001 Environment Management Systems (EMS) have also been 
organized through SISIs and RTCs. 
  
1.15.3  The Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) upgrades  its standards from t ime to time. Apart from
formulation, emphasis is laid also on regular review of the standards to keep them in line with modern
technological developments, as also to harmonise them with international standards or their equivalents.
A well orchestrated plan has been  drawn up for improved adoption of  Indian Standards by industry,
large scale purchasing organisations, statutory bodies  and universities. BIS has set up a single-window 
Small Scale Industries ( SSI ) FACI LITATION CELL at its headquarte rs in New Delhi with the sole
aim of providing variety of  informations/assistance to Indian industries, particul arly Small Scale
Sectors. These informations relate to various activities of the Bureau - national as well as international. 
  
MULTIPLICITY OF AGENCIES 
  
1.16     
RECOMMENDATION  
  
  
            The Committee, therefore, recommends  that roles of all these orga nizations be re-evaluated an d 
clearly defined.  It needs to be ensured that their activities do not overlap eac h other.  There should also
be coordination in the activities of  these agencies. Most importantly, all of these should be able to
provide effective service to the small scale sector.  
(Para No.19.2)
  
Action Taken 
  
Page 15 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

1.16.1  Roles of all the Government agencies are well defined. The presence of DC(SSI) on the Board of
SIDBI and Joint Secretary(SSI) on the Board of National Small Indus tries Corporation, as well as
regular interaction with SFCs through SIDBI  ensures elimination of overlapping.  
  
1.16.2  The Product-cum-Process Development Centres f unction as R&D Institutes for the promotion of 
specific industries like glas s, electronics, electrical measures, footwear, sports goods, etc. The Regional
Testing Centres provide the needed  testing facilities wh ich individual SSI units cannot afford.  The
Office of the Development Commissioner (SSI) provides the needed co-ordination.   
  
1.16.3  At the State level, in stitutes like District Indus tries Centres, State Financial Corporations, Small
Industries Development Corporations, etc., are performing in those areas which are not covered by other
Institutes. 
  
INTEGRATED INFRASTRUCTURAL DEVELOPENT SCHEME (IIDS) 
  
1.17     RECOMMENDATION  
  
  
            The Committee recommends that unl ess State Governments play a proactive role in creating
infrastructure for industries, inte gration and harmonization of villages with indus trial development can
not be achieved.  Active particip ation of State Governments, NGOs  and SS Associations should be
ensured by providing appropriate enc ouragement to them.  This is in keeping with the Industrial policy
announced in 1991, to give special thrust to the promotion and stre ngthening of small tiny and village
industries.  
  
(Para No. 21.3)
  
Action Taken 
  
  
1.17.1  All important i ssues pertaining to the promotion and strengthening of small tiny and village 
industries are discussed in the SSI  Board Meeting, which is held pe riodically. The State Governments,
NGOs and SSI associations are perm anent members of the SSI Board. Th ey are encouraged to put forth
their views/ideas and sugges tions at this forum and are, in turn, apprised of the initiatives taken by the
Ministry of SSI. Each and every State Government take s active part in the deliberations of this meeting
individually. Besides State-specific problems are also addressed through field offices of SIDO located in 
every State, as and when required. 
  
DELAYED PAYMENT TO SSIs 
  
1.18     
RECOMMENDATION  
  
             
            The Committee is of the opinion that the timely payment to SSIs c ould be ensured by issuing an
appropriate circular of th e Ministry of Finance for the Ministries/Departments at least of the Central
Government.  The Central Government should also impress upon the St ate Governments to take simila r
measures to expedite payments to SSIs. 
(Para No. 22.5)
  
Action Taken 
  
Page 16 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

1.18.1  The Matter has been duly taken up with the Ministry of Finance. 
  
1.19     RECOMMENDATION  
  
            The Committee re iterates its recommendati on that stringent action s hould be taken against the
erring large companies which have fa iled to make payment to SSIs in due time. Necessary amendment
for taking punitive action may also be contemplated in the Delayed Payment Act.  
(Para No. 22.6)
  
Action Taken 
  
1.19.1  The punitive action in the In terest on Delayed Payment Act is under consideration of the
Government.    
  
PURCHASE PREFERENCE FOR SSI SECTOR 
  
1.20     
RECOMMENDATION  
  
            The Committee reiter ates its recommendati on, made in  its 75 th Report, that in order to protect 
small scale sector from multinational companies and others, a certain % of items, say 33% should be
purchased from SSI sector by Cent ral and State Government  Departments/Agencies specially when the
items reserved for SSI sector have been withdrawn and majority of the items have been put on OGL list. 
The policy of purchase preference system as followed by USA Government for protection of indigenous
industries may be emulated.  Necessa ry action in this regard should be  initiated by the Ministry of SSI
immediately.  
(Para No. 24.2)
Action Taken 
  
1.20.1  Provisions relating to procurement policy to be followed by the Cent ral Government and PSUs
in respect of purchases from small enterprises have been incorporated in the Draft Small Enterprises
Development Bill 2003 under which Government shall notify from time to time the percentage o r
quantum which shall be reserved for small enterpri ses and/or price preferen ce in favour of small
enterprises as may be considered appropriate.  
  
LIMITED PARTNERSHIP ACT 
  
1.21     RECOMMENDATION  
  
  
            A mention has been made about  the Partnership Act in th e Union Budget 2003-04 and the 
Ministry of SSI is addressing the matter.  The Comm ittee desires that the legi slation should be enacted
without much delay.  
(Para No. 25.2)
  
Action Taken 
  
1.21.1  The Department of Company Affairs has set up a High Level Committee under the
Chairmanship of former Cabinet Secretary and Ambassador to USA Shri Naresh Chandra.  The terms o f
reference of this Committee inter-alia, covers, enac tment of Limited Partnership Act also.  The report of 
the Group has been submitted to the Finance Minister  and is under consideration of the Department o f
Company Affairs. 
Page 17 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

  
SINGLE  "COMPREHENSIVE LAW" 
  
1.22     RECOMMENDATION  
  
  
            The Committee recommends that th e Comprehensive law should be  enacted.  It should be 
an encompassing one and should enable the SSI sector to come out of the clutches of Inspector
Raj.  The Committee is of th e opinion that Inspector Ra j has persisted despite attempt at the
higher level to chan ge it and time has come to enact suitable le gislative action to brin g the
Inspector Raj to an end.  
(Para No. 27.3)
  
Action Taken 
  
  
1.22.1  A Single Comprehensive Act i.e. Small En terprises Development Bill submitted by the
Administrative Staff College of India (ASCI), Hyderabad has been revised.  Th e revised draft is unde r
active consideration of the Government.   
  
 
Page 18 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

CHAPTER-II 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHISH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE. 
  
  
GRANTS TO NATIONAL SMALL INDUSTRIES CORPORATION FOR DEVELOPENT OF 
SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES 
  
2.1       RECOMMENDATION  
  
            The Committee expresses its concerns on the role of National Small Industries Corporation
in the small scale industr y sector.  The Committee feels th at the Corporation is still ver y much
relevant in the present scenario and recommends that the Ministry should wholeheartedly support
its restructuring business plans and ensure that Corporation does not lose its focus, i.e., providing
marketing and technology upgradation support to the small sector.  
(Para No. 4.6)
  
Action Taken 
  
  
2.1        During the course of Business Restruct uring of NSIC, the Government had al so consulted the
various stakeholders of NSIC and envisaged the future role of the Corporation which inter-alia included 
the activities of Technology Upgradation and Marketing Promotion.  Based on the deliberations with the
Ministry, NSIC submitted its Busi ness Restructuring Pla n, which has been appr oved by the Govt.  The
focus of NSIC’s activities in future would primarily be on Te chnology Upgradation and Marketing
Promotion.  
  
CREDIT TO SSI SECTOR 
  
2.2       RECOMMENDATION  
  
  
  
            The Committee is of the opinion that there should be effective implementation of these schemes. 
Further, once a loan has be en sanctioned, a time fram e for the release of various  installments should be
committed in accordance with the needs of the entrepreneurs.  The Committee also feels that it must also
be ensured that with the provision of the concept of single window, the time involved in making the
disbursements is considerably reduced.  As far as the National Equity Fund (NEF) scheme is concerned,
it may be noted that the disbursements under the scheme are very small.  The scheme needs to be made
more effective and efficient.  
(Para No. 6.13)
Action Taken 
  
2.2.1    With a view to ensure timely disbursement of loans to SSI Sector, RBI has directed all the banks
that all loan applications upto Rs. 25,000 should be disposed off within two weeks and upto Rs. 5 lakhs
within a period of 4 weeks, provided the loan applications are complete in all respects. 
  
2.2.2    To reduce the time involve d and hassles in obtaining worki ng capital and term loans, from
different agencies, Banks have been providing Composite Loan to SSIs for which the loan limit has been
raised to Rs. 50 lakhs from Rs. 25 lakhs. 
Page 19 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

  
2.2.3    The progress of the National Equity Fund (NEF) Scheme implemente d by the Small Industries
Development Bank of I ndia (SIDBI), is monitored on a quarterly basis. Banks have been advised to lay
down a clear cut monitoring system which captures th e process of sanctioning lo an from the receipt o f
application to sanction or rejection and the reasons for rejection. 
  
2.2.4    The scope of the NEF Scheme has been enha nced to cover project cost limit upto Rs. 50 lakhs.
Further, banks have been advised time and again to make efforts to ensure further utilization of the
limits by giving wider publicit y to the scheme at the br anch level. They have been advised to instruct
their branches particularly the specialized SSI  branches to make earnest efforts in extending the
facilities under the scheme to entrepreneurs in SSI and tiny sector and also impress upon their field level
functionaries to popularize the scheme. 
             
  
2.3       RECOMMENDATION  
  
            The Committee recommends that cost  of credit should be direct ly linked with the benchmarks
achieved by a small unit in term s of Financial, Marketing, Tec hnical, Quality, and Environmental
standards.    
(Para No. 6.14)
Action Taken 
  
  
2.3.1    Financial, marketing, technical, quality and environmental standards, etc. are factors, which
influence the overall performance of  the units. Units doing well in th ese areas would get better credit
rating and would be eligible for final interest rates.  For limi ts upto Rs. 25,000 banks do not levy any
penal interest as per RBI directions.  
  
2.3.2    Banks decide their lend ing rates based on their commerci al judgement, subject to the
announcement of PLR since Octobe r, 1994.  The banks accord SSI un its with a good track record the
benefit of lower spreads over the PLR.  Further, banks have also been advised by RBI to set thei r
interest rate on advances to SSI  Sector keeping in view prevai ling general southward movement in
interest rates. 
  
2.3.3    To reduce the cost of credit, IBA has alread y advised the banks to adopt the interest rate band o f
2 per cent above and below their Pr ime Lending Rate (PLR) for secured advances.  It is expected that
the lending rates would come down considerably as a result of the Policy of softer interest rate bias.   
  
CREDIT GUARANTEE FUND SCHEME FOR SMALL INDUSTRIES 
  
2.4       RECOMMENDATION  
  
  
            The Committee desired that the working of credit guarantee scheme and the availability of credit
should be looked upon as a major issue.  The Committee obser ves that the amount of Rs. 397.56 crore
for Credit Guarantee Scheme is wort h Rs. 172.80 crores is very thin in sp ite of the fact th at this is main
item on the budget of the Small Scale Industry Mi nistry.  The Committee strongly recommends fo r
enhancement of allocation and impr esses upon the Mini stry of Small Scale I ndustries to take up the
matter with the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission. 
(Para No. 7.8)
  
Page 20 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

Action Taken 
  
  
2.4.1    The Credit Guarantee Sche me was launched in August, 2000 with  an initial corpus  of Rs. 100
crore (Government of India share) ,  which was enhanced on year to  year basis with the approval o f
Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission.  The  corpus of the Scheme has been raised by Rs. 100
crores in 2001-02 and by Rs. 142 cror es in 2002-03 and by Rs. 150 crores  in 2003-04 (BE) aggregating 
to Rs.  492 crore.      
  
CREDIT LINKED SUBSIDY SCHEME  FOR TECHNOLOGY UPGRADATION 
  
2.5       RECOMMENDATION  
  
            The Committee observes that remova l of quantitative restrictions  has brought Indian industry
face-to-face with foreign products, which are technologically far superi or.  Moreover, technical barriers
to trade are emerging as major n on-tariff barriers to access the ma rkets of the developed countries. 
Therefore, Indian Industry, particularly, the SSI sector, needs support to upgr ade to the high technical
standards set by the developed countries. 
(Para No. 9.8)
  
Action Taken
 
  
  
2.5.1    The Scheme of UPTECH implemented by the Ministry of SSI aims to facilitate technology
upgradation of small scale industrie s on cluster approach basis.  27 clusters have been taken up fo r
technology upgradation under the scheme, out of them 6 are na tional programmes on Toy, Machine
Tools, Stones, Lock, Hand Tool s and Glass, being implemented in collaboration with UNIDO
assistance.   
  
2.5.2    To facilitate the technology upgradation of SSI units in the specifie d products/sub-sectors, a 
Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme is being implemented since August, 2000 which provides 12%
capital subsidy for induction of proven technologies.  21 Sub-sectors are eligible for assistance under the 
scheme.  The scheme is gradually being made br oad based by adding more number of sub-sectors an d 
new technologies for assistance under it.  
  
  
VALUE ADDED TAX (VAT) 
  
2.6       RECOMMENDATION  
  
            The Committee further observes that th e Central Government  should act swiftl
y and 
decisively to bring in  the homogeneity in the States’ VAT Acts: homo geneity in basic principles 
and classification. 
(Para No. 11.4)
  
Action Taken 
  
  
2.6.1    The Central Government has already pr ovided the States with a Model VAT Law. The
Empowered Committee of State Finance Ministers also strives to bring about homogeneity in the States’
VAT Bills relatin g the basic principles and classificator y issues. The draft VAT Bills were also
Page 21 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

examined in the Department of Revenue for standardization before administrative approval was given.  
             
ANTI-DUMPING MEASURES 
  
2.7       RECOMMENDATION  
  
  
            The Ministry has informed that it was pointed out by the industry that the imports from Nepal are
basically re-exports wi thout any significant value addition to take advantag e of the facility of 0% 
customs duty.  The Committee is also concerned that  goods like Vanaspati ar e being imported which is
adversely affecting the domestic producers.  In the absence of proper rules of origin, Nepal has become
a re-export point for many of the pr oducts from China and other Sout h Asian countries.  The provision
of certificate of origin was dispensed with in the Indo-Nepal Treaty, which gave rise to a spurt in flow of 
Chinese goods in the guise of Nepali goods. The Co mmittee recommends that adequate safeguards be
taken to stop misuse of Indo-Nepal Treaty for import of goods from China and other Countries.  
(Para No. 12.2)
  
Action Taken 
  
2.7.1    Import from Nepal is gove rned by the Indo-Nepal Treaty on Trade and Transi t. This Treaty has
been renewed for a period of 5 years w.e.f. 6th March, 2002.   To take care of re-exports from Nepal, the 
provisions relating to value addition and certificate of origin have be en incorporated in the renewed
Treaty so as to protect the interests of Indian industry. The provision incorporated in the renewed Treaty
would put a check on Chinese goods being routed through Nepal.  
  
MARKETING  & EXPORTS 
  
2.8       RECOMMENDATION  
  
Marketing is an integral part of any commercial ventures.   The Committee recommends that
banks and other financial in stitutions provide market ing oriented financial a ssistance to Small Scale
sector, particularly for advertising, product promotion and sett ing up of regional marketing offices. 
Factoring services by the banks may also be given greater priority.  The Committee further recommends
that Sector specific export thrust/policy measures and mo re Export Promotion Zones should be
established.  
 
(Para No. 16.4)
Action Taken 
  
2.8.1    Advertising Agencies and Marketing Consulta ncies are considered as Small Scale Service and
Business (Industry Related) Enterprises for financi ng under the SSI.  Financ ial assistance provided by
the banks to the SSIs in the form of working capital includes the requirements of the units for marketing
of its products also.  They also provide export credit.  The National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC)
established by Govt. Of Indi a assist SSIs in marketi ng its products by particip ating in bulk local/global
tender on behalf of SSIs / Enterpri ses.  It also operates an Integr ated Marketing Support programme in
which bills pertaining to supplies made by SSIs to eligible purchasers are di scounted.  Besides, SIDBI
has also instituted special schemes for creating and strengthening marketing infrastructure. 
  
2.8.2    Progress is expected in im plementation of the factoring servi ces by banks after the enactment o f
the proposed law which is under consideration of the Government. 
  
Page 22 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

2.8.3    In order to achieve the share of 1% of globa l and accelerated growth in  export, Government has
identified six thrust sector viz.  electronics hardware, textile incl uding garments, Gems and Jewellery,
Auto exponent/Anc. Agriculture a nd service sector.  Regarding es tablishment of Special Economic
Zones, Ministry of Commerce has been requested as subject matter pertains to them.  
  
LABOUR REFORMS IN SSIs 
  
2.9       RECOMMENDATION  
  
  
            The Committee further observes that the existin g social securit y le gislations such as 
Employees’ Provident Fund and Mi scellaneous Provisions Act, Emplo yees State Insurance Act,
Maternity Benefits Act, Workmen’s Compensation Act, and the Payment of Gratuity Act are very
cumbersome for entrepreneurs of small scale units to understand and compl y with.  The
Committee therefore re commends that instead of so man y social securit y le gislations, a
comprehensive Social Securit y Scheme be formul ated on a priorit y basis for providin g for one
insurance cover to each workman.  The Committee strongly feels that the Small Scale units should
be able to devote more time to quality management rather than inspector management.  
 
(Para No. 18.4)
 
Action Taken 
  
2.9.1    The 2 nd National Commission on Labour  has recommended an Act viz. the Small Enterprise
Employment Relations Act which inter-alia includes provisions of safety, service conditions, social
security etc.  The Act is under consideration of Ministry of Labour. 
  
DE-RESERVATION OF SSI ITEMS 
  
2.10     RECOMMENDATION  
  
            The Committee feels that the Gove rnment should have given a s upport package to the affected
units before doing away with the reservation for such SSI units.  The Committee recommends that this
may include timely and low cost cr edit; export assistance and proper infrastructure facilities.  Afte r
giving the package, a time frame may be simultaneously  given to such affected units to enable them to
fight for survival.  In the absence of such package,  the Committee feels that units might be hard-pressed 
to survive.  Moreover, effecting dereservation without any package will bring deleterious socio
economic changes as reservation directly affects employment and economic growth.  
(Para No. 20.7)
Action Taken 
  
2.10.1  The Government announced the Comprehensive Policy Package in  August, 2000 i.e. more than
two years before major dere servation took place.  Most  of the items have been  dereserved only in the
year 2002-2003 (51 items dereserved) and 2003-2004 ( 75 items dereserved).   The policy package 
announced in August, 2000 inter alia includes financ ial incentives, easier access to credit, market
support, availability of collateral free composite loans upto Rs.25 lakhs, capital subsidy fo r
technological upgradation, export assistance scheme and improved infrastructure which takes care of the
concerns of small scale sector. 
  
2.10.2  Further, the dereservation of items placed on th e list of items reserved  for manufacture in SSI is
done only in consultation with th e stake holders and after the same  is recommended by the Advisory
Page 23 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

Committee on Reservation. 
  
DELAYED PAYMENT TO SSIs 
  
2.11     RECOMMENDATION  
  
            The Committee therefore, recomm ends that Comptroller and Auditor General should be 
advised to devise some s ystem so that the pa yments due to SSI are automaticall y paid within a
specified time.  
(Para No. 22.4)
  
Action Taken
 
  
  
2.11.1  The CAG has been apprised of the recommendation of the Co mmittee by the Office of the
Development Commissioner (SSI).  
  
  
IMPACT OF GLOBALISATION AND  LIBERALISATION ON SMALL SCALE SECTOR 
  
2.12     RECOMMENDATION  
  
  
            From the oral evidence rendered be fore the Department related Parliament Standing Committee
on Industry by various SSI Associations, it  appears that the impact of the above activities have not been
as it should have been.  The Comm ittee, therefore, recommends that activities like seminars/workshops
should be intensified to bring adequate awareness among the SSI entrepreneurs.    
(Para No. 26.5)
  
Action Taken 
  
2.12.1  The Ministry of SSI organised 28 one -day Sensitization Workshops and 4 Product Specific 
Workshops all over the country with a view to create awareness among the SSI units/Associations on
WTO Agreements and their implications . The Ministry also organized 8 one -day Workshops on 
Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) during 2002-2003. It also organized 16 Seminars all over the country
to disseminate information to the SSI Industries’ Associations on Anti Dumping Procedures.  
  
SURVIVAL OF MINI CEMENT PLANTS 
  
2.13     RECOMMENDATION  
  
            In view of the replies received from the Ministry, the Committee hopes that the problems 
could be sorted out with the Uttar Pradesh Financial Corporation as informed by the Ministry of 
SSI. 
(Para No. 28.2)
  
Action Taken 
  
2.13.1  As the Committee is aware, the Ministry of SSI took up the matter wi th UPFC. The UPFC has
informed that in view of the dismal performance of the Mini  Cement Plants after 1995-96, the 
Corporation offered a packa ge of One Time Sett lement (OTS) to these units which inte r-alia provided 
Page 24 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

OTS amount of the higher of the two listed below: - 
  
(i)      Outstanding Principal + 12% Simple Interest from the date of first continuous defaults. 
(ii)   Valuation of property (both Prime & Collateral mortgaged).  It was further decided that amount
received from the party after the date of default shall be deducted from the total OTS amount for
arriving at the total figure of OTS.   
 
Page 25 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

CHAPTER-III 
  
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
HAS NOT ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES 
  
DEVELOPMENT COMMISSIONER FOR SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES 
  
3.1       RECOMMENDATION  
             
            The Committee observes that in th e era of Globalisat ion and liberalizati on of the economy, the
Small Scale Industries shoul d be strengthened to compete in the in ternational markets. Policy measures
should be formulated and relevant  data should be obtaine d through surveys, inves tigations and studies. 
The Committee recommends that th e role of Developmen t Commissioner for SSI should be oriented in
accordance with the ever-changing scenario so as to make the SSI sector internationally competitive.  
 
(Para No. 3.5)
  
Action Taken 
  
3.1.1    The role of the Development Commissioner is  that of the advocacy a nd facilitation of the SSI
Sector in the country.  With the aim to make the SSI Sector globall y and domestically competitive, a
Comprehensive Policy Package was announced in August, 2000 by the Hon’ ble Prime Minister in the
First National Convention on SSIs.  This Package cont ains measures related to credit and fiscal support,
marketing, infrastuctural development, technological  upgradation and quality im provement etc. in the
form of incentives and financial a ssistance.  With a view to obtain latest information on various aspects
of the SSI Sector, Office of the Development Commissioner (Small  Scale Industries) has conducted the
Third Census of SSIs.  The results of the Census would be utilized for policy formulation.  The Ministry
of SSI also entrusts St udies to various eminent Research In stitutes/Organisations on topical issues
pertaining to SSI sector. The findings of the Studies provide a vital feedback for Policy decisions.   
  
3.1.2    The role of Development Commissioner is reoriented from time to  time in accordance with
emerging needs.  While taking any policy initiative/decision, the DC (SSI) assures that due consultations
are held with the stakeholders in  the SSI Sector. Recently, the Deve lopment Commissioner’s Office has 
extended due focus on development of Clusters aime d at not only technological  upgradation but also to
improve credit availability in the Clusters.  A list of 60 identified Clusters has been submitted to Reserve
Bank of India for improving the flow of credit therein.  
   
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
  
  
3.1.3    The Committee further obs erves that Comprehensive Polic y Packa ge was announced in
August, 2000 by the Hon ’ble Prime Minister shou ld be monitored from time to time and an y 
lacunae in this re gard should be appropriatel y removed. The Committe e also recommends that
the involvement of SSIs in Policy formulation should be done at the earliest. 
  
PROMOTION OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES SCHEMES 
  
3.2       RECOMMENDATION  
  
Page 26 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

            The Committee feels that techni cal assistance alongwith ot her basic necessary inputs fo r
production such as power, fuel, raw materials and credit at reasonable prices should be provided to make
SSIs more competitive.  The Committee further r ecommends that Cluster-w ise tool rooms and CAD-
CAM rooms should be set up.  
(Para No. 5.4)
  
Action Taken 
  
3.2.1    Ministry of SSI have established a numbe r of Tool Room & Traini ng Centres, as autonomous
bodies, in order to provide technical, advisory and consultancy services to the industries particularly the
small scale industries in the fields of designing, de veloping and manufacturing tools, dies, moulds, jigs,
fixtures, gauges etc. and also to provide training for tool makers. 
  
3.2.2    In order to meet the growi ng demand of tools and dies , it has been decided to persuade the State
Governments to set up Tool Rooms of smaller size (Mini Tool Room and Training Centres) with Central
assistance, which is equal to 90% of the cost of machinery, in ca se of new projects, and 75% of the cost
of  machinery in case  of existing projects to be upgraded/modernized.  The balance cost of machinery,
the cost of land, buildings and the recurring cost  are to be borne by th e State Government/State
Agencies.  This scheme was introduced w.e.f. 1.3.2001, and Government have  approved five proposals
so far received from Government  of Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Karn ataka, Nagaland and West Bengal. 
The State Governments while selecting the site of the project do take into consideration the fact that the
tool room and training facilities and CAD/CAM ar e established in the same areas where there is cluste r
of industries.  
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.2.3    The Committee further reco mmends that the Government s hould monitor the progress of the 
proposals received from the State Governments like  Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka, Nagaland and
West Bengal for setting up Mini Tool rooms a nd Training centres. The Government should also
persuade other State Governments to take initiative in this regard so as to spread the benefits at
macrolevel. 
  
CREDIT TO SSI SECTOR 
  
3.3       RECOMMENDATION  
  
  
            The Committee feels that the proce ss of liberalization has expose d the Small Scale Industries
(SSI) Sector to intensified compet ition both globally and dom estically.  In order to help building up the
capabilities of the units in the SSI sector to fa ce the emerging challenges, there has to be a furthe r
increase in the flow of financial assistance to facili tate additional capacity generation, expansion of the
existing units and improving thei r capacity utilization, diversif ication and to enhance the
competitiveness of the sector with a thrust on technology upgradation and modernization.  
(Para No. 6.8)
Action Taken 
  
3.3.1    As a result of globalisation/liberalizat ion of Indian economy since 1991 and recent WTO
agreements, the SSI Sector has been facing lot of competition and challenges from MNCs and the large
sector.  The solution to overcome these challenge s lies in technology upgradation, modernization,
emphasis on core competence and prom oting clusters/industrial estates.  To facilitate this, besides the
“Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme” of Small Industrie s Development Bank of India, Ministr y of
Page 27 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

SSI has launched a “Cred it Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme for Technology Upgradation” for SSIs, 
under which 12% capital subsi dy is admissible on the loans sanctioned to SSIs by Scheduled
Commercial banks/designated SFCs  for technology upgradation.  The Ministry of SSI has launched 6
National Programmes of Cluster Development with UNIDO assistance for Toys, Locks, Machine Tools,
Stone, Glass and  Hand Tools Industries. 
  
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.3.2    The Committee feels that th e Government should play a pro -active role in disseminating 
information on a regular basis a bout the technology upgradation sche mes. Loans disbursed under the
schemes should be increased and simp lified so that more people can ex tract the benefits of the schemes.
The Government should tie up with the foreign tec hnical firms to give a boost to the schemes and
technical know how. 
  
PROJECTS SCHEMES FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE NE AREAS AND SIKKIM 
  
3.4       RECOMMENDATION  
  
  
            The Committee is of the opinion that due to locational disadvantage  and peculiar set up of the
North Eastern region, industries which have set up for full fl edged establishments in the North Eastern
Region should be given the benefit of Excise Duty  exemption to generate employment in the region. 
The Committee notes that Finance Mini ster informed th e Rajya Sabha on 6 th May, 03 that some legal 
questions had arisen regarding chewing tobacco – The Finance Minister assured the House that he 
would take action after obtaining le gal advice in the matter.  The Committee observes that while giving
exemption to excise duty in the North East, the Government should s ee as to whether such units have
employment potential and consistent with our tobacco policy.  
 
(Para No.14.3)
  
Action Taken 
  
3.4.1    The matter has been taken up with Ministry of Finance. 
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.4.2    The Committee observes that in case of excise exemption not being tenable for the North Eastern 
Industries because excise exemption may disturb the whole tax structure, concessions in the form of 
some subsidy, may be provided to these industries, which are disadvantageously located but have the 
potential of ample employment generation for the people of industrially backward areas. 
             
LABOUR REFORMS IN SSIs 
  
3.5       RECOMMENDATION  
  
            The Committee therefore, recommends  that instead of a plethora of labour laws, a single unified
Act with simple provisions understandable by the entr epreneurs of SSI units be legislated.  SSI units
employing upto 50 persons should be  kept outside the purview of the labour law.  Instead of the
complex Industrial Disputes Act, a simpler law to govern the relationship between the Employer and the
Employee has to be made applicable.  The Shops and Establishments Act may also be suitably modified
Page 28 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

so as to adapt itself to the needs of the present day SSI sector.  
(Para No. 18.3)
  
Action Taken 
  
3.5.1    The Administrative Staff College of India (ASCI) Hyderabad has subm itted revised draft of a
Single Comprehensive Act i.e. Small Enterpri ses Development Bill 2003, after having wide r
consultations with the stake holders  and in consultation with Ministry  of SSI.  The Draft Bill is unde r
active consideration of the Minist ry of SSI. The Bill suggests stre amlining of inspections and reduction
of a large number of forms under various labour la ws.  In addition, the National Commission on Labou r
has recommended the enactment of a Small Ente rprises Employment Relati ons Act under which SSI
units employing upto 19 persons could be kept outside the purview of Labour Laws. 
  
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.5.2    The Committee further recommen ds that the Government shou ld expedite the action in
regard to the labour laws with th e suitable provisions incorporat e d  i n  i t  t o  s u i t  b o t h  t h e
entrepreneurs and labour. 
 
Page 29 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

CHAPTER-IV
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
  
SMALL INDUSTRIES DEVELOPMENT BANK OF INDIA (SIDBI) 
  
4.1       RECOMMENDATION  
  
            The Committee recommends that in order to initiate the activities of the proposed fund
(SIDBI’s Venture Capital Fund) and run th e same on sustainable basis, initiall y a fund support of 
Rs. 20 crore may be provided by the Government of India to Small Industries Development Bank
of India.  The Committee reiterates that the Income Tax Exemption ma y be provided to Small
Industries Development Bank of India as it is engaged in development of the small scale sector and
provide financial and support services to the SSIs with the help of existin g credit delivery system
and support service agencies. 
(Para No. 10.4)
 
Action Taken 
  
4.1.1    The Banking Division, Ministry of Finance examined the Recommendation of the Committee in
consultation with the Integrated Finance. They have informed that  foray into Venture Capital is a
commercial activity which has high ri sk and at the same time scope for high returns. This therefore,
cannot be termed as a social activity which need s Government support. SIDB I has been making profits
and has enough Reserves and Surplus for Venture Fund activities and therefore, needs no support in this
regard.   
  
4.1.2    The recommendation regardi ng restoration of tax exemption status of SIDBI was examined in
consultation with Central Board of  Direct Taxes.  Department of Revenue feels that exemptions from
Income Tax have become inconsistent with the pr esent day moderate tax-regime and are being phase d 
out as a matter of policy. Withdrawal of tax exem ption status to SIDBI was announced in the Budget
2001-02.  Subsequently though the issue was reviewed, tax exemption status was not restored, instead in
the Union Budget 2002-03, it was inter alia announced that capital gains exemption under Section 54 EC 
of the Income Tax Act would be available in respect of amounts invested in Bonds issued by the SIDBI. 
  
4.1.3    Furthermore, the activities carried out by SIDBI, include comm ercial activities such as direct
finance, bill finance, refinance, international finance, Capi tal Gain bonds/ FD and other Schemes with a
view to earn profits.  Notwithstanding its role in promotion of SSI Sector, the activities of SIDBI are not
in the nature of charitable  or non-profitable.  It is not out of pl ace to mention that SIDBI has earned net
profit of Rs. 405 crores and Rs. 315 crores respectively in the year s 2001-02 and 2002-03.  Considering 
all these aspects, it would not be possible to restore the tax exemption status enjoyed by SIDBI till 2000-
01.  
VALUE ADDED TAX 
  
4.2       RECOMMENDATION  
  
            The Committee however, feels that the Cent ral Government should establish a nodal 
agency, keeping in view the interest of SS Is in particular and industr y in general, in Ministr y of
Finance (preferabl y headed b y an officer not below the rank of Additional Secretar y) to
coordinate implementation of VAT in States.  There is a need to  list the operati ve problems in
interstate transactio ns, which could onl y be solved with the int ervention of the Central
Page 30 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

Government. 
(Para No. 11.3)
Action Taken 
  
4.2.1    The Central Government has already cons tituted an Empowered Co mmittee (EC) of State
Finance Ministers to take deci sions on Sales Tax reforms includi ng implementation of State VAT. As
per Entry 54 of the State List (List II) to the Sevent h Schedule of the Constituti on of India, taxes on the
sale or purchase of goods is a State Subject. Hence, the Central Government can only facilitate this tax
reform measure undertaken by the States themselves as  the concept of fiscal federalism as enshrined in
the Constitution has to be respecte d. The EC meetings are also at tended by senior officers of the
Department of Revenue, Mi nistry of Finance, wher e decisions are taken on th e basis of consensus. As
regards the need to list the opera tive problems in inter-S tate transactions, it is clarified that though 
Central Sales tax is a Central enact ment, the revenue generated by it is  entirely retained by the States as
enshrined in Article 269 of the Constitution. Hence, i ssues relating to inter-State tax are also discusse d 
in this Empowered Committee. Mini stry of Finance has informed that  establishment of a separate nodal
agency is not required. 
  
4.3       RECOMMENDATION  
  
            The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance s hould develop an extensive
information base in Ministry’s webs ite on VAT or a separate site alt ogether to solve confusion arising 
out of lack of updated information at one point.  
(Para No. 11.5) 
  
Action Taken 
  
4.3.1    As per Entry 54 of the State List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India, sales tax is
a State Subject. It is the State Governments who have unanimously decide d to introduce a value added
regime in lieu of the existing sales tax regime. Each State is expected to maintain an information system
in this regard. Ministry of Finance has informed  that there is no need to develop any extensive
information base in the web site of the Ministry of  Finance. However, they have mentione d that the
issue can be considered as and when a revised roadmap for Value Added Tax is prepared in consultation
with the Empowered Committee of State finance Ministers. 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A 
GLANCE 
  
                        The Committee further observes that Comp rehensive Policy Package was announced in
August, 2000 by the Hon’ ble Prime Minister should be monitored from time to time and lacunae in this
regard should be appropriately removed. The Committee also recommends that the involvement of  SSIs
in Policy formulation  should be done at the earliest. 
 
(Para No. 3.1.3)
  
            The Committee further recommends that the Government should monitor the progress of the
proposals received from the State Governments like  Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka, Nagaland and
West Bengal for setting up Mini Tool  roos and Training centres. Th e Government should also persuade
other State Governments to take initiative in this regard so as to spread the benefits at macrolevel. 
  
(Para No. 3.2.3)
             
Page 31 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

The Committee feels that the Government should play a pro-active role in disseminating information on 
a regular basis about the technology upgradation schemes. Loans disbursed under the schemes should be
increased and simplified so that ore people can ex tract the benefits of th e schemes. The Government
should tie up with the foreign technical firms to give a boost to the schemes and technical know how. 
(Para No. 3.3.2)
             
The Committee observes that in case of excise ex emption not being tenabl e for the North Eastern
Industries because excise exempti on may disturb the whole tax struct ure, Concessions in the form o f
some subsidy, may be provided to these industries which are disadvantageously  located but have the
potential of ample employment generation for the people of industrially backward areas. 
(Para No.3.4.3)
  
  
            The Committee further recommends th at the Government should expedite the action in regard to
the labour laws with the suitable provisions incor porated in it to suit both the entrepreneurs and thei r
labour. 
 
(Para No. 3.5.2)
MINUTES 
Page 32 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

XIV
Fourteenth Meeting 
  
          The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry met at 3.30 p.m. on 
Thursday, the 18th December, 2003 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi. 
  
  
PRESENT 
     Dr. P.C. Alexander              -- Chairman 
  
                        RAJYA SABHA 
  
2.                  Prof. M.M. Aggarwal 
3.                  Shri Faguni Ram 
4.                  Shri P.K. Maheshwari 
5.                  Shri KhanGhufran Zahidi 
6.                  Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
  
LOK SABHA 
  
7.                  Smt. Jayashree Banerjee 
8.                  Shri Nepal Chandra Das 
9.                  Shri K. Francis George 
10.              Shri Thomas Hansda 
11.              Shri A.C. Jose 
12.              Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
13.              Shri Sunil Khan 
14.              Shri Manjay Lal 
15.              Dr. K. Malaisamy 
16.              Shri P. Rajendran 
17.              Smt. D.M. Vijayakumari 
18.              Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
            Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary 
            Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary 
Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary 
Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer 
  
2.                  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee and 
recalled the work transacted by the Committee during the year 2003.  The Committee also took note
of the work transacted by the four Sub-Committees. 
  
3.                  The Committee then took up the following reports for its consideration:- 
  
Page 33 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

(i)                  130th Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in  Himachal Pradesh (Ministry of Small 
Scale Industries); 
(ii)                131st Report on constraints in Industrial Development of North Eastern Region
(Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises); 
(iii)               132nd Report on  MoU performance in respec t of PSUs of Power Sector (Ministry
of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises); 
(iv)              133rd Report on Action Taken by the Govern ment on Recommendations containe d
in the Committee’s 117 th Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry o f 
Small Scale Industries; 
(v)                134th Report on Action Taken by the G overnment on the Recommendations 
contained in the Committee’s 119 th Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) o f 
Department of Public Enterprises (M inistry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises); 
(vi)              135th Report on Action Taken by the G overnment on the Recommendations
contained in the Committee’s 120 th Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) o f 
Department of Heavy I ndustries (Ministry of H eavy Industries and Public
Enterprises); 
(vii)             136th Report on Action Taken by the Govern ment on Recommendations contained 
in the Committee’s 127 th Report on MoU performance in respect of PSUs o f 
Shipping Industry, (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises); 
(viii)           137th Report on Action Taken by the Gove rnment on Recomme ndations contained 
in Committee’s 122nd Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of Steel; 
(ix)              138th Report on Action Taken by the Govern ment on Recommendations contained 
in the Committee’s 111 th Report on Operational Efficiency and Survival of Alloy
Steel Plan ( ASP) Durgapur (Ministry of Steel); 
(x)                139th Report on Action Taken by the Govern ment on Recommendations containe d
in the Committee’s 125 th Report on Implementation St atus of Modernization
Expansion and Financial-cum-Business Re structuring Programme of SAIL at a 
Glance (Ministry of Steel); 
(xi)              140th Report on Action Taken by the Govern ment on Recommendations contained 
in the Committee’s 126 th Report on Revival of Nagaland Pulp and Paper Mills 
(Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises); 
(xii)             141st Report on Potential and Promotion of Coir Industries in West Bengal an d
Andaman and Nicobar (Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries); 
(xiii)           142nd Report Action Taken by the Government on Recomm endations contained in
the Committee’s 123 rd Report on Demands for Grants  (2003-04) of Ministry o f 
Mines; 
(xiv)           143rd Report on level Playing Field for the Capital Goods Indus tries (Ministry o f 
heavy Industries and Public Enterprises); and 
(xv)            144th Report on Action Taken by the Gove rnment on Recommendations containe d
in the Committee’s 124 th Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry o f 
Agro and Rural Industries. 
4.         The Chairman requested the Members to give any suggestion or change in the Report, i f
required.  After a brief discussion all the Reports were adopted.
Page 34 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm

  
5.         The Committee authorized Prof. M.M. A ggarwal and in his absence Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi,
members Rajya Sasbha, to present th e Reports to the Rajya Sabha.  It also authorized Smt. Jayashree
Banerjee and in his absence Shri  A.C. Jose, Members Lok Sabha, to present the Reports in the Lo k
Sabha on 22nd and 23rd December, 2003. 
  
  
6.                                 *                                    *                                            * 
  
7.         The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 p.m. 
***relates to other matters. 
             
             
             
  
 
Page 35 of 35133rd Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/133rdreport.htm