158th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/158threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:26]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY-EIGHTH REPORT
 
ON
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE COMMITTEE'S
143RD REPORT ON LEVEL PLAYING FIELD FOR THE INDIAN
CAPITAL GOODS INDUSTRY
(MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES)
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 17TH DECEMBER, 2004)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 17TH DECEMBER, 2004)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2004/AGRAHAYANA, 1926 (SAKA)
 
E-mail: rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
 
CONTENTS
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2. COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE-IV
3. INTRODUCTION
4. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
5. OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE ---- AT A
GLANCE
6. MINUTES
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
(Date of Constitution – 1st January, 2003)
   1.  Dr. P.C. Alexander     ––      Chairman
        RAJYA SABHA
   2.  Prof M.M. Agarwal
   3.  Shri Jayantilal Barot
   4.  Dr. M.N. Das
   5.  Shrimati Saroj Dubey
   6.  Dr. Faguni Ram
   7.  Shri Lajpat Rai
   8.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   9.  Shri P.K. Maheshwari

158th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/158threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:26]
10.  Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
11.  Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
12.  Shri S. Sivasubramanian
13.  Shrimati Sushree Devi
14.  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
15.  Shri K. Chandran Pillai
        LOK SABHA
16.  Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
17.  Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
18.  Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
19.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das
20.  Shri K Francis George
21.  Shri Thomas Hansda
22.  Md. Anwarul Haque
23.  Shri A.C. Jose
24.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
25.  Shri Mansoor Ali Khan
26.  Shri Sunil Khan
27.  Shri Deepak Kumar
28.  Shri Manjay Lal
29.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
30.  Shri A. Narendra
31.  Shri Ananta Nayak
32.  Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
33.  Shri Uttamrao Patil
34.  Shri Malyala Rajaiah
35.  Shri P. Rajendran
36.  Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
37.  Shri Tarachand Sahu
38.  Shri Ramanand Singh
39.  Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
40.  Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
41.  Shri V. Vetriselvan
42.  Shrimati D.M. Vijaya Kumar
43.  Shri Radha Mohan Singh
44.  Shri Vijay Sankeshwar
        SECRETARIAT
        Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
        Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
        Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
        Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
        Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
 
COMPOSITION OF PRESENT COMMITTEE
(Date of Constitution – 5
th August, 2004)
   1.  Shri Santosh Bagrodia––  Chairman
        RAJYA SABHA
   2.  Prof. M.M. Agarwal
   3.  Shri Surendra Lath
   4.  Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
   5.  Dr. K. Malaisamy

158th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/158threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:26]
   6.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   7.  Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
   8.  Dr. Vijay Mallya
   9.  Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
10.  Shrimati Vanga Geetha
        LOK SABHA
11.  Shri Guharam Ajgalle
12.  Shri Kailash Baitha
13.  Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
14.  Shri Subhash Deshmukh
15.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
16.  Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria
17.  Shri Sunil Khan
18.  Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato
19.  Shri Prakash Paranjpe
20.  Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel
21.  Shri Rajnarayan
22.  Shri Bagida Ramakrishna
23.  Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
24.  Shrimati Rubab Sayeda
25.  Shri Rana Gurjeet Singh
26.  Shri Manvendra Singh
27.  Shri Ganesh Singh
28.  Shri Suraj Singh
29.  Shri Chandramani Tripathi
30.  Shri Girdhari Yadav
31.  Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
        SECRETARIAT
        Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
        Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
        Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
        Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
        Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
 
COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE-IV FOR ACTION TAKEN REPORT
   1.  Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato  -----      Convenor
        RAJYA SABHA
   2.  Prof. M.M. Agarwal
   3.  Dr. Vijay Mallya
   4.  Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
   5.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
        LOK SABHA
   6.  Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria
   7.  Shri Sunil Khan
   8.  Shri Suraj Singh
 
INTRODUCTION
        I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having been authorised
by the Committee, hereby present this One Hundred fifty-eighth Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Committee’s 143rd Report on Level Playing Field for the Indian Capital Goods

158th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/158threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:26]
Industry (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises).
2.     The Committee examined and considered the Action Taken Notes supplied by the Government (Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises) on the recommendations contained in its 143rd Report on Level Playing Field for the
Indian Capital Goods Industry
3.     The Sub-committee-IV for the Action Taken Reports at its meeting held on 8th December, 2004 considered and
adopted the Report.
4.     The Committee at its meeting held on 9th December, 2004 considered and adopted the Report.
 
NEW DELHI
9th December, 2004
SANTOSH BAGRODIA
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry
 
REPORT
         The Present report is the Action Taken Report on the Action Taken Note received from the Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s 143rd Report on “Level
Playing Field for the Indian Capital Goods Industry”. The said report was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the
table of Lok Sabha on 23rd December, 2003.
2.      The Committee’s 143rd Report outlines the Government’s Exim  Policy in the context of the liberalization and
globalization process and the consequent impact on the domestic capital goods industries. In the early eighties, when
India’s economy was on an uptrend, there was need for investment in the infrastructure sector. Investment from within
India was not forthcoming mainly because of higher rate of interest and private sector risk aversions. Investment during
those years was mainly from multilateral/bilateral funding agencies. For judicious usage of these funds, the projects
were established under International Competitive Bidding procedures. Indian companies were also eligible to participate
in the bidding procedure. Overseas suppliers could enjoy soft export financing from their exim banking and other export
benefits prevailing in those countries. The Indian companies were also extended the duty free raw material imports and
refund of excise duty on their finished goods to have a level playing field. Supplies to such projects were termed as
Deemed Exports.
3.      The Industrial Policy of 1991 started the process of de-licensing. The process of de-regulation was aimed at
enlarging competition and allowing new firms to enter the markets. The market was opened up to domestic
entrepreneurs/industrialists, which was reserved for public sector undertakings, and foreign capital was provided free
entry up to 51% equity in high technology areas. With the advent of globalization, when World Bank-aided projects
started coming in the country, the lifting of import control and drastic reduction of import duties, competition from
overseas posed a problem to the domestic capital goods industry. It became difficult to stay in the race for this industry
in the face of stiff competition from the multinational giants.
4.      As a part of the commitment given to WTO, the peak rate of customs duty was to be brought down to a level
agreed with WTO in a time-bound manner and accordingly the rate of customs duty for the projects was also reduced
gradually. Project import duty for the power projects was settled at 20% and Nil CVD since 1992-93.  Since the import
tariffs were coming down, the domestic industry was facing tough competition from the foreign suppliers. Till the time
the customs duty was 20% with Nil CVD, the domestic industry was getting the refund of Terminal Excise Duty as most
of the projects were multilateral/bilateral funded projects. Later, as the economic conditions improved, the investment
started coming from within the country as well. Recognizing the importance of infrastructure projects in the area of
power and refinery sector, DGFT announced that the supplies to such projects will be treated as deemed exports, even if
these were not funded by multilateral/bilateral agencies. Therefore all the supplies to power projects were treated as
deemed exports w.e.f. 3lst March, 1997. In the absence of CVD on the direct import under Project Imports, there was no
level playing field for the, domestic industry, as these supplies were subjected to Excise Duty. Therefore, domestic
industry represented to the Government for refund of TED, which was permitted by DGFT form 18th October, 1996.
5       After l8th October, 1996, there were equal opportunities for the foreign suppliers and the domestic suppliers as the
imports were subjected to customs duty @ 22% with Nil CVD and domestic supplier was getting the refund of TED.

158th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/158threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:26]
This position remained unchanged till 28th February, 1999. During the period 1996-99, power projects attracted basic
customs duty of 20% with Nil CVD. The terminal excise duty paid by Indian manufacturers was refunded by the office
of DGFT. This provided protection of 20% to indigenous industry against the disadvantages suffered on account of sales
tax and other local levies on inputs/final product, higher cost of finance, infrastructure inadequacies etc.
6.      During the budget of 1999-2000, the customs duty was reduced to 5.5% from 22% but CVD was imposed @16%.
The overall impact on the imported goods was 22.38%: Therefore, this change in the duty structure had not impacted
much on the imports. Domestic suppliers continued to get the refund of TED in spite of imposition of CVD @ 16%. But
DGFT while announcing the Exim Policy effective from the year 2000, discontinued the refund of TED to the domestic
suppliers. Although the domestic suppliers were permitted duty free imports, the earlier gap between the foreign
supplier and domestic supplier, which was 22.38% reduced to 8.03% [22.38% - 16% + 1.65% (5.5% of the import
content of 30%)]. This gap has been further reduced to 7.45%, since the surcharge of customs duty is withdrawn [21.8%
- 16% + 1.65% (5% of import content of 30%)]. This has put the domestic suppliers in a disadvantageous position.
7.      It is pertinent to note that prior to 31st March, 2000 i.e. the date when refund of terminal excise duty was
withdrawn, domestic manufacturers have secured orders under international competitive bidding by passing on to the
customer the benefit of refund of TED as applicable in the Exim Policy. In case of power and fertilizer projects, where
the cycle time for competition is normally 3-4 years, the schedule for supply of capital goods is invariably 3 years. In
this category of projects, the domestic industry has been requesting the Central Government for refund of TED, which
was withdrawn on the supplies made from 1st April, 2000. It was mentioned that the domestic industry is suffering from
cost disadvantages like inadequate and high cost of infrastructure, higher cost of financing, sales tax, Octroi and other
taxes etc., which are of the tune of 14% to 23% depending upon the location of the project and the supplier.
8.      The Committee had been deliberating on the issue of refund of TED for a long time and it had given its
recommendations on the issue in its 36th, 45th and 59th reports. The Department of Heavy Industries in their Action
Taken Notes informed the Committee that the matter did not find favour of the DGFT on one or the other ground. The
Committee considered the Export-Import Policy announced on 31st March, 2000 which had withdrawn the refund of
Terminal Excise duty in case of fertilizer and power projects. This has created a situation where indigenous
manufacturers have been put to cost disadvantage compared to foreign suppliers. Domestic manufacturers suffer
inherent cost disadvantages to the extent of 18% to 28% of the equipment price on account of sales tax and other local
levies on inputs/final product, higher cost of finance, infrastructure inadequacies etc. indigenous manufacturer is
allowed to import its inputs at zero duty under deemed export scheme instead of 5% applicable for direct imports by the
project authorities. Assuming an import content of 40%, this gives an advantage of only 2%. After taking into account
4% (effective 4.64%) Central Sales Tax applicable on indigenous supplies and exemption of Special Additional Duty
(SAD) on direct imports, there is negative protection of 2.64% on account of customs duties alone.
9.      The Committee in its 143rd Report underlined the fact that one of the objectives of Exim  Policy was to provide
consumers with good quality goods and services at internationally competitive prices while at the same time a level
playing field for the domestic players. The Government provided a level playing field for the domestic producers and
therefore, wherever, the domestic producers secure orders even from within India, such suppliers were treated as
Deemed Exports, provided such orders were secured through International Competitive Bidding procedure. Deemed
Exports were eligible for all benefits in respect of manufacture and supply of goods.
10.    All power projects are entitled to get (i) advance license and Deemed Exports, (ii) Deemed Exports drawback and
(iii) Refund of Terminal Excise Duty (TED). But, domestic suppliers in power projects with domestic funding are
getting only first two benefits. Prior to 1st April, 2000, such suppliers were getting many more benefits. With the
announcement of Exim Policy on lst April, 2000 the refund of Terminal Excise Duty (TED) was discontinued with the
reduction of Basic Custom Duty (BCD) and imposition of CVD. Such mid term policy changes resulted in either the
manufacturer/supplier absorbing substantial loss or project cost substantially going up. When the matter was taken up
with DGFT, they maintained that changes effected in the Exim  Policy came into affect immediately and all supplies
effected from 1st April, 2000 were not entitled for  Terminal Excise Duty (TED).
11.    The Committee in the 143rd report observed that the basic concept of Exim  Policy was to provide a level playing
field between domestic supplier and foreign supplier. It started from those projects which were funded by multilateral
agencies where items were allowed under zero duty to give the domestic suppliers a level playing field so that they can
compete with the foreign companies. But in the light of Chaturvedi  Report, BCD was brought down from, 20% to 5%
and CVD was introduced 16% and TED was withdrawn. CVD was the protection given to domestic industry over and

158th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/158threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:26]
above 5% BCD. The industries are supposed to have a built in cushion of 5% and they are getting the deemed export
benefit. But there are certain inefficiencies and bottlenecks in our systems. The domestic industries have to pay various
taxes to the State Governments and they have some legacies of the past in the form of townships, which are social
obligations, and the cost of this in our country is very high. These disadvantages are not neutralized. The Committee felt
that some sort of balance is to be stuck to neutralize the disadvantage faced by the domestic industries. The Committee
observed in that Report that Government should see how domestic industry would survive in the present globalised
world. The Government had to see the interest of domestic industries as compared to the foreign companies.
Government should also look into the matter relating to the local taxes domestic industry has to pay.
12.0  After presentation of 143rd Report to Parliament the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises were
requested to furnish the Action Taken Replies on the Committee’s recommendations contained in that Report. The
Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises have not furnished the Action Taken Notes para-wise as under along
with Committee’s further observations/recommendations thereon.
Recommendation
Refund of Terminal Excise Duty
12.1  If a contract has been awarded earlier and if the Government make any changes in policy, the whole contract
remains in dispute. This makes the projects very difficult. The Committee, therefore, recommends that whenever change
is made in the EXIM Policy, it should be for the prospective contracts.
(Para 6.15)
12.2  Since disadvantage forced by the domestic industries due to mid-term policy change, the Committee recommends
that where orders/letters of intent has been placed before 31st March, 2000 for power and fertilizer projects, the
provision of EXIM Policy of 1999-2000 may be made applicable to allow refund of Terminal Excise Duty.
(Para 6.16)
Action Taken
12.3  As directed by the Sub-committee-III of Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, a
Committee of Secretaries was constituted to look into the issue of Refund of Terminal Excise Duty (TED), which
considered the matter and referred it to Department of Revenue.
12.4  The recommendations of the Committee in the above paras were referred to the DGFT and Department of
Revenue. DGFT have commented that no further action is due on their part and it is for the Department of Revenue to
reconsider the matter. The comments of Department of Revenue are awaited.
Further recommendation
12.5  The Committee reiterates its stand that the change in the EXIM policy should have the prospective effect. Giving
effect the change in the EXIM policy the retrospective implementation had amounted to change the rule of the game in
the mid -course. It was the retrospective implementation of the changes ‘in the EXIM policy which adversely affected
the PSUs like BHEL in the completion of its projects. That is why the Committee recommended in its 143rd Report that
if a contract has been awarded earlier and if the Government make any change in the EXIM policy at later stage it
should be for the prospective contracts.
12.6  The Committee is of the view that Government should review its policy of giving duty concessions to the foreign
companies in as much as it leads to disadvantages to the domestic companies especially the PSUs. It is the considered
view of the Committee that foreign companies should not be shown favour at the expense of domestic companies.
DGFT should consider, as special case, to issue notification for refund of terminal excise duty for projects ordered/bids
under International Competitive Bidding prior to 1st April, 2000.
12.7  The Committee reiterates its recommendation as made in 59th Report that DGFT should also issue notification for
refund of terminal excise duty for projects ordered/bid under International Competitive Bidding (ICB) prior to lst April,
2000 when such a refund was allowed under the extant EXIM Policy but withdrawn subsequently. In such a situation,
where customers are neither agreeable to re­negotiate the prices to compensate the manufacturers, nor are they ready to
pay the applicable excise duty, the refund of terminal excise duty for at least these projects which were ordered/Letters
of Intent (LOI) placed before 1st April, 2000 under ICB must be allowed under a special notification.
12.8  The Committee therefore, recommends that the Department of Revenue should reconsider the matter and

158th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/158threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:26]
accordingly issue guidelines to DGFT that where orders/letters of intent has been placed before 31.03.2000 for power
and fertilizer projects, the provision of EXIM policy of 1999-2000 may be made applicable to allow refund of Terminal
Excise Duty.
Recommendation
l3.     Uniform duty structure
13.1  The Committee in its 143rd Report recommended that the duty structure should be rationalized as under :
-     Custom Duty 20%
-     CVD - Nil
-     With corresponding refund of TED to the domestic supplies.
13.2  The Committee finally recommends that Government should have taken into account the recommendations made
by this Committee while doing the budget exercise (2004-05) and provide a level playing field for the Indian Capital
Goods Industry.
Action Taken
13.3  On the basis of request made by BHEL and Industry Associations, this Department had requested Ministry of
Finance for a uniform duty structure for supplies of Heavy Electricals  Equipments to Power, Gas, Oil, Fertilizer, etc.
sector projects as under :­-
Custom duty = 15%; CVD = NIL; SAD = Equal to Sales tax
13.4  Subsequently, the Government announced certain significant changes in the indirect tax rates modifying the basic
custom duty and SAD effective from 9.1.2004. The revised rates have an adverse effect on the domestic industries in the
Heavy Electrial Sector including BHEL. The gist of announcement of Government and its impact on BHEL are
enumerated below :
Changes announced by the Govt.                                                            Impact
Peak basic customs duty rate  Imports shall become cheaper.
reduced from 25% to 20%.  Marginal positive impact on the imports of  inputs.
  Overall, the domestic Capital Goods industry
  competitiveness vis-a-vis foreign supplier shall
  get negatively affected for products.
All goods exempted from special  Imports shall become cheaper.
additional duty (SAD) of customs of  Marginal positive impact on the imports of
4%.  inputs.
  However, SAD was already not levied on Power project
imports. Rather, BHEL were requesting
  for levy of SAD on Power project imports to offset the sales
tax which the domestic manufacturers are subjected to.
  Removal of SAD will thus impact negatively on
  all domestic companies.
The basic customs duty on captive Imports shall become cheaper.
power plants (CPP) of 5 MW or Peak Customs Duty rate under project import
more reduced from 25% to 20%.  has been reduced from 25% to 20%.
The basic customs duty on project In fact, the above-mentioned customs duty @
imports has been reduced from 25%  20% becomes redundant as an importer can
to 10% in case of all projects  very well import @ 10%, i.e. at a lower duty
(including ongoing projects) with an  rate, under this scheme. In this context, BHEL
investment of at least Rs. 5 crores in  have most of its projects in this category and
plant and machinery (excluding land  their competitiveness shall be highly affected
and buildings) e.g. for CPP.  as effective duty rate has now been made 10%
  compared to 30.8% as applicable earlier.

158th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/158threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:26]
 
13.5  The above modifications announced by the Ministry of Finance indicate that our suggestion regarding duty
structure have not been considered favourably by the Ministry of Finance.
Further recommendation
13.6  The Committee understands that the basic concept of EXIM policy is to provide a level playing field between
domestic supplier and foreign supplier. The Committee is of the view that Government should see how domestic
industry would survive in the present globalised  world. The Government has to see the interest of domestic industries
compared to the foreign companies. The Government should also look into the matter relating to the local taxes
domestic industry has to pay. Because the domestic industries have to pay various taxes to the State Governments and
they have some legacies of the past in the form of townships, which are social obligations,  and the cost of this in our
country is very high. These disadvantages are not neutralized. The Committee feels that some sort of balance is to be
struck to neutralize the disadvantage faced by the domestic industries.
13.7  The Committee is constrained to note that the suggestion of the Committee for rationalization of duty structure i.e.
20% Custom duty, nil CVD and corresponding refund of TED to the domestic suppliers in order to provide a level
playing field for the Indian capital goods industry could not receive the attention of the Ministry of Finance. The
Committee notes the announcement of changes in the indirect tax modification in the basic custom duty and SAD w.e.f.
9th January, 2004 and its adverse impact on the domestic industries in the heavy electrical sectors including BHEL. The
Committee notes the observation of the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises that the reduction of peak
basic custom duty rate from 25% to 20% would adversely affect the domestic capital goods industry’s competitiveness
vis-a-vis foreign suppliers. The basic customs duty on project imports has been reduced from 25% to 10% in case of all
projects (including ongoing projects) with an investment of at least Rs. 5 crores in plant and machinery (excluding land
and buildings) e.g. for CPP. The basic customs duty on captive power plants (CPP) of 5 MW or more reduced from 25
% to 20%. In fact, customs duty @ 20% becomes redundant as an importer can very well import @ 10%, i.e. at a lower
duty rate, under this scheme. BHEL has most of its projects in this category and their competitiveness shall be highly
affected as effective duty rate has now been made 10% compared to 30.8% as applicable earlier.
13.8  The Committee reiterates its observation as made in its 36th Report as under:­
“BHEL has successfully withstood the changes brought about by the liberalization of Indian economy. The impressive
track record of it calls for a special mention of its achievements. As a matter of fact, BHEL is a role model for other
PSUs of Ministry of Heavy Industry. For it has managed to stay in the race despite the odds faced by it as a result of
stiff competition unleashed by the multinational giants operating in its field of specialization namely, manufacture of
power plants. Though BHEL has managed to sustain its viability yet it is facing some unfair challenges. The absence of
a level playing field vis-a-vis its multinational competitors has been posing stiff challenges to the company. This is
leading to an ever-increasing pressure on its profitability. Despite this, the company has been constantly upgrading its
technology and has also been successful in acquiring state of the art technology used in HVDC power projects. This
reflects the commitments of the company as a whole to serve the nation even when the odds are stacked against it.
Therefore, what this company requires is a little help from the Government in the form of suitable policy measures. In
this regard, the sub-committee draws the attention of the Government to the issues of price and purchase preference to
BHEL, and import duty concessions to the foreign companies. Though in some cases price and purchase preference is
granted to the PSUs , the positive results of this measure are negated by the import duty concessions extended to the
foreign companies by the Government. These concessions and exemptions are precisely the reasons for the playing field
not being level for domestic companies or for that matter PSUs as the bids offered by foreign players are much lower in
comparison to the ones offered by PSUs . In other words, the competition is killed well before it begins. The committee
believes that the need of the hour is not to go back to the days of protectionism rather to provide a level playing field to
all the players for the sake of healthy competition.”
13.9  Keeping in view the case study of BHEL, the Committee recommends that the Government should review its
policy of giving duty concessions to the foreign companies in as much as it leads to disadvantages to the domestic
companies especially the PSUs. It is the considered view of the committee that foreign companies should not be shown
favour at the expense of domestic companies. Under the circumstances, the Committee further recommends that the
Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises should assess the impact of existing tax structure on the Capital
Goods Industry and the suitable and sustainable tax structure for the Capital Goods Industry and continue to impress

158th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/158threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:26]
upon the Ministry of Finance for yielding to provide a level playing field for the revitalization and revival of Capital
Goods Industry.
 
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMEDATIONS OF THE
COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE
REFUND OF TERMINAL EXCISE DUTY
         The Committee reiterates its stand that the change in the EXIM policy should have the prospective effect. Giving
effect the change in the EXIM policy the retrospective implementation had amounted to change the rule of the game in
the mid -course. It was the retrospective implementation of the changes in the EXIM policy which adversely affected
the PSUs like BHEL in the completion of its projects. That is why the Committee recommended in its 143rd Report that
if a contract has been awarded earlier and if the Government make any change in the EXIM policy at later stage it
should be for the prospective contracts.                                                                                                    (Para 12.5)
         The Committee is of the view that Government should review its policy of giving duty concessions to the foreign
companies in as much as it leads to disadvantages to the domestic companies especially the PSUs. It is the considered
view of the Committee that foreign companies should not be shown favour at the expense of domestic companies.
DGFT should consider, as special case, to issue notification for refund of terminal excise duty for projects ordered/bids
under International Competitive Bidding prior to 1.4.2000.                                                                          (Para 12.6)
         The Committee reiterates its recommendation as made in 59th Report that DGFT should also issue notification for
refund of terminal excise duty for projects ordered/bid under International Competitive Bidding (ICB) prior to lst April,
2000 when such a refund was allowed under the extant EXIM Policy but withdrawn subsequently. In such a situation,
where customers are neither agreeable to re­negotiate the prices to compensate the manufacturers, nor are they ready to
pay the applicable excise duty, the refund of terminal excise duty for at least these projects which were ordered/Letters
of Intent (LOI) placed before 1st April, 2000 under ICB must be allowed under a special notification.(Para 12.7)
         The Committee therefore, strongly recommends that the Department of Revenue should reconsider the matter and
accordingly issue guidelines to DGFT that where orders/letters of intent has been placed before 31.03.2000 for power
and fertilizer projects, the provision of EXIM policy of 1999-2000 may be made applicable to allow refund of Terminal
Excise Duty.                                                                                                                             (Para 12.8)
         The Committee understands that the basic concept of EXIM policy is to provide a level playing field between
domestic supplier and foreign supplier. The Committee is of the view that Government should see how domestic
industry would survive in the present globalised  world. The Government has to see the interest of domestic industries
compared to the foreign companies. The Government should also look into the matter relating to the local taxes
domestic industry has to pay. Because the domestic industries have to pay various taxes to the State Governments and
they have some legacies of the past in the form of townships, which are social obligations,  and the cost of this in our
country is very high. These disadvantages are not neutralized. The Committee feels that some sort of balance is to be
struck to neutralize the disadvantage faced by the domestic
industries.                                                                                                       (Para 13.6)
         The Committee is constrained to note that the suggestion of the Committee for rationalization of duty structure i.e.
20% Custom duty, nil CVD and corresponding refund of TED to the domestic suppliers in order to provide a level
playing field for the Indian capital goods industry could not receive the attention of the Ministry of Finance. The
Committee notes the announcement of changes in the indirect tax modification in the basic customs duty and SAD with
effect from 9
th January, 2004 and its adverse impact on the domestic industries in the heavy electrical sectors including
BHEL. The Committee notes the observation of the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises that the
reduction of peak basic customs duty rate from 25% to 20% would adversely affect the domestic capital goods
industry’s competitiveness vis-a-vis foreign suppliers. The basic customs duty on project imports has been reduced from
25% to 10% in case of all projects (including ongoing projects) with an investment of atleast  Rs. 5 crores in plant and
machinery (excluding land and buildings) e.g. for CPP. The basic customs duty on captive power plants (CPP) of 5 MW
or more reduced from 25 % to 20%. In fact, customs duty @ 20% becomes redundant as an importer can very well
import @ 10%, i.e. at a lower duty rate, under this scheme. BHEL has most of its projects in this category and their
competitiveness shall be highly affected as effective duty rate has now been made 10% compared to 30.8% as
applicable earlier.                                                     (Para 13.7)

158th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/158threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:26]
         Keeping in view the case study of BHEL, the Committee recommends that the Government should review its
policy of giving duty concessions to the foreign companies in as much as it leads to disadvantages to the domestic
companies especially the PSUs. It is the considered view of the committee that foreign companies should not be shown
favour at the expense of domestic companies. Under the circumstances, the Committee further recommends that the
Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises should assess the impact of existing tax structure on the Capital
Goods Industry and the suitable and sustainable tax structure for the Capital Goods Industry and continue to impress’
upon the Ministry of Finance for yielding to provide a level playing field for the revitalization and revival of Capital
Goods Industry.     (Para 13.9)
 
MINUTES
I
MINUTES OF THE MEETING
         The Sub-Committee-IV for Action Taken Reports (of Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Industry) met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 8
th December, 2004 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New
Delhi.
         PRESENT
   1.   Shri Santosh Bagrodia        —      Chairman
   2.   Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato  —      Convenor
         RAJYA SABHA
   3.   Prof. M.M. Aggarwal - Convenor
   4.   Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
   5.   Dr. K. Malaisamy
         LOK SABHA
   6.   Shri Sunil Khan
         SECRETARIAT
         Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
         Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
         Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
         Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
2.      At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the Chairman of the Committee and Members of the
Sub-Committee-IV to the meeting. The Sub-Committee, thereafter, took up the following Reports for consideration:-
(i)    154
th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 129 th
Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in the Regions of Delhi, Noida and Ghaziabad (Ministry of Small
Scale Industries).
 (ii)   155
th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s
130th Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in Himachal Pradesh (Ministry of Small Scale Industries).
(iii)   156th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 131st
Report on constraints in Industrial Development of North Eastern Region (Ministry of Heavy Industries and
Public Enterprises).
(iv)   157
th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 141st
Report on Potential of Coir Industries in West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar (Ministry of Agro and
Rural Industries).
(v)   158
th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 143 rd
Report on Level Playing Field for the Indian Capital Goods Industry (Ministry of Heavy Industries and
Public Enterprises).
th

158th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/158threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:26]
(vi)   159  Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s
145th Report on Problem being faced by Small Scale Industries in the Procurement of Steel (Ministry of
Small Scale Industries).
3.      After a brief discussion, all the above reports were adopted by the Sub-Committee.
4.      The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M.
 
X
TENTH MEETING
         The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 9 th
December, 2004 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
         PRESENT
   1.   Shri Santosh Bagrodia      —        Chairman
         RAJYA SABHA
   2.   Prof. M.M. Agarwal
   3.   Shri Surendra Lath
   4.   Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
   5.   Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   6.   Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
   7.   Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
         LOK SABHA
   8.   Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
   9.   Shri Subhash Desmukh
10.   Shri Sunil Khan
11.   Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato
12.   Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel
13.   Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
14.   Shri Ganesh Singh
15.   Shri Chandramani Tripathi
16.   Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
         SECRETARIAT
         Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
         Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
         Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
2.      At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting. The Committee, thereafter,
took up following Reports for consideration :
(i)    154
th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 129 th
Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in the Regions of Delhi, Noida and Ghaziabad (Ministry of Small Scale
Industries).
(ii)    155 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 130 th
Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in Himachal Pradesh (Ministry of Small Scale Industries).
(iii)   156th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 131 st
Report on constraints in Industrial Development of North Eastern Region (Ministry of Heavy Industries and
Public Enterprises).
(iv)   157
th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 141 st
Report on Potential of Coir Industries in West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar (Ministry of Agro and Rural
Industries).

158th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/158threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:26]
(v)   158th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 143 rd
Report on Level Playing Field for the Indian Capital Goods Industry (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises).
(vi)   159th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 145th
Report on Problem being faced by Small Scale Industries in the Procurement of Steel (Ministry of Small Scale
Industries).
3.      After a brief discussion, all the reports were adopted by the Committee without any modification and decided to
present / lay from 154th to 156th Reports on 16th December 2004 and from 157 th to 159th Reports on the following day
i.e. 17th December, 2004.
4.      The Chairman, then, nominated Prof. M.M. Agarwal, in his absence Shri Surendra Lath, and in their absence of
Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra for Rajya Sabha and Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato and in his absence Shri Sunil Khan for Lok
Sabha for presenting / laying 154th to 156th Reports to both the Houses of the Parliament on 16 th December, 2004. The
Chairman nominated Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy and in his absence Shri Suresh Bhardwaj and in their absence of Dr. K.
Malaisamy in Rajya Sabha and Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria and in his absence Shri Swadesh Chakraborty in Lok Sabha for
presenting / laying 157 th to 159 th Reports of the Committee to both the Houses of the Parliament on 17 th December,
2004.
5.      The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M.
 