 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
July, 2013/Ashadha, 1935 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
24 5 
TWO HUNDRED AND FORTY FIFTH REPORT 
ON 
REVIEW THE IMPLEMENTATION OF MICRO, SMALL 
AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES DEVELOPMENT ACT, 2006 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES 
 
               (PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 23.07.2013) 
             (FORWARDED TO HON’BLE SPEAKER LOK SABHA ON 23.07.2013) 
PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 06.08.2013 
LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 06.08.2013 

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
July, 2013/Ashadha, 1935 (Saka) 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND FORTY FIFTH REPORT 
ON 
REVIEW THE IMPLEMENTATION OF MICRO, SMALL 
AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES DEVELOPMENT ACT, 2006 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO,SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES 
                
               (PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 23.07.2013) 
             (FORWARDED TO HON’BLE SPEAKER LOK SABHA ON 23.07.2013) 
PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 06.08.2013 
LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 06.08.2013 
 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
                                                                                                               PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …………………………………………  ( i ) 
 
2. INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………   (ii) 
 
3. REPORT ……………………………………………………………………………    
 
4. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE – AT A  
    GLANCE…………………………………………………………………………… 
 
5. MINUTES………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
           (CONSTITUTED  W.E.F.  31 ST   AUGUST,  2012) 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
1.   Shri Tiruchi Siva   — Chairman  
2. Shri Narendra Budania 
3.   Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
4.   Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
5.   Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor 
6.   Shri Basawaraj Patil 
7.   Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel 
8.   Shri Vivek Gupta 
9.   Shri Nandamuri Harikrishna 
10. Shri M.P. Achuthan   
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
11.   Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala 
12.   Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
13. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
14. Smt. Poonamben Veljibhai Jat 
15. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
16. Shri Hassan Khan 
17. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
18. Shrimati Ingrid Mcleod 
19. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal 
20. Shri Somen Mitra 
21. Shri P.R. Natrajan 
22. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey 
23. Shri Jayaram Pangi  
24. Shri R. K. Singh Patel 
25. Shri B. Y. Raghavendra 
26. Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
27. Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
28. Ch. Lal Singh 
29. Shri Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
30. Shri E.G. Sugavanam  
31. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.      Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary 
2.      Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
3.      Shri Roshan Lal, Joint Director 
4.      Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 
(i) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamen tary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred 
and Forty Fifth Report on Review the implementation  of Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises Development Act, 2006 pertaining to Min istry of Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises. 
 
2.  The Committee heard the representatives of Mini stry of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises, organizations under the adminis trative control of Ministry of 
MSME and received valuable inputs from select MSME Associations on the issue.   
 
3.  The Committee in its meeting held on 2
nd  July, 2013 considered and adopted the 
report. 
 
 
 
 
 
TIRUCHI SIVA        
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
 
 
New Delhi,  
July, 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report  
 
The MSME Sector accounts for 45% of the country’s m anufacturing output, 40% 
of the exports and 8% of our GDP. The 26 million enterprises employing some 60 million 
people, have investment to the tune of Rs. 6.89 lak h crores, yet about 94% remain 
unregistered with large number of them being establ ished in unorganized and informal 
sector. The Report of Prime Minister’s Task Force o n MSME brings out the  largest 
significant of MSMEs for economy and states :  
 
“….   The labour to capital ratio in MSMEs and the over all growth in the MSME 
sector is much higher than in the large industries.  The geographic distribution of 
the MSMEs is also more even. Thus, MSMEs are import ant for the national 
objectives of growth with equity and inclusion. 
 
…. The MSME sector in India is highly heterogeneous  in terms of the size of the 
enterprises, variety of products and services produ ced and the levels of 
technology employed. While one end of the MSME spec trum contains highly 
innovative and high growth enterprises, more than 9 4 per cent of MSMEs are 
unregistered, with a large number established in th e informal or unorganized 
sector.”  
 
2. Until 2006, the small scale industries sector wa s being regulated by two sections 
of Industries (Development & Regulation) Act, 1951.  There was absence of an 
institutional regulatory and consultative mechanism  to capture and guide the organic 
progress of the sector from a micro enterprise to s mall scale enterprise to eventually a 
medium scale one. It also excluded the fast emergin g service sector. It was therefore 
considered essential to provide an exclusive legisl ation for the micro, small and medium 
enterprises. Such Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on 12 
th  May, 2005 and was referred 
to this Committee. The Committee had held extensive  consultations on the provisions of 
the legislation which  included provisions pertaining – 
 
• statutory definitions of “small enterprise” and “medium enterprise”; 
• establishment of a National Small and Medium Enterp rises Board, a high-level 
forum consisting of stakeholders for participative review of and making  
 
• recommendations on the policies and programmes for the development of small 
and medium enterprises; 
 
• Classification of small and medium enterprises on the basis of investment in plant 
and machinery, or equipment  
 
• establishment of an Advisory Committee to recommend on the related matter; 
 
• The Act also sought to empower the Central Governme nt to notify programmes, 
guidelines or instructions for facilitating the pro motion and development and 
enhancing the competitiveness of small and medium enterprises; 
 
 
 

• The Act  also made provisions for ensuring timely a nd smooth flow of credit to 
small and medium enterprises to minimize the incide nce of sickness among and 
enhancing the competitiveness of such enterprises; 
 
• The Act also provided that the Central and State Go vernments may notify 
preference policies in respect of procurement of goods and services, produced and 
provided by small enterprises, by the Ministries, d epartments and public sector 
enterprises; 
 
• The Bill had a provision for the Central Government to create a Fund or Funds for 
facilitating promotion and development and enhancin g the competitiveness of  
small enterprises and medium enterprises; 
 
• It made further improvements to ensure timely payme nts to Small Scale 
enterprises.  
 
3. The Committee had acknowledged that the Bill was  an important and forward 
looking initiative. In its discussions with various  stake-holders, Industry associations and 
representatives of State Governments, there was gen eral approval for the Bill. In its 
Report to the Parliament, the Committee made follow ing recommendations for the 
Government:  
 
“…. certain States and industry associations sought  greater elaboration of the 
provisions of Bill particularly on the enabling Cla uses for promotion, 
development and enhancement of competitiveness of t he tiny, small and medium 
enterprises.   
 
….the Ministry of SSI should hold wide consultation s with the industry 
associations and State Governments while framing th e rules, so as to incorporate 
the views of the State Governments who shall be exe cuting the provisions of the 
Bill.  
 
….Having formulated the enabling rules, the Ministr y should continue to monitor 
their execution by agencies at local level and shou ld ensure that the agencies 
evolve processes / procedures that are simple and i n consonance with the 
objectives of the Act.  
 
….in order to encourage tiny, small  and medium ent erprises to adhere to 
pollution control norms, as per the Order dated the  10 
th  December 1997 of the 
Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion, the cost of pollution control and 
R&D devices should not be included while calculatin g the investments in plant 
and machinery. Similar exemption should be made wit h respect to industrial 
safety devices to promote such units to adopt industrial safety norms.  
 
… The Industrial Facilitation Council should evolve  into an effective forum of 
arbitration, to resolve the issue of delayed paymen ts to small and tiny enterprises, 
conferred with sufficient mandate to execute its aw ard, appeal against which 
could be filed only in the High Court of the State where IFC is located” 
 

 
4. The Act was passed and notified on 16 th  June 2006. The Act provided advisory 
and regulatory framework and had enabling provision s which needed subordinate 
legislations in form of Rules, Regulation and polic ies on the part of Union and State 
Governments.   
 
5. After passage of six years of the notification o f the MSME Development Act, 
2006, the Committee decided to review the implement ation of the Act in July, 2012. The 
Committee held four meetings on the subject on 6 
th  July, 13 th  July, 20 th  July and 27 th  July, 
2012 with the representatives of select industry associations and the representatives of the 
Ministry of MSME. The Committee also received a lar ge number of written 
representations. The Ministry of MSME was asked to furnish their comments on the 
suggestions made by the representatives of  industry associations.  
 
6. In its written submission to the Committee, the Ministry of MSME informed that 
in order to provide greater efficacy to some import ant provisions of the MSMED Act 
particularly in respect of delayed payments,  a pro posal to amend the relevant Sections of 
the Act was under consideration. It also submitted that in pursuance of different 
provisions of the Act the Government has been issui ng periodic notifications regarding 
operationalisation of the Act from 2 
nd  October 2006, constitution of National Board of 
MSME and Advisory Committee, classification of the micro, small and medium 
enterprises and exclusion of items while calculatin g the investment in plant and 
machinery. The Government has also notified the aut hority in the States/UTs with whom 
the medium enterprises are to be registered and the Format of memorandum to be filed by 
the micro, small and medium enterprises. The Govern ment has also notified rules for 
National Board of Micro, Small and Medium Enterpris es. However,  the Committee 
notes that the National Board of MSME had so far he ld only nine meetings at 
random intervals as against the statutory requireme nt of one meeting every three 
months.  The  Committee also  expresses reservation over the proposal to amend th e 
relevant Section of the Act which provides for quar terly meetings of the Board and 
placing it under the Rules which would fall within the scope of subordinate 
legislation.  The Committee unable to comprehend the rationale be hind such 
proposal.  It only reinforces the apprehension that the role of statutory Board would 
be further diluted.  The Committee strongly recomme nds for creating a Monitoring 
Cell for Delayed Payment in office of the Development Commissioner, MSME.   
 
7. In addition, the Advisory Committee set up under  Section 7 (2) of the Act too has 
discussed the issue of modifications in Entrepreneu rs Memoranda, issue related to 4 
th  
MSME Census and the prospects of separate SME Exchange.  
 
8. The Committee was also informed that the Governm ent has issued notifications 
regarding filing of Entrepreneurs Memorandum by the Medium Enterprises under Section 
8 of the Act. The State Governments are expected to  issue notifications in respect of 
small and micro enterprises. The Committee notes that the number of enterprises who 
had filed memoranda has increased exponentially from about 1.75 lakh in 2007-08  
 
 
 
 

 
to 2.82 lakh in 2011-12. However, the Committee obs erves reduction in number of 
registrations in successive years in case of certai n States. The Committee would like 
to explore the reasons for such reduction.  
 
9. The Committee was informed that as per the Secti on 11 Act, the Government has 
notified Procurement preference policy in March 201 2, wherein minimum 20% of 
procurement of annual requirement of goods and serv ices by all the Central 
Ministries/Departments/PSUs from MSEs, of which 4% should be sourced from the 
enterprises owned by SC/ST entrepreneurs.  
 
10. The Committee observes that the said notification does not cover the 
Autonomous organizations/Societies/ Trusts/Institut ions/ Universities and other 
Government aided organizations under the various Ce ntral Government 
Ministries/Departments. The Committee also wonders if the notification includes the 
Constitutional bodies.  The Committee recommends that the said notification  should 
include such institutions. The Committee also recom mends that the Central 
Government should persuade the State Governments to  adopt similar policies, for 
which Government can use the National Board as a fo rum where State 
Governments are also represented by rotation.  
 
11  The Committee recommends that like the Central Ministries/Departments/PSUs, 
the private sector companies should also procure a minimum of 20% of annual 
requirements of goods and services from MSEs. 
 
12. Section 20 of the Chapter V of the Act provide for the establishment of Micro and 
Small Enterprises Facilitation Council (MSEFCs) by the State Government. The Central 
Government had formulated and circulated to the States, the model rules regarding filling 
up of the vacancies of such Councils and for discha rging their functions. The Committee 
was informed that while 34 States and Union Territo ries had notified the rules, 34 
States/UTs had set up such Facilitation Councils. The Committee takes note of the 
performance of the Facilitation Councils in States. It is rather strange that in certain  
States/UTs no fresh cases were filed during year 20 11-12. Also there is large 
pendency of cases and disposal rate is rather slow.  This is clear violation of Section 
18 (5) of the Act which make disposal of references  within Ninety days, obligatory. 
The Committee also apprehends that decline in the f iling of fresh cases may be due 
to dwindling faith in the efficacy of this mechanis m. The Committee therefore 
suggests that the rate of disposal of cases should be faster. Further, it appears that 
as per Section 19 the supplier does not have right to appeal against the Award given 
by an IFC.  Considering that the IFC do not have po wers to enforce the award, the 
suppliers too should have the right to appeal.  It also reiterates its previous 
recommendation that “The Industrial Facilitation Co uncil should evolve into an 
effective forum of arbitration, to resolve the issu e of delayed payments to small and 
tiny enterprises, conferred with sufficient mandate  to execute its award, appeal 
against which could be filed only in the High Court  of the State where IFC is 
located.” The Committee also takes note of the amen dments to make IFCs more 
effective, that are under consideration of Governme nt. These amendments pertain 
to bringing earnest money/security deposit submitte d during tender and falls within 
the ambit of provisions related to delayed payment.   The amount of award given by 

the Facilitation Council should be realizable as ar rears of land revenue.   The 
amount of award given by the Facilitation Council w ould be made enforceable and 
should include earnest money and securities submitt ed during the tender . The 
Committee recommends that by brining earnest money scrutiny deposit within the 
ambit of provisions related to delayed payment in MSMED Act 2006, this delay may 
be checked and regulated.   
 
13. Apart from the inputs from the administrative M inistry of MSME, the Committee 
also received inputs from select industry associati ons. During the course of its interaction 
with the representatives of industry associations t he following major concerns were 
raised : 
 
Definition of MSME 
 
14. In view of inflation there was demand to enhanc e the limit on the investment in 
plant and machinery in micro and small scale enterp rises. It was also underscored that it 
was difficult to differentiate between private and business assets of MSMEs, hence it was 
difficult to assess the investment in assets with required exactitude.  
 
15. The Ministry in its reply generally agreed with  the contention but expressed 
constraint stating “ The present definition is in t he Act itself. These need to be defined in 
Rules rather than in Act itself. The definition sho uld be dynamic to enable the MSME to 
avail the benefits as well as handle global competition.” 
 
16.  Considering the inflation and dynamic market  sit uation, the Committee 
feels that definition of MSMEs as provided in the A ct may be revised every five 
years. 
 
Entrepreneurs’ Memorandum 
 
17. It was suggested that the filing of the Memoran da should be simplified by making 
it online. 
 
18. The Ministry agreed with the suggestion that th e filing of the Memorandum 
should be made online. It was informed that a consu ltation meeting with the States in this 
regard was held in January 2012.  
 
19. The Committee notes that the Report of the Working  Group on the MSME 
for the 12 
th  Plan, too recommended that the States should encou rage ‘online’ filing 
of Memoranda. Considering the consensus on the issu e, the Committee expects that 
necessary steps should be taken to resolve the issu e expeditiously .  The MSME 
Ministry should encourage the Micro and Small Enterprises to register themselves.     
Delayed Payment 
 
20. The Committee notes general dissatisfaction ove r the issue of delayed payment. 
The Committee also believes that this issue is crit ical for the survival of micro and small 
enterprises who work with limited working capital a nd any interruption in cash flow puts 
their survival at stake. The Committee also notes t hat the mechanism of Industrial 
Facilitation Council have not been very helpful in resolving the issue of delayed payment. 

There have been demands by the industry association s to give recovery powers to the 
IFCs. Some other associations asked for similar pow ers to be given to National Board for 
MSME. The Committee also recognizes that Section 18 (2) stipulates that the conciliation  
is done in conformity with the Section 65-81 of the  Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 
1996. Cognizant of the increasing pendency of cases  and low registration of fresh cases, 
the Committee believes that the entrepreneurs  are gradually loosing faith in  the  efficacy  
of the mechanism.  The Committee therefore reiterat es its earlier recommendation 
containing in its 176 th  Report that arrangements should be made to give Co uncils to 
enforce their awards. The regular flow of cash is critical for the very survival of the micro 
and medium enterprises who by definition have a ver y small investment base.   The 
Committee recommends  to  the  Ministry to  assess  whether  enjoining  the  IFCs  
with  the provisions of Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, has actually rendered 
the mechanism ineffective and to devise more effect ive provisions for IFC.  The 
Committee also suggests that methods like supply ag ainst Letters of Credit etc. 
should be used more regularly to make payment predi ctable. The Committee 
suggests that Ministry should explore the possibili ty if such methods could be made 
mandatory.   
 
 
 
21. There were complaints regarding different inter est rates being awarded by IFCs 
on the amount due under the provisions of delayed p ayment. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should ensure that the IFCs in different States should 
award interest rates as per section 16 of the of MSMED Act. 
Procurement Preference Policy 
 
22. The Committee notes that the Procurement Prefer ence Policy notified by the 
Government in March 2012 will come to effect from 1
st  April 2015.  However the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry of MSME work  in close coordination 
with the Directorate General, Supply and Disposals (DGS&D) and other similar 
Government procurement agencies to iron out initial  functional bottlenecks in 
implementing the Policy. The Ministry must see that  tender specifications must not 
be designed to exclude the MSE sector. The Committe e also notes the exclusion of 
Medium enterprises from the Policy. 
 
23. In this regard the Committee also takes note of th e Section 11 of the Act 
which too is limited only to micro and small enterp rises. The Committee believes 
that as the idea of this Act was to facilitate an o rganic progression of any enterprise 
from micro to small and to medium enterprise, and r ecommends that the Ministry 
of MSME may explore the possibility to include medi um enterprises in the  
Purchase Preference Policy without diluting stress on the interests of micro and 
small enterprises.  
 
24. The Committee is in agreement with the suggestion of the Working Group on 
MSME for 12 
th  Plan that ‘ Each Ministry/Department and CPSU, etc ., should make 
a specific mention of the compliance with the prefe rence policy in its Annual Report 
to be tabled in Parliament. Progressive Association s of MSEs should be associated 
with monitoring implementation and suggesting appro priate revision of the 
policies.’ 
 
 

 MSME and FDI  
 
25. The Prime Minister’s Task Force had suggested t hat FDI in the MSME sector 
would facilitate greater access to technology. Howe ver, the Task Force had also 
recognized that past FDI policies did not result in  substantial technology gains. Yet it 
recommended 100% equity participation in SSI sector  for both Foreign and Domestic 
investors.  
 
 26. The Committee also takes cognizance of recent policy of opening up multi-brand 
retail sector for 51% FDI. The policy makes it obli gatory to source 30% of procurements 
from the Small scale sector . The Committee also notes that the current policy al lows FDI 
in the MSE sector as per the sectoral caps.  The  Committee notes that the Press Note 5 
of ( 20 
th  September 2012) mentions only the Small Industries  and not enterprises 
thereby excluding the service sector. Further the M icro and medium enterprises 
have largely been excluded in the Press Note. The C ommittee recommends that 
Ministry of MSME may take up the issue with Departm ent of IPP in this respect. 
The Committee also notes that the said Press Note d efines a Small Scale Industry as 
having an investment of US $ 1 Million in Plant and  machinery. And that “ if at any 
point of time, this valuation is exceeded, the indu stry  shall not qualify as ‘ small 
industry’ for this purpose.” This will put severe c ap on the growth prospects of 
small  supplier,  which  goes  against  the  intent  of the  MSMED  Act.  However, the  
Committee notes the Budget proposal for the year 20 13-14 which proposes to 
restore the benefits and preferences enjoyed by the  MSME units for another three 
years after they grow out of their category. The Fi nance Minister said that “ to 
begin with, I propose that the non-tax benefits may  be made available to a MSME 
unit for three years after it graduates to a higher  category” The Committee also 
notes that the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion, is in the process of 
seeking necessary approvals to amend the Policy in this regard. 
  
27. Furthermore, going by the current FDI policy, ther e could be possibility of 
global retail companies setting up their subsidiari es for sourcing the supplies, 
instead of sourcing the supplies from Indian SSIs.  
 
28. Committee is aware of the fact that while this Se ctor is largely unorganized, 
the new giants will set a well organized supply cha in. Therefore there is inherent 
dichotomy in existing MSE sector in India and the i ntended retail trade. There is a 
vast difference in the business processes, structur e and philosophy of the two 
sectors. The Committee therefore recommends that the Government should monitor 
the impact of FDI in retail trade on the MSE sector. There should be biennial survey 
to see the incidents of sickness/ takeovers/ mergers and other effects on the Sector.  
 
29     The Committee recommends that a monitoring m echanism should be set up to 
effectively monitor 30% procurement from small industries.  
 
Credit related Issues 
 
30. The Committee shares the concerns of the Working G roup on MSME for 
12 
th  Plan  which states that “The reduction in Net Bank  Credit to the SSI in the last 
decade and in the number of SSI accounts is a cause  of serious concern . This needs 

to be monitored periodically through effective meet ings of the Standing Advisory 
Committee of RBI .” 
 
31. Section 10 of the MSME Act 2006 states that “ T he policies and practices in 
respect of credit to micro, small and medium enterp rises shall be progressive and such 
may be specified in the guidelines or instructions issued by the Reserve Bank, from time 
to time, to ensure timely and smooth flow of credit  to such enterprises, minimize the 
incidence of sickness among them and enhance the competitiveness of such enterprises.” 
 
32. The Committee was informed that the issue was c omprehensively addressed by 
the Prime Minister’s Task Force on MSMEs. According ly, the RBI too has advised the 
Public Sector Banks to: 
 
Achieve 20% year-on-year growth in credit to micro and small enterprises 
 
Allocation of 60% of the MSE advances to micro sect or which is to achieved by 
2012-13  
 
Achieve a 10% annual growth in number of micro enterprises accounts 
 
33. Banks are mandated not to accept collateral sec urity in case of loans upto Rs 10 
lakhs to MSE enterprise. The Government is also imp lementing Credit Guarantee 
Scheme to facilitate credit flow to the sector.   
 
34. The representatives of the industry association s informed the Committee that the 
interest rates were still too high and were not uni form. The associations suggested 
Interest subvention scheme for MSEs on the lines of  agriculture, so that net rate of 
interest should not exceed 8-9%. The Committee was informed that while Banks are free 
to charge any interest rate with the reference to B ase Rate, the Ministry of MSME has 
taken up the issue with the Department of Financial  Services.  Also the Performance and 
Credit Rating Scheme of the Ministry of MSME run th rough accredited rating agencies.  
The Banks often consider the credit rating of the M SE unit, while settling lower   interest  
rates.  So  far 14  Banks   had  entered  into  agreement   in   this  regard.  
Considering the benefits MSEs get in interest rate,  t he Committee would like to 
know the coverage of the Performance and Credit rat ing Scheme and steps taken to 
expand the coverage.  The Committee suggests that t he MSEs should be encouraged 
to adopt credit rating. In view of similar suggesti on of the Task Force, the 
Committee would like to know from the Ministry abou t Government’s response to 
the suggestion of interest rate subvention in respe ct of MSEs. However, the 
Committee again notes that the Scheme excludes the Medium enterprises, which 
goes against the inherent intent of the MSMED Act t hat considers MSME sector as 
an organic progression. 
 
35     The interactions of Committee with various associat ions and banks revealed 
that interest rates charged by banks  differ. The Ministry of Finance should 
intervene to fix the upper limit of rate of interes t which must be adhered to by the 
banks while extending the credit to MSMEs. The Mini stry of Finance must ensure 
its implementation.    
 

 
36. Another point raised was pertaining to complex procedures and absence of 
response from  the Banks. The Committee too feels that the Banks too should be more 
responsive and sympathetic towards any new prospect ive entrepreneur.  The Banks 
should prescribe time bound disposal of application s and the reasons for rejection 
should be communicated in writing so that the appli cant may after fulfilling the 
conditions re-submit the application. The Committee  recognizes the similar 
recommendation given by the Task Force which was to  be complied within 2 
months. Committee would like to know the status of compliance.   The Committee 
was  informed  that  RBI  has asked all the Scheduled Commercial Banks to set up a SME  
portal on their Website where all the information/b anking products for SMEs could be 
displayed. The Committee recommends that Banks should aggressi vely publicise 
their products for MSMEs and the Government sponsor ed schemes. A certain part 
of their annual expenditure on publicity must be ea rmarked for publicity of such 
programmes/products targeted for MSMEs. 
 
37. There was impression among industry association s that the credit guarantee 
scheme has not picked up yet and Banks still rely o n collateral guarantees. The 
Committee was informed that the CGTMSE has engaged Bankers, banking associations 
and industry associations to generate awareness abo ut the credit guarantee scheme. 
Member Lending Institutions are also involved to encourage entrepreneurs to take benefit 
of the scheme.  The Committee also noted that there  was a demand to increase the limit 
and to cover loans upto Rs 2 crores. The Committee was informed that till 15 
th  July 2012, 
cumulatively about 8.61 lakh proposals were approve d for guarantee cover for a total 
sanctioned loan of about Rs 41,000 crore.  The Committee notes that the burden of 
insuring the bank credit through CGTMSE ultimately falls upon the entrepreneur 
who in any case pays higher interest rate to Bank.  The Committee recommends 
that cost of insuring the credit should be borne by  the Bank and not by the 
entrepreneur. In this regard, the Committee would a lso like to know the 
recommendations of the Working Group under the Chai rmanship of the Executive 
Director, RBI.  
 
38. The Committee also appreciates the concern regardi ng shorter repayment 
period to banks. The SMEs face huge pressure of per formance and work under 
constant threat of defaulting on repayment, which may eventually leads to sickness.  
 
39. The Committee takes note of the suggestion that th e repayment period may 
be increased up to 15 years and recommends that RBI  should take note of such 
suggestions in view of increasing sickness in the s ector. The Committee would also 
expect that RBI dilutes NPA norms for micro and sma ll enterprises most of whom 
often suffer constraints in cash flow from their re spective buyers or face severe 
vagaries of market.  
 
 
40. The Committee also takes note of new concepts like  factoring services. The 
Act must provide for such mechanisms so as to enabl e the MSME units to avail 
these mechanisms for easy access to institutional credit.   
 

41. Apart from the inputs from the Associations, th e Committee also took note of the 
recommendations of the Prime Minister’s Task Force on MSME, few of which are as 
following :  
 
Credit 
 
… All the scheduled commercial banks should achieve  a 20% growth in credit year-on 
year to micro and small enterprises and strictly ad here to the allocation of 60% thereof to 
micro enterprises to ensure enhanced credit flow. F rom 1 
st April 2010, shortfall of any 
bank against the already accepted target of 60% to micro enterprises (of the total lending  
to MSEs) may be put into an appropriately named cor pus with the Small Industries 
Development Bank of India (SIDBI). This would facil itate additional credit flow of over 
Rs.3 lakh crore to micro enterprises from the sched uled commercial banks over a period 
of 5 years. 
(Action: Ministry of MSME / DFS - 3 months) 
 
…. A target of 15% annual growth in number of micro en terprise accounts may be 
stipulated for all scheduled commercial banks till financial inclusion has been 
substantially achieved. Reserve Bank of India (RBI)  may issue necessary instructions in 
this regard. This would help in covering an additio nal 30 lakh micro enterprises under 
institutional credit in a period of 5 years. 
(Action: DFS/RBI – 1 month) 
 
… A Committee under the chairmanship of Member (Ind ustry), Planning Commission, 
with the Secretary, Department of Financial Service s, Chairman, Indian Banks’ 
Association and representative of the industry as M embers and the Secretary, Ministry of 
MSME as its Member Secretary may be constituted. Th e Committee may (i) Monitor the 
overall credit flow to the MSME sector at regular i ntervals; (ii) Look into the existing 
interest subvention schemes for the agriculture and  housing sectors to examine the extent 
of replicability for the MSEs; (iii) Identify institutional bottlenecks in the flow of credit to 
the sector; and (iv) Suggest policy measures for au gmenting credit flow to the MSME 
sector. 
(Action: Ministry of MSME – 1 month) 
 
….  The ability of MSMEs (especially those involving innovations and new technologies) 
to access alternative sources of capital like angel  funds/risk capital needs to be enhanced 
considerably. For this purpose, removing fiscal/regulatory impediments to use such funds 
by the MSMEs should be considered on priority. 
(Action: Ministry of MSME/DOR/DEA – 3 months) 
 
…. The recommendations of the High Level Committee to review the Lead Bank Scheme 
under Smt. Usha Thorat, Deputy Governor, RBI may be  implemented on priority basis to 
facilitate banking penetration and to strengthen th e monitoring systems at State/District 
level. 
(Action: RBI – 1 month) 
…. The Task Force noted that a Working Group under the  chairmanship of Executive 
Director, RBI is looking into the issues regarding:  (a) Enhancement of the collateral-free 
loan limit for MSEs from Rs.5 lakh to Rs.10 lakh; a nd (ii) Absorption of the one-time 
guarantee fee and annual service charges by the ban ks under the Credit Guarantee 

Scheme to facilitate higher flow of credit to MSEs without collateral/third party 
guarantee. The Working Group may submit its report within 3 months. 
(Action: RBI – 3 months) 
 
 
…. Banks should approve project loans (comprising of b oth term loan and working 
capital) for MSEs to avoid delay in tying up of fun ds by the MSEs. The RBI may 
consider making this mandatory for the banks. 
(Action: DFS / RBI / Banks – 3 months) 
 
…. In order to simplify the process of credit dispensa tion to micro enterprises, a uniform 
loan application form for loans up to Rs.25 lakh should be devised by the IBA that should 
be applicable to all the banks.  
(Action: DFS – 3 months) 
 
…. All the banks may adopt Banking Code for MSEs to br ing about uniformity in 
operations.  
(Action: DFS/RBI – 3 months) 
 
… Banks should be encouraged to participate in organi zing joint programmes relating to 
entrepreneurship and skill development. RUDSETI, wh ich are promoted by the banks, 
should also impart entrepreneurship and skill devel opment training for different MSME 
clusters. 
(Action: DFS/RBI/Banks – 3 months) 
 
… Banks may put in place an electronic tracking syste m for ensuring timely 
approval/rejection of loan applications of MSEs and  they should be informed about the 
reasons for rejection of their loan application wit hin a definite period. For this purpose, 
Banks may have a dedicated cell at the Regional Off ice level to monitor the progress of 
applications received till its final disposal. RBI may suitably advise the Banks in this 
regard. 
(Action: DFS/RBI/Banks – 2 months) 
 
…. The Lead Bank in association with the District Indu stries Centre should prepare a 
shelf of project profiles on a periodic basis for d ifferent viable activities which have a 
good potential. The progress in this regard may be monitored at the District, State and 
Central level. 
(Action: DFS/RBI/Banks - instructions issued) 
 
…. Each lead bank of a district may adopt at least one  MSE cluster and banks should 
open more MSE focused branch offices at different M SE clusters which can also act as 
Counseling Centres for MSEs. 
(Action: DFS/RBI/Banks – Instructions issued)  
 
…. Banks should encourage their officials to undergo s pecialized certificate course run 
by Indian Institute of Banking and Finance on the subject of SME Finance for Bankers by 
suitably incentivising them.  
(Action: DFS / IBA – no time lines) 
 

…. The Ministry of MSME may set up an ‘MSME Helpline’ after detailed discussions 
with the Departments/agencies having similar ‘Helpl ines’ to ensure that the same is 
successfully implemented. 
(Action: Ministry of MSME – 6 months) 
 
 
Rehabilitation and Exit Policy 
 
Section 25 of the MSMED Act provides for the exit policy for the closure of micro, small 
or medium enterprises. The Committee was informed that units that are not Companies or 
Limited liability partnerships, are largely governe d by provincial Insolvency Act, 1920, 
where there is no separation of personal and busine ss assets, which leads to lengthy 
litigation. The Ministry recognized the need for a separate and much simpler mechanism 
for the revival or exit of MSMEs. The Committee was  informed that the Ministry was 
working on a Draft framework in this respect which provides for setting up of Revival 
and Exit Committee of MSME Facilitation Council through which a MSME or a Creditor 
can initiate filing for either revival or exit route.  
 
The Committee also took note of the recommendations  made by the PM’s Task Force on 
the MSME in this regard, some of which are as under : 
 
 
…. The Limited Liability Partnership Act 2008 (LLP) pr ovides for enabling schemes of 
revival as well as liquidation and winding up. The Ministry of Corporate Affairs has also 
introduced the Companies Bill 2009 which includes a  provision for a ‘one person 
company (OPC)’. The MSMEs need to be encouraged/ in centivised to convert to these 
forms.  
(Action: MoCA/ DoR/MoMSME – no time lines) 
 
… Banks have existing mechanism/ procedures for rehab ilitation/ restructuring of 
potentially viable sick MSMEs. However, as the track record of the sick units is generally 
poor, the bankers are often reluctant to rehabilita te such units. Consequently, very few 
units are being rehabilitated by banks. Moreover th ese mechanisms do not provide 
protection from statutory dues or other creditor ac tion. There is, therefore, a need for an 
alternate mechanism to re-examine the viability of such units and implement a 
rehabilitation package in a time bound manner. It is suggested that for MSME units found 
to be unviable by the banks, an administrative mech anism may be put in place at district 
level, under the GM (DIC) to re-examine the viabili ty and implement a rehabilitation 
package, wherever necessary. The rehabilitation pac kage may comprise, besides 
additional lending by banks, of relief and concessi ons in statutory dues by the State 
Governments/autonomous bodies, Power Supply Company etc. Since the promoters often 
find it difficult to infuse fresh funds to the exte nt required by the Banks, Rehabilitation 
funds specially set up by the State Governments cou ld part-finance promoters margin 
money requirement. The Central Government may support the setting up of rehabilitation 
funds  in  the States to  facilitate  and  encourage  rehabilitation  of  potentially viable sick  
units. An appropriate scheme should be formulated b y Ministry of MSME with an 
estimated outlay of Rs.1,000 crore. District Level Committees will be convened by GM, 
DIC. The rehabilitation Cell set up in DICs will fo rm the Secretariat of these committees. 
It will receive and monitor the applications and wi ll also draw up a panel of Technical 

Officers/ Chartered Accountants to provide assistan ce in the preparation of the 
rehabilitation packages. The Rehabilitation cell in  consultation with the entrepreneur 
shall prepare the rehabilitation packages and place  before the Committee for approval. 
The entire process of preparation of rehabilitation plan to finalization of the rehabilitation 
package should be completed in 2 months time. Till the rehabilitation package is 
finalized, all statutory and bank payments will be kept in abeyance. This will be binding  
on all parties by issuance of Government order by t he State Government. The banks 
should devise a liberal One Time Settlement  policy  for small enterprises particularly 
micro enterprises found unviable by the District level Committee. 
(Action: Ministry of MSME/State Governments/Banks – 6 months) 
 
…. In place of the outdated Provincial Insolvency Act,  1920, action may be initiated to 
formulate and circulate a model Insolvency Act with in 6 months which will have 
enabling provisions for time bound revival and exit  for the unincorporated firms. The 
model Act should take into consideration the following 4 critical elements:  
 
(a) a specialized quasi-judicial body, to appraise viability and set up time bound revival/ 
closure plans;  
(b) enabling provisions for a holding period for revival;  
(c) segregation of business assets from personal assets based on reasonable norms; and  
(d) speedy winding up in case the business is determined as non-revivable. 
 
(Action: Ministry of MSME in consultation with M/o Corporate Affairs & 
Ministry of Law & Justice – 6 months) 
 
42. The Committee takes note of the recommendations of  the Task Force, which 
has identified the concerned Ministries and set the  timelines for the implementation 
of its recommendations. The Committee would like to  know the status of 
implementation of these recommendations. In this re spect, the Committee also took 
note of the observation made by the Task Force whic h stated “ None of these 
measures will work unless their implementation stat us is monitored regularly at the 
highest level. The issues are simply too diverse to  be handled by a single line Ministry. 
The Task Force accordingly recommends the establish ment of Prime Minister’s Council 
on Micro and Small Enterprises in the Prime Ministe r’s Office which may oversee 
implementation of these recommendations on a half yearly basis. The Ministry of MSME 
shall   be   the   servicing  arm  for  the  Counci l.” The  Committee though  shares  the 
apprehensions and concern of the Task Force regardi ng implementation of its 
recommendation, it is convinced that the implementa tion should be monitored by a 
Ministry that is answerable to the Parliament and i ts Committee, directly and not a 
Task Force. The Ministry must make use of the avail able statutory forum like 
National MSME Board where concerned Ministries, Ban kers/ financial institutions, 
State Governments and select associations are repre sented. Side tracking a 
Statutory Board shall only dilute the eminent force  of a law passed by the 
Parliament.  
 
43. In addition to above, the Committee also recommend s that the following 
suggestions merit due consideration and should, the refore, be incorporated in the 
proposed amendments to the Act – 
 

• As the MSE Facilitation  Councils do not consider complaints other than bills 
for supply of goods or services, they need some sta tutory body which 
provides quick relief in the matters like that of p enalty, price variation, 
earnest money and security deposit. 
 
• After Section 2 (p), 2 (q) may be added to extend t his Act to J&K. This will 
enable the supplier to supply in that State without risk. 
 
• The Facilitation Councils should be revitalized, th ey should meet regularly 
and their recommendations should be given due weightage. 
 
• There should be uniformity in awarding same rate of interest by the IFCs for 
the amount due under the provisions of delayed payment. 
 
• In  case of decree given by the Court too, provision should be made in the Act 
that the buyer will have to deposit 75% of the amou nt of decree in the Court 
before filing the appeal.  
 
• In case a buyer is found harassing a MSE supplier, provision should be made 
for a reference to be made to IFC. If the IFC finds  the reference to be true, it 
should pass the appropriate order. The IFCs should be a watchdog to 
prevent undue harassment by bigger buyers.  
 
• IFCs should have a code of dos and don’ts. 
 
• The life of the National Board should be extended f rom current two years to 
‘till the next Board is constituted’.  
 
44. The Committee is of opinion that the MSMED Act,  2006 was a positive 
beginning which provides a really enabling environm ent for the MSME sector. The 
efficacy of its provisions should be tested periodi cally and upgraded as per the ever 
changing economic scenario and the demands of the s ector. In this regard the current 
review by the Committee was   one such exercise by a Parliamentary Committee. The 
Committee also had the benefit of the prior reviews  made by the Task Force (2010) and 
the Working Group (2012) and largely concurs with t heir concerns.   Committee believes 
that the Ministry will give due consideration to th e issues raised by it in the Report 
and incorporate the same in the proposed amendments.  
 
********  
 
 
 

 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE 
 
1.  . However,  the Committee notes that the National Board of MSME  had so 
far held only nine meetings at random intervals as against the statutory requirement 
of one meeting every three months.  The  Committee also  expresses reservation over 
the proposal to amend the relevant Section of the A ct which provides for quarterly 
meetings of the Board and placing it under the Rule s which would fall within the 
scope of subordinate legislation.  The Committee unable to comprehend the rationale 
behind such proposal.  It only reinforces the appre hension that the role of statutory 
Board would be further diluted.  The Committee stro ngly recommends for creating 
a Monitoring Cell for Delayed Payment in office of the Development Commissioner, 
MSME.   
(Para No. 6) 
  
2.  The Committee notes that the number of enterprises who had filed 
memoranda has increased exponentially from about 1.75 lakh in 2007-08  
to 2.82 lakh in 2011-12. However, the Committee obs erves reduction in number of 
registrations in successive years in case of certai n States. The Committee would like 
to explore the reasons for such reduction.  
(Para No. 8) 
  
3. The Committee observes that the said notification does not cover the 
Autonomous organizations/Societies/ Trusts/Institut ions/ Universities and other 
Government aided organizations under the various Ce ntral Government 
Ministries/Departments. The Committee also wonders if the notification includes the 
Constitutional bodies. The Committee recommends that the said notification  should 
include such institutions. The Committee also recom mends that the Central 
Government should persuade the State Governments to  adopt similar policies, for 
which Government can use the National Board as a fo rum where State 
Governments are also represented by rotation.  
(Para No. 10) 
4  The Committee recommends that like the Central Min istries/Departments/PSUs, 
the private sector companies should also procure a minimum of 20% of annual 
requirements of goods and services from MSEs. 
(Para No. 11) 
 
5.  . The Committee takes note of the performance of the Facilitation Councils 
in States. It is rather strange that in certain Sta tes/UTs no fresh cases were filed 
during year 2011-12. Also there is large pendency o f cases and disposal rate is 
rather slow. This is clear violation of Section 18 (5) of the Act which make disposal 
of references within Ninety days, obligatory. The C ommittee also apprehends that 
decline in the filing of fresh cases may be due to dwindling faith in the efficacy of 
this mechanism. The Committee therefore suggests th at the rate of disposal of cases 
should be faster. Further, it appears that as per S ection 19 the supplier does not 
have right to appeal against the Award given by an IFC.  Considering that the IFC 
do not have powers to enforce the award, the suppli ers too should have the right to 
appeal.  It also reiterates its previous recommendation that  “The Industrial 

Facilitation Council should evolve into an effectiv e forum of arbitration, to resolve 
the issue of delayed payments to small and tiny enterprises, conferred with sufficient 
mandate to execute its award, appeal against which could be filed only in the High 
Court of the State where IFC is located.” The Commi ttee also takes note of the 
amendments to make IFCs more effective, that are un der consideration of 
Government. These amendments pertain to bringing ea rnest money/security deposit 
submitted during tender and falls within the ambit of provisions related to delayed 
payment.  The amount of award given by the Facilita tion Council should be 
realizable as arrears of land revenue.   The amount  of award given by the 
Facilitation Council would be made enforceable and should include earnest money 
and securities submitted during the tender . The Committee recommends that by 
brining earnest money scrutiny deposit within the a mbit of provisions related to 
delayed payment in MSMED Act 2006, this delay may be checked and regulated.   
 
(Para No. 12) 
 
 6.  Considering the inflation and dynamic market  sit uation, the Committee 
feels that definition of MSMEs as provided in the A ct may be revised every five 
years. 
(Para No. 16) 
  
7. The Committee notes that the Report of the Working  Group on the MSME 
for the 12 
th  Plan, too recommended that the States should encou rage ‘online’ filing 
of Memoranda. Considering the consensus on the issu e, the Committee expects that 
necessary steps should be taken to resolve the issu e expeditiously .  The MSME 
Ministry should encourage the Micro and Small Enterprises to register themselves.     
Delayed Payment 
(Para No. 19) 
  
 8. The Committee recommends  to  the  Ministry to  ass ess  whether  enjoining  
the  IFCs  with  the provisions of Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, has 
actually rendered the mechanism ineffective and to devise more effective provisions 
for IFC.  The Committee also suggests that methods like supply against Letters of 
Credit etc. should be used more regularly to make p ayment predictable. The 
Committee suggests that Ministry should explore the  possibility if such methods 
could be made mandatory.   
(Para No. 20) 
9.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry should e nsure that the IFCs 
in different States should award interest rates as per section 16 of the of MSMED 
Act. 
 (Para no. 21) 
 
10.  .  However the Committee recommends that the Ministry  of MSME work in 
close coordination with the Directorate General, Su pply and Disposals (DGS&D) 
and other similar Government procurement agencies t o iron out initial functional 
bottlenecks in implementing the Policy. The Ministr y must see that tender 
specifications must not be designed to exclude the MSE sector. The Committee also 
notes the exclusion of Medium enterprises from the Policy. 
(Para No. 22) 

 
11. In this regard the Committee also takes note of th e Section 11 of the Act 
which too is limited only to micro and small enterp rises. The Committee believes 
that as the idea of this Act was to facilitate an o rganic progression of any enterprise 
from micro to small and to medium enterprise, and r ecommends that the Ministry 
of MSME may explore the possibility to include medi um enterprises in the  
Purchase Preference Policy without diluting stress on the interests of micro and 
small enterprises.  
(Para No. 23) 
 
12. The Committee is in agreement with the suggestion of the Working Group on 
MSME for 12 th  Plan that ‘ Each Ministry/Department and CPSU, etc ., should make 
a specific mention of the compliance with the prefe rence policy in its Annual Report 
to be tabled in Parliament. Progressive Association s of MSEs should be associated 
with monitoring implementation and suggesting appro priate revision of the 
policies.’ 
(Para No. 24) 
 
 13. The  Committee notes that the Press Note 5 of ( 20 th  September 2012) 
mentions only the Small Industries and not enterprises thereby excluding the service 
sector. Further the Micro and medium enterprises have largely been excluded in the 
Press Note. The Committee recommends that Ministry of MSME may take up the 
issue with Department of IPP in this respect. The C ommittee also notes that the said 
Press Note defines a Small Scale Industry as having  an investment of US $ 1 Million 
in Plant and machinery. And that “ if at any point of time, this valuation is 
exceeded, the industry  shall not qualify as ‘ smal l industry’ for this purpose.” This 
will put severe cap on the growth prospects of smal l  supplier,  which  goes  against  
the  intent  of the  MSMED  Act.  However, the Comm ittee notes the Budget 
proposal for the year 2013-14 which proposes to restore the benefits and preferences 
enjoyed by the MSME units for another three years a fter they grow out of their 
category. The Finance Minister said that “ to begin  with, I propose that the non-tax 
benefits may be made available to a MSME unit for t hree years after it graduates to 
a higher category” The Committee also notes that th e Department of Industrial 
Policy and Promotion, is in the process of seeking necessary approvals to amend the 
Policy in this regard. 
 (Para No. 26) 
14. Furthermore, going by the current FDI policy, ther e could be possibility of 
global retail companies setting up their subsidiari es for sourcing the supplies, 
instead of sourcing the supplies from Indian SSIs.  
(Para No. 27) 
15 . Committee is aware of the fact that while this Se ctor is largely unorganized, 
the new giants will set a well organized supply cha in. Therefore there is inherent 
dichotomy in existing MSE sector in India and the i ntended retail trade. There is a 
vast difference in the business processes, structur e and philosophy of the two 
sectors. The Committee therefore recommends that the Government should monitor 
the impact of FDI in retail trade on the MSE sector. There should be biennial survey 
to see the incidents of sickness/ takeovers/ mergers and other effects on the Sector.  
(Para No. 28)  
 

16     The Committee recommends that a monitoring mechani sm should be set up to 
effectively monitor 30% procurement from small industries.  
(Para No. 29)   
17.  The Committee shares the concerns of the Working G roup on MSME for 
12 th  Plan  which states that “The reduction in Net Bank  Credit to the SSI in the last 
decade and in the number of SSI accounts is a cause  of serious concern . This needs 
to be monitored periodically through effective meet ings of the Standing Advisory 
Committee of RBI .” 
(Para No. 30) 
 
18.  Considering the benefits MSEs get in interest rate ,  t he Committee would like 
to know the coverage of the Performance and Credit rating Scheme and steps taken 
to expand the coverage.  The Committee suggests tha t the MSEs should be 
encouraged to adopt credit rating. In view of simil ar suggestion of the Task Force, 
the Committee would like to know from the Ministry about Government’s response 
to the suggestion of interest rate subvention in re spect of MSEs. However, the 
Committee again notes that the Scheme excludes the Medium enterprises, which 
goes against the inherent intent of the MSMED Act t hat considers MSME sector as 
an organic progression. 
(Para No. 34) 
19    The interactions of Committee with various associat ions and banks revealed 
that interest rates charged by banks  differ. The Ministry of Finance should 
intervene to fix the upper limit of rate of interes t which must be adhered to by the 
banks while extending the credit to MSMEs. The Mini stry of Finance must ensure 
its implementation.    
(Para No. 35) 
20.   The Committee too feels that the Banks too should b e more responsive and 
sympathetic towards any new prospective entrepreneu r.  The Banks should 
prescribe time bound disposal of applications and t he reasons for rejection should 
be communicated in writing so that the applicant ma y after fulfilling the conditions 
re-submit the application. The Committee recognizes  the similar recommendation 
given by the Task Force which was to be complied wi thin 2 months. Committee 
would like to know the status of compliance.     The Committee recommends that 
Banks should aggressively publicise their products for MSMEs and the Government 
sponsored schemes. A certain part of their annual e xpenditure on publicity must be 
earmarked for publicity of such programmes/products targeted for MSMEs. 
(Para No. 36) 
21.  The Committee notes that the burden of insuring the  bank credit through 
CGTMSE ultimately falls upon the entrepreneur who i n any case pays higher 
interest rate to Bank.  The Committee recommends th at cost of insuring the credit 
should be borne by the Bank and not by the entrepre neur. In this regard, the 
Committee would also like to know the recommendatio ns of the Working Group 
under the Chairmanship of the Executive Director, RBI.  
(Para No. 37) 
22. The Committee also appreciates the concern regardi ng shorter repayment 
period to banks. The SMEs face huge pressure of per formance and work under 
constant threat of defaulting on repayment, which may eventually leads to sickness.  
 
(Para No. 38) 

23. The Committee takes note of the suggestion that th e repayment period may  
be increased up to 15 years and recommends that RBI  should take note of such 
suggestions in view of increasing sickness in the s ector. The Committee would also 
expect that RBI dilutes NPA norms for micro and sma ll enterprises most of whom 
often suffer constraints in cash flow from their re spective buyers or face severe 
vagaries of market.  
(Para No. 39) 
 
24. The Committee also takes note of new concepts like  factoring services. The 
Act must provide for such mechanisms so as to enabl e the MSME units to avail 
these mechanisms for easy access to institutional credit.   
(Para No. 40) 
 
25. The Committee takes note of the recommendations of  the Task Force, which 
has identified the concerned Ministries and set the  timelines for the implementation 
of its recommendations. The Committee would like to  know the status of 
implementation of these recommendations. In this re spect, the Committee also took 
note of the observation made by the Task Force whic h stated “ None of these 
measures will work unless their implementation stat us is monitored regularly at the 
highest level. The issues are simply too diverse to  be handled by a single line Ministry. 
The Task Force accordingly recommends the establish ment of Prime Minister’s Council 
on Micro and Small Enterprises in the Prime Ministe r’s Office which may oversee 
implementation of these recommendations on a half yearly basis. The Ministry of MSME 
shall   be   the   servicing  arm  for  the  Counci l.” The  Committee though  shares  the 
apprehensions and concern of the Task Force regardi ng implementation of its 
recommendation, it is convinced that the implementa tion should be monitored by a 
Ministry that is answerable to the Parliament and i ts Committee, directly and not a 
Task Force. The Ministry must make use of the avail able statutory forum like 
National MSME Board where concerned Ministries, Ban kers/ financial institutions, 
State Governments and select associations are repre sented. Side tracking a 
Statutory Board shall only dilute the eminent force  of a law passed by the 
Parliament.  
(Para No. 42) 
 
26.   Committee believes that the Ministry will give due  consideration to the 
issues raised by it in the Report and incorporate t he same in the proposed 
amendments.  
(Para No. 44) 
 
********  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat  
Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry  
 
XXI 
 
Twenty-First Meeting  
 
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M on Tuesday, the 2 nd  July, 2013 in Committee 
Room ‘A’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present  
 
     Shri Tiruchi Siva  — Chairman  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
1.   Shri Narendra Budania 
2.   Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
3.   Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
4.   Shri Basawaraj Patil 
5.   Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel 
6.   Shri Vivek Gupta 
7.  Shri M.P. Achuthan 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
8.    Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
9. Shri Hassan Khan 
10.    Shri. Kaushalendra Kumar 
11. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal 
12.   Shri Somen Mitra 
13.   Shri P. R. Natarajan 
14. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey 
15.   Shri R. K. Singh Patel 
16.   Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
17.   Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
18.    Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
 
Secretariat  
1. Shri. S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
3. Shri. Roshan Lal, Joint Director 
4. Shri. Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
Contd…………..2/ 
 
 
 
 

-2- 
 
  At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welc omed the Members and briefed 
them that the agenda of the meeting, was to conside r and adopt the Draft reports on the 
Review of the implementation of MSMED Act, 2006 (Mi nistry of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises) and revival of Nagaland Pulp an d Paper Co. Ltd  (Department of 
Heavy Industry) of the Committee.  
2.  Thereafter, the Committee took up the reports f or consideration and after some 
discussion the Committee unanimously decided that the report on the revival of Nagaland 
Pulp and Paper Co Ltd 
 is to be considered at a later date for adoption, after redrafting.  
3. Then, the Committee took up the report on the Re view of the implementation of 
MSMED Act, 2006 for consideration. The Committee su ggested certain amendments and 
additions and the Draft report was unanimously adopted with such changes.  
4.         Further, the Committee also decided to u ndertake a study visit to Mumbai-
Chennai during the third week of July, 2013. Accord ingly, it has been directed to take 
necessary permissions for the abovementioned study tour from Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya 
Sabha. 
The meeting adjourned at 12.30 P.M 
 
 
New Delhi                                                                                                      Roshan Lal  
2
nd  July, 2013                                                                                              Joint Director 
 
 
To  
The Chairman and Members of the  
Department –Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 