 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
July, 2013/Ashadha, 1935 (Saka) 
 
REPORT NO.  
247 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND FORTY SEVENTH REPORT 
ON 
IMPLEMENTATION OF INTEREST SUBSIDY 
ELIGIBILITY CERTIFICATION (ISEC) SCHEME 
PERTAINING TO  
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM  ENTERPRISES  
 
               ( PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 23.07.2013) 
             (FORWARDED TO HON’BLE SPEAKER LOK SABHA ON 23.07.2013) 
PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 06.08.2013 
LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 06.08.2013 

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
July, 2013/Ashadha, 1935 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND FORTY SEVENTH REPORT 
ON 
IMPLEMENTATION OF INTEREST SUBSIDY 
ELIGIBILITY CERTIFICATION (ISEC) SCHEME 
PERTAINING TO  
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM  ENTERPRISES  
                
           ( PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 23.07.2013) 
             (FORWARDED TO HON’BLE SPEAKER LOK SABHA ON 23.07.2013) 
PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 06.08.2013 
LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 06.08.2013 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
                                                                                                               PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …………………………………………  ( i ) 
 
2. INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………   (ii) 
 
3. REPORT ……………………………………………………………………………    
 
4. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE – AT A  
    GLANCE…………………………………………………………………………… 
 
5. MINUTES………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
           (CONSTITUTED  W.E.F.  31 ST   AUGUST,  2012) 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
1.   Shri Tiruchi Siva   — Chairman  
2. Shri Narendra Budania 
3.   Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
4.   Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
5.   Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor 
6.   Shri Basawaraj Patil 
7.   Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel 
8.   Shri Vivek Gupta 
9.   Shri Nandamuri Harikrishna 
10. Shri M.P. Achuthan   
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
11.   Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala 
12.   Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
13. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
14. Smt. Poonamben Veljibhai Jat 
15. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
16. Shri Hassan Khan 
17. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
18. Shrimati Ingrid Mcleod 
19. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal 
20. Shri Somen Mitra 
21. Shri P.R. Natrajan 
22. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey 
23. Shri Jayaram Pangi  
24. Shri R. K. Singh Patel 
25. Shri B. Y. Raghavendra 
26. Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
27. Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
28. Ch. Lal Singh 
29. Shri Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
30. Shri E.G. Sugavanam  
31. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.      Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary 
2.      Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
3.      Shri Roshan Lal, Joint Director 
4.      Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 
 
(i) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamen tary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred 
and Forty Seventh Report on implementation of Inter est Subsidy Eligibility Certification 
(ISEC) Scheme pertaining to Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. 
 
2.  The Committee heard the representatives of Mini stry of MSME, KVIC and Public 
Sector Banks during study visits at various part of the Country and also received valuable 
inputs from them.   
 
3.  The Committee in its meeting held on 11 
th  July, 2013 considered and adopted the 
report. 
 
 
 
 
 
TIRUCHI SIVA        
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
 
 
New Delhi,  
11 
th  July, 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report   
 
 During the freedom struggle the Khadi emerged as a  symbol for our 
freedom and independence from colonial rule and eng aged communities in 
the movement to achieve economic self-reliance unde r the inspiring 
leadership of Mahatma Gandhi. Emphasis on Khadi and  its use gave 
respectability to artisans and their skills.  After  independence Khadi became 
a tool of inclusive empowerment and an expression o f enterprise.  The 
biggest challenge is to retain the competitiveness of khadi in an open market.  
The Government of India through Khadi & Village Ind ustries Commission 
has been promoting the khadi sector through its various schemes.  Till 1977-
78, the Government was providing cheap loans to kha di institutions through 
its budgetary support.  However, KVIC found it diff icult to meet the 
growing credit requirement of the Khadi institution s solely through the 
budgetary support and with the approval of Governme nt, devised a new 
scheme to mobilize bank credit. The Interest Subsid y Eligibility Certificate 
(ISEC) scheme was launched in May 1977 as the major  source of funding 
for Khadi sector.  The Committee was informed that from 1977 to 1997, the 
major khadi institutions were supported by banking institutions, whereas 
budgetary support was meant for medium and smaller khadi institutions.  
However, since 1997 almost entire working capital r equirement of all 
registered institutions under KVIC/KVIB covering all KVI activities is being 
met through the ISEC scheme.   
2. The scheme was envisaged to provide interest sub sidy on the working 
capital requirement of khadi institutions under whi ch the khadi and 
polyvastra  producers can access bank credit at a c oncessional rate of 4%. 
This interest subvention enables the khadi institutions to significantly reduce 
their cost of production.  In a recent study conduc ted by the Development 
and Research Services Pvt. Ltd. ( Delhi), it was fo und that 90% of the 
respondent beneficiaries reported average to very h igh increase in 

production and 85% accepted moderate to high increa se in their earning 
primarily due to this scheme. 70% respondents rated ISEC favorably.  
 
3.  The Committee was informed that during the XI P lan period the 
khadi production increased from Rs 543.39 crores to  Rs 716. 98 crores and 
Polyvastra production rose from Rs 58.20 crores to Rs 74.42 crores. To a 
large extent this increase can be attributed to the support offered under ISEC 
scheme.  
1 
4. However, the Committee noted that one of the maj or bottlenecks in 
the scheme was difference between KVIC and the fina ncing banks over 
assessments of working capital requirement of a Kha di institution. The 
KVIC has formulated a fairly detailed procedure of scrutiny and approval of 
working capital requirements filed by khadi institutions.  The details of it are 
given below: 
1. Khadi/poltvastra institutions submit their budge t to State level 
Budget Team for commending it to the Central office Mumbai, 
2. KVIC places fund directly with the nodal branches of Bank through 
core banking, with an instruction to release funds to the financing 
branches according to institution-wise interest subsidy due to them,  
3. Upon the approval given by the Standing Finance Committee of 
KVIC, the State /Division office issues Interest Su bsidy Eligibility 
Certificate to Khadi/polyvastra institution, 
4. On the basis of ISEC issued by the KVIC, the fin ancing branch of 
the Bank fixes the credit limit for the working cap ital and lends credit 
at the prevailing interest rate. A khadi institutio n mortgages its 
property in favour of KVIC, which provides first ch arge to the 
financing bank as a security to the bank.  
5. The Financing Branch claims interest subsidy fro m the nodal bank 
where the KVIC places the imprested amount.   

 
5. Despite such elaborate procedure, the difference  in assessment has 
resulted in sub-optimal availment of approved bank finance, as is given 
below : 
 
Year Bank finance issued 
by KVIC to 
institutions 
Bank finance 
actually availed 
by institutions 
% Availment  
2007-08          456.76         227.62          49. 83 
2208-09          480.74         244.85          50. 93 
2009-10          548.92         279.02          50. 83 
2010-11          566.05         275.52          48. 67 
2011-12          584.94         306.20          52. 35 
Total        2637.41       1333.21          50.55 
 
6. In context of existing divergence in assessments , the Committee 
undertook the study of implementation of ISEC schem e during its visits to 
Kolkata Tiruchirapalli ( October 2010), and  Munnar  ( February 2013), with 
KVIC and the prominent Public Sector Banks in those regions.   
 
7. The Committee observes that working capital amou nt under the 
ISEC as approved by the KVIC and actual availed cre dit have 
increased over the years, however, the difference b etween the two, in 
percentage terms too has increased to about 50%. Th e Committee finds 
such a situation where Banks lend only half the amount of credit what is 
approved by the KVIC, patently unacceptable. There is a need for 
serious efforts to bridge this gap. While the Government has formulated 
enabling scheme to address the credit needs of khad i and polyvastra 
institutions, the policies and guidelines for finan cing institutions are 
either not in sync with Government's policy or the guidelines are not 
being enforced by the Banks and the RBI.  The Commi ttee was also 

informed by the KVIC officials that even though the  beneficiaries got 
the interest at the rate of four per cent, actually  some banks are 
charging more interest than prescribed.  This is a very serious matter.  
The Committee recommends that those banks which do so must be 
investigated upon and appropriate action may be tak en so that such 
gross breach of banking norms do not take place.  T he Committee 
recommends that the banks must give credit to the k hadi institution 
under the ISEC slightly above the base rate.  The C ommittee 
recommends that the banks must honour the ISEC and strict 
instructions be issued to the bank Managers to honour it.  
 
8. The KVIC informed that the issue of objectively assessing the actual 
working capital requirement have been examined by t he successive expert 
Committees like Sovani Committee (1963), Khadi Comm ittee (1973) and 
Tandon Committee (1977). On the basis of findings o f these Committee a  
formula to assess the working capital requirement o f Khadi institutions was 
developed by Vaikunth Bhai Mehta Trust under the gu idance of Prof. M.L. 
Dantwala. The latest formula prescribed by KVIC is based on these studies 
and the Kalia Committee (1994), the then M.D., NABA RD and has also 
been approved by the Government. Based on the recom mendations of the 
Kalia Committee, RBI too has issued relevant guidel ines for the banks.  The 
Kalia Committee placed greater emphasis on the asse ssment of KVIC in 
respect of working capital requirements of the khad i institutions.  The Kalia 
Committee took a view of specific nature of operati ons and financial 
requirements of the khadi institutions and accordin gly suggested that KVIC 
assessment should be accepted by the banks in case the difference in 
assessment does not exceed 10%.  However, if difference exceeded 10%, the 
issue could be resolved through mutual discussions between khadi 
institution/KVIC and the financing bank.  In 1994, the RBI also declared 
KVI as priority sector to enable KVI institution to obtain bank credit.  

9. The Committee was informed that despite these re commendations  the 
difference in assessment has grown over the years. The Committee 
observes that the banks have not complied with the RBI guidelines in 
this regard which were based on the Kalia Committee 's 
recommendations.  A mechanism must be created to mo nitor the 
implementation of guidelines.  Any breach of such g uidelines must be 
dealt with seriously.   
 
10. In its written submission the KVIC informed the  Committee about the 
reservations which banks possibly have in respect o f working capital needs 
of KVI institutions.  It was informed that bankers were often not convinced 
with the year-long utilization cycle of funds by th e khadi institutions while 
the standard  banking norms permited that the credit cycle should not exceed 
three months.  The Committee is aware of the nature of khadi busin ess. 
Unlike any other business, a typical khadi institut ions runs an 
integrated business involving spinning, weaving, we t processing, fabric 
conversion, wholesale distribution and retailing. T herefore  routine 
banking norms should not be applied in the khadi sector.  
 
11. The Committee in this respect was informed of  the pattern of 
assistance given to a khadi or Polyvastra institution, which was as following:  
  
Particulars Cotton/Muslin 
Khadi 
Silk Khadi Woollen 
Khadi 
Polyvastra 
Production 40% 40% 60% 35% 
Retail Sale 40% 40% 60% 40% 
Vastragar 25% 25% 25% 15% 
Raw Material 25% 40% 50% 15% 
Processing 8% 8% - 25% 
Total 138% 153% 195% 120% 

12. It was also informed that standard Banking norm s  prescribe Debt 
Equity Ratio of 1:4, whereas KVIC follows Debt Equity ratio of 1:10. Banks 
lend according to their norms in supersession over the KVIC assessment.  It 
was further informed that the Khadi institutions ha ve to execute stringent 
hypothecation deed with Banks for availing banking credit. Banks believe 
that the Khadi stocks can not be sold/traded even a t par value if they were to 
be auctioned in event of liquidation. Therefore ban ks insist on maintenance 
of 138% of stocks against sanctioned amount.  The Committee feels that 
such conditions of maintaining a stock of value hig her than the 
sanctioned amount, is too stringent a condition whi ch will only make a 
khadi unit unviable.   
 
 
13. The Committee also observed that the KVIC has r epeatedly sought to 
address these issues in context of evolving banking  norms and increasing 
demands for institutional credit by the khadi institution.  It was informed that 
the KVIC in 2008 commissioned an independent study by Development and 
Research Service Ltd. New Delhi, to make an objecti ve evaluation of the 
implementation of ISEC scheme.  The Study also cons ulted the banks.  The 
Study recommended that KVIC should take up the issu e of adequate 
institutional finance with RBI and NABARD to facili tate adequate credit to 
the Khadi and Village Industries institutions as pe r their requirement.  It 
observed that there was a need for banks to comply with RBI guidelines in 
letter and spirit, while assessing the working capi tal requirements of khadi 
institutions.  It was also suggested that RBI shoul d set up institutional 
mechanism to resolve the divergence  in assessment and most importantly it 
suggested bank and financial institutions should ta ke steps and interact with 
khadi institutions to appreciate their business processes and business model.   
 
14. The Committee concurs with the suggestions emer ging from the 
study.   The Committee particularly recommends that  there was a need 

that the banking institutions appreciate the busine ss cycle of khadi 
sector and the constraints faced by it.  There is a  need for alignment of 
banking/financial norms with business cycle of khadi sector.  
  
15. The Committee was informed that the based on th e outcome of this 
independent study the KVIC set up a broad based Tas k Force headed by the 
Chairman, KVIC and involving Executive Director, RB I, Chairmen SBI and 
NABARD, Chief Executive, Indian Bank Association, t o suggest the 
methods so that the Khadi institution could avail t he institutional finance. 
While agreeing with the working capital formula fol lowed by the KVIC, the 
Task Force realized that since the formula evolved by Vaikunth Bhai Mehta 
Trust needed to be updated there was a need for a r elook by an expert 
agency to convince bankers.  The Task Force accordingly referred the matter 
to the Chief Advisor (Cost), Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance 
to study and suggest the working capital norms in respect of KVI sector.  
The Committee was informed by the KVIC that the Chi ef Advisor 
(Cost) gave the following observation/recommendations:- 
i) Since the ISEC is issued for one year based on t he targets of 
production and sales fixed for the year, it is felt that the cycle needs to 
be fixed at a maximum of 100% of production. 
ii) The steps to be taken to recover the loans in a  time bound manner 
should be provided in clear terms which should form  part of the 
agreement, so that the banks will come forward to e xtend loans 
without hesitation in the event of default. 
iii) Suitable changes in the statute (the relevant Act under which the khadi 
Institutions are formed) may be incorporated so tha t KVIC can 
appoint a receiver/administrator to manage units in  case of default, if 
required. 
iv) KVIC may restrict the amount approved for issua nce of ISEC to 
annual sales projectd. 

v) The loan under ISEC may be renamed as "Annual Lo an on Subsidized 
interest to khadi" so that the same can be assessed distinctly as the SSI 
category by banks/lending institutions. 
vi) All the loans disbursed by banks under ISEC sch eme may be 
guaranteed by KVIC through a suitable arrangement w ith Credit 
Guarantee Funds for Micro and Small Enterprises (CG TSME); and 
the required premium may be met by the KVIC and 
vii) For smooth flow of annual loan on subsidized i nterest to khadi, KVIC 
may examine issuing ISEC for a block of 3 years eac h time, so that 
the units as well as banks are not forced to indulg e in the elaborate 
ritual of assessment each year." 
 
16. The Committee is inclined to accept the observa tions made by the 
Chief  Advisor ( Cost). Still, the Committee hopes that the detailed 
norms should facilitate the KVI institutions to acc ess the institutional 
finance at affordable rate. The Committee also obse rves that while the 
Government and RBI has put the sector under priorit y sector category, 
yet the terms and conditions are too stringent and defeat the entire 
purpose of placing them in the priority sector. The  purpose of 'priority 
sector' is not merely to provide greater access to institutional credit, 
rather to provide greater access to it at affordabl e terms.  While 
financing Khadi, the Banks should not look at it as  a commodity, they 
should also look at the noble legacy and philosophy  which sustain it. 
Howsoever intangible it may be, Khadi remains a pro ud heritage of 
freedom struggle invoking the ideals for which Maha tma Gandhi lived 
and sacrificed his life. 
17. The Committee notes that the ISEC is a very goo d scheme.  
However, it regrets to note that banks are issuing fifty per cent loans to 
the total ISEC issued.  The RBI guidelines based on  Kalia Committee, 
governing ISEC mandate that if less than ninety per  cent ISEC issued 

are honoured by banks then the tripartite meeting a mong the bank, 
beneficiary and the State level Director must be or ganized.  The 
Committee notes with concern that hardly any such tripartite meeting is 
organized.  It is a very serious matter.  In the ab sence of such tripartite 
meeting, the ISEC scheme is not being implemented p roperly and 
effectively.  Such tripartite meeting would provide  opportunities for 
discussing the problems affecting the khadi institu tions and for 
coordinating the implementation of the scheme which  involves banks, 
KVIC and the beneficiaries.  The Committee recommen ds that the 
KVIC must ensure that such tripartite meetings take  place in every 
State.  Besides, the Committee recommends that the State level 
Directors of KVIC must also take the initiative to organize such 
tripartite meetings.       
 
******* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
RECOMMENDATIONS  AT  A  GLANCE  
 
  1. The Committee observes that working capital amou nt 
under the ISEC as approved by the KVIC and actual a vailed credit 
have increased over the years, however, the differe nce between the two, 
in percentage terms too has increased to about 50%.  The Committee 
finds such a situation where Banks lend only half t he amount of credit 
what is approved by the KVIC, patently unacceptable . There is a need 
for serious efforts to bridge this gap. While the G overnment has 
formulated enabling scheme to address the credit ne eds of khadi and 
polyvastra institutions, the policies and guideline s for financing 
institutions are either not in sync with Government 's policy or the 
guidelines are not being enforced by the Banks and the RBI.  The 
Committee was also informed by the KVIC officials t hat even though 
the beneficiaries got the interest at the rate of f our per cent, actually 
some banks are charging more interest than prescrib ed.  This is a very 
serious matter.  The Committee recommends that thos e banks which do 
so must be investigated upon and appropriate action  may be taken so 
that such gross breach of banking norms do not take  place.  The 
Committee recommends that the banks must give credi t to the khadi 
institution under the ISEC slightly above the base rate.  The Committee 
recommends that the banks must honour the ISEC and strict 
instructions be issued to the bank Managers to honour it.  
(Para No. 7) 
 2.  The Committee observes that the banks have not comp lied with 
the RBI guidelines in this regard which were based on the Kalia 
Committee's recommendations.  A mechanism must be c reated to 
monitor the implementation of guidelines.  Any brea ch of such 
guidelines must be dealt with seriously.   

(Para No. 9 ) 
3.   The Committee is aware of the nature of khadi busin ess. Unlike 
any other business, a typical khadi institutions ru ns an integrated 
business involving spinning, weaving, wet processin g, fabric conversion, 
wholesale distribution and retailing. Therefore  ro utine banking norms 
should not be applied in the khadi sector.  
(Para No. 10) 
4. The Committee feels that such conditions of maintai ning a stock 
of value higher than the sanctioned amount, is too stringent a condition 
which will only make a khadi unit unviable.   
(Para No. 12) 
 5.  The Committee concurs with the suggestions emergin g from the 
study.   The Committee particularly recommends that  there was a need 
that the banking institutions appreciate the busine ss cycle of khadi 
sector and the constraints faced by it.  There is a  need for alignment of 
banking/financial norms with business cycle of khadi sector.  
 (Para No. 14) 
6. The Committee is inclined to accept the observat ions made by the 
Chief  Advisor ( Cost). Still, the Committee hopes that the detailed 
norms should facilitate the KVI institutions to acc ess the institutional 
finance at affordable rate. The Committee also obse rves that while the 
Government and RBI has put the sector under priorit y sector category, 
yet the terms and conditions are too stringent and defeat the entire 
purpose of placing them in the priority sector. The  purpose of 'priority 
sector' is not merely to provide greater access to institutional credit, 
rather to provide greater access to it at affordabl e terms.  While 
financing Khadi, the Banks should not look at it as  a commodity, they 
should also look at the noble legacy and philosophy  which sustain it. 
Howsoever intangible it may be, Khadi remains a pro ud heritage of 

freedom struggle invoking the ideals for which Maha tma Gandhi lived 
and sacrificed his life. 
(Para No. 16) 
7. The Committee notes that the ISEC is a very good  scheme.  
However, it regrets to note that banks are issuing fifty per cent loans to 
the total ISEC issued.  The RBI guidelines based on  Kalia Committee, 
governing ISEC mandate that if less than ninety per  cent ISEC issued 
are honoured by banks then the tripartite meeting a mong the bank, 
beneficiary and the State level Director must be or ganized.  The 
Committee notes with concern that hardly any such tripartite meeting is 
organized.  It is a very serious matter.  In the ab sence of such tripartite 
meeting, the ISEC scheme is not being implemented p roperly and 
effectively.  Such tripartite meeting would provide  opportunities for 
discussing the problems affecting the khadi institu tions and for 
coordinating the implementation of the scheme which  involves banks, 
KVIC and the beneficiaries.  The Committee recommen ds that the 
KVIC must ensure that such tripartite meetings take  place in every 
State.  Besides, the Committee recommends that the State level 
Directors of KVIC must also take the initiative to organize such 
tripartite meetings.       
(Para No. 17) 
*******  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat 
 
Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry  
 
 
XXII 
 
Twenty-Second Meeting 
 
 
 
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M on Thursday, the 11 
th  July, 2013 in Committee 
Room ‘A’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present  
 
     Shri Tiruchi Siva  — Chairman  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
1.   Shri Narendra Budania 
2.   Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
3.   Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
4.   Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor  
5.   Shri Basawaraj Patil 
6.   Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel 
7.   Shri Vivek Gupta 
8.  Shri M.P. Achuthan 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
9.     Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala  
10.     Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
11.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
12.   Shri. Kaushalendra Kumar 
13.   Shrimati Ingrid Mcleod  
14. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal 
15.   Shri P. R. Natarajan 
16. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey 
17.   Shri R. K. Singh Patel 
18.   Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
19.   Ch. Lal Singh 
20. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
21.   Shri E. G. Sugavanam 
22.   Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
 
Contd…………..2/ 
 
 

 
 
-2- 
Secretariat  
1. Shri. S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
3. Shri. Roshan Lal, Joint Director 
4. Shri. Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 
  At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welc omed the Members and briefed 
them that the agenda of the meeting was to consider  and adopt the Draft 246 
th , 247 th and 
248 th  reports on Revival of Nagaland Pulp & Paper Compan y Ltd pertaining to the 
Department of Heavy Industry, M/o Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises; 
Implementation of Interest Subsidy Eligibility Cert ificate (ISEC) Scheme pertaining to 
the M/o Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises and Capac ity Addition and Expansion of 
Manufacturing facilities of Madras Fertilizers Ltd,  pertaining to the Department of 
Fertilizers, M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers, respectively of the Committee.  
2.  Thereafter, the Committee took up the reports f or consideration and after some 
discussion the Committee decided that the 246 th  draft report on the revival of Nagaland 
Pulp and Paper Co Ltd  i s to be considered during the next meeting for adop tion, after 
redrafting as suggested by the Committee.  
3. Then, the Committee took up the 247 
th and 248 th  reports for consideration. After 
some discussions, the Committee adopted the 247 th and 248 th  Draft Reports.  
The meeting adjourned at 12.00 Noon. 
 
New Delhi                                                                                                          Roshan Lal  
11 
th  July, 2013                                                                                               Joint Director 
 
 
To  
The Chairman and Members of the  
Department –Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry 
 
 
 