197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
ONE HUNDRED AND NINETY SEVENTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE 188TH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE DEMANDS
FOR GRANTS (2006-07)
PERTAINING TO MINISTRY OF AGRO RURAL  INDUSTRIES
                                        
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON   9TH  MARCH, 2007  )
   (LAID ON THE TABLE  OF THE  LOK SABHA ON  9TH  MARCH, 2007  )
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2007  / AGRAHAYANA, 1928 (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
                                                                                                                           
             
 1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE   
2.INTRODUCTION                                                                                                     
 3.REPORT                                                                                                                    
            (i)CHAPTER – I                                                                                                     
 
(ii)CHAPTER–II                                                                                                     
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
does not desire to pursue for now in view of the
Government's replies                                                                                           
 
(iii)CHAPTER–III                                                                                                
The recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies of the
Government                                                       
   
(iv)CHAPTER – IV                  
                                                                                                                                                                          
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Ministry have not been received                                 
                                                                                                    COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
(Date of constitution 5th August, 2006)
                 
Shri Santosh Bagrodia                   —        Chairman
           RAJYA SABHA
2.      Shri  G. Sanjeeva Reddy
3.      Dr. Prabha Thakur     
4.      Shri Kalraj Mishra      
5.      Smt. Hema Malini      
6.      Dr. K. Malaisamy      
7.      Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
8.      Dr. Vijay Mallya
9.      VACANT     
10.  O.T.Lepcha
                   
                           LOK SABHA
11.  Shri Guharam Ajgalle
12.  Shri S.K. Biswamuthiary        
13.  Shri Ajoy Chakraborty           
   Recommendations/observations, which have been
   accepted by the Ministry.                                                                                              

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
14.  Shri Swadesh Chakraborty                 
15.  Shri Subhash   Sureshchandra Deshmukh        
16.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan         
17.  Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria         
18.  Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani                                     
19.  Shri Kishanbhai V.  Patel
20.  Shri P.Rajendran        
21.  Shri Badiga  Ramakrishna
22.  Shri  Gurjeet Singh Rana
23.  Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana   
24.  Shri Rajnarayan Budholiya
25.  Shri K.C. Pallanisamy            
26.   Kunwar  Manvendra Singh                
27.  Shri Ganesh Singh                  
28.  Shri V.K. Thummar                
29.  Shri Girdhari Yadav
30.  Shri Umakant Yadav
31.  Shri Mohan S. Delkar
     SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Girija Shanker Prasad, Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having   been  authorized  by the
Committee, hereby present this  One hundred and Ninety  Seventh Report on Action taken Notes  furnished  by the Ministry of Agro
Rural Industries  on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s One Hundred and Eighty Eighth  Report on the  Demands For
Grants (2006-07) pertaining to Ministry of Agro Rural Industries. 
 
2.         I thank the Ministry of Agro Rural Industries for furnishing the Action Taken Notes on the recommendations contained in
the Committee’s One Hundred and Eighty eighth Report.
 
3.         The Committee in its meeting held on the 7
th  March,2006 considered and adopted the  report.
NEW DELHI;
March, 2007
SANTOSH BAGRODIA
Chairman
 Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Industry
 
             REPORT
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries  on the
recommendations contained in the  189 th      Report (of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry) on 
Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to the Ministry of Small Scale Industries .  The Report was presented /laid on the Table of
Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha on  the.23rd May,2006.
2.         Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Small Scale Industries    in respect of the   recommendations
contained in the Report.   These have been categorized as follows:
Chapter - I- The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry :- Paras : 3.3, 4.2, 5.2, 7.2, 7.3, 9.5.2,
13.2, 14.5, 16.4,  18.5, 18.6, 20.6.3, 20.6.5, 21.2.6, 22.8,  22.9.4, 24.2, 26.2, 28.3, 29.3, 30.4, 32.3, 33.3, 34.5.2, 34.5.6, 34.6.2, 38.5,
38.11, 39.10, 39.11, 39.12.2, 39.14.6, 39.14.7, 41.6, 41.8.2, 41.10.4, 41.11.2, 41.12.3, 41.13.5, 41.14.4, 41.17.2, 41.18.2, 41.19.3,
41.21.2, 41.24.1, 42.5, 43.3, 45.2, 48.3, 50.3, 51.2, 52.2, 61.2 and 62.1
             The Committee is pleased to observe that  the   Ministry  has accepted its  recommendation as  mentioned in Chapter –I of
the  Report. 
 
Chapter - II- The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies :
- Paras :- 21.2.3 and 36.2.
 
 In respect of these recommendations the Committee is  convinced  with the logic and explanation  advocated by the Ministry 
and therefore   does not want to  pursue  as of now. 
Chapter - III- The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies of the Ministry: -
Paras:  2.2, 3.4, 21.3.3, 21.5.2, 25.3, 31.3, 37.2, 37.3, 41.15.2, 41.20.3, 46.6, 47.2, 53.3, 54.3, 56.3, 57.5 and 58.10.
 

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
 The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation  of recommendations contained in  Chapter-III 
and desires that the Ministry should furnish  logical  explanation  in respect of these recommendations.  
 
Chapter - IV- The recommendations/observations in respect of which  final replies of the  Ministry have not been received :- Paras: 
6.6, 8.1.1, 8.1.2, 8.1.3, 8.1.4, 8.1.5, 17.2, 20.5, 21.4.3, 22.4.4, 23.3, 27.2, 35.2, 38.6, 40.5, 41.16.3, 44.5, 49.2, 53.7, 58.5, 59.3 and
60.2,
In respect  of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV, the Ministry has  either   furnished the interim replies or couched its
language in  vague terms like  noted for compliance/guidance, therefore, the Committee desires  that the Ministry should furnish
Action Taken Notes in  respects of recommendations categorized   in Chapter-IV  in detail and to the point, as per the intention and
spirit of the recommendations of the Committee.
                                   
3.         The Details of the ATR is being discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
 
 
Recommendation
 
1.0       Policy initiatives taken by Government during the financial year 2005-06
 
1.1       The Committee understands that alongwith agriculture and organized large industries, the small enterprises sector including
both SSI and services provide the largest employment generation potential in the country.  The Committee is of the view that
Government should make comparative assessment of Small Scale Industries vis-à-vis other Industries on the basis of growth rate, and
chalk out strategy for enhancing further the employment generation potential, maximizing contribution to national exchequer, in
order to combat the problem of poverty and improving the standard of living and thus making real contribution to the National
Economy.
Para (3.3)
Action Taken
 
1.1.1    The rate of growth in production of the small enterprises (SE) sector has been consistently more than that of the overall
industrial production as given in the table below:
Year SE Sector (%) Total industrial sector (%)
2001-2002 6.06 2.7
2002-2003 7.68 5.7
2003-2004 8.59 7.0
2004-2005 9.96 8.4
2005-2006 9.25* 8.0
  * Based on April–December 2005.
1.1.2    Recognising the vast employment potential of this sector, the Government has taken the following measures for the promotion
and development of the SE sector:
(i)
                  The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development (MSMED) Act, 2006 has been promulgated on 16 June 2006
and shall come into force from 2 October 2006. The Act provides for facilitating the promotion and development as well
as enhancing the competitiveness of micro, small and medium enterprises. Further, this Act covers not only the
manufacturing establishments but also service entities, which would help this sector to achieve higher rate of growth and
to generate more employment opportunities.
(ii)
                The Government has announced on 10 th August 2005 a ‘Policy Package for stepping up Credit to Small and Medium
Enterprises’ with an objective to double the flow of credit to the sector within a period of five years.
(iii)               A National Manufacturing Competitiveness Programme has been drawn up and a Promotional Package for the Micro
and Small Enterprises is under finalisation.
1.1.3    These initiatives are expected to help enhance the competitiveness of MSMEs and their contribution to the national economy,
and in generating more employment opportunities.
 
Recommendation
 
1.2       Charter of functions of Ministry of Small Scale Industries
 
1.2.1    The Committee understands that the Ministry of SSI designs policies, programmes, projects and schemes in consultation with
its organizations and various stakeholders and monitor their implementation with a view to assisting   the promotion and growth of
small scale industries. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should not only advocate the policy on behalf of the
SSI sector with other Ministries/Departments of the Central Government and the State and Union Territories for the promotion and
proliferation of SMEs but also co-operate and co-ordinate with them in the implementation of schemes/projects prepared in this
regard.
Para (4.2)
CHAPTER - I

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
Action Taken
 
1.2.2    Recommendation noted. The Ministry coordinates with other Central Ministries, Planning Commission, State Governments
and Financial Institutions concerning implementation of various Scheme/Projects intended for the promotion of SSIs.
 
 
Recommendation
 
1.3 Organizational structure of Ministry of SSI
 
1.3.1    The Committee is of the view that monitoring mechanism of the Ministry of SSI should aim at developmental supervision
which would lead to carrying out the schemes and programmes efficiently and effectively in time and without cost over-run. 
Para (5.2)
Action Taken
 
1.3.2    Regular monitoring of status of implementation of the schemes/programmes is done to ensure that there is no time and cost
over-run.                                                            
Recommendation
 
1.4 Action Plans set for the Ministry for the year 2006-07
 
1.4.1    The Committee recognizes that the organizational structure of Ministry of SSI have proved effective as an instrument of
implementation of various policies, programmes/schemes relating to Ministry of Small Scale Industries during 2005-06. The
Committee is pleased to note that the present organizational set up has been quite effective and efficient however, the Ministry of SSI,
keeping in view the emergence of SMEs, which has been well recognized in its Action Plan, would need some re-orientation of form
and retraining of staff to enable it to make full use of the opportunities and challenges in the future. The Committee, accordingly,
recommends that following iniatives may be undertaken :-
(i)
     More regular appraisal of policy initiative for the SME sector in similar countries;
(ii)   Ascertaining best practices within the Central Government and also abroad for promotion and development of SME sector
and their adoption/adaptation in the Indian SME context;
(iii)  Closer and more structural interaction with the stakeholders;
(iv) Improving synergies among the constituent organizations of the Ministry and the Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries;
(v)   Promoting constructive competitiveness among field level organizations based on well defined objectives and action plans;
(vi) Retraining of staff, as appropriate.
Para (7.2)
Action Taken
 
1.4.2    Recommendation noted. For the appraisal of policy initiatives, to ascertain best practices within Central Government and to
strengthen the process of consultations, the MSMED Act, 2006 has provision for National Board for Micro, Small & Medium
Enterprises  (NBMSME) under the Chairmanship of the Minster (SSI) which, inter alia, has members from the concerned Central
Ministries, State Governments and other stake holders, including specific number from tiny organisations and women organisations
and persons of repute. The Act has inbuilt provision for having quarterly meeting. 
 
Recommendation
 
1.5 Precautionary measure to achieve the Action Plan
 
1.5.1 The Committee hopes that once the requisite steps are taken and adequate   precautionary measure are undertaken to achieve the
Action Plan subsequent to the constant review and monitoring of the Action Plan, there should not be any problem in achieving the
targets set in the Action Plan 2006-07.
Para (7.3)
Action Taken
 
1.5.2    Ministry agrees with the views of the Committee.
 
Recommendation
 
1.6       Proposals/targets set by the Ministry of Small Scale Industries for 10th Five Year Plan
 
1.6.1    The Committee is of the view that Government should make efforts for achieving the goals towards liberalization and
globalization in the SSIs sector of the economy particularly, in the areas where liberalizing reforms remain to be achieved and chalk
out the strategy for achieving the same within stipulated timeframe.
Para (9.5.2)
               Action Taken
1.6.2    The Government is fully aware of the post WTO environment and has taken appropriate measures for preparing the small-

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
scale sector to meet the challenges of liberalization and globalization and has put in place several measures to help small enterprises
to become globally competitive. Further, a package for promotion of micro and small enterprises is being finalised to provide support
to this sector, including strengthening the infrastructure facilities, technology up-gradation and credit facilities.
Recommendation
 
1.7       Motivational schemes/plans
 
1.7.1    The Committee recommends that that adequate motivational schemes/plans may be initiated to enhance the performance of
Secretariat Economic Services. Adequate number of staff and officers should be employed to Ministries of SSI and ARI as the matter
is pending in the Department of IPP and Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance.
Para (13.2)
Action Taken
 
1.7.2    This Ministry, in consultation with IF Wing, had moved the proposal for creating various posts in different grades and sought
the approval of Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry of Finance. The clarifications, as sought by the DoE, are being obtained
from the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion and will be sent shortly.
2.         Further, the Ministry, in order to enhance professional competence, nominates officers/staff for in-services
training/specialized training courses in the area of office procedure and management, personnel management and administration,
financial management, computer application, good governance, etc.
 
Recommendation
 
1.8       Development Commissioner for Small Scale Industries (including library)
 
1.8.1    The Committee takes note of expenditure incurred in 2005-06, which was 11% less than the projected at B.E. in plan outlay.
The B. E. for the same for 2006-07 is higher by Rs. 0.66 crore than the last year B.E. The Committee is however not convinced by the
reasons given by the Ministry (as their projection do not seem realistic). The Committee hopes that the Ministry will take necessary
precaution to avoid such situation in future.
Para (14.5)
Action Taken
1.8.2    The observations of the Committee have been noted.
 
Recommendation
 
1.9       Establishment bill and wage bill
 
1.9.1    The Committee is in agreement with the views of the Ministry of SSI that the role of the Office of DC (SSI) should be
reoriented, broadly on the following lines in the changing scenario of liberalization and globalization:-
 
(a) In view of the world-wide trend, now also recognized in India, it is necessary to treat the small and medium enterprises (SME) as
a composite sector so as to facilitate their promotion and development, enhance their competitiveness and encourage the graduation
of tiny to small and small to medium enterprises. Towards this, the Office of the DC (SSI) would need to equipped and strengthened
to view the sector as a composite whole, without losing the focus on the need for generation of employment as well as the specific
developmental/promotional requirements and inter-linkages of each distinct component of the composite sector and the products and
services produced by them.
(b) To address the issues of liberalization and globalization, the Ofiice of DC (SSI) need to widen and continuously update its
knowledge base regarding global trends in policies and Government interventions as well as ascertain ‘best practices’ in this field,
within the country and abroad, and appropriately adopt them.
(c) It would need to strengthen its linkages with the State Governments, other Central Ministries/Departments and associations of
SMEs to achieve the objectives more effectively.
(d) Finally, it would need to forge stronger links with the relevant international institutions and bilateral organizations for more
effective cooperation so as to derive full advantage of the comparative strengths of the Indian SME sector.
Para (16.4)
 
Action Taken
 
1.9.2    With the promulgation of MSMED Act, 2006, the action to re-orient the role of DC (SSI) and its field offices is under
consideration.
2.         Representatives of the Ministry regularly take part in various national and international
seminars/conferences/exhibitions/meetings, etc., on subjects relating to SMEs, WTO issues, Intellectual Property Rights, etc. 
3.         The Ministry maintains liaison with other Central Ministries, Planning Commission, State Governments and Financial
Institutions directly, as necessary.
4.         This Ministry has also taken initiatives to forge linkages with the international institutions in other countries for developing
cooperation among SMEs for making them more competitive and viable.
 

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
 
Recommendation
 
1.10     Legal framework affecting the Small Scale Industries
 
1.10.1  The Committee understands that legal framework affecting the Small Scale Industries is not conducive and satisfactory,
therefore, the Committee feels that in order to give fillip to the promotion and development of Small Scale Industries, the following
immediate measure may be undertaken: 
 
(a)
               A single Unified Act governing the rules pertaining to retrenchment and layoffs and social benefits for employees.
(b)               Enactment of SMED Bill, 2005.
(c)                Comprehensive Social Security Scheme for widening the social safety nets.
(d)               Since the Inspector Raj is causing severe harassment to Small Scale Units, therefore, the provision made in the proposed
legislation for giving good bye to Inspector Raj to wipe out the tyranny  of Inspector Raj.
Para (18.5)
Recommendation
 
1.11     Issues relating  Labour and Employment
 
1.11.1  Since the issues relates to Ministry of Labour and Employment, therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry of
SSI should coordinate with Ministry of Labour and Employment at the earliest and effectively, and furnish the Committee outcome of
the efforts so undertaken by the Ministry.
Para (18.6)
 
Action Taken
 
1.10.1  (a) and (c)        These issues relates to Ministry of Labour and Employment and their reply/comments on same are stated
below:-
 
(i)         The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 provides provisions for investigation and settlement of industrial disputes and certain
other matters.  Chapter-VA of the Act provides provisions relating to lay-off and retrenchment of workman.  Lay-off compensation
is not required to be paid by the employer to the workman laid off in the industrial establishment employing less than 50 workmen. 
The chapter also contains provisions that an industrial establishment employing, on an average, more than 50 workmen is required to
give 60 days notice before affecting closure.  The provisions also include payment of retrenchment compensation equivalent to 15
days wages for every completed year of service by the workman and principle of last come first go in case of retrenchment.      Prior
permission is required by the  industrial establishment i.e. factory, mines and plantations wherein 100 or more workmen are
employed before effecting lay-off, retrenchment or closure.
 
(ii)        Social Security Scheme:   The Government has initiated several measures to provide social security to the workers in the
unorganized sector various labour laws like the Minimum Wages Act, 1948, the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923, the Equal
Remuneration Act, 1976, the Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment & Conditions of Service) Act,
1996 etc. are applicable to the labourers in the unorganized sector also.
 
            The Government has also set up the Welfare Funds to provide social security/welfare measures to certain categories of
workers i.e. beedi workers, certain non-coal mine workers and the cine workers.  The welfare measures include health care, housing,
educational assistance for childeren, drinking water supply etc.  The State Governments like Tamil Nadu and Kerala have
implemented Welfare Funds to provide adequate protection and social security to certain occupational groups.
 
            The Non-Governmental Organizations like SEWA also provide social security network for women workers in unorganized
sector.  The Government is also contemplating to enact “Unorganized Sector Workers Bill 2004” to provide for safety, social
security, health and welfare matters of unorganized sector workers.
 
            The Employees’ Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1956 also provide financial security for employees in an
establishment employing 20 or more persons.  Presently, the Act is applicable to 180 specified industry/classes of establishments.  As
on 31
st March 2004, there were 3,70,386 establishments and factories covered under the Act with a membership of 400.92 lakh under
the Employees Provident Fund Scheme both in the Exempted and Unexempted Sectors.  The ability to pay contributions is not
uniform across all sectors of workers and employers.  The proposal for increasing coverage by reducing threshold for minimum
number of employees would require consensus across the board among representatives of workers and employers.  The Ministry is
exploring ways and means to extend social security cover to identifiable groups, which are presently not covered.
 
            The Employees State Insurance Scheme under the aegis of the Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948 provides comprehensive
medical care and cash benefits in the contingencies of sickness, maternity, employment injury and death due to employment injury to
the workers working in power using factories employing 10 or more workers, and in non-power using factories, shops, hotels,
restaurants, cinemas including pre-view theatres, road motor transport undertakings, newspaper establishments and educational
institutions employing 20 or more workers in the implemented areas under the Act.  The employers covered under the Employees’

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
State Insurance Act, 1948 are absolved of their liabilities under the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 and the Maternity Benefits
Act, 1961.  All the small-scale units satisfying the above mentioned criteria are covered under the Employees’ State Insurance Act,
1948 and cash and medical benefits are provided to their employees covered under the Act.
 
(b)        The SMED Bill, 2005 has been enacted as MSMED Act, 2006 on 16 June 2006, with amendments.
 (d)       Clauses No. 9(2), 15 and 16 were added in the SMED Bill 2005 to get freedom from the Inspector Raj. However, during the
inter-Ministerial consultations and Group of Ministers (GOM) level discussions, these Clauses were dropped and the representation to
national level trade unions in the National Board for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (NBMSME), to be constituted under the
MSMED Act.2006, is provided for taking care of such issues.
Recommendation
 
1.12     Working of cluster approach to the promotion and    proliferation of Small Scale Industries
 
1.12.1  The Committee notes that under Cluster Development approach, the key problems faced by Micro, Small & Medium
Enterprises (MSMEs) are being addressed. The Committee understands that the isolated enterprises are unable to achieve economies
of scales, lack negotiating power and have limited access to credit, strategic information, technology and market etc, therefore, such  
enterprises especially the Small & Micro ones can significantly increase their comparative advantage by mutual- cooperation and
building linkages with private & public service providers.  The Committee views that there is the need to   build competitive strength
through cost reduction, value chain upgradation and utilization of collective economies of scale. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that   Cluster Development must focus on reducing the isolation faced by MSMEs by strengthening the linkages among
all cluster stakeholders to coordinate action and pool resources for a common development goal. 
Para (20.6.3)
Action Taken
 
1.12.2     The Ministry of Small Scale Industries has already focused on the cluster development mode to strengthen the SMEs to 
meet the challenges for globalization and emerge as important players in a global market. The Ministry is intervening in 83 SSI 
clusters and is expected to take up more clusters during the current year for developing efficient technology, competitive marketing 
systems and self-governance at the cluster level. 
 
Recommendation
 
1.13     Financial requirement for Cluster Development
 
1.13.1  The Committee notes the financial requirement for Cluster Development during the Tenth and Eleventh Five Year Plans, and
desires that efforts should be made to fulfill the same to promote SSI sector at accelerated pace nation - wide through cluster
approach in time bound programme, so as to strike the twin problems of poverty and unemployment in the country.
Para (20.6.5)
 
Action Taken
 
1.13.2  The Government has identified development of SME clusters as an important thrust area for intervention for the resurgence
and rejuvenation of the SME sector. During the year 2006-07, an amount of Rs. 43.96 crore has been earmarked for development of
clusters in the SME sector. In the 11th Plan, cluster approach is expected to be the main thrust area of the Government for solving the
twin problem of poverty and unemployment through various models, viz. Development of SME clusters, Growth Poles for
Unorganized Informal Sector and Providing Urban Amenities in Rural Areas.
 
Recommendation
 
1.14     Increase in plan outlay for 2006-07
 
1.14.1  The Committee approves the increase in plan outlay for 2006-07 as against R.E. of 2005-06 i.e. BE 2006-07 to the tune of Rs.
26.45 crore in comparison to the projected plan outlay of Rs. 22.50 crore in RE 2005-06 which is mainly on account of the increase in
the outlay towards Performance and Credit Rating scheme for small enterprise, as the same would lead to improving the credit flow
to SSI sector.
Para (21.2.6)
Action Taken
1.14.2  No comments.
 
 
Recommendation
 
1.15     Comparative study of Small Scale Industries in regard to comparative Competitiveness of Indian Small Scale Industries
 
1.15.1  The Committee feels the need for undertaking the Comparative study of Small Scale Industries in regards to comparative
Competitiveness of Indian Small Scale Industries. The Committee recommends that efforts should be made to combat the barriers to

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
competitiveness of Indian Small Industries viz. the large scale technological obsolescence, an antiquated mind set which insulates the
industry from global market trends, lack of a technology strategy, lack of structured business plans and absence of networking
between small and large industries. The Committee would like to know the outcome of the efforts undertaken in this regards.
 
Para (21.5.2)
Action Taken
 
1.15.2  In the Commonwealth-India Small Business Competitiveness Development Programmes, which is organized by Ministry and
National Small Industries Corporation, comparative analysis of SMEs of Commonwealth countries is being done. The Ministry also
facilitated participation of small enterprises in overseas exhibitions, business delegations, etc., which provided them with an
opportunity to know the best practices followed by other countries.
 
Recommendation
1.16     Appropriation of Plan Outlay under Major Head 3602
          The Committee approves the provision made  under the Major Head 2851, which relates to  various schemes like IID
Scheme, Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme, Tool Rooms, Technology Upgradation, Cluster Development, Research Institutes,
SISIs, Testing Centres, Training etc. as  the Committee hopes the implementation of these schemes are indispensable  for promotion
of SSIs. The Committee is also in agreement for the provision made   under the Major Head 3601 (for States) , where a provision of
Rs.4.00 crore has been made for the year 2005-06 and under Major Head 3602 (for UTs), wherein a provision of Rs.0.20 crore has
been made for the year 2005-06.  The Committee has been given an understanding that the Budget provision under these ‘Heads’ is
grant-in-aid to the State Governments /UTs to collect, maintain and update information on the important economic characteristics of
small scale sector such as employment, investment, production, inputs and wages, requirement of raw materials, working capital,
value added at the various industrial groups etc.
Para (22.8)
Action Taken
1.16.1  No comments.
 
Recommendation
 
1.17     Working of Central Institute of Tools Design 
 
1.17.1  The Committee desires for opening more branches of Central Institute of Tool Design to  facilitate the services all over the
country  for  providing services to SMEs in their respective regions.
Para (22.9.4)
Action Taken
 
1.17.2  The Central Institute of Tool Design (CITD), Hyderabad was established in 1968 with the objective of fulfilling the tooling
needs of the small enterprises in the field of Tool design and training of technical personnel. It has extension centres at
Visakhapatnam, Vijayawada and Tirupati. The Institute is also exploring possibility of opening an extension centre at Chennai. In
order to provide similar services as of CITD, the Ministry has also established 9 Tool Room and Training Centre at Ludhiana,
Aurangabad, Ahmedabad, Indore, Bhubaneswar, Jamshedpur, Kolkata, Jalandhar and Guwahati. Efforts will be made to provide
more and more tooling facilities by giving financial support to the States for setting up of Mini Tool Rooms under the Mini Tool
Room Scheme being implemented by this Ministry.
Recommendation
 
1.18
          Rural Infrastructure Development Fund
 
1.18.1  The Committee is pleased that the present UPA  Government has revived  the Rural Infrastructure Development Fund with
the  corpus of Rs. 8000.00 crore and thus consolidating the rural economy. The Committee is of the view that developed rural
infrastructcture would be helpful in  proliferation of Small Scale Industries in rural areas, therefore, in order to have co-ordinated and
focused approach for rural and  industrial development, the Ministry of SSI should liaise with NABARD  to impress upon that  of
appropriation of RIDF must   prove helpful for  Integrated Infrastructure Development Projects for SSI Sector.
Para (24.2)
Action Taken
 
1.18.2 The RIDF is routed through the National Bank of Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) to the State Governments
for creating rural infrastructure such as electricity, water resources for irrigation and roads. These funds are not available for creating
industrial infrastructure like the IID projects. However, it is expected that this will be helpful in creating requisite infrastructure
appropriate for setting up small and tiny units. 
 
Recommendation
 
1.19 Integrated Infrastructure Development projects for SSI Sector  .

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
 
1.19.1  The Committee desires that Central Government should invite and induce the State proposals on Integrated Infrastructure
Development projects specially   from economically backward regions like Bihar, Orrisa, Chhatisgarh etc and   efforts should also be
made for Public Private partnership for the accelerated promotion of Integrated Infrastructural Development.
Para (25.3)
Action Taken
 
1.19.2  The following steps/measures have been taken by the Ministry of SSI to popularize and to induce proposals from the States
under the IID Scheme:
 
(a)
                Minister of SSI & ARI addressed a letter to the Chief Ministers of States that are lagging behind in taking advantage
of IID Scheme to set up IID Centres in their State.
(b)               Minister of SSI & ARI has sent booklet containing information on all developmental schemes of Ministry of Small
Scale Industries and Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries to the Governors/ Chief Ministers of all the States, Union
Ministers/Ministers of States and all the Members of Parliament.   
(c)                Senior officers of the Ministry visiting various States meet industry officials and apprise them of various scheme of
this office including the IID Scheme.
(d)                SISIs make efforts to create awareness about the provisions under various Schemes. 
 
Recommendation
 
1.20     Third Census for SSI
 
1.20 .1 The Committee hopes that conclusions arrived at after Third Census through  collection of statistics and the subsequent
scientific analysis would prove  instrumental in ameliorating the status of Small Scale Industries.  Therefore, the Committee feels that
the Government may formulate   policy and programmes for promotion of SMEs based on the conclusions of Third Census, which
may include Liberalising credit policy to make institutional credit more accessible to SSI units including unregistered units ;
Identifing  industries requiring technological upgradation which can be assisted either under on-going programmes/schemes or new
appropriate schemes for the same ; setting Target sub-sectors which have high employment potential, for assistance under different
schemes ; Assistance for improving quality and productivity, especially of registered units which account for bulk of the output ;
identifyig  high tech industries which can be promoted in the SSI sector; Formulating  schemes of assistance for the growing service
sector (SSSBEs) ; Evolving  a system for regular collection of data through Sample Surveys at short intervals and a mechanism for
reaching the benefits of Government assistance to unregistered units.
Para (26.2)
Action Taken
 
1.20.2  The Third All-India Census of Small Scale Industries (2001-02) has provided valuable insight in to the status of small
enterprises sector and their needs. Based on the findings of the 3 rd Census, the Government has taken several measures for the
promotion and development of the small enterprises sector. These, inter alia, include: 
(i) With the objective of doubling the credit flow to the SME sector within a period of 5 years, the Government announced a ‘Policy
Package for Stepping up Credit to Small and Medium Enterprises’ on 10 August 2005. The package, inter alia, included fixing of
self-set targets by the banks for funding SMEs so as to achieve a minimum 20 per cent year-on-year growth in credit to SMEs.
(ii) Under the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS) for Technology Upgradation, amendments have been made with
effect from 29 September 2005 which, inter alia, include raising ceiling on loans from Rs.40 lakh to Rs.1 crore and the rate of subsidy
from 12 per cent to 15 per cent.
(ii) A Promotional Package for the Micro and Small Enterprises is under finalisation, This would include incentives for technology
upgradation, infrastructural and marketing facilities, capacity building of micro and small enterprises, support to women
entrepreneurs, etc. Further, with technical assistance of the Central Statistical Organisation (CSO), statistics and information on
micro, small and medium enterprises will also be collected through annual surveys and quinquennial census.
 
Recommendation
 
1.21     SENET Project:  promotion and development of Small Scale Industries
 
1.21.1  The Committee appreciates the role of SENET project in facilitating the  networking amongst the information seekers, which
concerns the development of the small scale sector, including the Central/State Governments, Government agencies engaged directly
or indirectly in the promotion and development of the SSI sector, national and state level industry associations, NGOs , however, its
contribution to SSI can further be enhanced by promotion of ICT tools in SME sector and deployment of more delivery mechanisms
such as information Kiosks, involving more SSI associations in popularizing usage of IT tools, ERP solutions etc. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the SENET project may incorporate these activity and financial assistance be accordingly be enhanced.
Para (28.3)
Action Taken
1.21.2  The National Manufacturing Competitiveness Council (NMCC) has submitted a 5 year National Manufacturing
Competitiveness Programme (NMCP) with a view to improve the competitiveness of the Indian Manufacturing Industries,
particularly in Small and Medium Enterprises. The NMCP includes, inter alia, a programme for promotion of ICT in the Indian

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
manufacturing sector. This programme envisages that in clusters of SMEs, which have quality production and export potential,
should be encouraged and assisted in adopting ICT applications to achieve competitiveness in the National and International Markets.
The programme is presently being examined in the Ministry, and is proposed to be included in XIth Plan/Annual Plan - 2007-08.
 
Recommendation
 
1.22     Quality of SSI products of domestic Small Scale Industries in comparison to the international and domestic market
 
1.22.1  The Committee feels that the quality of products is key to profitable marketing strategy as the same leads to sustainable
competitive edge in the domestic as well as international market, therefore, the Committee is of the view that steps must be  be
undertaken  in this regard to gain the competitive advantages for domestic products for a better tomorrow for SMEs.
Para (29.3)
            Action Taken
 
1.22.2  The Government has put in place several measures to help small enterprises become globally competitive. These include
special focus on areas such as technology up gradation, infrastructure assistance through the cluster approach, timely availability of
credit, adoption of modern management practices, use of electronic infrastructure and other IT applications, marketing and timely
information dissemination, including sensitisation of small industries to the emerging challenges of trade liberalisation.
 
1.22.3  To make the Indian SSI products more competitive, the Ministry of SSI has modernised its Product-cum-Process
Development Centres (PPDCs) and Tool Rooms. In addition, the field offices of SIDO,  Small Industries Service Institutes (SISIs)
have set up Technology Resource Centers (TRCs) to advise and enable the SSIs to upgrade themselves to compete in the global
market.
 
1.22.4  In order to help SSIs produce as per national and international standards, industries associations and State Governments are
being encouraged to set up their own testing laboratories under the “Scheme for setting up of testing centres by Industry Associations
and Modernisation/Expansion of Quality Marking Centres of State Governments and their autonomous bodies”. Under the scheme,
13 laboratories have been set up/modernized.
 
Recommendation
 
1.23     Incentive Scheme for acquiring ISO-900 Certification and Awareness and Motivational Programme on ISO-9000
 
1.23.1  The Committee notes that Incentive Scheme for acquiring ISO-900 Certification and Awareness and Motivational Programme
on ISO-9000 is proving  beneficial to the entrepreneurs and consumer.
Para (30.4)
 
Action Taken
 
1.24.2  The Ministry is in agreement with the observations of the Committee.
 
Recommendation
 
1.25     Process modification and product diversification in SMEs
 
1.25.1  The Committee is of the considered view that there is always the need for technology upgradation, product  and  process
development in Small Scale sector, therefore, the  Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme for Technology Upgradation undertaken by 
Office of  DC(SSI) would take care of the needful technology upgradation, product  & process development in Small Scale sector.
Para (32.3)
Action Taken
 
1.25.2  The observations of the Committee have been noted. With increasing competition due to liberalisation of the economy, the
survival and growth of the SSI units are critically dependent on their modernisation and technological upgradation. Upgradation of
both the process of manufacture and corresponding plant and machinery is necessary for the small enterprises to reduce the cost of
production and remain price competitive at a time when cheaper products are easily available in the global market. It is in this
background that Ministry of Small Scale Industries (SSI) is operating the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS), which
aims at facilitating technology upgradation by providing upfront capital subsidy to SSI units, including tiny, khadi, village and coir
industrial units, on institutional finance (credit) availed of by them for modernisation of their production equipment (plant and
machinery) and techniques.
 
Recommendation
 
1.26     The Chinese challenge              
 
1.26.1  The Committee observes that our market is fluxed with Chinese products manufactured in Small Scale segment, therefore,

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
there is urgent need for taking corrective  steps for  cost reduction, design, process-modification and production diversification to
make the Indian SSI product more competitive to combat the Chinese challenge.
Para (33.3)
Action Taken
 
1.26.2  The export-import data obtained from Department of Commerce, Ministry of Commerce and Industry indicate that while
India’s imports from China have increased from US $ 1283 million during 1999-2000 to US $ 7098 million during 2004-2005,
exports from  India to China have also grown from US $ 539 million during 1999-2000 to US $ 5616 million  during 2004-05.
 
1.26.3  To facilitate cost reduction, design, process-modification and product diversification to make the Indian SSI products more
competitive, the Ministry of SSI has modernised its Product-cum-Process Development Centres (PPDCs) and Tool Rooms. In
addition, the field offices of SIDO, Small Industries Service Institutes (SISIs) have set up Technology Resource Centers (TRCs) to
advise and enable the SSIs to upgrade themselves to compete in the global market.
 
1.26.4  In order to help SSIs produce as per national and international standards, industries associations and State Governments are
being encouraged to set up their own testing laboratories under the “Scheme for setting up of testing centres by Industry Associations
and Modernisation/Expansion of Quality Marking Centres of State Governments and their autonomous bodies”. The scheme provides
for one time capital grant equal to 50% of the cost of testing machinery and equipment, restricted to Rs.50 lakh per Industry
Associations/ State Governments/ State Government funded autonomous bodies. Under the scheme 13 laboratories have been set
up/modernized. Grants to the extent of Rs.222 lakh have been provided to these laboratories.
 
Recommendation
 
1.27     Working of the CLCSS for technological upgradation
 
1.27.1  The Committee desires that the  Governing and Technology Approval Board (GTAB)  must oversee the working of Credit 
linked Capital Subsidy Scheme in an effective manner so as to make the Scheme all successful.
Para (34.5.2)
Action Taken
 
1.27.2  The observation of the Committee has been noted. A Governing and Technology Approval Board (GTAB) under the
Chairmanship of the Secretary (SSI & ARI) is already in place to monitor the progress made in the implementation of the CLCSS and
to bring suitable policy changes to make the Scheme more focused and result oriented. 
 
Recommendation
 
1.28     Problems in implementation of Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme(CLCSS) 
 
1.28.1  The Committee takes note that SIDO faces  some problems in implementation of Credit Linked Capital Subsidy
Scheme(CLCSS)  which interalia include  lack of awareness about the scheme on the part of beneficiary units, lack of awareness
about the scheme among the managers of banks and financial institutions and the reluctance on the part of bankers to sanction term
loan. The Committee  is of the view that in order to combat the problem the SIDO should organize awareness programmes at various
locations all over the country to increase the awareness level of industry associations, banks and other concerned agencies , take up
regular review of progress of the scheme in the meetings of State Level Bankers’ Committees (SLBCs) and publicity measures to
increase general awareness about the scheme.
Para (34.5.6)
Action Taken
 
1.28.2  SIDO is organising sensitisation/awareness programmes at various locations throughout the country through its field offices,
i.e. the Small Industries Service Institutes (SISIs) to increase awareness about the CLCSS among the beneficiary/prospective
beneficiary units and other stake-holders.  It is also proposed to organise more sensitisation progrmmes during the current financial
year, especially in areas, where no such programme has been conducted so far.  In these programmes, the SISIs associate the nodal
agencies, i.e. the SIDBI and the NABARD, industry associations, State Government Departments and agencies, banks and financial
institutions, so as to make collective efforts in sensitising the participants about all aspects of the CLCSS, including the operational
and modalities issues.
 
1.28.3  In August, 2005, the Reserve Bank of India was requested to issue directions to all the Convener Banks to oversee the
progress made under the CLCSS in the monthly review meetings of State Level Bankers Committee (SLBC) and for giving due
attention to the concerns pertaining to delayed disbursement of term loan and subsidy under the CLCSS during such review meetings.
Based on the advice of this Ministry, the RBI has issued specific instructions to all the SLBC Convener Banks.
 
1.28.4  The revised guidelines on the CLCSS have been sent to the nodal agencies/banks, Secretary (Industries) and
Commissioner/Director of Industries of all States and UTs, prominent Small Industry Associations, Directors of all SISIs and
Regional Testing Centres (RTCs) with a request to disseminate the information to all concerned.  These revised guidelines are also
available on SIDO website.

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
 
1.28.5  In order to ensure more effective flow of subsidy to the eligible beneficiaries and to reduce the average time lag between filing
of the request and release of subsidy under the CLCSS, nine new nodal banks/agencies have been included under the CLCSS, in
addition to the existing nodal agencies i.e. the SIDBI and the NABARD. These nine nodal agencies are the State Bank of India, the
Canara Bank, the Bank of Baroda, the Punjab National Bank, the Bank of India, the Andhra Bank, the State Bank of Bikaner and
Jaipur, the Tamil Nadu Industrial Investment Corporation Ltd., and the National Small Industries Corporation Ltd.  These nodal
banks/agencies are also requested to undertake sensitisation programmes/ awareness campaign for the successful implementation of
the CLCSS.
 
Recommendation
 
1.29     Standard/ quality of technology
 
1.29.1  The Committee desires that the standard/ quality of technology employed in domestic Small Scale Industries must be 
comparable enough to technology employed by SMEs in  other developing/developed countries so as to imbibe competitiveness in
domestic SSI products vis-a-vis foreign products in view of its influx as the consequent of removal of quantitative restrictions in the
wake of WTO guidelines. The Committee feels that  WTO guidelines awareness programme and  techonological imorovement
schemes together can imbibe competitiveness in domestic SSI products vis-a-vis foreign products.
Para (34.6.2)
Action Taken
 
1.29.2  The value of SSI exports from India has been growing consistently and SSI contributes as much as around 34 per cent of the
nation’s exports.  Thus the Indian SSI products are competitive in the global market for quite a number of products.  In order to
further improve our competitive strength for domestic products in the international market, the following steps have been taken: (i)
assisting Industry Associations to establish Product Testing Centres; (ii) assistance to units to obtain ISO:9000/ISO:14001
certification and registration for Bar Coding; (iii) Opening of more Mini Tool Rooms, etc. The SIDO and the National Small
Industries Corporation are also implementing various schemes for marketing support and export promotion.  
 
Recommendation
 
1.30     Other Schemes
 
1.301   The Committee notes that the participation of Small Scale Industries in exhibitions, fairs and taking of business delegations
abroad and the consequent results of the surveys, studies and policy research would be used for policy research and enhancing
efficiency and competitiveness of SSI & ARI sectors and also expanding generation of sustainable employment .
Para (38.5)
 
Action Taken
1.30.1  In order to make participation in fairs more effective and meaningful, SSI-MDA scheme has been partially modified.  Now
more number of owners/ representatives of the participating units will be able to accompany their exhibits in the international trade
fairs/ exhibitions.  Such participations would provide them an insight into market strategies, business practices of foreign competitors,
international trends in product designing/ packaging, pricing etc.  It would also give an opportunity to the SSI units to establish long-
term business contacts with prospective buyers/ sellers as large number of them visits such fairs/ exhibitions.
 
1.30.2  The feedback and inputs brought back by SSI participants, who are sponsored for exhibitions, fairs, business delegations
abroad under the ‘International Cooperation Scheme’ and the findings of studies and surveys under the Survey and Studies Scheme
will continue to be used for policy research and for enhancing efficiency and competitiveness of SSI and ARI sectors.
 
Recommendation
 
1.31     Technology upgradation and exposure to the latest technologies
 
1.31.1  The Committee is of the view that country’s  small enterprises need technology upgradation and exposure to the latest
technologies available globally for increasing their competitiveness.  The Committee, therefore, is in agreement with the provision of
enhanced outlay under the International Cooperation Scheme, and the Committee hopes the enhanced outlay would be suffient   to
support more events to enable small enterprises’ participation in international exhibitions, trade fairs, etc. for facilitating joint venture,
technology infusion and enhancing their exports.
Para (38.11)
Action Taken
1.30.2  The Ministry is in agreement with the observations of the Committee.
 
Recommendation
 
1.31     Credit Guarantee Scheme
 

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
1.31.1  The Committee is of the view that in order to strengthening the monitoring mechanism of the Credit Guarantee Scheme RBI
may consider to  include “review of Credit Guarantee Scheme” as one of the items in its agenda for regular meetings held with
commercial banks. Moreover, the Ministry of Finance may install a monitoring mechanism for reviewing the progress made under
Credit Guarantee Scheme by banks. It is expected that the Directorates of Industries in various States should  be directed to carry out
review of coverage of credit under Credit Guarantee Scheme by banks in their respective States. The commercial banks must  apprise
the Ministry of SSI, regularly, on the progress made under the Credit Guarantee Scheme.
Para (39.10)
Action Taken
 
1.31.2  The Reserve Bank of India has been apprised of the suggestions of the Committee. Further, the Directorate of Industries in all
States/UTs have been requested review the progress made under Credit Guarantee Scheme, in association with the banks. The bank-
wise progress made under the scheme is being furnished by the CGTSI to the Ministry and is reviewed by Secretary (SSI & ARI) on
monthly basis.
 
 
Recommendation
 
1.32     Employment opportunities
 
1.32.1  The Committee observes that one of the main objectives of the Credit Guarantee Scheme is to generate more employment
opportunities spreading across length and breadth of the country , therefore, the CGTSI must prove  instrumental in creating new job
opportunities.  The beneficiaries under the Scheme may cover the tiny sector comprising of rural artisans, self-employed
entrepreneurs etc so that the Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme be able to tackle the twin problem of unemployment and poverty.
Para (39.11)
 
Action Taken
1.32.2  The CGTSI provides coverage to units promoted by the rural artisans, self-employed entrepreneurs, etc., to the extent that the
activities are eligible for coverage. With concerted efforts made by the Government and the CGTSI in creating awareness of the
scheme, the performance under the scheme has picked up considerably. As on 31 July 2006, cumulatively 46,481 proposals involving
credit of Rs.1181.53 crore have been approved for guarantee under the scheme. The employment generated by the units covered
under the scheme is estimated to be around 2.35 lakh persons.
 
Recommendation
 
1.33     Collateral/third party guarantee
 
1.33.1  The Committee observes that despite the provision of the loans (up to 25.00 lakh) without collateral/third party guarantee and
the guidelines  of the Reserve Bank of India thereto, banks insist  on the collateral security and the third party guarantee and despite
the Committee's repeated recommendation to change the mindset of the Branch Managers, nothing fruitful has come out, therefore,
the Committee desires that Government should come out with  the suitable and sustainable measures for effective working of the
scheme as per its declared vision and mission.
Para (39.12.2)
Action Taken
 
1.33.2  The banks have been advised by the RBI to consider increasing the exemption limit for doing without collateral security for
all SSI borrower accounts, based on good track record and financial position of the units, from Rs.15 lakh to Rs.25 lakh, with the
approval of their Boards of Directors. The CGTSI is making all efforts to change the mindset of the branch level bank managers to
consider the loan applications on merits rather than on the strength of collaterals and/or third party guarantee. Further, changes in the
scheme are introduced from time to time, to make it more user friendly. Workshops for branch level managers of banks are being
held regularly to apprise them of the procedural details of the Credit Guarantee Scheme and address any apprehensions they may
have regarding the scheme. As a result of the efforts of the CGTSI and member banks, the coverage under the scheme has picked up
significantly in recent years.
 
Recommendation
 
1.34     Working of income tax exemption
           
1.34.1  The Committee notes the  announcement made  by   the Finance Minister  in is Budget Speech (2006-07) on the success of
Credit Guarantee Scheme and the consequent   promotion and proliferation of SMEs :-
 
(a)        Raising  the corpus of the Credit Guarantee Fund from Rs. 1.13 crore at end-March 2006 to Rs. 2,500 crore in five years.  In
2006-07,  proposing  to provide a sum of Rs. 118 crore;
(b)        Advising  Credit Guarantee Trust for Small Industries (CGTSI) to  reduce the one time guarantee fee from 2.5 per cent to 1.5
per cent for all loans; and
(c)        Extending  insurance cover to approximately 30,000 borrowers, identified as chief promoters, under the CGTSI.  The sum

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
assured would be Rs. 200,000 per beneficiary and the premium will be paid by CGTSI.
Para (39.14.6)
Action Taken
 
1.34.2  Raising the corpus of the CGTSI to Rs.2500 crore is one of the components of the ‘Package for Promotion of Micro and Small
Enterprises’, which has been considered by the EFC at its meeting held on 31
st May 2006. The Package will be placed before the
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs shortly.
 
1.34.3  The one-time guarantee fee under the Credit Guarantee Scheme has been reduced from 2.5 per cent to 1.5 per cent w.e.f. 1
April 2006.
 
1.34.4  The proposal to extend insurance cover to the beneficiary under the scheme is under consideration and is expected to be
operational shortly. 
 
 
Recommendation
 
1.35     Higher the corpus fund of CGTSI
 
1.35.1  The Committee is in agreement with the   Credit Guarantee Fund  to be increased to Rs.2500 crore over the next 5 years with
total contribution from GOI of Rs.2000 crore and Rs.500 crore from SIDBI respectively, therefore, approves the provision for the 
sum of Rs. 118 crore during the year 2006-07.  The Committee is quite convinced that   higher the corpus fund, the credibility of
CGTSI would get enhanced in the opinion  of the lending institutions seeking guarantee cover so that in case of default by SSI
borrowers, CGTSI would be in a position to meet claims raised against the guarantees issued by it, therefore, the Committee, believes
that  the corpus fund would be  helpful  in  meeting  the likely contingent liabilities arising out of the guarantees issued by CGTSI. 
Para (39.14.7)
Action Taken
 
1.35.2  The Ministry agrees with the observations of the Committee.
 
Recommendation
 
1.36     Lump sum provision for projects/schemes for the benefit of the North Eastern Region  and Sikkim
 
1.36.1  The Committee is of the view that the North Eastern Region and Sikkim have abundant natural resources and potential for
small and tiny units which  can be utilized for industrial development.  Despite the several steps taken to accelerate the setting up of
SSI units,   the absence of motivated entrepreneurs has hampered the promotion and rapid industrialization and   the growth of small
scale industries in the North Eastern States including Sikkim has not kept pace with the growth of SSIs in other parts of the country,
therefore, the Committee views that concerted efforts should be made for promotion and proliferation of SMEs in the region . 
Para (41.6)
Action Taken
 
1.36.2  For the promotion of small enterprises in the North Eastern Region (NER), 13 IID Centres have been sanctioned in the region
so far. Further, the National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) is organizing skill upgradation programmes in various fields such
as leather, electronics, food processing, computer hardware maintenance, mobile and telephone repairing, tailoring and knitting,
hospitality and tourism management, etc., to motivate entrepreneurs and utilise local resources. In addition, the NSIC is organizing
‘Small Enterprises Establishment Programme’ during the current year in each North Eastern States including Sikkim. The NSIC has
also entrusted Indian Institute of Entrepreneurs, Guwahati to carry out a study with regard to purchase pattern of Government
Departments/PSUs in the region to enable capacity building of the existing SSIs as well as setting up of new enterprises.
 
Recommendation
 
1.37     Central/State incentives or exemption from taxation in setting-up of small scale industries in NER or Sikkim
 
1.37.1  The Committee observes that despite the several Central/State incentives or exemption from taxation in setting-up of small
scale industries in NER or Sikkim due to the locational disadvantages or the situational problems prevailing in the region, the region
has not seen the light of industrial development at the expected pace, therefore, the Committee, recommends that Ministry of SSI in
tandem with States Government should induce the setting up of SSI units.
Para (41.8.2)
Action Taken
1.37.2  In order to accelerate the setting up of SSI units in the NER, the following measures have been taken:
 
1.37.2  The Small Industries Service Institutes/Branch Institutes (SISIs/BIs) have been opened in all the NE States and Sikkim, which
regularly conducts training programmes for entrepreneurship development and skill development as well as conduct campaigns to
generate awareness.

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
1.37.3  Under the IID scheme, Central Grant of up to 80% (maximum Rs.4 crore) is provided to the implementing agency for setting
up IIDcentres in NE States and Sikkim. So far, 13 IID Centres have been sanctioned in the region.
 
1.37.4  A Tool Room and Training Centre has been set up at Guwahati to design and manufacture tools, dyes, jigs, fixtures, etc. and
to impart training in tool and dye manufacturing and use of computers in design and manufacturing.
 
1.37.5  The Indian Institute of Entrepreneurship (IIE) has been set up at Guwahati. Promotion of new entrepreneurs has been the
major focus area of the training programmes organized by the Institute.
 
Recommendation
 
1.38     Small Industries Service Institute (SISI) in NER
 
1.38.1  The Committee is of the considered view that the institutions in the NER & Sikkim must provide the latest state of the art
technology to clusters and the Government should provide adequate fund for technology development and modernization of existing
infrastructure in the region.
Para (41.10.4)
Action Taken
 
1.38.2  Under the IID Scheme, an amount of Rs.10.08 crore has been released during 2005-06 to the NER for strengthening of
infrastructural facilities.  
 
1.39.3  The Small Industries Service Institutes (SISIs) and branch SISIs functioning in NER have been provided with the computers
along with all necessary softwares, photocopiers, LCD projectors, etc., to provide the latest information and guidance to the
entrepreneurs required for promotion and development of micro, small & medium industries. Further, technical officers of these
institutes are provided training to meet the requirement of the industries in the region. Sufficient funds are available under the Credit
Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme to enable the entrepreneurs in the North East region to go in for technology upgradation.
 
Recommendation
 
1.40     Training Institutions - DC (SSI)
 
1.40.1  The Committee is of the view that in the absence of training institution under the unbrella of DC (SSI), the existing 4 SISIs
one each in Guwahati (Assam), Imphal (Manipur), Agartala (Tripura) and Gangtok (Sikkim) must provide
entrepreneurship/managerial/skill development training, consultancy, project profiles, extension services and common facilities to the
small scale entrepreneurs for its ensured promotion.
Para (41.11.2)
Action Taken
 
1.40.2  The four SISIs in Guwahati (Assam), Imphal (Manipur), Agartala (Tripura) and Gangtok (Sikkim) are providing
entrepreneurship managerial training, consultancy, project profiles and extension services to the existing and prospective
entrepreneurs of these States.  The common facility services attached with SISI Guwahati and Imphal are conducting Skill
Development Training Programmes in the area of machinist, fitter, welding, etc. These common facility centers are equipped with
latest machines. The hi-tech jigs, fixtures, components and parts of machine tools are also being developed / manufactured in these
common facility workshops. Further, these SISIs are also providing training to the existing and prospective entrepreneurs in the area
of CAD/CAM. 
 
Recommendation
 
1.41     Trade  Related Entrepreneur Development for women (TREAD)
 
1.41.1 The Committee approves the fund for Trade Related Entrepreneur Development for women (TREAD) as the scheme is in
consonance with the national priority to empower the women and shift towards gender – sensitization programme. The Committee is
however, of the view that NGOs be permitted to conduct the training programmes under the Scheme as the same would enable the
women entrepreneurs from the NER including Sikkim, to take the benefits of the scheme.
Para (41.12.3)
Action Taken
 
1.41.2  Under the existing guidelines, NGOs are not permitted to conduct the training programmes under the scheme unless they have
raised the loan on behalf of entrepreneurs for income generating activities in non-farm sector. As a special dispensation, the proposal
of the NGOs based in NER including Sikkim have already been permitted to conduct the training programmes under the scheme,
irrespective of whether they have raised loan for women beneficiaries under the scheme, if their proposals are routed through IIE,
Guwahati and NSIC, Guwahati. 
 

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
Recommendation
 
1.42     Sub-Contracting Exchange for Ancillary  Development
 
1.42.1  The Committee approves the provision for the common fund for Sub-Contracting Exchange for Ancillary  Development and
Vendor Development Programme   ( VDP) and hopes that the provision so made would lead to   proliferation of industrial activities
in the backward areas of NER and Sikkim  by motivating large public and private sector units and other organizations to get their
requirement of spares/sub-assemblies and other items from the small scale units  resulting  into  ancillary development. 
Para (41.13.5)
 
 
Action Taken
 
1.42.2  Vendor Development Programmes are organised by the field institutions located in the region every year in order to establish
business linkages between large and small enterprises. Central Government Departments/Public Sector Undertakings like Defence,
Railways, Coal, Steel, Petro-Chemicals, Food & Food Processing, etc., as well as private sector industries participate in these
programmes.
 
Recommendation
1.43     Tool Room   in NER  including Sikkim
1.43.1 The Committee hopes that the Tool Rooms providing  the technological support services to SMEs in the North Eastern Region
by precision quality toolings and trained manpower in the area of tool engineering would go a long way in the promotion and
proliferation of SMEs in NER  including Sikkim.
Para (41.14.4)
Action Taken
 
1.43.2  The Tool Room and Training Centre at Guwahati is nearing completion and has already started training programmes. In
addition, Government has also approved two proposals received from Government of Nagaland and Government of Tripura for
setting up Mini Tool Rooms at Dimapur and Agartala, with Central assistance under the Mini Tool Room Scheme. It is expected that
these three Tool Rooms will meet the toolings and training requirements of NE Region.
 
Recommendation
1.44     Collection of Statistics  of SSIs
 
1.44.1  The Committee understands that the main objective of the Collection of Statistics  of SSIs is to collect, maintain and update
the data related to SSI Sector for conducting sample survey, diagnostic survey, Index of Industrial Production (IIP) data collection
and census. The Committee finds that the collected data provide considerable details on various economic parameters like growth in
the number of SSI units and their production, employment, investment, etc, and therefore would be of considerable importance for
policy- formulation.
Para (41.17.2)
 
 
Action Taken
 
1.44.2  Data on SSI sector collected through the Scheme of Collection of Statistics of SSIs is essential for the planning and policy
formulation. At present, the data on SSI sector (defined in terms of investment in plant and machinery) is not available through any
other sources. Also data collected under the scheme provide considerable details on SSI sector characteristics not available from other
sources.
 
 
Recommendation
 
1.45     Credit Guarantee Scheme for SSI Sector
 
1.45.1  The Committee is pleased  to  know that   guarantee fee for all proposals received from NER has been reduced from 2.5% to
1.5%  for stepping up credit to Small & Medium Enterprises’, however, the Committee would like to know the implication of the 
provision on the Credit Guarantee Scheme for SSI Sector in the region.
Para (41.18.2)
Action Taken
1.45.2  In line with the announcement made in the Budget 2006-07, the one-time guarantee fee under the scheme has been reduced

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
from 2.5 per cent to 1.5 per cent for all borrowers throughout the country with effect from 1 April 2006. The reduction in the
guarantee fee is expected to encourage more number of small entrepreneurs in availing the benefits of the scheme. While the
CGTSI’s income will get reduced to the extent of reduction in the guarantee fee, the concomitant higher volumes in guarantee
coverage and the resultant increase in guarantee fee income is likely to offset the deficit. 
 
Recommendation
 
1.46     Micro Finance Programme
 
1.46.1  The Committee finds that the funds under PRF are utilized for security deposit requirement of the loan amount from the
MFIs/NGOs in the hitherto underserved States including North Eastern States and Sikkim. The Committee desires that the
government should undertake  the needed measures viz. capacity- building of micro finance institutions for covering larger number of
beneficiaries of  the NER; and  training of prospective and existing micro entrepreneurs for making them competitive  for improving
the status of micro units in NER and Sikkim .
Para (41.19.3)
Action Taken
 
1.46.2  The Scheme of Micro Finance Programme being implemented by the Ministry has been tied up with the existing Micro Credit
Scheme of SIDBI. SIDBI has been putting special emphasis on the development of micro credit delivery network in the NER and has
taken the following measures: (i) More than 20 MFIs/NGOs have so far been assisted under the scheme benefiting 55,000
beneficiaries (mostly women), with total assistance of more than Rs.10 crore. The activities that have been covered include bamboo
craft, weaving, tailoring, handlooms and handicrafts, cane work, rice milling, etc.; (ii) SIDBI has identified 4 new NGOs in NER for
possible partnership and one Non-Bank Financial Company (NBFC) in Nagaland for an initial capacity building support so that the
outreach could be further expanded. The capacity building package comprises support for capacity creation/upgradation at the
beneficiary/client level to enhance the operating capability of micro non-farm units;  (iii) To have focused attention for the
development of NER, SIDBI has opened an exclusive cell, known as “Cell for development of NER”, at Guwahati. The Cell along
with the Bank’s regional office at Guwahati and seven branch offices in the NER/Sikkim identify new MFIs/NGOs and work in close
co-ordination with other development agencies to bring about a visible impact on the living standard of the poor in the region.  
 
Recommendation
 
1.47     Other Grants – NSIC
 
1.47.1  The Committee recommends that  a study may be undertaken  with respect to activities of various organisations engaged in
the promotion of industrialization in North-East region and the problems being faced by the entrepreneurs of NER to evaluate the role
of       NSIC for rapid promotion of SMEs in the region. The Committee feels that the role of NSIC could be that of nodal agency for
the procurement of the requirements of all the Government bodies including PSUs. This would greatly help NSIC in assessing the
total requirement of the products being met from outside NER and the need to increase capacities of SSIs of NER.
Para (41.21.2)
Action Taken
 
1.47.2  The suggestions of the Committee have been noted for necessary compliance. With its seven offices in North East Region
(NER), the National Small Industries Corporation is in a position to act as a nodal agency for marketing and capacity building of
small scale industries of NER.
 
Recommendation
 
1.48     Outlook of unorganized /informal sector in NER including Sikkim
 
1.48.1  The Committee finds that  the enterprises based in the NER and Sikkim are predominantly handlooms and handicraft based
and also relate to activities in food processing industries. The Committee is in agreement with the Ministry that through the
intervention of Growth Poles as proposed  by the NCEUS there is large scope to increase the productivity of these enterprises and
give a fillip to skill formation and growth in SSI  sector. In addition,  there is a section of the informal sector that are home based
workers, services sector etc. The Committee feels that the complementarities that are proposed to be built up as a result of
intervention in the Growth Pole would  benefit the unorganized/ informal sector as a result of forward and backward linkages in
productive activities  .
Para (41.24.1)
Action Taken
 
1.48.2  Keeping in view the importance of the North-East region, the NECEUS is presently engaged in formation of detailed project
report for a pilot Growth Pole in Assam. The State Government of Assam has responded to the initial request of the NCEUS and is in
process of selecting a multi-product cluster for the formation of Growth Pole. For this purpose, separate budgetary provision of
Rs.3.30 crore has been made.  
 

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
 
Recommendation
 
1.49     Investments in Public Enterprises
 
1.49.1  The Committee recommends that NSIC must be  guided by the Principle of Management by Objectives (MBO) . The
Committee feels that in order to ensure smooth credit flow to small enterprises, NSIC should  enter  into strategic alliances with
commercial banks to facilitate long term / working capital financing of the small enterprises across the country.
Para (42.5)
            Action Taken
 
1.49.2  National Small Industries Corporation has tied up with banks for sanction of terms loan and working capital facilities to meet
the credit needs of small enterprises. Such tie-up arrangements have been firmed up with United Bank of India, UCO Bank, Oriental
Bank of Commerce, Central Bank of India and Bank of Maharashtra. Similar arrangements are in pipeline with other major banks in
the country. National Small Industries Corporation mobilizes and forwards the credit proposals to these banks to provide financial
assistance as per their lending policy.
 
Recommendation
 
1.50     Tiny and Micro Enterprises
 
1.50.1  The Committee is of the view that concrete  steps may be taken to strengthen and streamline the tiny sector and in order to
give tiny sector an organized outlook. The Committee finds that Small Scale Industries (SSIs) including tiny units in the country 
have enough competitive strength to withstand the impact of free imports and intense global competition.  Government should launch
awareness programme  of the WTO provision and international  environment for preparing the small scale sector including tiny sector
to meet the challenges of globalization. Government should  constantly monitor  the impact of the removal of QRs and WTO
Agreements on the economy including the SSIs in the country. The Committee is aware that the removal of QRs have exposed the
SSIs to a greater competition, yet the SSI sector including tiny sector  is bound to grow.  
Para (43.3)
Action Taken
 
1.50.2  The Small Scale Industries (SSIs), including tiny units have enough competitive strengths to withstand the impact of free
imports and intense global competition under WTO regime as is evident from their past track record.  With a view to create
awareness about the WTO provisions and also for preparing them to meet the challenges of globalistion, Government launched the
awareness programme in the year 2000. Since then a number of sensitisation programmes, workshops, etc. on WTO its impact have
been organised.  Concerted efforts in this direction will continue during the current year also.   
 
1.50.3  Government is constantly assessing and monitoring the impact of the removal of Quantitative Restrictions (QRs) and
Globalisation on the growth and development of Small Scale Industries (SSIs) in the country.  Though removal of QRs has exposed
the SSIs to a greater competition, yet the SSI sector has continued to grow. However, even after the removal of QRs, protection to the
industries is available in the form of raising custom duties upto the bound levels, imposing anti-dumping duties, taking safeguards
measures in case of surge in imports, etc.  This monitoring process will continue. 
 
1.50.4  Removal of QRs does not automatically remove all the protection available to the domestic producers.  India can regulate
imports through adjustments in tariff  within the bound rates.  Apart from tariff, action under anti-dumping and safeguard measures
can be taken to provide protection to the domestic producers. For initiating anti-dumping action and imposition of safeguard duty
separate Directorates are already working under the Ministry of Commerce and Industry and the Ministry of Finance respectively.
 
1.50.5  The Government has put in place several measures to help small enterprises become globally competitive. These include
special focus on areas such as technology up gradation, infrastructure assistance through the cluster approach, timely availability of
credit, adoption of modern management practices, use of electronic infrastructure and other IT applications, marketing and timely
information dissemination, including sensitisation of small industries to the emerging challenges of trade liberalisation.
In view of above, even after removal of QRs and exposure of SSIs to a greater competition, the SSI sector including tiny
sector will continue to grow. 
 
Recommendation
 
1.51     Institutional support in rehabilitation of Sick SSI units
           
1.51.1  The Committee is, of the view that  for effective  rehabilitation of Sick SSI units and promotion of SSI Sectors  all the
Regional Offices of RBI should ensure that meetings of State Level Inter-Institutional Committee SLIICs are convened at regular
periodical intervals and the meetings are attended by the senior officials of banks/financial institutions so as to serve the desired
objective. The representatives of the local SSI Associations should also be invited to the meetings of SLIIC, which should play a
major role in rehabilitation of sick units. SLIICs should address the  issues regarding delay in carrying out viability studies and
initiating nursing programmes of viable units as also progress in revival of units, which have been placed under the nursing
programme. Further, the issues relating to the progress made in implementation of the revised guidelines issued by the RBI based on

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
the recommendations of Kohli Working Group must  be addressed  to ensure that the banks strictly follow these guidelines for
detection of sickness at an early stage and take remedial measures for speedy rehabilitation of sick SSI units identified as potentially
viable.
 Para (45.2)
Action Taken
 
1.51.2  The State Level Inter-Institutional Committee (SLIIC) has been reviewing the problem of rehabilitation of sick SSIs on
quarterly basis. The meetings of these Committees are convened by Regional Offices of RBI and presided over by the Secretary,
Industry of the State Government concerned. It provides a useful forum for adequate interfacing between the State Government
Officials and State Level Institutions on the one side and the term lending institutions and banks on the other. The SLIIC forum
makes efforts in consultation with State Government agencies to remove bottlenecks in rehabilitation of sick SSI units. Among
others, the representatives of the local state level SSI associations are also invited to the meetings of SLIIC.
 
1.51.3  Based on the recommendations of Kohli Working Group, the RBI has issued detailed revised guidelines to banks on 16
January 2002 for detection of sickness at an early stage and taking remedial measures, and for rehabilitation of sick SSI units
identified as potentially viable.  These guidelines include, inter alia, change in the definition of sick SSI units, norms for deciding on
their viability, concessional finance, etc., with a view to helping the banks in detecting sickness at an early stage and taking corrective
action for revival of the potentially viable sick SSI units.
 
Recommendation
 
1.52     Credit rating system for SSI unit or group of SSI units during the year 2006-07"
 
1.52.1  The Committee welcomes  the  Credit Rating Agency for SMEs namely, SME Rating Agency of India Ltd. (SMERA) which 
aims at providing affordable, credible and independent ratings to the SMEs, and thus  would help enhancing their credibility and
standing.
Para (48.3)
Action Taken
 
1.52.2  The SME Rating Agency of India Ltd. (SMERA) is committed to creating an enabling environment towards enhancing flow
of credit to SMEs. It has so far conducted rating of 136 SME units and is constantly endeavouring to popularise the concept amongst
the Banks and SMEs. Towards this end, SMERA has already entered into MoUs with 16 Banks and the benefits of rating services
have started to percolate in the form of better credit terms. In order to enhance the outreach of Banks, develop a better understanding
of SME clusters and encourage cluster based financing, SMERA has undertaken ‘Risk profiling of clusters’. Risk profiling studies in
respect of 4 clusters viz., Jamshedpur (engineering and fabrication), Nashik (steel furniture), Baddi/Parwanoo (light engineering) and
Kochi (rubber products) are in the process of finalisation.
 
Recommendation
 
1.53     
Linkages between large and small enterprises   
 
1.53.1  The Committee is of the view that the concrete  steps may be undertaken  to accelerate and strengthen the partnership
approach to develop linkages between large and small enterprises. Steps may also be taken for revitalization and regeneration of
existing organizations and revamping  of existing organizations and revamping of the mechanism for technological upgradation. The
Committee would like to know the status of R&D in technology upgradation, further steps required for designing and outcome of
efforts towards cost-reduction  consequent to the technological upgradation and steps being taken towards avoidance of waste and
non-value adding activities.
Para (50.3)
Action Taken
 
1.53.2  To develop linkages between large and small enterprises, this Ministry organizes Vendor Development Programmes (VDPs)
through SISIs. The VDPs provide a common platform to both the buying and selling organizations to interact with each other with a
view to identify emerging demands of the buyer organizations as also opportunity for displaying the capabilities of the small scale
entrepreneurs and their industrial ventures. During 2006-07, 45 VDPs will be organized in different parts of the country.
 
1.53.3  This Ministry has also set up Sub-contract Exchanges (SCXs) across the country for dissemination of information to the small
and large organizations. The SCXs have helped in fostering closer cooperation between large and small scale organizations. 
 
1.53.4  Ministry of SSI operates two schemes for technology up-gradation, viz., Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS) and
Small Industry Cluster Development Programme (SICDP). The former provides a subsidy to an SSI unit for induction of improved
technology @ 15% on purchase price of plant and machinery. The latter aims at technology up-gradation in the cluster as a whole. It
covers a comprehensive range of issues related to technology up-gradation, improvement of productivity, energy conservation,
pollution control, product diversification and training needs, etc. In addition, this Ministry has also set up autonomous bodies, viz.,
Tool Rooms for providing tooling facilities to small enterprises, products based Process cum Product Development Centres for
product development and process improvements and Testing Centres for testing of the quality of the product.

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
 
1.53.5There are schemes with Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR) which promote and facilitate R&D activities
taken up by the industry. This Ministry maintains close interaction with these institutions for utilising their services for implementing
the SICDP. The issue pertaining to waste minimization/ utilization and non-value adding activities are addressed during the
implementation of the SICDP.
 
Recommendation
 
1.54     The Policy of Reservation
 
1.54.1  The Committee notes the stand of the Government that  the Policy of Reservation discourages investment competition &
technology up-gradation in the small sector. The Committee also takes note that  de-reservation of 180 items, as announced in the
Budget (2006-07) would  help the small scale sector to meet the demand for technological upgradation, encourage research and
development and make the sector competitive to face the domestic and global competition. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the overall impact of the de-reservation of reserved items.
Para (51.2)
Action Taken
 
1.55.2  Government has entrusted a study to RGICS to assess the impact of de-reservation. As per their findings, the reserved SSI
sector is a minor component of the SSI sector and only few industry classification account for bulk of reserved output. No significant
fall in the SSI output in most de-reserved product segments. De-reservation followed by fall in the growth rate of imports of the de-
reserved items and only very few large units shown interest in entering the reserved sector.
 
Recommendation
 
1.56     Anti-dumping mechanism 
 
1.56.1  The Committee would like to know the views  on the following issues along with progress made in regard to: -
 
(a)
                Working of renewed provision in Indo-Nepal Treaty in Trade Transit in checking influx of chinese goods en-route
Nepal during the years 2006-07;
(b)               Conversion of Quantitative Restrictions (QRs) into rationalised tariff regime for providing protection to the
domestic SSIs;
(c)                Rationalisation of countervailing duties and safeguard duties to protect domestic producers in consonance  with
WTO provision; and
(d)               Expeditious disposal of dumping cases are anti-dumping actions thereto, in view of almost all SSI products under
open general license (OGL) list.
Para (52.2)
Action Taken
 
1.56.2  The Department of Commerce revised the Indo-Nepal Treaty of Trade and the revised protocol came into force with effect
from 6.3.2002 for a period of 5 years. To protect the interests of the industry the following steps were taken: (i) Rules for granting
Certificate of Origin were changed.  Only following articles were allowed to be imported preferentially - those, which are
manufactured in Nepal wholly from Nepalese and/or Indian materials; the articles involving a manufacturing process in Nepal that
brings about a change in classification in 4-digit level; and products in which there is value addition of at least 43% (effective from
6
th March, 2003).
                         
1.56.3  In addition, certain special provisions with respect to import of vegetable fats (vanaspati), acrylic yarn, copper products and
zinc oxide will be allowed in India subject to a fixed quota per year as prescribed and no preferential facility will be available for
import of items like alcoholic liquors, beverages and their by-product except industrial spirits, perfumes and cosmetics with non-
Nepalese/non-Indian brand name and cigarettes and tobacco. After the revision of the Indo-Nepal Treaty Trade, problems faced by
small scale industries have been resolved to a large extent. 
 
(a)
    Under the WTO regime all Quantitative Restrictions (QRs) have been abolished except 430 QRs maintained on account of
public morality, safety and health, etc.  The current peak tariff rate on SSI products is 12.5 per cent.  These tariffs are among
the higher tariffs applied by the various member states under the WTO regime.  The Ministry of Commerce and Industry
while monitoring trade, including that falling under the SSI sector, keeps a watch on the tariff being applied on the various
products.
 
(b)
   The Director General of Safeguards has taken up action in respect of 18 products for investigations. So far, safeguard duties in
respect of 10 cases have been imposed. The Government is in the process of amending the provisions of Foreign Trade
(Development and Regulation) Act 1992 so that safeguard action in the form of QRs could be applied, if there are sudden and
massive imports. There is also the provision for imposition of countervailing duty, if required.
 
(c)
    Anti-dumping actions were initiated by the Director General of Anti-dumping and Allied Duties (DGAD) in respect of certain

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
products of SSI concern like Dry-Cell Batteries and sports shoes. The Anti-dumping authority in the Ministry of Commerce
and Industry is responsible for the anti-dumping actions when complaints are made by the SSI sector. The time taken by the
Indian authority to dispose off anti-dumping cases compare favourably with other major users of anti-dumping measures in
the world. The DGAD is fully geared up to take expeditious action on dumping in the form of imposing anti-dumping duty so
as to protect the interests of small scale industries. 
 
Recommendation
 
1.57     Recognizing SMEs in the service sector
 
1.57.1  The Committee welcomes the announcement of the Finance Minister in the Budget  (2006-07)  treating the small scale
enterprises in the services sector on par with the small scale enterprises in the manufacturing sector. The Committee would like to
know the   impact  and implication of recognizing SMEs in the service sector.
Para (61.2)
Action Taken
 
1.57.2  To provide recognition to the MSMEs in the service sector, the same has now been defined in the MSMED Act, 2006, section
III, 7(1)(b)(i) to (iii) wherein micro service enterprises has been defined as an enterprise having investment in equipment not
exceeding Rs.10 lakh, (ii) in case of small service enterprise, the investment in equipment should be more then Rs.10 lakh but not
exceeding Rs.2 crore and (iii) in case medium service enterprise the investment in equipment more than Rs.2 core but not exceeding
Rs.5 crore.  
 
Recommendation
 
1.58     Promotion of  SMEs during the financial year 2006-07
 
1.58.1  The Committee would like to know as to what steps are being envisaged to promote SMEs during the financial year 2006-07
in regard to strengthening credit delivery system and support services agencies; net percentage of credit to Small Scale Industries  vis-
a-vis the Large Scale Industries and  the details of NPAs of SSI sector in comparison to Large Scale Industries for last five years;
Progress made in regard to Restructuirng of State Financial Corporations (SFCs);  Steps envisaged to be taken for securtisation  of
debt to enhance flow of additional credit for SSI sector; Reinforcing Technology Bank for SME upgradation to facilitate technology
transfer, project evaluation, risks management etc.;  Modalities of re-orienting the role of Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) for extending
credit flow to rural Small Scale Industries;  Programme for introducing and encouraging Laghu Udyog Credit Cards during the year
2005-06 ; Status and financial assistance extended to Self Help Groups and initiative for the promotion of Micro - Finance .
Para (62.1)
Action Taken
1.58.2  As per the RBI data, the percentage share of net bank credit to SSI sector in the books of public sector banks since 2002 (as at
the end of March) is as under:
(Rs. in crore)
As at the end of March Net Bank Credit Total outstanding advances to
SSI
Percentage to Net Bank Credit
2002 3,96,954 49,743 12.5
2003 4,77,899 52,988 11.1
2004 5,58,849 58,278 10.4
2005 7,18,722 67,634 9.4
2006* 10,17,614 82,492 8.1
*Provisional
 
1.58.3  The NPAs in SSI sector vis-a vis total advances to SSI sector in the books of public sector banks since 2002(as at the end of
March) is as under:
(Rs. in crore)
Year NPAs in SSI sector Total SSI advances Percentage
2002 10,584 49,743 21.28
2003 10,162 52,988 19.18
2004 8,838 58,278 15.17
2005 7,835 67,634 11.58
2006* 6,809 82,492 8.25
*Provisional
           
1.58.4  The RBI does not capture sector-wise data specifically relating to large industries. However, as per NPA data-Industry sector-
wise for public sector banks as a whole (all types of industries-small, medium and large), the total NPAs as on 31
st March, 2006
amounted to Rs. 20,803 crore.
 
1.58.5 Apart from granting need based restructuring/relief packages, SFCs have been allowed to prepay their high cost bearing
refinance at times even without premium on prepayment. This has resulted in reduction in the cost of borrowing of SFCs. At the

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
initiative of the Government, SIDBI has extended a package of relief and concessions to SFCs, which are willing to abide by certain
norms enumerated in a MoU executed by them alongwith the respective State Governments with SIDBI. So far, 10 SFCs have
entered into the MoU with SIDBI. As per the conditions of the MoU, SFCs have been extended moratorium of one year for
repayment of existing refinance outstanding, reduction in interest on the entire refinance outstanding by 2% and a rebate of 2% on the
future refinance assistance subject to timely and regular payment to SIDBI. The State Governments have indicated their commitment
by providing equity support to some of the SFCs. The MoU has had a positive impact on the financials of the 10 SFCs. The MoU has
not only helped the respective SFCs in bringing down their overall cost of refinance borrowings and improving their liquidity, but has
also sensitised them on the need to further reduce interest expenditure, diversify resource base and improve recovery performance so
as to remain solvent. The MoU has also facilitated in bringing about greater involvement of the State Governments in the affairs of
the SFCs.
           
1.58.6  Considering the weak financials of the remaining 8 SFCs, the SIDBI had extended restructuring/settlement packages to SFCs
in Assam, Bihar, Jammu & Kashmir, Orissa, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh pending signing of the MoU. Under the restructuring/settlement
packages, SIDBI has allowed moratorium on principal repayments, funded the overdue interest, waived penal interest and also in a
few cases, reduced the rate of interest on refinance outstanding. In a few cases where the State Government had decided not to revive
the Corporations, SIDBI has opted for the settlement route involving waiver of interest and other penal charges.
           
1.58.7  Besides, SIDBI has initiated an action plan for capacity building of SFCs. As a first step, training on all critical areas viz.,
Credit Management, Asset Liability Management, NPA Management, Risk Management, etc. have been arranged for the officials of
SFCs. So far, more than 300 SFC officials have been trained during the past 3 years. Further, SIDBI is also trying to improve the
existing systems and processes in SFCs so as to bring about transparency and objectivity in its credit processing systems and has
initiated action for implementation of Risk Management Systems/ Credit Scoring Models and also Project Management Systems in
the SFCs. A part of the cost of this initiative which is essentially technology oriented is proposed to be met by SIDBI under its
development activity.
 
1.58.8  The SIDBI, Indian Bank and Oriental Bank of Commerce contributed Rs. 1 crore each towards subscription to the equity of
the new Technology Bank and it has been incorporated in the name and style of “India SME Technology Services Ltd.” on November
17, 2005. Certificate of Commencement of Business has also been obtained on December 29, 2005 after raising the capital and
fulfilling the other formalities as required by the Registrar of Companies. In order to help SMEs face the challenges of new economic
order, ISTSL in association with its co-promoters and associates has taken several initiatives and put in place an effective mechanism
to address the technology and collaboration related needs of the sector.
 
1.58.9  To strengthen the structure of Regional Rural Banks (RRBs), the Government has initiated the process of
merger/amalgamation of these banks on the basis of sponsor banks, State-wise. Since the RRBs have to achieve the higher target of
60% for priority sector lending it is expected that after merger/amalgamation, RRBs will be in a better position to cater to the credit
needs of SSI, agriculture and other priority sectors.
 
1.58.10            The implementation of strategic business plan for SSI/SMEs has boosted the Laghu Udhyami Credit Cards (LUCC)
scheme. The banks give wide publicity to LUCC scheme at their State/District business centres and SME clusters and also while
organizing interactive meetings with industry bodies. The progress under LUCC scheme is indicated below:
As on Number of Accounts Limit Sanctioned
(Rs. in crore)
Total amount outstanding (Rs. in
crore)
31
st March, 2005 1,32,677 2026.44 1853.65
31st March, 2006 1,62,247 2651.33 2407.44
 
1.58.11            SIDBI has been able to create, develop and nurture a pool of over 85 partner MFIs that is likely to grow to 100 by the
year 2007. SIDBI provides need-based financial assistance by way of loans to partner MFIs on an annual basis for on-lending to poor,
mostly women. Assistance to MFIs is based on an independent Capacity Assessment Rating (CAR) supplemented by in-house
appraisal of financial, management and institutional aspects of the organization. SIDBI also offers a short-term loan product
(Liquidity Management Support) for its partners to enable them to tide over their temporary liquidity constraints in their on-lending
operations. The Transformation Loan (TL) product is envisaged as a quasi-equity type support to partner MFIs that are in the process
of transforming themselves /their existing structure into a more formal and regulated set-up for exclusively handling micro finance
operations in focused manner. SIDBI provides equity capital to eligible institutions not only to enable them to meet the capital
adequacy requirements but also help them leverage debt funds. SIDBI provides adequate and customized package of Capacity
Building (CB) grant tailored to the needs of the MFIs with a view to building their operational, financial and institutional capacities
as well as those of the end-users.
CHAPTER - II
 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES
 
 
Recommendation
 
2.0 Grants to National Small Industries Corporation for development of Small Scale Industries

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
 
2.1 The Committee notes that plan outlay was reduced by Rs. 1.00 crore at RE stage to Rs. 22.80 crore   whereas Rs. 0.80 crore were
spent over and above the allocation made at RE Stage. The explanation given by the Ministry is not satisfactory. The Committee,
therefore impress upon the Ministry to justify such expenditure in the ATR of the present report.
Para (21.2.3)
Action Taken
 
2.1.2 BE 2005-06 was Rs.23.80 crore, which was reduced to Rs.22.80 crore at RE stage. Out of Rs.1.00 crore reduced at RE stage,
Rs.20.00 lakh was utilised for meeting the expenditure under the ‘International Cooperation Scheme’ and the balance Rs.80.00 lakh
was utilized for meeting the expenditure for establishment of Laghu Udyog Mart at National Small Industries Corporation, Okhla
after re-appropriation of funds. Thus, the total expenditure was Rs.23.60 crore (Rs.22.80 crore + Rs. 0.80 crore).
 
Recommendation
 
2.2.Problems being faced by SIDO in the implementation of programmes encouraging SMEs
           
2.2.1 The Committee is of the view that working of SIDO  must be strengthened so much so that it can encourage emerging SMEs to catch up
the global trend . There is a need to encourage SSI units for obtaining credit rating and setting up of exclusive credit rating agencies for the
SSI sector. There is further need for wider and effective dissemination of information on the schemes/ facilities being provided by the banks to
the SSI sector at the branch level and among the entrepreneurs.  In addition, the State Governments need to provide an enabling environment
for development and promotion of the SSI sector through provision of fiscal concessions/incentives to the sector, better infrastructure facilities
etc. for facilitating smooth implementation of the schemes of SIDO. The Committee is of the considered view that the  Small and Medium
Enterprises Development Bill, 2005, would  strengthen SIDO.  Besides, SIDO may be entrusted with the effective  role in the  implemetaion
of  promotional package for the small scale sector which  is under formulation.
Para (36.2)
 
 
Action Taken
 
2.2.2 Consequent upon promulgation of MSMED Act, 2006, the reorientation of the role of SIDO is under active consideration.
 
2.2.3 National Small Industries Corporation is implementing a ‘Performance and Credit Rating Scheme for Small Industries’. To
create awareness of this scheme amongst the small enterprises, open houses and exclusive sessions of the Rating Scheme are being
organized by involving various Industries Associations, the representatives of Rating Agencies and bank officials. Further, the SIDBI
has promoted a dedicated rating agency for the SME sector viz., SME Rating Agency of India Ltd. (SMERA).  The SMERA has been
promoted alongwith Dun & Bradstreet and has various public, private and foreign banks as shareholders. 
 
2.2.4 For dissemination of information on the schemes/facilities for SSIs, all the public sector banks have come out with ‘SSI
Charter’ containing details of facilities available to SSI entrepreneurs. The RBI has advised all banks to display the same in their
branch premises.
 
2.2.5 The promotion and development of SSIs is primarily the responsibility of the respective State Governments. The Central
Government, however, support and supplements the efforts of the State Governments through implementation of various schemes
relating to fiscal and credit support, infrastructural development,  technology upgradation, marketing, entrepreneurial development,
etc., across the country. The State/UT Governments also provide various concessions and incentives for the promotion of SSIs in
their respective States/UT.  The problems being faced in the States/UTs are discussed in various forums.
 
Further Recommendation
           
2.2.6 The Committee observes that the Government should not delay  the re-orientation of the role of SIDO as per the provisions and
mandate of Micro-Small and Medium enterprises Development Act, 2006.  Because the procrastination in re-orientating the role of
SIDO would delay in providing the enabling environment to the State Governments for development and promotion of SSI Sector.  
           
2.2.7 The Committee further observes  that SIDBI  should guide SME Rating Agency of India Ltd. (SMERA) to cover SMEs in ARI
sector in rural areas also as the same would lead to knitting and consolidation of rural economy besides enhancing the rural
employment generation potential.
 
 
 
Recommendation
 
3.18     Raising equity participation from the existing 24% to 49%  (FDI) in SSI sector
 
3.18.1  The Committee desires that  the Government may consider the  proposal for raising equity participation from the existing 24%
to 49%  (FDI) in SSI sector for better technology transfer and further  FDI can be encouraged for sizeable investments towards larger
returns give space to grow SEs out MEs.

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
Para (58.10)
Action Taken
 
3.18.2  In case of non-manufacturing units (both Indian and Foreign), the equity is no bar in the first instance but in subsequent
investments the provisions of clubbing will follow  (the hike in investment limit will enhance the equity participation).
CHAPTER – III
 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
Recommendation
 
3.0 SWOT analysis (Strength, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats) of Small Scale Industries.
           
3.1 The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of SSI should make SWOT- analysis as the tool of management for SSI Units by
overcoming the weaknesses and threats to the SSI sector and availing the opportunities and strength, thereby, making the SWOT –
Analysis as tool for Management by Objective and policy intervention.
 
Para (2.2)
Action Taken
 
3.1.1 Recommendation noted. At present also, Government’s policies and programmes are discussed at different fora in the light of
previous experience, opportunities and strength before being implemented. In addition best/international practices are also studied
before arriving at a decision. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
 
3.1.2 The Committee would like to know as to what extent the SWOT analysis was adopted as tool of management  by the Ministry
of Small Scale Industries to boost the SSI units during the years 2005-06 and  2006-07 alongwith  the outcome thereof.  The
Committee would like to know specifically those international practices which were taken into consideration and policy intervention 
including the impact of such international practices and policy intervention on the strengthening and consolidation of SSI sector in
India.  The Committee is of the opinion that the Ministry should   elucidate the Action Taken notes with    facts and figures.
 
Recommendation
 
3.2. Streamlining and strengthening the contribution of small enterprises sector in the national economy
 
3.2.1 The Committee is of the view that for streamlining and strengthening the contribution of small enterprises sector in the national
economy, the Government should focus on the following issues: 
(i)
   Providing full credit, technology upgradation, modernization and marketing support to the SSI sector;
(ii) Infrastructure upgradation in general and particularly in the major small enterprises clusters; these would include road
connectivity, regular supply of power, common effluent treatment facility and water supply, etc.
(iii)               Freedom from the plethora of rules and regulations existing in the small enterprises sector, which is known as Inspector
Raj;
(iv)              Full support to the service industry to fulfill its true growth and employment generation potential; and
(v) Training of existing and potential entrepreneurs and workers on a massive scale.  Modern management practices and skill
upgradation through advanced training facilities for capacity building in the small enterprises sector.
Para (3.4)
Action Taken
           
3.2.2 The Government has announced on 10
th August 2005 a ‘Policy Package for stepping up Credit to Small and Medium
Enterprises’ with an objective to double the flow of credit to the sector within a period of five years.
           
3.2.3 A National Manufacturing Competitiveness Programme has been finalized under which ten schemes have been drawn up
including schemes for promotion of information and communication technology, mini tool rooms, design clinics and marketing
support for SMEs.
           
3.2.4 A Promotional Package for the Micro and Small Enterprises is under finalisation. This would include incentives for technology
upgradation, infrastructural and marketing facilities, capacity building of micro and small enterprises, support to women
entrepreneurs, etc.
           
3.2.5  Clauses No. 9 (2), 15 and 16 were incorporated in the SMED Bill 2005 to make the SMEs free from the Inspector Raj.
However, during inter-Ministerial consultations and Group of Ministers (GOM) level discussions, these Clauses were dropped and
the representation to national level trade unions in the National Board for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (NBMSME), to be
constituted under the MSMED Act.2006, is provided for taking care of such issues.

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
           
3.2.6    The Service sector has grown rapidly and has become one of the major employment providers. The Government is conscious
about its potential and therefore, the MSMED Act, 2006 has defined Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, which include both
manufacturing & service enterprises, with a view to extend support to the service sector also.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
 
3.2.7    The Committee appreciates the launching of the policy package for stepping up credit to small and medium enterprise with an
objective to    double the flow of credit to the sector within a period of five years.  But the Committee expresses its concern that  since
the launching of the programme on 10
th August, 2005, the percentage net Public Sector  Banks  credit to SSI sector has declined from
10.4 % in 2004 to  9.8 in 2005 and further to 8.1 (provisional) in  2006  as furnished by the Ministry of SSI in its Action Taken Note
in response to the Committee’s recommendations in Para 62.1 of 189th Report   .  The Committee feels that the financial institutions  
must accord the intention  of the Government to provide adequate credit to  SSI sector.
 
3.2.8    The Committee feels that the promotional package for the Micro and Small enterprises is under finalization stage since long,
therefore, it is felt that the Ministry of SSI must be forthcoming in right earnest in the formulation of  policy intervention  for the
benefit of the SSI sector.  The Committee impresses upon the Ministry to indicate a time frame therefor.
 
3.2.9    The menace of Inspector Raj has posed serious threats to the growth of SSI sector which has been incorporated  by the
Committee in several reports and the issue has been voiced by the Prime Minister on several occasions but the Committee wonders
that clauses  9(2), 15 and 16 in the SMED Bill intended to make SMEs free from the Inspector Raj were dropped during Inter-
Ministerial consultations and Group of Ministers.    The Committee expresses its concern on how the Government proposes to curb
the adverse  impact of Inspector Raj on the SSI sector in the absence  of express legal provision.   The Committee, however would
like to know the time frame  by which the National Board for Micro, Small  and Medium enterprises is going to be constituted  and
what role it is likely to play in eliminating /reducing the rules and  regulations advocating Inspector Raj.
 
 
Recommendation
 
3.3       Formulation of National Policy for Small Scale Industries.
 
3.3.1    The Committee feels that there is the need for Comprehensive National Policy for strengthening the Small Scale Sector,
although the process has already been  started since 1991 in the sporadic manner, the need is to consolidate and streamline the
national policy.  Keeping in view of the dynamic situation of the Indian SSI sector vis-à-vis domestic & international industrial &
economic environment, the Committee feels that that SSI policy must have been revisited and revitalized  incorporating components
viz programmes for infrastructure development, technological upgradation, marketing support, easier access to credit and scientific
management for inter-sectoral cooperation for ensured promotion and proliferation of SMEs. 
Para (19.3)
Action Taken
           
3.3.2    Following measures are being taken for strengthening the SSI sector:
(a)        MSMED Act 2006 has already been enacted to provide for the development of MSME sector.
(b)        The Constitution of National Board for Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises (NBMSME) is under active consideration.
(c)        A Promotional Package for Micro and Small Enterprises is under consideration.  EFC of the component proposals in the
Package has already been cleared on 31.05.06. Draft CCEA Note has been circulated on 22.06.06 for eliciting views of the Ministries/
Departments concerned.
(d)        Flow of credit to this sector would be doubled in the next five years as announced by the Finance Minister in the Budget
2005-06.
 
           
3.3.3    The Committee reiterates that the National Policy for Small Scale Industries must have been revisited and revitalized 
incorporating components viz programmes for infrastructure development, technological upgradation, marketing support, easier
access to credit and scientific management for inter-sectoral cooperation for ensured promotion and proliferation of SMEs.   The
Committee appreciates  the promulgation of MSMED Act, 2006 and the in-built  provision therein regarding  the National Board for
Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises but the need for Comprehensive National Policy for SSI sector is required to consolidate the SSI
Sector vis-a-vis domestic & international industrial & economic environment.  The Committee therefore, recommends that a
comprehensive National Policy for SSI sector be prepared in the light of recently enacted MSMED Act. 2006.
 
Recommendation
 
3.4       Appropriation of non-plan allocation .
 
3.4.1    The Committee is in agreement with the provision of of Rs .9.47 crore at R.E stage during 2005- 06 and an amount of Rs.4.00
crore has been earmarked in BE 2006-07 (Non plan) towards the reimbursement of expenditure incurred by NSIC on Voluntary
Further Recommendation

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
Retirement Scheme, as the streamlined HRD in the NISC would lead to improved working of NSIC.   The Committee, however,
desires to know the reasons for the inordinate delay in this regard.
Para (21.3.3)
Action Taken
3.4.2    As per the Ministry of Finance’s instructions, budgetary support can be provided for implementation of Voluntary Retirement
Scheme (VRS) in the form of non-plan loan only and not as grant-in-aid. The National Small Industries Corporation decided not to
avail non- plan loan of Rs.9.47 crore provided for VRS scheme due to higher rate of interest.
 
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.4.3    The Committee would like to know the alternative source of raising the fund to meet the expenditure by NSIC on VRS, as the
NSIC has decided not to avail non -plan loan of Rs. 9.47 crores at RE stage during 2005-06 due to higher rate of interest.  The
Committee would like  to  know whether the NSIC has also decided not to  avail an amount of Rs. 4.00 crore earmarked for BE 2006-
07. 
 
Recommendation
 
3.5.      Integrated Infrastructure Development projects for SSI Sector  .
 
3.5.1    The Committee desires that Central Government should invite and induce the State proposals on Integrated Infrastructure
Development projects specially   form economically backward regions like Bihar, Orrisa, Chhatisgarh etc and   efforts should also be
made for Public Private partnership for the accelerated promotion of Integrated Infrastructural Development.
Para (25.3)
Action Taken
3.5.2    The following steps/measures have been taken by the Ministry of SSI to popularize and to induce proposals from the States
under the IID Scheme:
(e)
                Minister of SSI & ARI addressed a letter to the Chief Ministers of States that are lagging behind in taking advantage
of IID Scheme to set up IID Centres in their States.
(f)                 Minister of SSI & ARI has sent booklet containing information on all developmental schemes of Ministry of Small
Scale Industries and Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries to the Governors/ Chief Ministers of all the States, Union
Ministers/Ministers of States and all the Members of Parliament.   
(g)                Senior officers of the Ministry visiting various States meet industry officials and apprise them of various scheme of
this office including the IID Scheme.
(h)                 SISIs make efforts to create awareness about the provisions under various Schemes. 
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.5.3    The Committee, while appreciating the efforts undertaken by the Ministry of SSI and ARI for popularizing and inducing 
proposals from the states under the IID scheme, the Committee would like to know the response from State Governments of Bihar,
Orissa, Chhatisgarh, etc.
 
Recommendation
 
3.6       Comparative study to assess the export potential of SSI Sector
 
3.6.1    The Committee desires that the Government should take benefits of the comparative study undertaken by M/s. A.C. Nielsen to
assess the export potential of SSI Sector and increase the export potential of SSI sector .  The Committee desires that the Ministry of
SSI may  apprise the Committee of the  outcome of the strategy for increasing the export potential of SSI sector as per the findings of
the study undertaken.
Para (31.3)
Action Taken
3.6.2    In line with the recommendation made by M/s A.C. Nielsen, a provision is being made in the existing SSI-MDA scheme to
reimburse 75% of airfare to small scale (manufacturing enterprises) and 90% for micro (manufacturing enterprises) so that more and
more units send their representatives to the fairs where SIDO participates.
 
Further Recommendation
           
 3.6.3   The Committee observes that Ministry did not give categorical reply to the Committee’s recommendation.  The intention of
the Committee is to know the outcome of the study for harnessing the export potential for SSI.   The Committee therefore, reiterates it
recommendation as made in para 31.3 and desires  that the Ministry of SSI should furnish in  its Action Taken Notes as per the spirit
of recommendation of the Committee.
 
Recommendation
 

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
3.7       Working of Small Industries Development Organization (SIDO )
 
3.7.1    The Committee appreciates the working of Small Industries Development Organization (SIDO) as an apex body in the
Ministry of Small Scale Industries so far as the  formulation of the policies and programmes for SSI Sector is concerned , however, 
role  of SIDO can be strengthened in the promotion and development of SMEs by  emphasizing  on sensitization programmes, which
include sensitization programmes on WTO, Intellectual Proprietary Rights (IPR), information and encouragement, sunrise industries,
cluster development and modernization and technical up-gradation. 
Para (37.2)
Action Taken
 
3.7.2    The Ministry is organizing regular awareness programmes in respect of all the schemes/programmes, including those for
Small Industry Cluster Development Programme and Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme for technology upgradation.
3.7.3    Ministry is also making concerted efforts towards sensitising the small scale industries about various aspects of the WTO.
This Ministry has conducted following programmes to create awareness among SSI entrepreneurs about India’s obligations under
WTO regime and their impact on various sectors of Small Scale Industries: (i) 40 awareness programmes/ seminars on WTO related
issues; (ii) 71 workshops on Intellectual Property Rights  (IPRs); (iii) 6 one-day sensitization workshops on Geographical Indications;
and (iv) 17 information dissemination seminars on Anti-Dumping Investigations.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.7.4    The Committee desires  that SIDO should especially formulate policies and programmes for SMEs in rural areas and organize
the sensitization programmes in rural areas viz.  Information and encouragement to Sunrise Industries,  its potential and opportunities 
in rural areas.
 
Recommendation
 
3.8       The Committee hopes that SIDO would play the prominent role  in the  promotion of small scale industries through various
promotional programmes and services provided by its field offices e.g. SISIs, RTCs, FTSs, Autonomous Bodies including
PPDCs/Tool Rooms & Branches of   SISIs and thus prove milestone in converting the SEs into MEs. 
Para (37.3)
Action Taken
 
3.8.1    Necessary efforts are being made to optimally utilize all the field offices/autonomous bodies for the promotion and
development of small enterprises so as to meet the stated objective.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.8.2    The Committee would like to know the activities undertaken or likely to be undertaken during forthcoming year by the field
offices of SIDO e.g. SISIs,  RTCs, FTSs,  Tools Room in rural areas for  the promotion  of Small Scale Industries through various
programmes and services.
 
 
Recommendation
3.9       Marketing  Assistance Scheme  & Export Promotion
 
3.9.1    The Committee is of the view that Government should undertake marketing assistance to SSI entrepreneurs in NER  and
Sikkim and chalk out marketing strategy for NER and Sikkim. The Ministry of SSI  may identify the products  which are being 
exported from NER   including Sikkim to the market share of products  from NER  and Sikkim which has been only 0.70 per cent of
the total export of the nation during 2001-02 as per Third Census.
Para (41.15.2)
Action Taken
 
3.9.2    The primary responsibility for promotion and development of small scale industries vests with the State Governments/ Union
Territory Administrations. The Central Government supplements these efforts by implementing a number of schemes/ programmes
throughout the country, including in the North East Region. The Development Commissioner (SSI) promotes participation of SSI
units of the country (including those situated in NER and Sikkim) in product specific/ general exhibitions in India and abroad every
year.  Besides this, training in Export Marketing and Packaging for Exports is also provided to SSI units. Further, assistance for
participation in overseas fairs, study tours, production of publicity material for overseas publicity, etc., are provided to the SSI
entrepreneurs. 
 
Further Recommendation
           
3.9.3    The Committee acknowledges that the Development Commissioner  (SSI) promotes participation   of SSI units of the country,
including in NER and Sikkim, in product specific/ general exhibitions in India and abroad.  However, the Committee would like  to 

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
know whether any special measure have been undertaken to identify the products for export from NER and Sikkim and to enhance 
market share from existing level of 0.70 per cent of the total export of nation as per Third Census.
 
Recommendation
 
3.10     Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme
 
3.10.1  The Committee wonders that under the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy funds amounting to Rs1.2 crore,
 Rs. 0.61 crore and Rs.
2.0 crore was earmarked for NER including Sikkim during the last three years,  i.e 2003-04, 2004-05 and 2005-06 respectively,  but
no units under the CLCSS was assisted in NER including Sikkim during last three years.  The Ministry of SSI may explain the
situation and the reasons for making the provision under Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme year after year when no case has
been covered under the Scheme in NER including Sikkim during last three years.
Para (41.20.3)
 
Action Taken
 
3.10.2  To improve the awareness among the beneficiary units and other stakeholders, sensitization/awareness programmes have been
organized in Agartala, Guwahati and Imphal by the SISIs. The CLCSS is a demand driven scheme and the power to sanction the
subsidy under the CLCSS has been delegated to the Nodal Agencies. The nodal agencies have been requested to motivate the existing
and prospective beneficiaries to avail benefit under the CLCSS. The Regional Offices of these agencies in the NER are also making
efforts to popularize the scheme in the NER.
 
3.10.3  The officers from this Ministry visiting NER interact with the various stakeholders to motivate the existing and prospective
beneficiaries. Pursuant to above interactions and sensitization/awareness programmes, this office has included technology needs for
printing industry and chalk crayons, as suggested by the Industry Associations/ SSI units from the NER, under the CLCSS. It is
expected that with these initiatives, SSI units from NER will come forward to avail benefits under the CLCSS.
 
3.10.4  Funds amounting to Rs.1.2 crore, Rs.0.61 crore and Rs.2.0 crore were earmarked for NER including Sikkim during the last
three years, i.e., 2003-04, 2004-05 and 2005-06 respectively in pursuance to the directions received from the Government of India for
earmarking 10 per cent of Plan Budget for the NER, which is mandatory.
           
3.10.5  The Committee understands that provision under the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy scheme funds amounting to Rs. 1.2
crores, 0.61 crores and Rs. 2.0 crores have been earmarked for NER & Sikkim during 2003-04, 2004-05 and 2005-06, respectively, 
in pursuance of the direction from the Government of India for earmarking of 10% of  plan Budget.  The Committee is constrained to
note that initiatives taken by Ministry of SSI and the  respective States have not yielded the desired result.  The Committee feels that
Government agencies have to play their role more vigorously, if necessary, they may review their strategy.
 
 
Recommendation
 
3.11     Strategy of "Focused Sectoral Approach"
 
3.11.1  The Committee feels that NSIC must be able to implement the strategy of "Focused Sectoral Approach" i.e. up-grading
identified sectors in terms of the projects, business applications of the new technologies, quality control, packaging, marketing and
linking to the global markets in order to meet the twin challenges of growth and competition of SMEs with human face.
Para (42.11)
Action taken
 
3.11.2  National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC), through its network of various offices in the country, has been implementing
its schemes in all the sectors with special focus on units located in various clusters. The Cluster Development Programme is being
implemented by the Office of DC (SSI) and NSIC is implementing its various schemes for providing marketing, technology and
credit support in such clusters.
           
3.11.3  The Committee is aware  that NSIC has been performing/implementing its schemes but what the Committee desires is that
NSIC should re-orient its role as per the requirement of SMEs so that Indian  SMEs be capable of catching  up with the global SMEs.
NISC must appreciate and cater to the needs of emerging SMEs.
 
Recommendation
 
3.12     Sunrise industries in the SMEs sector
 
 
Further Recommendation
 
Further Recommendation

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
3.12.1  The Committee desires that  suitable  steps may be  taken  to identify / address the problems being faced by the sunrise
industries and enhance the prospects of  the sunrise industries in the SMEs sector e.g. Information Technology (IT), Biotechnology
(BT) Pharmaceuticals and Nano-technologies along with IT enabled services . The Committee also desires that  suitable  steps must
be  undertaken to reinforce appropriate policy regime to promote sunrise SMEs industries which have the potential to be the winners
of tomorrow.  The Committee directs the Government that the issues such as IPR protection and management of rapid up-scaling of
operations should be taken up on priority basis.
Para (46.6)
Action Taken
3.12.2  The Department of Chemicals and Petro-Chemicals, in consultation with Ministry of SSI, is setting up Pharmaceutical
Technology Upgradation Fund (PTUF) to assist the pharmaceutical units (including small scale units) for setting up Good
Manufacturing Practice (GMP) facilities in their manufacturing plant by way of offering an interest subsidy on loan.
 
3.12.3  Under the Mission for Millennium 2000, five industry clusters have been taken up under the Small Industries Cluster
Development Programme of SIDO for providing technology support services to the cluster industries in the fields of   herbal,
aromatic and medicinal plants. The information is being disseminated to the entrepreneurs for setting up enterprises based on neem
oil/isolates, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, pesticides and fertilizer applications, etc.
3.12.4  The officials of SISIs regularly conduct sensitization programmes on biotechnology in different parts of the country. Some
innovative entrepreneurs have already started biotechnology-based units in the SSI sector, especially in the field of plant tissue
culture, bio-fertilizers, bio-pesticides, fresh water prawn culture/hatchery, vermi composting and medicinal plant extractions.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.12.5  The Committee, while appreciating the  initiatives taken by the Ministry of SSI in the field of Pharmaceuticals, and Bio-
technology,  desires that such initiatives should also be made in the field of Nano- technologies, IT - enabled  Services, IPR
protection and management.  The Committee further recommends that adequate impetus must be made to boost the sunrise industries 
of  SMEs sector in rural areas as well.
 
Recommendation
 
3.13   Working of SME Development Fund
 
3.13.1  The Committee understands that SME Development Fund promoted by SIDBI/banks with a corpus of Rs.500 crore aims at 
funding  export oriented and high technology SME. The Committee advises the Ministry of SSI to examine whether   there is the
need to enhance the said corpus fund to proliferate the SMEs, and if yes,  the strategy/ mechanism to support SMEs in knowledge- 
based industries such as Pharma, Bio-tech. and I.T. to this fund. The Committee would like to know the progress made in this regard
during 2005-06 and the  steps which may further be taken during the year 2006-07 contributing to  the accredited cluster which  can
play catalytic role in the advancement of SME sector.
Para (47.2)
Action Taken
 
3.13.2  SME Growth Fund was launched in October, 2004 by SIDBI in association with other leading public sector banks.  It has a
corpus of Rs.500 crore and a life of 8 years.  The focus industries of the fund includes industries such as life sciences, retailing, light
engineering, food processing, information technology, infrastructure related services, healthcare, logistics, and distribution, etc.  The
fund has to commit investments out of the corpus over 4 years.  First investment out of the fund was made in January, 2005.  Since
then, the fund has approved investments of Rs. 124.82 crore in 10 units in diversified sectors such as pharmaceuticals, organized
retailing, biofuels, engineering, auto components and IT / Telecom.  The fund has disbursed Rs.56.62 crore to these companies so
far.  SIDBI expects 60% of the fund to be committed by end of the year.  The fund is a close-ended fund with life of 8 years. 
Financial closure of the fund has been achieved with entire corpus being committed by 8 public sector banks and SIDBI and thus no
increase in fund corpus is envisaged. SIDBI Venture Company Ltd. (SVCL) shall consider floating additional funds at suitable stage
after assessing the absorption of the current fund.
 
Further Recommendation
           
3.13.3  The Committee observes that SME Growth Fund launched by SIDBI with corpus of Rs. 500 crore has the limitation of close-
ended  fund with life of 8 years.  This is  a severe  limitation keeping in view the wide & diversified segment of SMEs which is
reflected from the performance of fund that only an investment of Rs. 124.82 crore could be made in 10 units in such diversified
sector such as pharmaceutical, organized retailing, bio-fuels, engineering, auto component and IT/Telecom.  The Committee,
therefore, feels that financial institution must envisage to enhance SMEs Growth Fund with timeframe investment but with open life
span.  SMEs Growth Fund must be an going programme.  
   
Recommendation
 
3.14     
Working Group on rehabilitation of Sick units
 
3.14.1  The Committee views that banks should carry  out specialized studies to ascertain the reasons for sickness so that suitable

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
rehabilitation measures can be drawn up for sick SSIs units.
Para (53.3)
Action Taken
 
3.14.2  The RBI from time to time has been carrying out specialised studies/sample surveys through its Regional Offices to ascertain
the reasons for sickness in SSI sector. These specialised studies/sample surveys reveal that the reasons for sickness among SSIs
mainly are: (a) Internal causes like limited financial resources, lack of organizational, financial and managerial skills and expertise (b)
External factors like non-availability of power, shortage of raw materials, marketing difficulties, delayed and inadequate credit,
labour problems, obsolete technology, inadequate infrastructure, etc.      In most of the cases, sickness is not confined to any similar
reason but a combination of different causes.  SIDBI also carries out failure cause analysis of NPA cases in order to ascertain the
reasons / causes inter alia of sickness and the remedial action to be taken.
 
Further Recommendation
           
3.14.3  The Committee would like to know the outcome of the rehabilitation measures undertaken during 2005-06 and 2006-07 and
the conclusions arrived at  through the experience of implementing the measures.
 
Recommendation
 
3.15     Implementation Status of A.S. Ganguly's  recommendations in regard to credit flow to SSI sector by pubic sector banks
 
3.15.1  The Committee desires that the Government should implement the A.S. Ganguly's  recommendations in regard to credit flow
to SSI sector by pubic sector banks to facilitate additional capacity generation, expansion of existing units and improving the
capacity  utilization,  diversification of products  and to enhance competitiveness of SSI sectors. 
Para (54.3)
Action Taken
 
3.15.2  The total number of recommendations made by the Working Group on flow of credit to SSI sector (Ganguly Committee) was
31.  Out of these recommendations 14 pertain to the RBI and other banks and the remaining 17 pertain to other agencies.  The RBI
has accepted 8 of the recommendations and 6 have not been accepted.  Seven recommendations pertaining to other agencies have
been accepted and 10 were not accepted. The following recommendations pertaining to the RBI were accepted and commended to
banks for implementation:
(i)
                  Adoption of cluster based approach for financing SME sector;
(ii)                Sponsoring specific projects as well as widely publicising successful working models of NGOs by Lead Banks which
service small and tiny industries and individual entrepreneurs;
(iii)               Considering sanctioning of higher working capital limits by banks operating in the North East region to SSIs due to the
hilly terrain and frequent floods causing hindrance in the transportation system;
(iv)              Exploring new instruments by banks for promoting rural industry and improving the flow of credit to rural artisans, rural
industries and rural entrepreneurs; and
Revision of the tenure as also interest rate structure of deposits kept by foreign banks with SIDBI for their shortfall in priority sector.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.15.3  The Committee would like to know the status of the accepted recommendations of the Ganguly Committee  in regard to credit
flow to the SSI sector and the outcome of the recommendations,   which have been or are being implemented.
 
Recommendation
 
3.16     Credit Policy Package as announced by the Finance Minister on  10th August  2005
 
3.16.1  The Committee welcomes the announcement of the Government for ‘Policy Package for stepping up of Credit to Small and
Medium Enterprises’ whereby the  Public Sector Banks have been advised to fix their own targets for funding SMEs in order to
achieve a minimum 20% year-on-year growth in credit to the SME sector. The Committee notes that under policy package although  
objective is to double the flow of credit from Rs.67,600 crore in 2004-05 to Rs.1,35,000 crore to the SME sector by 2009-10, i.e.
within a period of five years, the Committee feels that the Government needs to  do more in this regard to ensure the adequate credit
to the SME sector.
Para (56.3)
Action Taken
 
3.16.2  In line with the Policy Package announced by the Government, the RBI has constituted empowered committees at the regional
offices of the RBI, with the Regional Director of the RBI as the Chairman and representatives of State Level Bankers Committee
(SLBC) convenor, senior level officers from two banks having predominant share in SME financing in the State, representatives of
SIDBI regional office, State Director of Industries, representatives of SE/SME Associations in the State and senior officers from
SFC/SIDC as members to review the progress in SME financing and coordinate with other banks, financial institutions and the State
Governments in removing bottlenecks, if any, in smooth flow of credit to the sector.

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
 
3.16.3  The District Consultative Committee (DCC)/District Level Review Committee (DLRC)/SLBC fora under the Lead Bank
Scheme also review the credit flow to SE sector on quarterly basis. Further, as per the decision in the 5 th meeting of the Standing
Advisory Committee, the Indian Banks’ Association has advised its local chapters to hold periodical meetings with SE associations to
sort out the issues relating to credit flow to the SE sector.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.16.4  The Committee would like to know the outcome during the first year of the implementation of Policy Package for stepping up
of credit to SMEs whereby the Public Sector Banks have been advised to fix  their own targets for funding  SMEs in order to  achieve
a minimum 20% year-on-year growth in credit to the SME Sector.  The figure  may also to be given in term of percentage of net
credit flow to SSI sector by the Public sector  Banks.
 
Recommendation
 
3.17     Measures for SMEs friendly tax regime
 
3.17.1  The Committee, while taking note of the fiscal concessions being extended by the Government  to  facilitate  the sector in
growing and providing large scale employment. The Committee, however, is of the view that  to give a boost to the growth of the
small enterprises sector to generate employment at faster rate, the under-mentioned tax-related measures may further be taken :
 
(i)
   The General SSI Excise Exemption limit may be enhanced from Rs. 100 lakh to Rs. 125 lakh on the first clearance  of SSI
units.
(ii) Increasing the SSI Turnover Eligibility Limit from Rs. 4 crore to Rs. 5 crore, for Availing of General SSI Excise Exemption
benefit.
(iii)               Restoration of option to pay Excise Duty at the rate of 60% along with CENVAT credit.
(iv)              To allow excise exemption to SSI units manufacturing branded goods in urban areas, as available to the units set up in
the rural areas.
(v) Capital Gains Exemption to sick SSI units selling off Fixed Assets to repay their Bank Loans.
(vi)              Exemption from Service Tax to SSI Units providing Business Auxiliary Services.
(vii)             The limit of 15 days for payment of excise duty should be increased to 45 days for micro and tiny small enterprises.
(viii)           SSI units having annual turn over up to Rs. 10 lakh be exempted from levy of service tax.
Para (57.5)
 
Action Taken
 
3.17.2  The aforesaid proposals were taken up by this Ministry with the Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance in the pre-
Budget proposals 2006-07. However, the same were not agreed to by the Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance. Some of these
proposals constitute a part of the ‘Package for Promotion of Micro and Small Enterprises’. EFC of the component proposals in the
Package has already been cleared on 31.05.06.  Draft CCEA Note has been circulated on 22.06.06 for eliciting views of the
Ministries/ Departments concerned.
 
 
3.17.3  The Committee reiterates its recommendation as made in Para 57.5 of 189
th Report in regard to the measures for SMEs
friendly tax-regime as the same is essential to  boost the growth of the SMALL enterprises SECTOR and desires that Ministry of SSI
should continue to take up these issues  at the appropriate fora
CHAPTER - IV
 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  FINAL REPLIES OF THE  MINISTRY 
HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
 
Recommendation
 
4.0       Proposal of re-christening of the Ministry of SSI into the Ministry of Small and Medium Enterprises (SME) 
 
4.1       The Committee is of the considered view that keeping in view the overall global scenario, it is most appropriate and desirable
to adopt the nomenclature suggested by the ERC and accordingly change the nomenclature of the Ministry of SSI to that of the
Ministry of Small & Medium Enterprises and that also to implement the objectives, achievements and targets of Indian SMEs as set
by Finance Minister in General Budget 2006-07 and the years to come.
Para (6.6)
Action Taken
4.1.2    Consequent upon promulgation of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development (MSMED) Act, 2006, necessary
changes in the  allocation of business for the Ministry of SSI including change in the name and functioning of the Ministry is under
active consideration.
Further Recommendation

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
 
Recommendation
 
4.2       Reduced budgetary allocation to the Ministry of SSI during the year 2006-07
 
4.2.1    The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure over the reduced budgetary allocation to the Ministry of SSI during
the year 2006-07. Against the projected sum of Rs. 574.68 crore  (inclusive of Rs. 3.60 crore for works Outlay provided in the
Demands of Ministry of Urban Development) for the year 2006-07, the Planning Commission has fixed the Annual Plan Outlay at
Rs. 469.93 crores (inclusive of Rs. 3.60 crore for works Outlay provided in the Demands of Ministry of Urban Development). The
Committee wonders as how the Ministry of SSI would manage the budgetary gap while achieving the originally envisaged objectives
and action plan.
Para (8.1.1)
4.2.2    The Committee is anguished to observe that the budgetary allocation has been reduced under the Ministry’s demands for  
Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme where the proposed demand was Rs. 206.00 crore but the Planning Commission has approved only to
the tune of   Rs. 118.10 crore.  Similarly, under the Head Science & Technology, Research and Development, the proposed demand
was Rs.  21.85 crore while the same was approved to the tune of Rs.  16.85 crore only. 
Para (8.1.2)
 
4.2.3    The Committee understands that Credit Guarantee Scheme is significant so far the credit to the SSI sector is concerned. And
the net credit to the SSI sector by the Public Sector Banks as the percentage to the total credit is dwindling to the level of 9.8%.  The
Finance Minister, on the one hand understands the need for gearing up the SSI sector, considering its importance as the “Engine of
Growth” and having the employment –generation potential but on the other hand, the Planning Commission has reduced the
budgetary allocation under the Credit Guarantee Scheme against the projected demand by the Ministry of SSI for the year 2006-07. 
The Committee is unable to understand the basic logic behind such budgeting, where there remains enormous gap between the policy
and finance required to support the Programmes/schemes under the policy.
Para (8.1.3)
 
4.2.4    The Committee is of the considered view that Science & Technology, Research and Development is very much beneficial for
any industrial activity  so far as  the cost-reduction, product-development, product - design etc. is concerned, therefore, reducing the
budgetary –allocation against the projected demand by the Ministry of SSI would amount to cutting the R&D activities, thereby, the
margin of the profits.
Para (8.1.4)
 
4.2.5    The Committee, therefore, desires that the Planning Commission would pay due attention to the proposals of the Ministry of
SSI at the R.E. stage and accordingly allocate the demands as per the requirement of the SSI sector. 
Para (8.1.5)
Action Taken
 
4.2.6    The proposal for enhancing the budgetary support will be taken up with the Ministry of Finance at the RE stage.
 
Recommendation
 
4.3       National Board for MICRO, Small and Medium Enterprises in facilitating co-ordination and inter-institutional linkages. 
 
4.3.1    The Committee hopes that the “National Small and Medium Enterprises Board” as conceived in the Small & Medium
Enterprises Development Bill, once constituted would play pro- active role in facilitating and co-coordinating the inter institutional
linkages among the Organizations of Central/State Governments for the growth and development of SEs and MEs in India.
Para (17.2)
Action Taken
 
4.3.2    With the enactment of the MSMED Act, 2006, the notification and constitution of National Board for Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises (NBMSME) is under active consideration.
 
 
 
Recommendation
 
4.4       Development of clusters
 
4.4.1    The Committee appreciates the announcement of the Finance Minister made in his Budget Speech (2006-07) that the Cluster
Development Model can be usefully adopted not only to promote Manufacturing but also to renew industrial towns and build new
Industrial Township. The Committee also makes note of the decision of the Prime Minister to constitute an Empowered Group of
Ministers to lay down the policy for cluster development and oversee the implementation, and strongly believes that these
announcement would have definite bearing on the growth and development of SSI sector. 
Para (20.5)

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
Action Taken
 
4.4.2       Process for constituting an Empowered Group of Ministers to lay down policy for Cluster Development and oversee the 
implementation has been started. The Ministry of Small Scale Industries is providing the secretarial service for the EGOM and it is 
expected that the recommendations of the EGOM will lead to an enhanced growth of both the industrial and non-industrial sectors of 
the economy on a cluster mode. Guidelines for renewal of the industrial towns and build new industrial townships on the cluster 
development model is also to be laid down by the EGOM.
 
Recommendation
 
4.5       Creation of Infrastructural facilities and institutional support. 
 
4.5.1    The Committee views that NSIC should play the pro-active role in the creation of Infrastructural facilities and institutional
support to the SSI units.
Para (21.4.3)
Action Taken
 
4.5.2    The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for necessary compliance.
 
Recommendation
 
4.6       Appropriation of plan outlay made under Major head 2851 in BE 2005-06
 
4.6.1    The Committee observes that allocation is on higher side comparing the last year expenditure, however, the allocation was
reduced at the R.E. stage. The Committee cautions the Ministry to ensure that schemes activities identified under Major Head 2851
are taken up in strategic manner so that it makes best use of the money allocated and achieve the target as fixed.
Para (22.4.4)
Action Taken
 
4.6.2    The observation of the Committee has been noted. 
 
Recommendation
 
4.7       National Manufacturing Competitiveness  Council (NMCC)
 
4.7.1    The Committee welcomes the announcement of the Finance Minister in his Budget Speech (2006-07) that “ the National
Manufacturing Competitiveness  Council (NMCC) has finalized a five year National Manufacturing Competitiveness programmes.
The Committee notes the  Ten schemes which have been drawn up including schemes for promotion of ICT, mini tool rooms, design
clinics and marketing support for SMEs.  The Committee hopes that the  implementation of these schemes in PPP model, and the
consequent  financing  during the course of the next year would boost  the up- coming SMEs.
Para (23.3)
Action Taken
 
4.7.2    Action already initiated to implement all the ten Schemes through SFC/EFC, as the case may be.  Modalities are being worked
out.
 
Recommendation
 
4.8       Development Strategy for promotion of SMEs
 
4.8.1    The Committee is of the view that since the Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) would make an significant  contribution
to   the national economy of India,   therefore, the Committee desires that  the Government must make  conscious efforts  towards
facilitating the promotion and development and enhancing the competitiveness of small and medium enterprises in the country.
Para (27.2)
Action Taken
 
4.8.2    The development and promotion of the micro and small enterprises has always been a conscious approach of the
Government.  Accordingly, policy interventions have been put in place in credit/fiscal incentive, technology upgradation through
cluster development, marketing assistance and infrastructure development.  The medium sector has been recognized and defined in
the MSMED Act, 2006, thus paving way for such interventions, which are deemed necessary for making the sector including medium
enterprises effective and competitive both at domestic and global level.  
Recommendation
 
4.9       Public Private Partnership
 

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
4.9.1    The Committee is of the view that the requisite steps may be undertaken to  promote public private partnership in regard to
technology upgradation for  the SMEs. In order to  promote Public-Private Partnership for technology upgradation in the under going
Schemes, awareness of the enshrined provisions in the Schemes among the Industry Associations need  to be increased.  Further,
SMEs associations must  be  guided for identifying the felt-needs of SMEs  and chalking out the operational modalities of such
common facilities so as to enable them to prepare project proposals which are technically sound and financially viable.
Para (35.2)
Action Taken
4.9.2    Noted and being taken care of in most of the projects/schemes being formulated for development and promotion of MSME.
Recommendation
 
4.10     The Committee is of the  view that the key areas for international cooperation may be  promotion of Joint Ventures;
establishment of Institutional arrangements for Technology Transfer between Indian and foreign enterprises;  Exports and Imports of
products and machinery; and exchange of information/knowledge/ideas. The Committee is further of the view that the benefits to the
SSI  sectors from international cooperation initiatives can be enhanced by continuing the International Cooperation Scheme with a
higher plan allocation, so that more & more small enterprises can be benefited.
Para (38.6)
Action Taken
 
4.10.1  The views of the Committee to continue ‘International Cooperation Scheme’ with a higher plan allocation to benefit more
small enterprises have been noted. Accordingly, higher plan budget allocation under the scheme will be proposed.
Recommendation
4.11     National Commission on Enterprises in the Unorganized/Informal Sector
4.11.1  The Committee, while welcoming the setting up of National Commission on Enterprises in the Unorganized/Informal Sector
and  taking note of terms of reference of the Commission,hopes that in     pursuant to a the terms of reference , the National
Commission will  examine  the problems confronting the enterprises in the unorganized/informal sector. The NCEUS would make
appropriate recommendations to provide technical, marketing and credit support to these enterprises that would  be helpful in
promoting  this sector.
Para (40.5)
Action Taken
 
4.11.2  The NCEUS is engaged in the examination of the problems confronting the enterprises in the unorganized/informal sector and
would make appropriate recommendations to provide technical, marketing and credit support to these enterprises.
 
Recommendation
 
4.12     Integrated  Infrastructure Development Scheme (IIDS)
 
4.12.1  The Committee understands that the IID Scheme primarily aims at improving the infrastructure and facilitating  the setting up
of small/tiny units. Since the Scheme, is demand driven and State Governments have to submit suitable projects, the Committee
recommends that the Ministry of SSI should not only  encourage the States in NER & Sikkim to prepare  the projects but also render
assistance in preparing viable  projects .
            Para (41.16.3)
Action Taken
 
4.12.2  All Small Industries Service Institutes (SISIs), including those situated in the NER, have been asked to assist respective State
Governments for preparing IID projects and also to monitor the implementation of projects set up in the States.  
 
Recommendation
 
4.13     Mechanism of institutional arrangement
 
4.13.1  The Committee is in agreement with  the the Finance Minister who has recognized  the  small scale industries as the engine of 
growth.  The Committee is also of the view that  finance  to SSI must be treated as financing to  SME in order to give the SSI units to
grow into Medium Enterprises, therefore, recommends that concerted efforts step must be undertaken to meet the requirement of
Small and Medium Enterprises (SME). Adequate steps must be taken to promote and proliferate the  Medium Enterprises. And due
incentive and exemption be granted as required for each the Small scale industries and the Medium enterprises.
Para (44.5)
 
Action Taken
 
4.13.2  The proposed promotional package for micro and small enterprises take note of the announcement of FM.
 
Recommendation
 
4.14     Towards technology upgradation

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
 
4.14.1  The Committee understands that the technology upgradation of SSI  units is the most urgent requirement to do business in a
competitiveenvironment. In this regard, the Committee welcomes the announcement of the  Finance Minister in his Budget Speech
(2006-07) that the “new thrust is towards up-scaling the size and technological upgradation”, therefore, the committee desire that the
Ministry of SSI should undertake    to achieve the intention of Finance Minister in line with the recommendations of the Committee.
Para (49.2)
Action Taken
 
4.14.2  The proposed promotional package for micro and small enterprises take note of the announcement of Finance Minister.
 
Recommendation
 
4.15     Sickness in SSI sector
 
4.15.1  The Committee takes note of the information  from the RBI data on sickness in SSI sector, that  the number of sick units
amongst SSI has declined marginally from 1,38,811 in 2004 to 1,38,041 in 2005, however, the Committee observes that very little
has been achieved in regard to rehabilitation process , therefore, concrete steps are required to be taken.
Para (53.7)
Action Taken
 
4.15.2  In line with the ‘Policy Package for Stepping up Credit to Small and Medium Enterprises’ announced by the Government on
10
th August, 2005, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has issued detailed guidelines on 8 th September, 2005 to all commercial banks
for implementation of debt restructuring mechanism for units in SME sector.  These guidelines have been issued to ensure
restructuring of debts of all eligible small and medium enterprises, which are viable or potentially viable.  These guidelines would be
applicable to all non-corporate SMEs irrespective of the level of dues to banks and all corporate SMEs, which are enjoying banking
facilities from a single bank, irrespective of the level of dues to the banks and corporate SMEs, which have funded and non-funded
outstanding up to Rs. 10 crore under multiple / consortium banking arrangement.
 
Recommendation
 
4.16     Impact of WTO provisions on various sectors of Small Scale Industries
 
4.16.1  The Committee is in agreement with the Governments policy in the post QRs phase , to provide protection to the industries in
the form of raising custom duties upto the bound levels, imposing anti-dumping duties, taking safeguard measures in case of surge in
imports which would protect the domestic industries from the on- slaught of MNCs.  
Para (58.5)
Action Taken
4.16.2  No comments.
 
Recommendation
 
4.17     Country’s  Model of SSI Sector Stand today vis-a-vis model of SSI sectors
 
4.17.1  The Committee is of the view that in the context of globalisation there is a growing trend to boost the SME sector, so that,  
country should not lag behind in boosting the SMEs. There is an urgent need to provide adequate space for SSIs to grow into Medium
enterprises. Country  should   recognize the lower end of the industrial and enterprise segment of the economy as consisting of the
SME sector as one distinct entity requiring almost similar policy interventions. 
Para (59.3)
Action Taken
 
4.17.2  Recommendation noted. The MSMED Act, 2006, which defined Medium Enterprises, first time in the country, both in
manufacturing and service sector, will pave the way for small enterprises to grow into medium as a natural process. This will also
help to have requisite policy interventions.  
 
Recommendation
 
4.18     Policies for SME
 
4.18.1  The Committee is of the view that there is the need for undertaking the initiatives like Small & Medium Enterprises Fund of
SIDBI, strengthening the institutional backup to be able to suggest, formulate, coordinate and ensure implementation of policies and
programmes for small and medium enterprise (SME) Sector. There is the need to  provide sensitization programmes in respect of the
fast changing economic scenario and ensure dissemination of information, cluster oriented infrastructural development, trade specific
measures, market assistance and simplification of rules and regulations. Such   concrete initiatives must intend  for promotion and
development of the SME Sector.  Service enterprises, fast growing trades like IT, pharma, biotechnology, etc., needs special
attention. 

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
Para (60.2)
Action Taken
 
4.18.2  For the appraisal of policy initiatives, to ascertain best practices within Central Government and to strengthen the process of
consultations, the MSMED Act, 2006 has provision for National Board for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises  (NBMSME) under
the Chairmanship of the Minster (SSI) which, inter alia, has members from the concerned Central Ministries, State Government and
other stake holders, including specific number from tiny organisation and women organisation, persons of repute etc. The Act has
inbuilt provision for having quarterly meeting.
 
4.18.3  The Service sector has grown rapidly and has become one of the major employment providers. Recognising its potential, the
MSMED Act, 2006 has defined Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, which include both manufacturing and service enterprises,
with a view to extend support to the service sector also.
 
4.18.4  The development and promotion of the micro and small enterprises has always been a conscious approach of the Government.
Accordingly, policy interventions have been put in place relating to credit/fiscal incentive, technology upgradation, marketing
assistance and cluster-based infrastructure development. Further, a Promotional Package for the Micro and Small Enterprises is under
finalisation, This would include incentives for technology upgradation, infrastructural and marketing facilities, capacity building of
micro and small enterprises, support to women entrepreneurs, etc.               
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE
SWOT analysis (Strength, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats) of Small Scale Industries.
 
 
3.1.2 The Committee would like to know as to what extent the SWOT analysis was adopted as tool of management  by the Ministry
of Small Scale Industries to boost the SSI units during the years 2005-06 and  2006-07 alongwith  the outcome thereof.  The
Committee would like to know specifically those international practices which were taken into consideration and policy intervention 
including the impact of such international practices and policy intervention on the strengthening and consolidation of SSI sector in
India.  The Committee is of the opinion that the Ministry should   elucidate the Action Taken notes with    facts and figures.
 
 
3.2.7    The Committee appreciates the launching of the policy package for stepping up credit to small and medium enterprise with an
objective to    double the flow of credit to the sector within a period of five years.  But the Committee expresses its concern that  since
the launching of the programme on 10
th August, 2005, the percentage net Public Sector  Banks  credit to SSI sector has declined from
10.4 % in 2004 to  9.8 in 2005 and further to 8.1 (provisional) in  2006  as furnished by the Ministry of SSI in its Action Taken Note
in response to the Committee’s recommendations in Para 62.1 of 189th Report   .  The Committee feels that the financial institutions  
must accord the intention  of the Government to provide adequate credit to  SSI sector.
 
3.2.8    The Committee feels that the promotional package for the Micro and Small enterprises is under finalization stage since long,
therefore, it is felt that the Ministry of SSI must be forthcoming in right earnest in the formulation of  policy intervention  for the
benefit of the SSI sector.  The Committee impresses upon the Ministry to indicate a time frame therefor.
 
3.2.9    The menace of Inspector Raj has posed serious threats to the growth of SSI sector which has been incorporated  by the
Committee in several reports and the issue has been voiced by the Prime Minister on several occasions but the Committee wonders
that clauses  9(2), 15 and 16 in the SMED Bill intended to make SMEs free from the Inspector Raj were dropped during Inter-
Ministerial consultations and Group of Ministers.    The Committee expresses its concern on how the Government proposes to curb
the adverse  impact of Inspector Raj on the SSI sector in the absence  of express legal provision.   The Committee, however would
like to know the time frame  by which the National Board for Micro, Small  and Medium enterprises is going to be constituted  and
what role it is likely to play in eliminating /reducing the rules and  regulations advocating Inspector Raj.
 
Formulation of  National Policy for Small Scale Industries.
 
3.3.1    The Committee feels that there is the need for Comprehensive National Policy for strengthening the Small Scale Sector,
although the process has already been  started since 1991 in the sporadic manner, the need is to consolidate and streamline the
national policy.  Keeping in view of the dynamic situation of the Indian SSI sector vis-à-vis domestic & international industrial &
economic environment, the Committee feels that that SSI policy must have been revisited and revitalized  incorporating components
viz programmes for infrastructure development, technological upgradation, marketing support, easier access to credit and scientific
management for inter-sectoral cooperation for ensured promotion and proliferation of SMEs. 
           
3.3.3    The Committee reiterates that the National Policy for Small Scale Industries must have been revisited and revitalized 
incorporating components viz programmes for infrastructure development, technological upgradation, marketing support, easier
access to credit and scientific management for inter-sectoral cooperation for ensured promotion and proliferation of SMEs.   The
Committee appreciates  the promulgation of MSMED Act, 2006 and the in-built  provision therein regarding  the National Board for
Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises but the need for Comprehensive National Policy for SSI sector is required to consolidate the SSI
Sector vis-a-vis domestic & international industrial & economic environment.  The Committee therefore, recommends that a
comprehensive National Policy for SSI sector be prepared in the light of recently enacted MSMED Act. 2006.
 

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
Appropriation of non-plan allocation .
 
3.4.1    The Committee is in agreement with the provision of of Rs .9.47 crore at R.E stage during 2005- 06 and an amount of Rs.4.00
crore has been earmarked in BE 2006-07 (Non plan) towards the reimbursement of expenditure incurred by NSIC on Voluntary
Retirement Scheme, as the streamlined HRD in the NISC would lead to improved working of NSIC.   The Committee, however,
desires to know the reasons for the inordinate delay in this regard.
.
3.4.3    The Committee would like to know the alternative source of raising the fund to meet the expenditure by NSIC on VRS, as the
NSIC has decided not to avail non -plan loan of Rs. 9.47 crores at RE stage during 2005-06 due to higher rate of interest.  The
Committee would like  to  know whether the NSIC has also decided not to  avail an amount of Rs. 4.00 crore earmarked for BE 2006-
07. 
 
Integrated Infrastructure Development projects for SSI Sector  .
 
3.5.1    The Committee desires that Central Government should invite and induce the State proposals on Integrated Infrastructure
Development projects specially   form economically backward regions like Bihar, Orrisa, Chhatisgarh etc and   efforts should also be
made for Public Private partnership for the accelerated promotion of Integrated Infrastructural Development.
 
3.5.3    The Committee, while appreciating the efforts undertaken by the Ministry of SSI and ARI for popularizing and inducing 
proposals from the states under the IID scheme, the Committee would like to know the response from State Governments of Bihar,
Orissa, Chhatisgarh, etc.
 
Recommendation
 
3.6       Comparative study to assess the export potential of SSI Sector
 
3.6.1    The Committee desires that the Government should take benefits of the comparative study undertaken by M/s. A.C. Nielsen to
assess the export potential of SSI Sector and increase the export potential of SSI sector .  The Committee desires that the Ministry of
SSI may  apprise the Committee of the  outcome of the strategy for increasing the export potential of SSI sector as per the findings of
the study undertaken.
Para (31.3)
Action Taken
3.6.2    In line with the recommendation made by M/s A.C. Nielsen, a provision is being made in the existing SSI-MDA scheme to
reimburse 75% of airfare to small scale (manufacturing enterprises) and 90% for micro (manufacturing enterprises) so that more and
more units send their representatives to the fairs where SIDO participates.
 
Further Recommendation
           
 3.6.3   The Committee observes that Ministry did not give categorical reply to the Committee’s recommendation.  The intention of
the Committee is to know the outcome of the study for harnessing the export potential for SSI.   The Committee therefore, reiterates it
recommendation as made in para 31.3 and desires  that the Ministry of SSI should furnish in  its Action Taken Notes as per the spirit
of recommendation of the Committee.
 
Recommendation
 
3.7       Working of Small Industries Development Organization (SIDO )
 
3.7.1    The Committee appreciates the working of Small Industries Development Organization (SIDO) as an apex body in the
Ministry of Small Scale Industries so far as the  formulation of the policies and programmes for SSI Sector is concerned , however, 
role  of SIDO can be strengthened in the promotion and development of SMEs by  emphasizing  on sensitization programmes, which
include sensitization programmes on WTO, Intellectual Proprietary Rights (IPR), information and encouragement, sunrise industries,
cluster development and modernization and technical up-gradation. 
Para (37.2)
Action Taken
 
3.7.2    The Ministry is organizing regular awareness programmes in respect of all the schemes/programmes, including those for
Small Industry Cluster Development Programme and Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme for technology upgradation.
3.7.3    Ministry is also making concerted efforts towards sensitising the small scale industries about various aspects of the WTO.
This Ministry has conducted following programmes to create awareness among SSI entrepreneurs about India’s obligations under
WTO regime and their impact on various sectors of Small Scale Industries: (i) 40 awareness programmes/ seminars on WTO related
issues; (ii) 71 workshops on Intellectual Property Rights  (IPRs); (iii) 6 one-day sensitization workshops on Geographical Indications;
and (iv) 17 information dissemination seminars on Anti-Dumping Investigations.
 
 
Further Recommendation

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
 
3.7.4    The Committee desires  that SIDO should especially formulate policies and programmes for SMEs in rural areas and organize
the sensitization programmes in rural areas viz.  Information and encouragement to Sunrise Industries,  its potential and opportunities 
in rural areas.
 
Recommendation
 
3.8       The Committee hopes that SIDO would play the prominent role  in the  promotion of small scale industries through various
promotional programmes and services provided by its field offices e.g. SISIs, RTCs, FTSs, Autonomous Bodies including
PPDCs/Tool Rooms & Branches of   SISIs and thus prove milestone in converting the SEs into MEs. 
Para (37.3)
Action Taken
 
3.8.1    Necessary efforts are being made to optimally utilize all the field offices/autonomous bodies for the promotion and
development of small enterprises so as to meet the stated objective.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.8.2    The Committee would like to know the activities undertaken or likely to be undertaken during forthcoming year by the field
offices of SIDO e.g. SISIs,  RTCs, FTSs,  Tools Room in rural areas for  the promotion  of Small Scale Industries through various
programmes and services.
 
 
Recommendation
3.9       Marketing  Assistance Scheme  & Export Promotion
 
3.9.1    The Committee is of the view that Government should undertake marketing assistance to SSI entrepreneurs in NER  and
Sikkim and chalk out marketing strategy for NER and Sikkim. The Ministry of SSI  may identify the products  which are being 
exported from NER   including Sikkim to the market share of products  from NER  and Sikkim which has been only 0.70 per cent of
the total export of the nation during 2001-02 as per Third Census.
Para (41.15.2)
Action Taken
 
3.9.2    The primary responsibility for promotion and development of small scale industries vests with the State Governments/ Union
Territory Administrations. The Central Government supplements these efforts by implementing a number of schemes/ programmes
throughout the country, including in the North East Region. The Development Commissioner (SSI) promotes participation of SSI
units of the country (including those situated in NER and Sikkim) in product specific/ general exhibitions in India and abroad every
year.  Besides this, training in Export Marketing and Packaging for Exports is also provided to SSI units. Further, assistance for
participation in overseas fairs, study tours, production of publicity material for overseas publicity, etc., are provided to the SSI
entrepreneurs. 
 
Further Recommendation
           
3.9.3    The Committee acknowledges that the Development Commissioner  (SSI) promotes participation   of SSI units of the country,
including in NER and Sikkim, in product specific/ general exhibitions in India and abroad.  However, the Committee would like  to 
know whether any special measure have been undertaken to identify the products for export from NER and Sikkim and to enhance 
market share from existing level of 0.70 per cent of the total export of nation as per Third Census.
 
Recommendation
 
3.10     Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme
 
3.10.1  The Committee wonders that under the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy funds amounting to Rs1.2 crore,
 Rs. 0.61 crore and Rs.
2.0 crore was earmarked for NER including Sikkim during the last three years,  i.e 2003-04, 2004-05 and 2005-06 respectively,  but
no units under the CLCSS was assisted in NER including Sikkim during last three years.  The Ministry of SSI may explain the
situation and the reasons for making the provision under Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme year after year when no case has
been covered under the Scheme in NER including Sikkim during last three years.
Para (41.20.3)
 
Action Taken
 
3.10.2  To improve the awareness among the beneficiary units and other stakeholders, sensitization/awareness programmes have been
organized in Agartala, Guwahati and Imphal by the SISIs. The CLCSS is a demand driven scheme and the power to sanction the
subsidy under the CLCSS has been delegated to the Nodal Agencies. The nodal agencies have been requested to motivate the existing

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
and prospective beneficiaries to avail benefit under the CLCSS. The Regional Offices of these agencies in the NER are also making
efforts to popularize the scheme in the NER.
 
3.10.3  The officers from this Ministry visiting NER interact with the various stakeholders to motivate the existing and prospective
beneficiaries. Pursuant to above interactions and sensitization/awareness programmes, this office has included technology needs for
printing industry and chalk crayons, as suggested by the Industry Associations/ SSI units from the NER, under the CLCSS. It is
expected that with these initiatives, SSI units from NER will come forward to avail benefits under the CLCSS.
 
3.10.4  Funds amounting to Rs.1.2 crore, Rs.0.61 crore and Rs.2.0 crore were earmarked for NER including Sikkim during the last
three years, i.e., 2003-04, 2004-05 and 2005-06 respectively in pursuance to the directions received from the Government of India for
earmarking 10 per cent of Plan Budget for the NER, which is mandatory.
           
3.10.5  The Committee understands that provision under the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy scheme funds amounting to Rs. 1.2
crores, 0.61 crores and Rs. 2.0 crores have been earmarked for NER & Sikkim during 2003-04, 2004-05 and 2005-06, respectively, 
in pursuance of the direction from the Government of India for earmarking of 10% of  plan Budget.  The Committee is constrained to
note that initiatives taken by Ministry of SSI and the  respective States have not yielded the desired result.  The Committee feels that
Government agencies have to play their role more vigorously, if necessary, they may review their strategy.
 
 
Recommendation
 
3.11     Strategy of "Focused Sectoral Approach"
 
3.11.1  The Committee feels that NSIC must be able to implement the strategy of "Focused Sectoral Approach" i.e. up-grading
identified sectors in terms of the projects, business applications of the new technologies, quality control, packaging, marketing and
linking to the global markets in order to meet the twin challenges of growth and competition of SMEs with human face.
Para (42.11)
Action taken
 
3.11.2  National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC), through its network of various offices in the country, has been implementing
its schemes in all the sectors with special focus on units located in various clusters. The Cluster Development Programme is being
implemented by the Office of DC (SSI) and NSIC is implementing its various schemes for providing marketing, technology and
credit support in such clusters.
           
3.11.3  The Committee is aware  that NSIC has been performing/implementing its schemes but what the Committee desires is that
NSIC should re-orient its role as per the requirement of SMEs so that Indian  SMEs be capable of catching  up with the global SMEs.
NISC must appreciate and cater to the needs of emerging SMEs.
 
Recommendation
 
3.12     Sunrise industries in the SMEs sector
 
3.12.1  The Committee desires that  suitable  steps may be  taken  to identify / address the problems being faced by the sunrise
industries and enhance the prospects of  the sunrise industries in the SMEs sector e.g. Information Technology (IT), Biotechnology
(BT) Pharmaceuticals and Nano-technologies along with IT enabled services . The Committee also desires that  suitable  steps must
be  undertaken to reinforce appropriate policy regime to promote sunrise SMEs industries which have the potential to be the winners
of tomorrow.  The Committee directs the Government that the issues such as IPR protection and management of rapid up-scaling of
operations should be taken up on priority basis.
Para (46.6)
Action Taken
3.12.2  The Department of Chemicals and Petro-Chemicals, in consultation with Ministry of SSI, is setting up Pharmaceutical
Technology Upgradation Fund (PTUF) to assist the pharmaceutical units (including small scale units) for setting up Good
Manufacturing Practice (GMP) facilities in their manufacturing plant by way of offering an interest subsidy on loan.
 
3.12.3  Under the Mission for Millennium 2000, five industry clusters have been taken up under the Small Industries Cluster
Development Programme of SIDO for providing technology support services to the cluster industries in the fields of   herbal,
aromatic and medicinal plants. The information is being disseminated to the entrepreneurs for setting up enterprises based on neem
oil/isolates, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, pesticides and fertilizer applications, etc.
3.12.4  The officials of SISIs regularly conduct sensitization programmes on biotechnology in different parts of the country. Some
innovative entrepreneurs have already started biotechnology-based units in the SSI sector, especially in the field of plant tissue
culture, bio-fertilizers, bio-pesticides, fresh water prawn culture/hatchery, vermi composting and medicinal plant extractions.
 
Further Recommendation
 
Further Recommendation

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.12.5  The Committee, while appreciating the  initiatives taken by the Ministry of SSI in the field of Pharmaceuticals, and Bio-
technology,  desires that such initiatives should also be made in the field of Nano- technologies, IT - enabled  Services, IPR
protection and management.  The Committee further recommends that adequate impetus must be made to boost the sunrise industries 
of  SMEs sector in rural areas as well.
 
Recommendation
 
3.13   Working of SME Development Fund
 
3.13.1  The Committee understands that SME Development Fund promoted by SIDBI/banks with a corpus of Rs.500 crore aims at 
funding  export oriented and high technology SME. The Committee advises the Ministry of SSI to examine whether   there is the
need to enhance the said corpus fund to proliferate the SMEs, and if yes,  the strategy/ mechanism to support SMEs in knowledge- 
based industries such as Pharma, Bio-tech. and I.T. to this fund. The Committee would like to know the progress made in this regard
during 2005-06 and the  steps which may further be taken during the year 2006-07 contributing to  the accredited cluster which  can
play catalytic role in the advancement of SME sector.
Para (47.2)
Action Taken
 
3.13.2  SME Growth Fund was launched in October, 2004 by SIDBI in association with other leading public sector banks.  It has a
corpus of Rs.500 crore and a life of 8 years.  The focus industries of the fund includes industries such as life sciences, retailing, light
engineering, food processing, information technology, infrastructure related services, healthcare, logistics, and distribution, etc.  The
fund has to commit investments out of the corpus over 4 years.  First investment out of the fund was made in January, 2005.  Since
then, the fund has approved investments of Rs. 124.82 crore in 10 units in diversified sectors such as pharmaceuticals, organized
retailing, biofuels, engineering, auto components and IT / Telecom.  The fund has disbursed Rs.56.62 crore to these companies so
far.  SIDBI expects 60% of the fund to be committed by end of the year.  The fund is a close-ended fund with life of 8 years. 
Financial closure of the fund has been achieved with entire corpus being committed by 8 public sector banks and SIDBI and thus no
increase in fund corpus is envisaged. SIDBI Venture Company Ltd. (SVCL) shall consider floating additional funds at suitable stage
after assessing the absorption of the current fund.
 
Further Recommendation
           
3.13.3  The Committee observes that SME Growth Fund launched by SIDBI with corpus of Rs. 500 crore has the limitation of close-
ended  fund with life of 8 years.  This is  a severe  limitation keeping in view the wide & diversified segment of SMEs which is
reflected from the performance of fund that only an investment of Rs. 124.82 crore could be made in 10 units in such diversified
sector such as pharmaceutical, organized retailing, bio-fuels, engineering, auto component and IT/Telecom.  The Committee,
therefore, feels that financial institution must envisage to enhance SMEs Growth Fund with timeframe investment but with open life
span.  SMEs Growth Fund must be an going programme.  
   
Recommendation
 
3.14     
Working Group on rehabilitation of Sick units
 
3.14.1  The Committee views that banks should carry  out specialized studies to ascertain the reasons for sickness so that suitable
rehabilitation measures can be drawn up for sick SSIs units.
Para (53.3)
Action Taken
 
3.14.2  The RBI from time to time has been carrying out specialised studies/sample surveys through its Regional Offices to ascertain
the reasons for sickness in SSI sector. These specialised studies/sample surveys reveal that the reasons for sickness among SSIs
mainly are: (a) Internal causes like limited financial resources, lack of organizational, financial and managerial skills and expertise (b)
External factors like non-availability of power, shortage of raw materials, marketing difficulties, delayed and inadequate credit,
labour problems, obsolete technology, inadequate infrastructure, etc.      In most of the cases, sickness is not confined to any similar
reason but a combination of different causes.  SIDBI also carries out failure cause analysis of NPA cases in order to ascertain the
reasons / causes inter alia of sickness and the remedial action to be taken.
 
Further Recommendation
           
3.14.3  The Committee would like to know the outcome of the rehabilitation measures undertaken during 2005-06 and 2006-07 and
the conclusions arrived at  through the experience of implementing the measures.
 
Recommendation
 

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
3.15     Implementation Status of A.S. Ganguly's  recommendations in regard to credit flow to SSI sector by pubic sector banks
 
3.15.1  The Committee desires that the Government should implement the A.S. Ganguly's  recommendations in regard to credit flow
to SSI sector by pubic sector banks to facilitate additional capacity generation, expansion of existing units and improving the
capacity  utilization,  diversification of products  and to enhance competitiveness of SSI sectors. 
Para (54.3)
 
 
Action Taken
 
3.15.2  The total number of recommendations made by the Working Group on flow of credit to SSI sector (Ganguly Committee) was
31.  Out of these recommendations 14 pertain to the RBI and other banks and the remaining 17 pertain to other agencies.  The RBI
has accepted 8 of the recommendations and 6 have not been accepted.  Seven recommendations pertaining to other agencies have
been accepted and 10 were not accepted. The following recommendations pertaining to the RBI were accepted and commended to
banks for implementation:
(v)
                Adoption of cluster based approach for financing SME sector;
(vi)              Sponsoring specific projects as well as widely publicising successful working models of NGOs by Lead Banks which
service small and tiny industries and individual entrepreneurs;
(vii)             Considering sanctioning of higher working capital limits by banks operating in the North East region to SSIs due to the
hilly terrain and frequent floods causing hindrance in the transportation system;
(viii)           Exploring new instruments by banks for promoting rural industry and improving the flow of credit to rural artisans, rural
industries and rural entrepreneurs; and
Revision of the tenure as also interest rate structure of deposits kept by foreign banks with SIDBI for their shortfall in priority sector.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.15.3  The Committee would like to know the status of the accepted recommendations of the Ganguly Committee  in regard to credit
flow to the SSI sector and the outcome of the recommendations,   which have been or are being implemented.
 
Recommendation
 
3.16     Credit Policy Package as announced by the Finance Minister on  10th August  2005
 
3.16.1  The Committee welcomes the announcement of the Government for ‘Policy Package for stepping up of Credit to Small and
Medium Enterprises’ whereby the  Public Sector Banks have been advised to fix their own targets for funding SMEs in order to
achieve a minimum 20% year-on-year growth in credit to the SME sector. The Committee notes that under policy package although  
objective is to double the flow of credit from Rs.67,600 crore in 2004-05 to Rs.1,35,000 crore to the SME sector by 2009-10, i.e.
within a period of five years, the Committee feels that the Government needs to  do more in this regard to ensure the adequate credit
to the SME sector.
Para (56.3)
 
Action Taken
 
3.16.2  In line with the Policy Package announced by the Government, the RBI has constituted empowered committees at the regional
offices of the RBI, with the Regional Director of the RBI as the Chairman and representatives of State Level Bankers Committee
(SLBC) convenor, senior level officers from two banks having predominant share in SME financing in the State, representatives of
SIDBI regional office, State Director of Industries, representatives of SE/SME Associations in the State and senior officers from
SFC/SIDC as members to review the progress in SME financing and coordinate with other banks, financial institutions and the State
Governments in removing bottlenecks, if any, in smooth flow of credit to the sector.
 
3.16.3  The District Consultative Committee (DCC)/District Level Review Committee (DLRC)/SLBC fora under the Lead Bank
Scheme also review the credit flow to SE sector on quarterly basis. Further, as per the decision in the 5
th meeting of the Standing
Advisory Committee, the Indian Banks’ Association has advised its local chapters to hold periodical meetings with SE associations to
sort out the issues relating to credit flow to the SE sector.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.16.4  The Committee would like to know the outcome during the first year of the implementation of Policy Package for stepping up
of credit to SMEs whereby the Public Sector Banks have been advised to fix  their own targets for funding  SMEs in order to  achieve
a minimum 20% year-on-year growth in credit to the SME Sector.  The figure  may also to be given in term of percentage of net
credit flow to SSI sector by the Public sector  Banks.
 
Recommendation
 
3.17     Measures for SMEs friendly tax regime

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
 
3.17.1  The Committee, while taking note of the fiscal concessions being extended by the Government  to  facilitate  the sector in
growing and providing large scale employment. The Committee, however, is of the view that  to give a boost to the growth of the
small enterprises sector to generate employment at faster rate, the under-mentioned tax-related measures may further be taken :
 
(ix)              The General SSI Excise Exemption limit may be enhanced from Rs. 100 lakh to Rs. 125 lakh on the first clearance  of
SSI units.
(x) Increasing the SSI Turnover Eligibility Limit from Rs. 4 crore to Rs. 5 crore, for Availing of General SSI Excise Exemption
benefit.
(xi)              Restoration of option to pay Excise Duty at the rate of 60% along with CENVAT credit.
(xii)             To allow excise exemption to SSI units manufacturing branded goods in urban areas, as available to the units set up in
the rural areas.
(xiii)           Capital Gains Exemption to sick SSI units selling off Fixed Assets to repay their Bank Loans.
(xiv)           Exemption from Service Tax to SSI Units providing Business Auxiliary Services.
(xv)            The limit of 15 days for payment of excise duty should be increased to 45 days for micro and tiny small enterprises.
(xvi)           SSI units having annual turn over up to Rs. 10 lakh be exempted from levy of service tax.
Para (57.5)
 
Action Taken
 
3.17.2  The aforesaid proposals were taken up by this Ministry with the Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance in the pre-
Budget proposals 2006-07. However, the same were not agreed to by the Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance. Some of these
proposals constitute a part of the ‘Package for Promotion of Micro and Small Enterprises’. EFC of the component proposals in the
Package has already been cleared on 31.05.06.  Draft CCEA Note has been circulated on 22.06.06 for eliciting views of the
Ministries/ Departments concerned.
 
 
3.17.3  The Committee reiterates its recommendation as made in Para 57.5 of 189
th Report in regard to the measures for SMEs
friendly tax-regime as the same is essential to  boost the growth of the SMALL enterprises SECTOR and desires that Ministry of SSI
should continue to take up these issues  at the appropriate fora
CHAPTER - IV
 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  FINAL REPLIES OF THE  MINISTRY 
HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
 
Recommendation
 
4.0       Proposal of re-christening of the Ministry of SSI into the Ministry of Small and Medium Enterprises (SME) 
 
4.1       The Committee is of the considered view that keeping in view the overall global scenario, it is most appropriate and desirable
to adopt the nomenclature suggested by the ERC and accordingly change the nomenclature of the Ministry of SSI to that of the
Ministry of Small & Medium Enterprises and that also to implement the objectives, achievements and targets of Indian SMEs as set
by Finance Minister in General Budget 2006-07 and the years to come.
Para (6.6)
Action Taken
4.1.2    Consequent upon promulgation of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development (MSMED) Act, 2006, necessary
changes in the  allocation of business for the Ministry of SSI including change in the name and functioning of the Ministry is under
active consideration.
 
Recommendation
 
4.2       Reduced budgetary allocation to the Ministry of SSI during the year 2006-07
 
4.2.1    The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure over the reduced budgetary allocation to the Ministry of SSI during
the year 2006-07. Against the projected sum of Rs. 574.68 crore  (inclusive of Rs. 3.60 crore for works Outlay provided in the
Demands of Ministry of Urban Development) for the year 2006-07, the Planning Commission has fixed the Annual Plan Outlay at
Rs. 469.93 crores (inclusive of Rs. 3.60 crore for works Outlay provided in the Demands of Ministry of Urban Development). The
Committee wonders as how the Ministry of SSI would manage the budgetary gap while achieving the originally envisaged objectives
and action plan.
Para (8.1.1)
4.2.2    The Committee is anguished to observe that the budgetary allocation has been reduced under the Ministry’s demands for  
Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme where the proposed demand was Rs. 206.00 crore but the Planning Commission has approved only to
the tune of   Rs. 118.10 crore.  Similarly, under the Head Science & Technology, Research and Development, the proposed demand
was Rs.  21.85 crore while the same was approved to the tune of Rs.  16.85 crore only. 
Further Recommendation

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
Para (8.1.2)
 
4.2.3    The Committee understands that Credit Guarantee Scheme is significant so far the credit to the SSI sector is concerned. And
the net credit to the SSI sector by the Public Sector Banks as the percentage to the total credit is dwindling to the level of 9.8%.  The
Finance Minister, on the one hand understands the need for gearing up the SSI sector, considering its importance as the “Engine of
Growth” and having the employment –generation potential but on the other hand, the Planning Commission has reduced the
budgetary allocation under the Credit Guarantee Scheme against the projected demand by the Ministry of SSI for the year 2006-07. 
The Committee is unable to understand the basic logic behind such budgeting, where there remains enormous gap between the policy
and finance required to support the Programmes/schemes under the policy.
Para (8.1.3)
 
4.2.4    The Committee is of the considered view that Science & Technology, Research and Development is very much beneficial for
any industrial activity  so far as  the cost-reduction, product-development, product - design etc. is concerned, therefore, reducing the
budgetary –allocation against the projected demand by the Ministry of SSI would amount to cutting the R&D activities, thereby, the
margin of the profits.
Para (8.1.4)
 
4.2.5    The Committee, therefore, desires that the Planning Commission would pay due attention to the proposals of the Ministry of
SSI at the R.E. stage and accordingly allocate the demands as per the requirement of the SSI sector. 
Para (8.1.5)
Action Taken
 
4.2.6    The proposal for enhancing the budgetary support will be taken up with the Ministry of Finance at the RE stage.
 
Recommendation
 
4.3       National Board for MICRO, Small and Medium Enterprises in facilitating co-ordination and inter-institutional linkages. 
 
4.3.1    The Committee hopes that the “National Small and Medium Enterprises Board” as conceived in the Small & Medium
Enterprises Development Bill, once constituted would play pro- active role in facilitating and co-coordinating the inter institutional
linkages among the Organizations of Central/State Governments for the growth and development of SEs and MEs in India.
Para (17.2)
Action Taken
 
4.3.2    With the enactment of the MSMED Act, 2006, the notification and constitution of National Board for Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises (NBMSME) is under active consideration.
 
Recommendation
 
4.4       Development of clusters
 
4.4.1    The Committee appreciates the announcement of the Finance Minister made in his Budget Speech (2006-07) that the Cluster
Development Model can be usefully adopted not only to promote Manufacturing but also to renew industrial towns and build new
Industrial Township. The Committee also makes note of the decision of the Prime Minister to constitute an Empowered Group of
Ministers to lay down the policy for cluster development and oversee the implementation, and strongly believes that these
announcement would have definite bearing on the growth and development of SSI sector. 
Para (20.5)
Action Taken
 
4.4.2       Process for constituting an Empowered Group of Ministers to lay down policy for Cluster Development and oversee the 
implementation has been started. The Ministry of Small Scale Industries is providing the secretarial service for the EGOM and it is 
expected that the recommendations of the EGOM will lead to an enhanced growth of both the industrial and non-industrial sectors of 
the economy on a cluster mode. Guidelines for renewal of the industrial towns and build new industrial townships on the cluster 
development model is also to be laid down by the EGOM.
 
Recommendation
 
4.5       Creation of Infrastructural facilities and institutional support. 
 
4.5.1    The Committee views that NSIC should play the pro-active role in the creation of Infrastructural facilities and institutional
support to the SSI units.
Para (21.4.3)
Action Taken
 
4.5.2    The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for necessary compliance.

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
 
Recommendation
 
4.6       Appropriation of plan outlay made under Major head 2851 in BE 2005-06
 
4.6.1    The Committee observes that allocation is on higher side comparing the last year expenditure, however, the allocation was
reduced at the R.E. stage. The Committee cautions the Ministry to ensure that schemes activities identified under Major Head 2851
are taken up in strategic manner so that it makes best use of the money allocated and achieve the target as fixed.
Para (22.4.4)
Action Taken
 
4.6.2    The observation of the Committee has been noted. 
 
Recommendation
 
4.7       National Manufacturing Competitiveness  Council (NMCC)
 
4.7.1    The Committee welcomes the announcement of the Finance Minister in his Budget Speech (2006-07) that “ the National
Manufacturing Competitiveness  Council (NMCC) has finalized a five year National Manufacturing Competitiveness programmes.
The Committee notes the  Ten schemes which have been drawn up including schemes for promotion of ICT, mini tool rooms, design
clinics and marketing support for SMEs.  The Committee hopes that the  implementation of these schemes in PPP model, and the
consequent  financing  during the course of the next year would boost  the up- coming SMEs.
Para (23.3)
Action Taken
 
4.7.2    Action already initiated to implement all the ten Schemes through SFC/EFC, as the case may be.  Modalities are being worked
out.
 
Recommendation
 
4.8       Development Strategy for promotion of SMEs
 
4.8.1    The Committee is of the view that since the Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) would make an significant  contribution
to   the national economy of India,   therefore, the Committee desires that  the Government must make  conscious efforts  towards
facilitating the promotion and development and enhancing the competitiveness of small and medium enterprises in the country.
Para (27.2)
Action Taken
 
4.8.2    The development and promotion of the micro and small enterprises has always been a conscious approach of the
Government.  Accordingly, policy interventions have been put in place in credit/fiscal incentive, technology upgradation through
cluster development, marketing assistance and infrastructure development.  The medium sector has been recognized and defined in
the MSMED Act, 2006, thus paving way for such interventions, which are deemed necessary for making the sector including medium
enterprises effective and competitive both at domestic and global level.  
 
Recommendation
 
4.9       Public Private Partnership
 
4.9.1    The Committee is of the view that the requisite steps may be undertaken to  promote public private partnership in regard to
technology upgradation for  the SMEs. In order to  promote Public-Private Partnership for technology upgradation in the under going
Schemes, awareness of the enshrined provisions in the Schemes among the Industry Associations need  to be increased.  Further,
SMEs associations must  be  guided for identifying the felt-needs of SMEs  and chalking out the operational modalities of such
common facilities so as to enable them to prepare project proposals which are technically sound and financially viable.
Para (35.2)
Action Taken
 
4.9.2    Noted and being taken care of in most of the projects/schemes being formulated for development and promotion of MSME.
 
Recommendation
 
4.10     The Committee is of the  view that the key areas for international cooperation may be  promotion of Joint Ventures;
establishment of Institutional arrangements for Technology Transfer between Indian and foreign enterprises;  Exports and Imports of
products and machinery; and exchange of information/knowledge/ideas. The Committee is further of the view that the benefits to the
SSI  sectors from international cooperation initiatives can be enhanced by continuing the International Cooperation Scheme with a
higher plan allocation, so that more & more small enterprises can be benefited.

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
Para (38.6)
Action Taken
 
4.10.1  The views of the Committee to continue ‘International Cooperation Scheme’ with a higher plan allocation to benefit more
small enterprises have been noted. Accordingly, higher plan budget allocation under the scheme will be proposed.
 
 
Recommendation
 
4.11     National Commission on Enterprises in the Unorganized/Informal Sector
           
 
 
4.11.1  The Committee, while welcoming the setting up of National Commission on Enterprises in the Unorganized/Informal Sector
and  taking note of terms of reference of the Commission,hopes that in     pursuant to a the terms of reference , the National
Commission will  examine  the problems confronting the enterprises in the unorganized/informal sector. The NCEUS would make
appropriate recommendations to provide technical, marketing and credit support to these enterprises that would  be helpful in
promoting  this sector.
Para (40.5)
Action Taken
 
4.11.2  The NCEUS is engaged in the examination of the problems confronting the enterprises in the unorganized/informal sector and
would make appropriate recommendations to provide technical, marketing and credit support to these enterprises.
 
Recommendation
 
4.12     Integrated  Infrastructure Development Scheme (IIDS)
 
4.12.1  The Committee understands that the IID Scheme primarily aims at improving the infrastructure and facilitating  the setting up
of small/tiny units. Since the Scheme, is demand driven and State Governments have to submit suitable projects, the Committee
recommends that the Ministry of SSI should not only  encourage the States in NER & Sikkim to prepare  the projects but also render
assistance in preparing viable  projects .
            
Para (41.16.3)
Action Taken
 
4.12.2  All Small Industries Service Institutes (SISIs), including those situated in the NER, have been asked to assist respective State
Governments for preparing IID projects and also to monitor the implementation of projects set up in the States.  
 
Recommendation
 
4.13     Mechanism of institutional arrangement
 
4.13.1  The Committee is in agreement with  the the Finance Minister who has recognized  the  small scale industries as the engine of 
growth.  The Committee is also of the view that  finance  to SSI must be treated as financing to  SME in order to give the SSI units to
grow into Medium Enterprises, therefore, recommends that concerted efforts step must be undertaken to meet the requirement of
Small and Medium Enterprises (SME). Adequate steps must be taken to promote and proliferate the  Medium Enterprises. And due
incentive and exemption be granted as required for each the Small scale industries and the Medium enterprises.
Para (44.5)
 
Action Taken
 
4.13.2  The proposed promotional package for micro and small enterprises take note of the announcement of FM.
 
Recommendation
 
4.14     Towards technology upgradation
 
4.14.1  The Committee understands that the technology upgradation of SSI  units is the most urgent requirement to do business in a
competitiveenvironment. In this regard, the Committee welcomes the announcement of the  Finance Minister in his Budget Speech
(2006-07) that the “new thrust is towards up-scaling the size and technological upgradation”, therefore, the committee desire that the
Ministry of SSI should undertake    to achieve the intention of Finance Minister in line with the recommendations of the Committee.
Para (49.2)
Action Taken
 

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
4.14.2  The proposed promotional package for micro and small enterprises take note of the announcement of Finance Minister.
 
Recommendation
 
4.15     Sickness in SSI sector
 
4.15.1  The Committee takes note of the information  from the RBI data on sickness in SSI sector, that  the number of sick units
amongst SSI has declined marginally from 1,38,811 in 2004 to 1,38,041 in 2005, however, the Committee observes that very little
has been achieved in regard to rehabilitation process , therefore, concrete steps are required to be taken.
Para (53.7)
Action Taken
 
4.15.2  In line with the ‘Policy Package for Stepping up Credit to Small and Medium Enterprises’ announced by the Government on
10
th August, 2005, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has issued detailed guidelines on 8 th September, 2005 to all commercial banks
for implementation of debt restructuring mechanism for units in SME sector.  These guidelines have been issued to ensure
restructuring of debts of all eligible small and medium enterprises, which are viable or potentially viable.  These guidelines would be
applicable to all non-corporate SMEs irrespective of the level of dues to banks and all corporate SMEs, which are enjoying banking
facilities from a single bank, irrespective of the level of dues to the banks and corporate SMEs, which have funded and non-funded
outstanding up to Rs. 10 crore under multiple / consortium banking arrangement.
 
Recommendation
 
4.16     Impact of WTO provisions on various sectors of Small Scale Industries
 
4.16.1  The Committee is in agreement with the Governments policy in the post QRs phase , to provide protection to the industries in
the form of raising custom duties upto the bound levels, imposing anti-dumping duties, taking safeguard measures in case of surge in
imports which would protect the domestic industries from the on- slaught of MNCs.  
Para (58.5)
Action Taken
4.16.2  No comments.
 
Recommendation
 
4.17     Country’s  Model of SSI Sector Stand today vis-a-vis model of SSI sectors
 
4.17.1  The Committee is of the view that in the context of globalisation there is a growing trend to boost the SME sector, so that,  
country should not lag behind in boosting the SMEs. There is an urgent need to provide adequate space for SSIs to grow into Medium
enterprises. Country  should   recognize the lower end of the industrial and enterprise segment of the economy as consisting of the
SME sector as one distinct entity requiring almost similar policy interventions. 
Para (59.3)
Action Taken
 
4.17.2  Recommendation noted. The MSMED Act, 2006, which defined Medium Enterprises, first time in the country, both in
manufacturing and service sector, will pave the way for small enterprises to grow into medium as a natural process. This will also
help to have requisite policy interventions.  
 
Recommendation
 
4.18     Policies for SME
 
4.18.1  The Committee is of the view that there is the need for undertaking the initiatives like Small & Medium Enterprises Fund of
SIDBI, strengthening the institutional backup to be able to suggest, formulate, coordinate and ensure implementation of policies and
programmes for small and medium enterprise (SME) Sector. There is the need to  provide sensitization programmes in respect of the
fast changing economic scenario and ensure dissemination of information, cluster oriented infrastructural development, trade specific
measures, market assistance and simplification of rules and regulations. Such   concrete initiatives must intend  for promotion and
development of the SME Sector.  Service enterprises, fast growing trades like IT, pharma, biotechnology, etc., needs special
attention. 
Para (60.2)
Action Taken
 
4.18.2  For the appraisal of policy initiatives, to ascertain best practices within Central Government and to strengthen the process of
consultations, the MSMED Act, 2006 has provision for National Board for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises  (NBMSME) under
the Chairmanship of the Minster (SSI) which, inter alia, has members from the concerned Central Ministries, State Government and
other stake holders, including specific number from tiny organisation and women organisation, persons of repute etc. The Act has
inbuilt provision for having quarterly meeting.

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
 
4.18.3  The Service sector has grown rapidly and has become one of the major employment providers. Recognising its potential, the
MSMED Act, 2006 has defined Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, which include both manufacturing and service enterprises,
with a view to extend support to the service sector also.
 
4.18.4  The development and promotion of the micro and small enterprises has always been a conscious approach of the Government.
Accordingly, policy interventions have been put in place relating to credit/fiscal incentive, technology upgradation, marketing
assistance and cluster-based infrastructure development. Further, a Promotional Package for the Micro and Small Enterprises is under
finalisation, This would include incentives for technology upgradation, infrastructural and marketing facilities, capacity building of
micro and small enterprises, support to women entrepreneurs, etc.
            OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE
 
 
SWOT analysis (Strength, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats) of Small Scale Industries.
 
 
The Committee would like to know as to what extent the SWOT analysis was adopted as tool of management  by the Ministry
of Small Scale Industries to boost the SSI units during the years 2005-06 and  2006-07 alongwith  the outcome thereof.  The
Committee would like to know specifically those international practices which were taken into consideration and policy intervention
including the impact of such international practices and policy intervention on the strengthening and consolidation of SSI sector in
India.  The Committee is of the opinion that the Ministry should   elucidate the Action Taken notes with    facts and figures.
 
(Para 3.1.2)
 
            The Committee appreciates the launching of the policy package for stepping up credit to small and medium enterprise with an
objective to    double the flow of credit to the sector within a period of five years.  But the Committee expresses its concern that  since
the launching of the programme on 10
th August, 2005, the percentage net Public Sector  Banks  credit to SSI sector has declined from
10.4 % in 2004 to  9.8 in 2005 and further to 8.1 (provisional) in  2006  as furnished by the Ministry of SSI in its Action Taken Note
in response to the Committee’s recommendations in Para 62.1 of 189th Report   .  The Committee feels that the financial institutions  
must accord the intention  of the Government to provide adequate credit to  SSI sector.
(Para 3.2.7)
 
            The Committee feels that the promotional package for the Micro and Small enterprises is under finalization stage since long,
therefore, it is felt that the Ministry of SSI must be forthcoming in right earnest in the formulation of  policy intervention  for the
benefit of the SSI sector.  The Committee impresses upon the Ministry to indicate a time frame therefor.
(Para 3.2.8)
 
            The menace of Inspector Raj has posed serious threats to the growth of SSI sector which has been incorporated  by the
Committee in several reports and the issue has been voiced by the Prime Minister on several occasions but the Committee wonders
that clauses  9(2), 15 and 16 in the SMED Bill intended to make SMEs free from the Inspector Raj were dropped during Inter-
Ministerial consultations and Group of Ministers.    The Committee expresses its concern on how the Government proposes to curb
the adverse  impact of Inspector Raj on the SSI sector in the absence  of express legal provision.   The Committee, however would
like to know the time frame  by which the National Board for Micro, Small  and Medium enterprises is going to be constituted  and
what role it is likely to play in eliminating /reducing the rules and  regulations advocating Inspector Raj.
(Para 3.2.9)
 
Formulation of  National Policy for Small Scale Industries.
 
            The Committee feels that there is the need for Comprehensive National Policy for strengthening the Small Scale Sector,
although the process has already been  started since 1991 in the sporadic manner, the need is to consolidate and streamline the
national policy.  Keeping in view of the dynamic situation of the Indian SSI sector vis-à-vis domestic & international industrial &
economic environment, the Committee feels that that SSI policy must have been revisited and revitalized  incorporating components
viz programmes for infrastructure development, technological upgradation, marketing support, easier access to credit and scientific
management for inter-sectoral cooperation for ensured promotion and proliferation of SMEs. 
(Para 3.3.1)
           
            The Committee reiterates that the National Policy for Small Scale Industries must have been revisited and revitalized 
incorporating components viz programmes for infrastructure development, technological upgradation, marketing support, easier
access to credit and scientific management for inter-sectoral cooperation for ensured promotion and proliferation of SMEs.   The
Committee appreciates  the promulgation of MSMED Act, 2006 and the in-built  provision therein regarding  the National Board for
Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises but the need for Comprehensive National Policy for SSI sector is required to consolidate the SSI
Sector vis-a-vis domestic & international industrial & economic environment.  The Committee therefore, recommends that a
comprehensive National Policy for SSI sector be prepared in the light of recently enacted MSMED Act. 2006.
 (Para 3.3.3)
 

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
Appropriation of non-plan allocation .
 
            The Committee is in agreement with the provision of of Rs .9.47 crore at R.E stage during 2005- 06 and an amount of Rs.4.00
crore has been earmarked in BE 2006-07 (Non plan) towards the reimbursement of expenditure incurred by NSIC on Voluntary
Retirement Scheme, as the streamlined HRD in the NISC would lead to improved working of NSIC.   The Committee, however,
desires to know the reasons for the inordinate delay in this regard.
. (Para 3.4.1)
 
            The Committee would like to know the alternative source of raising the fund to meet the expenditure by NSIC on VRS, as the
NSIC has decided not to avail non -plan loan of Rs. 9.47 crores at RE stage during 2005-06 due to higher rate of interest.  The
Committee would like  to  know whether the NSIC has also decided not to  avail an amount of Rs. 4.00 crore earmarked for BE 2006-
07.  
  (Para 3.4.3)
Integrated Infrastructure Development projects for SSI Sector  .
 
            The Committee desires that Central Government should invite and induce the State proposals on Integrated Infrastructure
Development projects specially   form economically backward regions like Bihar, Orrisa, Chhatisgarh etc and   efforts should also be
made for Public Private partnership for the accelerated promotion of Integrated Infrastructural Development.
(Para 3.5.1)
 
            The Committee, while appreciating the efforts undertaken by the Ministry of SSI and ARI for popularizing and inducing 
proposals from the states under the IID scheme, the Committee would like to know the response from State Governments of Bihar,
Orissa, Chhatisgarh, etc.
(Para 3.5.3)
 
Comparative study to assess the export potential of SSI Sector
 
            The Committee desires that the Government should take benefits of the comparative study undertaken by M/s. A.C. Nielsen to
assess the export potential of SSI Sector and increase the export potential of SSI sector .  The Committee desires that the Ministry of
SSI may  apprise the Committee of the  outcome of the strategy for increasing the export potential of SSI sector as per the findings of
the study undertaken.
(Para 3.6.1)
 
 
            The Committee observes that Ministry did not give categorical reply to the Committee’s recommendation.  The intention of
the Committee is to know the outcome of the study for harnessing the export potential for SSI.   The Committee therefore, reiterates it
recommendation as made in para 31.3 and desires  that the Ministry of SSI should furnish in  its Action Taken Notes as per the spirit
of recommendation of the Committee.
(Para  3.6.3)
 
 
Working of Small Industries Development Organization (SIDO )
 
            The Committee appreciates the working of Small Industries Development Organization (SIDO) as an apex body in the
Ministry of Small Scale Industries so far as the  formulation of the policies and programmes for SSI Sector is concerned , however, 
role  of SIDO can be strengthened in the promotion and development of SMEs by  emphasizing  on sensitization programmes, which
include sensitization programmes on WTO, Intellectual Proprietary Rights (IPR), information and encouragement, sunrise industries,
cluster development and modernization and technical up-gradation. 
(Para 3.7.1)
 
            The Committee desires  that SIDO should especially formulate policies and programmes for SMEs in rural areas and organize
the sensitization programmes in rural areas viz.  Information and encouragement to Sunrise Industries,  its potential and opportunities 
in rural areas.
(Para 3.7.4)
 
 
            The Committee hopes that SIDO would play the prominent role  in the  promotion of small scale industries through various
promotional programmes and services provided by its field offices e.g. SISIs, RTCs, FTSs, Autonomous Bodies including
PPDCs/Tool Rooms & Branches of   SISIs and thus prove milestone in converting the SEs into MEs. 
 (Para 3.8)
 
            The Committee would like to know the activities undertaken or likely to be undertaken during forthcoming year by the field
offices of SIDO e.g. SISIs,  RTCs, FTSs,  Tools Room in rural areas for  the promotion  of Small Scale Industries through various
programmes and services.
(Para 3.8.2)

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
 
Marketing  Assistance Scheme  & Export Promotion
 
            The Committee is of the view that Government should undertake marketing assistance to SSI entrepreneurs in NER  and
Sikkim and chalk out marketing strategy for NER and Sikkim. The Ministry of SSI  may identify the products  which are being 
exported from NER   including Sikkim to the market share of products  from NER  and Sikkim which has been only 0.70 per cent of
the total export of the nation during 2001-02 as per Third Census.
(Para 3.9.1)
           
            The Committee acknowledges that the Development Commissioner  (SSI) promotes participation   of SSI units of the country,
including in NER and Sikkim, in product specific/ general exhibitions in India and abroad.  However, the Committee would like  to 
know whether any special measure have been undertaken to identify the products for export from NER and Sikkim and to enhance 
market share from existing level of 0.70 per cent of the total export of nation as per Third Census.
(Para 3.9.3)
 
Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme
 
            The Committee wonders that under the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy funds amounting to Rs1.2 crore,
 Rs. 0.61 crore and Rs.
2.0 crore was earmarked for NER including Sikkim during the last three years,  i.e 2003-04, 2004-05 and 2005-06 respectively,  but
no units under the CLCSS was assisted in NER including Sikkim during last three years.  The Ministry of SSI may explain the
situation and the reasons for making the provision under Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme year after year when no case has
been covered under the Scheme in NER including Sikkim during last three years.
(Para 3.10.1)
           
             The Committee understands that provision under the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy scheme funds amounting to Rs. 1.2
crores, 0.61 crores and Rs. 2.0 crores have been earmarked for NER & Sikkim during 2003-04, 2004-05 and 2005-06, respectively, 
in pursuance of the direction from the Government of India for earmarking of 10% of  plan Budget.  The Committee is constrained to
note that initiatives taken by Ministry of SSI and the  respective States have not yielded the desired result.  The Committee feels that
Government agencies have to play their role more vigorously, if necessary, they may review their strategy.
 
(Para 3.10.5)
 
Strategy of "Focused Sectoral Approach"
 
            The Committee feels that NSIC must be able to implement the strategy of "Focused Sectoral Approach" i.e. up-grading
identified sectors in terms of the projects, business applications of the new technologies, quality control, packaging, marketing and
linking to the global markets in order to meet the twin challenges of growth and competition of SMEs with human face.
(Para 3.11.1)
 
            The Committee is aware  that NSIC has been performing/implementing its schemes but what the Committee desires is that
NSIC should re-orient its role as per the requirement of SMEs so that Indian  SMEs be capable of catching  up with the global SMEs.
NISC must appreciate and cater to the needs of emerging SMEs.
 
(Para 3.11.3)
 
Sunrise industries in the SMEs sector
 
            The Committee desires that  suitable  steps may be  taken  to identify / address the problems being faced by the sunrise
industries and enhance the prospects of  the sunrise industries in the SMEs sector e.g. Information Technology (IT), Biotechnology
(BT) Pharmaceuticals and Nano-technologies along with IT enabled services . The Committee also desires that  suitable  steps must
be  undertaken to reinforce appropriate policy regime to promote sunrise SMEs industries which have the potential to be the winners
of tomorrow.  The Committee directs the Government that the issues such as IPR protection and management of rapid up-scaling of
operations should be taken up on priority basis.
(Para 3.12.1)
 
            The Committee, while appreciating the  initiatives taken by the Ministry of SSI in the field of Pharmaceuticals, and Bio-
technology,  desires that such initiatives should also be made in the field of Nano- technologies, IT - enabled  Services, IPR
protection and management.  The Committee further recommends that adequate impetus must be made to boost the sunrise industries
of SMEs sector in rural areas as well.
(Para 3.12.5)
 
Working of SME Development Fund
 
            The Committee understands that SME Development Fund promoted by SIDBI/banks with a corpus of Rs.500 crore aims at

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
funding export oriented and high technology SME. The Committee advises the Ministry of SSI to examine whether   there is the need
to enhance the said corpus fund to proliferate the SMEs, and if yes,  the strategy/ mechanism to support SMEs in knowledge-  based
industries such as Pharma, Bio-tech. and I.T. to this fund. The Committee would like to know the progress made in this regard during
2005-06 and the steps which may further be taken during the year 2006-07 contributing to the accredited cluster which  can play
catalytic role in the advancement of SME sector.
(Para 3.13.1)
 
            The Committee observes that SME Growth Fund launched by SIDBI with corpus of Rs. 500 crore has the limitation of close-
ended fund with life of 8 years.  This is  a severe  limitation keeping in view the wide & diversified segment of SMEs which is
reflected from the performance of fund that only an investment of Rs. 124.82 crore could be made in 10 units in such diversified
sector such as pharmaceutical, organized retailing, bio-fuels, engineering, auto component and IT/Telecom.  The Committee,
therefore, feels that financial institution must envisage enhancing SMEs Growth Fund with timeframe investment but with open life
span.  SMEs Growth Fund must be a going programme.  
    (Para 3.13.3)
 
Working Group on rehabilitation of Sick units
 
            The Committee views that banks should carry out specialized studies to ascertain the reasons for sickness so that suitable
rehabilitation measures can be drawn up for sick SSIs units.
(Para 3.14.1)
           
            The Committee would like to know the outcome of the rehabilitation measures undertaken during 2005-06 and 2006-07 and
the conclusions arrived at through the experience of implementing the measures.
 
            Implementation Status of A.S. Ganguly’s recommendations in regard to credit flow to SSI sector by pubic sector banks
(Para 3.14.3)
 
            The Committee desires that the Government should implement the A.S. Ganguly's  recommendations in regard to credit flow
to SSI sector by pubic sector banks to facilitate additional capacity generation, expansion of existing units and improving the
capacity  utilization,  diversification of products  and to enhance competitiveness of SSI sectors.
 (Para 3.15.1)
 
         The Committee would like to know the status of the accepted recommendations of the Ganguly Committee in regard to credit
flow to the SSI sector and the outcome of the recommendations,   which have been or are being implemented.
(Para 3.15.3)
 
Credit Policy Package as announced by the Finance Minister on 10th August 2005
 
The Committee welcomes the announcement of the Government for ‘Policy Package for stepping up of Credit to Small and
Medium Enterprises’ whereby the  Public Sector Banks have been advised to fix their own targets for funding SMEs in order to
achieve a minimum 20% year-on-year growth in credit to the SME sector. The Committee notes that under policy package although  
objective is to double the flow of credit from Rs.67,600 crore in 2004-05 to Rs.1,35,000 crore to the SME sector by 2009-10, i.e.
within a period of five years, the Committee feels that the Government needs to  do more in this regard to ensure the adequate credit
to the SME sector.
(Para 3.16.1)  
 
            The Committee would like to know the outcome during the first year of the implementation of Policy Package for stepping up
of credit to SMEs whereby the Public Sector Banks have been advised to fix  their own targets for funding  SMEs in order to  achieve
a minimum 20% year-on-year growth in credit to the SME Sector.  The figure may also to be given in term of percentage of net credit
flow to SSI sector by the Public sector Banks.
(Para 3.16.4)
 
Measures for SMEs friendly tax regime
 
The Committee, while taking note of the fiscal concessions being extended by the Government to facilitate the sector in growing
and providing large scale employment. The Committee, however, is of the view that to give a boost to the growth of the small
enterprises sector to generate employment at faster rate, the under-mentioned tax-related measures may further be taken:
 
(xvii)
         The General SSI Excise Exemption limit may be enhanced from Rs. 100 lakh to Rs. 125 lakh on the first clearance  of
SSI units.
(xviii)        Increasing the SSI Turnover Eligibility Limit from Rs. 4 crore to Rs. 5 crore, for Availing of General SSI Excise
Exemption benefit.
(xix)           Restoration of option to pay Excise Duty at the rate of 60% along with CENVAT credit.
(xx)            To allow excise exemption to SSI units manufacturing branded goods in urban areas, as available to the units set up in
the rural areas.

197th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/197threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:08]
(xxi)           Capital Gains Exemption to sick SSI units selling off Fixed Assets to repay their Bank Loans.
(xxii)         Exemption from Service Tax to SSI Units providing Business Auxiliary Services.
(xxiii)        The limit of 15 days for payment of excise duty should be increased to 45 days for micro and tiny small enterprises.
(xxiv)       SSI units having annual turn over up to Rs. 10 lakh be exempted from levy of service tax.
(Para 3.17.1)  
 
            The Committee reiterates its recommendation as made in Para 57.5 of 189 th Report in regard to the measures for SMEs
friendly tax-regime as the same is essential to  boost the growth of the SMALL enterprises SECTOR and desires that Ministry of SSI
should continue to take up these issues  at the appropriate fora
 
(Para 3.17.3)
_________________________
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 