77th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/77threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:41]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
SEVENTY-SEVENTH REPORT
 
ON
 
ACTION TAKEN  BY THE GOVERNMENT ON RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED  IN THE 
COMMITTEE ' S  67TH   REPORT ON THE ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE AND PERFORMANCE
REVIEW OF INDIAN BUREAU OF MINES (IBM)
DEPARTMENT OF MINES (MINISTRY OF COAL AND MINES )
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 20TH AUGUST, 2002)
(LAID ON THE TABLE  OF THE  LOK SABHA ON AUGUST,  2002)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
AUGUST, 2002/SRAVANA, 1924  (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
 
 
                                                                                                                                   
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
                                                     
2.         INTRODUCTION                                                                                        
3.         REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                  
4.         OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS  AND   RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE  COMMITTEE AT A
GLANCE
5.         MINUTES                                                                                           .......                       
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
(Date of Constitution - 1st January, 2002  )
           
Shri T.N. Chaturvedi — Chairman @
RAJYA SABHA
Prof. M.M. Aggarwal
 @@3.   Dr . Abrar Ahmad
 $ 4.   Shri Jayantilal Barot
 @5.   Shri Prasanta Chatterjee 
Smt. Saroj Dubey
Shri Faguni Ram
  ☼ 8.   Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
Shri P.K. Maheshwari

77th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/77threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:41]
Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
Shri S. Sivasubramanian
 #13. Smt. Sushree Devi
14. Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
LOK SABHA
Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
Kumari Mamata Banerjee
Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
Shri Nepal Chandra Das
Shri Deepak Kumar
Shri Thomas Hansda
22. Dr. S. Jagathrakshakan
Shri A.C. Jose
Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
25. Shri Brijlal Khabri
26. Shri Sunil Khan
27. Shri Manjay Lal
Dr. K. Malaisamy
Shri A. Narendra
Shri Ananta Nayak
Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
 Ø 32. Shri Dharam Raj Singh Patel
@ Appointed Chairman and Member of the Committee w.e.f. 15
th April, 02 vice Sh Ramdas Agarwal who ceased to be
a member of the Committee w.e.f. 09th April, 02 consequent upon his cessation to be a Member of the Rajya Sabha
@@Nominated w.e.f. 22nd April, 02 vice Ms. Frida Topno who  ceased to be a  Member of the Committee w.e.f. 02nd
April, 02 consequent upon her cessation to be a Member of  the Rajya Sabha
$ nominated w e.f 14
th May, 02
@nominated w.e.f. 22nd May, 02 vice Shri Jibon Roy ceased to be a Member of the Committee # nominated w.e.f. 14th
May, 02 vice Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 09th April, 02 consequent upon
his cessation to be Member of  the Rajya Sabha
*nominated w.e.f.  15
th May, 02 vice Shri G. Mallikarjunappa ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  25th
February, 02
Ø nominated  w.e.f. 10
th June, 02
☼ nominated w.e.f 11th June, 02
 
33. Shri Uttamrao Patil
34. Shri Malyala Rajaiah
35. Shri P. Rajendran
Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
Shri Tarachand Sahu
Shri Ramanand Singh
Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
Chowdhary Talib Hussain
Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari
Shri Beni Prasad Verma
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary

77th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/77threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:41]
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director
Shri  D.P. Ahuja ,Under Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
I N T R O D U C T I ON
 
I,  the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry,  having   been authorised  by
the Committee, hereby present this Seventy-Seventh  Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in  the   Committee ' s  67
th   Report on  Organisational Structure and Performance Review
of Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM) which is under the administrative control of the  Department of Mines (Ministry of
Coal and Mines ) .
 
2.         The Committee   examined and  considered  the Action Taken note    on recommendations contained  in the  
Committee ' s  67
th   Report  on Organisational Structure and Performance Review of Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM)
which is under the administrative control of Department of Mines (Ministry of Coal and Mines ) .
 
3.         The Committee at its meeting held on  ..............., 2002 considered and adopted the Report.
                                   
 
NEW DELHI;
…………….,2002
 
 
          T .N. CHATURVEDI
Chairman
Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry
 
REPORT
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Mines ((Ministry of Coal and  Mines)
on the Recommendations contained in its 67
th Report (of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Industry) on  the Organisational Structure  and Performance  Review of Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM)  which is under
the administrative control of  Department  of Mines.   The Report  was presented /laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha and
Lok Sabha on  the............, 2002.
 
Action Taken Notes have been received from the Department  of Mines in respect of the recommendations contained in
the Report.   These have been categorized as follows:
 
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Department  of Mines
(Chapter - I).
 
Recommendations: - 4.6, 5.1.3, 5.2.4, 5.3.2, 5.3.3, 5.4.3, 5.6.2,7.2, 7.4.
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the government's replies :
(Chapter - II)
 
Recommendations:- 2.3 , 5.7.5 ,6.3, 6.1.2,
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies of the Department of
Mines:. (Chapter - III).
 
Recommendations:-2.2,   4.3, 5.5.2,  5.5.3 ,7.3
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the  Department of Mines   have not been received.
(Chapter - IV).
 

77th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/77threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:41]
NIL
 
CHAPTER - I
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ACCEPTED BY THE   GOVERNMENT
 
Recommendations of the Committee
 
Performance of  mineral maps
 
(Para 4.6) : The Committee is happy to note that IBM has taken up the task of  providing  the specialized and
Customized data, preparation of mineral maps and forest overlays. The Committee hopes that the IBM in tandem with
the Forest Survey of India and Ministry of Environment and Forest would continue to take up latest forest overlays
maps. Forest overlays maps used by State Government and Central Forest Department would help to cut-down delays in
obtaining forest clearance for Mining Lease ( ML ) and   prospective licence  (PL).
 
Action Taken 
: As per the decision taken by the National Advisory Committee on Environment aspects in Mining Areas
under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Mines) and Secretary (MOEF), 50 multi- mineral maps were completed by IBM
as per target of 2001-02 and sent to FSI for the forest overlays. The annual target for such maps for subsequent years has
been fixed  at 100 index maps on a scale1:50000. This activity is envisaged to cover entire mining area in the country
with the priority assigned to ecologically fragile area in the State of. Chattisgarh, Jharkhand, Orissa, Madhya Pradesh,
Karnataka  and   Rajasthan~ in line with the decision of MOEF.
 
Recommendations of the Committee
 
Division wise functions of IBM
 
Mines Control and conservation of Minerals Division (MCCM Division)
 
(Para 5.1.2): The Committee feels that MCCM division of IBM would be able to function effectively once IBM is made
a regulatory body because MCCM is entrusted with enforcement of systematic development of mineral deposits and
conservation studies.
 
Action Taken: There is a need for strict enforcement of MCDR, 1988 particularly in respect of small (B) category of
mines Special integrated studies covering 30-40 groups of mines in each region have been programmed to highlight the
issues involved in scientific mines on regional basis including  that of environmental aspects.
 
Recommendations of the Committee
 
(Para 5.1.3) :  The Committee  further recommends  that MCCM should keep on up-dating mineral maps and cover all
minerals throughout  the country .
 
Action Taken :  All efforts. will be  made to update the mineral maps; excluding  that of coal and minor minerals  all
over  the country as per the targets.
 
Recommendations of the Committee
 
Ore Dressing Division (OD Division)
 
(Para 5.2.4) : The Committee recommends that IBM management and the Department of Mines should ensure that R&D
wings of IBM may be well equipped for mineral beneficiation. The Sub-Committee further recommends that Ore
Dressing division of IBM should undertake such research work pertaining to beneficiation of low-Ore content mineral
in cost effective manner for viable and commercial production of metals.

77th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/77threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:41]
 
Action Taken:  All efforts are being made to upgrade the equipment in the O.D. Division and the beneficiation studies
are undertaken on sponsored basis, to exploit low grade ore deposits in cost effective manner.
 
Recommendations of the Committee
 
Mineral Economic   Division (M.E. Division)
 
(Para 5.3.2) : The Committee feels that M.E. division of IBM should undertake adequate market survey and research 
for  procuring demand for cost/projection so that IBM would function in right direction.
 
Action Taken: The Mineral Economic division of IBM will undertake the market survey on chromites and dimension
stone including that of  assessment of demand/supply projection during 2002-03. If deemed necessary, specialized
organizations will be consulted in future.
 
Recommendations of the Committee
 
(Para 5.3.3) : The Committee further recommends that M.E. division should undertake study of comparative mining loss
and suggest reforms in Indian Mining legal framework. including modifications in the provision of MM  (D&R) Act,
1957, MCR,1960, MCDR, 1958,and Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) Notifications, if  required.
 
Action Taken  : As per annual programme 2002-03. a comparative study of mining laws of India and other countries is
proposed to be undertaken. This study will include mining laws of India and five other countries, i.e. Brazil, Canada,
South Africa, Namibia and Indonesia.
 
Recommendations of the Committee
 
Technical Consultancy Division (T .C. Division)
 
(Para 5.4.3) :    The Committee notes that the functions and responsibilities entrusted to T.C. Division of IBM and hopes
that it would leave no stone unturned in accomplishing its task. The Committee recommends that the Department of
Mines in tandem' with IBM management should estimate the requirement of field equipments for Technical consultancy
division and accordingly, manage funds for purchase of that  equipment in the financial year (2002-2003), itself.
 
Action Taken : The recommendations is .well taken and necessary action is already under way in this regard.
Recommendations of the Committee
 
Planning and Co-Ordination Division
 
(Para 5.6.2): The Committee is of the view that IBM should impart training  to  Geology students of various Indian
university on a nominal fee basis which would serve the purpose of
 
injecting geological insight into students of Geology as well as generation of revenue for IBM. In this regard, the
Committee recommends that the training unit of IBM should be strengthened. If necessary, the Department of Mines
should approach the University Grant Commission for incorporation of compulsory geology training for students of
geology to be imparted by IBM.
 
Action Taken:  The suggestion is well taken and would be given due emphasis while programming the training
courses.   The GSI's training institute would be in a better position to impart training to the university students of
geology on a  regular basis. The training programmes in the areas of mining, environmental protection and ore
beneficiation will be considered if necessary. As UGC provides grants only to Universities and academic institutions,
the Department of Mines will provide adequate funds for the purpose.
 
Recommendations of the Committee

77th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/77threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:41]
 
 
SWOT analysis of IBM
 
(Para 7.2) :  The Committee understands that IBM draws its strength from its charter of functions and it is but natural
that duty and responsibilities must have requisite infrastructure and facilities coupled with statutory provisions.
However, in order to inject new vision and trained hands in the system,  it is essential that IBM should go in pruning of
surplus manpower from non-core sector and recruit scientists/staff as per requirement.  By adopting the policy of
rationalization of manpower in non-core sector and recruitment of scientist in desirable fields would keep non-plan
expenditure under control with the added advantage of having manpower as per requirement.
 
Action Taken: It is true that with added duties and  responsibilities, IBM must have requisite infrastructure and 
facilities. In this context, the pruning of surplus manpower is already being done by surrendering vacant posts in non-
core sector in line with the recommendations of Expenditure Reforms Commission. In addition, the cadre structuring
proposal of Group A, B, C & D posts is also under formulation by way of rationalization of manpower.
 
Recommendations of the Committee
 
(Para 7.4 ) : Being engaged in mine planning since long, IBM will face few problems in developing expertise in large
scale mine planning and operation. IBM should also undertake to the management of mine waste once having gained
experience and expertise in large scale mine planning and operation and management of mine waste, the same could be
imparted to any  interested party engaged in mining operations and thus IBM would be able to generate more revenue to
meet its non-plan expenditure.
 
Action Taken : The suggestion is well taken for implementation. In this context, under Indo-French Collaboration a
project of Solid Waste Management has already been conceived for attaining the expertise in management of mine
waste disposal.
 
CHAPTER - II
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH COMMITTEE DOES NOT WANT TO PURSUE 
 
Recommendations of the Committee
 
Charter of functions of IBM
 
(Para 2.3) :       The Committee further recommends that since IBM has been entrusted with the function of approving
mining plans in respect of mining leases granted on behalf of the Central Government as well as conducting studies of
environmental protection  and pollution control, it is pertinent on the part of IBM management that while approving 
mining plans the issue of environmental protection should be given due importance. The Committee is also of the
opinion that the time-gap between the environment clearance and approval of mining lease should not be too large as to
hamper the growth rate of mining industry,
 
Action Taken :  The approval of mining plan is accorded by IBM which also invariably includes environmental
management plan of that particular lease area. But Ministry of Environment & Forests as well as State Governments
grant the environmental clearance. IBM approves the mining plans within  90 days', the  specified time.
 
Recommendations of the Committee
 
Mining Research Cells
 
(Para 5.7.5) :  The Committee opines that the  Mining Research Cell has been entrusted with the important task of

77th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/77threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:41]
mining research. The Committee feels that with  a rapidly  develops mining industry the relevance of mining research
cell would be felt further. The Committee recommends that the mining Research Cell of IBM may be strengthened
further. Its expertise can be utilized in a better manner for safety in industries and mines and prevent pollution.
 
Action Taken:  The mining research cell is already undertaking environmental studies in the mining areas. The
recommendations of the ERC are under consideration and strengthening of the Mining Research Cell will be possible
after rationalization of core and non-core staff strengths.
 
Recommendations of the Committee
 
Computer Data Processing
 
(Para 6.3) : The Committee recommends that the Department of Mines may provide the required funds for purchase of
computer equipments at least during the financial year (2002-2003) for collection and dissemination of data.
Action Taken: Under the IBM-BRGM TMIS project completed recently, the computer equipments have already been
procured and installed.
 
Recommendations of the Committee
 
Revenue Generation by IBM
 
(Para 6.1.2) : The Sub-Committee appreciates the efforts of the IBM management for  generating internal revenue and
hopes that IBM management would encourage M.R. Cell, T.C. Division and Ore-dressing division for enhancing
generation in the ensuing financial years.
 
Action Taken : The suggestion is noted for improving revenue generation.
 
CHAPTER - III
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED
REPLIES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF MINES OR WHERE FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
COMMITTEE IS REQUIRED
 
Recommendations of the Committee
 
Charter of function of  IBM
 
(Para 2.2) :       The Committee takes note of functions envisaged in the charter of functions of IBM and hopes that IBM
would be able to accomplish its task as enshrined in the charter of functions. The Committee recommends that the
Department of Mines should take steps towards further empowering IBM so that it  would be able to discharge its
functions and responsibility in an efficient and effective manner. IBM from time to time should monitor mining plan of
all  Mines.
 
Action Taken :-
 
After amendments in the MMDR, MCR; 1960 and MCDR, 1988 in 1999-2000 the Indian Bureau of Mines has been
entrusted with the additional responsibilities and the same have been taken due note of in the Annual Programrne, 
2002-03.
 
The working group for 10
th   Five Year Plan on mineral exploration and development has recommended the  role of a
Central a  Regulatory Authority for IBM and  Expenditure Reforms Commission has recommended downsizing of
IBM.  The recommendations of the ERC are under consideration. Empowerment of  IBM will be possible only after the
strength of personnel has been finalized. However, simultaneously training, expertise and equipment facilities will be

77th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/77threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:41]
enhanced.
 
So far as monitoring of mining plans of all  mines is concerned, committee of senior officers has been constituted by
CG, IBM. MCCM Division of IBM takes necessary steps on a regular   basis for monitoring of mining plans.
 
Further Recommendation
 
The Committee is of the view that the Department of Mines should have apprised the a Committee of the additional
responsibility with which Indian Bureau of Mines has been entrusted.  The Committee should have been further
apprised of the `Mechanism evolved in the  Annual Programme 2002-03 for discharging of additional responsibility by
IBM.
 
The Committee welcomes the recommendations of the Working Group for Tenth Five Year Plan on Mineral
Explorations and Development regarding entrusting IBM the role of a Central Regulatory Authority.   The Committee
recommends that adequate structural mechanism should be evolved within the overall structure of IBM for the discharge
of the role and responsibilities of a Central Regulatory Authority.  So far as recommendations of the expenditure
Reforms Commission regarding down sizing of IBM is concerned, the Committee holds the view that downsizing of
Government Departments have also become a national policy  with the purpose of cutting down non-plan expenditure
So, the Committee does not  differ from the  recommendations made by the ERC.  However, the Committee hopes that
IBM management  would  take    due care while downsizing  IBM so that it   should not become a stumbling  bloc in the
way of IBM’s   discharging  of its  responsibility  as a  Central Regulatory Authority.
 
Recommendations of the Committee
 
Budgetary Support
 
(Para 4.3) : The Committee, taking note of the need of the enhanced budgetary support of IBM, recommends that the
Department of Mines,  in tandem with IBM management, should estimate the actual need of budgetary support and take
it up with the Ministry of Finance.
 
Action Taken :  A proposal for the enhanced budget support for 2002-2003 for IBM would be considered in due course
of time for consideration at RE stage.
 
Further Recommendation
 
The Committee feels that the Department of Mines in Consultation with IBM management  should have  started 
assessing  the   actual financial requirement of IBM  and the  same alongwith  detailed  appropriation   should have
been  communicated  to the Ministry of  Finance.  The  Department  of  Mines should  have kept   the Committee 
posted   of the development position in the present ATN.
 
            It would have  been another  matter if the  IBM  can be  granted  enhanced  budgetary  support at  RE stage of
financial year 2002-03.  The Committee recommends that the Department  of  Mines, in its ATN to the present Report
should furnish the details of IBM's   actual financial  requirement, the alongwith their appropriation and the  actual 
sanctioned amount at the RE stage.
 
Recommendations of the Committee
 
Diversification of Consultancy Services
 
(Para 5.5.2) : The Committee, appreciating the wide scope for diversification, desires that IBM management may
explore diversification of consultancy  services which might be imparted by IBM in areas like Geo-technical
investigation for non-mining projects and techno-economic scrutiny of foreign investment proposals in the Mining
Sector in India. The Committee also recommends that the requirement of IBM in respect of manpower, equipment and
training to enable it to diversify consultancy services may be fulfilled.

77th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/77threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:41]
 
Action Taken: The geo-technical investigation in the mining project and techno-economic appraisal have already been
undertaken by TC  Division but the suggestion of such investigation in  non-mining projects would be taken care of.
 
Further Recommendation
 
The Committee feels that IBM  and the Department of Mines  should  apprise the  Committee of Geo-technical
investigation in non-mining projects.  The Committee  is constrained  to  express its dissatisfaction as the Department
of   Mines  has maintained  silence over the actual  assessment of IBM in respect by manpower, equipment  and training
for enabling IBM to diversify  consultancy  services.  The Committee feels that  the Department of Mines should  play 
a pro-active role  in respect of  its remaining PSUs,  subsidiary organisations and so-called  `core function' otherwise 
the Department of Mines would lose any justification  for its existence and  continuance.  The Committee recommends
that the Department of Mines should guide IBM  in respect of the actual requirement of manpower, equipment and ways
and  means for diversification of consultancy services.
Recommendations of the Committee
Diversification of Consultancy Services
 
(Para 5.5.3) : The Committee further recommends that IBM should create  business promotion cell for procuring work
order  from developing countries particularly South-East-Asia and Africa. IBM should charge for providing consultancy
services and thus generate revenue.
 
Action Taken  
: All efforts are being  made to enhance  revenue generation out of  consultancy assignment. The
suggestion  of business promotion cell would be considered by the Department at the  appropriate time.
 
Further Recommendation
 
The Committee fails to understand the reasons for the procrastination    and delaying  attitude  of Department of Mines
for opening up of  a business  promotion cell in IBM.  In the prevailing cut-throat competitive   market era the decision
to put off/postpone the decision may prove harmful, therefore, the Committee recommends that the Department of
Mines should, instead of suggesting the  IBM that  wait   for appropriate time  for considering to open the business 
promotion  cell, (since time  waits for none) direct IBM to  open up business promotion call  at the first  opportunity 
without wasting further time.
 
Recommendations of the Committee
 
SWOT analysis of IBM
 
(Para 7.3) : The Committee is also of the opinion that officials of IBM should have interactive sessions with national
and international scientists and institutions of repute engaged in environmental studies to gather knowledge and
expertise. The Committee also recommends that IBM should continue to  undertake study of comparative mining laws
and practice and keep the Indian legal framework in consonance not only with international trends and developments
but also re-orient its activities in conformity with industry trends and developments.
 
Action Taken : The re-orientation of activities of IBM is being done in post liberalization scenario and all efforts are
being made to have proper interaction with national and  international institutions to gather relevant knowledge and 
expertise. Regarding the study of comparative mining laws and  practices in the context of Indian legal framework, the
same is being. taken care of in the Annual Programme of Mineral Economic Division for 2002-03 and onwards.
 
Further Recommendation
 
The Committee would  like to be apprised of the re-oriented  new activities  of IBM designed in consonance  with the
requirement and   canons of  post-liberalisation of scenario.  The Committee would  like to know  also the  frequency
and types of National and international institution with whom IBM  management  interacted and the  out come  of such
interactions.

77th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/77threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:41]
           
The Committee recommends  that the Department  of Mines should   furnish the details  of modifications/amendments
in the  comparative Mining  laws  and practice  as enshrined in the Annual  Programme of Mineral Economic Division 
for 2002-03 and onwards.
 
CHAPTER - IV
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
MINES HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
 
NIL
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE
 
Charter of Function of   IBM
 
            The Committee is of the view that the Department  of Mines  should have apprised the Committee  its additional 
responsibility with which Indian Bureau of Mines has been entrusted.  The Committee should have further been
apprised of the `Mechanism evolved in the  Annual programme 2002-03 for discharging of additional responsibility by
IBM.
 
            The Committee welcomes  the recommendations of the working group  for  Xth Five Year Plan on Mineral
Explorations  and Development regarding  entrusting IBM   the role of Central Regulatory  Authority.  The Committee
recommends that  adequate  structural mechanism should be evolved  within the  overall structure of  IBM  for the
discharge of role  and responsibilities of a Central Regulatory Authority.  So far as recommendations of expenditure
Reforms Commission  regarding down sizing of  IBM  is concerned, the Committee  holds  the view that  downsizing of
government  Department  has also become a national policy  with the purpose of cutting  down  non-plan expenditure. 
So, the  committee doesn't     differ from the  recommendations made by the ERC.  However, the Committee hopes that
IBM management  would  take    due care while downsizing  IBM so that it IBM  should not become a stumbling  bloc
in the way of IBM  discharging  its  responsibility  as a Central Regulatory Authority.
                                                                                                                        (Para 2.2 )
 
The Committee feels that the Department of Mines in Consultation with IBM management  should have  started 
assessing  the   actual financial requirement of IBM  and the  same alongwith  detailed  appropriation   should have
been  communicated  to the Ministry of  Finance.  The  Department  of  Mines should  also kept appropriated    in the 
present action taken note   of the Committee  with the development.
 
            It would have  been another  thing that the IBM  could be  granted  enhanced  budgetary  support at  RE stage of
financial year 2002-03.  The Committee recommends that the Department  of  Mines , in its ATN to the present Report
would furnish the details of IBM's   actual financial  requirement, the alongwith their appropriation and the  actual 
sanctioned amount at the RE stage.
 
(Para 4.3 )
 
 
The Committee feels that   IBM  and the Department of Mines  should  apprise  Committee of  Geo-technical
investigation  in non-mining projects.  The Committee  is constrained  to  express its dissatisfaction as the Department
of    Mines  has maintained  silence over the actual  assessment of IBM in respect by manpower, equipment  and training
for enabling IBM    to diversify  consultancy  services.  The Committee feels that  the Department of Mines should 
play  pro-active role  in respects of  its remaining PSUs,  subsidiary organisations and so-called  `core function' 
otherwise  the Department of Mines would    lose  justification  for its existence and  continuance   .  The Committee
recommends that the Department of Mines should guide IBM  in the actual requirement of manpower, equipment and
ways and  means for diversification of consultancy services.
 

77th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/77threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:41]
                                                                                                                        (Para 5.2.2 )
 
The Committee fails to understand the reasons for the procrastination   and delaying  attitude  of Department of Mines
for opening up of  a Business  promotion cell' in IBM.  In the prevailing cut-throat competitive  market era the decision
to put off/postpone the decision may prove may prove harmful, therefore, the Committee  recommends  that the
Department  of Mines should,  instead of suggesting  IBM  wait   for the  appropriate time ' for considering to open the
business  promotion  cell, (since time  waits for none) direct IBM to  open up business promotion call  at the first 
opportunity  without wasting  further time.
 
                                                                                                                        (Para 5.5.3 )
 
The Committee would  like to be apprised of the re-oriented  new activities  of IBM designed in consonance  with the
requirement and   canons of  post-liberalisation of scenario.  The Committee would  like to know  also the  frequency
and types of National and international institution with where IBM  management  interacted and the  out come  of such
interactions.
           
The Committee recommends  that the Department  of Mines should    furnish the details  of modifications/amendments
in the  comparative Mining  laws  and practice  as enshrined in the Annual  Programme of Mineral Economic Division 
for 2002-03 and onwards.
 
                                                                                                                        (Para 7.3 )
 
MINUTES
XI
 
ELEVENTH MEETING
 
                        The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday the 9
th August, 2002 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
           
PRESENT
 
Shri T.N. Chaturvedi - Chairman         
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Dr. Abrar Ahmad        
3.         Shri Prasanta Chatterjee          
4          Smt. Saroj Dubey                    
5          Dr.  Faguni Ram                                  
6          Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
7          Sh. P.K. Maheshwari              
8          Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
9          Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
                                   
LOK SABHA
 
10        Smt. Jayashree Banerjee          
11        Shri Nepal Chandra Das          
12        Shri A.C. Jose
13        Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
14        Shri Sunil Khan

77th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/77threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:41]
15        Dr. K.Malaisamy
16        Shri A. Narendra 
17        Shri P. Rajendran
18        Dr. B.B. Ramaiah
18        Chowdhary Talib Hussain
19        Shri Chunnilal Bhau Thakur
20        Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri  Tapas Das Gupta, Director
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
2.         Shri A.C. Jose, Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi and Dr. B.B. Ramaiah and other members of the Committee 
felicitated the Chairman of the Committee who had since been designated as the Governor of Karnataka.  In the
felicitation address, all the three Convenors and other members of the Committee appreciated the work done by the
Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri T.N. Chaturvedi.  They all were of the view that Shri Chaturvedi gave a new
thrust and orientation to the working of the Committee and gave inspiration to the Committee with his valuable
contribution and personal interest in the day-to-day working of the Committee and in a short span of four months, the
Committee could present a record number of ‘23’ reports.
            The Chairman, in response, observed that due to the hard work put in by the Sub-Committees it had been
possible to prepare such a large number of reports.  He thanked the Convenors of all the Sub-Committees, Members of
the Committee and the Secretariat for extending cooperation to him to discharge his duties as the Chairman of the
Committee.
3.         The Committee then took up consideration of the following draft reports:-
76
th Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee’s 53rd Report on Modernization, Restructuring
and Expansion Programmes of NALCO.
77
th  Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee’s 67th Report on Organization, Structure and
Performance Review of Indian Bureau of Mines.
 78
th  Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee’s 68th Report on Working and Performance
Review of Mineral Exploration Corporation Ltd. (MECL).
79
th  Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee’s   65th Report on Modernisation,
Restructuring and Expansion Programmes of Hindustan Copper Ltd. (HCL).
80
th  Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee’s 66th Report on Performance Review of
Jawahar Lal Nehru Aluminum Research Development and Design Centre.
81
st   Report  on Sickness in SSI Sector of Cement Industry in Uttar Pradesh.
82nd   Report on  MoU system in the Strategic Sector PSEs
83rd Report on  MoU system in the Allied Sector PSEs.
84th Report on Implementation of Prime Minister’s Rozgar Yojana (PMRY) in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Kerala.
85th Report on Implementation Status of Financial Assistance-cum-Restructuring Package and Revival of Hindustan
Steel Works Construction Ltd. (HSCL).
86
th Report on Performance Review of Metal Scrap Trade Corporation Ltd. (MSTC).
87th Report on Implementation status of Financial Assistance-cum-Restructuring Package and Revival of Bharat
Refractories Ltd. (BRL).
88
th Report on  Performance review of Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL).
89th Report on Modernisation, Restructuring and Expansion Programmes of Durgapur Steel Plant (DSP).
90th Report on Sickness in SSI Sector in the City of Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh.
91st   Report on Coir Board – A performance Review.
 

77th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/77threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:41]
4.         The Committee adopted all the above stated reports and authorized its Chairman  to make corrections, if any, in
the reports.  The Committee decided to present/lay the above mentioned reports on the 13th August, 2002.  The
Committee for this purpose authorized its Chairman to present the reports  in the Rajya Sabha and in his absence Shri
Khan Ghufran Zahidi and Prof. M.M. Agarwal to present the reports.  The Committee also authorized Dr. B.B. Ramaiah
to lay the reports in the Lok Sabha and in his absence authorized Shri A.C. Jose and Shri A. Narendra to lay the reports.
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 P.M.
 
 