PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/118threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:04]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH REPORT
 
                                         ON
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 90TH    REPORT ON `SICKNESS IN SSI SECTOR IN THE CITY OF KANPUR, UTTAR PRADESH’
PERTAINING TO THE MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON     8th VAISHAKHA, 2003)
              (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 8th VAISHAKHA, 2003)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2003/AGRAHAYANA, 1924 (SAKA)
 
 
C O N T E N T S
 
 
                                                                                         
 1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
                                                       
 2.            INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                         
 3.            REPORT                                                                                                                                                                                         
(i)            CHAPTER – I                                                                                                                         
Recommendations/Observations have been accepted by the
Government
 
(ii)
                 CHAPTER–II                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                           
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not
to pursue in view of the Government's replies
 
(iii)
               CHAPTER–III                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                           
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee
has not accepted replies of the Government
 
(iv)
               CHAPTER–IV                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                           
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
  4.            MINUTES
                                                                                                   
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
                  Dr. P.C. Alexander            —   Chairman
                       
                       
 RAJYA SABHA
 
2.      Prof. M.M. Agarwal
3.      Shri  Jayantilal Barot
4.      Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5.      Dr. M.N. Das
6.      Shrimati Saroj Dubey
7.      Shri Faguni Ram
8.      Shri Lajpat Rai
9.      Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/118threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:04]
10.  Shri P.K. Maheshwari
11.  Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
12.  Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
13.  Shri S. Sivasubramanian
14.  Shrimati Sushree Devi
15.  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
 
LOK SABHA
 
16.  Shrimati  Jayashree Banerjee
17.  Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
18.  Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
19.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das
20.  Shri K Francis George
21.  Shri Thomas Hansda
22.  Md. Anwarul Haque
23.  Shri  A.C. Jose
24.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
25.  Shri Mansoor Ali Khan
26.  Shri Sunil Khan
27.  Shri Deepak Kumar
28.  Shri Manjay Lal
29.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
30.  Shri A. Narendra
31.  Shri Ananta Nayak
32.  Shri  Dayabhai V. Patel
33.  Shri Uttamrao Patil
34.  Shri Malyala Rajaiah
35.  Shri P. Rajendran
36.  Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
37.  Shri Tarachand Sahu
38.  Shri Ramanand Singh
39.  Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
40.  Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
41.  Shri V. Vertiselvan
42.  Shrimati  D.M. Vijaya Kumari
43.  Shri Ram Prasad Singh
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri  K.P. Singh,  Under  Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
 
 
INTRO
DUCTION
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having   been  authorized  by the Committee, hereby present this  One hundred-ninth Report on the  Action Taken  by the
Government on the Recommendations  contained in  the  74
th   Report of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry on Demands for Grants for (2002-03) pertaining to the Ministry of Agro & Rural
Industries.
 
2.         The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry considered and adopted  the Draft report at its meeting held on the 11
th December, 2002.
 
3.         The 74
th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  the14th May 2002.
 
NEW DELHI;
December 11, 2002
Dr.P.C.Alexander
Chairman
Department –related ParliamentaryStanding Committee onIndustry
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/118threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:04]
REPORT
 
 
1.         The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in its 90 th Report of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry on
`Sickness in SSI Sector in the city of Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh' which was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 11th December, 2002.
 
2.         Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorised as follows :-
 
(i)
                  Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Government :- Paras 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8, 1.9, 1.10 and 1.11 (Chapter - I)
 
(ii)        Recommendations/Observations, which   the Committee does not desire to pursue in  view  of  the Government's replies :- Paras 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.6 and 2.7  (Chapter-II).
 
(iii)       Recommendations/Observation in respect of  which   the Committee has not accepted replies of the Government :- Paras 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7, 3.8, 3.9,  3.7,  3.8,  3.9, 3.10, 3.11, 3.12, 3.13, 3.14,
3.15, 3.16, 3.17 and 3.18 (Chapter-III).
 
(v)
               Recommendations/Observations of the Committee have been placed separately. (Chapter-IV).
 
3.         The Committee is pleased to observe that the Ministry of Small Scale Industries has accepted its recommendations as mentioned in Chapter - I of the Report.
 
4.         In respect of the recommendations made in Para 2.11, 2.18, 2.22, 4.0, 4.5, 4.6 and 4.9 in Chapter-II, the Committee is convinced with the explanation given by the Ministry and therefore does not want to pursue
further.
 
5.         The Committee expresses its concern over non-implementation of recommendations contained in Chapter-III and therefore the Committee desires that the ministry  should furnish logical explanation in respect of
these recommendations.
 
6.            Observations and Recommendations at a glance may be seen in Chapter IV.
 
ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE 90 TH REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY ON
SICKNESS IN SSI SECTOR IN THE CITY OF KANPUR, UTTAR PRADESH
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – I
 
LABOUR REFORMS IN SSI SECTOR
 
Recommendation
 
1.1       The Associations brought it to the notice of the Committee that the Union Finance Minister had assured that units employing less than one thousand persons would not be brought under the ambit of labour laws, but in
reality, when these units are required to resize their manpower, they are not able to do it as the employees go in for arbitration where dates of hearing are fixed six months after filing the application.  When labour is given
some rights, they start misbehaving with the management.  Management of SSI units spend a lot of time in solving the problems posed by the labourers.  In Kanpur 90 per cent of SSI units have become sick due to leadership
of labour.  There is no power in the hands of the management to discipline the labour.
 
Wherever the statutory dues were paid in the industry, sickness started to surface and whenever workers were made permanent, they stopped doing work and started misbehaviour with the management.  Labour
reforms should, therefore, be done in a way so that the constraints coming in the way of running units could be removed.  Hire and Fire system may be one of the options  which can be considered by the Government. 
(Para  2.3)
 
Action taken by the Government
 
Amendment proposals in the Industrial Disputes Act,1947 are under consideration of the Government as informed by Ministry of Labour which deals with the issue.
 
 
PROVISIION FOR TESTING FACILITY
 
1.2            Recommendation
 
There is no provision for a testing facility in Kanpur for the paint industry. Consequently, they have to go to Kolkata for getting their products tested. To an enquiry the Association informed that IIT and CIGS do not
have any provision for testing facilities for SSI units. These institutions cater to the needs of the defence sector only. Even if SSI sector get any tests done at these institutions, the test results are not accepted by other
organizations like Railways, etc. The Associations, therefore, requested for providing a testing facility for the paint industry.
(Para  2.5)
 
Action taken by the Government
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/118threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:04]
            The Regional Testing Centre (NR), New Delhi is having complete testing facilities for testing paints, enamels, dry distemper, varnish, solvents, thinners, pigments and extenders as per relevant Indian Standards. This
Centre provides services to all small scale industrial units located in the northern region of the country, which include the State of UP. Small scale industrial units located in Kanpur can avail the testing facilities for getting
their products tested at RTC, New Delhi. It is further stated that concessional testing charges are levied for test samples received from registered small scale industrial units. The laboratories of Regional Testing Centre(NR),
New Delhi are having  recognition from the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS), New Delhi and accreditation with the NABL, Department of Science & Technology, Govt. of India, New Delhi.  SISI, Kanpur has been advised
to disseminate the information on test facilities available at the Centre regarding paints, varnishes, etc. and motivate the SSI units to take advantage of these testing facilities.
 
BANKING OMBUDSMAN SCHEME
 
1.3            Recommendation
 
Even if an industry falls sick, it does not mean that it will not survive.  If the proper aid is given to the industry at the initial stage of sickness, it can survive.  The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has given a guideline for
assessing the sickness of SSI but it is on paper only.  The banks and Financial Institutions (FIs) are not adhering to it.  It should be mandatory for the banks/ Financial Institutions to adhere to the RBI guidelines regarding
assessment of sickness of industries.  There should be an ombudsman with whom complaints against banks/ Financial Institutions can be registered.
Para  2.12
 
Action taken by the Government
 
The detailed guidelines have been issued by RBI to all scheduled commercial banks for implementation, wherein banks have been advised to take a sympathetic attitude and strive for rehabilitation in respect of viable
SSI units, particularly wherever the sickness is on account of circumstances beyond the control of entrepreneurs.  The guidelines also provide for a mechanism for early detection of sickness in SSI units and the package for
rehabilitation of such units for implementation by the financing banks.
 
The RBI has advised the banks to implement the guidelines fully and to submit a report to their Boards on the progress made in assisting the SSI units under the new guidelines.
 
            The Banking Ombudsman Scheme exits which covers aspects relating to non-observance of RBI directives on interest rates, delays in sanction, disbursement or non-observance of prescribed time schedule for
disposal of loan applications, etc. The RBI has given directives that banks should comply with the Banking Ombudsman Scheme.
 
 
TELECOM NETWORK
 
1.4            Recommendation
 
Poor telecom network in semi-urban areas sometimes prove to be a hindrance for SSI units.  A little communication gap between the supplier and the client due to absence of proper telecommunication system may
result in business loss.
Para  2.14
 
Action taken by the Government
 
With infrastructure growth in the communications sector, telecom services, Internet services, etc. have expanded vastly reaching even to semi-urban and rural areas.  The telecommunication system has improved
considerably and SSI entrepreneurs should not find any major difficulties in accessing the services.
 
MINIMUM WAGES
 
1.5            Recommendation
 
Industrial unrest and wages are inter-linked.  If the industry is using skilled labour, it cannot be engaged on minimum wages.  Wages are determined by demand and supply.  Skilled workers will go to an industry
where  they get higher wages.  If the industry sticks to the stipulated minimum wages, it will give rise to industrial unrest, which will hamper working of the industry.  Government should make a fresh survey to define
minimum wages.
Para  2.16
 
Action taken by the Government
 
Ministry of Labour has informed that the Minimum Wages Act,1948 provides for fixation, revision and enforcement of minimum wages of the workers engaged in the scheduled employments both in the Central and
State sphere mostly in the unorganized sector. The Act safeguards the interests of these workers, as they are susceptible to exploitation due to illiteracy and lack of bargaining power. The Act binds the employers to pay the
minimum wages fixed under the Act. The minimum wages are fixed and revised separately for highly skilled, skilled, semi-skilled and unskilled workers. The rates of wages of the workers are fixed at higher level with the
rise in merits of the skills.
 
PURCHASE PREFERENCE POLICY FOR SSI
 
1.6            Recommendation
 
Government institutions are not giving priority to SSIs in the matter of purchase of various items, Government bodies are purchasing items from outside the state although the same items are available in the state at
competitive rates.
 
Action taken by the Government

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/118threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:04]
 
There already exists a Government Purchase & Price Preference Policy wherein certain facilities/ benefits are being provided to the SSI units as a marketing support measure. The Draft “Small Enterprises
Development Bill” under  consideration of the Ministry of SSI  also covers the aspect of measures for trade protection.
 
 
WORKSHOP IN KANPUR
 
1.7            Recommendation
 
The Committee desired that the Ministry should reach the grass-root level and for this purpose, it should hold regular orientation courses, seminar, workshop etc. in Kanpur.  The Committee hopes that this kind of
action would enable the SSIs to reap benefit of the schemes formulated for them by the Government of India.
Para  4.1
 
Action taken by the Government
 
SISI, Kanpur has been organizing Skill Development Programmes, Industrial motivational campaigns, Entrepreneurship Development Programmes, Management Development Programmes, Vendor Development
Prgrammes, Buyer Seller Meets, etc. on a regular basis at Kanpur. Besides, Awareness Programmes/ Workshops, Training Programme on Packaging for Exports/ISO 9000, Sensitization Programme on WTO, etc. are also
organized. These programmes are organized in collaboration with the concerned Central/ State Departments and information on the various schemes being implemented for the promotion and development of SSIs is
provided for the benefit of SSI entrepreneurs/participants.
 
 
MONITORING OF CREDIT FLOW TO SSIT SECTOR
 
1.8            Recommendation
 
The Committee observes that there was some mismatch between the RBI figures and the associations contention about the non-availability of credit.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Small
Scale Industries should strictly monitor the credit flow to SSIs so that the true picture in this regard emerges.
Para  4.2
 
Action taken by the Government
 
            The Reserve Banks of India (RBI) regulates the scheduled commercial banks and is therefore, is the only authentic source of information on credit flow to the SSI sector from the commercial banks.  The data on
advances to the sector by the various banks is compiled and monitored at the RBI level. 
 
            In order to have a constant and focused vigil on flow of credit to SSI and address the problems faced by the sector in securing adequate credit, etc. the RBI has constituted the Standing Advisory Committee to review
flow of Institutional Credit to SSI sector under the Chairmanship of the Deputy Governor, RBI.  The representatives of SSI Associations are also members in this Committee. The Committee inter-alia reviews the flow of
credit to the SSI sector and problems faced by the sector in securing an adequate flow of credit. Therefore, it may be seen that there is a transparency in the mechanism of monitoring of credit flow to the SSI sector wherein
the SSI Associations are given the opportunity to give their views or suggestions.    
 
DISPOSAL OF LOAN APPLICATIONS IN BANKS
 
1.9            Recommendation
 
The Committee recommends that the banks should give receipt to the applicant  after taking the application and inform the applicant within two months the reasons for rejecting the application.  Banks should be
persuaded to be SSI friendly.  As regards non-supply of required financial data by the applicants, the banks should give the applicant proper counselling at the initial stage of the scrutiny of the application.
Para  4.3
 
Action taken by the Government
 
The RBI has advised the banks that a clear cut monitoring system may be laid down which captured the process of sanctioning loan from the receipt of application to sanction or rejection and the reasons for rejection.
The banks  have also been advised to prepare the necessary ‘Check List’ and circulate it among the controlling offices and branches to make available the same to the potential borrower while giving the loan application
forms.
Further, the RBI has recently instructed the banks to dispose off loans up to Rs.25,000 within 2 weeks and in other cases for loans up to Rs. 5 lakhs within a period of 4 weeks on receipt of loan applications complete
in all respects and duly accompanied by a check list. All such loan applications which are complete in all respects and accompanied by a check list should also be acknowledged by the bank branches on the same day i.e. on
the day the application is received by the branch.
 
ROLE OF LEAD BANKS
 
1.10            Recommendation
 
The Committee further recommends that all the lead banks should have interaction with the State Industries’ Association on regular basis regarding credit and its recovery etc.  and the decisions taken in the meeting
may be conveyed to the Ministry of SSI and RBI for further necessary action.
Para  4.4
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/118threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:04]
Action taken by the Government
 
            Lead banks in their quarterly meetings of DCC/ DLRC critically reviews the position of flow of credit as well as recovery position of all member banks.  The RBI is of the view that in order to avoid the list of
participants becoming unmanageable, it may not be necessary to invite representative of SSI Association.  However, whenever discussion on agenda of the SLBC/ DCC / DLRC meeting includes the interest of SSI the
representative of SSI Associations are being invited as a Special Invitee.  Further, representative of SSI Associations are being invited to State Level Institutional Committee (SLIIC) as regular member.
 
The Lead Bank Scheme envisages a coordinating role for the Lead Bank and it does not have any supervisory power or authority over the banks in its lead districts. Bank of Baroda, Convenor of SLBC in U.P. has
noted the recommendation that  lead bank should have interaction with the State Industries Association for compliance.  Further, it been informed by the Convenor, SLBC that Indian Industries Association (an Association of
Small & Medium Industries) is actively participating in quarterly meetings of the State Level Inter Institutional Committee (SLIIC) which are presided over by the Industrial Development Commissioner and Principal
Secretary, Govt. of U.P. and also participated by Senior Government Officials, RBI Officials and Senior Executives of Commercial/ Nationalised Banks. The Committee is constituted for resolving the various problems
faced by industrial sector in the State.
           
IMPROVING CD RATIO OF UTTAR PRADESH
 
1.11            Recommendation
 
As regards the CD ratio of Uttar Pradesh, the Committee observes that the ratio is much below the desired level.  The Committee desires that Ministry of SSI and RBI should impress upon the State Government to
find ways and means for increasing the level of CD ratio in the State.
Para  4.8
 
Action taken by the Government
 
            The RBI has informed that the State Government has been impressed upon to initiate measures for improving CD ratio by critically reviewing in different fora such as SLBC/ DCC/DLRC.             Bank of Baroda has
informed that being Convenor of SLBC in State of U.P., the Bank has taken the initiative and discussed the issue in various SLBC meetings and formed a core group of SLBC for C.D. Ratio in January,2002. Core group of
SLBC consists representatives of all nine Lead Banks working in U.P. The group has conducted a study in various districts in U.P. to find out the causes for low C.D. Ratio in the State and to suggest the measures for
improving the C.D. Ratio. The Core Group has completed the study and submitted their views in the meeting convened by them on 13.11.2002. On the basis of the views/ observations of the Core Group, recommendations to
this effect have been made which are to be discussed in next meeting SLBC meeting, for further action.
 
CHAPTER – II
 
RECOVERY OF LOAN
 
2.1            Recommendation
 
Banks have no mechanism to recover loans.  State Finance Corporations have the right under the Provision of Arrears of Land Revenue to sell the closed unit to another unit to recover the amount of loan.  In case of
banks, the matter goes to the Debt Recovery Tribunal and the condition of machines purchased by the sick units becomes worse due to non-use.  To obviate the situation, the banks should be given the right to sell the
defaulter unit.  This would encourage the banks to give loans, as there would be a way to recover the loan.
Para  2.11
 
Action taken by the Government
 
            In case of conduct of SSI accounts becoming unsatisfactory and the borrowers failing to regularize the position despite notices from the bank, the loan can be called up and recovery suit can be filed against the
borrower to recover the loans.
 
            “The Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Ordinance, 2002 repromulgated on 21.8.2002 provides that in case of default in repayment of secured debt by
borrower and the account in respect of such debt being classified as non-performing asset, the secured creditor may require the borrower through notice to discharge full liabilities within 60 days and in the event of borrower
failing to discharge the liabilities, the secured creditor may take over possession of secured assets (including the right to transfer, assignment or sale) for realizing the secured asset and / or  take over the management  of
secured assets and realize the secured assets,  appoint a manager to manage the secured assets, require any person who acquired the secured assets from the borrower from whom money is due to pay to the secured creditor
money sufficient to pay the secured debt. (The Ordinance has since been passed by both the Houses of the Parliament in Winter Session 2002).
 
Where dues of the secured creditor are not fully satisfied with the sale proceeds of secured assets, the secured creditor may file an application  to the Debts Recovery Tribunal (DRT) or a competent Court for recovery
of the balance amount from the borrower.  
 
EPF & ESI SCHEMES
 
2.2            Recommendation
 
Some deductions are made from the salaries of the labourers on account of Provident Fund.  But when the labourers change one unit after another, in most cases they do not get their dues due to non-availability of
records.  It is, therefore, suggested that the employees may be issued passbooks and entries relating to amount deducted from their salaries may be entered in them.  They would be able to receive their dues from the units
from which they retire on this factual basis.
In the case of ESIC, the benefits go to the owner or director of the unit and not to workers.  A policy should be evolved so that workers get their benefit and owners pay the premium for the same.
Para  2.18
 
Action taken by the Government

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/118threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:04]
 
The Employees’ Provident Fund Scheme,1952 provides for issue of passbooks to employers to suit the requirements of their employees. Further, Account Slips are issued every year to members showing opening
balance, contribution received during the year and interest earned on such contribution. Also, to resolve the problem reported, Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation (EPFO) has already initiated the process for issue of
Social Security Number (SSN).  On allotment of the unique SSN, this problem may be solved since each worker will have only one unique number irrespective of the establishment(s) in which the member may be working.
 
The ESI Scheme under the ESI Act,1948 is a Contributory Scheme. It is mainly financed from Contribution by the Employees and Employers. The rate of contribution by employers is 4.75% of the wage wherein the
employee’s contribution is at the rate of 1.75% of the wage. The employees of factories/ establishments drawing wages not exceeding Rs. 6500/- P.M. are covered under the ESI Scheme. Workers who are covered under the
ESI Scheme are entitled to medical care and cash benefits in the contingency of sickness/maternity/ disablement and death due to employment, under the ESI Act. Contributions are payable by the Principal employers of
factory/establishments. However, he is authorized to recover from the wages and not otherwise provided that no such deduction are to be made from any wages other than those relating to the period in respect of which the
contribution is payable. The employer is not entitled to recover the employer’s share of contribution from the wage of the employees.
 
TAXATION ON HOSIERY INDUSTRY
 
2.3            Recommendation
 
Four per cent taxation has been imposed on hosiery industry. Due to this, it has become sick. The rate of taxation should be uniform throughout the country and, like other states, the taxation rate should be one per
cent on this industry.
Para  2.22
 
Action taken by the Government
 
            Imposition of 4% sales tax on the hosiery industry is as per the uniform floor rates list of sales tax which has been unanimously adopted by all the State Governments as per the decision taken in the Conference of
Chief Ministers of States/ UTs held on 16
th November, 1999.  Ministry of Finance has informed that since the uniform floor rates list has been adopted by all the States, the 4% rate of sales tax on hosiery industry is uniform
throughout the country. 
 
 
PROBLEMS OF SSI
 
2.4            Recommendation
 
During the interactive sessions with the Ministry of Small Scale Industry, the Committee observed that there was a big communication gap between the Ministry,  banks, FIs on the one hand and the SSI Associations
and  individual entrepreneurs on the other hand.  The Committee, however, recommends that the Ministry of SSI should address the issues illustrated in paras 2.2 to 2.27 of this report. 
Para  4.0
 
Action taken by the Government
 
The action taken/ comments on the issues at para no. 2.3 to 2.27 of the report have been given above. 
 
PROBLEMS OF SSI
 
2.5            Recommendation
 
The Committee recommends that Government should take suitable steps to make the Delayed Payments Act effective so that the money of SSIs are not blocked by the large industries for more than three months.  The
Committee also recommends that Purchase Preference Policy should be made mandatory.
Para  4.5
 
Action taken by the Government
 
            Same as given under para 2.17.
 
PURCHASE PREFERENCE POLICY
 
2.5            Recommendation
 
The Committee recommends that government should find out a solution on the lines of State Financial Corporation which can take action against the defaulters under the provision of Arrear of Land Revenue.
Para 4.6
 
Action taken by the Government
 
            In case of conduct of SSI accounts becoming unsatisfactory and the borrowers failing to regularize the position despite notices from the bank, the loan can be called up and recovery suit can be filed against the
borrower to recover the loans.
 
            “The Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Ordinance, 2002 repromulgated on 21.8.2002 provides that in case of default in repayment of secured debt by
borrower and the account in respect of such debt being classified as non-performing asset, the secured creditor may require the borrower through notice to discharge full liabilities within 60 days and in the event of borrower

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/118threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:04]
failing to discharge the liabilities, the secured creditor may take over possession of secured assets (including the right to transfer, assignment or sale) for realizing the secured asset and / or  take over the management  of
secured assets and realize the secured assets,  appoint a manager to manage the secured assets, require any person who acquired the secured assets from the borrower from whom money is due to pay to the secured creditor
money sufficient to pay the secured debt. (The Ordinance has since been passed by both the Houses of the Parliament in Winter Session 2002).
 
Where dues of the secured creditor are not fully satisfied with the sale proceeds of secured assets, the secured creditor may file an application  to the Debts Recovery Tribunal (DRT) or a competent Court for recovery
of the balance amount from the borrower.  
 
 
2.7            Recommendation
 
As regards labour problems, the Committee desires that SSI management should evolve ways and means to motivate labour for maximum productivity.  The Committee feels if labour is taken into confidence and is
apprised of the situation, they will lend their helping hand to the management for the overall benefit of the SSI Sector.
Para  4.9
 
Action taken by the Government
 
The SISIs impart training to entrepreneurs /workers under various entrepreneurship development/ management development programmes and skill development programmes. In these training programmes, training is
imparted even on behavioural aspects based on techniques for maintaining cordial and harmonious relations between management and workers on the one hand and amongst co-workers on the other hand and the need for
developing a harmonious relationship is emphasized.  The onus for motivating the labour lies on the management style and policies of the entrepreneurs. 
 
ANTI-SOCIAL ELEMENTS IN INDUSTRIAL AREAS
 
2.8            Recommendation
 
Due to power cut, anti-social elements are thriving in industrial areas. State police authority expresses their helplessness,as they do not have enough force to tackle the law and order situation there. The SSI branches
of banks are located outside the urban area of Kanpur. It is quite difficult to go to the SSI branch to deposit or collect money. Banks should be located in safe areas.
Para  2.21
 
Action taken by the Government
 
Maintenance of law and order primarily comes under the purview of the State Governments. After the nationalization of Banks, it was one of the basic objectives to expand the network of branches all over the country
and take banking to the remotest corner so that access to credit facilities becomes easier for various categories of borrowers including SSI borrowers.  Banks have been advised by the RBI to make concerted efforts to
operationalise at least one specialized SSI branch in every district and centres having clusters of SSI unit. As at the end of March, 2002, 395 specialised SSI branches of the public sector banks are functioning.  Further, banks
have been permitted to categorise their general banking branches having 60% or more of their advances to SSI sector as specialized SSI branches in order to encourage them to open more specialized SSI branches for
providing better service to this sector as a whole. 
 
COMMON EFFLUENT TREATMENT PLANT
 
2.9            Recommendation
 
Pollution control for the industries is necessary, but generally, problems keep on cropping up due to various reasons. Therefore, in industrial areas where SSIs are situated as a cluster, facilities should be provided by
the administration for setting up of a common effluent treatment plant.
Para  2.23
 
Action taken by the Government
 
The Scheme on Common Effluent Treatment Plant(CETP) which is for the prevention and control of pollution from the small scale industrial sector has been initiated by the Ministry of Environment & Forests. New
and the existing CETPs need technological up-gradation in order to meet the new standards, waste management policies prescribed by the Ministry from time to time.  The pattern of the funding is Central & State subsidy
25% each, entrepreneur contribution 20% and loans from financial institutions 30%. The entrepreneurs are required to have financial and technical appraisal of the project and then the project has to be routed through the
State Pollution Control Board for Central subsidy.
 
EXHIBITION OF SPARE PARTS
 
2.10            Recommendation
 
Exhibitions of articles related to spare parts used in railways may be organised  to revive the engineering units which are on the verge of closure in the adjoining areas of Kanpur. This will inspire the revival of
engineering industry.
Para  2.26
 
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/118threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:04]
SISI Kanpur will be organizing a Vendor Development Programme-cum-Exhibition with association of Railways in February, 2003. Railways will be requested to participate in the Programme and exhibit their spare
parts for the benefits of engineering industries.
 
 
 
2.11            Recommendation
 
SSIs receive their payments in smaller denomination notes (like one, two or five) and coins. The banks do not accept these currencies. SSIs have to suffer the loss of approximately five per cent (brokerage) in
payment on the coins. RBI should give clear guidelines to banks to accept all types of currencies.
Para  2.27
 
Action taken by the Government
 
            RBI has advised that all commercial banks are instructed to accept and exchange notes in all denomination including smaller denomination. If any SSI unit faces problem in this regard, a specific complaint could be
made to RBI’s Kanpur Regional Office or directly to the Central Office.
 
            Bank of Baroda, Convenor of SLBC in State of U.P. has advised the Regions and branches under their control to adhere to the guidelines issued by the RBI with regard to acceptance of currency. The bank has also
informed that they have not received any complaint of such nature by their clients so far.
 
 
2.12            Recommendation
 
The Committee understands that the Ministry of SSI has taken an initiative to bring forward a comprehensive legislation before Parliament for forging coordination at the Central and State level for the benefit of SSIs.
The Committee feels that since materialization of such a measure will take its own time, the Ministry should form a Task  Force at the Ministry level to tackle the problems faced by the SSIs located in and around Kanpur,
especially when Kanpur has been declared as a Special Economic Zone (SEZ). The Committee expects that the Central Government, in coordination with the Uttar Pradesh Government, RBI and local banks will be able to
restore the past glory of Kanpur and make it a vibrant centre of commercial  activities.
 
Para  4.10
Action taken by the Government
 
The Administrative Staff College of India (ASCI), Hyderabad had been commissioned by the Ministry of SSI   to work on a Single Law for the SSI sector. 
 
The Draft Small Enterprises  Development Bill prepared by ASCI was presented in the 47
th  meeting of the Small Scale Industries Board held on 4 th July, 2002. The feedback/ comments received thereon from the
stakeholders have been forwarded to ASCI, Hyderabad for consideration while finalizing the Draft Bill.
 
With regard to forming a Task Force to tackle the problems faced by the SSIs located in and around Kanpur, a State Level Forum viz., State Level Inter- Institutional Committee (SLIIC) is already functioning in the
State under the Chairmanship of the Secretary (Industries), Government of Uttar Pradesh with members from RBI, other banks, financial institutions, Industry Associations etc. The Committee, besides providing a useful
forum for exchange of information and discussions of  the problems faced by the SSIs, inter alia, also deals with coordination between bank and financial institutions, provision of adequate infrastructural facilities,  problems 
relating to grant of credit, review of sickness in the SSI sector etc. In the circumstances, forming any other Committee or Task Force would result in a parallel body being formed for attaining the same objectives. This may
lead to clash in the roles of SLIIC and the proposed Task Force. Kohli Committee has also recommended that this forum may be revitalized by holding its meeting as per schedule and with active participation by officials
who are empowered to take decision.
CHAPTER – III
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
 
POWER CUT AFFECTING S.S.I. UNITS
 
3.1            Recommendation
 
            In Uttar Pradesh there is a daily power cut of four hours.  As a result, only 60 per cent of production capacity can be achieved.  Four hours of total working hours are wasted as non-productive hours.  Four hours
power cut is a daily affair but sometimes it lasts for 10-12 hours, thus crippling the SSI units.  State Power Corporation has absolute authority in the matter of supplying of power.  They do not listen to the problems of the
SSI units.  There should be a State-Level Committee under the chairmanship of a judge, which should hear both sides and give decision which should be mandatory.
 
The Associations have suggested that like Telephone Department, State  Power Body should publish a booklet indicating contact numbers of officers who can be contacted in case of any difficulty.  The time taken in
taking a decision and giving effect to it in the Power Department should also be reduced to minimize the problems of SSI units.
 
Para  2.4
 
Action taken by the Government
 
Ministry of Power has informed that supply and distribution of electricity to various categories of consumers such as agricultural, industrial, domestic, etc. is primarily the responsibility of the State Government/ State
Power Utility concerned and is decided by the State Authority keeping in view the priorities for consumers as well as the total demand and availability of power in the State. Ministry of Power has informed that during the
period April to September, 2002 the requirement of power in Uttar Pradesh was 22908 MUs while the availability was 18215 MUs, representing a shortage of 20.5%.  During the same period, peak shortage in the State was

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/118threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:04]
of the order of 15.8%.  During the period April- September, 2002 UP had drawn 7047.3 MUs from central sector stations against its entitlement of 7665.9 MUs.    If the paying capability of Uttar Pradesh Power Corporation
Ltd. improves, it will be able to draw more power from central sector stations as per its entitlement which would improve the overall power supply position in the State.   As per available information, there was no power cut
during September, 2002 on industries in Uttar Pradesh.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
 
            The Committee notes that Utter Pradesh Power Corporation is not allowed to draw more power from Central Power Station due to inability to pay to the Central Power Stations. The Committee recommends that SSI
Associations may be informed of the position and the State Govt. may also be conveyed the Committee’s concern in the matter.
 
 
REHABILITATION OF SICK UNITS
 
3.2            Recommendation
 
The Associations informed that when large industries fall sick, they could be revived through the revival package given by the Bureau of Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR).  But when a small sector
industry becomes sick, it has no route for revival.  In case there is any revival route, the SSIs should be told about how to go about it.
Para  2.6
 
Action taken by the Government
 
The State Level Inter-Institutional Committee (SLIIC) has been set up in each State to deal with the problems in rehabilitation of sick SSI units. A Sub-Committee of SLIIC has been set up wherein borrowers and
concerned banker are invited to discuss the issue relating to rehabilitation.
 
Further, based on report of the Working Group on Rehabilitation of Sick SSI, the detailed revised guidelines for Rehabilitation of sick Small Scale  Industrial units have been issued by the  RBI to all scheduled
commercial banks for implementation, wherein banks have been advised to take a sympathetic attitude and strive for rehabilitation, in respect of viable SSI units, particularly wherever the sickness is on account of
circumstances beyond the control of entrepreneurs.  The guidelines also provide for a mechanism for early detection of sickness in SSI units and the package for rehabilitation of such units for implementation by the
financing banks.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
 
            The Committee understand that the recommendations contained in the working group on rehabilitation of sick SSI are yet to be implanted. The Committee desires to know the number of SSI units rehabilitated in
Kanpur since the said report was presented to the Govt. Similar information may also be furnished in respect of SSI units of other states.
 
CREDIT FLOWs
 
3.3.            Recommendation
 
Associations informed that SIDBI is making available loan without collateral security, but when the SSIs go to any bank, the latter informed them that they have no information about such a system.  All the banks
should be informed that loan without collateral security should be made available.
 
The SSIs procure land, construct buildings/ shed and purchase machinery on their own and thereafter seek loan either from the market or from banks.  When their turnover increases, their working capital requirement
also increase.  They are trapped due to non-release of loan from banks.
  
Para  2.7
Action taken by the Government
 
Collateral free loans up to Rs.25 lakhs are provided by the Banks (MLIs) under Credit Guarantee Scheme being operated by CGTSI of SIDBI. In order to give greater publicity to the Scheme, Credit Guarantee Fund
Trust for Small Industries (CGTSI) has been organizing seminars at  various centres and participating in various seminars/industry related exhibitions organized by SSI Associations. CGTSI officials have been attending
SLBC meetings in different States, creating better understanding about the Credit Guarantee Scheme among the participating banks. Interactive seminars / workshops –cum – training programmes are also organized at
various centres for the benefit of operating staff of Member Lending Institutions (MLIs). A well – focused and multifaceted media strategy is being pursued by CGTSI, comprising publicity through print media
(newspapers/magazines), posters ( at bank branches, offices of SISI,DICs, etc.), direct mailers, trade journals, souvenirs of industry associations, etc. MLIs are being advised to give wide publicity to the scheme and extend
the benefits of the scheme to the eligible borrowers. As a result of these publicity initiatives, there has been wide awareness about the Credit Guarantee Scheme among the SSI entrepreneurs and the number of MLIs has
increased to 34 till now.
 
Besides, the RBI has also advised the banks in January, 2002 to extend the benefit under the increased exemption limit of borrowal accounts for obtention of collateral securities of Rs. 5 lakh to all SSI units  so as to
ensure flow of credit to this sector.  Further, the RBI in April, 2002 has advised the banks that they may, on the basis of good track record and the financial position of the units, increase the limit of dispensation of collateral
requirement for loans from the existing Rs. 5 lakh to Rs. 15 lakh. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
 
            The Committee notes that credit guarantee fund trust for Small Industries of SIDBI has been organizing seminars/workshop for creating awareness about the collateral free loans. The Committee desires to know as to
how many such seminars/workshops had been organized in Kanpur in the last three years and how many SSI units have been able to get collateral loan during that period.
 
TECHNOLOGY UPGRADATION
3.4            Recommendation

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/118threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:04]
 
Adoption of new technologies is not taking place in the SSI sector and most of them are using obsolete technology.  Awareness about the new technology is limited to a limited circle only.
 Para  2.8
 
Action taken by the Government
 
Various initiatives have been taken by Government to encourage technology upgradation in SSI sector. SIDBI has launched in 1995-96 the  Technology Development and Modernisation Fund (TDMF) Scheme with
an  initial corpus of Rs.200 crore out of its own resources. The present corpus of the fund has been enhanced to Rs.300 crore.  Under the  Scheme, financial assistance are provided at SIDBI’s PLR. Government of India has
also launched Tannery Modernisation Scheme and Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS). Under CLCSS, 12% capital subsidy is provided for induction of proven technologies approved under the scheme in the
specified products/sub-sectors in the SSI. In order to provide encouragement to the textile and jute industries, the Government has launched Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS) for providing 5% reimbursement
of interest on financial assistance. The scheme of Reimbursement of the cost of acquiring ISO-9000 Certification by SSI/ ancillary units to the extent of 75% of the total cost limited to Rs.75,000/- in each case is being
continued in the 10th Plan. The scope of the scheme has been enhanced further to reimburse ISO-14001 certification expenses also. Under Integrated Technology Upgradation and Management Programme (UPTECH) 13
clusters have been taken up for development including four UNIDO assisted programmes being implemented  viz., National Programmes for the development of the Toy Industry, Stone Industry, Lock Industry and Machine
Tool Industry.
 
 As a part of its ‘Techno-mission’, SIDBI brought out a book viz. ‘Technology for Small Scale Industries -  Current Status and Emerging Needs’ with three basic objectives: (a) to assess existing technology gaps in
SSIs, (b) to induce modernization and technological upgradation of SSIs with a vision of 2010 AD and (c) to provide inputs for policy formulation in respect of technology for SSIs. The complimentary copy of the book was
circulated among all the leading industry associations  for the use of their members.
 
The awareness about these schemes are increased through various modes including through SIDO’s website- www.laghu-udyog.com.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
 
            The Committee notes that SIDBI brought out a book entitled “Technology for Small Scale Industries – Current Status and emerging needs” for creating awareness amongst the SSI sector.   The Committee
recommends that the hindi version of the book may be circulated amongst the SSI associations of Kanpur. The Committee also recommends that SIDBI should be hold seminars/workshops in Kanpur to create awareness
about the technology upgradation.
 
MARKETABILITY OF S.S.I. PRODUCTS
 
3.4            Recommendation
 
Before embarking upon a particular industry, entrepreneurs are not aware about the marketability of their products.  Also, they use obsolete technology for production,  manufacture poor quality products at high cost,
and compete with each other.  Big industries on the other hand, with their better quality products and reasonable prices, snatch away the market from the SSI.s
Para  2.9
 
 
Action taken by the Government
 
            With a view to enhance the awareness of marketability of SSI products, Government conducts buyer-seller meets, runs vender development programmes and have reserved 358 items to be purchased by Public Sector
Undertakings/ Govt. Departments only from SSI units. Besides, for technology upgradation, Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme for Technology Upgradation of the SSIs (CLCSS) has been launched by the Ministry of
SSI to facilitate technology upgradation of SSI units in the specified products/ sub –sectors.  Banks have also been advised by the RBI to develop schemes to encourage investment by SSI units in technology upgradation and
harmonize the same with SIDBI schemes.  Various schemes of technology upgradation and quality improvement launched by the Government are intended to enhance the competitiveness of the SSI sector.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
 
            The Committee notes that Government and its buyer/seller meets, runs vender development programmes to enhance their awareness of marketability of SSI  products. The Committee desire to know also how many
such programmes had been held in Kanpur in the last three years and what reasons.
 
 
ADHERENCE TO RBI GUIDELINES BY THE BANKS
 
3.6            Recommendation
 
SSIs are totally at the mercy of the bank mangers.  If the manager is good and efficient, the SSIs get all assistance and loan.  Where the bank managers are indifferent, one has to pay a number of visits to the bank for
obtaining relevant forms.  Even after obtaining and filling in forms, loans are not easily available as the bank officials are wary of giving  loans, as they are not sure about the viability of the project.  A guideline should be
circulated to the SSIs to educate them about how to get bank loans and bank officers should also be trained as to how to help the SSIs in getting loans.
Para  2.10
 
Action taken by the Government
 
With a view to provide better customer service and to ensure that all loan applications for loans up to Rs. 5 lakhs from all categories of borrowers are disposed off expeditiously, the RBI has advised all the banks in
October, 2002  to adhere to the prescribed time norms i.e disposal within two weeks of  receipt of loan applications in respect of loans up to Rs. 25,000  and in respect of other cases for loans up to Rs. 5 lakhs, within four
weeks on receipt of loan applications.  The above time norms shall be applicable subject to receipt of loan applications duly completed in all respects and accompanied by a check list.  All such loan applications should also
be acknowledged by the bank branches on the same day the applications are received. 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/118threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:04]
 
            The officials in banks dealing with appraisal of projects have during the course of their jobs developed expertise in appraising projects.  Regular training programmes are organized by the banks for staff/ officers so as
to improve their work performance.  The RBI has advised all the banks to conduct entrepreneurship development training programmes and also give exhaustive training to the staff members sensitizing them towards the
needs of SSI sector.  
 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
 
The Committee recommends that the above guidelines should be displayed in bold letters in the banks located at Kanpur for the benefit of SSI. The Committee also desires to know the number of entrepreneurship 
development training programme and exhaustive training  programme  to the staff member of banks sensitizing them to SSI Sector had been organized during the last three years as advised by the RBI at Kanpur and with
what results.
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS OF COMMITTEES SET UP FOR SSIs
3.7            Recommendation
 
A number of committees on SSIs had been formed but the Government does not monitor implementation of their recommendations.  Similarly, RBI guidelines are there for credit flow and rehabilitation of sick
industries, but there is no mechanism to monitor their implementation.  The banks and FIs are not ready to talk to industry associations.  They want to talk to borrowers only.  Some mechanism should be evolved on a
reasonable basis to hear the grievances of SSIs with regard to non-implementation of the RBI guidelines by the individual banks.
Para  2.13
 
Action taken by the Government
 
Monitoring of implementation of recommendations of the Committees set up on SSIs is done at the Government level.  The major recommendations of the various Committees like  Nayak Committee, Abid Hussain
Committee, the High Level Committee on Credit to SSI( Kapur Committee), Working Group on Rehabilitation of Sick Small Scale Industrial  units (Kohli Committee), Study Group on development of Small Scale
Enterprises (Dr. S.P. Gupta Study Group), etc., wherever, feasible  have been accepted and implemented.
 
            The RBI has constituted the Standing Advisory Committee to review flow of Institutional Credit to SSI sector under the Chairmanship of the Deputy Governor, RBI. The Ministry of SSI, Ministry of Finance
(Banking Division), SIDBI, NABARD, KVIC, some Banks/SFCs, are represented in this Committee.  The representatives of SSI Associations are also members in this Committee. The Committee inter-alia reviews the flow
of credit to the SSI sector and problems faced by the sector in securing an adequate flow of credit.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
 
            The Committee notes that RBI has been constituted the Standing Advisory Committee to review flow of Institutional Credit to SSI sector. The Committee desires to know the number of credit related issue faced by
SSIs at Kanpur had come before the said Committee for consideration during the last three years and decisions taken their on. Similar information may also be furnished in respect of other states.
 
HOSIERY INDUSTRY
 
3.8            Recommendation
 
Hosiery industry in Kanpur is linked with cotton and textile but there is no centre for Uttar Pradesh to develop cotton and textile. Hosiery industry has to go all the way to Tirupur for development purpose. A process
and product development centre should be established at Kanpur to help the SSIs in the matter of technology. This will give hope to the closed cotton and textile mills.
Para  2.15
 
Action taken by the Government
 
Ministry of  Textiles has stated  that the Government of India supported Powerloom Service Centre (PSC) at Kanpur, is providing very valuable support to small scale industry located there. The Centre provides
technical advice and testing facilities to the industry. The PSC is proposed to be provided with modern looms and strengthened in 10 th plan. At the moment Textiles Ministry has no new scheme to establish process and
product development centre. However, the Powerloom Service Centre can provide all necessary assistance to the SSIs located at Kanpur in the matter of technology. 
 
A Textile & Hosiery Park is proposed to be developed at Kanpur by UPSIDC Ltd. at an estimated cost of Rs. 21 crores with an objective to impart focused thrust for setting up of apparel manufacturing units of
international standards.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
 
            The Committee happy note that Powerloom Service Centre (PSC) at Kanpur can provide all assistant to the SSIs located in Kanpur in the matter of technology. The Committee also notes that a Textile and Hosiery
Park  is proposed to be developed at Kanpur. The Committee recommends that SSI association be informed about this information in a suitable way.
DELAYED PAYMENTS TO SSIs BY PSUs AND LARGE INDUSTRIES
 
3.9            Recommendation
 
Public Sector Undertakings and other large industries buy from SSIs on credit basis and the credit period varies from three to six months.  But SSIs are  not able to realize the payment from such buyers and thus their
money remains blocked for a long period.  The Delayed Payments Act, which is supposed to resolve the issue, proved to be ineffective.  Government should suitably amend the Act to make it more effective.
Para  2.17

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/118threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:04]
 
Action taken by the Government
 
            To ensure prompt payment by large industries to small scale industrial units, the Government has enacted Interest on Delayed Payments to Small Scale and Ancillary Industrial Undertakings Act in 1993. The Act as
amended provides for payment of penal interest by the buyers to supplier, if payment are made after due date, at one and half time of Prime Lending Rate charged by State Bank of India. The Act also provides that
notwithstanding anything contained in the Income Tax Act, 1961, the amount of interest payable or paid by any buyer under or in accordance with the provisions of this Act, shall not for the purpose of computation of
Income under Tax Act, be allowed as deduction. However, the problem of delay in payment of bills for supplies made by Small Scale Industrial (SSI) units to large industries continued despite enactment of the Act.
 
To make the Act effective, the Act was amended in 1998. The most important change that has been brought about by amended Act is that the SSI supplier can now approach the Industry Facilitation councils (IFCs)
set up by States for settlement of their disputes with the buyers in regard to delay in payment etc. of the supplies made by them. Facilitation Council has been set up in Uttar Pradesh which is working for about last 2 years. 
    
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
 
            The SSI association has informed that if they approach the Industry facilitation council for settlement of disputes with the buyers in regard to delay in payment, they would not get orders from such buyers in future.
To that extend the amended act has failed to achieve its objective. In fact IFCs should impact the books of PSUs and other large industries to ascertain the extent of delay by them in making payment to SSIs.  
 
SOAP INDUSTRY
 
3.10            
Recommendation
 
With the arrival of MNCs and concession given to Khadi industries, sickness in the soap industry commenced. The methodology and size of manpower required for hand made soap industry is the same in both the
SSI and Khadi industries. But Khadi industries get concession while SSIs do not get any such relief. Kanpur had 150 soap factories in SSI sector. Today, it has not more than 20, which are struggling to alive. Soap is made
out of imported non-edible oil on which 55 per cent import tax is paid by the industry. For the last one and a half year the rate of import duty has been raised to the extent of 45 per cent. In Nepal, there is no import duty.
They import duty- free non-edible oil, manufacture finished product and re-export to the third country. While the manufacturing cost of Nepal soap is Rs. 16,  the same is manufactured in Kanpur at a cost of Rs. 24.  To save
the soap industry in Kanpur, the rate of import duty on non-edible oil has to be reduced.
Para  2.19
 
Action taken by the Government
 
Laundry soap is reserved for exclusive development in the small scale sector and thus no MNC / organized sector unit is permitted to manufacture laundry soap (except in certain specific conditions of meeting export
obligation or having COB licence). However, it may be stated that due to the introduction of Detergent Powder / Cakes, the consumers are slowly and slowly switching over to Detergent Powders/cakes for laundry purpose.
Accordingly, a large number of small scale laundry soap units have also diversified their production to the manufacture of Detergent Cakes/Powders in the country.
 
              There is no concession given to the KVIC/KVIB or any other organization approved by KVIC/KVIB manufacturing laundry soap. Both KVIC/KVIB units and small scale units manufacturing laundry soap without
the aid of power are chargeable NIL rate of duty.
 
             There is no specific exemption from import duty levied on imported non-edible oil used as raw-material in the manufacture of laundry soap in Khadi Industries and SSI units. At present, the non-edible oils such as
Palm Fatty Acid Distillate (PFAD) or Palm Acid Oil which are most commonly used by KI or SSI units with more than 20% free fatty acid content are levied import duty at 30%.It may also be stated that to eliminate
misdeclaration of crude oil e.g. Crude Palm Oil as non-edible oil, a condition of minimum 20% FFA has been added for availing concessional rate of duty.
 
              As regards imports of laundry soap from Nepal, where 0% import duty is leviable on raw-materials for products which are subsequently exported, it is to be stated that this is applicable to all products.
 
            The renewed Indo-Nepal Treaty has been appreciated and it been observed that the Agreement takes care of most of the problems. Due to incorporation of value addition norms in the Renewed Treaty, goods of Non-
Nepalese origin would not be accepted(in the guise of Nepalese goods) in India as per the Renewed Agreement.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
 
            The Committee notes that SSIs engaged in laundry soap has lost its market as consumers are snitching over to detergent cake/powder and how many SSI units have diversified their production to manufacture
detergent cake/power.  The Committee recommends that SSI associations be also persuaded to diversify their production to suit the consumers choice. The Committee further notes that import duty on non edible oils which is
raw material for soap industry are levied import duty at 30%. The Committee is still of the opinion that duties on import of non edible oils for use in SSI sector should be suitably reduced to assist the SSI soap units which are
at present struggling to remain in the market.
 
INTEGRATED INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT SCHEME
 
3.11            
Recommendation
 
Industries are given sites at places where basic infrastructure like roads, communication, drainage etc. are not provided. Industrial sites are allotted far away from the urban area where basic amenities like drinking
water are not available. No redressal measures have been taken by the Government despite the fact that this was brought to their notice.
Para  2.20
 
Action taken by the Government
 
The State Governments provide necessary infrastructure facilities to develop the small scale industries in their respective States.
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/118threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:04]
            The Integrated Infrastructure Development (IID) Scheme launched by the Government of India extends to all areas in the country with 50% reservation for the rural areas. The scheme aims at creation of basic
infrastructure on cluster basis for the small scale sector. The thrust of the scheme is on creation/ upgradation of infrastructural facilities like power, water, tele-communication, drainage, pollution control facilities, effluent
treatment & disposal system, roads, banks, raw material depots, storage, and marketing outlets, etc. in the new /existing Centres/ Industrial Areas.
 
            The Central Government and SIDBI contribute to each IID Centre up to Rs. 5 crores in the ratio of 2:3 (4:1 in case of NE Region) and the cost in excess of Rs. 5 crores per centre are to be met by the State/ UT
Governments.   Under the Scheme, the State/UT Governments have to provide suitable land for the Centres the cost of which may be recovered from the implementing agencies. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
 
            The Committee desires to know the details of infrastructure created/upgraded in and around Kanpur under the Integrated Infrastructure Development Scheme. Similar information may be given in respect of other
states.
 
ANTI SOCIAL ELEMENTS IN INDUSTRIAL AREAS
 
3.12            Recommendation
 
Due to power cut, anti-social elements are thriving in industrial areas. State police authority expresses their helplessness,as they do not have enough force to tackle the law and order situation there. The SSI branches
of banks are located outside the urban area of Kanpur. It is quite difficult to go to the SSI branch to deposit or collect money. Banks should be located in safe areas.
Para  2.21
 
Action taken by the Government
 
Maintenance of law and order primarily comes under the purview of the State Governments. After the nationalization of Banks, it was one of the basic objectives to expand the network of branches all over the country
and take banking to the remotest corner so that access to credit facilities becomes easier for various categories of borrowers including SSI borrowers.  Banks have been advised by the RBI to make concerted efforts to
operationalise at least one specialized SSI branch in every district and centres having clusters of SSI unit. As at the end of March, 2002, 395 specialised SSI branches of the public sector banks are functioning.  Further, banks
have been permitted to categorise their general banking branches having 60% or more of their advances to SSI sector as specialized SSI branches in order to encourage them to open more specialized SSI branches for
providing better service to this sector as a whole. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
 
            The Government has not appreciated the apprehansion expressed by the SSI units about the anti social elements thrives in industrial areas. The Committee recommends that the concern of the Committee may be
conveyed to the State Govt. for  appropriate action. 
 
COMMENEFFLUENT TREATMENT PLANT           
 
3.13            Recommendation
 
Pollution control for the industries is necessary, but generally, problems keep on cropping up due to various reasons. Therefore, in industrial areas where SSIs are situated as a cluster, facilities should be provided by
the administration for setting up of a common effluent treatment plant.
Para  2.23
 
Action taken by the Government
 
The Scheme on Common Effluent Treatment Plant(CETP) which is for the prevention and control of pollution from the small scale industrial sector has been initiated by the Ministry of Environment & Forests. New
and the existing CETPs need technological up-gradation in order to meet the new standards, waste management policies prescribed by the Ministry from time to time.  The pattern of the funding is Central & State subsidy
25% each, entrepreneur contribution 20% and loans from financial institutions 30%. The entrepreneurs are required to have financial and technical appraisal of the project and then the project has to be routed through the
State Pollution Control Board for Central subsidy.
 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
 
            The Committee desires to know the details of the scheme on common ------ Treatment Plant  initiated for Small Scale Industrial sector in and around Kanpur.
 
REPRESENTATION OF SSI IN STATE LEGISLATURE AND MUNICIPAL CORPORATIONS
 
3.14            Recommendation
 
In the absence of any representation of SSIs in the State Legislature and Municipal Corporations, the problems of SSIs are not highlighted and even if these are highlighted Government does not take them seriously. A
provision for representation of SSIs should, therefore, be made so that they are given an opportunity of being heard.
Para  2.25
 
Action taken by the Government
 
            The specific issue raised in the above para does not come under the purview of Ministry of  SSI.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/118threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:04]
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
 
            The Committee desires that the concern of the Committee may be conveyed to the state Govt.
 
EXHIBITION OF SPARE PARTS           
 
3.15            Recommendation
 
Exhibitions of articles related to spare parts used in railways may be organised  to revive the engineering units which are on the verge of closure in the adjoining areas of Kanpur. This will inspire the revival of
engineering industry.
Para  2.26
 
Action taken by the Government
 
SISI Kanpur will be organizing a Vendor Development Programme-cum-Exhibition with association of Railways in February, 2003. Railways will be requested to participate in the Programme and exhibit their spare
parts for the benefits of engineering industries.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
 
            The Committee desires to know whether the said exhibition was actually held in February, 2003 and  if so,  whether any impact of the event has been assessed.
 
ACCEPTANCE OF PAYMENT IN SMALLER DENOMINATION BY BANKS
 
3.16            Recommendation
 
SSIs receive their payments in smaller denomination notes (like one, two or five) and coins. The banks do not accept these currencies. SSIs have to suffer the loss of approximately five per cent (brokerage) in
payment on the coins. RBI should give clear guidelines to banks to accept all types of currencies.
Para  2.27
 
Action taken by the Government
 
            RBI has advised that all commercial banks are instructed to accept and exchange notes in all denomination including smaller denomination. If any SSI unit faces problem in this regard, a specific complaint could be
made to RBI’s Kanpur Regional Office or directly to the Central Office.
 
            Bank of Baroda, Convenor of SLBC in State of U.P. has advised the Regions and branches under their control to adhere to the guidelines issued by the RBI with regard to acceptance of currency. The bank has also
informed that they have not received any complaint of such nature by their clients so far.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
 
The Committee is happy to note that RBI  has issued a guideline in the matter. The Committee desires that SSI associations may be informed of the RBI instructions given to the banks.
 
CHARGING OF INTEREST BY BANKS
           
3.17            Recommendation
 
The Committee has been informed that as per RBI’s recent instructions, NPAs are affected within three months of sanction of loan.  In addition, interest is charged every month, which in turn affects the credit
availability.  The Ministry of SSI has taken up the matter with the RBI.  The Committee recommends that government should look into the matter and come out with a suitable solution keeping in view the overall interest of
SSIs.
Para  4.7
 
Action taken by the Government
 
The RBI advised the banks to adopt 90 days’ norm for recognition of loan impairment from the year ending March 31,2004 and that they should move over to charging of interest on advances at monthly rests with
effect from April 1,2002. Ministry of SSI had taken up with the RBI the issues that 90 days’ over due norm for identification of NPAs would be disadvantageous for the SSIs and charging interest on monthly rests would
make credit costlier. The RBI has clarified that the above norm for recognition of loan impairment and the consequent charging of interest at monthly rests has been introduced after due consideration and in keeping with
international best practices. Since our financial system is also under scrutiny from various international agencies, it is not feasible to depart from these norms without affecting the confidence of the international and financial
capital markets. Besides, 90 days’ norm will come into effect only after a considerable lapse of time viz., March 31,2004 and hence both banks and the industry will have sufficient time to adjust to the new requirement.   
 
            The RBI has subsequently advised the banks in May,2002 that they should ensure that the effective rate does not go up merely on account of switchover to the system of charging of interest on monthly rests. The
banks have been advised not to compound interest at monthly rests till March31,2003.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/118threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:04]
            The Committee recommends that the RBI’s clarifications  statement                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              should
be circulated to SSI Associations so that the adjust thoroughly to the new situation.  
 
 
 
3.18            Recommendation
 
The Committee understands that the Ministry of SSI has taken an initiative to bring forward a comprehensive legislation before Parliament for forging coordination at the Central and State level for the benefit of SSIs.
The Committee feels that since materialization of such a measure will take its own time, the Ministry should form a Task  Force at the Ministry level to tackle the problems faced by the SSIs located in and around Kanpur,
especially when Kanpur has been declared as a Special Economic Zone (SEZ). The Committee expects that the Central Government, in coordination with the Uttar Pradesh Government, RBI and local banks will be able to
restore the past glory of Kanpur and make it a vibrant centre of commercial  activities.
Para  4.10
 
Action taken by the Government
 
The Administrative Staff College of India (ASCI), Hyderabad had been commissioned by the Ministry of SSI   to work on a Single Law for the SSI sector. 
 
The Draft Small Enterprises  Development Bill prepared by ASCI was presented in the 47
th  meeting of the Small Scale Industries Board held on 4 th July, 2002. The feedback/ comments received thereon from the
stakeholders have been forwarded to ASCI, Hyderabad for consideration while finalizing the Draft Bill.
 
With regard to forming a Task Force to tackle the problems faced by the SSIs located in and around Kanpur, a State Level Forum viz., State Level Inter- Institutional Committee (SLIIC) is already functioning in the
State under the Chairmanship of the Secretary (Industries), Government of Uttar Pradesh with members from RBI, other banks, financial institutions, Industry Associations etc. The Committee, besides providing a useful
forum for exchange of information and discussions of  the problems faced by the SSIs, inter alia, also deals with coordination between bank and financial institutions, provision of adequate infrastructural facilities,  problems 
relating to grant of credit, review of sickness in the SSI sector etc. In the circumstances, forming any other Committee or Task Force would result in a parallel body being formed for attaining the same objectives. This may
lead to clash in the roles of SLIIC and the proposed Task Force. Kohli Committee has also recommended that this forum may be revitalized by holding its meeting as per schedule and with active participation by officials
who are empowered to take decision.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
 
            Had the SLIIC been effective most of problems faced by the SSI units in Kanpur would not have been these. Moreover, the Ministry of SSI is not represented in that body and they are unaware about the deliberation
of meetings. Sitting on ivory tower the Ministry cannot go in to the depth of the problems of SSI units of the states. Being the nodal agency in the matter the Ministry should play a proactive role instead of running away for
its responsibility. The Committee’s recommendation  made was made in its 90
th report taking into consideration of the fact that Kanpur once a city called Manchester of India  is not driven to the doom. The state Govt. have
atleast declared the city as special Economic zone and prepare to set up a Textile park. The Committee expects that the Ministry should also make its meaningful contribution by way of having can be – State forum to restore
the past glory of the city, if they have strong objection to form a Task Force in the mater.
CHAPTER-IV
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
The Committee notes that Utter Pradesh Power Corporation is not allowed to draw more power from Central Power Station due to its inability to pay to the Central Power Stations. The Committee recommends that
SSI Associations may be informed of the position and the State Govt. may also be conveyed the Committee's concern in the matter.
(Para 3.1)
 
The Committee understands that the recommendations contained in the working group on rehabilitation of sick SSI are yet to be implemented. The Committee desires to know the number of SSI units rehabilitated in
Kanpur since the report of the Working Group on Rehabilitation of Sick SSI was presented to the Govt.                      
(Para 3.2)
 
The Committee notes that Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Small Industries of SIDBI has been organizing seminars/workshop for creating awareness about the collateral free loans. The Committee desires to know as
to how many such seminars/workshops had been organized in Kanpur in the last three years and how many SSI units have been able to get collateral loan during that period.
(Para 3.3)
 
The Committee notes that SIDBI brought out a book entitled "Technology for Small Scale Industries - Current Status and emerging needs" for creating awareness amongst the SSI sector. The Committee recommends
that the Hindi version of the book may be circulated amongst the SSI associations of Kanpur. The Committee also recommends that SIDBI should be hold seminars/workshops in Kanpur to create awareness about the
technology upgradation.
(Para 3.4)
 
The Committee notes that Government conducts buyer/seller meets, run @endor development programmes to enhance the awareness of marketability of SSI products. The Committee desires to know how many such
programmes had been held in Kanpur in the last three years and with what results.
(Para 3.5)
The Committee recommends, that the guidelines to the S.S.Is to educate them about how to get bank loan should be displayed in bold letters in the banks located at Kanpur for the benefit of SSI.  The Committee also
desires to know the number of entrepreneurship development training programme and exhaustive training programme to the staff member of banks sensitizing them to SSI Sector had been organized during the last three
years at Kanpur as advised by the RIBI and with what results.
(Para 3.6)
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/118threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:04]
The Committee notes that RIBI has constituted the Standing Advisory Committee to review flow of Institutional Credit to SSI sector. The Committee desires to know the number of credit related issues faced by SSIs
at Kanpur that had come before the said Committee for consideration during the last three years and decisions taken their on.
(Para 3.7)
 
The Committee is happy to note that Powerloom Service Centre (PSC) at Kanpur can provide all assistant to the SSIs located in Kanpur in the matter of technology. The Committee also notes that a Textile and
Hosiery Park is proposed to be developed at Kanpur. The Committee recommends that SSI association be informed about this information in a suitable way.
(Para 3.8)
 
The SSI association has informed that if they approach the Industry Facilitation Council for settlement of disputes with the buyers in regard to delay in payment, they would not get orders from such buyers in future.
To that extent the amended Act has failed to achieve its objectives In fact IFCs should inspect the books of PSUs and other large industries to ascertain the extent of delay by them in making payment to SSIS. The Committee
also desires to know how many cases have been settled by IFC, Uttar Pradesh in respect of SSIs located at Kanpur.
(Para 3.9)
 
The Committee notes that S.S.I.s engaged in laundry soap has lost its market as consumers are switching over to detergent cake/powder and desires to know how many SSI units have diversified their production to
manufacture detergent cake/powder. The Committee recommends that SSI Associations be also persuaded to diversify their production to suit the consumers choice. The Committee further notes that import duty on non
edible oils which is raw material for soap industry are levied at 30%. The Committee is still of the opinion that duties on import of non edible oils for use in SSI sector should be suitably reduced to assist the SSI soap units
which are at present struggling to remain in the market.
(Para 3.10)
 
The   Committee    desires   to  know    the   details  of Infrastructure created/upgraded in the State of Uttar Pradesh under the Integrated Infrastructure Development Scheme. Similar information may be given in
respect of other states.
(Para 3.1 1)
 
The Government have not appreciated the apprehension expressed by the SSI units about the anti social elements thriving in industrial areas. The Committee recommends that the concern of the Committee May be
conveyed to the State Govt. for appropriate action.
(Para 3.12)
 
The Committee desires to know the details of the Scheme on Common Effluent Treatment Plant initiated for Small Scale Industrial sector in and around Kanpur.
(Para 3.13)
 
The Committee desires that the concern of the Committee may be conveyed to the state Govt.
(Para 3.14)
The Committee desires to know' whether the said exhibition was actually held in February, 2003 and if so, whether any impact of the event has been assessed.
(Para 3.15)
The Committee is happy to note that R-BI has issued a guideline in the matter. The Committee desires that SSI associations may be informed of the RBI instructions given to the banks.
(Para 3.16)
 
The Committee recommends that the RBI's  clarificatory  statement should be circulated to SSI Associations so that they adjust thoroughly to the new situation.
(Para 3.17)
 
Had the State Level later-Institutional Committee been effective most of the problems forced by the SSI units in Kanpur would not have been there. Moreover, the Ministry of SSI is not represented in that body and
they are unaware about the deliberations of meetings. Sitting on ivory tower the Ministry cannot go into the depth of the problems of SSI units of the States. Being the nodal agency in the matter the Ministry should play a
proactive role instead of running away for its responsibility. The Committee's recommendation was made in its 90  th report taking into consideration of the fact that Kanpur once a city called Manchester of India is not
driven to the doom. The State, Govt. have at least declared the city as Special Economic Zone and propose' to set up a Textile -Park there. The Committee expects that the Ministry should also make its meaningful
contribution by way of having  Centre-State forum to restore the past glory of the city, if. they have strong objection to form a Task Force in the mater.
(Para 3.18)
 
MINUTES
X
TENTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday the 6th May, 2003 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
                  PRESENT
 
1.
                              Dr. P.C. Alexander  --  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.                              Prof. M.M. Aggarwal
3.                              Dr. M.N. Das
4.                              Shri Faguni Ram
5.                              Shri Lajpat Rai
6.                              Smt. Sumitra Mahajan

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/118threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:04]
7.                              Shri P.K. Maheshwari
8.                              Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
9.                              Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
10.                          Shri K. Chandran Pillai
 
LOK SABHA
 
11.                          Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
12.                          Shri Francis George
13.                          Shri A.C. Jose
14.                          Shri Manjay Lal
15.                          Shri A Narendra
16.                          Shri Ananta Nayak
17.                          Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
18.                          Shri V. Vertiselvan
19.                          Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari
 
SECRETARIAT
           
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
            Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
            Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
            Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
 
2.
                  At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee.
...2/-
-3-
 
3.                              The Committee then took up the following draft Report for its consideration:-
 
(i)                 118th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendation Contained in the Ninetieth Report on ‘Sickness in SSI Sector in the city of Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh (Ministry of Small Scale
Industries).
 
4.
                              The Chairman requested the Members to give any suggestion or change in the Report, if required.  After a brief discussion the Reports were adopted.
 
5.
                              The Chairman nominated Prof. M.M. Aggarwal and in his absence Shri Khan Gufran Zahidi, Members Rajya Sabha to present these reports to the Rajya Sabha.  He also nominated Dr. B.B. Ramaiah and in his
absence Shri A.C. Jose, Members Lok Sabha to present these reports in the Lok Sabha on 8th May, 2003.
 
6.
                              The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M.