99th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/99threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
NINETY-NINTH REPORT
 
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN
COMMITTEE ' S 71ST   REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS   (2002-03) PERTAINING
TO DEPARTMENT OF MINES
(MINISTRY OF COAL AND MINES)
 
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON  17TH DECEMBER, 2002)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON  17TH DECEMBER, 2002)
         
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
DECEMBER, 2002/AGRAHAYANA, 1924  (SAKA)
                                                       E-mail: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in
                                                              Website: http//parliamentofindia.nic.in
C O N T E N T S
 
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                 
2.         INTRODUCTION                                                                                                    
3.         REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                          
4.         OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE
           
5.         MINUTES                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                  COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE
 
(
Date of Constitution - 1st January, 2002  )
 
Dr. P.C. Alexander        — Chairman@
RAJYA SABHA
 

99th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/99threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
2. Prof. M.M. Aggarwal
3. Dr . Abrar Ahmad
4. Shri Jayantilal Barot
5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee 
6. Smt. Saroj Dubey
7. Shri Faguni Ram
8. Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
9. Shri P.K. Maheshwari
10. Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
11.  Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
12. Shri S. Sivasubramanian
13. Smt. Sushree Devi
14. Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
15. vacant
 
LOK SABHA
 
16.  Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
17.  Kumari Mamata Banerjee
18.  Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
19.  Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
20.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das
21.  Shri Deepak Kumar
22.  Shri Thomas Hansda
23.  Dr. S. Jagathrakshakan
24.  Shri A.C. Jose
25.
  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
26. Shri Brijlal Khabri
27. Shri Sunil Khan
28. Shri Manjay Lal
29.
  Dr. K. Malaisamy
30.  Shri A. Narendra
31.  Shri Ananta Nayak
32.  Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
33.  Shri Dharam Raj Singh Patel
____________________________________________________________________
 
@ Appointed Chairman and Member of the Committee w.e.f.12th .November, 02 vice Shri T.N. Chaturvedi who  ceased
to be the Member of the Committee and Rajya Sabha with effect from 20th August, 02
(i)
34.  Shri Uttamrao Patil
35. Shri Malyala Rajaiah
36. Shri P. Rajendran
37.
  Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
38.  Shri Tarachand Sahu
39.  Shri Ramanand Singh
40.  Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
41.  Chowdhary Talib Hussain
42. Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
43.
  Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari
44.  Shri Beni Prasad Verma
45.vacant
 

99th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/99threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta,  Joint  Secretary
Shri  A.K. Singh,  Deputy  Secretary
Shri  D.P. Ahuja ,Under Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
I N T R O D U C T I ON
 
I,  the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry,  having   been
authorised  by the Committee, hereby present this Ninety- ninth    Report on the Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in  the   Committee’s 71
st  Report on  Demands for Grants  (2002-03) pertaining to
Department of Mines (Ministry of Coal and Mines).
 
2.         The Committee   examined and  considered  the Action Taken Notes on the recommendations contained  in its 
71st  Report on  Demands for Grants  (2002-03) pertaining to Department of Mines (Ministry of Coal and Mines).
 
3.         The Committee at its meeting held on 11th December, 2002 considered and adopted the Report.
 
NEW DELHI
December 11, 2002
DR. P.C. ALEXANDER
 Chairman
Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry
REPORT
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Mines (Ministry of Coal and
Mines) on the Recommendations contained in the  71st Report (of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Industry) on Demands for Grants (2000-2003)pertaining to the Department of Mines (Ministry of Coal &
Mines)  .The Report  was presented /laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha on  the 14
th May, 2002.
 
2.         Action Taken Notes have been received from the Department  of Mines in respect of the   recommendations
contained in the Report.   These have been categorized as follows:
 
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Department  of Mines
 
(Chapter - I).
 
Recommendations:-7.1.7, 7.1.8 , 7.2.7 ,13.2 ,13.4.5 , 13.4.6 , 13.5.2, 13.5.4 , 15.1.10, 15.5.4, 16.5, 17.0, 17.3 and 18.3,
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies :
(Chapter - II)
 
Recommendations:- 13.5.3, 15.3.11, and 15.5.6.
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies of the Department of
Mines:. (Chapter - III).
 
Recommendations:- 1.15,  1.16 , 2.2, 6.3, 7.2.9, 8.3, 11.3,  12.3, 14.9 and 15.1.9.
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  final replies of the  Department of Mines   have not been received.
(Chapter - IV).
 

99th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/99threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
Recommendations:- 7.1.9, 7.2.9, 8.3, 9.9,10.10, 10.11, 13.3.3, 14.8, 15.1.8, 15.2.3, 15.3.8, 15.3.9, 15.3.10 15.4.5,
15.5.5,16.4 and  18.4 .
 
3.         The Committee is pleased to observe that  the   Department of Mines has accepted its  recommendations as 
mentioned in Chapter –I of the  Report. 
4.                  In respect of the recommendations made in paras 13.5.3, 15.3.11 and 15.5.6   in Chapter-II  the Committee is 
convinced  with the logic and explanation  advocated by the Department of Mines and therefore   does not want to 
pursue  further .
5.         The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation  of recommendation contained in  Chapter-
III  and therefore  the Committee desires that the Department of Mines should furnish  logical  explanation  in respect of
these recommendations
6.         In respect  of recommendations  placed in Chapter-IV, the Department of Mines has  either   furnished the
interim replies or couched its language in  vague terms like  noted for compliance/guidance,  therefore, the Committee
desires  that the Ministry of Mines should furnish Action Taken Note in  respect of recommendations categorized   in
Chapter-IV  in detail and to the point, as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee.
7.         The details of the Action Taken is being discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.
CHAPTER - I
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
 
Recommendations    (Para 7.1.7)
 
MODERNISATION OF THE GEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA
The Committee understands that in the wake of radical reforms in economic and mineral policies of the country, up-to-
date high quality database for optimum development of natural resources both on land and offshore, management of
natural hazards and protection of environment became essential. A quantum jump to the modernisation and technology
up gradation in all spheres of activity is prerequisite for the goal.
Action Taken
            The Department is giving full support to the modernization efforts and capacity building of GSI so that GSI is
geared to make available the high quality database for optimum development of natural resources both onland and off
shore.
 
Recommendations  (Para 7.1.8 )
EARTHQUAKE STUDIES BY THE GEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA       
After the devastating effect of the Gujarat earthquake, the Committee feels more emphasis should be given on the
earthquake studies to save human lives and property in the urban as well rural areas. The Committee recommends the
adequates funds may be made available to the G.S.I. for the purpose. The G.S.I. should also take the aid and assistance
of the experts available across the World.
Action Taken
GSI has given thrust to active fault mapping and microzonation studies of urban clusters, as a part of earthquake
studies towards deleneation of potential risk zones and mitigation of impact of disasters.  It is also collaborating with
Indian Metrological Department and participating in a Department of Science & Technology sponsored Indo-Italian
Collaborative Research Project for seismic studies.  Provision has been made for the procurement of the state-of-art
field location cum data collection equipments as a part of modernization programmes of Geological Survey of India .
Recommendations  ( Para 7.2.7 )

99th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/99threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
FUNDS FOR MINERAL EXPLORATION CORPORATION LTD.
            The Committee notes that   in case the provision    of Rs.8 crore as earmarked in BE 2002-03 proves insufficient
for MECL for  its  promotional projects the shortfall amount should be  made available from `Mineral  Exploration
Fund'  which has a provisional fund of Rs.12.00 crore .
Action Taken
            There would be no problem of funds in view of availability of funds in Mineral Exploration Fund.
 
Recommendations (Para 13.2)
Non-Plan Loan to Mines PSUs
The Committee   is of the opinion that   non-plan loan is a necessary evil as it is   essential   for loss making PSUs to
maintain its  operation and   separation of surplus  work force and  sometimes even to meet the  cash loss, all depending 
upon the quantum of  loss being incurred by a  PSU.  Non-plan loan is an evil in the sense   that the amount of non-plan
loan gets added to the liability of the Company, which is always a burden on the Company.  The Committee notes that
during  2002-03  no non-plan loan has been allocated to mines PSUs, although rationalisation of manpower is being 
undertaken in almost  all mines PSUs.
Action Taken
            During the year 2002-03, no non-plan loan has been allocated to the PSUs under the Department of Mines.  The
position of non-plan loan given earlier to the PSUs is as follows:
(a)
                Hindustan Copper Ltd.
(i)                  A total non-plan loan of Rs.440 crores has been converted as grant.
(ii)                Additional grant of Rs. 130 crores for rationalization of manpower is being provided.
(b)               Mineral Exploration Corporation Ltd.
(i)         The conversion of non-plan loan will be taken into account at the time of disinvestment.
 
Recommendations   (Para 13.4.5 & 13.4.6.)
FINANCIAL RESTRUCTURING OF HINDUSTAN COPPER LTD.    
The Committee is pleased to note that as a result of implementation of VRS in HCL during last three years the wage
cost as percentage of turnover has come down   from 35.81% in 1999 -2000 to 22.98% in 2000-01 and turnover per
employee has increased from Rs. 3.30 lakh to Rs.5.11 lakh during the same period.
The Committee understands that HCL is sailing through adverse financial situation and is a loss making PSU, therefore,
the Committee is in agreement with the Department of Mines regarding incapacity of repayment of non-plan loan by
HCL. The Committee   feels that since the financial restructuring     of HCL is on the card the Department of Mines
should not delay any longer the submission of the proposal for conversion of non-plan loan   of Rs.440 crore   into grant
and the Government should not hesitate in clearing the proposal, as cleaner the balance sheet   of the Company larger
the possibility of a potential purchasers coming forward.
Action Taken    (Para 13.4.5 and Para 13.4.6)
            The Government has already approved the financial restructuring of Hindustan Copper Limited which includes
conversion of non-plan loan of Rs.440 crores into grant. Besides following measures have also been taken:-
(i)
                  Conversion of outstanding plan loan as on March 31, 2002, amounting to Rs.71.50 crore into equity to
improve the net worth of the Company.
(ii)                Waiver of outstanding interest on plan loan amounting to Rs.25.72 crore as on March 31, 2002.
(iii)               Extension of period of the Government guarantees already provided for raising working capital term loan
by a further 2 years or disinvestments which is earlier, in order to facilitate meeting the obligations for the
Secured Bond repayment.

99th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/99threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
(iv)              Waiver of outstanding guarantee fee as on March 31, 2002 i.e. Rs.6.75 crore for extending guarantee by
Government of India for raising working capital and further waiver of accrual of any guarantee fee on such
guarantees from April 1st 2002 till expirty of guarantee.
(v)                To provide for an additional amount of Rs.130 crore as grant to meet the expenses of closing underground
mining at Surda and Khetri by separating 3000 employees under VRS in the year 2002-2003.
(vi)              An additional equity of Rs.30 crores for the financial year 2002-2003 to meet the part of the cash losses and
particularly for the interest payment against government guaranteed loan and bonds.
 
Recommendations ( Para 13.5.2)
PURCHASE OF MINERAL EXPLORATION CORPORATION LTD
Since with the passage of time technology becomes   obsolete the Committee feels that modernisation of technology is a
natural course for any    undertaking henceforth, the provision of Rs.3 crore as equity for purchase of equipments in
respect of MECL and a provision of Rs.25 crore for replacement and renewal is but natural to meet the requirement of
AMR schemes.
Action Taken
            MECL has been provided with Rs. 3 crores as equity for the year 2002-03. There is a provision of Rs.25 crores
for replacement and renewal to HCL during 2002-03, and the same is expected to be utilized for the intended purpose.
 
 Recommendations  (Para 13.5.4)        
BUDGETARY SUPPORT TO HINDUSTAN CORPORATION LTD.
The Committee is in complete agreement with the provision of Rs.95 crore in RE- 2001-02 for HCL to keep the 
Company  afloat so that capital restructuring   process should not suffer a jolt.
Action Taken
            Rs.95 crore provided in RE 2001-02 was fully released to the Company.
 
Recommendations ( Para 15.1.10 )
PRESENCE OF GOVERNMENT NOMINEE DIRECTORS IN THE MEETING  OF BALCO
            The Committee understands that Government’s stake in BALCO is 49% even after disinvestment and 4
Directors     from Government side are  there  on the  Board of Directors.   The Committee has been given to understand
that as per the SHA the presence of at least one   representative or nominee each of the Government and the purchaser
shall be required   for taking decision  on all  such matters  that may have a material impact on the business of the
Company.  The Committee hopes that the nominee from Government side  would participate in all the   meetings  of the
Board of Directors and participate  actively  in   the  discussion ensuring the proper   utilisation of national resources in
best possible ways.  Higher performance of the Company and protection of national interest should be the prime
consideration of Directors from Government   on the BALCO’s Board of Directors.
Action Taken
            BALCO is regularly convening Board Meetings at suitable intervals, and there has been participation of more
than one Government nominee Directors in every meeting.  All major decisions and performance of the Company is
appraised to the Board in the meetings.
Recommendations   (Para 15.5.4)
DIVERSIFICATION PROGRAMMES OF MECL
The Committee opines that diversification programmes of MECL contain the element for survival and improved

99th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/99threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
performance.  The Committee recommends that MECL would    make efforts for exploration of coal bed methane   for
which Rs.3 crore has been earmarked during the year 2002-03.
Action Taken
            MECL has already carried out CBM drilling on contractual basis for ONGC and negotiations for further work
are on.
 
 Recommendations (Para 16.5)
DIVERSIFICATION PROGRAMMES OF JNARDDC, NIRM AND NIMH
The Committees recommends that NIRM, JNARDDC and NIMH should   make concerted efforts towards
diversification of services rendered by them through consultancy services.
Action Taken
(i)         JNARDDC
JNARDDC has been making conscious and concerted efforts to diversify the services.  To this end, an
impressive brochure called “profile” of the Centre has been printed and distributed widely to very large number
of industries both in the aluminium as well as non-aluminium sector. JNARDDC proposes also to diversify its
activities to cover industries dealing with other non-ferrous metals like copper, zinc, titanium etc. 
(ii)        NIRM
NIRM provides research and consultancy services to Hydroelectric and tunneling projects and to coal and non
coal mining companies.
(iii)       NIMH
NIMH carries out studies in the occupational health/hygiene problems in metal ferrous mining sector.
Recommendations ( Para 17.3)
Impact of withdrawal of the SSI exemption   on   granite in the budget 2002-03 on the granite industry.
            The Committee observes that the exemption of excise duty on small scale and cottage scale granite industry upto
limit of Rs.1.00 crore in the budget 2002-03 has rendered 5 thousand granite units in complete doldrums and
employment of 3 lakh workers is in jeopardy.  The Committee has been given to understand that SSI granite industry is
already reeling under high cost of production, adverse affect of recession and dumping of  cheaper   product  from China
and the  withdrawal of the SSI exemption  on granite SSI  sector would  further   hit the granite SSI  sector adversely. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends, that the Government should take due note of the provisions enshrined  in the 
budget 2002-03 and  do justice  to the granite SSI  industry. 
Action Taken   (Para: 17.3)
            Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance vide notification No.26/2002-Central Excise dated 27
th April, 2002
has notified that first sale upto Rs.1 crore of polished slabs and tiles of granite and marble processed in SSI factory shall
be exempted from Central Excise duty and as such the grievance of the granite industry has been redressed.
 
Recommendations (Para 18.2)         
MINES PSUs CONTRIBUTION TO NATIONAL EXCHEQUER
 The Committee is pleased to note the contribution made by Mines PSUs to National Exchequer especially contribution
made by HZL and NALCO.  The committee understands that   due to dwindling physical and financial performance by
HCL its contribution to National Exchequer has been declining over the year.  However, the Committee hopes that once
the capital restructuring of HCL takes place physical and financial performance of HCL would start improving and
therefore its contribution  towards    national  exchequer would   automatically  improve.
Action Taken

99th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/99threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
            Department of Mines’ PSUs would continue to contribute to the national exchequer to the maximum extent
possible.
           
Recommendations Para (18.3):
Contribution Of Mining Sector To The Nation  
The Committee further observes  that the more and more private  sector players   are coming to the mining sector and
mines PSUs are either have already been disinvested  i.e. BALCO  and HZL     or  are on the verge of disinvestment  as
in the  case of HCL  and NALCO and   due  to  on-going  liberalisation  process , the contribution of   mining sector  to
national exchequer would improve in the years to come.  The Committee hopes that the on-going  liberalisation process
should enhance the capabilities  of making  contribution of mining sector to the nation   and society in general.  In this
regard the  Committee  hopes that the Government would give due consideration towards  the contribution  made by
units of private  sector and PSUs in mining sector.
Action Taken
            Under the National Mineral Policy, 1993, 13 minerals hitherto reserved for exploitation by Public Sector were
thrown open for exploitation by Private Sector also and thereby provided a level playing field to private companies in
the mineral sector.  Thus entire mining sector is open for private investment including Foreign Direct
Investments(FDI).  A number of leading global mining companies have evinced interest in Indian mining sector
resulting in expected FDI inflow of Rs.3963 crores.  The National Mineral Policy, 1993 has also recognized the need for
encouraging private investment including FDI and state of art technology in the mineral sector and has therefore
contributed towards national exchequer and society in general.  Besides this, a number of amendments have been carried
out in the MMDR Act, 1957, MCR, 1960 and MCDR, 1988,  since 1994 to make Indian mining sector investor friendly
and hassle free.
 
CHAPTER –II
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE
 
 
Recommendations Para  (13.5.3)
ACTIVITIES AT GHATSHILA MINES
The Committee is of the opinion that HCL management should enhance the mining activities in areas with high ore
content like Ghatshila in Jharkhand.
Action Taken
            The mining from the open cast mines at Malanjkhand Copper Project (MCP) is more profitable than the
underground mining at Indian Copper Project (ICC), Ghatshila.  Thus, efforts were made to enhance mining activity at
MCP.  Metal in concentrate production from Malanjkhand Copper mine has been increased to 24,000 tonnes during the
year 2001-02 as against an average production of 19,700 tonne during the last three years.  The unviable underground
mines at Ghatshila have been closed.
 
Recommendations ( Para 15.3.11)   
DELAY IN COMPLETION OF IAPL PROJECT
The Committee in its38
th Report on Demands for Grants (2000-01), while welcoming the   acquisition of International
Aluminium Products Ltd.  (IAPL) by NALCO., expected  that sharing of common facilities due to  the  proximity of
facilities of NALCO and IAPL   would  lead to  timely completion of the  project  of setting up of a  cold rolled product 
plant with a capacity of 50,000 TPA at  Angul, Orissa adjacent to the NALCO's   Smelter plant for manufacture of
Aluminium  sheets, coils and rolled products.   The Committee has been informed that the said project has been
completed in March, 2002 . The original cost of the project was Rs.284.61 crore while the actual cost   stood at

99th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/99threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
Rs.330.81 crore.  The time overrun in the completion of the project is of about 21 months.   The Committee observes
that   the time and cost overrun in the completion of the project should have been avoided.  
Action Taken
 
            IAPL being a 100% export oriented unit, the project cost in terms of dollars is of significance and in dollar terms
there is no appreciable cost increase.  However, in terms of Rupee cost, there is a cost increase of Rs. 46.20 crores from
the time of take over by NALCO.  This variation is mainly due to variation in exchange rate and increase in interest
during construction.  The amount of exchange rate the remaining amount of Rs.9 crores the change in working capital
margin accounted for about Rs.4 crores.
variation is about Rs.17 crores and that for financing charges, it is about Rs.20 crores.  Thus adding to about Rs.37
crores.  Out of
            The increase in financing charges and working capital are basically due to delay in implementation of the
project.  Reasons for the delay were considered by the Standing Committee and its findings were presented to the PIB. 
It was also explained to the PIB that these delays have taken place in spite of NALCO’s best efforts and could not be
attributable to anybody in particular.  The total delay can be divided into two parts i.e. delay of about 9 months from the
date of Board’s decision to actual take over i.e. June, 1999 to March, 2000 and delay in the project implementation of
about 12 months after the take over.  The initial delay of 9 months was mainly due to delay in confirmation from M/s.
SBI and M/s ICICI, which could only be obtained on January 28, .2000.  Litigation regarding private land also resulted
in delay in closure of boundary wall and subsequent asset verification before take over.
 
The delay of about 12 months in project implementation was because of re-negotiation of about 12 contracts for
various mechanical and electrical works and the contract for civil/structural work.  These contracts were earlier awarded
to a single party and have expired.  This process of re-negotiation took about 9 months.  Similarly re-negotiation with
the imported equipment suppliers also resulted in the delay in the erection/commissioning.   The project has since been
completed in March 2002.
 
Recommendations ( Para 15.5.6) 
EXPLORATION WORK BY MECL in NON-CIL BLOCK
The Committee is pleased to note the details of performance of MECL in the field of coal exploration work in the  non-
CIL  bloc, as per the information   furnished  by the Department of Mines in its Action Taken Note of  recommendation
contained in the   Committee's  55
th    Report  on Demands for  Grants   (2001-02).  The Committee recommends that
MECL should continue to procure work order in the field of exploration work in the non-CIL block.
 
Action Taken
            In view of the proposed privatization of coal sector,  non-CIL block are no longer released for exploration by
Department  of Coal.
 
 CHAPTER-III
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE HAS NOT
ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF MINES
Recommendations ( Para 1.15 & 1.16 ).
Constitution of  a Task Force To Examine Pertinent  Issues
           
The Committee recommends that Government should immediately constitute a Task Force having
representatives from Department of Coal, Mines, Petroleum   and Steel   to examine the following issues:-
i
                 Determination of continuation of Department of Mines with a view to discharge its core function;

99th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/99threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
ii               Feasibility and desirability of integration/merger of GSI, IBM and MECL and transferring of same to
either    Department of Coal, Petroleum or Ministry of Steel.
iii              Transfer of  NMDC, KIOCL, MOIL and MECON from the Ministry of Steel  to Department of Mines.  
iv             Merger of Department of Mines, Coal and Steel.
Para 1.16:        The  Committee recommends that the Committee be apprised of the  findings    of Task Force and
thereafter  the Committee would   form its final opinion after examination the  findings of the   Task Force.  The 
Committee recommends that Task Force  should examine all the issues in  a time bound  programme..
Action Taken  (Para 1.15 & 1.16)
(i)           There is no need to set up a Task Force having representatives from Department of Coal, Mines,
Petroleum and Steel as the subject matter has already been discussed at length by the Expenditure Reforms
Commission (ERC)  which has given its recommendations about Department of Mines.  ERC has
recommended abolition of 87 posts. This Department, after examination of the recommendations have
come to the conclusion that as a result of implementation of disinvestment in the PSUs there would be
some reduction in the work load and accordingly 35 posts are proposed for reduction only as this
Department would continue to look after the technical and administrative work of GSI, IBM, Autonomous
Bodies and Revision Petitions against the orders passed by the State Governments apart from its other
assigned duties.
(ii)
         GSI, IBM and MECL have been assigned different roles and these roles cannot be merged.  It may also
not be possible to transfer them to Department of Coal, Petroleum or Ministry of Steel as the activities of
these Departments are different from the Department of Mines.
(iii)
       The transfer of NMDC, KIOCL, MOIL and MECON from the Ministry of Steel to Department of Mines is
not possible, as this subject has been assigned to Ministry of Steel specifically.
(iv)       Ministry of Steel and Departments of Mines and Coal cannot be merged as they have been assigned
different roles.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS
            The Committee  is of the opinion  that  recommendations of the eEpenditure  Reforms Commission  is a
conclusion  arrived at  in the pre-disinvestment era and things have changed  a lot  in post disinvestment  phase,  when
the  spheres of functions of the  Department of Mines  have reduced considerably.   The Committee understands that the 
decision of the Department of Mines to reduce  35 post  consequent upon implementation of disinvestment  in Mines
PSUs  is a decision of the Department of Mines.   While  the Committee  desires that Government  should consider
whether  it is the absolute necessity  for a separate Department of  Mines   just to  look after  the technical and
administrative work of GSI, IBM , Autonomous bodies and  revision petition  etc.             
Recommendations ( Para 2.2)  
BUDGET PROPOSALS OF DEPARTMENT OF MINES FOR 2002-03
The Committee is pleased to note that the economic philosophy behind the budget proposals of the Department
of Mines is broadly based on the principle that extensive survey and investigation should be carried out in the field of
minerals in which the country is deficient or which are of strategic importance for the country.  Besides this, the need
for advance exploration and prospecting techniques in the field of geophysical and geo-chemical methods has been
envisaged and participation of domestic and foreign private explorators and prospectors has been stressed. 
Simultaneously, the need for modernisation and up gradation of technical skills of the organizations like GSI, MECL,
IBM and some of the State Department of Mines and Geology has been planned. In the field of mineral output , stress
has been laid on recycling of metal scraps and enhancement of smelting capacities of metals like Aluminium, lead &
zinc, copper, steel and Ferro alloys has been taken into consideration.  Stress has also been laid on development of
dimension and decorative stones, mining and processing industry, minerals required for advanced ceramic and glasses,
abrasive minerals and materials, high purity metals alloys and electronic materials based on minerals. Development of
infrastructure is another important issue on which stress has been laid in annual plan 2002-03.  States are being

99th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/99threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
encouraged to ensure proper linkage of raw material to the industry along with development of necessary basic
infrastructure. In the field of mineral administration, with the desired level of amendments in the Acts and Rules
governing mineral sector, the environment is highly congenial for both domestic and foreign investors. With these
measures, the budget proposals for the year 2002-03 pertaining to the Department of Mines, are expected to prove as an
instrument to march forward towards the national goal of overall development in the era of liberalised and globalised
economy.
Action Taken:
            The Department is trying and expects that the budget proposals of the Department become an instrument to
march forward towards the national goal of overall development in the era of liberalized and globalised economy.
            The Committee feels that had the Department of Mines furnished the details of  identification of goals,  (Mineral
specific –Industry-wise)  course of action   envisaged , steps taken to  achieve the goals and  outcome  thereof   The
Committee could have been in a better position  to understand as   to how the budget  proposals ( 2002-03) of   the
Department  of Mines  is proving an instrument  to  march forward towards the national goal of overall development in
the era of liberalized  and globalised economy.
 
RECOMMENDATIONS ( PARA 6.3 )      
EXPENDITURE INCURRED BY THE DEPARTMENT  OF MINES  DUE TO CHANGE OF  MINISTER
The Committee notes that the Department   of Mines could not follow the guidelines of the Ministry of Finance
for 10% reduction in non-salary item  during 2001-02 due to change of Minister  of Coal and  Mines  and Minister of 
State  of Coal  and Mines.   However, the Committee feels that this is not very convincing explanation and the
guidelines of the Ministry of Finance should be observed  in the forthcoming financial year.
Action Taken:
            It is reiterated that due to change in Minister (Coal & Mines) and Minister of State (Coal & Mines) additional
expenditure under various heads had to be undertaken during 2001-02.  On account of expenditure on telephones, fax,
photocopier, stationery, computers and its accessories, renovation and furniture.
            However, concerted efforts will be made to strictly observe the guidelines of the Ministry of Finance in this
regard in the year 2002-03.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
            The Committee is of the  opinion that  expenditure on telephone,   fax, photo copier, stationery, computer and its
assessories, renovation and furniture is of regular nature , however, it hopes that    the concerted efforts should be made 
to strictly observe the guidelines   of the Ministry of  Finance  for rationalisation of non-plan expenditure  in the
forthcoming financial years which would the definitely yield  a positive result.   
Recommendations ( Para 7.2.9)
RESTRUCTURING OF MECL
The Committee further recommends that Government should give due consideration to the proposal of financial
restructuring of MECL.
Action Taken:
            Financial restructuring of the Company has been under the consideration of the Government.  However, from the
data presently available it does not appear that financial restructuring would be viable.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
            The Committee wonders that financial restructuring of the Company  (MECL) has been under the consideration
of the Government, does not appear as viable to the Department of Mines.  Is the Government considering   what is not
viable   or  the Department of Mines  is  a mute  spectator  over  the  issue   and  not in a  position to formulate a viable
financial  restructuring  proposal for MECL .   

99th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/99threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
 
RECOMMENDATIONS  (Para 8.3)
Utilisation of assets of   B.G.M.L
            The Committee notes  with concern the  financial state of Bharat Gold Mines Ltd.(BGML)    The Committee
reiterates  its  recommendation made in  its   50
th  Report on Demands for Grants (2001-02)  that in the case of winding
up/liquidation of the Company the  interest of the workers/employees be protected in all respects.  The Committee
further made its recommendation that the  large  tracts of land/other assets should be properly  utilised and the assets of
the Company should not  be allowed to deteriorate   owing  to  inadequate/lack of maintenance.  Regular  maintenance 
of the asset  may be kept.  Proper utilisation   of asset of the Company in the case of winding  up means  its proper
disposal/ strategic sale and  mitigation of the   Company's  liability by optimum appropriation of proceeds of such
strategic sale and not the  utilisation of the plants and  machinery in the process  of production even  if   the Company is
closed, as the  meaning interpreted by the Department of Mines in its  ATN on Committee's 55 th  Action taken Report 
on Action Taken by   the Government on the  recommendation  contained in the   Committee's  50 th Report.  The
Committee would appreciate   if the Committee's recommendations are interpreted broadly and explained in its true
spirit and substance. 
Action Taken:
            In the case of winding up/closure of the Company, the interest of the workers would be governed in accordance
with the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and the Companies Act, 1956.  However, to mitigate the
financial hardship of the employees of BGML, the Government has been announcing VSS from time to time and has
also decided to sell the hutments to the workers on the value assessed by Liquidator/Collector or any person authorized
by the Court subject to the decision of the Court as  the winding up/closure of the Company is sub-judice in the High
Court of Karnataka.  BGML owns about 12,000 acres of land.  This asset of the Company has to be disposed of in
accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956.  Maintenance of plants and machinery would entail
employment of the personnel and may not be fruitful, as the same would be disposed of in accordance with the
Companies Act, 1956.  The assets of the Company have to be disposed of by the liquidator when the liquidation of the
Company starts.  The efforts for rehabilitation of the Company through joint venture route have not fructified. 
Therefore the question of the strategic sale of the Company does not arise.  
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
            The Committee desires that the plant and machinery of BGML should be maintained in such a way so that it
would entail maximum possible proceeds and the same is not disposed of as distress sale.
Recommendations ( Para 11.3)
NATIONAL MINERAL POLICY
            The Committee understands that    since the  adoption of the policy of liberalisation and  privatisation    
Government is  withdrawing from commercial ventures, therefore, the proportionate   increase in the participation of
private sector in the transaction of business /commercial venture is but natural .  The Committee   is in agreement with
the view of Department of Mines that the  promulgation of  new National Mineral Policy in 1993  has opened   the gate
for  private player into non-ferrous mining and metallurgical   industries.  However, the  Committee is of the view that  
it is  the time  to  review the extent of participation of private sector  into the mining sector.  The Committee
recommends that   a review panel should be constituted  to examine the following issues  and the findings of the   panel 
be furnished to this Committee for  forming   its final  opinion:-
i
                 to examine the comprehensiveness of National Mineral Policy, 1993 and suggest amendment if required.
ii               status  of  implementation of National Mineral Policy , 1993
iii              to suggest amendment , if required to existing legal   framework,  or  if required,  new legislation for 
promotion of private sector in mining sector
iv             extent of  participation of private sector till date and  report  thereon  covering all  necessary aspects.

99th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/99threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
v               Any other  necessary and incidental matters relating to the subject.
Action Taken:
 
The National Mineral Policy, 1993, recognised the need for encouraging private investment including foreign
direct investment and state-of-the-art technology in mineral sector. Further , National Mineral Policy 1993 has  stressed 
that the Central  Government in consultation with the State Governments, shall continue to formulate the legal measures
for the regulation of mines and the development of mineral resources to ensure basic  uniformity  in mineral 
administration and to ensure that the development of mineral resources keeps pace, and is in consonance with the
national policy goals.
 
It is therefore evident that review of the policy and consequent amendment(s) in the Mines and Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 and rules framed there under to cater to future demands is(are)  an ongoing
process, and can not be a one time exercise.
 
 For a structured  and institutionalized review of the policies and procedures affecting the mining and the mineral
sector and for all matters connected or incidental thereto, the Mineral Advisory Council has been constituted by the
Government. The Hon’ble Minister for Coal and Mines is the Chairman of the Council. The Council has balanced
representation from State Governments, Industry Associations , Experts in mining sector as well as Members of
Parliament. The Mineral Advisory Council inter alia reviews the status of implementation of the National Mineral
Policy, advises the Government on mineral policy and legislation and the status of the mining and the mineral sector,
including inter alia  all the issues identified by the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry in its Report.
 
After the National Mineral Policy was announced, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957
has been amended in 1994 and 1999. After amendment in the Principal Act in 1999, the Mineral Concession Rules,
1960 have been amended on January 17,.2000, September 25,.2000,January 22,2000, and on January 11.,2002 .
Similarly, after 1999, the Mineral Conservation and Development Rules 1988 have been amended on 17.1.2000,
25.9.2000 and 11.1.2002.
The  amendments in the legislation have been extensively discussed prior to their enactment and honed as per
recommendations of the Mineral Advisory Council in its various meetings. As a recent example, minerals for which the
State Governments would be empowered to approve mining plans have been identified, time limits have been prescribed
for  conveying a decision on application(s) for mineral concessions and mining plans, and fees payable for various
applications under the rules have been revised as per recommendations of the Mineral Advisory Council.
 
            Two meetings of the Mineral Advisory Council have been held since 1999. In addition the Department of Mines
organized a Conference of State Ministers of Mining and Geology, as well as a Tripartite Meeting of the Central
Government, State Governments and Investors in the Mining Sector in 2001. These meetings also discussed inter alia
the issues identified by the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry. The review of the National Mineral Policy
and the other issues identified by the Parliamentary Standing Committee will therefore appropriately be listed for
discussion in the next meeting of the Mineral Advisory Committee.         
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
            The Committee expects  that the  Department of Mines  understands the concern  of Department related
Parliamentary  Standing Committee on Industry  and  therefore  appreciate its desire accordingly.  Interchanging and
intermingling  and  the functions of  Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee with  Mineral Advisory
Council  would not only be belittling and undermining the status of  this Committee   but also juxtaposing  the role   of
Mineral Advisory Council.    The Department of Mines placed  the issues identified  by the Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Industry in the meetings of  Mineral Advisory Council  but deprived the Committee of the outcome of the
meetings and  discussion held.  The Committee recommends that the Department of Mines should  furnish the details of 
Action Taken in its Note and  apprise the Committee comprehensively.   The Committee recommends that  the
Department of Mines should forward the  minutes of the meeting of Mineral Advisory  Council  to this Committee
whenever  the Mineral Advisory Council discusses the issues identified by the Committee.
RECOMMENDATIONS ( Para 12.3)

99th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/99threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
FOREIGN INVESTMENT IN MINING SECTOR
 The Committee appreciates  the  efforts made by the Department of Mines towards making the  mining sector more  
investor friendly  but  at the same time hopes that  pace of foreign  investment  in the mining sector may be  
accelerated.
Action Taken:
            The liberalisation of policy has provided a conducive atmosphere for the international mining companies to
invest in the country and bring with this investment and world class mining technology.  The policy of the Government
of India has been to actively encourage foreign investors to participate in the exploration and production of minerals and
mineral based industries.  Sustained inflow of private including foreign investment is desirable to bring in state-of-the-
art technology, coupled with foreign capital for the exploration and exploitation of mineral resources and in-country
value addition.
            As a part of the policy to actively encourage such investments, in order to give a further push for the FIPB
approved projects to get off the ground quickly, a monitoring system has been put in place.  This involves a periodic
review by the Foreign Investment Implementation Authority (FIIA), which looks at the progress made in implementing
the major projects.  Also, within each Ministry, there is a Fast Tract Committee (FTC) which closely monitors the
projects in that particular sector.
            The Department of Mines has been effectively utilizing various international fora, to highlight the policy and
legislative initiatives undertaken to project India as an attractive investment destination and the opportunities available. 
In this context the response has been good.
            Meetings with foreign investors have also been organized to identify the problems in implementation of various
Projects.  A time frame for disposal of applications for mineral concessions have also been fixed in the Mineral
Concession Rules.  These initiatives will accelerate the inflow of foreign investment in the mining sector.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
            The Committee observes that the Department of Mines have  furnished in its Action Taken Note only the
institutional  arrangement for accelerating  the pace  of foreign investment in the Mining Sector   but that is not
sufficient, the Committee feels.  The  Department of Mines should have furnished the details of  course of action
undertaken to promote foreign investment in the mining sector, region and  mineral-wise  and the outcome of efforts  so
made in the  form of quantum of  foreign investment.  The Committee recommends that FIIA and FTC should play  pro-
active role   for promotion of foreign investment.      
RECOMMENDATIONS ( Para 14.9)        
Exemption to loss  making mines PSUS
 
The Committee has been given  to understand that Department    of Mines has obtained   exemption    of  10% 
mandatory expenditure in respect  of  loss making PSUs such as MECL  and HCL as   well as   in respect of NALCO
and HZL as  these  PSUs  are not  getting any  budgetary  support.  The  Committee is in agreement  with the
Department of  Mines  and the Planning Commission   for seeking / granting  such  exemption  in respect of percentage
of  their MECL and HCL .  However, the Committee is of the view that the Government  should   make    certain
guidelines  not only for  profit making PSUs (  even  if these PSUs   are not the  recipient  of budgetary support )  but
also for joint venture ( a divested PSUs) i.e.  BALCO and HZL   for  making a certain   profit  as contribution to   
NER   as these  companies are after all using the national  resources and  proceeds of national  resources  must benefit to
overall  development of nation.
Action Taken
            Appropriating of the profit is purely a commercial matter of a company.  After disinvestment and transfer of
management control to a Strategic Partner (SP), the guidelines framed by the Government will not carry the force of the
law.
            The profit making PSUs may not be forced to earmark a certain percentage as they are contributing to the
national exchequer by paying taxes/duties etc.

99th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/99threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
            The Committee   understands that  the guidelines  framed by the Government  will not carry  the force of the
law  but  nevertheless  Indian  Government and administrative structure has  plethora of  guidelines  which are  being
observed by all concerned.   So long  India remains  a welfare state business units have the social /moral responsibility.  
Presuming that no one would  obey  the guidelines  as its lacks the  force of law and therefore  not feeling the need for
such guidelines is highly  presumptuous.   The Committee feels that a  beginning  should be made in  this  direction .
Recommendations Para 15.1.9:
PERFORMANCE OF BALCO
The Committee understands the reasons for the lower performance of BALCO, in post divested phase in
comparison   to pre-divested phase and is in agreement with  view   of  Department of Mines.
Action Taken
No action is required.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
            The new management should   make an all out efforts for improving the performance of BALCO  in post
disinvestment  phase  and thus justifying the Government steps. 
 
CHAPTER – IV
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF MINES HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED.
 
Recommendations ( Para 7.1.9)
Surplus manpower and its reduction   through VRS
 
The Committee is of the opinion that GSI should  explore the possibility of identifying  the  surplus manpower and its
reduction   through VRS.
Action Taken
            Surplus manpower has been identified and further action on the same would be initiated only after
recommendations of an ‘Expert Committee’ constituted for the purpose on  May 23, 2002 are accepted and
implemented by the Government.
Recommendations( Para 7.2.8 )
Physio-financial performance of MECL
The Committee is in agreement with the Department of Mines that physio-financial performance of MECL would
improve by laying emphasis    on diversification programmes, rationalisation  of manpower , increment in 
competitiveness and due  attention  on its core activities.
Action Taken
            MECL is laying emphasis on diversification programmes, rationalization of manpower, etc. to improve its
performance.
Recommendations ( Para 7.3.10 )
Contribution of Indian Bureau of Mines in the field of promotion and conservation of Minerals
The Committee appreciates the contribution of Indian Bureau of Mines in the field of promotion and conservation of
Minerals and protection of environment and beneficiation of low ore and   hopes that IBM would continue its efforts
towards its cherished   goal. 

99th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/99threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
Action Taken
            IBM has been advised to fulfill the appreciation of the Standing Committee in the field of promotion and
conservation of minerals, protection of environment and beneficiation of low ore and IBM would continue its efforts
towards its cherished goal.
Recommendations (Para 9.9 )          
Financial Restructuring of HCL
The Committee is in complete agreement with the provision of Rs.90 crore to keep the operation of HCL continuing  so
that prospective and strategic  `joint ventures  partner s may come forward to give a  new  lease of  life to the  
Company  which is heading towards the  `moribund stage' and if  timely relief  is not given in the  form of grant  the  
operation of the Company would come to a  standstill.  However the Committee feels that panacea   to problem of  
HCL lies in its financial structuring and the Committee expresses the hope that something   substantial would come out
of    recent initiative   taken by the Department of Mines.
Action Taken
 
            Government has approved the proposal of financial restructuring of HCL which includes the following:-
 
                        (i)      Conversion of non-plan loan of Rs.440 crore given for VRS into grant-in-aid.
 
                      (ii)      Conversion of outstanding plan loan as on  March31,2002, amounting to Rs.71.50 crore into equity to
improve the net worth of the Company.
 
                     (iii)      Waiver of outstanding interest on plan loan amounting to Rs.25.72 crore as on March 31,.2002.
                    (iv)      Extension of period of the Government guarantees already provided for raising working capital term loan
by a further 2 years or disinvestments which is earlier, in order to facilitate meeting the obligations for the
Secured Bond repayment.
                      (v)      Waiver of outstanding guarantee fee as on March 31,.2002 i.e. Rs.6.75 crore for extending guarantee by
Government of India for raising working capital and further waiver of accrual of any guarantee fee on such
guarantees from April 1,.2002 till expiry of guarantee.
 
                    (vi)      To provide for an additional amount of Rs.130 crore as grant to meet the expenses of closing underground
mining at Surda and Khetri by separating 3000 employees under VRS in the year 2002-2003.
 
                   (vii)      An additional equity of Rs.30 crores  for the financial year 2002-2003 to meet the part of the cash losses
and particularly for the interest payment against Government guaranteed loan and bonds.
Recommendations (Para 10.10 )
Grants In Aid To Research Projects
            The Committee reiterates its recommendations made in  its  38th Report  on Demands for Grants (2000-01) that
while    it  is rational for  grants in aid to research projects  and provision of funds for awards  but at the same time
opines that autonomous and scientific  bodies should generate revenue to meet non-plan expenditure.  In  this regard 
JNARRDC,  National  Institute of  Rock Mechanics (NIRM) and  National Institute of Miner's Health (NIMH)  should
generate sufficient fund to meet their requirement of non-plan  expenditure.  In today's  commercial world service is
regarded as product so these scientific  institutions should open avenues  for  generating revenue by providing
consultancy services.  By  diversification and exploring the possibility of service  mix, these  institutions may go for 
service endowment  in the field  of  consultancy, training and ideas for project generation.  They should become the 
seller of    ideas  and once the measures click they may reign and  rule  in the    world   market of ideas.  On the  whole
the Committee is of the  view  that scientific institutions  should  create  opportunity for extending consultancy service
and help Government  in pruning  of non-plan expenditure.
Action Taken

99th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/99threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
 
JNARDDC
            JNARDDC over the last few years, have been making strenuous efforts to generate funds to meet the
requirement of non-plan expenditure, as recommended by the Committee.  The measures initiated include the following:
(i)                  Consultancy and testing services to the aluminium  industry in India, other mineral processing industries
as also non mineral industries which have a need for the testing facilities available in the Centre.
(ii)                Sponsored R&D programmes from the industry which include all the primary aluminium industry
namely BALCO, INDAL,HINDALCO,MALCO and NALCO, bauxite exporters such as Ashapura and
Trademin auxiliary materials suppliers such as Goa Carbon, Alufluoride and various other industries.
(iii)
               Diversification of Centre’s activities to extend consultancy and testing services to the downstream
processing industry.
(iv)              Training programmes for personnel from the industries for which substantial training fees are collected.
(v)                Organisation of seminars, short courses, conferences in which delegate and sponsorship fee are
collected and the savings after expenditure are added to the internal resource generation.
Using the above measures, the Centre has been able to generate over Rs.47 lakhs during the Financial Year
2001-02.  This amounts to about 33% of the total non-plan expenditure of the Centre.
 
                        It is expected that with the intensified efforts initiated already this percentage will further go up during
the current financial year 2002-03.
NIRM
             
The facilities and the expertise skills of the Scientists at NIRM are being continuously upgraded to enhance
revenue generation.  NIRM has generated surplus revenue in previous two years. A corpus fund of Rs.2.5 core has
already been generated.
NIMH
            Efforts are on to strengthen the Institute.
Recommendations ( Para 10.11 ) 
Research & Technology Mission
            The Committee is aware  that research and development is an on-going   process, however, the  outcome thereof
should benefit the present civilization and that is  possible  only when adequate degree of intellectual honesty is
involved  in the research process.  Research  is  carried  out not just  for the sake of research but for the  benefit and
welfare of human being.  Research  and  development in mining field can  not  only provide cost  effective  tools and
technology but may  go in a long way for   management  of    eco-friendly environment.  The Committee would like to
recommend that the Department of Mines should have definite  "Research & Technology Mission” which should act as
the   storehouse of mining related `experiments and observations’  and knowledge   and experience skimmed of such 
Mission would be helpful in removing the problems being  faced by mining sector.
Action Taken
            For implementation in Xth Plan, 138 Project proposals/concepts have been received from Industry, Research
Organizations, etc.  To shortlist and develop these in to mission mode, multidisciplinary, multiorganizational national
projects, a brain-storming session of eminent experts will be organized.  The Projects so formulated will be given high
priority and importance in implementation. R&D efforts are on for the following:
 
(a)
                Advanced process control and optimization of technology in mineral processing plants.
(b)               Health hazards due to mining accidents.
(c)                Safety problems in mining of soft ore bodies like soapstone.

99th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/99threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
(d)               Indigenous process for utilization of low-grade ores, reduction in energy consumption and production of
waste in mining.
 
Recommendations  ( Para 13.3.3.) 
Full  Utilisation Of The  Non-Plan Loan 
The Committee is pleased  to note  the full  utilisation of the  non-plan loan  of Rs. 5 crore  earmarked  in RE -2001-02
for MECL for VRS.  The Committee  is of the opinion that  the Company can  survive  only with optimum work force.
Action Taken
The observations have been communicated to MECL.
 
Recommendations ( Para 14.8)
Decentralisation Of  Industrial  Growth And  Removal  Of Regional  Disparities 
The Committee is of the   view that   a balanced national economic growth and development is  possible  only through
decentralisation of  industrial  growth and  removal  of regional  disparities  Development of North-Eastern States has  
been  the  cherished  national policy and priority  and  guidelines   of  the  Government    for  spending  10%  gross   
budgetary support  for  development of North-eastern  region is  a step forward in  this direction.  The Committee 
observes that  since the year 2001-02  Government   had   decided to   open two   separate major  heads i.e. 2552  for 
expenditure of  capital nature.   The Committee also  notes the details of programmes to be  undertaken by GSI   and
IBM for the year 2002-03 and hopes that GSI and IBM would make its tangible  contribution  towards benefits of NER.
ACTION TAKEN NOTES:
 
GSI and IBM will spend 10% of plan budget except foreign aid earmarked for them for expenditure of capital
and revenue nature so that they help in the national economic growth thereby removing regional disparities.
 
Recommendations  (Para 15.1.8) 
Physical and Financial performance of BALCO.
The Committee, while   noting the  provision in the  share  purchase  agreement (SPA) and  share holders
Agreement  (SHA) signed between Government of India, strategic partner    and BALCO as on 31
st    March, 01, hopes
that new management would make  an  all out  efforts to ensure better  physical and financial performance of the
Company,  utilising the scarce   resources of the  nation in the  optimum manner.
Action Taken
            The new management of BALCO has assured that they will make all out efforts to ensure better physical and
financial performance, utilizing the scare resources of the nation in the best possible manner.
Recommendations ( Para 15.2.3-15.2.5)         
Performance of  HCL 
The Committee observes that HCL is in deep trouble as the  performance of  HCL  has been affected adversely
by   steep  fall in the prices of copper in   Landon Metal Exchange (LME) .   The Company has been incurring losses
(Rs.147.46 crore in 1999-2000; Rs.105.80 crore in 2000-01 and Rs.49.84 crore till December 2001-02)  and
accumulated loss  stands out to be Rs.556.75 crore as on March 31,2001.  The Committee further observes that
reduction in customs   duty of copper from 25% to  35%  would  further  add  to the losses of  HCL.
HCL lacks even the working   capital and it is dependent wholly     on budgetary support for keeping the mill
running.  The increase in the budgetary support from Rs.25 crore in BE to Rs.110 crore in RE 2001-02 was made to
provide fund for working capital.  And the budgetary support of Rs.25 crore for the year 2002-03 is meant for
replacement and renewals.

99th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/99threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
The Committee, in view of the ongoing process of financial restructuring, recommends  that Government should
provide sufficient  working capital in order to keep the operation  going on so  that Government  should have  no
difficulties in finding a suitable and  strategic partner.
Action Taken (Para :15.2.3, 15.2.4 & 15.2.5)
            The status of the Company as an ongoing concern was maintained by giving budgetary support from
Government of India to facilitate the disinvestment.
Recommendations  (Para 15.3.8 )
Profit making  potential   of NALCO
            The Committee notes the   mode of raising IEBR to the tune of Rs.1100.00   crore and their appropriation on
capital  expenditure on account of expansion of mMnes  &  Refinery and Smelters and Power    Plant and hopes that
money  so spent  would enhance the profit making  potential   of NALCO.
Action Taken
            The expenditure on expansion of Mines and Refinery and Smelter & Power Plant would enhance the profit
making potential of NALCO.
 
Recommendations ( Para 15.3.9)
Expansion Of And Ongoing Projects of NALCO.
The Committee has been given  to understand that the  capital outlay of Rs.900.00 crore  as projected during  BE 2002-
03 would  be sufficient for expansion of  and  ongoing   projects  and would  meet the completion schedule.
Action Taken
            The capital outlay provided will be sufficient for expansion of and ongoing projects.   NALCO has been asked to
complete the work as per schedule and there should not be any cost over run.
Recommendations  (Para 15.3.10)
STATUS OF NAVRATNA TO NALCO.
The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendations that NALCO should be given the status of NAVRATNA  keeping
in view its performance .
Action Taken
            The matter is under active consideration of the Government.
 
Recommendations (Para 15.4.5)
MAKING PROFIT CAPACITY OF HZL
The Committee is pleased to  note  that HZL has  been consistently  making profit and  raising  IEBR for  capital
expenditure.  The Committee hopes that HZL would make even  further profit under new management in post divested
phase.
Action Taken
            Government has disinvested 26% equity in HZL and management control has been transferred to the Strategic
Partner on April 11,2002.  It is expected that private management would bring greater efficiency in the management of
HZL.
 
 Recommendations  (Para 15.5.5)
Financial Restructuring of MECL
            The Committee further recommends that Government  should clear   the proposal for financial restructuring of

99th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/99threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
MECL without  delay   so that MECL   would start generating its own IEBR.
Action Taken:
            The matter is under consideration.  As per DPE guidelines on financial restructuring, one time capital
restructuring can be made only when the Government is sure that in the post-restructuring period, the Company would
be able to sustain. Despite reduction in manpower from 4588 in 1995-96 to 2557 in 2001-2002  & diversification by the
Company, though the losses have been reduced but the net worth gives a very high debt equity ratio.  Over the years,
funding for promotional work is also getting reduced.  In view of above, financial restructuring at this juncture may not
be viable.
Recommendations ( Para 16.3)
NIRM and JNARDDC making efforts  to raise I&EBR
            The Committee is pleased to note that NIRM and JNARDDC are making efforts successfully to raise I&EBR (
to the  tune of Rs.4.12 crore   in 2001-02 and Rs.3.50 crore in the year  2002-03) to reduce their  dependence of these
institution  on  budget support from the  Government.
Action Taken
            The Institutes are given full support in their efforts to raise I&EBR.  Their dependence on Budget support from
Government is being reduced in a phased manner.
 
Recommendations ( Para 16.4)
SHIFTING  OF  NIRM and NIMH to JNARDDC CAMPUS
The Committee, keeping in view of the  closure of Bharat Gold Mines is of the opinion that National Institute of Rock
Mechanics,  Kolar  Gold  Field  Karnataka and National Institute of Miner Health   located at Kolar  Gold  Field should
be   shifted to suitable place and preferably at Nagpur in the  complex   of JNARDDC which  has a big building  with
large   parts remaining  unutilised.
Action Taken
            The proposal to shift NIRM and NIMH to JNARDDC campus has been partly implemented.  Office space to the
tune of over 37,000 sq.ft. has been provided to these two Institutes.  NIMH has already moved into the new premises on
17
th April, 2002.  A similar step is awaited from NIRM.
Recommendations ( Para 18.4)
MEETING SOCIAL OBLIGATION AND DISCHARGING SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITIES AND DUTIES
            The Committee further recommends that the units in private sector engaged in mining operation and   PSUs in its
post divested phase should take concrete steps   towards meeting social obligation and discharging social responsibilities
and duties.   These units in the mining sector should contribute towards development.   The   Committee hopes that
regulation and development of mineral resources would be carried on in such a manner that, the mining sector is on the
course of sustainable development.  
Action Taken
Mining contributes tremendously to the socio economic development of the people in the backward and tribal
areas of the country by upgrading infrastructure and other amenities and opening them to the mainstream of national
development.  However, this fact is not fully realized in many quarters. There is a  need felt  need to bring together
mining industry, Government. officials and NGOs and other interested groups to discuss socio economic development
of the people in these areas through mining activities.  In this background, a Conference was recently organized by
Federation of Indian Mineral Industries (FIMI) on 31
st Jan. and 1 st Feb.2002 in Jaisalmer, Rajasthan to sensitise the
Industry and  State Governments on social and community issues.
A number of amendments have been carried out in the Mines and Minerals (Development & Regulation) Act,
1957 in 1994 and 1999 and corresponding amendments in Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 and Mineral Conservation
and Development Rule, 1988 have also been made to make mining sector investor friendly and hassle free.  A number

99th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/99threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
of leading global mining companies have also evinced interest in Indian Mining Sector resulting in expected FDI inflow
of Rs. 3963 crores.
It is expected that units in private sector and PSUs in post divested phase would make their best efforts towards
meeting social obligations and discharging social responsibilities and duties.
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE
 (Para 1.15 & 1.16)
Constitution of  a Task Force To Examine Pertinent  Issues
            The Committee  is of the opinion  that  recommendations of the expenditure  Reforms Commission  is a
conclusion  arrived at  in the pre-disinvestment era and things have changed  a lot  in post disinvestment  phase when
the  spheres of functions of the  Department of Mines  have reduced considerably.   The Committee understands that the 
decision of the Department of Mines to reduce the 35 post  consequent upon implementation of disinvestment  in Mines
PSUs  is a decision of the Department of Mines.   while  the Committee  desires that Government  should consider
whether  it is the  whether  it is the absolute necessity  for a separate Department of  Mines   just to  look after  the
technical and administrative work of GSI IBM , Autonomous bodies and  revision petition  etc.        
 
RECOMMENDATIONS ( Para 2.2)          
Budget proposals of Department of Mines for 2002-03
            The Committee feels that had the Department of Mines furnish the details of  identification of goals,  (Mineral
specific –Industry-wise)  course of action   envisaged , steps taken to  achieve the goals and  outcome  thereof, the
Committee could have been in a better position  to understand as   to how the budget  proposals ( 2002-03) of   the
Department  of Mines  is proving an instrument  to  march forward towards the national goal of overall development in
the era of liberalized  and globalised economy.
 
RECOMMENDATIONS ( Para 6.3 )         
Expenditure incurred by the Department  of Mines  due to charge of  Minister
            The Committee is of the  opinion that  expenditure on telephone,   fax, photo copier, stationery, computer and its
assessories, renovation and furniture is of regular nature , however, it hopes that    the concerted efforts  to strictly
observe the guidelines   of the Ministry of  Finance  for rationalisation of non-plan expenditure  in the forthcoming
financial years would the definitely yield  a positive result.   
RECOMMENDATIONS ( Para 7.2.9)
Restructuring of MECL
            The Committee  wonders that  financial restructuring of the Company  (MECL)  is under the consideration of 
the Government  ,  does not appear as viable  to the Department of Mines.  Is the Government  considering   what is not
viable   or  the Department of Mines  is mute  spectator  over  the  issue   and  not in a  position to formulate a viable
financial  restructuring  proposal for MECL .   
Recommendations  (Para 8.3)
Utilisation of assets of  B.G.M.L
            The Committee desires that the plant and  machinery of BGML would be maintained  in such a way as it would
entail  maximum possible proceeds  and the same is not  disposed of as distress sale.
 
RECOMMENDATIONS ( Para 11.3)
National Mineral Policy
            The Committee expect s  that the  Department of Mines  understands the manded of Department Related

99th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/99threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
Parliamentary  Standing Committee on Industry  and  therefore  honour  its status accordingly.  Interchanging and
intermingling  and  the functions of  Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee with  Mineral Advisory
Council  would not only be belittling and undermining the status of  this Committee   but also juxtaposing  the role   of
Mineral Advisory Council.    The Department of Mines placed  the issues identified  by this Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Industry in the meetings of  Mineral Advisory Council  but deprived the Committee  the outcome of the
meetings and  discussion held.  The Committee recommends that the Department of Mines should  furnish the details of 
Action Taken in its Note and  apprise the Committee comprehensively.   The Committee desires that  the Department of
Mines would forward the  minutes of the meeting of Mineral Advisory  council  to this Committee whenever  the
Mineral Advisory Council discusses the issues identified by the Committee.
Recommendations ( Para 12.3)
FOREIGN INVESTMENT IN MINING SECTOR
            The Committee observes that the Department of Mines have  furnish in its Action taken Note only the
institutional  arrangement for accelerating  the pace  of foreign investment in the Mining Sector.  But that is not
sufficient, the Committee feels.  The  Department of Mines should have furnished the details of  course of action
undertaken to promote foreign investment in the mining sector, regin and  minerals-wise  and the outcome of efforts  so
made in the  form of quantum of  foreign investment.  The Committee recommends that FIIA and FTC should play  pro-
active role   for promotion of foreign investment.      
 
RECOMMENDATIONS ( Para 14.9)        
Exemption to loss  making Mines PSUs
The Committee   understands that  the guidelines  framed by the Government  will not carry  the force of the
law  but  never the less  Indian  Government and Administrative structure has  plethora of  guidelines  which are  being
observed by all concerned.   So long  India remains  a welfare state business units have the social /moral responsibility
.   Such guidelines are duly  observed by all those   upon whom  goods and prevails .   Presuming that no one would 
obey  the guidelines  as its lacks the  force of law and therefore  not feeling the need for such guidelines is highly 
presumptuous. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS ( Para 15.1.9 )
Performance of BALCO, in post divested phase in comparison   to pre-divested phase
The new management should   make an all out efforts for improving the performing of BALCO  in post
disinvestment  phase  and thus justifying the Government steps. 
MINUTES
 
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
        The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 11th December, 2002 in Room No.62, First Floor Parliament
House, New Delhi.
     1.   Dr. P.C. Alexander        -----     Chairman
           RAJYA  SABHA
     2.   Prof. M.M. Agarwal
     3.   Shirimati Sumitra Mahajan
     4.   Shri P.K. Maheshwari
           LOK  SABHA
     5.   Shri Nepal Chandra Das
     6.   Shri A. C. Jose
     7.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
     8.   Shri A. Narendra

99th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/99threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
     9.   Shri Ananta Nayak
   10.   Shri Malyala Rajaiah
   11.   Shri P. Rajendran
   12.   Dr. B.B. Ramaiah
   13.   Shri Tarachand Sahu
   14.   Chowdhary Talib Hussain
           SECRETARIAT
           Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
           Shri D.P Ahuja, Under Secretary
           Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
2.     At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members and apprised them of agenda for the meeting of the day.
3.     *                                                               *                                                                     *
3.1   *                                                               *                                                                     *
3.2   *                                                               *                                                                     *
3.3   *                                                               *                                                                     *
4.     The Committee, thereafter, took up the following draft reports for consideration :-
(i)    92nd Draft Report on the Action Taken on recommendations contained in Committee's 73rd Report on
Demands for Grants (2002-03) pertaining to Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries
and Public Enterprises);
(ii)    93rd Draft Report on the Action Taken on recommendations contained in Committee's 75th Report on
Demands for Grants (2002-03) pertaining to Ministry of Small Scale Industries.
(iii)   94th Draft Report on MoU system in the Chemical Sectors PSEs of the Department of Public Enterprises
(Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
(iv)   96th Draft Report on Inter PSU Cooperation in Engineering and Construction Sectors, the Department of
Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
(v)   97th Draft Report on the Action Taken on recommendations contained in Committee's 74th Report on
Demands for Grants (2002-03) pertaining to Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries;
(vi)   98th Draft Report on the Action Taken on recommendations contained in Committee's 70th Report on
Demands for Grants (2002-03) pertaining to Ministry of Steel;
(vii)  99th Draft Report on recommendations contained in Committee's 71st Report on Demands for Grants (2002-
03) pertaining to Department of Mines (Ministry of Coal and Mines);
(viii)101st Draft Report on recommendations contained in Committee's 72nd Report on Demands for Grants (2002-
03) pertaining to the Department of Heavy Industry (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
(ix)   102nd Draft Report on MoU system in the Fertilizers Sectors PSEs on the Department of Public Enterprises
(Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
4.1   After a brief discussion all the Reports were adopted unanimously without any modification.
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 5.10 P.M.