RAJYA SABHA 
DEPART!VIENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
ON 
THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE 
MINISTRY OF STEEL FOR 1995-96 
(Presented on the 8th May, 1995) 
RAJY A SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
May·, 1995/Vaisakha, 1917 (Saka) 

CONTENTS 
I. CoMPOsmoN OF THE CoMMITfEE •••••••••• •••••••••••••••••••••••• •• ••••••••• •••••••••••••••• ••• 
II. REPORT oF THE CoMMITfEE .......................................... .. ......................... . . 
III. ANNEXURE (MINUTES OF TiiE MEETINGS) ..................................................... . 
PAGES 
(i)-(ii) 
1-6 
7-15 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
1. Shri Ashok Mitra-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri Sana tan Bisi · 
4. Smt. Chandrika Abhinandan Jain 
5. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
6. Shri Anil Kumar 
7. Shri Govind Ram Miri 
8. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mody 
9. Shri· V. Rajeshwar Rao 
10. Shri Raj Nath Singh 
11. Shri K.K. Veerappan 
12. Shri Nyodek Yonggam 
13. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav 
14. Shri Shivajirao Giridhar Patil 
15. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani 
LOK SABHA 
16. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
17. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
18. Smt. Kesharbai Sonajirao Kshirsagar 
19. Smt. Pratibha Devisi.ngh Patil 
20. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala 
21. Shri K. Ramamurthy 
22. Shri Balin Kuli 
23. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
24. Shri Vishveshwar Bhagat 
25. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
26. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
27. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
28. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
29. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
30. Smt. Sumitra Mahajan 
31. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri 
32. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
33. Shri S.N. Vekaria 
34. Shri Ramdew Ram 
35. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
36. Shri Satyanarayan Jatiya 

37. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
38. Shri Naval Kishore Rai 
39. Shri Manjay Lal 
40. Shri Rasheed Masood 
41. Smt. Suseela Gopalan 
42. Shri Puma Chandra Malik 
43. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
44. Shri P.G. N8{ayanan 
45. Shri Bolla Buili Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri SatiSh Kumar~ Joint Secretary 
2. Shri G.K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Shamsher Singh Rana, Under Secretary 
4. Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer 

FOURTEENTH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
I, the Chairman, Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry , 
having been authorised by the Committee, present this Fourteenth Report of the Committee 
on the Demands for Grants for 1995-96 of the Ministry of Steel. 
2. The Committee started examination of Ministry's demands by seeking views of the 
representatives of Chambers of Commerce such as FICCI and the CII on the performance of 
the steel sector and the impact of the recent budget proposals relating to Ministry of Steel. 
The Committee also heard the views of representatives of Central trade unions in the same 
context. 
3. At its subsequent meeting held on the 7th April, 1995, the Committee heard oral 
evidence tendered by the Secretary. Ministry of Steel on the Performance Budget for 1995-
96 in connection with the Dema!lds for Grants of the Ministry. 
4. The Committee eonsidered the Ministry's budgetary proposals in three sittings and 
adopted the report at its sittin~ held on the 28th April, 1995. 
S. The Committee was given to understand that the total demand of ~inistry as per 
Demand No. 75 for 1995-96 is to the tune of Rs. 294.46 crore out of which Rs. 284.50 crore 
is for the Plan sector and remaining Rs. 9.96 crore have been allocated to non-plan 
activities. 
6. Taking into account the documents and other material made available to it and the oral 
evidence tendered before it by the representatives of industry. trade unions and the Ministry 
of Steel, the Committee would like to make the following recommendations and suggestions: 
6.01 The Committee is constrained to make one preliminary observation. A perusal of the 
budgetary allocations for the Ministry · of Steel for the years 1993-94, 1994-95 and 1995-96 
would suggest that the allocations are declining steadily over the years. Were the factor of 
inflation to be taken into account, the real content of the outlay proposed for the Ministry 
would appear to be declining at an. even sharper gradient. True, in the ambience of 
liberalisation, the authorities could be influenced by the judgement that the role of the 
government in propelling -industrial growth is going to be progressively less and less from 
now on, justifying cutbacks in the outlays for hithertocrucially important ministries, such as 
the Ministry of Steel.. But certain other aspects of the emerging reality, the Committee feels, 
should also be taken into account. If industrial growth is to grow at the rate of around 10 to 
12 per cent for the next decade or thereabouts, as is being assumed i~ official circles, the 
significance of steel, one of the mQst basic intermediate products, would loom large in the 
industrial landscape. For instance, aceording to projections incorporated in the rerformance 
Budget, 1995-96 of the Ministry of Steel, the domestic demand of steel would more than 
·double by the year 2001-02 from the present level of 15 .million tons. Such an increase in the 
demand for steel would call for a corresponding expansion of steel output. It could be that 
official prognosis is that the bulk of this increase in production would take place in the 
private sector. The assumption may initially sound plausible, ' but, given the capital 
intensiveness of the industry, is not altogether realistic. The fading away of the government 
from the steel sector reflected in the declining share of steel produGtion in public sector 

2 
plants in total output, would also need a reappraisal from another point of view. The experience 
garnered over the past few years has imparted one important lesson: public expenditure of a 
substantial order, which would have its impact on the demand for industrial goods, is still called 
for for sustaining industrial growth in the country. A more active role for the government might, 
judged from both these· points of view, be necessary to maintain an improved tempo of 
industrial activity. And irrespective of the relative roles of the public and private sectors, it has 
to be ensured that the development of the domestic steel industry is not hampered because of, 
for instance, the laqk of raw iron ore. This would necessitate large-scale investments, including 
for opening new mines. Extensive dependence on private mining activity for the purpose could 
entail several uncertainties. To pick another example, to ensure the supply Of ooking coal of the 
right specifications and quantum, it would be necessary to set up a network of new washeries. 
At the same time, it might be crucially important to open up, after careful exploratory activity, 
such mines as would offer prospects' '?f quality coal with a lower content of ash and sulphur. All 
this would, in addition to private initiative require public investment of a considerable order. 
While the Steel Authority of India can ey and large be expected henceforth to be self-sustaining, 
the range of activities just referred to might call for resources for which budgetary provision 
would appear to be desirable. Consideri~g all aspects together, the Committee would strongly 
recommend that the phase of progressive contraction of budgetary allocations for the Ministry of 
Steel be swiftly brought to an end. 
6.0Z The Committee has taken note of the reductions in the rates of import duty on steel items 
in the budget for 1995-96. The import duty on sponge iron, scrap and non-alloy steel has been 
reduced from the level of 30 per cent to 20 per cent; on ingots, from 50 per cent to 20 per cent; 
on stainless steel coils from 50 per cent to' 30 per cent; on C.R. coils from 40 per cent to 30 per 
cent; and on all other items from 50 per cent to 40 per cent. Whether it is desirable to proceed 
with the opening up of the domestic steel industry to external competition at a somewhat more 
gradual pace is a moot question. It would, in the view of the Committee, in any case have been 
desirable to have the rate of import duty imposed on a finished steel item kept at a higher level 
than the rates of duty on the corre·sponding non-finished items. Even this precaution does not 
appear to have been followed jn the current year's proposals. Given the huge excess capacity in 
steel-producing units in Western Europe, the United States of America and Japan, the 
downward adjustments in the import duty levels incorporated in this year's budget proposals 
could, in the opinion of the Committee, affect the viability of domestic producers, more so since 
they would also have to take into account the impact of inflation on the structure of cost. It is a 
matter of some disquiet that one of the main producers has already announced an across-the: 
board increase in the prices of several items because of cost escalation. In the circumstances, the 
Ministry of Steel, the Committee feels, would be justified to make a representation to the 
Ministries of Finance and Commerce that the roll-back of import duty rates on steel categories 
should proceed at a more circumspect tempo. What is also worth watching is the prospect of 
selective dumping by foreign exporters of steel items taking advantage of the liberalised import 
duty structure in India. That this aspect of the matter deserves to be kept is mind in confirmed 
by the comparison of the landed cost of selected steel categories with the ex-stockyard price of 
corresponding categories supplied by Indian producers on the eve of the budget proposals. The 
lowering of the rates of duty would seem to stack the decks further against the domestic units. 

Category 
1. Billets 
2. Wire Rods 
3. Structurals 
4. Plates 
5. Hot Rolled Coils 
6. Cold Rolled Coils 
7. GP Sheets 
8. Tin Plate (Prime) 
Source: Ministry of Steel. 
3 
Imports 
(Price inclusive of Cost and 
Freight) Rs. per tonne 
9608 
11,183 
11,340 
14,175 
14,333 
17,325 
18,900 
20,790 
Erx-stockyard price of SAIL 
product 
Rs. per tonne 
11,898 
14,083 
14,313 
16,901 
17,591 
23,023 
25,133 
34,367 
6.03 The Committee would now refer to another aspect of liberalisation as far as the steel 
industry is concerned, namely, the limited withdrawal of steel freight equalisation. Under the 
scheme of freight equalisation which was in operation between 1956 and 1992, the main steel 
producers used to collect from the buyers the equalised freight element built into the prices 
of iron and steel items and credit them with the Joint Plant Committee. The equalised 
freight element was calculated on the basis of the average distance of the steel plants from 
the different destinations. Whenever the actual freight was less than the equalised freight 
that was collected, the producers were liable to pay the difference to the JPC. Similarly 
when the actual freight incurred was higher than the equalised freight element, the 
difference was payable by the JPC to the producers. The scheme was abolished with effect 
from January, 1992. The producers were however advised by the authorities to fix ex­
stockyard prices on the basis of either the actual freight or the freight element as existed 
prior to deregulation whichever was lower. As a result, while the freight disadvantage to the 
States or areas proximately located to the steel plants has been partially removed, the 
situation as it has emerged can hardly be described as complete deregulation. Be that as it 
may, now that three years of the partial abolition of freight equalisation has been completed, 
a study of the impact of the new system on the consumption and use of the various steel 
items in the different parts of the country, would in view of the Committee, be well worth 
undertaking. Consumers in the relatively proximat~ areas could claim that since the freight 
subsidy being offered to areas remote from the steel · plants is still borne by the producers 
and added to the prices that are charged, they are not getting the full benefit of deregulation. 
The position is admittedly anomolou~ and d~serves examination in some depth. 
Even if such an appraisal is not immediately feasible, it is in any event necessary to 
consider separately the consequences of high freight on mini-steel plants located in regions 
and areas away from the location of the main steel producers. The socially felt need which 
led to the encouragement of mini-steel plants was to disperse industrial production in nooks 
and corners of the country. While several of these plants are currently either sick or closed 
for a wide variety of reasons, the non-availability of steel items at reasonable prices has been 
one contributory factor for the lack of viability. The recommendations made by the 
Committee in its Fourth Report for restoring the mini-steel plants to health could be 
reiterated here. It might be considered whether, in addition to the existing array of relief and 
concessions, a special transport subsidy could not be declared for mini-steel plants located in 
backward regions, particularly the north-east sector, on a case-by-case basis. 
6.04 In the introductory paragraphs above, the Committee has referred to the challenge of 
ensuring adequate supply of iron ore to meet the demands of a fast ~xpanding steel industry. 
It is important that a careful appraisal is undertaken of the domestic availability of iron ore 
of different specifications over the next decade. The domestic production of iron ore is 

currently at around 58 million tons per annum, of which about 30 million tons are 
earmarked for export. But since domestic demand for the ore is projected to increase to 
roughly 66 million tons by 2001-02, even assuming exports to be pegged at present levels, 
overall output would have to go up close to 100 million tons per annum in the course of the 
next five years. The Committee has taken note of the official projections regarding 
additional raising of iron ore from existing non-captive mines in the Bihar-Orissa sector, 
from the mines under the charge of the National Mineral Development Corporation in 
Madhya Pradesh and from the captive mines maintained by the Steel Authority of India in 
Orissa. It has also taken into account the new explorations that are on the anvil by the 
NMDC and the SAIL. None of these projections however give ground for confidence that 
an increase in overall production of iron ore by something like 40 million tons is achievable 
in the course of the next few years. 
In order to reach the level of ore production called for, three alternative possibilities are 
worth examination: (a) a vastly expanded scale of investment in mining operations by the 
public sector units, including the SAIL and the NMDC, which would conceivably however 
require substantial additional budgetary allocations; (b) a drastic cut-back in exports from 
the present level of 30 million tons, thereby incurring loss in foreign exchange earnings; and 
(c) large-scale deployment of external capital into the iron ore mining sector. Alternative (c) 
is unlikely to materialise given the short time-frame. The choice therefore has to be between 
(a) and (b), or a combination of the two. If domestic production of iron ore · cannot be 
augmented to an adequate extent because of a constraint of resources, exports would need 
to be curtailed. It is in any case in the nation's interest that the emphasis remains on the 
export of fmished steel items rather than that of iron ore. The Committee 'would hope that 
whatever the decision or decisions, action is taken ahead of time so that the process of 
industrial growth is not held back because of non-availability of steel on account of non· 
availability of requisite quantities of iron ore. 
6.05 The Committee would urge a similar approach in appraising the availability of coking 
coal to feed the steel plants. It is somewhat unlikely that private investment will be 
forthcoming to the necessary extent to either augment the capacity of coal washeries ·or set 
up new washeries. The major burden of the task will devolve on the government, since most 
of the coal with high ash content is raised in the public sector mines. The choice therefore 
lies between either setting up more washeries or allocating funds for the exploration and 
development of mines with proven deposits of coal of high quality and low ash content. 
Given the fact that this country has the largest reserves of coal, it should not be difficult to 
shift ilie concentration of coal-raising from high ash content to low ash content terrains. 
If the NMDC and the SAIL cannot spare funds for the purpose, the Ministry of Steel, the 
Committee feels, should either on its own or in. conjunction with the Ministry of Coal, 
concentrate on such exploration and development activities. The outlay required for the 
purpose should come from additional appropriations in the budget of the Ministry or 
Miaistries. 
6.06 The availability of resources, there is no question, is a major stumbling block. The 
Committee is therefore compelled to revert in the present Report to the issue of 
disinvestment of public undertakings, in particular of the shares of the Steel Authority of 
India Limited, pursuant to the policy of liberalisation. According to data made available to 
the Committee, roughly 11 per cent of the paid-up equity of the SAIL have been disposed of 
in the course of the five phases of disinvestment undertaken since 1991-92. The total 
realisation from th~se ·rounds of disinvestment has worked to Rs. 1,023 crore. A large array 
of questions have been raised with respect to the mode of disposal of these shares and the 

lack of transparency in the modalities that were adopted. The Mid-term Review of the 
Economy, undertaken by the Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Research, has, 
through meticulous research , reached some tentative conclusions about the overall loss to 
the national exchequer because of the procedures followed in the disinvestments undertaken 
between 1991-92 and 1993-94. Admittedly, the conclusions arrived at in the IGIDR study are 
dependent on certain assumptions which may not be fully acceptable . Even so, it is worth 
taking note of the tentative findings in this paper, which suggest that, given the extent of 
under-valuation of the shares disposed of, the aggregate loss of revenue suffered by the 
SAIL from the disinvestments during the rounds of 1991-92, 1992-93 and 1993-94 would 
amount to nearly Rs. 1,030 crore. On the basis of this judgement, the shares would appear 
to have been sold at less than 50 per cent of their true worth . The Committee has reason to 
feel perturbed over such findings because there is little ground for assuming that the 
government intends to draw a curtain on similar disinvestment activities in the future. The 
budget for 1995-96 has announced a further disinvestment of public sector equity to the 
extent of Rs. 7,000 crore during the year, and the SAIL would conceivably be called upon to 
again part with a sizeable slice of its equities. Mistakes are a part of life's activities and if the 
government has incurred severe losses from certain past transactions, all that can be urged 
upon it is that these mistakes be rectified and not repeated in future operations. In order to 
draw the appropriate l~ssons from the experience of. the disinvestments since 1991-92, it is 
therefore necessary, the Committee feels, that the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
be invited to embark on an appraisal of the disinvestment of the SAIL shares so that the right 
lessons could be drawn therefrom. In this connection, the Committee would also like to be 
assured that the proposed floatation of Euro-issues by the SAIL, reportedly amounting to 350 
million dollars, should be done in such a manner that the shares are not under-valued 
compared to prevailing market quotations in the country. Given the comfortable foreign 
exchange position, the Committee is not altogether convinced of the necessity for such a 
floatation. But, whatever the underlying reasons for the decision, it is important to ensure 
that the shares are not under-priced. 
6.07 A number of other related matters deserve mention. The history of the recent 
rounds of modernisation of the Durgapur, Bokaro and Rourkela plants bears witness that 
delays encountered in the course of the implementation of renewal and restructuring lead to 
considerable escalation in cost. "The modernisation of the Indian Iron and Steel Company 
should not be afflicted by similar ptocastination . ..:Pte· overall cost of the rehabilitation 
package proposal placed by the Steel Authority of India before the Board of Industrial and 
Financial Reconstruction does not seem excessive when compared to the cost of the 
rehabilitation packages implemented in the case of the three Hindustan Steel units. The 
Board of Industrial and Financial Reconstruction, the Committee understands, has 
commissioned the Industrial Development Bank of India·· to make a further appraisal of the 
SAIL proposal and the IDBI in its turn has sought the advice of a ·well-known Consultancy 
finn. Should the appraisal at these various levels of the SAIL package prove to be 
satisfactory and promise a reasonably good rate of return, there would seem to be little 
point in delaying further action on the proposal to modernise the liSCO on the ground that 
the BIFR has still to offer its final view. One significant issue could centre on the reported 
requirement of budgetary ·funds, estimated by SAIL to amount to around Rs. 1,100 crore. 
As this amount would need to be provided over a period of five years, the annual budgetary 
burden would appear to be moderate when account is taken of the aggregate value of the 
additional steel to be produced from the renovated and modernised plant. The Committee 
would stress its view that a major proportion of the amount raised through the sale of Steel 

v 
Authority of India Llmlted shares in the open market should be channelled for purposes of 
rehabilitation of SAn. units In difficulty, such as the liSCO. The Committee would also hope 
that care would be taken to maintain the tempo of progress in the functioning of the 
Visakhapatnam Steel Plant and its continual renewal and modernisation. 
6.08 The Committee would like to append a few supplementary remarks with respect to 
the Vijayanagar Steel Limited in Karnataka and Neelachal Ispat Nigam Limited in Orissa. 
These were initially placed under the umbrella of the SAIL, but the respective State 
governments were persuaded to take them over before the plants c,ould be commissioned. It 
is however unlikely that the State governments would have the necessary resources to 
complete the on-going works and make the units viable for production ·of saleable steel 
items. The Steel Authority of India may currently consider these two projects as no longer 
its burden. From tlie point of view of the nation, however, the investment funds already 
sunk in the two projects would be wasted if these are not completed. The Committee would 
expect the Ministry of Steel, along with SAIL authorities, to extend a helping hand to the 
respective State governments and offer technical advice as well as financial accommodation so 
that the units could be nurtured to a state where they are able to attain commercial viability. 
It would also recommend that a similar exercise be under taken In respect of the Visvesveraya 
Iron and Steel Limited (VISL) in Karnataka. In this connection, the feasibility of using the 
left-over resources lying with the Steel Development Fund for rehabilitati.qg the just· 
mentioned units may be examined. A part of the SDF could also be deployed for reactivating 
some of the mini-steel and rerolling mills i.l the country. 
6.09 Finally, the Committee would like to reiterate the views expressed In its Twelfth 
Report on the functioning of the National Renewal Fund. From a perusal of the Ministry's 
Annual Report as well as of the Performance Budget for 1994-95, it is abundantly clear th~t 
the old malaise continues and the National Renewal Fund has hardly been utilised for 
purposes beyond that of meeting the requirements of the Voluntary Retirement Scheme. It 
is for consideration whether, since concrete schemes for re-training and re-deployment of 
workers, which were supposed to be an integral part of the NRF as originally envisaged, has 
failed to take ofT, its funds allocated to the Ministry of Steel could not be directly utilised for 
rmancing the renewal of a number of steel units, big and small. By proceeding in this manner, 
society would at least be able to safeguard the employment of thousands of workers, a task 
which the NRF, as at present deployed, has failed to accomplish. 
6.10 The Committee hopes that, in the light of the recommendations included in this 
Report, the Ministry of Steel would feel encouraged to re-cast its demands for grants as well 
as obtain the sanction of the Ministry of Finance for seeking additional appropriations. 
NEW DELHI: 
28th April, 1995. 
ASHOK MITRA 
CHAIRMAN, 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY. 

ANNEXURE 
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE 
XXXIII 
THIRTY· THIRD MEETING 
The Committee met at 10.30 a.m. on Wednesday, the 5th April, 1995 in Committee 
Room 'A', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ashok Mitra-Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Sanatan Bisi 
3. Shri Govind Ram Miri 
4. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mody 
5. Shri Raj Nath Singh 
6. Shri K.K. Veerappan 
7. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav 
8. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani 
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
10. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
11. Shri Balin Kuli 
12. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
13. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
14. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
15. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
16. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
17. Shri Manjay Lal 
18. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
19. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri G.K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri S.S. Rana, Under Secretary 
4. Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
1. Representatives of Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry 
1. Shri A.K. Rungta, President 
2. Shri Y.P. Srivastava, Secretary 
., 

II. Representatives of Confederation-of Indian Industry 
1. Shri Deepak Singh, Chairman (NR) 
2. Shri Rajive Kaw, Vice-President 
3. Shri Dilip Chenoy, Director 
4. Shrimati M. Roy; Sr. Director 
5. Shri S. Sen, Sr. Director 
2 • •••••• 
3 ••••••• 
4. The Committee, thereafter, heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned 
witnesses on the performance of industrial sector in general and Steel and Mines sectors in 
particular and the impact of recent budget proposals relating to Ministries of Industry, Steel 
and Mines on industrial and economic growth. The Committee directed the witnesses to 
send an updated note on the· various issues raised during the course of discussion. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
S. The Commi.Uee then adjourned at 1.30 p.m. to meet again at 10.30 a.m. on 6th 
April, 1995. 
•••••Relates to other matten. 

XXXIV 
TWRTY-FOURm MEETING 
The Committee met at 10.30 a.m. on Thursday, the 6th April, 1995 in Committee 
Room 'A', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ashok Mitra--Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Sanatan Bisi 
3. Shri Govind Ram Miri 
4. Shri Raj Nath Singh 
5. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav 
LOK SABRA 
6. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
7. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala 
8. Shri Balin Kuli 
9. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
10. Shri Vishveshwar Bhagat 
11. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
12. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
13. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
14. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
15. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
16. Shri Ramdew Ram 
17. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
18. Shri Satyanarayan Jatiya 
19. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
20. Shri Manjay Lal 
21. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
22. Shri P.G. Narayanan 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri G.K. Saksena,. Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri S.S. Rana, Under Secreta.ry 
4. Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
Representatives of AU India Trade Union Congress 
1. Shri A.B. Bardhan, General Secretary 
2. Shri B.D. Joshi, Secretary 

2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses on 1 
performance of industrial sector in general and Steel and Mines sectors in particular and 1 
impact of recent budget proposals relating to Ministries of Industry, Steel and Mines 
industrial and economic growth. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 11.45 a.m. to meet again at 2.30 p.m. on 
April, 1995. 

XXXV 
TWRTY-FIFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 2.30 p.m. on Friday, the 7th April, 1995 in Room No. 63, 
Parliament House, New Det!ti. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ashok Mitra-Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Sanatan Bisi 
3. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4. Shri Govind Ram Miri 
5. Shri Raj Nath Singh 
6. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav 
7. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala 
9. Shri Balin Kuli 
10. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
11. Shri Vishveshwar Bhagat 
12. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
13. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
14. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
15. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
16. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
17. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
18. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
19. Shri Satyanarayan Jatiya 
20. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
21. Shri Naval Kishore Rai 
22. Shri Manjay Lal 
23. Shri Puma Chandra Malik 
24. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
25. Shri P.G. Narayanan 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri G.K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri S.S. Rana, Under Secretary 
4. Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal. Committee Officer 

WITNESSES 
I. Representatives of Ministry of Steel 
(1) Dr. J.K. Bagchi, Secretary 
(2) Shri B.P. Mathur, Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser 
(3) Shri S. Nautiyal. Joint Secretary 
(4) Shri K. Kipgen, Joint Secretary 
(5) Shri R.t. Mittal. Development Commissioner, Iron & Steel 
(6) Smt. Li ika Majumdar Roychoudhury, Director 
(7) Shri M. .R. Nair, Chairman, Steel Authority of India Limited 
(8) Shri J. Mehra, C.M.D., Visakhapatnam Steel Plant 
(9) Shri A. Krishnamurthy, C.M.D., Kudremukh Iron Ore Co. Ltd. 
(10) Shri. S. Jayaraman, Director (Finance), National Mineral Development Corporation 
II. ••••• 
·2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the witnesses mentioned at S.No. I above 
in connection with the Demands for Grants (1995-96) relating to the Ministry of Steel. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
3. The Committee, then, adjourned at 5.40 p.m. 
•••••Relates to other matters. 

IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 5.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 27th April, 1995 in Room No. 63, 
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ashok Mitra-Chairman 
MEMBERS. 
RAJVA SABRA 
2. Shri Sanatan Bisi 
3. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4. Shri Govind Ram Miri 
5. Shri Nyodek Yonggam 
6. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani 
LOK SABRA 
7. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
8. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
9. Smt. Kesharbai Sonajirao Kshirsagar 
10. Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil 
11. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala 
12. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
13. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
14. Shri ·Mullappally Ramachandran 
15. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
16. Shri lJarish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
17. Smt. Sumitra Mahajan 
18. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri 
19. Shri S.N. Vekaria 
20. Shri Ramdew Ram 
21. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
22. Shri Manjay Lal 
23. Smt. Suseela Gopalan 
24. Shri Purna Chandra Malik 
25. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Satish Kum~r, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri- S.S. Rana, ·under Secretary 
3. Shri' Jagmohan ·sundriyal, Committee Officer 
2. On the suggestion of some members, the Committee decided to adjourn till next day. 
3. The Committee adjourned at 5.20 p.m. to meet again at 10.15 a.m. on Friday, the 
28th April, 1995. 
1? 

v 
FIFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 10.15 A.M. on Friday the 28th April, 1995 in Room No. 63, 
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ashok Mitra--Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Sanatan Bisi 
3. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4. Shri Govind Ram Miri 
5. Shri Nyodek Yonggam 
6. Maulana Habibur Rahman Norriani 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
8. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
9. Smt. Kesharbai Sonajirao Kshirsagar 
10. Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil 
11. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala 
12. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
13. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
14. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
15. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
16. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
17. Smt. Sumitra Mahajan 
18. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri 
19. Shri S.N. Vekaria 
20. Shri Ramdew Ram · 
21. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
22. Shri Manjay Lal 
23. Smt. Suseela Gopalan 
24. Shri Puma Chandra Malik 
25. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri O.K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri S.S. Rana, Under Secretary 
4. Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee considered the draft Fourteenth and Fifteenth Reports relating to 
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Ministries of Steel and Mines respectively and after 
some discussion adopted both the reports unanimously. 
3. The Committee decided to present both the reports on 8th May, 1995 to Parliament. 
14 

The Committee 'authorised the Chairman of the Committee and ~ lui Bhubaneshwar Kalita, 
M.P. to present the reports in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Mullapp ally Ramachandran and 
Smt. Suseela Gopalan, M.Ps. to lay a copy each of the repor ts on the Table of the Lok 
Sabha. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 10.45 a.m . 