            
  
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2015/ Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) 
 
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY FIRST REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON  264 TH   REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2015-16)  
 
 PERTAINING TO  
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES    
      
 (PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 22 ND  DECEMBER, 2015) 
( LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 22 ND  DECEMBER, 2015) 
271 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2015/ Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY FIRST REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON  247 TH   REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
ON 
 IMPLEMENTATION OF  INTEREST SUBSIDY 
ELEGIBILITY CERTIFICATE (ISEC) SCHEME  
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY FIRST REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON 264 TH    REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2015-16) 
 PERTAINING TO  
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES    
      
 (PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 22 ND  DECEMBER, 2015) 
( LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 22 ND  DECEMBER, 2015) 

 
CONTENTS 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …………………………………(i)  
 
2. INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………(ii) 
  
3. REPORT …………………………………………………………………….   
 
(i) CHAPTER-I 
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by 
the Ministry…………………………………………………………      
 
(ii) CHAPTER-II 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies………………………    
 
(iii) CHAPTER-III 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has 
either not accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry 
to review its replies…………………………………………………     
 
(iv) CHAPTER-IV 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the  
Ministry have not been received…………………………………        
 
 
 4. *MINUTES ……………………………………………………………………… 
                  
  
 __________________________________________________ ______________ 
 * To be appended at printing stage 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
1. Shri  K.C. Tyagi  _       Chairman  
2. Shri Ramdas Athawale 
3. Shri Narendra Budania  
4. Shri Vivek Gupta  
5. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas  
6. Shri T. K. Rangarajan 
7. Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
8. Shri Pramod Tiwari 
9.   Shri Bhupender Yadav  
10. Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
11. Shri Deepak  (Dev) Adhikari  
12. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer 
13. Shri Birendra Kumar Chaudhary 
14. Shri S. P. Muddahanume Gowda    
15. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque 
16. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
17. Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena 
18. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
19. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
20. Dr. (Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
21. Shri Mutthamsetti Srinivasa Rao 
22. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
23. Shri Konda Vishweshwar Reddy 
24. Shri Raj Kumar Saini 
25. Shri B. Senguttuvan  
26. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
27. Shri Y. V. Subbareddy 
28. Shri Rameshwar Teli 
29. Smt. Savitri Thakur 
30. Smt. Dev Varma (Moon Moon Sen) 
31. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
 Shri A.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
 Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
 Shri Jayanta Kumar Mallick, Joint Director 
 Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Deputy Director 
 
(i) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
  
  
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliame ntary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred 
Seventy First Report on Action Taken Note furnished  by the Ministry of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises on the recommendations contained  in the Committee’s Two Hundred 
Sixty Fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2015-16).  
 
2. I thank the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises for furnishing the 
Action Taken Note on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred 
Sixty Fourth Report. 
  
3. The Committee in its meeting held on 17 
th  December, 2015 considered and adopted 
the report. 
 
  
 
  
K.C. Tyagi 
                                               Chai rman 
                                                                                   
                Department -related Parliamentary  
                                                                                       Standing  Committee   on    Industry  
 
New Delhi 
17 
th  December, 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
REPORT 
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with  the Action Taken by the 
Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises on the recommendations contained in the 
Committee’s Two Hundred Sixty Fourth Report on Dema nds for Grants (2015-16)  
pertaining to the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. 
 
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises in respect of the recommendation s contained in the Report. These have 
been categorized as follows:  
 
Chapter –I   The recommendations/observations, which have bee n accepted by the 
Ministry. 
 
 The Committee is pleased to observe that the Minis try has accepted its 
recommendations as mentioned in the Chapter – I of the Report. 
 
Chapter -II   The recommendations/observations which the Commit tee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies. 
 
 In respect of these recommendations the Committee is convinced with the logic and 
explanations advanced by the Ministry and therefore  do not want to pursue them for the 
present. 
 
Chapter -III    The recommendations/observations in respect of w hich the Committee has 
either not accepted replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its reply. 
 
 The Committee expresses its concern over the non-i mplementation of 
recommendations contained in Chapter – III and desi res that the Ministry should furnish 
logical explanations therefor. 
 
Chapter -IV    The recommendations/observations in respect of wh ich final replies of the 
Ministry have not been received. 
 
 In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either 
furnished the interim replies or couched its langua ge in vague terms like noted for 
compliance/guidance, therefore, the Committee desir es that the Ministry should furnish 
Action Taken Notes in respects of recommendations c ategorized in Chapter-IV in detail and 
to the point, as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee. 
 
3. The details of the ATR are being discussed in the succeeding pages. 
 
 
 
 
 

-2- 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The  Committee  notes  that  80%  of  trainees  of  courses  run  by  the Ministry  
or its subordinate  organisations  were  from short  dur ation programme.  In such a 
situation employability and recognition of such shor t term courses, assumes importance. 
The Committee also wonders if these courses have been aligned with the National Skill 
Development framework notified in 2013. 
 
 (Para 47) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
KVIC has initiated steps for aligning the skill development p rogrammes run by 
KVIC with the National Skill Development framework. Act ion for entering into suitable 
MoU in this regard is under progress. 
Coir Board has taken initiatives to align the coir technol ogy courses offered by it with the 
National Skill Development Framework. 
In respect of Skill Development Programmes being undertaken  by other organisations 
under the Ministry, all out efforts would be made to align  the courses with the National 
Skill Development framework notified in 2013. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
In view of prevailing inflation, the Committee is inclined to r ecommend to 
Ministry to consider the demand, particularly when the  Ministry itself is proposing an 
upward revision of investment limits for MSME sector. 
 (Para 60) 
Action Taken  
 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

-3- 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do es not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The  Committee  observes  that  since  January,  20 14,  the  number  and account of 
settlement has seen sudden spurt.  The Committee is ala rmed at growing cases of NPAs 
in MSE sector.  Forcing MLIs to invoke guarantees in lar ger number.   The Committee 
may also be informed about those Fixed Deposits whose gua rantee is not invoked by 
MLIs. 
 
 
(Para 58) 
Action Taken 
 
  
Ministry of MSME is keeping a close watch on the rising NPAs and outgoes on 
account of invoked guarantees. Also, there has been request to infuse the necessary amount 
of funds towards the corpus of CGTMSE. As on 31.05.201 5 the fixed deposits (i.e. total 
corpus plus interest and other incomes from corpus in vestment) stand at Rs. 4790.29 
Crore.  So far guarantees worth Rs. 1577.46 crore hav e been invoked. Remaining is the 
amount of Fixed Deposits whose guarantee is not invoked by MLIs. This is boosted further 
by service and guarantee fees collected which stand at Rs. 2497.21 Crore. 
 
  Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee also takes note of demand of raising the c apital investment limit 
under CLCSS from Rs. 1 crore to 2 crores.  There were  also suggestions that second 
hand plant, machineries or equipment too should be allo wed under the CLCSS Scheme. 
There was also suggestion that the scheme should be des igned on the pattern of 
Technology Upgradation Fund (TUF) meant for   textile s ector.   The   Committee   
seeks Ministry’s   view on the issues.  The Committee  found that not many 
nationalized Banks had become the nodal agencies under  the Scheme.  It recommends 
that Ministry should involve more and more banks in the  Scheme. The Ministry 
alongwith Banks should join the efforts to publisize the sche me among targeted groups 
and should also sensitize local industry associations to av ail Schemes.  
 (Para 69)    
 
 
 

-4- 
Action Taken  
CLCSS is a popular scheme of the Ministry, hence th ere is always a demand of 
raising the Capital Investment limit from Rs.1 crore to 2 crore. Though recommendation of  
the  Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) on raising  the Capital Investment  limit from 
Rs.1 crore to 2 crore and subsidy limit to 30 lakh ( max.15% of 2cr.) with enhancement of 
extra 5% subsidy to NE region, the same was not pro ceeded further due to constraint of 
additional fund requirements. 
 
The objective of the CLCSS scheme is to facilitate technology up-gradation for 
induction of well established and improved technolo gies in the specified sub-sectors 
/products approved under the scheme.  Since it is very difficult to calculate the residual life 
and  appraise the performance of second hand plant , machinery  and equipment  in a vast 
mosaic of MSEs, it is apprehended  that the very ob jective of the scheme will be defeated 
in case  such machinery under perform.  Hence, it i s advisable not to allow second hand 
plant, machineries or equipment in the scheme. The suggestion to redesign the Scheme on 
the pattern of Technology Up-gradation Fund (TUF) m eant for textile sector by Ministry 
of Textile at present can only be undertaken after independent evaluation of the present 
scheme by an Evaluation agency to assess the effica cy of the scheme and to ascertain 
fulfilment of the intended purpose of the scheme. P rior to restructuring the scheme, the 
critical parameters and constraints in implementing  the scheme are to be studied. Instead 
of focusing to a specific sector like textiles with  specific/alternate options of subsidy 
pattern , the present structure of the scheme  shou ld continue with the thrust of focusing 
on infusing  new and upgraded technology  to make MSME a vibran t sector.  Moreover, to 
ensure greater participation of MSEs, the subsidy cap may be enhanced . 
  
  Earlier there were only two nodal banks i.e. SIDB I & NABARD implementing the 
scheme. At present 12 nodal banks are implementing CLCSS, recently Indian Bank & 
Corporation Bank have been nominated. This ministry  is trying to nominate more and 
more banks especially nationalized banks as nodal b ank for better implementation of 
scheme. 
 
CLCSS being one of the flagship scheme of the Ministry, efforts are on to popularise 
the scheme in less participating states of NER. 
 
  Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee takes note of the Secretary’s submiss ion regarding  scheme and 
wonders if allocation was made without any proposal from  the Ministry. With Ministry 
having no plans or project to use the fund, such surpr ise allocation obviously led to delay. 
The Committee know the details of structures of these thre e schemes and are the 
beneficiaries identified. The Committee also cautions that th e Ministry must make use of 
funds efficiently. 
 (Para 105) 
 

-5- 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
The Ministry has notified a Scheme called ASPIRE (A  Scheme for Promoting  
Innovation,  Rural  Industry  and  Entrepreneurship).   The   objectives  of   the  
 
 
scheme are to set up business incubators so that th e eligible youth could be adequately 
incubated in various skills and provided the opport unity to set up their own business 
enterprises; to set up technology based incubators for incubation of innovative 
ideas/technology in the Agro-based industry; and Fu nd of Funds to establish Technology 
Centre Networks to promote Innovation, Entrepreneur ship and Agro-Industry.  The Fund 
of Funds will be created under SIDBI with a corpus of Rs. 60 crore and targets those 
knowledge initiatives which need support and nurtur ing to succeed in developing 
technology and business enterprise in the areas of innovation, entrepreneurship, forward 
and backward linkages etc. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee feels that the previous experience ha s told us that the Cluster based 
approach is essentially against the basic character of MSME  sector. The Units operate 
individually and independently under individual ownership o r limited partnership.   To 
ask MSME units to form Cluster will only delay the process as it involves land issues 
and would require administrative and statutory clearance s which may vary from State to 
State. 
 
 (Para 118) 
Action Taken 
 
 
Cluster based development of Traditional Industries and Villa ge Industries will 
ensure that they are more sustainable because of the stre ngthening of clusters.  This is the 
major objective of SFURTI.  Cluster development is also one model of development. 
In the 16 th  SSC held on 10.8.2015, 14 clusters (KVIC-9 & Coir-5) in volving an 
amount of Rs.2884.24 lakh worth of project cost and Rs. 2244.66 lakh as total assistance 
(including 50% of Soft Intervention, Technical Agency Cost and Implementing Agency 
Cost and 43% of Hard Intervention) under SFURTI has be en approved.  13 clusters 
(KVIC-10 & coir-3) in respect of Detailed Study Report (DS R) with total projects worth 
Rs.2530.70 lakh was approved in the 16 th  SSC meeting held on 10.8.2015. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 The Committee suggests that the possibility must be explored to use coir fibre in 
the production of paper and packaging material. 
 
 
(Para 132) 

-6- 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
The Research and Development wing of Coir Board has  already developed 
handmade paper out of coir, by which file covers, c arry bags, etc. could be produced.  
Similarly attempts were made by the wing for making packaging materials using coir.  The 
Board in collaboration with Indian Institute of Pac kaging (IIP), Mumbai, could develop 
economic packaging materials out of coir polymer co mposite boards replacing plywood, 
such as for sheathing of wooden crates for heavy eq uipments and machine tools, for pallet 
docks and for top and bottom closure for fibre board drums. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

-7- 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which th e Committee has either not 
accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its replies 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
Instead of assisting the State Government, the Mini stry has devised its own 
Schemes and implements them through State agencies like K VIBs and DICs.   The 
Committee finds that though State Governments are involved  in consultative process 
at apex level, and execution level, the Central and Sta te agencies do not converge 
institutionally.  For example in the KVIC act, there is  no institutional arrangement for 
coordination between KVIC, State Directorate and KVIBs  to execute KVIC programmes.   
The Committee observes that with greater emphasis of cooperative federalism and 
setting up of Niti Ayog as consultative forum between Centr e and State 
Governments, the role of the Ministry may be suitably recast with respect of formulation 
and implementation of the various programmes. 
 
 (Para 3)   
 
Action Taken  
 
The KVIC Rules 32 sub-rule 3 clearly defines the relations hip between KVIC and 
the State KVI Board for implementation of Khadi and Village Industries Programme.  
 
Under the Prime Minister’s Employment Generation Programme  Scheme, State 
KVIB’s and DICs have been included in the implementa tion of the programme.  KVIC is 
the nodal agency for implementation of the programme at the national level.  At the State 
level, the State/Divisional Offices of KVIC, KVIB and DICs ar e involved in the 
implementation of the programme.  The budget allocation is divided among the three 
agencies in the ratio of 30:30:40 for KVIC, KVIB and DIC s respectively.  70% of the 
Budget allocation as well as the scheme targets are implemented by the State agencies. 
Coir Board has been implementing its schemes like Coir Udy ami Yojana (CUY), 
Scheme of Fund for Regeneration of Traditional Industries (SFURTI), etc. in close co-
ordination with state governments and governmental agencies.  In important aspects of the 
implementation process, including selection of beneficiaries , disbursement of assistance, 
training etc., the Board seeks the assistance of the State  government and governmental 
agencies.  Under the Market Development Assistance Schem e, the states are offered a part 
of the discount amount borne by them for sale of coir pr oducts to consumers at reduced 
prices. 
Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Rural Industrialization (MGIRI) is  functioning with the 
vision of boosting and injecting innovation, quality and pro ductivity to make the rural 
products globally competitive and also to enable rural industries gets its due market share.   

-8- 
It is also conducting various awareness campaigns t hrough various channel partners at 
State level. 
Scheme of Fund for Regeneration of Traditional Indu stries (SFURTI) scheme has 
been launched to spread the outreach and to establi sh competence in cluster development, 
project management and facilitation of market acces s for Traditional/Village Industries. 
Khadi & Village Industries Commission (KVIC) shall be the Nodal Agency (NA) for KVI 
clusters and Coir Board shall be the NA for Coir ba sed clusters.  National Institute for 
Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises (NIMSME), Hyderab ad, National Institute of 
Entrepreneurship and Small Business Development (NI ESBUD), NOIDA and Indian 
Institute of Entrepreneurship (IIE), Guwahati have also been assigned the status of NA.  
The selection of cluster is done jointly by the NA’s and State Governments. 
A Scheme for Promotion of Innovation, Rural Industr y and Entrepreneurship 
(ASPIRE) scheme was launched to set up a network of  technology centres and to set up 
incubation centres to accelerate entrepreneurship a nd also to promote start-ups for 
innovation and entrepreneurship in agro-industry.  The most important component is to set 
up Livelihood Business Incubators (LBI) under Natio nal Small Industries Corporation 
(NSIC), KVIC or Coir Board or any other Institution /agency of GoI/State Government.  
Private partner institutions and entities can also set up livelihood incubation centres under 
PPP mode with the aforesaid institutions, viz., NSI C, KVIC or Coir Board or any other 
Institution/agency of GoI/State Government.  The ne xt important component is to set up 
Technology Business Incubator (TBI) at twin levels,  i.e. supporting existing incubation 
centres operated currently under different Ministri es and Departments of the Government 
of India or Institutions including National / Regio nal level institutions of GoI / State 
Governments to set up such centre dedicated to incu bation and enterprise creation in the 
area of Agro based Industries and also new incubati on centres to be set up by eligible 
private institutions including Industry Association s, along with the Academic Institutions, 
R&D laboratories, Universities, Government entities  and Technology Parks. Region wise, 
Crop wise, Product wise, Process wise and Industry Vertical wise Incubation Centres will 
be promoted. 
Therefore, Ministry of MSME, ARI Division ensures t hat the schemes are 
implemented in coordination with the State Govts/ag encies in line with the spirit of 
cooperative federation. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 The Ministry tends to deny the need for any further  coordination with State 
Agencies.  The Committee believes that in absence o f institutional coordination, 
Ministry’s programmes have under performed. For exa mple, despite of passage of 
almost ten years, there are still 175 Districts in the country, that do not have even 100 
PMEGP units. The numbers of SFURTI clusters have be en reduced from 800 to 71 
for 12 th  Plan.  On the one hand there is low achievement an d on the other hand the 
budgetary allocation remains under utilized for lar ger part of financial year.  The 
Committee repeatedly found these trends disconcerti ng. The Committee apprehends 
if such under performance of Schemes and under util ization of funds has ever been 
discussed in National MSME Board where States are also represented.  

-9- 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee had raised  serious  concern  over  u nder-utilisation  of funds by 
the Ministry in its Planned schemes.   Despite repeated o bservation by the Committee 
regarding issues of under-utilisation of funds year after  year in its Reports and its 
Action Taken Reports, its concerns have been ignored. Sa me pleas of procedural delays 
in devolution of funds, approvals by Banks etc. have b een taken by the Ministry. 
Notwithstanding Government’s pronouncements towards Ea se of Doing Business, it 
appears that these procedural complexities remain insu rmountable in the Ministry. How 
else can one justify 58% utilization of funds till the end o f third quarter of Financial 
Year and then sudden jump in expenditure in the fourth q uarter?   The Committee has 
repeatedly recommended that the expenditure on the plann ed schemes should not be 
crowded in the last quarter only. Yet, no heed has been g iven to Committee’s 
recommendations. 
 (Para 16)     
Action Taken  
 
Most of the Plan Schemes of the Ministry are demand driv en schemes and the 
expenditure is incurred as per actual requirements.  Furthe r, the Ministry of Finance has 
prescribed limits of expenditure for each quarter, which i s enforced through the Financial 
Advisor.  Therefore, even on crowding of expenditure in the last quarter, the prescribed 
ceiling of 33% cannot be exceeded. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 The Committee finds such explanation patently unac ceptable.  If  Ministry is so 
convinced of lack of demand, why does it seek great er allocation every successive 
year.  The Committee is of the impression that Sche mes are either too complex or 
Ministry has not been able to reach out to targeted group.      
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee finds that year after year, the actual exp enditure in last quarter has 
far exceeded the limit of 33% and the Committee has high lighted the same in its earlier 
Reports also. This year too, till 31 st December, 2014, by Ministry’s own admission it 
could spent only 55% of  the  allocation with DC- MSME  util izing    less    than  50%.  If  
the  Ministry  was  not  able  to  utilize remaining   45%   in   next   three   months,   the   
money   should   have   been surrendered at RE stage . Ministry’s plea that expenditures 
could not be made due to enforcement of Model Code of Co nduct would have been 
acceptable, had it  not  been  a  yearly  phenomenon.   Similarly, Ministry  knew  that  
the duration  of last financial   year 2014-15  was shorte r  one, yet it demanded 
higher funds and its allocations in BE 2014-15 were higher than the actual utilization of 
2012-13.   The Government has been generous in allocat ions to M/o MSME regardless 
of its ability to spend efficiently. 
 (Para 18)    

 
-10- 
Action Taken  
 
As mentioned in the preceding paragraph, the Minist ry of Finance has prescribed 
limits of expenditure for each quarter.  Therefore,  the expenditure cannot be crowded in 
the last quarter, where the ceiling of expenditure is 33% of BE.  Cycle of expenditure got 
affected on account of some schemes where expenditu re takes place in bulk viz., Credit 
Guarantee Scheme, credit Linked Capital Subsidy Sch eme, PMEGP.  Higher allocations 
were specifically proposed by the Ministry for cert ain schemes like PMEGP, CGS, 
CLCSS, KRDP and MDA, considering that the allocatio ns under these schemes were 
inadequate.  However, due to general Elections to t he Lok Sabha and assembly elections 
in some states and with the Model Code of Conduct c oming into operation, thereby 
affecting the cycle of expenditure. 
 
  Further Recommendation/Observation  
  By Ministry’s explanation, it appears that the Mini stry was not able to utilize 
remaining 45% of funds due to Finance Ministry’s li mit.  The Committee is 
disappointed by persistent lack of financial discip line despite repeated caution by the 
Committee.  The Ministry continues to deny and ignore these cautions. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee is apprehensive to accept the argumen t. The Committee also finds it 
strange that as per the Ministry’s own Annual Report , the Banks have been meeting the 
lending targets for MSE sector as prescribed by the RB I. Yet, banks are not coming 
forward to support Ministry’s schemes for MSME sector despite budgetary support.  
Obviously, the  answer  lies  in  the structure  of  s chemes  and  process  of  screening  
by  the  Ministry  and  its agencies, that needs to be addr essed. 
(Para 20)     
 
Action Taken  
 
The Ministry continuously monitors the performance of th e scheduled commercial Banks 
(SCBs) in terms of the recommendations of the PM’s Task  Force on MSMEs.  The 
performance of the SCB is also monitored by the Stand ing Advisory Committee (SAC) of 
the Reserve Bank of India and the Department related  Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Industry through its meetings wherein CMDs of major ba nks are invited and directed 
to the achieve the targets prescribed.  As a result, the credit flow to the MSE sector by 
SCBs indicates a steady growth from Rs. 687210.74 cr ore in March 2013 to Rs. 
850469.32 crore in March 2014, rising further to Rs. 964578.44 crore in March 2015. 
 
The Credit Guarantee Scheme has had a positive impact o n the economy in terms of 
turnover, exports and employment of MSEs.  The contin uous increasing trend in the 
number of guarantees approved and in loan amount exte nded by MLIs under the scheme 
proves that the scheme is successful.   The cumulative  Guarantee  approved  has increased  
 

-11- 
 
from 1419807 in March 2014 to 1817245 in March 2015 e xtending a cumulative loan 
amount of Rs. 70026.28 crore in March 2014 to Rs. 9044 5.90 crore in March 2015. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 The reply does not address the concern of the Comm ittee that Banks are not 
coming forward to support Ministry’s Schemes despite Budgetary support and credit 
guarantee.  It is indicated in the under utilizatio n of budget funds for larger part of 
financial year.  The concern remains, if Banks are meeting targets of MSME lending, 
then why are they not lending to govt. Schemes for MSME like PMEGP, CLCSS and 
ISEC.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
The Committee wonders if the Banks get the applicat ion only towards the  last  
months  of  the  Financial  Year  or  they  take  p rotracted  time  to scrutinize the 
application. The Committee will not be inclined to recommend to Banks to lower their 
standards of scrutiny. The applications  are  proce ssed by the agencies assigned by the 
Ministry. Whether these agencies scrutinize the app lications diligently? For example, 
in case of PMEGP, the applications are processed by  DLTFC. Majority of the 
applications forwarded by DLTFC are rejected by Ban ks. The Committee wonders if any 
purpose is served by DLTFC as the applications forw arded by them are to be rejected 
on merit. The Committee had asked the Ministry to f urnish the information if the 100 
days  deadline  prescribed  by  it  to  settle  an  application,  was  at  all  being followed. 
The Committee too had recommended that the DLTFC sh ould meet at least once in two 
months to clear the cases. The Ministry too has lau nched E tracking system. Yet, it was 
not in position to identify the bottlenecks except for  pointing  at  Banks  for  delay.  
For  example,  in  case  of  PMEGP  the Committee h as repeatedly asked that the 
projects should be sanctioned throughout the year. Yet, this year, within four days from 
28th February to 4th March, projects worth Rs 400 crores were disbursed.  
 
(Para 21) 
Action Taken  
 
The applications are scrutinized by KVIC, KVIB and DIC to ascertain fulfilment of 
scheme criteria.  Applications of PMEGP scheme afte r recommendation of the proposal 
by DLTFC, are forwarded to banks after completion o f formalities regularly throughout 
the year.  Applications recommended by DLTFC are ge nerally 3 times of the targets 
assigned to the districts. However, banks have thei r own standards of scrutiny and 1/3 
rd  of 
the applications are considered for sanction by banks.  
As per Ministry’s directives issued in 2014-15, 100  days deadline was prescribed to 
settle the applications within time bound manner. 
CEO, KVIC requested all CMDs of Public sector Banks  to set a time limit of 
maximum 30 days for sanctioning of PMEGP loan by ba nks and another 30 days for 
disbursement of loans so that the entire process of sanctioning and disbursement of the  

-12- 
 
project is over in not more than 100 days from the date of receipt of applications from the 
beneficiary. 
As per the Evaluation Study Report for extension of  PMEGP from XI th  to XII th  Plan 
conducted in 2013-14, loans are sanctioned within 30 days in respect of 33% beneficiaries, 
within 60 days in respect of 25% of the beneficiari es and more than 120 days in respect of 
20% of the beneficiaries.  
Directions have already been issued for regular con vening of DLTFC meetings. E-
tracking of PMEGP proposals has been introduced and  it is operational for last 3-4 years. 
The said system is being used to get feedback of th e scheme. Online submission of 
application and tracking of the same is already in place. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee may be informed about the rational of  forwarding applications 
thrice the target.  The Committee find the situatio n unacceptable. The Committee is 
of the view that KVIC should prescribe a standard c heck list of documents and 
proforma of project report as a template for submis sion and examination of 
applications within the specified time-frame.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee express its serious reservation over the fact that 
the announcement   
made i n  B u d g e t   Speech  are  not  operational  within  the Financial Year nor is 
any budget provision is made during the entire year. The Committee is of the view 
that such announcement should be made after detailed  c onsultation  between  
Ministries.    The Co mmi t t ee  i s  also o f   the opinion tha t Budget announcements 
should be treated as assurances to House and should be complied within 3 months of 
passage of Budget. 
 (Para 35) 
Action Taken  
 
Genesis of the ASPIRE (A Scheme for Promotion of Innova tion, Rural Industry and 
Entrepreneurship) scheme lies in the budget announcement of  the Finance Minister for 
2014-15 budget in the Parliament.  The consultation with Stak e Holders and formulation 
of the scheme took time.  The approval of the competent au thority was obtained during 
March, 2015.  Since, the delay was expected and the bud get allocation was reduced from 
Rs. 200.00 crore to Rs. 10.00 crore at RE Stage.  Henc e, only Rs. 5.00 crore could be 
utilized during 2014-15.  As the scheme has become opera tional, it is expected the amount 
of Rs. 200.00 crore earmarked in the next FY 2015-16 would be fully utilized. 
 
 
 

-13- 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
The Committee reiterates its reservation over preva iling practice where Budget 
announcements are not operationalized in same finan cial year.  The allocation is 
drastically reduced at R.E. stage.  In the case of ASPIRE, the allocation was reduced 
from Rs. 200 crores in BE  2014-15 to Rs. 10 crores  in RE with Rs. 5 crores actually 
being spent.  The Committee wonders how was Rs. 190  crores saving used.  Such 
situation represents less than adequate management of finance.  Ideally the 
consultation and structure of the Scheme must be se ttled before allocation and 
allocation must also include the cost of implementi ng the Scheme as revenue 
expenditure.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee infers from the interaction during ev idence that 
the Ministry of 
MSME was perhaps not involved in designing the Schemes.  The Committee would 
like to be apprised with the details of the structure and  source of investment of the 
Institutions and their mandate. 
 
 (Para 36) 
Action Taken  
 
 
RBI vide its letter dated August 26, 2014 had allocated Rs .10000 crore to SIDBI 
towards the VC fund for MSME Sector with a tenure of 3 y ears.  As there was a mismatch 
between the tenure of funds allocated and its usage/deploymen ts (i.e. investment in 
venture capital funds has tenure of around 10 – 12 year s), the matter was taken up by 
SIDBI as also DFS with RBI.   
A series of meetings have been conducted with regard to o perationlisation of the 
Fund. Based on the meeting taken by MOS (Finance) on  January 23, 2015, it was decided 
that Rs.10,000 crore may be treated as notional target to be achieved over a period of time. 
A smaller allocation of Rs.2,000 crore would suffice and th e balance allocation could 
follow in later years based on the annual review of utilization of fund. RBI was then 
requested to extend the tenure of Rs.2,000 crore from 3 years to 7 years of the India 
Opportunities Venture Fund (IOVF) provided in 2012-13.  RBI vide its letter dated 
February 10, 2015 communicated extension of tenure of India Opportunities Venture Fund 
(IOVF) of Rs.2000 crore, allocated to SIDBI as per the announcement made by Finance 
Minister in the budget for FY 2012-13, to 7 years from 3  years. Thus, requisite funds of 7 
years tenure are now available with SIDBI for the VC fund for MSMEs. 
As decided in the meeting held on April 22, 2015 with MoS  (Finance), SIDBI has 
identified experts in the field, for constituting a Screening Co mmittee, from among the 
persons   nominated   by  IIMs /  IITs /  ISB /  IVCA  etc.  in  this  respect.    Out   of   the  
 

-14- 
nominations received a panel of 12 experts have bee n shortlisted.   The Fund is expected 
to be operational shortly. 
As regards, Rs.10000 crore Fund, allocated by RBI f or 3 years, SIDBI has 
formulated a Scheme for extending direct soft loan assistance to MSMEs. The Scheme 
was forwarded to RBI. RBI while approving the propo sal had prescribed some guidelines 
which were difficult to comply with. In order to re solve the issues, meeting was recently 
held with Dy. Governor, RBI. Based on SIDBI’s repre sentation, RBI has agreed to 
reconsider its stipulations.  Formal approval on ou r letter dated July 06, 2015 from RBI in 
this regard is awaited.  On receipt of approval, this may be operationalised by SIDBI. 
The Ministry had detailed consultations with differ ent Ministries and Departments 
namely, Ministries of Food Processing Industries, T extiles, Science &Technology, Rural 
Development, Bio-Technology, Agriculture and Depart ment of Electronics and 
Information Technology to operationalize a Rs.200 c rore Fund for Technology Centre 
Network, Innovation, Entrepreneurship and Agro Indu stries. ASPIRE Scheme for 
promotion of innovation, entrepreneurship and Agro- Industry  has been launched by 
Hon’ble Minister (MSME) on 16.03.2015. A nationwide  "District level Incubation and 
Accelerator Programme" would be taken up for incuba tion of new ideas and providing 
necessary support for accelerating entrepreneurship 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
The reply reaffirms Committee’s impression regardin g inadequate financial 
management.  These Schemes are sample cases of lack  of detailed planning and 
identifications of targets/objectives and setting the instructions of the Schemes before 
seeking allocation only to be surrendered later for  the want of requisite approval.  
The Committee recommends that there is urgent need to improve these aspects for 
efficient use of resources.   
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee notes that earlier P.M.’s Task Force on MSME 
sector had given 
extensive recommendations on the issue of institutional fina nce to MSME sector.  
Majority of its recommendations have been accepted and were in various stages of 
implementation. The Task Force had identified nodal ag ency and prescribed time lines.  
A Monitoring  Committee  too  was  set up to oversee th e implementation.   Yet, another 
Committee to examine the financial architecture for MSME s ector will only obfuscate the 
issue and may undermine the recommendations of P.M’s T ask Force. The Committee 
would like to know the difference in terms of referen ce of two Committees and major 
difference in the recommendations. The Committee also re commends that statutory 
sanctity to the recommendations of such Committee be g iven and such 
recommendations  should be notified under the provision s of MSMED Act, 2006 and 
laid before the Parliament. 
 (Para 38) 
 

-15- 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
The terms of reference of the Committee on financia l architecture of the MSME 
sector are as follows: 
 Assessing the current structure of flow of finance  to MSME sector- delivery 
channels, products and services and policy environment. 
 Comparison with financial architecture in other de veloped and emerging economies 
for strong support to MSMEs. 
 
 Analysing the gap areas and suggesting measures fo r addressing the same with 
regard to the following to bring about significant improvement in India’s position in ease 
of starting business and ease of doing business indices for speedy growth of the sector. 
 
•    Role and scope of financial intermediaries- existing as well as   proposed 
• Financial products and services 
• Incentives and risk mitigation/ credit enhancement measures;   and 
• Medium term and long term policy prescriptions and directions. 
 
The Committee’s recommendations stress on creating a financial architecture for the 
MSME sector that would use technology driven platfo rms to drive inclusion in financing 
of the large number of MSMEs which do not have acce ss to credit. This will facilitate 
realization of the Make in India goal as articulate d by the Prime Minister and be in 
consonance with the Government’s Digital India mission. 
 
On the other hand, the report of PM’s Task Force on  MSME has made 
recommendations covering various areas related to M SME Sector including (i) credit, (ii) 
marketing, (iii) labour, (iv) rehabilitation and ex it policy, (v) infrastructure, technology 
and skill development, (vi) taxation, and special m easures for North-Eastern Region and 
Jammu & Kashmir.   
 
The scope of work of Sub-Group on Credit under PM’s Task Force on MSME is:   
 
(a) To examine the issues impacting adequate and timely  credit flow to the 
Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs) and the Unorganized sector;  
 
(b) To consider various suggestions made by the MSE Ass ociations, including 
earmarking of a separate sub-target under the prior ity sector lending, setting up of a Fund 
for the Unorganized Sector, setting up of SME Exchange, etc.  
(c) To consider the recommendations of the various Comm ittees/Working 
Groups relating to credit and sickness;  
 
(d) To recommend measures to improve the credit flow to  the MSE/ 
Unorganized sector; and  
 

-16- 
 
(e)    To recommend delivery mechanism for credit to MSE/unorganized sector 
 
So, the PM’s Task Force had a focus on unorganized sector whereas the Committee 
on Financial architecture in general deals with the  overall MSME Sector. 
Recommendations of both i.e. PM’s Task Force and Ka math Committee would facilitate 
the financing to the large number of MSMEs which do not have access to credit. 
 
The recommendations are advisory in nature and do n ot have statutory sanction 
under the MSMED Act 2006. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee finds the reply of Ministry as factua lly incorrect.  In the 
Chapter IV on the recommendations of the Task Force , the recommendation under 
5.2 deals extensively with the architecture for fin ancing Small and Micro Enterprises 
which could have covered Medium Enterprises as well.  Going by the mandate of two 
bodies, the Committee feels that there was absolute ly no need for another 
Committee. The recommendations of PMs Task Force, i f implemented, could have 
addressed the issues considered by new body. When t he majority of 
recommendations of the Task Force under implementat ion, another set of 
recommendations from a  new Committee will only dil ute the recommendation of 
P.M’s Task Force at the peril of MSE sector.  The C ommittee is of the opinion that 
there should be synergy between the two Committees objectives and the new 
Committee should not dilute the work done by P.M. Task Force for MSE sector.  The 
Committee demands a status note on the implementati on of recommendation of 
P.M’s Task Force and that of Kamath Committee.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee finds that clubbing of six components  of NMCP 
with CLCSS 
under the Scheme does not have any rational.   It wi ll be difficult to monitor the 
performance of individual component and overall Scheme . Therefore allocation for all 
the six components of NMCP and CLCSS should be indicated  distinctively. 
(Para 63)   
 
Action Taken  
 
The Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS) is covered u nder the  broad 
head “Quality of Technology Support Institutions & Programm e” along with Six 
component of NMCP, but it is an individual scheme and reporting  of the scheme is also 
being done individually.  Also, monitoring of performance of the scheme is reported 
separately and distinctively. 
 
 
 

-17- 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
The Committee recommends that two distinct planned allocations must be 
shown separately in Budget for better parliamentary  scrutiny of their performance 
and utilization of planned allocation.  The Ministr y has not given any convincing 
rational for covering two distinct schemes under si ngle  broad Head.  Considering 
less than optional utilization of funds, the Minist ry has not replied to Committee’s 
concern over monitoring of six components of N.M.C. P. The Ministry may convey 
Committee’s view to Ministry of Finance. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee notes that the Government has been em phasizing 
on manufacturing 
sector. National Manufacturing Competitiveness Programm es is designed to enhance 
competitiveness among MSME sector. There are six compo nents of the programme being 
run by Development Commissioner- MSME.   Rs 88 crores w ere allocated for this 
important scheme for 2014-15. Only 25% of funds were s pent   during the year, without 
much tangible measurable outcome. 
(Para 66)   
 
Action Taken  
 
The budgeted allocation for NMCP scheme could not be util ised fully because the 
programme is basically demand driven and there was lac k of demand.  
 
Implementation   of  the  programme, involves  proactive  participation  of  ME s, 
formation  of  mini  clusters,  engagement  of  consultants  line  in  Lean  
Manufacturing Scheme and Design Clinic Scheme etc .. This is a t ime consuming 
process . The funds could not be released until the process was over. 
 
It is proposed to modify the guidelines of the schemes u nder NMCP whereby 
Industry Associations, being major stakeholders, would be involved in  implementation 
of the schemes, thereby making it more effective.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee expresses serious reservation over state  of affairs. The 
Committee   feels   that   an   important   initiative   t o   make   MSME   sector 
competitive  in  a  liberalized     market,  cannot  be   allowed  to  fail  due  to 
Ministry’s  inability  to assess the demand.  Failure to g enerate demand for years also 
raises questions about methods of preparing Ministry’s an nual estimates. The Ministry 
cannot seek larger funds without commensurate demand. The Committee has found that 
the outreach of the Ministry is in any case restricted  vis-a-vis the scope of the sector 
in the country. The annual targets are too modest.  Whatev er  targets  are  fixed are  

- 1 8 -  
 
not met due for 
the want of demand r a i se s serious questions about Minist ry’s effort 
to reach out to targeted beneficiaries. The Ministry mus t review the structure of its 
scheme if it is not able to generate demand for years.    By the very character of the 
sector, MS MEs are spread and scattered geographically  i n  small pockets. To expect 
them to form mini cluster will only complicate their surviv al further as the cluster may 
require land issues and other administrative and statutory  clearances. In any case, the 
initiatives prescribed under the six components of NMCP  can be implemented on the 
individual unit instead of cluster. 
Para 68) 
Action Taken  
 
To make the sector more competitive and also to increase the demand for various 
components of the Scheme, the Ministry conducts awareness programmes, national level 
workshops etc. Further, steps are being taken to upscale in dividual components of the 
scheme.  The Lean Manufacturing component of the NMCP  Scheme has already been up 
scaled and steps to upscale the design clinic component of the Scheme are being initiated.  
Individual components of the scheme, barring the Lean Man ufacturing Competitiveness 
component, are being implemented on an individual basis.  In Lean Manufacturing 
Competitiveness, mini clusters comprising 6 to 10 units are fo rmed, where Lean 
experts/Lean Manufacturing consultants are deployed and L M techniques interventions 
takes place in individual units for a period of 18 months o r completion of the work. The 
issue of land and other administrative and statutory clearances are non-existent.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation (on para 66 & 68)  
 
The Committee takes cognizance of the reply that th ere is low demand among 
MSMEs for the Ministry’s programme to enhance compe titiveness in this 
marginalized sector.  The Ministry has not been abl e to create the architecture for 
this Scheme and generate willingness among MSMEs fo r opting the Ministry’s 
programme.  And despite persistent lack of demand, the Ministry continues to seek 
higher allocation in successive years for the schem e though the actual expenditure 
was just 25% of allocation.  The states of affairs,  re-affirms Committee’s view that 
programmes for MSME sector can succeed only with an  institutional partnership 
with States and not by the Central Ministry alone.  The Committee recommends that 
its views may be forwarded to Ministry of Finance for relevant action for 2016-17. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
The Committee noted that the Scheme was announced two years back with Rs. 
2200 crores.  Yet only Rs. 3.60 crores spent after tw o years on pre- project activities.  
This year implementation of 3-4 Technology Centres ou t of 12 identified are likely to 
start.  The Committee express its concern over tardy pac e of skill development and 
technology Upgradation project. This is yet another e xample of Budget announcement 
being made without institutional mechanism being on place to  execute the projects 
expeditiously.  As a result the Budget announcement is devoid of corresponding 
budgetary support. 
(Para 85) 
 

-19- 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
Finance Minister in his budget speech (2013-14) pro posed to provide with World 
Bank assistance a sum of Rs. 2200 crore during XII Plan to set up 15 new Technology 
Centres.  
In pursuance of the Finance Minister’s announcement , Ministry of MSME 
formulated Scheme/Programme, circulated it to Plann ing commission/Ministry of Finance 
and other concerned Ministries/Departments for comments, before putting-up the proposal 
to Expenditure Finance Committee for consideration.   The up-gradation of existing 
Technology Centres, was also included in the Progra mme which was finally cleared by 
EFC in its meeting held on 07.02.2014 and approved by CCEA in its meeting held on 
25.03.2014.  The actual expenditure during the year  2013-14, on pre-project activities was 
Rs.  0.36 crore only.   
In B.E. 2014-15, a provision of Rs. 150.00 crore was made for this programme.  
Ernst & Young (a Consultants’ firm) has been engage d as Project Management Unit 
(PMU) for designing the project. Since, due to long  time taken in designing the project 
and undertaking the pre-project activities followin g World Bank norms including signing 
the Loan Agreement with World Bank, the actual expe nditure on this programme, during 
2014-15 is Rs. 5.03 crore, which is mainly on Professional/Consultancy services.  
During the current financial year (2015-16), a provision of Rs. 100.00 crore has been 
made for TCSP.  It is expected that there will be v isible progress in the implementation of 
the Programme, and the targets fixed for 2015-16 will be achieved. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The reply only re-affirms Committee’s assertion tha t Budget proposals are 
made without adequate pre-project planning, survey and activity and approvals of 
appropriate authority.  Annual B.E. remains blocked  without any tangible progress.  
The Committee is surprised that Ministry does not f ind anything amiss in such state 
of affairs.  It is business as usual which does not  require any expediency even if 
Budget allocations remain unspent in successive yea rs.  The Committee requires that 
its observation may be shared with Ministry of Finance.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
Considering   that   these   Schemes   are   pendin g   for   approval   
from competent 
authority, the Committee considers it as a comment on Minis try’s inability  to  defend  
the  Scheme  designed  by  it  and  secure  approval  of  competent  authority.    It  is  
a  reflection  on  the  Ministry  that  approval  is pen ding for years and still being 
included in annual Demands for Grants of the Ministry. 
 
 (Para 102) 
 

-20- 
 
Action Taken  
 
Due to lack of clarity and clear vision in KVIC abo ut the purpose and scope of the 
schemes and inadequate groundwork/study along with the slow pace of expenditure under 
the existing components of VI grant which were prop osed to be used for formation of the 
new schemes of DISK  (Development of Infrastructure and Skills in KVI S ector), SPOKE  
(Scheme for Promotion of Khadi as an Exclusive Heri tage and Green product) and 
PROVIDE  (Promotion of Village Industries and Development o f Weak KVI Institution) 
was posing difficulty in preparation of SFC Memos f or appraisal in respect of these 
schemes.  Accordingly, it has been decided not to p ursue creation of these new schemes 
and continue to the release funds under the existin g Budgetary Heads/Schemes of VI 
grant, Khadi (S&T) and VI (S&T).  VI grant has been  approved by the competent 
authority for its continuation in the remaining per iod of the 12 
th  Five Year Plan and 
proposal for continuation of existing Khadi (S&T) and VI (S&T) schemes is under process 
for obtaining the approval of the competent authori ty.  As regards MPDA, EFC meeting 
for its approval has been held on 14.8.2015 under t he chairmanship of Secretary 
(Expenditure). 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 
By the Ministry’s own admission such important Sche mes for KVI sector are 
devised without clarity of vision about objective a nd scope and adequate ground 
work.  Despite that it was recommended by the Minis try for further approval by 
competent authority and allocations were made for s uccessive years.  The 
Committee’s views may be shared with Ministry of Finance.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The  Committee  finds that despite  reduction  of f unds from  Rs. 
1418 crores  at  
BE  (2014-15)  to  Rs.  1100  crores  at  RE  (2014- 15).  The  actual utilization till 
13.03.2015 was only Rs. 641.59 crores.  However, in reply to subsequent query, the 
Ministry informed that there were about 58000 project san ctioned by the Banks 
amounting to Rs. 1238 crores of margin money were pen ding for disbursal.  Were the 
Committee to believe that remaining Rs. 600 crores will be  used in remaining 15 days 
of financial year.   If yes, it will be despite Secretary’s  assertion that not more than 33% 
of allocation could be spent in one Quarter. It will also  be despite Committee’s several 
recommendations   against c r o w d i n g  o f  e x p e n d i t u r e    to wards t h e  e n d  
o f  financial year?  The Committee would like to know ho w such crowding could happen 
despite Ministry’s instructions to disburse the money within 100 days of receiving the 
applications. The Committee too had recommended that DLTFC  should meet at least 
once in two months to screen the pending applications thoroughly. The Committee also 
distressed to note that against an employment target of 8,2 4,852, only 2 lakh employment 
could be generated till  13.03.2015.   The Committee feels  that Ministry must re-design  

- 2 1 -  
 
the 
procedure to salvage the  objective  of  the  flagship  scheme.    Considering t ha t  
58000 projects were still pending with Banks for disbur sal, the Committee wonders 
why cases were referred to banks so late and without su ch screening at the level of 
DLTFC.  During the interaction, the Committee asked the  Secretary to furnish the 
number of cases that have been settled within prescr ibed 100 days.  Looking at the low 
success rate of the cases cleared by DLTFC, the Commit tee feels that in order to 
streamline  the procedure  and reduce the time, Ministry  must do  away  with the 
DLTFCs  and  like other  Schemes, the applicant should d irectly approach the Banks.  
Another solution could be to shift the Scheme from margin  money subsidy to interest 
subvention scheme, since the investment limit in PMEGP is fix ed. The Committee 
must also be informed as to how many districts have been  able to meet 100 PMEGP 
project targets. 
  
(Para 110) 
Action Taken  
 
The actual performance during 2014-15 in respect of loa n sanctioned and 
disbursement by banks involving Margin Money is as follows: 
 
Period 
upto 
Loan sanctioned 
by banks involving 
Margin Money (Rs. in 
crore) 
Margin 
Money disbursed 
by banks(Rs. in 
crore) 
Number 
of units set up  
Employment 
generated 
28 Feb 
2015 
1165.80 602.68 24577  189189 
31 Mar 
2015 
1436.88 847.66 36677  265352 
30 Apr 
2015 
1699.13 1122.54 48168  357502 
 
Rs.400.00 crore has not been disbursed in two weeks b ut in two months during 
March and April 2015.  Competent authority has approved  extension of one month upto 
30.04.2015 for disbursement of Margin Money subsidy in respect of projects approved 
upto 31.03.2015. 
 
Directions have already given for meeting of DLTFC at lea st once in two months to 
screen the pending applications thoroughly. 
 
Since banks have their own standard of scrutiny, delay oc curs, however with regular 
monitoring of the scheme, in accordance with the directions a lready given to process 
PMEGP applications on e-tracking system could help in avoiding  the delay.  As per report 
received from field offices more than 45 districts have co mpleted target of 100 PMEGP 
projects. 
 
 

-22- 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
Even if figures given by the Ministry is considered , the Margin Money of more 
than Rs. 500 crores out of allocation of Rs. 1100 c rores in RE stage was disbursed in 
last two months.  Does it not violate the Ministry of Finance norms of 33% cap per 
quarter?  The Committee also recognize the reply gi ven by Ministry to a Parliament 
question. According to which since beginning of thi s Scheme in 2008 till August, 
2015, there were 175 Districts, in the country that  have not achieved an aggregate of 
100 PMEGP projects in last 7 years.  In 2014-15, on ly 360 Districts in the country 
could set up only 50 out of targeted 100 PMEGP proj ects.  Regarding the structure 
of this Scheme and its performance, the Committee i n its meeting held at Mysore on 
5
th  June, 2015 had given specific suggestions to remov e bottlenecks in disbursal of 
money under this Scheme.  However, no reply has been furnished by the Ministry. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee noted that the year after year, the a llocations meant 
for North 
Eastern Region have remained almost unspent. As per the  Budgetary norms the 10% of 
the Planned allocation is allocated to NE Region which if unspent goes into a non 
lapsable pool of fund. The basic intention of such ini tiative was to persuade Ministries to 
undertake developmental works in the region. Given the ri ch tradition of crafts and 
ecology, the NE region is best suited for scaling up the  micro, small and medium 
enterprises. Yet, in 2013-14, Rs 333 crores remained u nspent. Last year, 2014-15 the 
BE allocation of Rs 333 crores was reduced  to Rs 221  crores. This year, 2015-16, the 
BE is further reduced to Rs 202 crores. The Committee wo uld like to judge the 
performance of Ministry in NE region in context of the com mitment made in the 
Budget speech that priority will be given for mainstre aming the North Eastern Region in 
nations economy. 
 
 (Para 134) 
 
Action Taken  
 
Out of total BE 2013-14 of Rs.1842 crore, funds of Rs .220.20 crore were earmarked 
for NER in respect of ARI Sector of the Ministry.  Out of allocation for NER, funds of 
Rs.127.12 crore were utilized during 2013-14.  Out of to tal BE 2014-15 of Rs.2042 crore, 
funds of Rs.251.09 crore were earmarked for NER.  O ut of allocation for NER, funds of 
Rs.101.40 crore were utilized during 2014-15.   The sav ings was due to inadequate 
response to KVI programmes in NE Region having geogra phical constraints, 
topographical conditions, poor communication and infrastructure facilities, etc.     
 
This Ministry has made allocation in accordance with guidelines  issued by the then 
Planning (Now NITI Aayog)  under NER in the ratio of  respectively. 
 
 
 

-23- 
 
 
As far as O/o DC(MSME) is concerned total budget ou tlay for the year 2014-15 was 
Rs.1058.00 crore and funds allocated under NER comp onent was Rs.58.00 crore and 
corresponding (provisional) expenditure up to 31.03 .2015 is Rs. 53.18 crore that is 
91.68%. 
 
Less numbers of proposals are generally received from North Eastern Region (NER). 
However, efforts are being made to enhance the participation of entrepreneurs of NER. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Ministry’s response shows that its efforts are not aligned with 
Government’s commitment.  While mainstreaming the N orth Eastern Region in 
Nations economy, the Ministry is not able to find o ut enough proposals from the 
employment starved region which has traditional ski lls.  The Committee notes the 
trend  that  Ministry  is  not  able to propagate its Schemes among targeted group.  If  
Ministry is not sure of demand for its Schemes, it must seek funds accordingly. The 
Committee’s observation may be shared with Ministry  of Finance for necessary 
action.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
Compared to vastness of the sector, the annual targ ets of 
Ministry’s schemes are too 
modest. The prospective beneficiary units are not aware  of existence of Ministry’s 
Schemes. In absence of awareness these schemes do no t percolate to grass root level 
where these small units exist. The outreach of the Mini stry is limited as it does not have 
country-wide institutional network and has to rely on State a gencies. In order to raise the 
awareness of Ministry’s Schemes  and  expand  their  ou treach,  the  Ministry  should  
provide  on  its Website the link to the detailed structure of respective Schemes, the 
details of resource agencies at District level, Proforma a pplication and the check-list of 
documents required for making application. The Committee feels that these steps will 
improve performance of the Ministry and its Schemes and ca n be done with this year 
given Government’s emphasis on E-governance. 
 
 (Para 136) 
Action Taken  
 
Guidelines of all major schemes being implemented by the M inistry are already on 
Ministry’s website.  In addition, awareness campaigns, vend or development programmes 
and marketing campaigns are organised with a view to pr opagate the schemes of the 
Ministry.  This is being popularised by MSME-DIs, expert a gencies/organisations in 
association with local MSME associations. Besides this, a dvertisements are released in 
leading newspapers and through radio jingles. 
 
 

-24- 
 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 If the Ministry’s initiatives are not able to elic it enough responses to utilize its 
funds, then obviously Ministry needs to take right steps to do better. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
In fact the primary responsibility for promotion an d development of MSMEs lies 
with State Government.   The Government of India ca n only supplement the efforts of 
the State Governments.  The role of the Ministry of  MSME is mainly to assist the States 
in their efforts to promote growth and development of MSMEs.  However, instead of 
assisting the State Government, the Ministry has de vised its own Schemes and 
implements them through State agencies  like  KVIBs   and  DICs.     Often  there  is  
overlap  of  schemes  or duplication of programmes of Center and State Governments. 
The Committee finds that though State Governments a re involved in consultative process 
at  apex  level, and  execution  level, the  Centra l  and  State  agencies  do  not  converge  
institutionally.  Financial institutions like Banks  have their own schemes for MSME 
sector.   While the Ministry has often argued that the delay in implementing  Schemes 
are mainly due to financial  institutions  and Bank s. The  Committee  found  that  
Banks  have  been  meeting  their  annual  credit l ending targets to MSMEs.  The 
Ministry has to look  into the  causes as why do no t Banks come forward to support 
Ministry’s Schemes for which there is Budget alloca tion. 
 (Para 137) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
From the implementation point of view, the schemes of the Ministry could be 
broadly placed in two groups.  Those schemes which are being directly implemented by 
the Ministry and those schemes which are implemente d through banks, like the Credit 
Guarantee Scheme and PMEGP etc. 
 
For those schemes which are being implemented by th e Ministry/designated 
agencies, the role of the banks is limited.  For th e schemes being implemented through 
banks, the banks use their norms like viability, fe asibility aspects etc. for advancing loans 
to the MSEs.  Incidentally, the performance of such  schemes is quite good, owing to 
continuous monitoring of the performance of the Sch eduled commercial Banks by the 
Ministry in terms of the recommendations of the PM’ s Task Force on MSMEs.  As a 
result, the credit flow to the MSE sector by SCBs i ndicates a steady growth from Rs. 
687210.74 crore in March 2013 to Rs. 850469.32 cror e in March 2014, rising further to 
Rs. 964578.44 crore in March 2015. 
 
 

-25- 
 
 
The Credit Guarantee Scheme has had a positive impact on  the economy in terms of 
turnover, exports and employment of MSEs.  The continuo us increasing trend in the 
number of guarantees approved and in loan amount ext ended by MLIs under the scheme 
proves that the scheme is successful.  The cumulative Guarantee approved has increased 
from 1419807 in March 2014 to 1817245 in March 2015 e xtending a cumulative loan 
amount of Rs. 70026.28 crore in March 2014 to Rs. 9044 5.90 crore in March 2015. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Ministry has not replied on Committee’s observation regarding duplication 
of Schemes of Centre and States and about the reaso ns for Banks not coming 
forward to support Ministry’s Schemes and lack of i nstitutional convergence 
between Ministry and State Govt. Agencies in implem enting its Schemes.  Ministry 
has also not replied on the lack of consultative pr ocess due to irregular meetings of 
MSME Board.   
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The  Committee  observes  that  uptil  2006,  the  Small  Sca le  Industries sector was 
being regulated under Industries (Development Regulation) Ac t, 1951. However, with the 
passage of 73rd Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1992, the small and Khadi & Cottage 
Industries were placed in Eleventh Schedule under the mand ate of Panchayati  Raj 
Institutions.     As   per   the   Article 243 G,  the  St ate  Legislature  has  the legislative 
power over Panchayati Raj Institutions.  As such, the Centr al Government   has   limited   
role   in   the subjects pertaining the Development of Small a nd Cottage Industries and 
Khadi,   with   Industries   (Development   &   Regulation)   Act,   1951   being superseded 
by the 73rd Constitution Amendment.  This is also corroborate d in the  constricted  
outreach  of  the  schemes  of  Ministry  of  MSME.  Despite generous annual allocations, 
the annual targets of Ministry’s schemes are too modest vis a vis massive scope and the 
Ministry is not able to utilize the allocations efficiently. 
  
(Para 138) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
The details of physical and financial targets fixed and ach ievements made during the 
Twelfth Plan period in respect of ARI Sector of the Ministry  are given in Annexures I & 
II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
-26- 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Ministry has not responded to the constitutiona l position as elaborated in 
the Committee’s observation.  The Committee while d rawing its inference was 
cognizant of Ministry’s reply wherein under-utiliza tion of funds was attributed to 
lack of demand.  The Committee also noted that the trend where despite reduction in 
R.E., the Ministry has been able to meet its target .  The Committee, therefore, safely 
infers that the targets set by the Ministry have be en rather modest.  Yet, going by 
the achievement in first three years of 12 
th  Plan, the Committee apprehends whether 
the Ministry will be able to meet its modest targets.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

-27- 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which fi nal replies of the Ministry have 
not been received 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
Another related aspect is targets.  The Committee f inds the targets of schemes 
rather moderate vis-à-vis the scope of MSMEs in the c ountry.  The Committee 
wonders that despite cut in RE and further under ut ilization, the Ministry is able to meet 
majority of its targets.  Obviously either target was kep t modest or the demands for 
allocation were inflated. 
 
 (Para 22) 
Action Taken 
 
 
The targets as well as allocation of funds are kept based  on the 
achievements/performance of the schemes in the previous years. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Ministry in its reply does not adequately addr ess the observation made by 
the Committee.  The Committee reiterates its observ ation and seek elaborate 
explanation.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
On  being  asked  whether  the  Ministry’s  schemes  w ere  reaching  to remaining 
unregistered and unorganized sector, the Committee was in formed in a written reply that 
the Ministry has not done any survey whether its Scheme s are reaching to unorganized 
sector nor has it taken steps so far to facilitate doing bus iness for the unorganized sector. 
(Para 26) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
As Chairman of the Inter-Ministerial Committee on Manufactu ring, Shri Madhav 
Lal, the then Secretary of MSME had pointed out the lacunae i n the laws that do not 
distinguish between a big enterprise and a small enterpris e when it comes to compliance, 
the result being a burden on the small enterprise whic h discourages them from registering 
themselves, thereby forcing them to function in such a ma ssive manner in the informal 
sector.  In order to find a solution to this problem, the M inistry has launched the 
programme of Udyog Aadhar for universal registration. 
 

-28- 
 Further Recommendation/Observation  
 The Ministry may provide details of the Udyog Adha r programme and how will 
it ensure that Ministry’s Schemes reach the unorganized sector. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee takes serious note of the situation.   Considering the Ministry’s 
admission that its schemes are mostly targeted to Registe red Units, and that only a 
miniscule minority of MSMEs is registered, the Committee find s the situation 
unacceptable. The MSMED Act, 2006 does not make it obli gatory  upon  micro  
enterprises  to  register.  In  excluding  unorganized s ector, the Ministry has gone against 
the statuary provisions of the Act in respect of registrati on. Unorganised sector is at the 
margins of even marginalized MSME sector.  The Ministry  should do a comprehensive 
survey if its Schemes are reaching to unregistered  mic ro  enterprises  who essentially 
seek ease of doing business. The Ministry has highligh ted involvement of multiple 
Ministries and State governments for facilitating conducive b usiness environment. The 
Ministry has conveniently confined itself to the role o f advocacy.  However, the 
MSMED Act provides for National MSME Board with represent ation from all the 
relevant Ministries and the State Governments.  The  M inistry  has  not  informed  that  
this  issue  was  ever discussed  or  likely to be disc ussed  in future, in the National 
Board  so  that a comprehensive   actionable  national  policy  on  “Ease  of  Doing  
Business” particularly for the unorganized unregiste red sector,  could be evolved. 
(Para 29) 
 
Action Taken:  
 
Unorganised sectors have been deriving benefits in the fo rm of positive externalities 
from the schemes, but could not be formally documented .  In order to find a solution to 
this problem, the Ministry has launched the programme o f Udyog Aadhar for universal 
registration after discussion in the National Board of MSME in its 12 th  meeting in July 
2015.  The issue of involvement of multiple Ministries and State Governments in 
rendering statutory clearances was also discussed with the  State Governments in the 11 th  
meeting of the National Board of MSME, but this would be po ssible after taking all the 
States on board for a meaningful discussion on evolving a w orkable Single Window 
Clearance Scheme. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 
The Committee may be informed of details of Udyog A dhar Programme. 
Whether such a data base ascertain if Govt. Schemes  are reaching to unorganized 
sector. Whether the Ministry has prepared any discu ssion paper on the facilitating 
business in unorganized sector, based on the 11 th  meeting of National MSME Board, 
for the discussion with other Ministries and State Govts.  What actionable steps have 
been taken by the Ministry on the discussion in the  meeting of the National MSME 
Board?  
 

-29- 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The   Committee   has   taken   cognizance   that   the   Government   has launched 
the MUDRA Bank as a refinancing Bank for micro finance  institutions to facilitate micro 
finance upto Rs 10 lakhs.  As  implied  from  the inter actions with the Secretary, M/o 
MSME, the Ministry of MSME was perhaps not involved in des igning  this  Scheme.  
This  does raise an important issue of mandate of the Ministry. The Ministry may provide 
the details of the structure and source of investment of the institution and its mandate. 
 
 (Para 31)  
Action Taken  
 
Mudra Bank stands for Micro Units Development Refinanc e Agency (MUDRA) 
which was launched on 08.04.2015 to benefit small entrepre neurs. This will also act as a 
regulator for 'Micro-Finance Institutions (MFIs)’. Since small entrepreneurs are businesses 
which are often cut off from banking system because of lim ited branch presence, Mudra 
Bank will partner with local coordinators and provide financ e to "Last Mile Financiers" of 
small/micro businesses. The Bank is being set up with a corp us of Rs 20,000 crore and a 
credit guarantee fund of Rs 3,000 crore. The bank will cater to 5.77 crore small business 
units that are spread all across India who currently find it difficult to access credit from the 
regular banking system.  The Prime Minister has said that M UDRA scheme is aimed at 
“funding the unfunded”. He said that the small entrepren eurs of India are used to 
exploitation at the hands of money lenders so far, but MUDR A will instill a new 
confidence in them that the country is ready to support the m in their efforts that are 
contributing so heavily to the task of nation building. It is in deed true that Ministry of 
MSME was not involved in designing this Scheme. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 
The Committee may be apprised of MUDRA’s State-wise  performance so far 
against annual target.   The Committee would like t o know the details of refinance 
business model. This will make credit more costly c ompared to Bank finance.  How 
does the Govt. propose to cap the cost of funds to MSME sector.  Ministry may also 
inform the source of investment in this institution.   
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The  Committee  considers  that  MSMED  Act  provision  of  security payment 
within 45 days have statutory backup.  The Ministry must respond as to why the 
statutory  provisions  of Industrial  Facilitation  Cou ncil  (IFC) could not fulfill its 
objectives and that but had to bring new mechanism in t erms of Trade Receivable 
Discounting Scheme (TReD). The Committee apprehends t hat the new scheme may be 
prejudicial to MSE units.   The Committee also noted that pr eventing ration trade 
discounting are very high  and  may  lead  these  units  into  debit   trap.  The   Committee   

-30- 
 
recommends  that interest rate for discounting of receivable, could be ke pt at minimal, 
similar to capital  goods  industry to help the MSMEs to sec ure the rightful payment.  
(Para 33) 
Action Taken  
 
In order to solve the problem of delayed payment to MSM Es, the Reserve Bank of 
India (RBI) has come out with the guidelines for setting up  and operating the Trade 
Receivables Discounting System  (TReDS) .   The scheme is for setting up and operating 
the institutional mechanism to facilitate the financing of tra de receivables of micro, small 
and medium enterprises (MSMEs) from corporate and oth er buyers, including government 
departments and public sector undertakings (PSUs) through  multiple financiers. The 
intention is to facilitate Electronic Bill Factoring Exchang es in the country, which could 
electronically accept and auction MSME bills so that MSMEs cou ld be paid promptly inter 
alia benefitted from the credit related problems. Ministry of Finance is looking after the 
Scheme and Ministry of MSME has not been consulted in dev ising this Scheme. We may 
agree with the Departmentally related Parliamentary Standing Committee’s view that the 
interest rate for discounting of receivables be kept at minimum.  
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 
The Ministry has not informed the Committee about t he status of Industrial 
Facilitation Councils (IFCs) as provided in the Act .  The Committee requires the 
Ministry to obtain inputs from Ministry of Finance regarding status and structure of 
TReDS and the interest rates for discounting of rec eivables and furnish the same to 
this Committee.  
Recommendation/Observation  
Regarding the constraints in respect of Rs 10,000 crore  fund for start ups as 
declared in Budget speech 2014-15, the Committee recomme nds that the Ministry to 
take up the issue with RBI for appropriate redressal. The Committee takes it seriously that 
such announcements are made without consultation betwe en Ministries and still various 
Ministries are giving inputs. 
 (Para 34) 
Action Taken  
 
 
There was no scope for Ministry of MSME taking any issu e with the RBI since this 
Ministry was not involved in devising the Scheme at any level. 
 
 
 
 

 
-31- 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry must obt ain the status note on 
the allocation of Rs. 10,000/- crores from the Mini stry of Finance, RBI and the 
proposed nodal agency to implement the Scheme and i ts structure.  The Ministry 
should furnish the same to the Committee for further detailed examination.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee therefore recommends that the Ministr y must 
survey that its 
Schemes must reach the largely unorganized micro sec tor even as it proposes to 
increase the investment limit. 
 (Para 41) 
Action Taken  
 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for future compliance. 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee may be informed of action taken so f ar on its recommendation.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee recommends that the steps taken in respect  of comprehensive 
bankruptcy code may be formulated within three months o f passing of the Budget. 
(Para 44) 
 
 Action Taken 
 
 
The Ministry has notified a ‘Framework for Revival and Rehabilitation of MSMEs 
on 29.5.2015, in exercise of the powers conferred unde r Section 9 of the MSMED Act, 
2006.  Under this framework, any enterprise can seek  revival and rehabilitation benefits 
through a Committee constituted by the banks with represe ntatives from State 
Governments, experts, regional or zonal head of the ban k and the officer in charge of 
MSME credit department of the bank.  A Committee may ex plore various options to 
resolve the stress in the account.  The intention is to arrive at an early and feasible 
solution to preserve the economic value of the underly ing asset as well as the lender’s 
loans and also to allow the enterprise to continue with its  business.  The options under 
Corrective Action Plan (CAP) by the Committee may include ; (i) rectification – regularise 
the account so that the account does not slip into the non -performing asset (NPA) 
category, (ii) Restructuring – restructuring the accou nt if it is prima facie viable and the 
borrower is not a wilful defaulter, and (iii) recovery – when none of the options at (i) and 
(ii) above are seen as not feasible. 

 
-32- 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee may be apprised of the structure, pr ocedure and performance 
of the framework so far. What is the extent of stre ssed accounts and how many 
MSMEs have benefited from this Scheme.  Whether Sta te Government and Banks 
are agreeable to such framework and whether it has the approval of RBI. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee sees it as yet another example of mak ing a Budget announcement 
without consulting the relevant Ministries and Stakeholders. T he M/o MSME is not aware 
of the status and future of its Skill Development Program mes, in the wake of Finance 
Minister’s Budget announcement. However, in view of the indifferent performance of 
Ministry’s Skill Development Programme, the Committee is incli ned to recommend that 
these programmes may be made part of the overall Nation al Skill Development Mission 
and assets/institution  may be transferred  accordingly.     The Committee is also of the 
view that the Ministry should request the CAG to conduct Performance Audits under 
Audit Regulations, 2007 ( Chapter 7) of the CAG act, 19 71,  on the Skill 
Development Programmes being run by tool Rooms/Technology   Centres and National  
Level Entrepreneurship Development Institutes. 
 (Para 49) 
Action Taken  
 
Skill Development Programmes of the Ministry are part of the o verall targets set for 
the National Skill Development Mission.  Performance audit is being conducted by CAG 
empanelled auditors for all activities including Skill Developme nt Programmes being run 
by Tool Rooms/Technology Centres.  In respect of the oth er Institutes the CAG would be 
requested accordingly. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee had specifically asked for Performan ce Audit as provided in 
Chapter 7 of the Audit Regulaltions, 2007. The Mini stry may share the outcome of 
the Performance Audit of Tool Rooms/Technical Centre. 
  
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee is dismayed that after committing Plan outl ay of Rs. 800 crores for 
12th Plan for such important Scheme, the approval is render ed invalid on purely 
administrative issues.  Another Cabinet Note for an other Scheme is under circulation 
for inter-Ministerial consultation. The Committee finds it to be an illustration of attitude 
towards the MSME sector. 
 (Para 51) 

 
-33- 
 
Action Taken  
 
After the change in Government, the National Innovation C ouncil has ceased to 
exist and since the scheme was driven by that body, oper ationalization of the Scheme got 
delayed.  Presently, discussions are going on with vari ous stakeholders to sort out issues 
in order to operationalize the Scheme. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee is dismayed at state of affairs wher e important Plan/Schemes 
with huge outlays are stopped with change in Govt.  While modifications/changes in 
schemes could have been done, but to stop an import ant scheme, just because of 
change in govt. is unacceptable.  The Committee is of the view that Govt. is a 
continuous and permanent institution.  The Committe e may be apprised of progress 
made on the new Cabinet note.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
The  Committee   noted  that  as  per  the  Outcome    Budget  till  31 st 
December, 2014, only about 60000 trainees were trai ned with Rs. 46 crores. Remaining 
40000 trainees were trained in next two months.  Wh ile Committee finds  serious  under-
utilization  of  fund  under  the  Scheme,  the  in tegrity  of figures as provided by the 
Ministry is doubtful. Despite drastic reduction in funds at RE stage the targets have not 
been revised. 
(Para 73) 
Action Taken  
 
The training targets were fixed at the beginning of  the financial year, taking into 
account the allocation made at the BE stage.  Even though the allocation was subsequently 
reduced at the RE stage, the targets already set we re not revised, since the courses had 
already commenced. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 In BE 2013-14 with Rs. 117 crore, the target was t o train 1 lakh trainees.  
Eventually, 1.75 lakh were trained with same amount .  In 2014-15 allocation, Rs. 116 
crores was reduced to Rs. 77 crores.  Rs. 46 crores could be spent till December, 2014 
with 60,000 trainees trained against the target of 1.37 lakh.  However, by February, 
2015 the number grew to 1 lakh in two months. Again st targeted 5000 training 
programmes, 3400 training programmes were completed.  The Committee would like 
to be informed about the institutions that impart s uch training and what is their 
annual enrolment capacity.  The Ministry should monitor regularly, by whom? 
 
 

-34- 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee finds it intriguing that while alloca tion was drastically reduced  
in  RE and utilization was only Rs 9 crores till the end o f III Quarter, yet achievement has 
been more than half the annual target. Despite such in credible  achievement  figures  the  
allocation  this  year  has  been  further pruned  to  o nly  Rs  3  crores.  This sums up the 
credence the  Government attaches to the performance under the scheme. The Committee 
finds the integrity of achievement figures doubtful or the  demands inflated. This has 
been borne out in the drastic reduction in BE 2015-16. 
 (Para 78) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
The allocation for 2015-16 has been kept at Rs. 3.00 c rore as compared to the 
allocation made in the previous year, since the activities r elating to EDP/ESDP/MDP, 
being conducted by the MSME – Development Institutes have b een shifted to Tool 
Rooms.  The allocations for Tool Rooms have accordingly been enhanced for this 
purpose. 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee may be informed of the reason for shi fting activities relating to 
EDP/ESDP/MDP from Development Institute to Tool Roo ms.  What will be the 
mandate of Development Institutes now?  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
The Committee considers that no purpose is served if t hese courses lack 
employability.  Ministry’s reply is silent over e m p l o y a b i l i t y . The C o m m i t t e e  is 
not aware of the courses under the Scheme have recogni zed.   The Ministry must 
maintain the employability figure and furnish the same t o the Committee.   The 
Committee is also concerned over under-utilization of fu nds. The Committee reiterates 
that Ministry must get the performance audit of its ski ll and entrepreneurship 
development programme done by CAG. 
 (Para 79) 
 
Action Taken  
 
Steps have been initiated by the Ministry to maintain the employ ability figures.  The 
recommendation of the Committee on performance audit has  been noted for future 
compliance. 
 
 

-35- 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee may be informed for further steps on  its recommendation.  The 
Committee specifically recommends Performance Audit  as per Chapter 7 of the 
Audit Regulations, 2007.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee is concerned over the employability o f trainees who undertake short 
term training at Technology Centres (TCs).  These cours es constitute the bulk of training 
programmes of TCs.   But no record of employability is kept.  To assess the efficiency of 
such courses, employment record must be maintained.  T he Committee reiterates its 
views that performance audit under Audit Regulations 2007 , (Chapter 7) of the CAG 
Act, 1971, of these TCs should be done by CAG.  The C ommittee may be apprised if 
these courses and institution will be transferred to Min istry of Skill Development as 
per Budget announcement. 
 
 (Para 86) 
Action Taken 
 
 
Technology Centres are conducting short term training progr ammes in the areas of 
Tool Engineering and related Upgradation of skills of the st udents who are 
pursuing/completed their degrees/diplomas/ITI trades in order to provide them hands on 
exposure.  These training programmes are also conducted for the employees of MSMEs to 
enhance their skills.  Technology Centres have observe d that most of the candidates 
undergoing short term training programmes (pursuing tech nical education or are already 
employed in the Industries) do not opt for placement.  How ever, the technology Centres 
have been advised to maintain placement records from the c urrent year onwards in respect 
of those candidates who opt for placement. 
 
Regarding performance audit by the CAG as 
 mphasized by the Committee, it is 
submitted that the accounts of the autonomous bodies are b eing audited by the CAG 
empanelled auditors, before the accounts are laid in both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
As regards the transfer of the training programmes and th e Institutions to the 
Ministry of Skill development, it is submitted that apart from conducting technical training 
programmes/skill development programmes, the Technology Centres are also engaged in a 
number of other important activities to facilitate promotion, de velopment as well as 
enhancing the competitiveness of Micro, small and Medium E nterprises as enshrined in 
the MSME Development Act, 2006.  As such, there is no pr oposal to transfer the training 
programmes and the Institutions to the Ministry of Skill Development. 
 
 

 
-36- 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee may be informed of number of trainees  in short term and long 
term courses and about employability of trainees.  The Committee reiterates its 
recommendation to have performance audit as per Ch.  7 of the Audit Regulation 
(2007) and not merely audit of accounts. If any Per formance Audit has been done 
same may be provided to the Committee.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
Yet on certain parameters, the targets were met.   This shows either figures are 
doubtful or the Ministry had inflated demands. Clubbing such varied  schemes  under  one  
umbrella    allocation,  is  obviously  going  to  be difficult to monitor yet the BE 
allocation for financial year 2015-16 have been retained at same level as previous BE 
2014-15.  Government must benchmark actual utilization whi le allocating funds.  Also 
Ministry must take a hard look of achievement figures.   To say that there are demand 
driven schemes only justify   that a l l o c a t i o n    should   have b e e n    benchmarked   
against   actual utilization. 
 (Para 89) 
Action Taken  
 
The difference between target and achievement both in t he physical and financial 
aspects depends on receiving response from various exp ert organisations as well as 
individual MSME. Most of the proposals/claims submitted by ex pert 
organisation/individual unit do not fulfil the requisite criteria  as per the scheme guidelines 
within the stipulated period, resulting delay in actual payments/e xpenditure. However, 
efforts are always being taken to improve actual utilisat ion of fund as well as achievement 
figures. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Ministry has not responded to Committee’s comm ents against clubbing up 
of different Schemes under one umbrella Scheme, making it difficult to monitor.  The 
Ministry may state the benefits of such clubbing co nsidering that there is serious 
under - utilization of allocation in each successive year yet, the BE remains the same.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
In every running Scheme, barring KRDP and new India Inn ovation 
Entrepreneurship and Agro Industry Fund, the BE (2015 -16) is lower than RE (2014-
15).  In both these Schemes the BE allocation were redu ced at RE stage and yet again 
they have been enhanced in BE (2015-16).   However, considering all other MSME 
Schemes the pattern is low BE which is enhanced at RE stage.  In the context of 
D.C.(MSME) Schemes the allocations have been enhanced  despite lower utilization, here  

-37- 
 
is case of KVIC, the budget 
allocation have  been  reduced  vis-a–vis  higher  RE.    The 
C o mm i t t e e   is  unable  to appreciate the reduction.   Th e Committee apprehends that 
such trend in allocation may force the  KVIC  to crow d its expenditure  towards  the  end  
of financial year.  KVIC is supposed to provide margin mo ney subsidy under PMEGP 
and Khadi Grant, the entire year, therefore its Budget allocation should be enhanced in 
the beginning of the financial year. 
 
 (Para 92) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
For the year 2014-15, funds to the tune of Rs. 3327.00  crore were allocated for the 
Ministry.  Out of this, funds to the tune of Rs. 2042.00  crore with Rs. 1418.28 crore alone 
being allocated for PMEGP.  During 2015-16, funds amounti ng to Rs. 2612.51 crore were 
allocated to the Ministry, out of which Rs. 1050.00 crore w as earmarked for PMEGP.  
Since the allocation of funds for 2015-16 were lower than 2 014-15, the provision for 
PMEGP was accordingly reduced in comparison to 2014-15. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 The Ministry has not informed as to why the Scheme s of DC(MSME) may get 
higher BE despite low utilization every successive year.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee has also failed to appreciate the rationa l of increasing budget 
allocation for Khadi Reform & Development Programme (K RDP) during 2015-16 as 
Rs. 66.50 crores when the scheme is not able to use the  money and allocation had to 
be reduced at RE stage. Acknowledging that the scheme is l argely funded by ADB 
assistance under certain conditions, the Committee also takes note of protests from Khadi 
Institutions against KRDP and the difficulties in getting the K hadi Institutions audited 
before availing the assistance under KRDP. 
 (Para 93) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
Khadi Reform and Development Programme (KRDP) suggeste d various reform 
activities for total turn-around of the Khadi Sector.  Initially  the KIs were not coming 
forward seeking reform assistance. After conducting fi eld level sensitization programme, 
the hesitation of KIs is disappearing and the pace of the programme is gradually picking 
up.   
 
 
 
 
 

-38- 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee may be apprised of suggested reform activities under this 
KRDP Programme and actual steps being taken under this Programme for total turn 
around of Khadi sector. Details of the terms and co nditions of ADB assistance and 
also the budget allocation for KRDP is being utilized be furnished to the Committee.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee notes that the allocation for Khadi I ndustries (Grants) hiked by 
almost double at RE stage in the year 2014-15.  The Ministr y state that it was done in 
view of increased midyear demand raised by KVIC.  The  Committee finds that this has 
been the pattern of allocation in previous years also.   The Committee wonders about the 
impact on Khadi Institution if grants are allocated within second half of the financial 
year.  It will force the KVIC to   release   Khadi   Gra nt   only   after   enhanced   
Revised   Estimates.   The Committee also wonder if only 57% of the BE was spent till 
the 3 rd quarter of financial year, why the allocation was enhan ced at RE stage.  The 
Committee therefore is of the view that Ministry must stagg er the release of grant 
in installments throughout the year. 
 
 (Para 99) 
 
Action Taken  
 
During 2015-16, adequate allocation of funds to the tune of Rs. 145.95 crore has 
been made in comparison to the previous year’s BE of Rs.  93.31 crore.  Thus, necessary 
action has been taken during 2015-16 while allocating budget under Khadi grant. 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee has not been informed about quarter-w ise release of allocation 
for the financial year 2015-16. The Ministry has in formed that it had used 90% of 
allocation by August, 2015.  The Committee may be i nformed if the funds were used to 
settle the dues of previous years.  If yes, has Min istry sought additional fund for 2015-
16.  
 
  Recommendation/Observation  
 
The  Committee  notes  that  MDA  scheme  was  devised   to  sustain  the Khadi 
institutions the year long instead of seasonal rebates. Ho wever, the purpose is defeated if 
MDA is released after the passage of Financial Year. Th e  Committee  therefore  
recommends  that  the  Ministry  must  devise  the schem e so as to ensure that MDA is 
staggered and is released to khadi institutions year lon g. The Committee noted that the  
khadi   institutions   were  working  on shrinking  marg ins and depleting capital.  Any  

 
-39- 
 
delay in 
releasing the  MDA  can  result  in  sickness  and  cons equent  
unemployment  among artisans.      The  Committee  stro ngly  recommends  that  the  
Ministry  must devise method and powers to transfer the K hadi   MDA Fund.   The 
Scheme was devised to replace annual rebate, so as  to  provide assistance throughout 
the  year.     However  current  expenditure  defeats  the  objective  of  MDA. Ministry  
must  ensure  regular  release  of  funds  at  any  sta ge  of  Khadi production. 
 (Para 100) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
MDA is a component of Khadi Grant Head of Account.  Und er Khadi Grant BE 
2014-15 was Rs. 93.31 crore and BE 2015-16 has been  enhanced to Rs.145.95 crore.  Out 
of this Rs. 140.95 crore has been earmarked for MDA ( Khadi).  During 2015-16 (upto 
31.8.2015), funds amounted to Rs.127.38 crore had alr eady been released to KVIC for 
settlement of the MDA claims of Khadi Institutions.  Thus , more than 90% of the 
allocation has already been released during the current financial year. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Ministry could utilize 90% of allocation by Au gust, 2015 whether it got 
additional allocation in supplementary demands to m eet the requirement for the 
remaining part of 2015-16.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The C o m m i t t e e    noted  the  suggestion   by  represen tative   of  Khadi 
Artisans that the Janshree Bima Yojna be replaced with Rashtriya Swasthya Yojna, 
which has better medical benefits. Considering no expend iture under Janshree Bima 
Yojna due to delay in approval, the Committee recommends  the  Ministry  to  take  
appropriate  note  of  the  suggestion  given  by  the be neficiary artisans to replace 
Janshree Bima Yojna with Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojn a  and also inform the 
Committee of its view. 
 (Para 103) 
Action Taken  
 
The views of the Committee will help in providing health covera ge to the Khadi 
artisans.  
  
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee may be informed of the further actio n taken in this regard.  
 
 
 

 
 
-40- 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee noted that 800 clusters were proposed  to be developed during 
12 th    Plan.   71 cluster, majority of them Mini Clusters with less  than 500  artisans  
were  to  be  set  up  in  the  current  first  phase.    Guidelines of revamped SFURTI were 
issued only in August, 2014.  After complex and protra cted procedure only 17 proposals 
have  been shortlisted for preparation of  preparator y  project  report  and  other  
preliminary  survey  and documentation.  The Committee  in  convinced  that  going  by  
general performance of Ministry, it is highly improbable that 800 clusters could be set up 
during 1 2 t h  Plan period till 2017.  It appears that the Ministry due i t own complex 
processes, is severely constricted and hampered in a chieving its own targets. 
 
 (Para 117) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
Seventeen Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) consisting of 9 p roposals from KVIC 
and 8 from Coir Board were presented before the Sche me Steering Committee (SSC) for 
obtaining final approval.  All 9 proposals from KVIC have been assigned ‘in principle’ 
approval of SSC in December 2014 and got revalidated in 1 5 th  Meeting of SSC on 
24.6.2015.  However, out of 8 proposals pertaining to Coir Board, 5 have been assigned ‘in 
principle’ approval of SSC in December 2014 and got rev alidated in 15 th  Meeting of SSC 
on 24.6.2015 and 3 proposal were put up for both ‘in p rinciple’ and final approval of the 
SSC. 
 
In the 16 
th  SSC held on 10.8.2015, 14 clusters (KVIC-9 & Coir-5) in volving an 
amount of Rs.2884.24 lakh worth of project cost and Rs. 2244.66 lakh as total assistance 
(including 50% of Soft Intervention, Technical Agency Cost and Implementing Agency 
Cost and 43% of Hard Intervention) under SFURTI has be en approved.  However, the 
releases have been restricted to Rs.968.911 lakh in resp ect of the final approvals of 
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs).  
 
As regards Detailed Study Report (DSR), 3 DSRs Coir cluster with one major cluster 
and two mini clusters have been approved in the 16 
th  SSC held on 10.8.2015.  10 proposals 
of KVIC for DSRs pertaining to different products and all in  mini category were approved 
by the SSC.  SSC also accorded financial approval of Rs. 107.21 lakhs for release to the 
Nodal Agencies in view of the ‘in principle’ approval of 13  clusters (KVIC-10 & coir-3) 
for total projects worth Rs.2530.70 lakh. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
-41- 
 
In order to achieve 800 Heritage clusters, Nodal Ag encies (NA) are also being 
increased and empanelled so that target are achieve d.  In addition to this, Asian 
Development Bank (ADB) fund was also being tied up.   
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 Of the 800 proposed SFURTI clusters for 12 th  Plan, 71 were selected for 1 st  
phase, of which till August, 2015, detailed study r eports for 13 clusters (10 khadi and 
3 coir) have been approved by Scheme Steering Commi ttee after protracted and 
complex procedure.  Entire worth of these 13 projec ts Rs. 25 crores as against 
allocation of Rs. 45 crores allocated for SFURTI-KV IC for 2015-16.  However, the 
Scheme Steering Committee has given financial appro val for Rs. 1 crore only.  The 
Committee notes that all action is happening only at the level of Ministry and none at 
ground level even after passage of half the period of 12 th  Plan.  The Committee re-
affirms its apprehension about 800 clusters.  The C ommittee may be informed of 
purpose of assistance from ADB and terms and condit ions of such assistance.  Also 
provide the details of 13 approved clusters.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee observes that the level of Non-Planne d expenditure  must be 
reduced and   scarce resources should be used for pl anned schemes for the Sector and 
coir artisans. For this the Committee had recommended to dr astically reduce the size of 
Coir Board and its Committees. The Committee reiterates i ts recommendation and asks 
the Ministry to bring a comprehensive amendment to the Co ir Act, expeditiously. 
 (Para130) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
Budgetary allocation for the financial year, 2015-16 unde r the head, Non-Plan 
Grants in aid is Rs.26.45 crore which consists of grant s in aid (Salary) and Grants in aid 
(General), Rs.22.20 crore and Rs.4.25 crore respectively.  The funds under the head Grants 
in aid (Salary) are utilized for the disbursement of salari es and allowances, pension and 
other staff entitlements.  All other establishment expenditure are met out of the funds 
under the head Grants in aid (General).  Allocation has be en made by the Ministry under 
Non-Plan head based on the annual requirement of the Bo ard in the light of scarcity of 
resources on the Non-Plan side.   
 
The proposal of comprehensive amendment to the Coir Industry Act for reducing the 
size of Coir Board and its Committees is under process f or obtaining the approval of the 
competent authority. 
 
 

-42- 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Budget allocation for  Non-Planned expenditure of Coir Board belies the 
promised autonomy as envisaged in Coir Board Act.  It is therefore imperative that 
Govt. reviews the Coir Act comprehensively to minim ise overhead administrative 
expenditure like massive Board and also grant autonomy to coir Board to generate its 
own resources.  The Committee is also cognisant tha t the Coir Board has given its 
inputs to proposed amendments in Act,  in 2009.  Th e Committee wonders how much 
more time does the Ministry require to propose exte nsive amendments in view of 
emerging challenges before Coir Board and changes i n Coir Industry.  The 
Committee expects that the amendment should not be merely administrative and 
superficial.  The Govt. must bring the Amendment Bill expeditiously.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee has also learnt that domestic coir in dustries are facing shortage 
of raw material as coir is being exported to China at a  concessional duty  and  the  
finished  imported  Chinese  Coir  products  are  drivin g  the domestic producers out 
of competition in our own market. The Committee recommend s that the Government 
should address this duty imbalance. 
 (Para 131) 
Action Taken  
 
The reasons for the shortage of coir fibre faced by the domestic industry is the 
decline in production of coconuts due to the drought faced  by T.N State, the mite attack on 
coconut palm, and the exports of raw fibre to China.  Actually, the emergence of a strong 
defibering sector of coir industry is due to the high deman d of fibre from China.  The 
import of coir products from China to the tune of 35.80  lakhs in 2014-15 is found to be not 
significant.  So far the Chinese coir products are not rais ing any market threats, for Indian 
coir products, in India.  The fibre imported from India is mainly used by China for 
manufacturing boards which is used by them for manufacturing mattresses.    
Coir Board has already initiated steps for the conduct of a study on the scarcity of 
fibre.  On the basis of the outcome of study and the recommendations therein, suitable plan 
of action will be evolved and implemented to contain the present problem.    
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee may be informed of the outcome of st udy being done by Coir 
Board and recommendations thereon which should be a ppropriately reflected in 
proposed amendment. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee is dismayed to note that its repeated reco mmendations seeking 
better  and  efficient  utilization  of  scarce  funds  f or as vital sector as MSME, have been  

-43- 
 
undermined by the Ministry despite its repeated 
assurance to   improve the performance.  
Every year the Ministry seeks ever higher allocation. Keeping in view the vast scope of 
the Sector, the Committee too would be inclined to support  the demand. But utilization of 
scarce fund defeats all the arguments in favour of enhan cing the allocation. The 
Committee recommends that Year-wise Budget Estimate , Revised Estimates and the 
Actual Expenditure should be provided on the Ministry’s w ebsite. Also, the Financial 
Advisor and Chief Controller of Ministry’s Accounts shoul d post Scheme-wise Planned 
and Non Planned expenditures for every Quarter of the F inancial Year. 
 (Para 135) 
Action Taken  
 
The Ministry has requested the Chief Controller of Accounts , M/o MSME for 
posting  the BE, RE and actual expenditure figures for the  last 3 years  on the Ministry's 
web portal.  Besides, we have also requested to post scheme-wise plan and non-plan 
expenditure figures, quarter-wise, from the current financial year onwards. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee noted that expenditure only upto 1 
st  quarter of current 
Financial Year has been posted on the website.  Exp enditure for subsequent 
Quarters has not been posted.  Even in the 1 st  quarter, performance of Schemes run 
by NSIC and DC, MSME has not been up to the expecta tions. The Committee 
cautions the Ministry of possible sub optimal performance.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
In this Report, the Committee has made appraisal of the De mands of the Grants 
of Ministry of MSME and its previous performance in res pect of utilization of 
allocations.   The Committee inclined to suggest that Bud get Estimates should also take 
into account, the utilization of funds both Planned and  Non-Planned, during the previous 
years. 
 (Para 139) 
Action Taken  
 
The proforma for Detailed Demands for Grants (DDG) ha s been devised by the 
Ministry of Finance which is mandatorily applicable for a ll Central Ministries. However, 
DDG for the particular year contains the previous year's B E and RE for Plan and Non-plan 
and also actuals for last to last year. For reference of Hon'ble Committee, a copy of DDG 
for --- is being attached. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee recommends that its observation on t his Report may be shared 
with Ministry of Finance.  
 
******* 

 
 