Ind. 24/98 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT 
ON 
THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (1998-99) 
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF MINES 
(MINISTRY OF STEEL & MINES) 
(PRESENTED ON THE 9TH JULY, 1998) 
I ' .......... 
RAJY A SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
JULY, 199&/ASADHA, 1920 (SAKA) 

1. 
2. 
3. 
CONTENTS 
COMPOSITION OF 1HE CoMMIITEE • • • 
REPORT OF 1HE COMMITTEE • • • • . • 
ANNEXURE (MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS) 
PAGES 
(iHii) 
1-6 
7-12 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
1. Shri Raghavji - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Govindrao Adik 
3. Shri Maurice Kujur , 
4. Shri Karma Topden 
5. Shri Rajubhai A. Parmar 
6. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
7. Dr. Ranbir Singh 
8. Shri C.O. Poulose 
9. Shri P. Prabhakar Reddy 
10. Shri Sanjay Dalmia 
11. Shri Nagmani. · 
12. Shri Gaya Singh 
13. Shri Bhagaban Majhi 
14. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
LOK SABHA 
15. Shri Muni Lall 
16. Shri M. Srinivas 
17. Shri Vijay Shankar 
18. Shri Gyan Singh 
19. Shri Tarachand Sahu 
20. Shri Ramanand Singh .. 
21. Shri Annasaheb M.K. Patil. 
22. Shri Jual Oram 
23. Shri Anand Ratna ·Maurya 
24. Shrt Punnulal Mohale · 
25. Shri Nadendla Bhaskar Rao 
26. Shri Kallappa Awade 
27~ Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
28. Shri Dutta Meghe 
29. Shri Konijeti Rosaiah 
30. Shri Bijoy Krishna Handique 
31. Dr. Shakeel Ahmad 
32. Shri Sunil Khan 
•33, Shri Ananda Pathak 
34. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
35. Shri K. Palaniswamy 
36. Shri Surendra Prasad Yadav (Jahanabad) 
37. Shri Sha'kuni Choudhury 
*Nominated w.e.f. 9.6.1998 vice Shri Moinul Hassan. 

38. Shri Malyala Rajaiah 
39. Shri Prabhat Kumar Samantaray 
40. Shri Ajay Chakraborty 
41. Shri Zora Singh 
42. Shri Ajit Kumar Panja 
43. Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
44. Prof. Jogendra Kawade 
S~CRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Deputy Secretary 
Shri P. C. Paikray, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh. · Committee Officer 

TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
1, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry 
having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, .present this 
Twenty-Fourth Report of the Committee. The Report is on the Demands for Grants for 
1998-99 of the Department of Mines (Ministry of Steel and Mines). 
(2) The Committee at its meeting held on 22nd June, 1998, considered relevant 
documents and papers received from the Department of Mines on Demands for Grants for 
the year 1998-99 and also heard the oral evidence of the Secretary of the Department of 
Mines on the performance Budget in the context of Demands for Grants of the Department 
of Mines. 
(3) The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on 1st July, 
1998. 
(4) The Demands for Grants of the Department for the year 1998-99 as presented are as 
under:-
Plan 
Non-Plan 
Total Plan 
150.26 crore 
173.93 crore 
324.19 crore . 
(5) Taking into account the documents and other related and relevant materials made 
available to it and oral evidence tendered before it, the Committee concludes as under:-
5.1 The Department is primarily responsible for regulation and development of the 
mineral sector including the mining and metallurgy of all non-ferrous metals both in private 
and public sector except natural gas, petroleum, coal and atomic minerals. Given the natural 
resource endowments-its richness and varieties and the nation being on the threshold of 
accelerated process of industrial transformation, sustainable and planned harnessing of 
minerals are of paramount importance for rapid economic gr~wth and national development. 
The 'Privatisation Policy' has opened up the.. non-fuel ·mineral sector for private sector, the 
liberalised trade and exchange rate policy created economic opportunities and scope for 
exports and globalisation process prepared the platform for marketisation of mineral 
products in the international fora. In the absence of the specific production target for private 
sector: mining industry the Department is not in a position to make a performance budget 
analysis of their activities. As the mining sector has been opened up for foreign participation 
and Indian registered forei~:n private companies for mineral development and exploitation, 
'adequate and suitable governmental remote control-mechanism' should be evolved to 
safeguard Indian's economic interest both at domestic and international level. The 
Government should set aside "blunderbuss policy and adopt long term policy so that short­
sighted private greed does not do undue damage to the national interest. In this background 
the Committee feels that Government may consider to amend the Mineral Policy 1993 to make 
it a part and parcel of an overall industrial, trade and investment policy. 
5.2 Due to advent of mod~m technology and application of scientific approach in 
mining operation, the adoption of sophisticated and upgraded tools and equipment is not 
only the need of the hour but also indispensable for cost effective harnessing of minerals. 
The Department must think and act upon "Technology Transfer" from comparatively 

developed countries in mmmg process in order to incorporate upgraded and up-to-date 
technical know.· how into ~he mining sector. 
5.3 Infrastructural bottlenecks remained a perennial problem for all industry in general 
and mining in particular. Infrastructural network with modern means of transportation and 
communication is of paramount importance to the mining sector. The Committee 
recommends that the Department should establish and maintain a smooth Management 
Information System. The Department is· supposed to make all necessary arrangement .to invite 
foreign capital inflow to infrastructure segment of mining process whereby a part ·of the 
proceeds of mining process should be given to investing parties as repayments in a certain 
timeframe. 
5.4 The cost of mining is a subject matter of major concern of the Committee. The cost 
level in Indian mining sector in general is high due to unecomomic production level, use of 
obsolete technology, high fixed or variable costs and high break even points having an 
adverse effect on the demand of the mineral products both in the domestic and the 
international market. It will not be out of context, to mention here despite India's advantage 
of enriched endowment of aluminium resources, even without excise duty and taxes the price 
of aluminium in Indi~ are 140 per cent higher than the U.K. price which determines 
international level. In this context the Committee recommends that the Department must set 
up an expert group in each PSU to monitor, "Cost Reduction and suggest Mechanism" for 
cost reduction working upon "break-even analysis" and applying the "Boston-consulting 
Group's Experience Curve's Effect" to understand . the cost behaviour in order to have the 
maximum possible minimisation of cost; to achieve comparative competitive cost strategy to 
boost the marketisation of Indian mineral products both in domestic and international market 
on high yielding profitable price. "Break-even analysis" involving varying "Cost-Volume· 
Profit Relationship" and application of Experience Curve's Effect, with improved productivity 
of labour, increased specialisation, innovation and application of modern production 
techniques is likely to galvanise mineral exploration and exploitation process. 
5.5 Taking into account the effect of devaluation and depreciation of Indian currency, 
the Committee is constrained to express its displeasure on the marginal increase in budgetary 
allocation to the Department of Mines. Keeping in view the ambitious target of industrial 
growth rate whereby additional supply of basis; minerals are required in large volume , it is 
imperative to throw popes and aspiration towards India 's rich natural resources , and avoid 
import of minerals which will have adverse impact on India's balance _of payment. How 
much it is disastrous to be dependent upon externai aid is crystal clear with sudden and 
surprising reduction in external aict from BRGM-France. BRGM aid in 1997-98 was 
Rs. 42.50 crore which was reduced subsequently. As a result in 1997-98, the BE (Plan) of 
Rs. 154.00 crore had to be reduced to Rs. 135.60 crore in RE. BRGM .aid in the current 
financial year is Rs. 25.51 crore. As far as foreign investment is concerned sizable foreign 
capital has flown to Portfolio investment in share markets and with liberalised policy private­
investors may have long bearing impact on national interest. In order to attain the much 
acclaimed ingredients of 'self-reliance', the budgetary allocation for the Department of Mines, 
should be enhanced considerably at the time of revised estimate in 1998-99. In this regard, the 
Committ\!e reiterates its view that the Department of Mines must convince, while workinr ill 
tandem with Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission, the growing significaACe of 
Mineral exploration and development and make. necessary persuasion to have 'lion's-sh.are' in 
plan outlay to switch over from Shoe string basis of mineral exploitation to long-term strategic 
and prospective commercial exploration and development of minerals. 

5.6 In this context, Geological Survey of India (GSI) is a premier organization for 
collecting, collating and disseminating of geological data and provides basic geological 
information ensuring the continued and steady supply of raw materials to the core industrial 
sector and contributing to successful implementation of developmental programmes. 1be 
Committee notes GSI's current shift of thrust from exploration of base metal and ferrous 
group of minerals to gold and diamond, with the emerging liberalisation in Economic and 
New Mineral Policy. However, GSI's excellent expedition to marvellous objective requires 
not only recongnising GSI as an independent and scientific organization empowered with 
functional and financial autonomy but allocation of additional budgetary support to replace 
its obsolete air born geophysical system. Ocean going research vessel, survey and drilling 
equipments enabling the institution to pedorm its basic function as surveying and mapping 
and mineral exploration. Hence the need to enhance to BE of Rs. 91.50 crore in respect of 
GSI in RE for 1998-99. 
5.1 Besides GSI, Mineral Exploration Corporation Limited (MECL) is the premier 
exploration agency to carry out exploration activities on promotional basis-on behalf of 
Government of India, and contractual basis-on behalf of other agencies like public sector, 
State Government, private sector. The Committee appreciates the significant role of MECL 
in national economy through exploration of various minerals/ores by drilling and exploratory 
mining and providing reserves for eventual exploitation but the Committee is at loss to 
perceive the progressively rising trend of net loss of MECL. 
MECL could not achieve the target set for it during the 8th Plan period and the' cause for 
tbe reduced achievements have been identified as reduction in work avilability on promotional 
as well as contractual account. The Committee bas taken note of this fact and is of the opinion 
that reduction in work availability is a "managerial responsibility". Unless the management of 
MECL is geared up it will not be able to achieve the target set for its during the 9th Plan 
period and the possibilities of the company reviving and generating surplus funds in a period 
or 2-5 years will be bleak. Marginal allocation of Rs. 4.00 crore as budgetary support of 
MECL in comparison to the RE in 1997-98 (Rs. 3.80 crore) is not very encouraging, 
particularly observing the scheme/plans which are at various stages of implementation during 
1988-99. 
Various promotional projects, its successful implementation, involves capital expenditure 
like replacement of drilling accessories wh.ich is necessary to make use of the capital 
equipments and achieve targetea productivity which in tum requires huge budgetary 
allocation. The Committee appreciates MECL's efforts for making contractual negotiations 
with MEfMIN, PASMINCO and RTG, BRGM, De Beers and BHP for exploration activity 
and implementation of participation management at corporate level. 
5.8 Indian Bureau of Mines {ffiM) is a scientific and technical department primarily 
responsible for the promotion and conservation of minerals, protection of envirohment in 
mines and scientific development of mineral resources other than coal, petroleum and 
natural gas. At a time when the mining sector is confronted with maximum objection from 
the environmental · controlling agencies due to faulty implmentation of technology leading to 
major environmental degradation, the onus shifts on mM to shoulder the responsibility of 
effective mining management and environmental rehabilitation through effective 
implementation of ceo-friendly mining techniques. IBM is also required to · observe the 
international canons like Stockholm and Rio-de-Geniro Declaration of Doctrine of 
Sustainable Developmeht. To generate responsiveaess and responsibilities to mM, 
Government in general and Department of Mines in particular should ~elp the said institution 
in all aspect and in particular by higher budgetary allocation. 

Tbe Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation, to equitably distribute the 
budcetary allocation amonc GSI, mM and MECL, and further recommends that the 
Department should strive for higher budgetary allocation. 
5.9 As per the Pedonnance Budget 1998-99 the copper consumption has grown in India 
at the compound annual growth rate of around 21 per cent in 1993-94 and 1994-95 and 
around 8 per cent thereafter . The copper ore resources as on 31.3.1995 were estimated at 
732 million tonnes averaging 1.17 per cent coper. Out of this, eight working mines of 
Hindustan Copper Limited are estimated to contain 430 million tonnes of ore with an 
average grade of 1.21 per cent copper representing 58.7 per cent of the total ore resources in 
the country. But the 'sorry-state of affairs' is that HCL has projected net loss of Rs. 119.39 
a-ores in 1997-98 and Rs. 91.85 crores in 98-99 as against actual loss of Rs. 130.60 crore in 
1996-97. The loss projection in 1997-98 and 1998-99 is mainly on account of drastic fall in 
'London Metal Exchange (LME) prices of copper. Even the raising of customs duty on 
wrought copper from 30 to '35 per cent is likely, in the opinion of the Department, to get 
neutralised due to continued fall of LME prices of copper. The Department of Mines is in 
favour of a uniform enhancement of 20 per cent in the prevailing basic customs duty 
structure on impot of copper concentrates cathode, wire bar and CCR. The Committee 
observed that the production of ore, metal in concentrates, refined copper (Cathode) and 
wire rod by HCL in the preceding four years have been fluctuating. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that in order to meet the demand and supply cap 
HCL. may be advised to undertake regorous exercise on cootinuting planned scheme during 
the 9th Five Year Plan and to give enthusiastic and zealous impetus to the planned new 
schemes to arrest the continuing losses and reverse the trend by accelerating its major thrust 
areas or action in order to enable it to raise the IEBR to the tune or Rs. 685.41 crore in 
current rascal year. 
5.10 The Pedonnance Budget reveals that given the natural resources endowments, 
growing demands for aluminium and its alloys, economic opportunities and its scope for 
exports; India can produce alumina at internationally competitive prices, but the irony of the 
situation is that aluminium production rema ins short of its installed capacity. 
Production of aluminium by the primary producers in the country during 1996-97 is as 
under 
Name 
Public Sector 
1. NALCO 
2. BALCO 
Private Sector 
3. HINDALCO 
4. INDAL 
5. MALCO 
TOTAL: 
Installed capacity 
(in tonnes per annum) 
230000 
100000 
210000 
117000 
25000 
682000 
Acutal production 
(in tonnes per 
annum) 
203823 
91996 
164558 
37370 
22865 
520612 

While India's bauxite reserves account for 11 per cent of the world's deposits, our aluminium 
capacity · is only 3 per cent indicating the scope and need for new capacities to meet growing 
internal demand and sizeable exports on a long term basis. The Committee was pleased with 
the performance of some PSUs in aluminium industry like BALCO and NALCO. The 
turnover of BALCO for the year 1997-98 was Rs. 861.23 crore as against Rs. 760.56 crore in 
1996-97 while the net profit after taxes was Rs. 133.86 crore for the year 1997-98. However, 
BALCO's plant is very old and with the passage of time, the requirement of replacement or 
massive modernisation is increasing. The Committee hopes that the fund likely to be raised 
through IEBR to the tune of Rs. 140 crore would be utilised in the optimal maDDer in the 
modernisation process. 
NALCO is an integrated multilocational aluminium complex, production bauxite and 
aluminium more than the estimated target. NALCO's perspective plan for women welfare 
and welfare measures of tribals and minorities is really a subject matter of high appreciation. 
The Committee wishes its best for NALCO to keep up the performance and exporting track 
at multiplying rate. The Committee hopes that NALCO will be able to raise IEBR in 
1998-99 to the expected tune of Rs. 685.41 crore. The Committee is constrained to make an 
observation regarding the S & T Advisory Committee of NALCO on Alumina and allied 
products, Raw materials and allied products and Aluminium and allied products projects 
which had the opportunity to hold only two meetings each. At the same time, the Committee 
is satisified with the recommendations made by the S & T Advisory Committee for better 
perfomrance by NALCO and hopes that they should be implemented without delay and within 
a definite time frame. 
Related with NALCO, is the issue of disinvestment of equity of NALCO which is a 
profit-making PSU, depsite the Committee's recommendation in its 22nd report that 
disinvestment of the equity of profit making public enterprises should be undertaken with 
great circumspection. The rationale behind the stated recommendation is to protect the 
national interest and to strengthen the concept of welfare state. If the purpose of 
disinvestment is to raise the requisite capital to cope up with modernisation and technological 
upgradation in order to ntlllse the fullest installed capacity of a PSU, it is a welcome step. The 
Committee recommends that the capital so raised should be strictly and fully utilised for the 
stated purpose i.e. modernisation and technological upgradation of the PSU conceroed. 
In order to rationalise the tax structure · and to give the aluminium industry a moral 
boost, the Committee recommends the Government to pay due consideration to the demand to 
reduce the customs duty on aluminium melting scrap for recycling from 20 per cent to S per 
cent In line with steel scrap and stainless steel scrap. At the same time customs duty on un· 
wrought aluminium, aluminium ingots should be reduced to 10 per cent to encourage value­
addition. · 
5.11 The Hindustan Zinc Limited is in the forefront of the business of zinc and lead 
mining and smelting and to develop ·other natural resource-competitively. During the year 
1997-98, the Company's provisional profit is Rs. 210 crore against budgeted profit of Rs. 53 
crore. During the year 1998-99, the proposed outlay is estimated at Rs. 221.5 crore and the 
Company expects to earn a net profit of Rs: 76 crore subject to "IMF prices phenomena" 
which causes the fall in the selling prices and consequent decline in profit. The capital 
expenditure is likely to be met through internal resources and EBR viz.-suppliers credit 
and public deposits. The Committee hopes that HZL would successfully implement corporate 
plan synchronised with Five Year Plans by increasing zinc smelting capacity, augmenting lead 
zinc mining capacity, and by joint ventures with VIGEGO and BHPM. 
5.12 Sikkim Mining Corporation produces polymetallic complex ore from its Bhotang 
mine but the financial position of the corporation always remained poor due to low ore 

concentrate, erratic power supply, high transportation cost. As a matter of fact, the 
Committee recommends that Sikkim Mining Corporation requires recuperative lostrospection 
through "cost benefit analysis" and prospective overhauling. 
5.13 The Golden Past of Bharat Gold Mines is really reeling under "gloomy present and 
awaits dark future" as it is in "moribund State" which either requires 'infusion of new life' 
through substantial and sustainable rehabilitation package or 'quick winding up' Budgetary 
support of mere Rs. 6.00 crore in the year 1998-99 will be of no use to BGML. In fact, the 
BIFR has given time till 31-7-1998 for submission of a Rehabilitation scheme through 
induction of private co-promotors. It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that 
the Company has got accumulation of more than 33 million tonnes of mill-tailings at an 
average grade of 0. 7 glt and these tailings can be treated by setting up of a carbon-in-pulp 
process plant . If a new plant , based on more cost effective carbon-in-pulp process is 
installed, mill tailings can be treated more economically and can produce more than 12 
tonnes of gold over a period of 10 years. The Committee recommends that the Deaprtment 
should work on the rehabilitation scheme as suggested by BIFR on war footing so that there is 
a positive outcome within the scheduled time. The Department should also examine the 
proposal of setting up carbon-in-pulp process plant expeditiously. In the meanwhile 
Government may consider giving VRS to BGML. 
5.14 Ultimately, the Committee would like to highlights that as the workers are the real 
producers and mining process is 'risk-oriented activity', all embracing and comprehensive 
welfare measures should be taken for them in accordance with the 'Directive Principles of 
State Policy' as enshrined in the Constitution . 
5.15 The Committee hopes that the Department of Mines and the Government would 
consider and implement the recommendations of the Committee . 
NEW DELHI; 
July 1, 1998 
RAGHAVJI 1 
Chairman , 
Department related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry . 
.-

ANNEXURE 
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE 
II 
SECOND MEETING 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Indu stry met at 
10.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 16th June , 1998 in Room No. 139, First Floor, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Raghavjt-Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Govindrao Adik 
3. Shri Maurice Kujur 
4. Shri Rajubhai A. Parmar 
5. Shri V.N. Gadgil 
6. Dr. Ranbir Sin&h 
7. Shri C. 0. Poulose 
8. Shri Nagmani 
9. Shri Bhagaban majhi 
10. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Muni Lall 
12. Shri Ramanand Singh 
13. Shri Annasaheb M.K. Patil 
14. Shri Anand Ratna Maurya 
15. Shri Nadendla Bhaskar Rao 
16. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
17. Dr. Konijeti Rosaiah 
18. Dr. Shakeel Ahmad 
19. Shri Sunil Khan 
•zo. Shri Ananda Pathak 
21. Shir Kirti Vardhan Singh 
22. Shri Prabhat Kumar Samantary 
23. Shri Ajay Chakraborty 
24. Shri Ajit Kumar Panja 
SECR!:T ARIA T 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Deputy Secretary 
Shri P.C. Paikray, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Officer 
•Nominated w.e.f. 9.6.1998 vice Shri Moinul Hassan. 

WITNESSES 
Representatives of Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) 
1. Shri K.A.P. Singh, Chairman, Steel Industry Division Director (Commercial SAIL) 
2. Dr. S.K. Gupta, Vice-Chairman, Jindal Vijaynagar Steel Ltd. 
3. Shri S. Banerjee, Asstt . Gen. Manager, SAIL 
4. Shri S. Sen, Dy. Director-General 
5. Shri Dilip Chenoy, Director 
6. Shri Tapas Datta, Dy. Director 
7. Shri Deepak Roy, Director 
8. Shri Rajesh Gupta, Managing Director, Lloyds Steel 
9. Shri V.S. Bapna, Director, Ispat Industries 
Representatives of Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) 
1. Shri Yogendra Kumar Modi, Chairman, Banking and Finance Committee 
2. Shri Y.P. Srivastava, Dy. Secretary-General 
Representative of the Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India 
(ASSOCHAM)) 
1. Dr. T.P. Bhat, Advisor 
Representatives of Centre of Indian Trade Unions (CITU) 
1. Dr. M. K. Pandhe, General Secretary 
2. Shri W. R. Varada Rajan, Secretary 
Representatives of Indian National Trade Union Congress (INTUC) 
1. Shri Chandidas Sinha, Secretary 
2. Shri S. L. Passey, General Secretary 
2. The Committee heard oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses in respect of 
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Ministries of Industry, Steel and Mines. Members 
sought clarification from the witnesses on various points. The Chairman directed the 
witnesses to consider the points raised by the Members during the meeting and send an 
updated-note on the same at the earliest for Committee's perusal. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 5.20 P.M. to meet again at 10.00 A.M. on 
Wednesday, the 17th June, 1998 at the same venue. 

IV 
FOURm MEETING 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry met at 
11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 22nd June, 1998 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament 
House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Raghavji-Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Dr. Ranbir Singh 
3. Shri Nagmani 
4. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
LOK SABRA 
5. Shri Muni Lall 
6. Shri M. Srinivas 
7. Shri Ramanand Singh 
8. Shri Annasaheb M.K. Patil 
9. Shri Jual Oram 
10. Shri Anand Ratna Maurya 
11. Shri Nadendla Bhaskar Rao 
12. Shri Kallappa Awade 
13. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
14. Shri Konijeti Rosaiah 
15. Dr. Shakeel Ahmad 
16. Shri Sunil Khan 
17. Shri Shakuni Choudhury 
18. Shri Malyala Rajaiah 
19. Shri Ajay Chakraborty 
20. Prof. Jogendra Kawade 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Deputy Secretary 
Shri P.C. Paikray, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
Representatives or Department or Mines (Ministry of Steel and Mines) at 11.00 A.M. 
1. Shri :Q. B. Tandon, Secretary 
2. Shri P. K. Mohanty, Add I. Secretary 
3. Shri A. H. Jung, AS & FA 

4. Shcimati Aruna Bagchee, Joint Secretary 
5. Shri. Satish Chander, Director 
6. Shri. N. Sanyal, Director 
7. Shri. S.S. Mehra, Director (Fin.) 
8. Shri. Alok Sheet, Director 
9. Dr. R.L. Munshi, Director 
10. Shri. K. V .K. Seshavataram, CMD-HZL 
11. Shri. A.N. Bose, CC-IBM 
12. Shri. P. Mazumdar, Director (F) BALCO 
13. Shri. D. Mukherjee, BM(P), BALCO 
14. Shri. S.K. Acharya, DG-GSI 
15. Shri. A. Gupta, Director, GSI 
16. Shri. R. Gupta, MD-BGML 
17. Shri. Rajesh, Director (F), MECL 
18. Dr. M.G. Deshmukh, Director (T) MECL 
19. Shri U. Sen, Director {P), HCL 
20. Shri J.P. Sehgal, Ex-Director (R), HCL 
21. Shri C. Venkatarama, Director ~F), NALCO 
22. Shri T.K. Bose, DDG-GSI 
23. Shri Lokesh Prasad, Director (0) HCL 
2. The Committee heard oral evidence of Secretary, Department of Mines (Ministry of 
Steel .and Mines) in respect of Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Department of Mines. 
During the course of oral evidence members sought clarificatiom from the witnesses on 
various points. 
3. • • • 
4. • • • 
5. The Chairman directed all the above witnesses to consider the points raised ·by the 
Members during the meeting and to send an updated note on the same at the earliest for the 
Committee,s perusal. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
6. Tbe Committee adjourned at 6.20 P.M. 
•••Relates w other matters. 

SIXTH MEETING 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry met at 12.00 
noon on Wednesday the 1st July, 1998 in Room No. 139, First floor, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Raghavji - Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Rajubhai A. Parmar 
3. Dr. Ranbir Singh 
4. Shri C.O. Poulose 
5. Shri Nagmani 
6. Shri Gaya Singh 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Muni Lall 
8. Shri Ramanand Singh 
9. Shri Annasaheb M.K. Patil 
10. Shri Nadendla Bhaskar Rao 
11. Shri K.H Muniyappa 
12. Shri Dutta Meghe 
13. Shri Konijeti Rosaiah 
14. Shri Bijoy Krishna Handique 
15. Dr. Shakeel Ahmad 
16. Shri Shakuni Choudhury 
17. Shri Malyala Rajaiah 
18. Shri Prabhat Kumar Samantaray 
19. Prof. Jogendra Kawade 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Deputy Secretary 
Shri P.C. Paikray, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Officer 
2. At the outset, the Committee decided to consider the draft Reports para-wise and first, 
took up the 23rd Report on the Demands· for Grants of Department of Steel for discussion. 
Some suggestions/views of the members raised during the discussion, were unanimously 
incorporated in the body of the Report. Next came the discussion on the 24th Report on the 

Demands for Grants 'of Department of Mines. Here again, the same procedure was followed 
• in the case of 23rd Report. 
3. • • • 
4. Each Report was adopted by the Committee immediately after the discussion on it was 
over. 
S. The Committee then decided to present all the three Reports to both the Houses of 
Parliament on Wednesday , the 8th July, 1998. For this, the Chairman nominated the 
foUowing Members to present the Report as shown against their names: ... 
(1) Nomlaatioa of Memben for the presentation or Reports to the; Rajya Sabba 
Tbe Chairman, Committee on Industry will 
llonpith the following Members: 
(i) Dr. Ranbir Singh 
(ii) Shri C.O. Poulose 
(iii) Shri Rajubhai A . Parm~r 
•i. present the Reports to the Rajya Sabha 
To present 23rd Report 
To present 24th Report 
To present 25th Report 
(2) Nomination of Memben for the presentation or Reports to the Lok Sabba 
(i) Shri K.H. Muniyappa 1.. 
(ii) Prof. Jogendra Kawadef 
(iii) Shri Annasaheb M.K. Patill 
(iv) Shri Nadcndla Bhaskar Raof 
(v) Shri Konijeti Rosaiah ) 
(vi) Dr. Shakeel Ahmad J 
To present 23rd ·Re}>ott · 
. .. f . 
To present 24th iepo'rt : 
•·!· 
To present 25th R~/£rl 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 1.45 P.M . 
•••Jt.cJates to odwr matters 