195th Report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/195threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:06:06]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
ONE HUNDRED AND NINETY FIFTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE 190TH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON  9TH MARCH, 2007)
   (LAID ON THE TABLE  OF THE  LOK SABHA ON  9TH MARCH, 2007)
                              RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
                 NEW DELHI
              FEBRUARY, 2007/ PHASGUNA , 1928 (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
 1.       COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
 2.        INTRODUCTION
3.                REPORT
4.                 (i)        CHAPTER – I  
                       Recommendations/observations, which have been     accepted by the Ministry.
(ii)                CHAPTER–II                                                                                                        
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee   does not desire to pursue for now in    view of the  
Government's replies                                                                           
           (iii)     CHAPTER–III                                                                                        
 Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the   Committee has not accepted replies of the Ministry     and
has asked the Ministry to review the reply or has   raised queries over the reply furnished by the
Ministry.                                                         
 (iv)      CHAPTER – IV
 Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry have not been received
                                                                                                   
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
(Date of constitution 5th August, 2006)
 
 
                  Shri Santosh Bagrodia              —        Chairman
          RAJYA SABHA
2.      Dr.  G. Sanjeeva Reddy
3.      Dr. Prabha Thakur     
4.      Shri Kalraj Mishra      
5.      Smt. Hema Malini      
6.      Dr. K. Malaisamy      
7.      Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
8.      Dr. Vijay Mallya        
9.      Shri O.T. Lepcha
10.  Vacant
                                 LOK SABHA
11.  Shri Guharam Ajgalle
12.  Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary       
13.  Shri Ajoy Chakraborty           
14.  Shri Swadesh Chakraborty                 
15.  Shri Subhash   Sureshchandra Deshmukh        
16.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan         

195th Report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/195threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:06:06]
17.  Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria         
18.  Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani                                     
19.  Shri Kishanbhai V.  Patel
20.  Shri P.Rajendran        
21.  Shri Badiga  Ramakrishna
22.  Shri  Gurjeet Singh Rana
23.  Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana   
24.  Shri Rajnarayan Budholiya
25.  Shri K.C. Pallanisamy            
26.   Kunwar  Manvendra Singh                
27.  Shri Ganesh Singh                  
28.  Shri V.K. Thummar                
29.  Shri Girdhari Yadav
30.  Shri Umakant Yadav
31.  Shri Mohan S. Delkar
     Secretariat
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Girija Shanker Prasad, Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having   been  authorized  by
the Committee, hereby present this  One Hundred and Ninety  Fifth Report on Action Taken Report submitted by the Government
on the One Hundred and Ninetieth   Report  of   the  Committee  on  the  Demand  for   Grants  of the  Department of Heavy
Industries (2006-07)
 
2.         The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry considered and adopted the Draft report at its
meeting held on the 7
th March, 2007.
 
3          I thank the Ministry of  Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises (Department of Heavy Industries) for providing
valuable inputs to the Committee. 
NEW DELHI;        
7th March,, 2007                     
                                                                              
SANTOSH BAGRODIA
Chairman
Department -related Parliamentary
                    Standing Committee on Industry
Report
 
1.         This  One Hundred and  Ninety  Fifth Report deals with action taken by the Government on the One Hundred
and Ninetieth  Report of the Committee.
. 2.       Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises(Department of Heavy Industries )  in respect of the recommendations contained in the Report. These have
been categorized as follows :-
Chapter -I- The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry.
Chapter -II- The recommendation/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
Government's replies.
Chapter -III- The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has either not accepted replies of
the Ministry or has asked the Ministry.
Chapter -IV- The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry have not been
received. In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV. The Ministry has either furnished the interim replies or
mater has been forwarded to other agency/Department whose reply is awaited or couched its language in vague terms
like noted for compliance/guidance.
CHAPTER I
Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry.
Recommendation

195th Report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/195threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:06:06]
 
1.         The Committee strongly feels that the Government should come out with a transparent policy for unlocking of surplus
assets by the PSEs. The Committee feels that such a policy need to be uniform in respect of all the CPSEs which fall under
various Ministries/Departments of the Government of India. If necessary the concerned State Government may be consulted
before the formation of the policy on this issue with a view to have broad consensus. The Committee considers that in absence
of a transparent policy, it would be difficult for the PSEs to generate resources by unlocking the surplus assets as it may
involve administrative issues and avoidable litigations.
(Para : 15)
Action Taken 
2.         There are 34 operating PSEs under the Department of Heavy Industry out of which 21 PSEs are loss making, many of
the loss making companies are sick and registered under BIFR. These sick companies have been disposing off their land as per
the directions of BIFR and in accordance with the procedures laid down by BIFR. Surplus assets of land, is also being utilized
by the PSEs to fund their own revival plans in a number of cases presented to BRPSE/Government. The money realized
through the sale of land etc. is ploughed back to fund the revival schemes of such companies. While disposing off land, urban
land norms as prescribed by the State Government are followed.
 
3.         As the land held by the PSEs is of varying types ie on limited time lease or free-lease or free-hold in their own name
and is not a property of the Central Government the policy of this Department is to encourage the PSEs to use such asset in
their own best interest.
4.         However, the Ministry of Urban Development has already initiated the process of formulation of policy guidelines
relating to land held by the Government including held by CPSEs/ Statutory/Registered bodies. These guidelines are at present
under discussion/formulation. The intention is to prepare a uniform policy for land management with a common set of
transparent and remunerative procedure for disposal which would be applicable to all the land holding of Central
Ministries/Departments. This would facilitate uniformity and common standards of efficiency and transparency in land
management and disposal practices in Central Government.  
Recommendation
5.         To consider the Cess as private sector’s contribution would be misrepresentation of fact. The Committee would like to
know the initial mandate for which Cess was levied, and if the NATRIP is covered within that mandate? The Committee is not
in agreement with the DHI’s assertion calling NATRIP a joint project by public and private partnership. As is evident from the
presentation given by the DHI, out of the total investment of Rs. 1718 crores only Rs 118 crores would be contributed by the
users from industry within three years, rest of the investment is to be made in one form or the other. The Committee feels that
the participation of industry should have been substantial to justify the public private partnership.
(Para: 44)
Action Taken
 
6.         Automotive Cess was levied by the Govt. since 1983-84  @ 1/8% i.e. 0.125% over and above the excise duty. It forms
part of the Consolidated Fund of India. Ministry of Finance allocates a portion of this fund through budget to DHI for the
Development Council for Automobile and Allied Industries (DCAAI). 
 
7.       As per para 9 of the IDR Act, 1951 the DCAAI may utilize the cess funds to promote scientific and industrial research
in the automobile sector, to promote improvements in design and quality of auto products, to provide training of technicians
and labour in the automobile industry and to meet such expenses in the exercise of its functions and its administrative
expenses. 
8.      National Automotive Testing and R&D Infrastructure Project (NATRIP) envisages setting up of world-class automotive
testing and homologation facilities in India. The project principally aims at (i) creating critically needed automotive testing
infrastructure to enable the Govt. in ushering in global vehicular safety, emission and performance standards, (ii) deepening
manufacturing in India, promoting larger value addition leading to significant enhancement of employment potential and
facilitating convergence of India’s strengths in IT and electronics with automotive engineering, (iii) enhancing India’s
abysmally low global outreach in this sector by de-bottlenecking exports and (iv) removing the crippling absence of basic
product testing, validation and development infrastructure for automotive industry. This way NATRIP is covered under the
mandate of getting funds from the DCAAI under Cess allocations.
9.         Out of the investment of Rs. 1718 crore, Rs. 1090 crore is from the Plan support by the Govt. and Rs. 273 crore of this
Plan support is in the form of loan, which has to be re-paid back by the Industry. Rs. 510 crore is being contributed through
automotive cess and Rs. 118 crore will be collected through user charges. We agree with the view of the Department Related
Parliamentary Standing Committee that Cess cannot be taken as a contribution of the Automotive Industry. NATRIP is largely
a public project of developmental nature being financed by the Govt. funds for establishment of the facilities. The project has
been conceived, designed and being implemented in total tandem with the automotive industry and its running is also
proposed to be looked after by the autonomous bodies having complete involvement of the industry.
Recommendation

195th Report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/195threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:06:06]
10.       The Committee feels that the PSEs to become financially self-reliant must harness the export opportunities to earn their
own finances for revival.
(Para : 114)
Action Taken  
11.       The Department is aware of this requirement. The PSEs are being encouraged to explore/harness export opportunities.
CHAPTER II
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue for now in view of the Government's
replies
Recommendation
1.         It is the considered view of the Committee that the revival plans pertained largely to financial reconstruction, and
technology and marketing aspects are not contained in the revival plan approved by the Government. As the nodal Department
the DHI must monitor with the management of PSEs on  these aspects of revival. The Committee would like to be informed of
the steps taken by the DHI in this regard.
(Para:10)
Action Taken
 
2.         Revival schemes of PSEs, besides including waiver of Government of India interest and conversion of loan equity also
envisages technology upgradation/ absorption, enhancing marketing network, manpower training etc.
3.         Consequent upon approval of the revival schemes for PSEs, MOU’s are being signed between this Department and the
concerned PSEs. The progress of revival schemes is being monitored on a regular basis in order to ensure sustainability of
revival and also to take necessary corrective steps in this regard.
Recommendation
4.         The Committee observes that considering that the Planned Capital expenditure is vital for a sustainable revival, and
survivability of the PSEs, of the total required outlay of Rs. 1350.22 crores, a budgetary support of only Rs 450 crores has
been given in the BE 2006-07.  The Committee wonders whether the PSEs would be able to generate the remaining Rs. 950.22
crores from non-budgetary sources. The Committee also wonders if the BRPSE has identified the potential sources to generate
balance funds from extra budgetary sources. The Committee would like to have the DHI’s comments on the possibility of such
shortfalls in budgetary allocations which may result in derailing the recommended revival of the PSEs.   
(Para : 19)
Action Taken 
5.         The break up of the approved Annual Plan of DHI for 2006-07 is as under:-
 
         1.  Budgetary Support           :   Rs. 450.00 crore
         2.  I&EBR                             :   Rs.  910.22 crore
         3.  Outlay                             :   Rs.  1360.22 crore
 
6.         The I&EBR figure mostly pertain to select PSEs namely BHEL, Braithwaite, REIL, HPC, HNL, EPI and BEML. 
These PSEs are profit making and have the capacity to generate internal resources or borrow from the Bank/FIs.  For the
portion relating to Budgetary Support from the Government, a lump sum provision has been made.   In the event of any
shortfall, funds shall be sought at RE/Supplementary stage.
Recommendation
7.         The Committee finds in view of the past experience that even the lump sum allocations in the BE stage have remained
unutilized till the last quarter of Financial Year. Even in case of lump sum provision of Rs. 95 crore in RE 2005-06 for
restructuring of PSEs, only Rs. 27 crores could be spent till March 2006. The Committee also observed that of this lump sum
amount a sizable Rs. 44.60 crores were re-appropriated as non-planned expenditure towards CCI.  And that  Rs. 2.70 crores
have been surrendered at the advice of Ministry of Finance. The Committee wonders if any worthwhile capacity building of
PSEs been done as part of intended sustainable restructuring. Also observing the smaller amount that have been allocated to
individual PSEs for restructuring, the Committee only wonders if the amount could have raised from the market with requisite
subsidies from the Government. The Committee should be apprised if the amounts given out of this lump sum provision are
loans or grants to the individual PSEs.
(Para: 69)
Recommendation
8.         The Committee notes with surprise that Rs. 44.60 crores meant for restructuring of CCI as Planned expenditure were
re-appropriated to Non-Plan expenditure. The Committee feels that such steps are ad-hoc and lack any long term strategy for
prudent financial management. The Committee asks DHI to clarify under which rule or guideline, such re-appropriation was
sought.
(Para : 70)
Action Taken (Para 69&70)
9.         The lump sum provision of Rs.95 crore for restructuring of PSEs had been obtained under Plan in RE:05-06 keeping in

195th Report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/195threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:06:06]
view a number of revival cum restructuring proposals that were under process and were expected to be cleared in the near
future. However since a few proposals could not be finalized by 31.3.2005, there was a saving available from the lumps um
provision of Rs.95 crore for restructuring of PSEs. Under the revival cum restructuring scheme of CCI, recommended by
BRPSE and sanctioned by BIFR, Govt. was required to provide a non-plan assistance of  Rs.153.62 crore as loan for
settlement of dues of banks/ creditors, employees dues in anticipation of wage revision and VRS/VSS and retrenchment
compensation in the 7 non-operating units. Rs.44.60 crore was therefore re-appropriated from the savings out of the lump sum
provision of Rs.95 crore provided for restructuring of PSEs under plan along with available savings from other heads /sub-
heads. The re-appropriation had been approved by Ministry of Finance under the powers vested under Rule 59 of GFR read
with Rule 10 of DFPR.It is extremely difficult for sick PSEs with negative worth to raise fund from the market even with
Govt. guarantee or subsidy support. All the funds provided out of this lump sum provision to individual PSEs were released as
loans.  
 
Further Recommendation 
10.       The Committee expresses its concern   that lump sum allocation remain under utilized till the last quarter of the
Financial year.  The Committee desires that  Government should ensure planned investment for capital expenditure.
Recommendation
11.       Committee observes that the sheer quantum of such non-planned expenditures for revival suggests that revival
packages have focused largely on clearing the financial dues which the PSEs owe. Compared to which the Lumpsum
allocations for the restructuring the PSEs under Planned Capital Expenditures has been meager Rs. 87.82 crores this year
which has been reduced from Rs. 95 crores.
(Para: 80)
Action Taken 
12.       The quantum of non-plan expenditure compared to planned capital expenditure for revival are generally higher as the
dues of the PSEs including employee related dues, bank loans and inter corporate deposits, have become very high over the
years resulting in the sickness of the PSEs and clearance of the dues is essential to make their net worth positive.  Initially
restructuring of PSEs had a provision of Rs. 1.00 crore  only which was enhanced to Rs. 95 crore at RE stage.
Recommendation
 
13.       The Committee observes that of the total BE ( 2006-07) of  Rs. 905 crores, Rs 455 crores are Non-Planned
expenditures meant for committed expenses. Of this Rs. 400 crores are meant to settle VRS and statutory dues, salaries and
wages. Though these are loans to begin with but the Committee also notes the abysmal record of PSEs in respect of Loan
Repayment. The Committee finds it alarming that this situation has remained for years. Even during the FY 2005-06, it is
evident that while the Planned expenditure was enhanced only by Rs. 94 crores, the Non-Planned expenditure was enhanced
by Rs. 116 crores. The non-Planned expenditure was increased to meet the salary dues of the PSEs.
(Para : 32)
Recommendation
14.       The Committee only wonders if the feeding the PSEs out of budgetary support is sustainable practice.
(Para: 33)
Action Taken   (Para 32 & 33)
15.       The non-plan budgetary support for salary & wages and VRS & statutory dues are being provided to mitigate the
hardship of the employees of the sick and loss making PSEs as they are unable to meet these expenses.  Govt. has undertaken
a drive to revive the sick and loss making PSEs wherever possible and close down those which are beyond revival. The Board
for Reconstruction of PSEs (BRPSE) set up for this purpose is already in the process of examination of the proposals on
various sick/loss making PSEs and making appropriate recommendations, on the basis of which Cabinet/CCEA are
considering various proposals of revival/closure of these PSEs.  Till this exercise, which is highly arduous and requires high
degree of financial, managerial and technical competence, is complete the non-plan budgetary support would have to be
provided to keep these PSEs afloat.   Such budgetary support would eventually get reduced as these PSEs get rehabilitated. 
 
16.       Keeping in view the advanced stage of the revival schemes of PSEs which were referred to Cabinet or were under
consideration of BRPSE, an additional amount of Rs.116 crore was obtained at RE stage which proved to be fully justified
later on when revival schemes of HEC and CCI were approved by the Cabinet.
Committee’s Further Recommendation 
17.       The Committee has been consistent in its view that the delay in decision and protracted proceedings of the revival have
only accumulated the liabilities that have made the rehabilitation of the PSES even more costly and a drain over the
Government’s finances. This is also reflected in the serious imbalance in Plan-Non-Plan expenditure, which the Committee
considers unsustainable in long run.
 
Recommendation
 

195th Report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/195threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:06:06]
18.       The Committee observes that the Non-Planned expenditure has been higher than Planned Expenditure for last several
years. Meaning thereby that the expenditure is much higher on the committed liabilities as compared to new developmental
and capacity-building initiatives under Government sponsored schemes. Even the committed liabilities reflected under Non-
Planned expenditure, the majority of expenditure has been going to meet on year to year basis the financial obligations
incurred by PSEs. In view of the definition of Capital expenditure as provided by the DHI, the Committee only wonders if the
lump sum allocations of Rs 400 crores to support to clear VRS dues and salary dues to the workers could at all be termed as
Capital expenditure. The Committee desires that DHI may clarify the position.
(Para : 35)
Action Taken 
19.       The non-plan budgetary support for salary & wages and VRS & statutory dues are being provided to mitigate the
hardship of the employees of the sick and loss making PSEs as they are unable to meet these expenses.  Govt. has undertaken
a drive to revive the sick and loss making PSEs wherever possible and close down those which are beyond revival. Till this
exercise, which is highly arduous and requires high degree of financial, managerial and technical competence, is complete the
non-plan budgetary support would have to be provided to keep these PSEs afloat.   Such budgetary support would eventually
get reduced as these PSEs get rehabilitated.
20.                   The Capital Payments consists of Capital Expenditure on acquisition of assets like land, building, machinery,
equipment as also investments in share etc and loan and advances granted by the Government of India to State/Union Territory
Governments, Government Companies, Corporations and other parties.           
Recommendation
21.       The Committee has not been furnished any information regarding the criteria on which any expenditure is approved by
the Planning Commission and is reflected as Planned Expenditure where as other bulk expenditures are shown as Non-Planned
expenditures. The Committee desires to know whether such a division is random or based on any objective criteria.
(Para : 36)
Action Taken 
22.       The planned expenditure is mainly for the capital expenditure programmes of PSEs which is approved by Planning
Commission after detailed discussions with Ministry/PSEs based on the schemes/programs of the concerned PSEs subject to
overall availability of funds and the performance of the PSEs. Revival Plans where new equipment or up-gradation is
envisaged, funds are provided from plan side.
Recommendation
23.       For Rs. 47.4 crores required for the two-year pilot scheme for textile and machine tools sector only Rs. 1 lakh token
amount has been allocated. No information has been given as to how the remaining finance shall be garnered. Further
Committee may be apprised of the method of identifying the beneficiary Units, delivery of funds and monitoring the
performance of the scheme. The Committee would like to know if the beneficiary would also include the private sector units.
(Para : 47)
Action Taken 
24.       The Department of Heavy Industry proposed a pilot scheme to Planning Commission for which a line entry and token
provision of Rs. 1.00 lakh has been made in the Budget of the department. The remaining finance for operation of the
proposed scheme would be raised through re-appropriation/supplementary grant in accordance with the advice/approval of the
Planning Commission which is awaited
25.       As per the proposed scheme, a Scheme monitoring Committee (SMC) will be set up under the chairmanship of
Secretary, Department of Heavy Industry, and Government of India. The Committee will comprise the representatives of the
Government R&D Institutions & Industry Associations and prestigious Institutions like IITs etc. SMC would be responsible
for development of detailed operational procedure, sanction and monitoring of projects under the scheme. The SMC would be
assisted by a Programme Manager (PM) in implementation of the scheme. The PM shall be an institution having sufficient
experience in project development and financing. SMC would finalise the terms of Reference (ToR) for such Programme
Manager also.
26.       Assistance under the proposed scheme would be available to the Public and Private Sector Units.
Recommendation
27.       The Committee wonders if the beneficiaries of the previous year would be repeated this year too. The Committee is
unable to comprehend the rationale behind having twin policies on VRS dues, one through the huge lump sum allocation and
also by subsidizing the PSEs for raising resources to settle VRS dues from market.
(Para : 59)
Action Taken 
28.       The budgetary support for VRS/VSS and statutory dues is generally being extended in case of sick and loss making
companies who are unable to meet such expenses.   Those PSEs which are not sick or loss making but are unable to undertake
manpower rationalization on their own are being asked to raise requisite fund for VRS from the market through bonds against
Govt. guarantee along with subsidized interest payment up to 50%.  This policy ensures that only   the deserving sick/loss
making PSEs avail of the budgetary support from the Govt.   Beneficiaries of previous year may get repeated this year
depending on the status of redemption of bonds floated by them.

195th Report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/195threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:06:06]
 
Recommendation
29.       The Committee is of the view that the Government has been actually losing money given as loans to PSEs. In several
cases, eventually these loans were either waived or converted into equity, thereby converting secure debt liability into an
insecure liability. The Committee impresses upon the DHI to check this trend and to take appropriate steps to ensure the
repayment of loans and interests thereon.
(Para : 108)
Action Taken   
30.       As a matter of policy, the Government do not waive loan or interest on the loan given to a PSE . Such waivers are
being provided only when a revival package formulated by expert/consultants or revival package sanctioned by BIFR is
implemented
Committee’s Further Recommendation 
31.       The Committee reiterates its reservations over the current trend of waiving Government’s loans and interests thereon
as part of revival of sick PSUs.   Considering it as unsustainable in long run, the Committee observes that the dues over
Governments loans were first allowed to increase due to delay in decision and then waived of as part of revival.  Whether, part
of policy or as an exigency of revival,  the fact remains that such waivers put serious pressure on Governments finances.  
Recommendation
32.       The Committee observes that the order book position of the PSEs under the DHI has grown steadily over past few
years. However the Committee expresses its serious apprehensions on the over dependence on Government for orders.
(Para : 116)
Action Taken
33.       It may be noted that with the increase in Government outlays for Defence, Railways, infrastructure etc. there has been
a surge in requirement and demand from Government Sector.  However,  PSEs are being encouraged to procure orders from
private sector also as emphasis is being lain on Public Private Partnership (PPP).
 
Committee’s Further Recommendation 
 
34.       The Committee observes that while there could be a possible growth in demand, however it is doubtful if many of loss
making PSEs have the required working capital to cater to such orders.
Recommendation
35.       The Committee concurs that stress of marketing should be beyond the State-owned sectors as more and more projects
are likely to be handled by the private sector or under public private partnership in various infrastructure areas.
(Para : 117)
Action Taken
36.       The Government is aware of the requirement and the PSEs are being encouraged to take care of this aspect while
formulating their marketing strategies. 
Recommendation
37.       The Committee recommends that the DHI should device an institutionalize mechanism to ascertain the expectations of
Auto Sector from Union Budgets and that the Department should convey the same to the Government on behalf of the Auto
sector.
(Para : 128)
Action Taken 
38.       As part of the Pre-Budget exercise, the Department of Heavy Industry holds extensive discussions with automobile
Industry Associations including Society of Indian Automobile Manufactures (SIAM), Automotive component Manufactures
Association of India (ACMA), Automotive Tyre Manufactures Association (ATMA) and Tractor Manufactures Association
(TMA) every year. The suggestions of the automobile industry for fiscal reforms and policy formulation are taken up through
the pre-budget memorandum of the Department of Heavy Industry to the Ministry of Finance. The Department of Heavy
Industry is of the view that it has been able to adequately capture the issues and concerns of the industry by the above process.
In view of this, the need for setting up an independent institutional mechanism for the auto sector for ascertaining their
expectations from the Budget may not be required. 
Recommendation
 
39.       The Committee observes from SWOT analysis that the PSEs consider increased competition in market as a major
threat also the technological drawback and inability to diversify the product profile are major constraining factors. The PSEs
still do not have marketing network so vital to retain the market niche and also to harness emerging. In absence of marketing
network and strategy, the PSEs continue to rely on Government and PSEs for orders, and have not been able to exploit new
business opportunities in private sector and export market. In order to face the increased competition, the PSEs have been
asking for consolidation, merger or Joint Ventures with other PSEs. However, these aspects have not been included in the
revival plans, whose focus is confined to the financial restructuring of the PSEs by infusion of fresh capital or waiving off or

195th Report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/195threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:06:06]
restructuring the previous liabilities. Except for HEC, no other PSE has been asked to garner resources from internal sources
by unlocking surplus assets. As a result the Government has to make huge investment for the revival of these PSEs, who in
turn have assured to earn a rather modest profit over next five years.(Para : 138)
Action Taken
40.       Keeping in view the SWOT analysis and deficiencies of earlier revival plans , the efforts are being made that the
current revival of plans of PSEs cover organizational/financial restructuring, manpower rationalization, technology up-
gradation/ acquisition  plan modernization, marketing strategies etc.  These revival plans are being formulated in consultation
with experts/consultants, inputs from BRPSE etc. These concerted efforts are expected to yield positive results by way of
viable turn around of sick/loss making PSEs. MOU’s are being/have been signed with the management with the PSEs,
prescribing time schedule for achieving the assigned targets. The implementation of revival plans is being monitored in this
Department on a regular basis   Apart from HEC, there are other PSEs also who are harnessing resources by unlocking surplus
assets.
 
Committee’s Further Recommendation 
41.       The reply of the Department is too general and is not corroborated by the information on revival packages given to the
Committee by the Department.  The Committee expects the Department to be alive of the previous failed   revival packages. 
The Committee would like see the efficacy of the MOU system for the revived PSEs.
Recommendation
42.       The Committee seeks the elaborate response from DHI of its observations, queries and suggestions in its ATN.
(Para :139)
Action Taken
 43.      The detailed status with regard to Action Taken in respect of the observations/  queries of the Committee has been
brought out above. The various suggestions of the Committee have been brought to the notice of all concerned officers of this
Department including Management of the PSEs under this Department for strict compliance and perusing implementation of
the various observations/suggestions of the Committee on a continuous basis
CHAPTER III
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies of the Ministry and has
asked the Ministry to review the reply or has raised queries over the reply furnished
by the Ministry.
Recommendation
1.         The Committee observes that greater part of BRPSE approved Revival Plans includes waiver or conversion of previous
loans and interest liabilities into equity and Government’s Guarantee for raising fresh loan. However such Revival Plans do
not elaborate other components that would be critical for sustainable revival like technology up gradation and absorption,
enhancing marketing network, manpower training etc. It may be recalled that previous revival efforts too pertained to similar
cosmetic restructuring of financial liabilities and fresh assistance without realigning the PSEs to new market realities. As such
previous revival plans could not ensure the sustainability of revival. The Committee doubts whether these packages would be
sustainable. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry of HI & PE to examine the inclusion of these vital components in the
revival packages so that the Companies come out of protected regime and operate in the new market realities.
(Para:9)
Action Taken 
2.         Revival schemes are formulated in consultation with the experts and the concerned PSEs. These schemes are finalized
to suit the specific requirements of the PSEs and also envisage technology up gradation / absorption, enhancing marketing
network, manpower training etc, besides including waiver of Government of India interest and conversion of loan into equity .
The implementation of revival packages is expected to enable the Companies to come out of protected regime and attain their
sustained revival.
Committee’s Further Recommendation 
3.         The Committee reiterates its observation. The reply is too general and does not give any information regarding the
specific measures to expand marketing and technological profile by the CPSEs approved by the BRPSE. Bearing in mind the
previous failed revival efforts and  in view of predominance of demands for Non-Planned expenditure, the Committee
wonders as to how did  the BRPSE convince itself of the sustainability of respective PSEs. The Committee also notes that the
BRPSE relies largely on the recommendations of consultants/experts and does not have any wherewithal to make its own
independent assessment.
Recommendation
4.         The Committee cautions that DHI should bear the previous experiences in mind while assessing and ensuring the
sustainability of revival. DHI should address the comprehensive restructuring of other critical factors that have bearing over
performance of a PSE. The Committee also suggests that the respective PSEs should be given financial targets to be achieved
within a time frame.  
(Para:11)

195th Report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/195threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:06:06]
Action Taken 
 
5.         The revival packages are generally formulated with the help of experts/consultants and all efforts are made to make the
packages comprehensive taking into account all the factors. Consequent upon approval of the revival schemes for PSEs,
MOU’s are being signed between this Department and the concerned PSEs. As suggested by the Committee, the respective
PSEs are being given financial targets to be achieved within a time frame. Progress of revival schemes is being monitored by
this Department on a regular basis in order to ensure sustainability of revival and also to take necessary corrective steps in this
regard.
 
Committee’s Further Recommendation 
 
6.         Given the prospective growth and investments in heavy industries and engineering   sector, the Committee observes
that the financial targets set for such CPSE are rather conservative vis a vis the cost of their revival.  The Committee impresses
upon the Government to ensure maximizing returns on its new investments in such PSEs.
 
Recommendation
 
7.         Moreover, in view of the details furnished by the DHI of the Planned capital expenditure, the Committee wonders that
such meager infusion as the part of revival plan, would at all be sufficient to carry out technological upgradations and to
realign market network. The DHI may offer its comments on the issue.
(Para:12)
Action Taken 
 
8.         The proposed planned capital expenditure as part of the revival plans of PSEs has been worked out in consultation with
the concerned PSEs based on the recommendations of consultants and BRPSE.  There is a separate head namely
“Restructuring of PSEs under DHI” with a provision of Rs. 87.82 crore in the budget of DHI for the year 2006-07 for
providing funds for revival/restructuring.    Any shortfall in funds is proposed to be met by re-appropriation/ Supplementary
Demands.
Committee’s Further Recommendation 
9.         The Committee finds the reply too general. Further, even after the passage of half the Financial Year, the Department
of Heavy Industries have not been able to provide the details of allocations out of the lump sum Planned allocation for the
Restructuring of PSEs and the purpose for which such allocations were made. The Committee is apprehensive that this year
too the appropriations from such lump sum allocations could be unevenly distributed. The Committee accordingly cautions the
Government to avoid such a practice.
Recommendation
10.       The Committee notes the reduction in allocation for FCRI. The Committee is of the view that this project is vital R&D
project and would require long-term committed allocations. The Committee therefore feels that budgetary constraints should
not come in the way. The Committee suggests that DHI may find out the ways to associate industry to meet the funds.
(Para : 50)
Action Taken
11.       The allocation is made on R&D requirement on a year –to- year basis. Allocation has been reduced because of the
budgetary constraints. However, in case of additional requirements during the year supplementary grant shall be sought. 
Testing/caliberation at FCRI is being done for the Industry on a chargeable basis.  These funds are also being utilized for
running of the Institute.    
 
Committee’s Further Recommendation 
 
12.       The Committee still feels that budgetary constraints should not come in the way. The Committee is keen to know
whether DHI has made any efforts to find out the ways to associate the industry to meet the funds. If not, the Committee may
be apprised of constrains.
 
Recommendation
 
13.       The Committee expresses its concern over the delay in sanctioning the project and would like to know the factors that
caused the delay to which the allocation could not be utilized in previous financial year. Furthermore, the Committee would
like to know the basis on which the allocations have been enhanced this year despite the fact the funds remained unutilized last
year.
(Para 55)
 

195th Report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/195threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:06:06]
Action Taken 
 
14.       After the “in principle approval” given by the Planning Commission to the projects of BEML, approval of the
competent authority namely EFC/PIB/Cabinet is a pre-requisite for the release of funds.  The projects are yet to be approved
by the EFC/PIB. Allocations have been enhanced in 2006-07 on account of lump sum provision of Rs. 87.82 crore for
restructuring of PSEs.  In the previous year 2005-06, only a token amount of Rs. 1.00 crore was provided for this purpose  
Committee’s Further Recommendation 
15.       The Committee notes that final approval is yet to be taken and recommends to expedite the decision on the so as to
avoid any further delay.
Recommendation
 
16.       The Committee however does not appreciate waiver of loan or interest on the loan given to a PSE. The Committee is
not sure whether this aspect is taken into account while extending loans to PSEs. The Committee desires to know the
circumstances under which such loans or interests thereon are waived. The Committee directs the re-examination of the whole
issue and DHI should furnish a detailed note on the issue while submitting the ATN.
(Para:64)
Action Taken
17.       As per the Public Sector Policy contained in National Common Minimum Programme   (NCMP), an exercise for
carefully appraising the fundamentals and capabilities of each of the PSE and formulating restructuring plans for each of the
PSE with the assistance of professional consulting agencies was initiated.
18.       Out of 27 PSEs of DHI, cases of 24 PSEs have already been submitted to BRPSE for seeking their recommendations. 
The cases of remaining 3 PSEs are likely to be submitted to BRPSE by September, October 2006.  BRPSE’s recommendations
have been received in 20 cases.
 
19.       Govt. have taken a decision in case of following 11 PSEs for revival restructuring/closure:
 
Hindustan Salts Ltd. (HSL) 7  Richardson & Cruddas (1972)
    Ltd.(R&C)
Bridge & Roof Company    Ltd.(B&R) 8  Tungbhadra Steel Products Ltd.(TSPL)
BBJ Construction Co. Ltd. 9  Cement Corporation of India Ltd.(CCI)
HMT(Bearings) Ltd. 10  Heavy Engineering Corpn. Ltd.(HEC)
Praga Tools Ltd. (PTL) 11  Bharat Ophtalmic Glass Ltd.(BOGL) – for closure.
 
Braithwaite & Company Ltd.  
 
20.       As a matter of policy, the Government do not waive loan or interest on the loan given to a PSE . Such waivers are
being provided only when a revival package formulated by expert/ consultants or revival package sanctioned by 
BIFR/BRPSE is implemented
Committee’s Further Recommendation 
 
21.       The Committee would like to be apprised of the basis on which the BRPSE convinced itself of the recommendations
by the consultants to suggest costly waivers of loans, the Committee is mindful of the fact that the previous revival failed
despite being approved by experts. The Committee has observed that PSEs are initially given loans as the Planned
expenditure, which in due course are either converted into equity or waived.
 
Recommendation
 
22.       The Committee observes that against the aggregate Paid up Capital of Government/ holding PSE to the tune of Rs
3911.96 crores, however the PSUs have accumulated loss of Rs 8795.24 crores with an aggregate negative net worth of Rs
5097.17 crores. The Committee apprehended that such a financial situation may eat up the modest profit, which PSEs are
likely to earn this year.
(Para : 111)
Action Taken
 
23.       Aggregate losses of the PSEs are high compared to the total paid up capital. In accordance with the policy enunciated
in the National Common Minimum Programme (NCMP), Government has undertaken a drive to revive the sick and loss
making PSEs wherever possible and close down those which are beyond revival. With implementation of the revival

195th Report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/195threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:06:06]
packages, the performance of PSEs is likely to improve as per the projections recommended by BRPSE.
 
Committee’s Further Recommendation 
24.       The Committee reiterates its observations and cautions the Department not to ignore financial realities.   The
Committee however seeks the response of the Department of its plan to liquidate such huge losses incurred by the PSEs and to
recover the value of Governments investment. 
 
 
Recommendation
 
25.       The Committee however noted that the efforts in the revival plans, is to gradually reduce the losses and turn these
companies into viable enterprises. To improve the Net worth of the PSEs the debt/loan liabilities are being restructured as a
part of revival plan. The Committee notes if such a pattern of assistance is sustainable for longer term and if it puts huge
pressure on Government’s finances. The Committee desires the DHI to find the way out.
(Para : 112)
Action Taken
 
26.       The revival packages involve not only the financial restructuring but also include technology, marketing etc. to ensure
sustainable revival. All the revival plans are formulated on the basis of the recommendations of the Board for Reconstruction
of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE). Financial support to the PSEs is being provided as per the approved revival plans.
 
Committee’s Further Recommendation 
           
27.       The Committee feels that the allocations for non-planned expenditure vis-à-vis planned expenditure themselves reflect
that the revival of PSEs is largely about liquidating the liabilities with  budgetary support.   The Committee is not informed of
the basis on which the BRPSE convinced itself of the viability of the recommendations of the respective consultants.  The
Committee feels that the Department is either shifting its accountability to the BRPSE or using it as an alibi.   The Committee
notes that even the recommendations of the BRPSE have to be eventually adopted by the Government and therefore, its is
incumbent upon the Government to justify such recommendations.
 
CHAPTER IV
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry have not been received
                                                                                     
Recommendation
 
1.         The Committee is constrained to note that in the several revival packages offering non-planned budgetary support for
wages, salaries, VRS and other statutory dues did enable the loss making PSEs to turn around but only marginally and
temporarily. This could have been due to faulty and partial implementation of lop-sided revival plans. The Committee
therefore cautions the Government to ensure the viability before approving the revival plan and also strictly monitor its
implementation. The Committee should be apprised of monitoring mechanism and the additional measures for successful
implementation.
(Para : 34)
Action Taken 
 
2.         The non-plan budgetary support for salary & wages and VRS & statutory dues are being provided to mitigate the
hardship of the employees of the sick and loss making PSEs as they are unable to meet these expenses. In accordance with the
policy enunciated in the National Common Minimum Programme (NCMP) Government has undertaken a drive to revive the
sick and loss making PSEs wherever possible and close down those which are beyond revival. All efforts are being made to
ensure that the preparation of the revival packages which involves financial, managerial and technical competence is
undertaken in consultation with experts/consultant, keeping in view various parameters to ensure sustainable revival.  
Consequent upon approval of the revival schemes for PSEs, MOU’s are being signed between this Department and the
concerned PSEs. The progress of revival schemes will be monitored by this Department on a regular basis in order to ensure
sustainability of revival and also to take necessary corrective steps in this regard.
 
Committee’s Further Recommendation 
3.         The Committee finds the reply too general inasmuch as it does not elaborate the monitoring mechanism with DHI. It
would also like to know the basis on which the BRPSE convinced itself of the viability of revival plan as suggested by the

195th Report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/195threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:06:06]
respective consultants.
Recommendation
 
4.         The Committee takes note of elaborate but protracted decision making procedure. However the DPR, as submitted in
January 2006, broadly indicates the extent of expenditure to be incurred in the project. Considering the relevance of the
technology demonstrator project, requisite finances should have been earmarked in the BE 2006-07. Here again the
Committee finds priorities of DHI flawed. The Committee accordingly considers that such R&D projects must be catered with
long-term committed finances instead of piecemeal allocations based on expeditious requirements.
(Para : 51)
 
Action Taken
 
5.         The R&D Committee for development of Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle (IGCC) technology, as suited to
Coal Gasification based Power Generation in India, in its 4
th Meeting held on 14 th October 2005 recommended the
commencement of Detailed Project Report (PR) preparation work for the 100 MW IGCC demonstration plant jointly by
BHEL and NTPC. Thereafter, a DPR was prepared by BHEL and submitted to NTPC in January 2006. Process of clarification
and consultation is on between NTPC and BHEL over reaching a final DPR. As such a final DPR is yet to be submitted jointly
by BHEL and NTPC (duly approved by their Board of Directors) to Department of Heavy Industry (DHI).
 
6.         As per the draft DPR, the Project cost is estimated at Rs. 885 crore for 125 MW IGCC Demonstration Project which
has a rated for gross capacity of 127.15 MW. As per the decision taken in the meeting of the Inter-Ministerial Steering Group
on 15
th December 2005, NTPC would contribute Rs. 4 crores per MW for the plant similar to the capital cost of other
generating plants. Accordingly, NTPC is expected to provide Rs. 508.60 crores (127.15x4). The investments for NTPC have
to be confirmed by NTPC’s Board. It may be noted that the rated capacity and the projected cost of the project has been
increasing over the years.
 
7.         BHEL is required to forward the final DPR (approved by the respective boards of NTPC & BHEL) to Department of
Heavy Industry along with the request for release of funds from DHI is appropriate proforma. Thereafter, DHI move the
proposal for approval of the competent authority for project including its funding components. 
 
Committee’s Further Recommendation 
 
8.         The Committee notes that even after the passage of half the Financial year, final approval is yet to be taken and
recommends to expedite  the decision on the DPR so as  to avoid any further cost escalation in the project . 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE
            The Committee strongly feels that the Government should come out with a transparent policy for unlocking of surplus
assets by the PSEs. The Committee feels that such a policy need to be uniform in respect of all the CPSEs which fall under
various Ministries/Departments of the Government of India. If necessary the concerned State Government may be consulted
before the formation of the policy on this issue with a view to have broad consensus. The Committee considers that in absence
of a transparent policy, it would be difficult for the PSEs to generate resources by unlocking the surplus assets as it may
involve administrative issues and avoidable litigations.(Para : 15)
 
            To consider the Cess as private sector’s contribution would be misrepresentation of fact. The Committee would like to
know the initial mandate for which Cess was levied, and if the NATRIP is covered within that mandate? The Committee is not
in agreement with the DHI’s assertion calling NATRIP a joint project by public and private partnership. As is evident from the
presentation given by the DHI, out of the total investment of Rs. 1718 crores only Rs 118 crores would be contributed by the
users from industry within three years, rest of the investment is to be made in one form or the other. The Committee feels that
the participation of industry should have been substantial to justify the public private partnership.(Para: 44)
 
            The Committee feels that the PSEs to become financially self-reliant must harness the export opportunities to earn their
own finances for revival.(Para : 114)
 
            It is the considered view of the Committee that the revival plans pertained largely to financial reconstruction, and
technology and marketing aspects are not contained in the revival plan approved by the Government. As the nodal Department
the DHI must monitor with the management of PSEs on  these aspects of revival. The Committee would like to be informed of
the steps taken by the DHI in this regard.(Para:10)
            The Committee observes that considering that the Planned Capital expenditure is vital for a sustainable revival, and
survivability of the PSEs, of the total required outlay of Rs. 1350.22 crores, a budgetary support of only Rs 450 crores has

195th Report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/195threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:06:06]
been given in the BE 2006-07.  The Committee wonders whether the PSEs would be able to generate the remaining Rs. 950.22
crores from non-budgetary sources. The Committee also wonders if the BRPSE has identified the potential sources to generate
balance funds from extra budgetary sources. The Committee would like to have the DHI’s comments on the possibility of such
shortfalls in budgetary allocations which may result in derailing the recommended revival of the PSEs.   
(Para : 19)
 
            The Committee finds in view of the past experience that even the lump sum allocations in the BE stage have remained
unutilized till the last quarter of Financial Year. Even in case of lump sum provision of Rs. 95 crore in RE 2005-06 for
restructuring of PSEs, only Rs. 27 crores could be spent till March 2006. The Committee also observed that of this lump sum
amount a sizable Rs. 44.60 crores were re-appropriated as non-planned expenditure towards CCI.  And that  Rs. 2.70 crores
have been surrendered at the advice of Ministry of Finance. The Committee wonders if any worthwhile capacity building of
PSEs been done as part of intended sustainable restructuring. Also observing the smaller amount that have been allocated to
individual PSEs for restructuring, the Committee only wonders if the amount could have raised from the market with requisite
subsidies from the Government. The Committee should be apprised if the amounts given out of this lump sum provision are
loans or grants to the individual PSEs.(Para: 69)
 
            The Committee notes with surprise that Rs. 44.60 crores meant for restructuring of CCI as Planned expenditure were
re-appropriated to Non-Plan expenditure. The Committee feels that such steps are ad-hoc and lack any long term strategy for
prudent financial management. The Committee asks DHI to clarify under which rule or guideline, such re-appropriation was
sought.(Para : 70)
            The Committee expresses its concern  that lump sum allocation remain under utilized till the last quarter of the
Financial year.  The Committee desires that  Government should ensure planned investment for capital expenditure.
Committee observes that the sheer quantum of such non-planned expenditures for revival suggests that revival packages have
focused largely on clearing the financial dues which the PSEs owe. Compared to which the Lumpsum allocations for the
restructuring the PSEs under Planned Capital Expenditures has been meager Rs. 87.82 crores this year which has been reduced
from Rs. 95 crores. (Para: 80)
 
            The Committee observes that of the total BE ( 2006-07) of  Rs. 905 crores, Rs 455 crores are Non-Planned
expenditures meant for committed expenses. Of this Rs. 400 crores are meant to settle VRS and statutory dues, salaries and
wages. Though these are loans to begin with but the Committee also notes the abysmal record of PSEs in respect of Loan
Repayment. The Committee finds it alarming that this situation has remained for years. Even during the FY 2005-06, it is
evident that while the Planned expenditure was enhanced only by Rs. 94 crores, the Non-Planned expenditure was enhanced
by Rs. 116 crores. The non-Planned expenditure was increased to meet the salary dues of the PSEs.(Para : 32)
 
            The Committee only wonders if the feeding the PSEs out of budgetary support is sustainable practice.(Para: 33)
 
            The Committee observes that the Non-Planned expenditure has been higher than Planned Expenditure for last several
years. Meaning thereby that the expenditure is much higher on the committed liabilities as compared to new developmental
and capacity-building initiatives under Government sponsored schemes. Even the committed liabilities reflected under Non-
Planned expenditure, the majority of expenditure has been going to meet on year to year basis the financial obligations
incurred by PSEs. In view of the definition of Capital expenditure as provided by the DHI, the Committee only wonders if the
lump sum allocations of Rs 400 crores to support to clear VRS dues and salary dues to the workers could at all be termed as
Capital expenditure. The Committee desires that DHI may clarify the position.(Para : 35)
 
            The Committee has not been furnished any information regarding the criteria on which any expenditure is approved by
the Planning Commission and is reflected as Planned Expenditure where as other bulk expenditures are shown as Non-Planned
expenditures. The Committee desires to know whether such a division is random or based on any objective criteria.
(Para : 36)
 
            For Rs. 47.4 crores required for the two-year pilot scheme for textile and machine tools sector only Rs. 1 lakh token
amount has been allocated. No information has been given as to how the remaining finance shall be garnered. Further
Committee may be apprised of the method of identifying the beneficiary Units, delivery of funds and monitoring the
performance of the scheme. The Committee would like to know if the beneficiary would also include the private sector units.
(Para : 47)
 
            The Committee wonders if the beneficiaries of the previous year would be repeated this year too. The Committee is
unable to comprehend the rationale behind having twin policies on VRS dues, one through the huge lump sum allocation and
also by subsidizing the PSEs for raising resources to settle VRS dues from market.(Para : 59)
            The Committee is of the view that the Government has been actually losing money given as loans to PSEs. In several

195th Report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/195threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:06:06]
cases, eventually these loans were either waived or converted into equity, thereby converting secure debt liability into an
insecure liability. The Committee impresses upon the DHI to check this trend and to take appropriate steps to ensure the
repayment of loans and interests thereon. (Para : 108)
            The Committee observes that the order book position of the PSEs under the DHI has grown steadily over past few
years. However the Committee expresses its serious apprehensions on the over dependence on Government for orders.
(Para : 116)
 
            The Committee concurs that stress of marketing should be beyond the State-owned sectors as more and more projects
are likely to be handled by the private sector or under public private partnership in various infrastructure areas.
(Para : 117)
                        The Committee recommends that the DHI should device an institutionalize mechanism to ascertain the
expectations of Auto Sector from Union Budgets and that the Department should convey the same to the Government on
behalf of the Auto sector.(Para : 128)
 
            The Committee observes from SWOT analysis that the PSEs consider increased competition in market as a major
threat also the technological drawback and inability to diversify the product profile are major constraining factors. The PSEs
still do not have marketing network so vital to retain the market niche and also to harness emerging. In absence of marketing
network and strategy, the PSEs continue to rely on Government and PSEs for orders, and have not been able to exploit new
business opportunities in private sector and export market. In order to face the increased competition, the PSEs have been
asking for consolidation, merger or Joint Ventures with other PSEs. However, these aspects have not been included in the
revival plans, whose focus is confined to the financial restructuring of the PSEs by infusion of fresh capital or waiving off or
restructuring the previous liabilities. Except for HEC, no other PSE has been asked to garner resources from internal sources
by unlocking surplus assets. As a result the Government has to make huge investment for the revival of these PSEs, who in
turn have assured to earn a rather modest profit over next five years.(Para : 138)
 
            The reply of the Department is too general and is not corroborated by the information on revival packages given to the
Committee by the Department.  The Committee expects the Department to be alive of the previous failed   revival packages. 
The Committee would like see the efficacy of the MOU system for the revived PSEs.
            The Committee seeks the elaborate response from DHI of its observations, queries and suggestions in its ATN.
(Para :139)
 
            The Committee observes that greater part of BRPSE approved Revival Plans includes waiver or conversion of previous
loans and interest liabilities into equity and Government’s Guarantee for raising fresh loan. However such Revival Plans do
not elaborate other components that would be critical for sustainable revival like technology up gradation and absorption,
enhancing marketing network, manpower training etc. It may be recalled that previous revival efforts too pertained to similar
cosmetic restructuring of financial liabilities and fresh assistance without realigning the PSEs to new market realities. As such
previous revival plans could not ensure the sustainability of revival. The Committee doubts whether these packages would be
sustainable. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry of HI & PE to examine the inclusion of these vital components in the
revival packages so that the Companies come out of protected regime and operate in the new market realities. (Para:9)
 
            The Committee reiterates its observation. The reply is too general and does not give any information regarding the
specific measures to expand marketing and technological profile by the CPSEs approved by the BRPSE. Bearing in mind the
previous failed revival efforts and  in view of predominance of demands for Non-Planned expenditure, the Committee
wonders as to how did  the BRPSE convince itself of the sustainability of respective PSEs. The Committee also notes that the
BRPSE relies largely on the recommendations of consultants/experts and does not have any wherewithal to make its own
independent assessment.
            The Committee cautions that DHI should bear the previous experiences in mind while assessing and ensuring the
sustainability of revival. DHI should address the comprehensive restructuring of other critical factors that have bearing over
performance of a PSE. The Committee also suggests that the respective PSEs should be given financial targets to be achieved
within a time frame.(Para:11)
 
            Moreover, in view of the details furnished by the DHI of the Planned capital expenditure, the Committee wonders that
such meager infusion as the part of revival plan, would at all be sufficient to carry out technological upgradations and to
realign market network. The DHI may offer its comments on the issue. (Para:12)
 
            The Committee notes the reduction in allocation for FCRI. The Committee is of the view that this project is vital R&D
project and would require long-term committed allocations. The Committee therefore feels that budgetary constraints should
not come in the way. The Committee suggests that DHI may find out the ways to associate industry to meet the funds.(Para :
50)

195th Report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/195threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:06:06]
 
            The Committee expresses its concern over the delay in sanctioning the project and would like to know the factors that
caused the delay to which the allocation could not be utilized in previous financial year. Furthermore, the Committee would
like to know the basis on which the allocations have been enhanced this year despite the fact the funds remained unutilized last
year.(Para 55)
            The Committee however does not appreciate waiver of loan or interest on the loan given to a PSE. The Committee is
not sure whether this aspect is taken into account while extending loans to PSEs. The Committee desires to know the
circumstances under which such loans or interests thereon are waived. The Committee directs the re-examination of the whole
issue and DHI should furnish a detailed note on the issue while submitting the ATN.(Para:64)
            The Committee observes that against the aggregate Paid up Capital of Government/ holding PSE to the tune of Rs
3911.96 crores, however the PSUs have accumulated loss of Rs 8795.24 crores with an aggregate negative net worth of Rs
5097.17 crores. The Committee apprehended that such a financial situation may eat up the modest profit, which PSEs are
likely to earn this year.(Para : 111)
            The Committee however noted that the efforts in the revival plans, is to gradually reduce the losses and turn these
companies into viable enterprises. To improve the Net worth of the PSEs the debt/loan liabilities are being restructured as a
part of revival plan. The Committee notes if such a pattern of assistance is sustainable for longer term and if it puts huge
pressure on Government’s finances. The Committee desires the DHI to find the way out.(Para : 112)
 
            The Committee is constrained to note that in the several revival packages offering non-planned budgetary support for
wages, salaries, VRS and other statutory dues did enable the loss making PSEs to turn around but only marginally and
temporarily. This could have been due to faulty and partial implementation of lop-sided revival plans. The Committee
therefore cautions the Government to ensure the viability before approving the revival plan and also strictly monitor its
implementation. The Committee should be apprised of monitoring mechanism and the additional measures for successful
implementation.
(Para : 34)
            The Committee takes note of elaborate but protracted decision making procedure. However the DPR, as submitted in
January 2006, broadly indicates the extent of expenditure to be incurred in the project. Considering the relevance of the
technology demonstrator project, requisite finances should have been earmarked in the BE 2006-07. Here again the
Committee finds priorities of DHI flawed. The Committee accordingly considers that such R&D projects must be catered with
long-term committed finances instead of piecemeal allocations based on expeditious requirements. Para : 51)