159thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/159threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:26]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON
INDUSTRY
 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY NINTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE COMMITTEE'S
145TH REPORT ON PROBLEMS BEING FACED BY SMALL SCALE
INDUSTRIES IN THE PROCUREMENT OF STEEL
(MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES)
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 17TH DECEMBER, 2004)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK  SABHA ON 17TH DECEMBER, 2004)
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
DECEMBER, 2004/AGRAHAYANA, 1926 (SAKA)
E-mail:rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
CONTENTS
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2. COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE-IV
3. INTRODUCTION
4. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
5. OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE ---- AT A
GLANCE
6. MINUTES.
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
(Date of Constitution – lst January, 2003 )
   1.  Dr. P.C. Alexander     –     Chairman
        RAJYA  SABHA
   2.  Prof M.M. Agarwal
   3.  Shri Jayantilal Barot
   4.  Dr. M.N. Das
   5.  Shrimati Saroj Dubey
   6.  Dr. Faguni Ram
   7.  Shri Lajpat Rai
   8.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   9.  Shri P.K. Maheshwari
10.  Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil

159thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/159threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:26]
11.  Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
12.  Shri S. Sivasubramanian
13.  Shrimati Sushree Devi
14.  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
15.  Shri K. Chandran Pillai
        LOK  SABHA
16.  Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
17.  Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
18.  Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
19.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das
20.  Shri K Francis George
21.  Shri Thomas Hansda
22.  Md. Anwarul Haque
23.  Shri A.C. Jose
24.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
25.  Shri Mansoor Ali Khan
26.  Shri Sunil Khan
27.  Shri Deepak Kumar
28.  Shri Manjay Lal
29.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
30.  Shri A. Narendra
31.  Shri Ananta Nayak
32.  Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
33.  Shri Uttamrao Patil
34.  Shri Malyala Rajaiah
35.  Shri P. Rajendran
36.  Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
37.  Shri Tarachand Sahu
38.  Shri Ramanand Singh
39.  Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
40.  Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
41.  Shri V. Vetriselvan
42.  Shrimati D.M. Vijaya Kumar
43.  Shri Radha Mohan Singh
44.  Shri Vijay Sankeshwar
        SECRETARIAT
        Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
        Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
        Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
        Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
        Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
COMPOSITION OF PRESENT COMMITTEE
(Date of Constitution – 5th August, 2004 )
   1.  Shri Santosh Bagrodia–    Chairman
        RAJYA  SABHA
   2.  Prof. M.M. Agarwal
   3.  Shri Surendra Lath
   4.  Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
   5.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
   6.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   7.  Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra

159thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/159threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:26]
   8.  Dr. Vijay Mallya
   9.  Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
10.  Shrimati Vanga Geetha
        LOK SABHA
11.  Shri Guharam Ajgalle
12.  Shri Kailash Baitha
13.  Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
14.  Shri Subhash Deshmukh
15.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
16.  Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria
17.  Shri Sunil Khan
18.  Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato
19.  Shri Prakash Paranjpe
20.  Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel
21.  Shri Rajnarayan
22.  Shri Bagida Ramakrishna
23.  Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
24.  Smt. Rubab Sayeda
25.  Shri Rana Gurjeet Singh
26.  Shri Manvendra Singh
27.  Shri Ganesh Singh
28.  Shri Suraj Singh
29.  Shri Chandramani Tripathi
30.  Shri Girdhari Yadav
31.  Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
        SECRETARIAT
        Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
        Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
        Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
        Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
        Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
Composition of Sub-Committee -IV for Action Taken Report
   1.  Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato - Convenor
        RAJYA SABHA
   2.  Prof. M.M. Agarwal
   3.  Dr. Vijay Mallya
   4.  Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
   5.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
        LOK SABHA
   6.  Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria
   7.  Shri Sunil Khan
   8.  Shri Suraj Singh
INTRODUCTION
        I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having been authorised
by the Committee, hereby present this One Hundred fifty ninth  Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Committee’s 145th Report on Problems being faced by Small Scale Industries in the
procurement of Steel.
2.     The Committee examined and considered the Action Taken Notes supplied by the Government (Ministry of Small
Scale Industries) on the recommendations contained in its 145 th Report on Problems being faced by Small Scale

159thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/159threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:26]
Industries in the procurement of Steel.
3.     The Sub-Committee-IV for the Action Taken Reports at its meeting held on 8 th December, 2004 considered and
adopted the Report.
4.     The Committee at its meeting held on 9th December, 2004 considered and adopted the Report.
 
NEW DELHI ;
9th December, 2004
SANTOSH BAGRODIA
Chairman,
Department-relatedParliamentary  Standing
Committee on Industry.
 
REPORT
         The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Small Scale Industries on the
Recommendations contained in the 145th Report (of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Industry) on the Problems being faced by Small Scale Industries in the procurement of Steel pertaining to the Ministry
of Small Scale Industries . The Report was presented /laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha on the 4 th
February, 2004.
2.      Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Small Scale Industries in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as follows:
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry of Small Scale Industries---- (Chapter
- I).
Recommendations:- 3.4 (i), 3.4 (iii), 3.4 (iv), 3.4 (vi), 3.4 (viii) c, 3.4 (viii) e.
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies : (Chapter - II)
Recommendations:- 3.4 (vii) a, 3.4 (viii) d, 3.4 (viii) f, 3.4 (viii) g, 3.4 (viii) h.
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies of the Ministry of
Small Scale Industries : (Chapter - III).
Recommendations:- 3.4 (ii), 3.4 (viii) b.
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry of Small Scale Industries have
not been received: (Chapter - IV).
Recommendations:- 3.4 (v).
3.      The Committee is pleased to observe that the Ministry of Small Scale Industries has accepted its recommendation
as mentioned in Chapter -I of the Report.
4.      In respect of the recommendations made in Chapter-II the Committee is convinced with the logic and explanation
advocated by the Ministry and therefore does not want to pursue further .
5.      The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of the recommendations contained in Chapter-
III and desires that the Ministry should furnish logical explanation in respect of these recommendations.
6.      In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV, the Ministry has either furnished the interim replies or
couched its language in vague terms like noted for compliance/guidance, therefore, the Committee directs that the
Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in respects of recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to
the point, as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee.
7.      The Details of the ATR is being discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.
CHAPTER - I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT

159thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/159threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:26]
Recommendation
l.l       ASSURED SUPPLY OF STEEL AS A RAW MATERIAL TO THE UNITS OF SMALL SCALE
INDUSTRIES
1.1.1Assured supply of steel as a raw material to the units of small scale industries:­--- keeping in view the importance
of Small Scale Industries steel producers should ensure that SSI mills are not forced to close down because of non
availability of raw materials. The Ministry of SSI must assess the requirement of raw material for the SSI units
throughout the country and forward the same in advance to the Ministry of Steel for ensuring that the supply of these
items to the small units is not arbitrarily reduced.
1.1.2The Government should consider introducing alternative institutional measures to ensure smooth supply of raw
materials----pig iron, coke, scrap iron, aluminium, copper, plastic raw materials, etc., at stable prices to the Foundry
units and SSI units working in the engineering and allied sectors. Even though the Government has dispensed with the
price control it should take note of the severe crisis situation that prevails in the SSI Sector because of the non-
availability of steel items and should step in with adequate alternative measures to ensure availability of raw materials
with the small scale manufacturers.
1.1.3The Committee is of the considered view that the Government must ensure the supply of raw materials at stable
prices for a period of 6 months to begin with. .All the buyer vendor agreements for private as well as the Government
purchases should have escalation clauses. Penalty clauses for the belated supplies should be introduced to protect the
interest of the Small Scale Sector.
1.1.4The Committee recommends that the consumer associations and the small scale industries associations could enter
into MoUs with the SAIL and other steel producers and get benefit of the incentives available to the long-term contracts
of the large scale industries.                                                                                             [Para 3.4. (i)]
Action Taken
1.1.5For assessing the requirement of iron and steel for the SSI units throughout the country, the Ministry of SSI had
requested all the States/UT Governments to furnish the projected demand for 2004-05, type/grade-wise. The Ministry of
SSI also held meetings with the State/U.T. Governments for expediting the requisite information. Based on the
information received from the States / U.Ts, the Ministry of SSI forwarded a consolidated statement in respect of 29
States /UTs to the Ministry of Steel for ensuring adequate supply of raw material to the SSI units in these States / UTs.
The Ministry of Steel convened a meeting on 7th April, 2004 with the representatives of State Corporations, major steel
producers and National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) to decide on the allocations of iron and steel for the year
2004-05. The first meeting of the Coordination          Committee was also held on 26th April, 2004, which was inter-alia
attended by the representatives of producers and consumer Associations. In the meetings, the Ministry of Steel informed
that allocations for the year 2004-05 in all those States where SSICs exist        would be made as per the demand
furnished by the States / U.Ts. Further, it was decided that supply of iron and steel would also be made through NSIC,
especially in those States where the SSICs do not exist and through other private steel producers like Jindal, Ispat, Essar,
JVSL etc. (without JPC rebate). The major steel producers agreed to enter into MoU with the consumer SSI
Associations and provide them maximum rebate / discount as given to any other agency lifting the same quantity.
1.1.6Furthermore, in order to ensure smooth supply of raw materials to the SSI units at reasonable prices, the
Government has issued Notification on 24.2.2004, lowering the customs duty on non-alloy steel items, pig iron, sponge
iron and met coke by 5 per cent In addition, vide Notification dated the 28th February 2004, the Government has
reduced the customs duty on coking coal (with ash content below 12 per cent) to 0 per cent and on non-coking coal and
pig iron to 5 per cent.
Recommendation
1.2    ESTABLISHMENT OF CO-ORDINATION COMMITTEE
1.2.1The Committee is of the view that there is a need to set up a Co-ordination Committee consisting of the
representatives of Ministry of Steel, Ministry of SSI and representatives of producers and consumers. This Co-
ordination Committee may look at the prices although not with the intention to regulate the prices but keep an eye on the
prices. This Committee may also assess the requirement of steel by the SSI sector and ensure timely
supply.                                           [Para 3.4. (iii)]

159thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/159threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:26]
Action Taken
1.2.2 A Co-ordination Committee has been set up under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Steel), consisting of Members
from the Ministry of Steel, Ministry of SSI, Department of Revenue, State Governments, Small Scale Industries
Development Corporations, producers and SSI Associations to assess the requirement of steel materials by the SSI
sector and the supply of such materials by the producers. The Committee shall also identify the problem areas and the
various bottlenecks and suggest measures, both short term and long term, for the assured supply of steel materials to the
SSI sector. The Committee shall meet at least once every quarter. The first meeting of the Coordination Committee was
held on 26th April, 2004 under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Steel).
Recommendation
1.3    STRENGTHENING  OF  STATE  SMALL  SCALE  INDUSTRIES  CORPORATIONS
1.3.1The Committee expresses its concern over the failure of several State Small Scale Industries Corporations in lifting
the steel for distribution to the units of the Small Scale Industries. It noted with concern the following statement made
by the representatives of Ministry of Steel before the Committee:­----
         “The Ministry of Steel gets demand chart from all the Small Scale Industries Corporations and they in turn give us
the aggregate demand of the SSI units. Based on the demand pattern, the Ministry of Steel ask the main producers
namely, the SAIL, IISCO, TISCO and others to tell us how much they need. More or less, the Ministry of Steel makes
efforts to match the demand with the supply. For example the Ministry of Steel allocated 5.4 lakh tonnes of steel based
on demand from the SSI Corporations. However, the State Small Scale Industries Corporation lifted only 40-50 per cent
of it on the stand that the price was high. They also change the requirement of the grades of steel”.
1.3.2The Committee gathers that the Small Scale Industries Corporations are given allocations every year based on their
demand. At the beginning of every year, material is allocated amongst the main producers, and an element of subsidy is
also provided to the Small Scale Industries Corporations. The Committee is of the view that the strengthening of State
Small Scale Industries Corporations would really help the small producers. The Committee also recommends that the
Small Scale Industries Corporations in the States should be made accountable for non-lifting of steel. The Ministry of
SSI should activate the Small Scale Industries Corporations in various States and chalk out the strategy to protect the
Small Scale Industries. The Committee noted with concern that the Ministry of SSI was not even aware of the non-
lifting of steel by the SSI corporations till the Ministry of Steel brought this information to the notice of the
Committee.                  [Para 3.4. (iv)]
Action Taken
1.3.3All the State/UT Governments have been apprised of the concerns of the Parliamentary Standing Committee
regarding non-lifting of iron and steel by the Small Scale Industries Development Corporations (SSIDCs) and the
recommendation of the Committee that the SSIDCs in the States should be made accountable for non-lifting of steel.
Furthermore, the State/UT Governments were requested to suggest measures, both short term and long term, needed to
revitalize the SSI Corporations/State Industrial Development Corporation (SIDCs) for their effective functioning. The
Ministry of Steel had also written to all the State Governments seeking co-operation in ensuring effective working of the
SSICs.
1.3.4The State / U.T. Governments have informed that poor lifting of raw material by the SSICs / SIDCs is mainly due
to the operational problems being faced by the Corporations vis-a-vis the steel producers. Some of the suggestions given
by the State / U.T. Governments for strengthening the functioning of SSICs/ SIDCs are: (i) the raw material should be
offered to the State Corporations at the same prices as to the private traders and same discount/ rebate should be
extended to them; (ii) the SSICs should be accorded priority by the producers for facilitating smooth supply to the SSI
units; (iii) the major steel producers should enter into MoUs with the State Corporations; (iv) required quantities of type
/ grade-wise iron and steel should be made available to the Corporations etc. These issues were discussed in detail in the
meetings convened by the Ministry of Steel. It was decided that main producers should route their supplies to SSI units
through SSICs and the SSICs should work in close coordination with the producers. The producers were advised to
schedule their rolling plan in accordance with the demand registered by the SSICs to the maximum extent possible. The
steel producers also assured to extend full cooperation to the Corporations in the supply of material.
Recommendation
1.4    NEED FOR SETTING UP OF COMPETITION COMMISSION
1.4.1During the course of interaction with SSI associations the representatives of Indian Micro Small and Medium
Enterprises and the Automotive Component Manufacturers Association of India (ACMA) complained about the
phenomenon of cartelisation by steel majors resulting in massive jump in steel prices and shortage of steel as a raw
material to the units of small scale industries. SSI units which are under contractual obligation to supply goods to
various States/Central agencies and other parties are incurring losses as the price increases in steel items are not

159thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/159threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:26]
included in the contract. Moreover, SSI units at present are not in a position to sign any long-term contract for exports
because of uncertainties over the price hike in steel. The Committee feels that if the prevailing situation is allowed to
continue for a longer period it may break the backbone of small scale industries and thus adversely affecting the national
economy. Therefore, the Committee strongly feels that there is an urgent need to set up the Competition Commission to
pre-empt such cartelisation. The Committee further recommends that the Government must also take up the question of
international cartelisation of steel with the WTO at the earliest.[Para 3.4. (vi)]
Action Taken
1.4.2 The recommendations of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry have been
brought to the notice of the Department of Company Affairs, which is the Administrative Department for the
Competition Commission and to the Ministry of Commerce regarding international cartelisation of steel. The
Department of Company Affairs has informed that a Competition Commission has already been set up.
Recommendation
1.5    HIGH PRICES OF NICKEL
1.5.1 Nickel is an 100 per cent imported raw material which bears a Custom Duty of 15 per cent ad volram, 16 per cent
CVD. The London Metal Exchange Rate with reference to Nickel has gone up to US$ 12800/- which is unprecedented.
This has almost crushed the tiny / SSI units who use nickel as their basic raw material. The rates have gone up to Rs.
850/- per kg. from Rs. 400/- per kg. The Committee observes that duty on Nickel should be drastically brought down
and MMTC should canalize the import to ensure the supply at reasonable rates.[Para 3.4. (viii) (c)]
Action Taken
1.5.2 The Government has already reduced the customs duty on nickel from 10 per cent to 5 per cent The Special
Additional Duty (SAD) of customs of 4 per cent has also been abolished with effect from 9th January, 2004.
Recommendation
1.6    CUSTOMS DUTY ON PRIME CRGO STEEL
1.6.1The Committee was apprised that the Prime CRGO steel is classified under Chapter 72 of the Customs Act, it is
bundled with other steels like mild steels, alloy steels, stainless steels etc., with a custom duty of 25 per cent which is
meant to protect the Indian Steel Industry against dumping of imported steel products. The high incidence of basic
customs duty @ 25 per cent on an important raw material (like CRGO steel) for transformer manufacturers is not
warranted as there is very limited indigenous availability. Therefore, the Committee is of the view that a reasonable
import duty on prime CRGO steel (electrical steel) will encourage usage of prime material in the manufacture of power
and distribution transformers in the Small Scale Sector. The Committee was assured by the Ministry of Small Scale
Industries that by using the proper CRGO steel, the quality of the transformers will be improved resulting in reduction
of transmission and distribution losses thereby effecting considerable savings.                                         
                                                              [Para 3.4. (viii) (e)]
Action Taken
1.6.2The Department of Revenue has informed that the general policy of the Government has been to prescribe, as far as
possible, the same rate of duty for the same class of products so as to avoid mis-declaration and disputes. Any reduction
in customs duty in respect of only a specific grade of electrical steel would mean that all steel consignments will need to
be examined/tested by customs in order to avoid misuse which may result in disputes and delay in customs clearances.
The Ministry of Steel has informed that M/s EBG India is the only producer of CRGO in the country and the firm is able
to meet the domestic requirement only partially. The customs duty on prime CRGO has been brought down to 15 per
cent w.e.f. 24.2.2004.
CHAPTER - II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation
2.0    RATIONALISATION OF TAX STRUCTURE
2.1.1During the course of interaction with the representatives of SSI Associations the Committee considered the
following proposals and feels that the Government should seriously give its thought for accepting and implementing

159thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/159threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:26]
them.
         (a)  Custom Duty on Prime Steel
         The Committee feels that the custom duty on prime steel may be reduced from 20 per crnt to 10% as per the
recommendations of Dr. Kelkar Committee, so as to provide level playing field. Even otherwise, the custom duty on
import of Iron and Steel material is to be reduced to 10 per cent by 2005 under the W.T.O. obligations. The removal of
non-tariff barriers and minimum floor rate would be ineffective if the custom duty is not brought down to 10 per cent.
[Para 3.4. (viii)]
Action Taken
2.1.2The Ministry of Finance has informed that the WTO binding for prime steel for 2005 is 40 per cent. As against this
binding, Government has already reduced the customs duty on prime steel from 25 per cent to 15 per cent. The Special
Additional Duty (SAD) of Customs of 4 per cent has also been abolished. Thus, the Government has reduced the overall
import duties on steel by about 17 per cent points. There is a strong domestic angle involved in respect of iron and steel,
and any further reduction in customs duty on steel may affect the domestic manufacturers of steel. Hence any further
reduction in customs duty on steel can be considered only in consultation with the Ministry of Steel.
Recommendation
2.2    CUSTOM DUTY ON SCRAP
2.2.1The Committee was apprised by the SSI Associations that at present the Customs Duty on scrap is 5 per cent plus
16 per cent CVD. In case, the scrap is imported by traders, the duty rules at 20 per cent. Thus, the cost of imported scrap
has increased to more than double. Moreover, the scrap is not available in India as China and Bangladesh have started
importing scrap from India. This trend has adversely affected the secondary producers for whom it is the basic raw
material. Keeping in view the interests of the domestic industries, the Committee feels that the customs duty structure
on scrap may be suitably rationalized enabling the tiny and SSI units to compete internationally as well as prohibiting
the dumping of scraps in Indian steel domestic market. A judicious decision on the part of the Government is required as
the steps taken for rationalization of custom duty on import of scrap must strike a balance in protecting the SSI units as
well as strengthening the anti dumping mechanism for the steel industry.                                                      [Para 3.4.
(viii) (f)]
Action Taken
2.2.2 The Department of Revenue has informed that the general rate of customs duty for iron and non-alloy steel is 15
per cent and iron and steel scrap imported for melting has been prescribed a concessional rate of 5 per cent. Melting
scrap is used in the induction/electric arc furnaces for melting (and manufacture of semi finished steel products) whereas
other forms of scrap such as re-rolling scrap can be directly re-rolled into finished steel products. It is not possible either
through testing or visual inspection to distinguish between melting scrap and other ferrous/non-ferrous scrap metal.
Hence an end use condition has been prescribed for availing the customs duty concession for melting scrap, so as to
avoid misuse of the concession. Customs duty on melting scrap has been continued at 5 per cent since 1994, whereas the
duty on re-rolling scrap has been gradually reduced by the Government and the customs duty on re-rolling scrap was
reduced from 25 per cent to 15 per cent. The Special Additional Duty (SAD) of Customs of 4 per cent has also been
abolished. The Department of Revenue is of the view that rationalisation of customs duty rates is a continuous process.
Recommendation
2.3    LEVYING OF CENTRAL EXCISE DUTY ON SHIP BREAKING
2.3.1The SSI Associations advocated the abolition of the 16 per cent central excise duty recently levied on ship breaking
which is according to them absolutely uncalled for as central excise duty can only be levied on the process of
manufacture as per the Act and ship breaking is not a process of manufacture by any standard. In their view such a step
would provide scrap for the secondary producers of Iron and Steel at cheaper rates. However, the Committee was
apprised by the representatives of the Ministry of Steel that the ship breaking industry has been recognized as the
manufacturing industry. In fact, the ship breakers have been fighting for being recognized as manufacturing industry.
Till 1994, they were not recognized, and after fighting for it, they got the status of manufacturing industry. Now, they
have gone to the Supreme Court because one of the High Courts has given a ruling that the ship breaking industry is not
a manufacturing industry and therefore, excise is not leviable. The excise duty paid by the ship breaking manufacturers
are modvatable as they collect it from the customer and pass forward. The Ministry of Steel has taken up their demand
that the duty should be reduced to 10 per cent. The Committee is of the view that pending decision of the Supreme

159thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/159threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:26]
Court in the matter, the Central Excise Duty may be reduced to the level as low as
possible.                                                                      [Para 3.4. (viii) (g)]
Action Taken
2.3.2The Department of Revenue has informed that the Supreme Court, in the case Ashish Steel Pvt. Ltd. vs. Collector-
1999 (108)E.L.T.A.180(S.C.) had rejected an appeal against the Tribunal Order holding that ship breaking is to be
considered as manufacturing activity under Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985. The process of obtaining goods specified in
Section XV of the First Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985, by breaking up of ships is deemed to be a
process amounting to manufacture for the purpose of levy of excise duty in view of Note 9 of the said Section. Excise
Duty paid on scrap, by ship breakers, is eligible for being taken as CENVAT credit by the downstream manufacturers.
Hence, it should not have any adverse effect on the prices of scrap.
Recommendation
2.4    ADEQUATE SUPPLY OF PIG-IRON TO THE FOUNDRY UNITS IN SMALL SCALE SECTOR
2.4.1The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry of Steel has directed PSUs especially RINL not to export pig-
iron and the RINL has released about 10,000 metric tonnes of pig iron in the market and tenders have been floated.
However, the Committee hopes that the steel PSUs wiIl continue to supply adequate quantity of the pig iron to the units
of the small and the medium enterprises.                                                                              [Para 3.4. (viii) (h)]
Action Taken
2.4.2The Ministry of Steel has set up the Co-ordination Committee to ensure adequate supply of raw material to the SSI
units. The steel producing PSUs have assured to extend full cooperation to the SSICs in the supply of iron and steel.
CHAPTER - III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE HAS NOT
ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES
Recommendation
3.0    SUPPLY  OF  STEEL  TO  THE  SSI  UNITS  AT  REASONABLE  PRICE
3.1.1Although the Committee appreciates that in an open economy the prices are determined by the market forces the
need for introducing appropriate mechanism for keeping the prices stable for a given period should receive the
immediate attention of the Government. A “Triggered Price Mechanism” should be considered by the Government as a
short-term measure to overcome the present crisis situation faced by the SSI Sector. There is 5 per cent reduction in
basic duty and 4 per cent in SAD and in effective implementation the duty reduction comes to 10.5 per cent which has
been announced some time ago. Further reduction in duty, should be considered as an intermediate measure of relief to
the SSI Sector, at least for a period of six months to begin with. It should be linked with the Triggered Price Mechanism
for example if the international price of HR coil goes beyond 400 dollars per tonne, duty can be reduced. If it comes
below 400 dollars per tonne, duty should remain the same. Under such a mechanism the duty automatically becomes
plus or minus depending on the price.            Para 3.4. (ii)
Action Taken
3.1.2The Department of Revenue has informed that customs duties cannot be a ‘correcting mechanism for market forces
as the prices of commodities vary on account of several factors including increase in input costs, demand-supply
situation etc. In case of steel, the prices of the inputs like coking coal, met coke etc., have increased steeply. It is thus
not possible to link the customs duty rates to the international prices of commodities.
         The Ministry of Steel has, however, informed that they would make appropriate recommendations to the Ministry
of Finance on “Triggered Price Mechanism” as proposed by the Committee.
Further Recommendation
3.1.3The Committee is in agreement with the opinion of Department of Revenue that the custom duty is not the only
correcting mechanism for the determination of price of the commodities as the price of the commodities are determined
by the market forces and other prices determinants including input costs, demand supply situation etc. but the market
situation is sometimes manipulated / where scenario of short supply of an item is reflected. In the present context, steel
products, which are also required by domestic small scale units as a raw materials have been supplied to China and other

159thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/159threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:26]
countries at discriminatory price tag in comparison to the domestic industries and the result was that the small scale
industries had run short of its basic raw materials.
3.1.4It is known to the Committee that the price of the steel is determined by inputs cost like coking coal, met coke and
rise and fall in inputs cost which leads to rise and fall in the steel prices. But the question arises has the rise in the steel
prices been in proportion to in the rise in inputs cost of the steel ? However, the basic concern of the Committee is the
supply of the steel to SSI units at reasonable price.
3.1.5The Committee is of the considered view that the Ministry of SSI and Steel should pursue the “Triggered Price
Mechanism” as a short term measure to ensure the supply of steel raw material to SSI units at reasonable price.
3.1.6The Committee further recommends that the Government may think in terms of creation of regulatory mechanism
in steel industry for monitoring price stabilization of steel products and related issues in line with Telephone Regulatory
Authority of India (TRAI) which would ensure discplined price fluctuation by steel players both in Public and Private
sectors.
Recommendation
3.2    INTER-SECTORAL CO-OPERATION AND COLLABORATIVE ATTITUDE AND APTITUDE
3.2.1Inter-sectoral Co-operation and Collaborative Attitude and Aptitude:- The Committee strongly feels that in order to
achieve the cherished national goal of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) above 10% it is essential that concerted and
considered impetus must be given to the equitable and proportionate growth and development of various sectors of
economy with the aid and advice of good governance and regulations under the liberalized and globalised regime. Such
holistic and integrated model of industrial growth and economic development is possible only when the element of
inter-sectoral cooperative and collaborative attitude and atmosphere prevails in all the rungs of the governance. There is
a great need for closer coordination among the Ministries of Small Scale Industries, Steel, Commerce and Finance for
sorting out the problems being faced by the SSI units under the prevailing circumstances.                                          
       Para 3.4. (vii)
Action Taken
3.2.2All the concerned Ministries/Departments have been apprised of the recommendations of the Committee. The
Department of Revenue has informed that tariff changes in customs and excise duties on various commodities are
carried out, inter alia, after consultation with the Administrative Ministries and taking into account the revenue needs of
the Government.
Further Recommendation
3.2.3The Committee is of the considered view that the equitable and proportionate growth and development of various
sectors of economy is the sina­qu-non for overall rapid and balanced growth and development of national economy.
That is possible only through integrated economic planning and inter ­sectoral co-operation and collaborative aptitudes.
Development of a particular segment of economy at the expense of other segment would only lead to segment ­-
specific-regional growth but such growth would retard the rapid national economic growth. In this context, the
Committee would like to highlight that small scale industries has the great potential of employment generation
particularly in the rural or semi urban areas where the pace of economic development needs to be accelerated. In order
to promote SSI sectors to its optimum potential and to encourage SSI to enhance its contribution to the growth and
development of national economy to the maximum extent, a rational tax regime needs to be applied. An objective
assessment of the other problems being faced by SSI units, other than taxation provisions, needs to be identified for their
immediate redressal. The Ministry of SSI should identify those problems and communicate the same to the concerned
Departments/Ministries and the concrete solution must be explored without delay for providing timely solution to the
SSI units. That is why, the Committee recommended for adoption of co-operative and collaborative attitude and aptitude
by the various Ministries towards SSI sectors. Such inter-sectoral co-operation should have objective base / contribution
and not merely on philosophical plane. SSI needs concrete assurance from the concerned Ministries including the
Department of Revenue.
Recommendation
3.3    RATIONALIZATION  OF  CUSTOM  DUTY  ON  STEEL  RAW  MATERIAL
3.3.1 The Committee also agrees that the customs duty should be lower on raw materials and higher on finished goods

159thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/159threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:26]
in order to boost the domestic industries. Therefore, the duty structure on steel raw material like HR Coils, CR Coils,
CR Strips, Steel ingots, Steel Flats, MS Rounds, Cutting should be reasonably fixed. The customs duty on the
secondary/defective materials is 40% plus 16% CVD which works out to 56%. It is therefore high time that the Customs
Duty on these materials should be reasonably brought down.                                        
                                                 Para 3.4. (viii) (b)
Action Taken
3.3.2 The Ministry of Steel has informed that the customs duty on seconds and defective items has been kept at the
highest level of 40% after a conscious decision of the Government. This has been done to prevent dumping of such
defective materials in the Indian market. The surge in imports of seconds and defectives during 2001-02 and 2002­-03,
to the severe detriment of the domestic industry had led to the decision. The Ministry of Steel has further informed that
the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry in an earlier recommendation, had
recommended imposition of measures to tackle the menace of imports of seconds and defectives.
Further Recommendation
3.3.4The basic concern of the Committee is the protection and encouragement to the domestic industries e.g. small scale
industries which has the potential of job-led growth. Therefore, the Committee reiterates that the custom duty should be
lower on raw material and higher on finished goods in order to boost the domestic industries. The Committee
understands that the protection and encouragement to the SSI sector is essential but equally important is the prevention
of dumping of seconds and defective items in domestic steel market.
         The Committee understands the need for strengthening anti dumping measures, which incorporates of course, the
imposition of suitable custom duties on seconds and defective steel items. The Ministry of Steel in conjunction with
Department of Revenue may explore the possibility of lowering of custom duty on steel items used as raw material by
SSI sector and streamlining the other anti dumping measures like strengthening of monitoring mechanism to ensure the
smooth running of job led growth of Small Scale Industries without weakening the anti dumping mechanism to protect
the domestic steel industry as well from the influx of seconds and defective items.
CHAPTER - IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
Recommendation
4.1    WITHDRAWAL OF THE LEVY OF EXCISE DUTY ON RAILWAY FREIGHT/STOCKYARD
EXPENSES ON TRANSPORTATION OF IRON AND STEEL FROM PLANTS TO STOCKYARDS
4.1.1Restoration of Notification No. 13/2000 i.e. withdrawal of the levy of excise duty on railway freight/stockyard
expenses on transportation of iron and steel from plants to stockyards: - The representatives of SAIL informed the
Committee that in the budget 2000-0l the integrated steel plants were excluded from payment of excise duty on freight
and distribution element for the depot sales. The Committee understands that the exclusion of steel units from payment
of excise duty on freight and distribution had helped in making steel available to small scale manufacturers/consumers
and also to rural areas which are primarily catered by stockyards. However, in the Union Budget for 2003-04, the
notification on excluding integrated steel plants from payment of excise duty on freight and distribution charges was
withdrawn. This has the following adverse effects according to SAIL:­
4.1.2The stockyard network, which is one of the biggest was established across the length and breadth of the country in
order to reach steel to small industries/common man. However, due to levy of excise duty on freight and distribution
charges, steel has become comparatively costlier for deliveries from stockyards.
4.1.3The small scale manufacturers/consumers requiring steel in small quantities and who are unable to procure rake-
loads directly from the plants have been put to disadvantage in comparison with the customers who can purchase the
material in rake loads from the steel plants directly.
4.1.4Viability of the stockyards is getting affected in fiercely competitive environment since steel has become costlier
for sales through stockyards, vis-a.-vis traders who might procure directly from plants and thus not required to pay
excise duty on freight, though final destination could be the same market.

159thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/159threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:26]
4.1.5There would be further stress on road movement, which has its own implications considering the congested road
network.
4.1.6The Committee endorses the view of the SAIL and recommends that the Notification No. 13/2000 be restored so
that small scale industries and other petty customers who normally lift the materials from stockyards, are not in a
disadvantageous position through excise duty on freight/stockyard expenses incurred on movement of iron and steel
items from plants to stockyards.                                                                             Para 3.4. (v)
Action Taken
4.1.7The Department of Revenue has informed that prior to Budget 2003-04, integrated steel plants were allowed to pay
central excise duty, on the ex-factory value, even if the products were sold to a buyer away from factory gate. The
implication of this exemption was that the integrated steel plants were not required to pay excise duty on the
transportation cost even though secondary steel manufacturers were paying excise duty on full value including
transportation cost. Since 2001, this exemption has been withdrawn as it is inconsistent with the concept of Transaction
Value adopted under the Central Excise Act. The transaction value is linked to the total amount recovered from the
customers and exclusion of certain portion of the cost from the value for charging excise duty is not consistent with the
new valuation scheme based on such transaction value. This is also the international practice. Moreover, the
downstream manufacturers are eligible to avail CENVAT credit of duty paid and as such, this change should not have
any adverse impact on the final product prices. Thus, it is not possible to make an exception only for steel industry.
4.1.8However, as suggested by the Committee, the Ministry of Steel has again taken up this issue with the Department
of Revenue.
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF
THE ­COMMITTEE ---- AT A GLANCE
SUPPLY OF STEEL TO THE SSI UNITS AT REASONABLE PRICE
         The Committee is in agreement with the opinion of Department of Revenue that the custom duty is not the only
correcting mechanism for the determination of price of the commodities as the price of the commodities are determined
by the market forces and other prices determinants including input costs, demand supply situation etc. but the market
situation is sometimes manipulated / where scenario of short supply of an item is reflected. In the present context, steel
products, which are also required by domestic small scale units as a raw materials have been supplied to China and other
countries at discriminatory price tag in comparison to the domestic industries and the result was that the small scale
industries had run short of its basic raw materials.                                                                                                              (
Para 3.1.3)
         It is known to the Committee that the price of the steel is determined by inputs cost like coking coal, met coke and
rise and fall in inputs cost which leads to rise and fall in the steel prices. But the question arises has the rise in the steel
prices been in proportion to in the rise in inputs cost of the steel ? However, the basic concern of the Committee is the
supply of the steel to SSI units at reasonable price.                                                                                   ( Para 3.1.4)
         The Committee is of the considered view that the Ministry of SSI and Steel should pursue the “Triggered Price
Mechanism” as a short term measure to ensure the supply of steel raw material to SSI units at reasonable price.( Para
3.1.5)
         The Committee further recommends that the Government may think in : terms of creation of regulatory
mechanism in steel industry for monitoring price stabilization of steel products and related issues in line with Telephone
Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) which would ensure disciplined price fluctuation by steel players both in Public
and Private sectors.            ( Para 3.1.6)
INTER-SECTORAL CO-OPERATION AND COLLABORATIVE ATTITUDE AND APTITUDE
         The Committee is of the considered view that the equitable and proportionate growth and development of various
sectors of economy is the sina­qu-non for overall rapid and balanced growth and development of national economy.
That is possible only through integrated economic planning and inter ­-sectoral co-operation and collaborative
aptitudes. Development of a particular segment of economy at the expense of other segment would only lead to
segment­-specific-regional growth but such growth would retard the rapid national economic growth. In this context,
the Committee would like to highlight that small scale industries has the great potential of employment generation

159thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/159threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:26]
particularly in the rural or semi urban areas where the pace of economic development needs to be accelerated. In order
to promote SSI sectors to its optimum potential and to encourage SSI to enhance its contribution to the growth and
development of national economy to the maximum extent, a rational tax regime needs to be applied. An objective
assessment of the other problems being faced by SSI units, other than taxation provisions, needs to be identified for their
immediate redressal. The Ministry of SSI should identify those problems and communicate the same to the concerned
Departments/Ministries and the concrete solution must be explored       without delay for providing
timely solution to the SSI units. That is why the Committee recommended for adoption of co-operative and
collaborative attitude and aptitude by the various Ministries towards SSI sectors. Such inter-sectoral co-operation should
have objective base / contribution and not merely on philosophical plane. SSI needs concrete assurance from the
concerned Ministries including the Department of Revenue.                                                                         ( Para 3.2.3)
RATIONALIZATION OF CUSTOM DUTY ON STEEL RAW MATERIAL
         The basic concern of the Committee is the protection and encouragement to the domestic, industries e.g. small
scale industries which has the potential of job-led growth. Therefore, the Committee reiterates that the custom duty
should be lower on raw material and higher on finished goods in order to boost the domestic industries. The Committee
understands that the protection and encouragement to the SSI sector is essential but equally important is the prevention
of dumping of seconds and defective items in domestic steel market.
         The Committee understands the need for strengthening anti dumping measures, which incorporates of course, the
imposition of suitable custom duties on seconds and defective steel items. The Ministry of Steel in conjunction with
Department of Revenue may explore the possibility of lowering of custom duty on steel items used as raw material by
SSI sector and streamlining the other anti dumping measures like strengthening of monitoring mechanism to ensure the
smooth running of job led growth of Small Scale Industries without weakening the anti dumping mechanism to protect
the domestic steel industry as well from the influx of seconds and defective items.                                                       (
Para 3.3.4)
MINUTES
I
FIRST  MEETING
         The Sub-Committee-IV for Action Taken Reports (of Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Industry) met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 8 th December, 2004 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House,
New Delhi.
         PRESENT
   1.   Shri Santosh Bagrodia   —   Chairman
   2.   Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato  —  Convenor
         RAJYA  SABHA
   3.   Prof. M.M. Aggarwal  —  Convenor
   4.   Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
   5.   Dr. K. Malaisamy
         LOK  SABHA
   6.   Shri Sunil Khan
         SECRETARIAT
         Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
         Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
         Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
         Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
2.      At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the Chairman of the Committee and Members of the Sub-Committee-IV to
the meeting. The Sub-committee, thereafter, took up the following Reports for consideration:-
(i)    154 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 129
Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in the Regions of Delhi, Noida and Ghaziabad (Ministry of Small Scale

159thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/159threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:26]
Industries).
 (ii)   155 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 130th
Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in Himachal Pradesh (Ministry of Small Scale Industries).
(iii)   156th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 131th
Report on constraints in Industrial Development of North Eastern Region (Ministry of Heavy Industries and
Public Enterprises).
(iv)   157th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 141th
Report on Potential of Coir Industries in West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar (Ministry of Agro and Rural
Industries).
(v)   158th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 143rd
Report on Level Playing Field for the Indian Capital Goods Industry (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises).
(vi)   159 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s I45th
Report on Problem being faced by Small Scale Industries in the Procurement of Steel (Ministry of Small Scale
Industries).
3.      After a brief discussion, all the above reports were adopted by the Sub-Committee.
4.      The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M.
 
X
TENTH  MEETING
         The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 9 th
December, 2004 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
         PRESENT
   1.   Shri Santosh Bagrodia  —  Chairman
         RAJYA  SABHA
   2.   Prof. M.M. Agarwal
   3.   Shri Surendra Lath
   4.   Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
   5.   Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   6.   Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
   7.   Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
         LOK  SABHA
   8.   Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
   9.   Shri Subhash Desmukh
10.   Shri Sunil Khan
11.   Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato
12.   Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel
13.   Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
14.   Shri Ganesh Singh
15.   Shri Chandramani Tripathi
16.   Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
         SECRETARIAT
         Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
         Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
         Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer

159thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/159threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:26]
2.      At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting. The Committee, thereafter,
took up following Reports for consideration :
(i)    154 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 129
Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in the Regions of Delhi, Noida and Ghaziabad (Ministry of Small Scale
Industries).
(ii)    155 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 130th
Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in Himachal Pradesh (Ministry of Small Scale Industries).
(iii)   156th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 131th
Report on constraints in Industrial Development of North Eastern Region (Ministry of Heavy Industries and
Public Enterprises).
(iv)   157th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 141th
Report on Potential of Coir Industries in West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar (Ministry of Agro and Rural
Industries).
(v)   158th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 143rd
Report on Level Playing Field for the Indian Capital Goods Industry (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises).
(vi)   159th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 145th
Report on Problem being faced by Small Scale Industries in the Procurement of Steel (Ministry of Small Scale
Industries).
3.      After a brief discussion, all the reports were adopted by the Committee without any, modification and decided to
present / lay from 154th to 156th Reports on 16th December 2004 and from 157th to 159th Reports on the following day
i.e. 17th December, 2004.
4.      The Chairman, then, nominated Prof. M.M. Agarwal, in his absence Shri Surendra Lath, and in their absence of
Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra for Rajya Sabha and Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato and in his absence Shri Sunil Khan for Lok
Sabha for presenting / laying 154th to 156th Reports to both the Houses of the Parliament on 16th December, 2004. The
Chairman nominated Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy and in his absence Shri Suresh Bhardwaj and in their absence of Dr. K.
Malaisamy in Rajya Sabha and Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria and in his absence Shri Swadesh Chakraborty in Lok Sabha for
presenting / laying 157 th to 159 th Reports of the Committee to both the Houses of the Parliament on 17 th December,
2004.
5.      The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M.
 
 