155th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/155threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:24]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
 COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY-FIFTH REPORT
 
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE COMMITTEE'S
130TH REPORT ON CREDIT FLOW TO SSI SECTOR IN
HIMACHAL PRADESH
MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 16TH DECEMBER, 2004)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 16TH DECEMBER, 2004)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2004/AGRAHAYANA, 1926 (SAKA)
E-mail : rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------
CONTENTS
            1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
            2. COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE-IV
            3. INTRODUCTION
            4. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
            5. OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE—AT A
GLANCE
            6. MINUTES
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
(Date of Constitution - 1st January 2003)
     1.   Dr. P.C. Alexander----Chairman
           RAJYA SABHA
     2.   Prof. M.M. Agarwal
     3.   Shri Jayantilal Barot
     4.   Dr. M.N. Das
     5.   Shrimati Saroj Dubey
     6.   Dr. Faguni Ram
     7.   Shri Lajpat Rai
     8.   Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
     9.   Shri P.K. Maheshwari

155th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/155threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:24]
   10.   Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
   11.   Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
   12.   Shri S. Sivasubramanian
   13.   Shrimati Sushree Devi
   14.   Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
   15.   Shri K. Chandran Pillai
           LOK SABHA
   16.   Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
   17.   Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
   18.   Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
   19.   Shri Nepal Chandra Das
   20.   Shri K Francis George
   21.   Shri Thomas Hansda
   22.   Md. Anwarul Haque
   23.   Shri A.C. Jose
   24.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
   25.   Shri Mansoor Ali Khan
   26.   Shri Sunil Khan
   27.   Shri Deepak Kumar
   28.   Shri Manjay Lal
   29.   Dr. K. Malaisamy
   30.   Shri A. Narendra
   31.   Shri Ananta Nayak
   32.   Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
   33.   Shri Uttamrao Patil
   34.   Shri Malyala Rajaiah
   35.   Shri P. Rajendran
   36.   Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
   37.   Shri Tarachand Sahu
   38.   Shri Ramanand Singh
   39.   Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
   40.   Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
   41.   Shri V. Vetriselvan
   42.   Shrimati D.M. Vijaya Kumari
   43.   Shri Radha Mohan Singh
   44.   Shri Vijay Sankeshwar
 
           SECRETARIAT
           Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
           Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
           Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
           Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
           Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Date of Constitution - 5th August, 2004)
     1.   Shri Santosh Bagrodia   ----       Chairman
           RAJYA SABHA
     2.   Prof. M.M. Agarwal
     3.   Shri Surendra Lath
     4.   Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
     5.   Dr. K. Malaisamy
     6.   Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
     7.   Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
     8.   Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
     9.   Dr. Vijay Mallya
   10.   Shrimati Vanga Geetha

155th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/155threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:24]
           LOK SABHA
   11.   Shri Guharam Ajgalle
   12.   Shri Kailash Baitha
   13.   Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
   14.   Shri Subhash Deshmukh
   15.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
   16.   Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria
   17.   Shri Sunil Khan
   18.   Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato
   19.   Shri Prakash Paranjpe
   20.   Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel
   21.   Shri Rajnarayan
   22.   Shri Bagida Ramakrishna
   23.   Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
   24.   Shrimati Rubab Sayeda
   25.   Shri Rana Gurjeet Singh
   26.   Shri Manvendra Singh
   27.   Shri Ganesh Singh
   28.   Shri Suraj Singh
   29.   Shri Chandramani Tripathi
   30.   Shri Girdhari Yadav
   31.   Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
           SECRETARIAT
           Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
           Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
           Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
           Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
           Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE-IV FOR ACTION TAKEN REPORT
     1.   Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato  —  Convenor
           RAJYA SABHA
     2.   Prof. M.M. Agarwal
     3.   Dr. Vijay Mallya
     4.   Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
     5.   Dr. K. Malaisamy
           RAJYA SABHA
     6.   Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria
     7.   Shri Sunil Khan
     8.   Shri Suraj Singh
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------
INTRODUCTION
         I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having been authorised
by the Committee, hereby present this One Hundred Fifty-fifth Report on the Action of Taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in the Committee's 130th Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in Himachal Pradesh.
2.      The Committee examined and considered the Action Taken Notes supplied by the Government (Ministry of Small
Scale Industries) on the recommendations contained in its 130th Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in Himachal
Pradesh.
3.      The Sub-Committee-IV for the Action Taken Reports at its meeting held on 8 th December, 2004 considered and
adopted the Report.
4.      The Committee at its meeting held on 9th December, 2004 considered and adopted the Report.     
NEW DELHI; SANTOSH BAGRODIA

155th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/155threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:24]
9th December, 2004 Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Industry.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
          REPORT
          The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Small Scale Industries on the
Recommendations contained in the 130th Report (of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Industry) on the Credit Flow to SSI Sector in Himachal Pradesh pertaining to the Ministry of Small Scale Industries.
The Report was presented/laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha on the on 22nd December, 2003.
2.       Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Small Scale Industries in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as follows:---
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry of Small Scale Industries: (Chapter-
I)
Recommendations : 2.7, 2.8, 2.9, 2.10, 2.11, 2.18, 2.36, 2 37, 2.48, 3.44, 3.48, 3.50, 4.19, 4.23, 4.25, 4.27
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies: (Chapter-II)
Recommendations : 3.3, 3.16, 3.22, 3.38, 3.46, 3.52
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies of the Ministry:
(Chapter-III)
Recommendations : 2.39, 3.5, 3.7, 3.27, 3.30, 3.39, 3.40, 3.41, 3.42, 3.43
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry have not been received:
(Chapter-IV)
Recommendations : 2.41, 3.9, 3.24, 4.3, 4.16, 4.29
3.       The Committee is pleased to observe that the Ministry has accepted its recommendation as mentioned in Chapter-
I of the Report.
4.       In respect of the recommendations made in Chapter-II the Committee is convinced with the logic and explanation
advocated by the Ministry and therefore does not want to pursue further.
5.       The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of recommendations contained in Chapter-III
and desires that the Ministry should furnish logical explanation in respect of these recommendations.
6.       In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV, the Ministry has either furnished the interim replies or
couched its language in vague terms like noted for compliance/guidance, therefore, the Committee directs that the
Ministry should furnish Action Taken “Notes in respects of recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to
the point, as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee.
7.       The Details of the ATR is being discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
1.1     Pattern of industrialization in Himachal Pradesh
1.1.1 The Committee feels that industrialization in Himachal Pradesh has been concentrated around few districts and a
large area of the State remains unaffected by industrialization. The Committee strongly recommends that new areas be
developed and the process of industrialization spread in a manner so as to benefit the State as a whole.            
                                                                                                                                            (Para: 2.7)
Action Taken
1.1.2  The State Government has informed that the entire State of Himachal Pradesh is industrially backward except

155th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/155threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:24]
some development on the periphery of the State. In the Industrial Policy 1999, the State has been classified into two
categories namely “Industrially developing areas” and “Industrially backward areas”. Tribal areas of the State, as
notified from time to time have been treated as tax-free industrial zones to promote industrial development in these
areas. To encourage industrial development in the interior areas, which are also industrially backward areas, graded
incentives have been provided in the Industrial Policy.
1.1.3  In order to ensure equitable industrial development, the Department of Industries has so far developed 31
industrial areas and 11 industrial estates in the State. Besides, the Department has in its possession few undeveloped
patches of land at certain locations. More Government land is being identified for creating a Land Bank which could be
utilized for the establishment of new industries. This would further help in the equitable industrial development of the
State.
Recommendation
1.2     Human resource development facilities
1.2.1  The Committee observed that human resource development facilities particularly in vocational and technical
education are not adequate in Himachal Pradesh. The Committee recommends that the local industry and State
Government should join hands to restructure training programmes so as to provide employment to the youth.
                                                                                                                                            (Para: 2.8)
Action Taken
1.2.3  The local industry and the State Government have recommended several areas in which the Industrial Training
Institutes (ITIs) and the industry could cooperate. One such area relates to restructuring of training programmes at the
ITIs by providing more autonomy to the Institutes through decentralization and to make training accountable to users.
For this purpose; it was proposed to constitute a High Powered Committee for each ITI for carrying on the suggested
activities effectively.
1.2.4  It was decided to take up one ITI in each district as pilot project. Based on the experience gained from the
cooperation other ITIs could be taken up later. Accordingly, it was proposed to constitute a separate Institute Managing
Committee (IMC) for each III having representation of State Government, Industry and others. It was also proposed to
constitute a Steering Committee at the State level under the Chairmanship of Stale Secretary Incharge of Vocational
Training which would decide the powers to be devolved to the IMCs, their functions and monitor and evaluate their
performance. To begin with, it was decided to take up one ITI as pilot project under the Scheme and ITI Solan was
selected as the Pilot Project in consultation with CII.
1.2.5  Based on the success achieved in the implementation of Pilot Project at ITT Solan, all the ITIs in the State are to
be covered in a phased manner under the scheme The IMCs for the ITIs at Nalagarh, Paunta Sahib, Nahan, Una,
Chamba, Shapur, Nehranpukhar, Nadaun, Bilaspur, Mandi, Rampur, Shamshi (W), Dharamshala and Sundernagar (PH)
have been constituted and notified by the Government. The meeting of the IMCs are being held at regular intervals with
the active participation of CII and the industries located in the areas. The proposal for the constitution of IMCs for the
rest of ITIs (except ITI Reckong Peo and Shimla) have been sent to the Government for notification, as has been
suggested by the Principals of respective ITIs. The primary objective of the scheme is to increase the relevance of the
training programmes conducted at the ITIs.
Recommendation
1.3     Incentives in industrially backward areas
1.3.1 The Committee observed that the entire State is industrially backward except some development on the periphery
of the State. The Committee feels that there is a need to give over-riding incentives in industrially backward areas. A
special package of incentives is required for fruit, vegetable and maize based units consuming locally available raw
material. In addition, emphasis is also to be given to thrust areas including 100% EOU’s For the units in large and
medium scale sector more emphasis is required to be laid for providing better infrastructure. In order to accelerate and
facilitate industrialization, clearances required for setting up of units in industrially developed areas shall be specially
dealt on fast track basis. The Committee also observed that Income Tax holiday and that Central Transport Subsidy
Scheme, the two major central incentives have helped the growth of industries in the State. The Committee also felt that
the Government of India should be approached to extend these incentives.
                                                                                                                                          (Para: 2.9)
Action Taken
1.3.2  The Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion has announced a new Industrial Policy and other concessions to

155th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/155threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:24]
promote industrialisation in the State of Himachal Pradesh on 7th January, 2003. Graded incentives have been provided
in the Industrial Policy to encourage industrial development in the interior areas. Tribal areas of the State, as notified
from time to time, have been made as tax-free industrial zones to promote industrial development in these areas. Priority
sector industries have been identified and
special incentives are admissible for the setting up of fruit, vegetable and maize based units. In addition, Government of
India is also providing special incentives to such units. The details of the incentives provided by the State Government
and the Central Government to Food Processing Industries are given below:----
State Government Incentives
1.3.3  Special Package of concession, incentives and facilities to fruit, vegetable and maize based units consuming at
least 60% of their total consumption from local produce and located in industrially backward areas (except breweries,
distilleries, non-fruit/vegetable wineries and bottling plant both for country liquor and Indian Made Foreign Liquor) as
per the provision made under incentive rules - 1999.
S.No. Concessions, Incentives & Facilities Period
1. GST exemptions 10 years
2. GST @ 1% on raw material processing and packaging material except
timber, shale and limestone
Upto 31st
March, 2009
3. CST @ 1% for new and existing units Upto 31st
March, 2009
4. Exemption from Electricity Duty 10 years
5. Electricity Duty Exemption on Captive Power Generated from D.G. Set/
Hydel Plant
 
6. Exemption from Excise Duty to new units 7 years
7. Interest Subsidy on Term Loan from financial institutions 6 years
8. Capital Investment Subsidy  
9. Price Preference Upto 15% to tiny/SSI and upto 3% to Medium/Large units  
10. Allotment of land/shed on out of turn basis at nominal price/rent  
11. Subsidy on the cost of preparation of Feasibility Report  
12. Exemption from payment of State Taxes and Duties 10 years (excluding
levies in the shape of Cess, fees, royalties etc.) in tax free zones
 
1.3.4  Central Government Incentives
          Schemes of Assistance available through the Ministry of Food Processing Industries
S. No. Name of the Scheme       Financial Assistance for Himachal Pradesh
1. A        Setting up / Expansion /
Modernisation of food
processing units
PSU - 50% of cost of capital equipments and technical
civil works upto Rs. 200 lakh as loan, or 50% of cost of
capital equipments and technical civil works upto 
Rs. 50 lakh as grant.
 B         Establishment of post harvest
infrastructure and cold chain
facilities for food processing
and integrated project of
mushrooms, hopes, gherkins
and baby corn.
Joint Sector – 25% of cost of capital equipments and
technical civil works upto Rs. 200 lakh as loan, or 50%
of cost of capital equipments and technical civil works
upto Rs. 25 lakh as grant.
  Private sector – 33.33% of cost of capital equipments
and technical civil works upto Rs. 75 lakh as grant.

155th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/155threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:24]
2. Modernisation of Pulses Milling Units PSU/NGOs/Cooperatives/Joint/assisted/Private
sector- 50% of the cost of Dyer and dust control system
upto Rs. 5 lakh as grant.
3. Setting up of mobile fruit and vegetable
processing unit
PSU/NGOs/Cooperatives/State Nodal agencies - 50%
of the project upto Rs. 60 lakh as grant.
4. Dissemination of low cost preservation
technology
PSU/NGQs/Cooperatives: actual cost of technology
and plant and machinery upto Rs. 5 lakh as grant.
  Private/Joint/assisted sector: actual cost of technology
and plant and machinery upto Rs. 5 lakh as loan.
5. Scheme for development/ modernization of
meat processing PSU/Joint sector: 75% of cost of capital equipments
and technical civil works upto Rs 100 lakh as grant or
50% of cost of capital equipments & technical civil
works upto Rs. 200 lakh as loan.
  NGOs/Cooperatives: 50% of cost of capital equipments
and technical civil works upto Rs. 100 lakh as grant.
  Private sector: 50% of cost of capital equipments and
technical civil works upto Rs. 100 lakh as loan.
6. Scheme for development of poultry & egg. PSU/Joint sector: 75% of cost of capital equipments
and technical civil works upto Rs. 100 lakh as grant or
50% of cost of capital equipments & technical civil
works upto Rs. 200 lakh as loan.
  NGOs/Cooperatives: 50% of cost of capital equipments
and technical civil works upto Rs. 100 lakh as grant.
  Private sector: 50% of cost of capital equipments &
technical civil works upto Rs. 75 lakh as loan.
7. Scheme for research and development in
Food Processing Industries Laboratories/IITs/Universities/NGOs: 100% of
project cost as grant.
  Public/Joint/Private sector: 1/3 of the project cost as
grant.
8. Establishment of food processing
Industrial Estate/Food parks Upto Rs. 4 crore for creation of common facilities as
grant.
1.3.5   In the State, the Department of Horticulture has established a number of Fruit Processing units at various
locations. Besides this, HPMC has fruit processing units at Jarol in District Mandi, Parwanoo and Jabli in District Solan.
In corporate and private sector, about 49 small scale and 3 medium and large scale fruit processing units are functioning
in the State. It is estimated that the total fruit processing capacity in the State is about 45,000 to 50,000 tons per annum.
There are two proposals to set up projects in the joint sector for the manufacture of fruit based wines. In addition, 51
fruit processing units in small scale and one unit in medium scale at Kala Amb in District Sirmaur are registered with
the Department on provisional basis for setting up of fruit processing units. Out of these, 16 small scale units and one
medium scale unit has taken effective steps for setting up their units and are expected to commence production shortly.
After the announcement of Special Package in January, 2003, the State has received 256 proposals in medium and large
sector and 1930 in small scale sector with proposed investment of Rs. 4195 crore and employment to 84,086 persons.
1.3.6   Although the intention of the Department is to achieve an equitable development of industrial activities in every
part of the State but most of the investment proposals are for District Solan, Sirmaur, Una, Kangra and Bilaspur. The
setting up of industrial units depends upon many factors like availability of developed infrastructure like roads, land,
water and electricity, technology, transport facility and social infrastructure facilities, access to raw material and market

155th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/155threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:24]
for their products etc. In this way, certain areas of the State have an advantage on other areas, which do not have
adequate infrastructural facilities. Efforts are being made to provide better infrastructural facilities in these areas through
various State/Centrally sponsored infrastructure development schemes.
1.3.7   With a view to provide umbrella support to existing and new ventures, the State Government has notified a State
Level Single Window Clearance and Monitoring Authority on 22/01/2004, which would function under the
Chairmanship of Hon’ble Chief Minister. The Authority would discuss and solve all contentious/inter ­departmental
issues, monitor and review the progress of units already approved/being set up, and expedite approvals (Administrative
and Statutory) of each concerned Department necessary for the establishment of the unit in the State. Project proposals
which are listed as negative in the Government of India OM dated 7/1/2003, i.e., Forest based industries and Power
Intensive units with power requirements of more than 1 MW will fall under the purview of the Authority. With the
establishment of such an Authority, the prospective entrepreneur will be able to set up his project in a time bound and
hassle free manner.
1.3.8   The Income-Tax Act, 1961 provides for 100% deduction for a period of 5 years and 25% (30% in the case of
companies) for the next 5 years, to a new undertaking or enterprises which is set up during the period 7.1.2003 to
31.3.2012 in certain notified areas of the State of Himachal Pradesh or to an existing undertaking or enterprise, located
in such areas, which undertakes substantial expansion during the said period. An identical deduction is also available to
a new undertaking/enterprise which undertakes substantial expansion and engaged in certain thrust sector activities such
as production and manufacture of agro-based products, sugar and its by products, silk products, sports goods and
articles, etc. during the period 7.1.2003 to 1.4.2012. The incentives provided under the Act specifically encourage the
growth of agro-based industries (including processing of fresh fruits and vegetables) in the Slate of Himachal Pradesh.
The Government of India has also extended Central Transport Subsidy Scheme for the industries in the State upto 31.3
2007.
Recommendation
1.4      Quality of power and power tariff structure
1.4.1   The Committee was informed that the State is committed to exploiting its vast power potential. Besides a number
of ambitious schemes are already under implementation. The Committee recognizes the importance of this sector for
industry and recommends that the State Government should take note of two important requirements i.e. quality of
power to sustain high technology industry and a power tariff structure which is so planned so that the entrepreneurs can
foresee its impact in the competitive manufacture and marketing of their products.
                                                                                                                                        (Para: 2.10)
Action Taken
1.4.2   The State Government has informed that for providing quality power to the Industrial Entrepreneurs, the
Electricity Board is proposing setting up of EHV network upto the level of 400 KV and upgradation of existing EHV
system (66 KV to 220 KV) with an approximate investment of Rs. 150 crore. For implementing the proposal, the
financial support from the Government would be required.
1.4.3   Under Accelerated Power Development Reform Programme (APDRP), schemes for strengthening and
improvement of sub-transmission lines and distribution system have been formulated for all the twelve Operations
Circles and a total amount of Rs. 322.78 crore have been sanctioned. These schemes mainly focus on upgradation of
sub-transmission and distribution in densely electrified zones in the industrial areas and would cover:
              (i)    Renovation and modernization of Sub-stations,
              (ii)    Power Transformer Augmentation and new sub-stations;
              (iii)   System Improvement through re-conduction and new feeders; and
              (iv)   Improvement in the Secondary system.
1.4.4   Power tariffs are being finalized by the Himachal Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission (HPERC) Present
industrial tariff is the lowest in the country, which is about Rs. 2 per unit.
Recommendation
1.5      Communication networks
1.5.1   The Committee also feels that Himachal Pradesh requires Industries in high technology areas where there is a
large value addition with low volumes of raw materials involved. These industries involve smaller transportation and

155th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/155threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:24]
volumes of both raw materials and finished products. With the advancement of technology today, the Committee was
appreciative of the fact that the State is very fortunate to have one of the best communication networks. The Committee
strongly recommends that the State Government should take every step possible to attract such industries in the State.
                                                                                                                                        (Para: 2.11)
Action Taken
1.5.2   The State Government has informed that after the announcement of the Special Package of Incentives, 14
proposals for setting up of units based on Electronics and Telecommunications have been registered in Medium and
Large Scale Sector. Besides this, the Government has also received proposals in high technology areas such as
Pharmaceuticals, Chemicals, automobiles and other engineering products.
Recommendation
1.6      Concessions to industry in the form of sales tax concessions, power tariff, interest subsidy and capital
investment subsidy
1.6.1   The Committee strongly recommends concessions to industry in the form of sales tax concessions, power tariff,
interest subsidy and capital investment subsidy need to be continued over a long term period. The Committee is of the
opinion that once industrial growth takes place the State will be able to generate revenue and cover up short term losses
if any.
                                                                                                                                          (Para: 2.18)
Action Taken
1.6.2   The State Government has provided incentives of sales tax concessions, power tariff, interest subsidy and capital
investment subsidy under Rule 7.1 to 7.4 of the ‘Rules regarding Grant of Incentives, Concessions and Facilities to
Industrial Units in Himachal Pradesh, 1999’. These incentives are admissible to various types of industries which have
been framed keeping in view the following objectives:
1.6.3   To achieve the objectives as announced by the Government in the Industrial Policy Guidelines. 1999.
1.6.4   To spell out the extent to which the State Government proposes to provide benefits, incentives, concessions and
facilities to existing industrial units and new units to be set up in the State.
Recommendation
1.7      Power infrastructure
1.7.1   The Committee is of the opinion that adequate funds be provided to the power sector in the State so as to upgrade
the power infrastructure. The Committee feels that roads are the arteries of a State and a good road network will go a
long way in bringing about prosperity. The Committee is appreciative of the efforts made in this regard and hopes that
the State Government will continue and augment its work in this area.
                                                                                                                                        (Para: 2.36)
Action Taken
1.7.2   In order to provide quality power to the industrial entrepreneurs, the State Electricity Board is proposing setting
up of EHV network up to the level of 400 KV and upgradation of existing EHV system (66 KV to 220 KV) with an
approximate investment of Rs 150 crore.
1.7.3   The State Government has been assigning high priority to road sector. During the financial year 2003-04, an
outlay of Rs. 230.02 crore was earmarked in Annual Plan under the State budget and other schemes. To speed up the
construction of roads and bridges, 122 roads and bridge projects have been prioritized by Government for an amount of
Rs. 193.61 crore from NABARD Loan assistance under RIDF-IX. Out of this, 10 projects with total cost of Rs. 13.48
crore have already been sanctioned by NABARD. In addition, sanction of 47 projects under RIDF-VII amounting to Rs.
32.07 crore has also been received
1.7.4   Efforts are also being made to arrange more funds from Government of India under PMGSY Programme. During
the year 2003-04, an amount of Rs. 70.86 crore for 151 road works have been sanctioned under the programme. In
addition, 219 road works costing Rs. 183.15 crore have been submitted to Government of India for sanction. During the
year 2003-04, 125 roads connecting 210 villages have been completed. A proposal for construction of 130 roads
amounting to Rs. 80.28 crore has been sponsored for sanction of funds from the World Bank.
1.7.5   The State also has 8 National Highways with total length of 1235 kms. and continuous work for improving these
Highways is being undertaken.

155th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/155threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:24]
Recommendation
1.8      Uneven industrial growth characteristic of Himachal Pradesh
1.8.1   Uneven industrial growth is a characteristic of Himachal Pradesh. The Committee is of the opinion that State
intervention is the only remedy to rectify this anomaly. The Committee strongly recommends that steps be taken to
address this issue on a priority basis and new industrial clusters be developed in the State.
                                                                                                                                          (Para: 2.37)
Action Taken
1.8.2   In order to ensure equitable industrial development, the Department of Industries, Government of Himachal
Pradesh, has so far developed 31 industrial areas and 11 industrial estates in the State. Besides, the Department has in its
possession few undeveloped patches of land at certain locations. More Government land is being identified for creating
a Land Bank, which could be utilized for the establishment of new
industries. This will further help in the equitable industrial development of the State.
1.8.3   For facilitating the location of Industries in backward areas, the Office of DC. (SSI), Ministry of SSI is operating
Integrated Infrastructure Development (IID) Scheme since 1994. Under this Scheme, two Integrated Infrastructural
Development Centres were sanctioned, one each in District Bilaspur and Mandi. While the IID Centre in Mandi was
abandoned by the State Government, work on the other Centre is going on at a very slow pace. This centre was
sanctioned in 1997 and an amount of Rs. 82 lakhs has been released for the centre. Government of Himachal Pradesh
has been requested to review the status of Bilaspur IID Centre and to consider setting up of more IID Centres in the
State, so that uneven industrial growth in the State is minimized.
1.8.4   At present, proposals of existing clusters are considered in ‘Small Industry Cluster Development Programme’
Scheme of the Office of the Development Commissioner (SSI). Under the Scheme, Food Products Cluster, Kulu and
Sirmaur and Light Engineering Cluster, Parwanoo have been selected for cluster based Credit planning of SSIs under
RBI’s supervision.
Recommendation
1.8.5   IT based industries
1.8.6   The Committee is of the opinion that setting up of IT based industries can go a long way in bringing industrial
growth in the area as IT based industries are not severely affected by infrastructure limitations and the excellent
communication and power infrastructure in the State can be put to optimum use. The Committee however is not pleased
with the steps taken by the State Government in attracting IT industries to the State. The Committee feels that if the
State Government takes a active role the State can become a success story in the IT sector and can develop as an
alternative after Bangalore and Hyderabad in providing world class IT services. The Committee strongly recommends
that the State Government should not delay further and pursue single-mindedly the agenda of attracting IT based
companies to the State.
                                                                                                                                          (Para: 2.48)
Action Taken
1.8.7   The State Government has created a Department of Information Technology to ensure the process of furthering
the development of IT in the State, encouraging investments in the IT sector industries, facilitating the establishment of
IT institutes and improving the quality of IT education and using IT tools to ensure a SMART (Simple, Moral,
Accountable, Responsive and Transparent) Government The Department has three wings viz., Industrial Development
Wing, Human Resource Development Wing and Electronic Governance Wing. The State government has approved its
IT Policy 2001 which was formally launched by the Hon’ble Home Minister Shri L.K. Advani on 9th of June, 2001.
State Government Incentives
1.8.8   The Himachal Pradesh Government has taken the following policy decisions to facilitate the growth of IT in the
State and to attract IT industries:-
           1.       Department of Information Technology will act as a single window clearance and will issue one single
Application Form, which will he used for setting up of IT unit in the State.
           2.       IT Software and IT Services shall be deemed as manufacturing activity for the purpose of incentives for the
industry, in line with the approved policy of Government of India. Depreciation norms and Loan for capital
investments and working capital requirements will be in line with the approved policy of Government of

155th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/155threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:24]
India.
           3.       All promotional and liberalized policy instruments available to the IT Software and IT Services shall be
made available to the IT enabled Services including the Information Content Industry.
           4.       All IT software and service industries including Services and training Institutions in IT will be entitled to
“Industry” status.
           5.       Interest subsidy scheme available to other industries would be made applicable for both computer hardware
and software sectors.
           6.       IT Software and Services industry will be treated as industrial consumers and electricity tariff applicable to
the industrial consumers will be levied on such industries. Industrial power tariff and all other admissible
incentives and concessions applicable to industries in the respect of power shall be applicable to the IT
industry.
           7.       The State Government would encourage flow of investments including FDI and would provide full support
wherever required.
           8.       HPSEB shall endeavour to ensure uninterrupted supply of power.
           9.       For registered IT units within the declared Software Technology Park, IT habitats and Hi-tech city,
relaxation of FAR to the extent of 50% of the prevailing norm will be available.
           10.     IT Software units will be permitted to be set up in residential areas subject to load restrictions.
           11.     Exemption from land and building tax will be given to the land and building within the declared STP, IT
habitats and Hi-tech city for a period of 10 years from the date of their having been declared as such by the
State Government.
           12.     The State Government will facilitate the creation of a Venture Capital Fund of Rs.
20 crore in association with the State Cooperative Bank, SIDBI and other Financial Institutions to meet the
equity requirements of the Small and Medium Enterprises/IT Startups.
           13.     The Sales tax receipts from the IT industry shall be earmarked for strengthening
of IT infrastructure in the State.
           14.     General permission is accorded to run a three-shift operation to the IT Software
and Services industry.
           15.     Vide  Notification No. EXN. F(9)/99-III dated 5-8-2002 of Excise and Taxation Department, it has been
directed that subject to the conditions specified in the above mentioned notification, no tax shall be levied
under Section 6 of the H.P. General Sales Tax Act, 1968 (Act No. 24 of 1968), on the sale of goods
manufactured by other industries, namely:—
                     (a)   The existing Information Technology industrial units, from the date of above mentioned notification
upto 31-03-2007; and
                     (b)   The new Information Technology industrial units, from the date of commencement of commercial
production upto 31-3-2007.
Central Government Incentives
           16.     Income Tax exemption/concession for 5+5 years for IT/BPO companies.
           17.     Central Excise exemption for 10 years.
           18.     15% capital Subsidy on plant and machinery.
1.8.9   Jaypee University of I.T
           With a view to expand the base of skilled manpower, the Government has facilitated / is facilitating the setting up
of specialized institutes of IT in the State. In this regard, Jaypee University of Information Technology has been
established by M/s. Jaiprakash Sewa Sansthan at Waknaghat (Rachhiana) District Solan about 22 kms. from Shimla.
1.8.10Software Technology Park
           State Government has got into an MoU with Government of India to set up a Software Technology Park and
High Speed Data Connectivity Facility in Shimla which has now been established in Shimla and has started its
activities.
1.8.11Earmarking of Area for IT Sector Investments

155th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/155threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:24]
1.8.12Bighas of land has been earmarked in the name of the Department of Information Technology at Waknaghat,
Tehsil Kandaghat, Distt. Solan for attracting investments in the IT sector.
Recommendation
1.9      Innovative ideas and vision
1.9.1   The Committee is of the opinion that in today’s world it is knowledge, innovative ideas and vision which is going
to be the mainstay of industrial growth. The Committee feels that there may be several entrepreneurs who would be
constrained to put their ideas into practice due to lack of capital The Committee recommends that Government should
encourage flow of venture capital in this regard by providing tax incentives, subsidy or allied benefits.
                                                                                                                                          (Para: 3.44)
Action Taken
1.9.2   To encourage Venture Capital funding to SSI units, the banks have been advised by the RBI that investment in
venture capital will be eligible for inclusion in priority sector lending. This is subject to the condition that the venture
capital funds/companies are registered with Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI). Further, in the recently held
meeting of the RBI’s Standing Advisory Committee on flow of institutional credit to SSI on Ist September, 2003, one of
the action points that emerged was that the banks should initiate innovative steps for increasing credit flow by means of
promoting Mutual Funds to SSI and venture capital funds, which has been communicated to all banks.
Recommendation
1.10    Setting up power intensive industries
1.10.1 The Committee recommends that the State Government should encourage setting up power intensive industries
so as to exploit the tremendous hydel potential of the State and to gain advantage over other States
                                                                                                                                          (Para: 3.48)
Action Taken
1.10.2Though the State has surplus power, it will be the conscious effort of the State Government to encourage
establishment of large number of industries so as to maximize returns in terms of investment, employment, output and
environmental preservation. For projects with power requirements exceeding 
1 MW, the decision falls under the purview of State Level Single Window Industrial Projects Clearance and Monitoring
Authority.
Recommendation
1.11    “Single window clearance”
1.11.1The Committee is of the opinion that despite repeated commitment “single window clearance” still remains a
mirage The Committee feels that in the present competitive scenario States have to provide the best possible facilities to
industrial entrepreneurs so as to attract industry in the State. The Committee strongly recommends that “single window
clearance” be made a real concept in practice and not a mere jargon.
                                                                                                                                          (Para: 3.50)
Action Taken
1.11.2With a view to provide umbrella support to existing and new ventures, the State Government has notified a State
Level Single Window Clearance and Monitoring Authority in Himachal Pradesh. This Authority has been notified on
22.1.2004 under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble Chief Minister, to discuss and solve all contentious issues and inter-
departmental issues, monitor and review the progress of units already approved and being set up and expedite approvals
(Administrative and Statutory) of each concerned Department necessary for the establishment of the unit in the State.
Project proposals which are listed as negative in the Government of India OM dated 7.1.2003, i.e., Forest based
Industries and Power Intensive units with power requirements of more than 1 MW will fall under the purview of the
Authority. With the establishment of such an Authority, the prospective entrepreneur will not have to run from
Department to Department to obtain individual clearances and will be able to set up his project in a time bound, hassle
free manner.
1.11.3The first meeting of this Authority was held on 26.02.2004 and during this meeting the Authority considered and
approved 16 proposals with an investment of Rs. 26311/- lakh and employment potential of 1902. Some of the
proposals approved are: a big size paper mill, tractor unit, combines and earthmoving equipments unit, three wheelers
unit, pharmaceutical formulation units including M/s. Ranbaxy Laboratories
and one Sugar Mill to be located in District Una. It was decided in the meeting that the State Level Single Window
Clearance and Monitoring Authority meetings will henceforth be held frequently on fortnightly basis so as to ensure that
the pending proposals lying with the Industries Department are approved expeditiously.
Recommendation
1.12    Popularization of the credit guarantee scheme

155th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/155threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:24]
1.12.1The Committee strongly recommends that banks should take active steps to popularize the credit guarantee
scheme so as the local industry can take advantage. The performance of the banks needs to be monitored so as credit
flow under the scheme improves for betterment of the industry. The Committee is of the opinion that the credit
guarantee scheme is hardly being utilized in Himachal Pradesh and strongly recommends that steps to improve the
performance under this scheme be taken on an immediate basis.
                                                                                                                                          (Para: 4.19)
Action Taken
1.12.2In order to popularise the Credit Guarantee Scheme, Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Small Industries (CGFTSI)
has been organizing seminars at various centres and participating in various seminars/industry related exhibitions
organized by SSI Associations. CGFTSI officials have been attending SLBC meetings in different States, creating better
understanding about the Credit Guarantee Scheme among the participating banks. Interactive seminars/workshops-cum-
training programmes are also organized at various centres for the benefit of operating staff of Member Lending
Institutions (MLIs). A well-focused and multifaceted media strategy is being pursued by CGFTSI, comprising publicity
through print media (newspapers/magazines), posters (at bank branches, offices of SISl, DICs, etc.), direct mailers, trade
journals, souvenirs of industry associations, etc. As a result of these publicity initiatives, there has been wide awareness
about the Credit Guarantee Scheme among the SSI entrepreneurs and the number of MLIs has increased to 45 till now.
The availment under Credit Guarantee Scheme in Himachal Pradesh as at the end of April, 2004 is for credit facilities
aggregating Rs. 276 lakh extended by banks in respect of 266 units/borrowers.
1.12.3A review meeting of Credit Guarantee Scheme with those banks whose performance was lagging behind was held
on 26th August, 2003 under the Chairmanship of the Hon’ble Minister (SSI & DONER). As per the decision taken in
this meeting, the banks have to take effective steps to enhance awareness about the Credit Guarantee Scheme and make
efforts to cover the maximum number of loans to SSIs under the Scheme. Further, the issues relating to credit flow to
the SSI sector was discussed with the Banks in a meeting held on 19th December, 2003 under the Chairmanship of the
Hon’ble Minister (SSI & DONER) and it was emphasized that the banks need to actively participate under the Credit
Guarantee Scheme.
Recommendation
1.13    Tiny sector
1.13.1 The Committee strongly recommends that the tiny sector should be given loans at soft rate of interest compared
to the large industries and banks should devise ways to provide loans catering to the specific requirement of this crucial
sector. The Committee recommends that innovative ways should be devised to make these schemes popular, as the
entrepreneurs are largely unaware of these schemes. Almost all the schemes prepared by the Bank for this sector as well
as RBI guidelines should be given weightage and adequate publicity, so that the Bank’s exposure to this sector may
increase
                                                                                                                                          (Para: 4.23)
Action Taken
1.13.2 As regards loans to tiny sector at soft rate of interest, the lending rates have gone down after the deregulation of
interest rates regime. As per extant guidelines the banks are required to fix their own Prime Lending Rates (PLRs) and
the maximum band over the PLR The interest rates on loans up to 
Rs. 2 lakh should not exceed the PLR and that beyond Rs. 2 lakh is left to the discretion of the banks subject to PLR and
the maximum bands. The banks have been advised to accord SSI units with a good track record the benefit of lower
spreads over the PLR. Further, as announced in the Union Budget 2003-04, the Indian Banks’ Association (IBA) have
already advised the banks to adopt the interest rate band of 2 per cent above and below their Prime Lending Rates
(PLRs) for secured advances
1.13.3 The banks have to ensure that out of their total funds lent to SSI sector, at least 40% should be made available to
units with investment in plant and machinery upto Rs. 5 lakh and 20% should be made available to units with
investment in plant and machinery between Rs. 5 lakh and Rs. 25 lakh. Thus, 60% of the funds earmarked for SSI sector
should go to small units in tiny sector.
1.13.4 Several banks have come out with “Charter for SSI” with a view to provide information on various credit
facilities being extended by them to SSI Sector. These Charters have been widely published in the National dailies,
displayed in the bank branches and have also been put up on the web-sites of the respective banks. As per the decision
of the 4th meeting of Standing Advisory Committee on Flow of Institutional Credit to SSI Sector, the RBI has advised
the banks to give adequate publicity to their schemes/facilities. Almost all the public sector banks have initiated

155th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/155threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:24]
necessary steps in this regard.
Recommendation
1.14    Trust factor between the entrepreneurs and the banks
1.14.1 The Committee is of the opinion that the trust factor between the entrepreneurs and the banks need to be bridged.
The Committee recommends that objective criteria be used to evaluate projects. The Committee feels that evaluation is
not done objectively in cases where loan is asked for without collateral security. The Committee strongly recommends
that in case of technically sound and economically viable projects banks should be more flexible towards lending
without collateral so as to develop a culture of entrepreneurship in the State.
                                                                                                                                          (Para: 4.25)
Action Taken
1.14.2Regular training programmes are organized by the banks for infusing customer friendly approach among the bank
officials. Furthermore, in pursuance to the decisions taken at the meeting of the Department Related Parliamentary
Committee held with the officials of banks/financial institutions during its study visit to Mumbai in June, 2001, RBI has
advised all the banks to conduct entrepreneurship development training programmes and also give exhaustive training to
their staff members for sensitizing them towards the needs of the SSI sector. The feedback received from the banks
reveals that several steps have been taken by banks in this regard.
1.14.3The Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme for Small Industries has been launched with a view to resolving the
impediments to credit flow to SSI sector owing to lack of collaterals and induce banks to gradually move towards
project based lending from collateral based lending. With the awareness about the Credit Guarantee Scheme growing
among the SSI borrowers, it is expected that the banks would make collateral free credit available to SSI borrowers for
viable projects covering such loans under the Scheme.
Recommendation
1.15    Banks with an open approach
1.15.1 The Committee recommends that banks should keep an open approach and should not shut its doors in case of
entrepreneurs whose accounts have turned NPAs on account of circumstances, which were beyond their control.
                                                                                                                                          (Para: 4.27)
Action Taken
1.15.2 To address the problem of NPAs on account of unavoidable circumstances and also the incidence of sickness,
RBI has issued a complete set of revised guidelines in January, 2002 based on recommendations of the Working Group
constituted under the Chairmanship of Shri S.S. Kohli.
1.15.3 As per the revised definition, a unit is considered as sick when any of the borrowal accounts of the unit remain
substandard for more than 6 months or there is erosion in the net worth due to accumulated cash losses to the extent of
50% of its net worth during the previous accounting year and the unit has been in commercial production for at least two
years. As per the revised guidelines the rehabilitation package should be fully implemented within six months from the
date the unit is declared as potentially viable/viable. During this six months period of identifying and implementing
rehabilitation package banks/financial institutions are required to do “holding operation”, which will allow the sick unit
to draw funds from the cash credit account at least to the extent of deposit of sale proceeds.
1.15.4RBI has advised the banks the following broad parameters for grant of relief and concessions/restructuring of debt
for revival of potentially viable sick SSI units:
          
(i) Interest on Working Capital 1.5% below the prevailing fixed/prime lending rate, wherever
applicable.
(ii) Funded Interest Term Loans Interest free.
(iii) Working Capital Term Loan 1.5% below the prevailing fixed/prime lending rate, wherever
applicable.
(iv) Term Loan Concessions to be given not more than 2% (not more than 3% in
the case of tiny/decentralized sector units) below the document
rate.

155th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/155threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:24]
(v) Contingency Loan Assistance The Concessional rate allowed for Working Capital Assistance.
1.15.5 Relief/concessions detailed above are only indicative. It is for the banks/financial institutions to decide on the
nature and extent of concessions necessary/warranted, depending upon the merits of each case. The banks have been
given freedom for extension of relief / concessions even beyond the parameters, in cases where it is considered
absolutely necessary.

155th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/155threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:24]
CHAPTER - II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation
2.1      Impact of telecom reforms
2.1.1   The Committee was of the opinion that this sounds like a paradox as in one context Himachal Pradesh is cited as
a successful case study for the impact of telecom reforms and in another context, the industrial associations are not
happy with the state of affairs. The Committee recommends that these issues should be taken up with the telecom
authorities like BSNL so that cheap, efficient and world class telecom facility is made available to all industrial zones in
Himachal Pradesh and also BSNL should be strengthened for strengthening telecommunication network.
                                                                                                                                            (Para. 3.3)
Action Taken
2.1.2   The State Government had taken up the matter with BSNL and have been informed that all modern facilities like
Internet, ISDN, Mobile, etc. are available in all the Industrial zones of Himachal Pradesh. Further, the Tariff in respect
of Telecom Services is decided at BSNL’s Headquarters, New Delhi which is applicable to all the Telecom Circles. In
case of any specific problem/demand in any Industrial Area of H.P., the same can be considered for taking further
necessary action
Recommendation
2.2      Providing tax concession and other incentives
2.2.1   The Committee is appreciative of the fact that hill States are treated differently as far as providing tax concession
and other incentives required for bringing about rapid industrial growth. However, the Committee feels that the
concession need to be provided for a longer span of time and Government should review and analyze the impact of
these concessions on a regular basis so that necessary positive catalytic modification can be made from time to time.
                                                                                                                                          (Para. 3.16)
Action Taken
2.2.2   As per the approval of the Cabinet and the subsequent policy announced by the Department of Industrial Policy
and Promotion (DIPP), 100% excise duty exemption has been provided for specified thrust industries without any
restriction on their location and other industries located in identified locations in the State of Uttaranchal and Himachal
Pradesh. Exemption from excise duty under the Scheme is available for a period of ten years from the commencement
of commercial production by the unit, a sufficiently long period for the purposes of attracting and justifying
investments, particularly in the SSI sector. Apart from the excise duty exemptions, the package for these States also
includes capital investment subsidy @ 15% of investment in plant and machinery, interest subsidy of 3% on working
capital loans, etc.
2.2.3   The Income-Tax Act, 1961 provides for 100% deduction for a period of 5 years and 25% (30% in the case of
companies) for the next 5 years, to a new undertaking or enterprise which is set up during the period 7.1.2003 to
31.3.2012 in certain notified areas of the State of Himachal Pradesh or to an existing undertaking or enterprise, located
in such areas, which undertakes substantial expansion during the said period. An identical deduction is also available for
undertakings engaged in certain thrust sector activities. Accordingly, an eligible undertaking which commences
production in the financial year 2011-12 would be entitled to the tax holiday till assessment year 2021-2022, which is a
fairly long period for promoting industrial growth in the hill States such as Himachal Pradesh and Uttaranchal.
Recommendation
2.3      Anomalies in the implementation of the transport subsidy scheme
2.3.1   The Committee is concerned to note the anomalies in the implementation of the transport subsidy scheme. The
Committee impress upon the Government to review the September, 1995 Notification so as to avoid discrimination
between the old units and the new units for allocation of transport subsidy. Hill States by virtue of the difficult terrain
require higher inputs in terms of transport costs vis-a-vis the industries situated in the plains. The Committee strongly
recommends that all industrial units should be considered eligible for transport subsidy benefits.
                                                                                                                                          (Para. 3.22)
Comments/Views
2.3.2   The matter was taken up with the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion, Ministry of Commerce and
Industry, who have informed that the transport subsidy has been restricted for a period of five years from the date of
commencement of commercial production both for new and the existing units. Thus, all industrial units are eligible to
avail this benefit

155th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/155threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:24]
Recommendation
2.4      Margin money and promoters contribution
2.4.1   The Committee is concerned to note the high percentage of margin money and promoters contribution taken into
account by the Banks for sanctioning loans. The Committee recommends that both margin money and promoters
contribution should be brought down to a maximum of 15% as is being done in case of housing loans etc.
                                                                                                                                          (Para. 3.38)
Action Taken
2.4.2   The Reserve Bank of India has informed that the extant instruction for obtention of margin is as under:
Primary Sector
 
1. (i)      Crap Loans No margin for loans upto Rs. 10,000/-
 (ii)     Term Loan of economic unit of Rs. 10,000 for
-        SME
 
No margin
-        Others 5%
(iii)    Other term loans and borrowers 15%-25% depending on purpose/quantum
Secondary Sector  
2. Artisans, village and cottage industries and
other SSIs
No margin for loans upto Rs. 25,000/-
Tertiary Sector  
3. General OPS Loans No margin for loans upto Rs. 25,000/-
2.4.3   The tenor of RBI’s instructions in respect of above limits are not mandatory and banks may consider granting
loans with lower margin also.
Recommendation
2.5      Regarding land use and other regulations
2.5.1   The Committee recommends that State Government should assist entrepreneurs to directly acquire the land.
Thereafter no permission should be required and the Town and Country Planning Department should only monitor
compliance of State Policy regarding land use and other regulations.
                                                                                                                                          (Para. 3.46)
Action Taken
2.5.2   Land is one of the basic infrastructures for industries. The availability of suitable land is the first and foremost
requirement of entrepreneurs willing to set up their industrial ventures. Recognizing this aspect the Department of
Industries under its infrastructure development programmes/schemes has been continuously developing industrial areas
and industrial estates in the State where developed plots and constructed sheds are made available to the entrepreneurs
for setting up their industrial units. The regulations pertaining to purchase of private land for industrial projects have
also been simplified and the time schedule for processing all such cases has been prescribed.
Recommendation
2.6      Status of industry to the Dairy Industry
2.6.1   The Committee strongly recommends that the status of industry be granted to the Dairy Industry as this is one
area which can help bring both prosperity and employment in the rural areas.
                                                                                                                                          (Para. 3.52)
Action Taken
2.6.2   Dairy Development is a agriculture related activity and is being taken care of by the Department of Animal
Husbandry and Dairying. As such, this activity cannot be granted industry status by the Ministry of SSI. The Dairy
Development Programme falls under the Ministry of Agriculture and is governed by different set of rules and
regulations meant for development and promotion of the agriculture and agriculture related activity.

155th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/155threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:24]
CHAPTER - III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
Recommendation
3.1      Implementation of incentives granted by the Central Government
3.1.1   The Committee is of the opinion that the incentives granted by the Central Government are yet to take off at the
ground level and have not managed to translate into higher industrial growth in the State. The Committee though is
appreciative of the incentives, strongly recommends that a analysis be done on their impact and necessary steps be taken
to implement them at the ground level.
                                                                                                                                          (Para: 2.39)
Action Taken
3.1.2   The State Government has informed that after the announcement of Special Package in January, 2003, which
provides various incentives, concessions and facilities to the industrial units, the State has received 256 proposals in
medium and large sector and 1930 proposals in small scale sector with proposed investment of Rs. 4,195 crore and
employment to 84,086 persons Although the intention is to achieve an equitable development of industrial activities in
every part of the State, yet most of the investment proposals are for District Solan, Una, Kangra and Bilaspur.
Further Recommendation
3.1.3   The Committee is pleased to observe that as a result of announcement of the Special Package, 2003 granting
various incentives, concessions and facilities to the industrial units the State has received 256 proposals in medium and
large scale sector and 1930 proposals in SSI sector with proposed investment of Rs. 4,195 crore and generating
employment to the tune of 84,086 persons. However, the Committee desires that the efforts should be continued for
giving impetus to further industrialization and employment generation in the State. But what is necessary is the
equitable development of Industrial activities in every part of the State for balanced industrialization of the State. The
State Government should come out with Additional Package for “industrially backward areas” for inducement of
investment and exploring employment generation. The State Department of Industries should acquire undeveloped
patches of land as soon as possible for promotion of cluster industries in industrially backward areas.
Recommendation
3.2      Issue of collateral security
3.2.1   The Committee is distressed to note that the issue of collateral security has not been resolved and entrepreneurs
are facing problems in getting loans from Banks. The Committee took up the issue with the banks and was informed that
collateral security was not insisted upon
                                                                                                                                            (Para: 3.5)
Action Taken
3.2.2   The Convener, State Level Bankers’ Committee in the State of Himachal Pradesh has intimated that as per the
RBI guidelines, banks in the State are not insisting on collateral security for loans upto Rs. 5 lakh. Further, no collateral
is insisted from the SSI units for the loans above Rs. 5 lakh and upto Rs. 15 lakh (enhanced to Rs. 25 lakh as per
announcement made in the Mid-Term Review of Monetary and Credit Policy 2003-04), provided they conform to
parameters of “good track record and financial position”.
3.2.3   Wherever collaterals are not available, the banks are covering the loans under the Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme
for Small Industries, which is being operated by the Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Small Industries (CGTSI),
Mumbai for guaranteeing credit facilities upto Rs. 25 lakh sanctioned to the SSI borrowers without any collateral
security and/or third party guarantee.
Further Recommendation
3.2.4   The Committee is aware that the Mid-Term Review of Monetary and Credit Policy 
2003-04, as per the RBI guidelines, provided that no collateral security should be insisted upon for loan upto Rs. 25 lakh
for SSI Sector. The provision exists there but the practical experience shows that banks vision has been conservative and
they still insist upon collateral security and third party guarantee. The condition of "good track record and financial
position" of borrower unleashes discretionary power/understanding of branch manager towards the borrower. The
practical experience shows that the branch manager doubts the repaying capacity of the borrower. The Committee
wonders as to how the branch manager would examine the condition of the “good track record and financial position” of

155th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/155threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:24]
borrower in the situation where the borrower is dealing with the bank for the first time. Therefore, the Committee
recommends that the clause of the “good track record and financial condition “of the borrower as the condition for
extending loan should be examined.
Recommendation
3.3      Truck unions
3.3.1   The Committee observed that truck unions were very powerful in the State and were holding the entrepreneurs to
ransom. The situation in the State was such that any entrepreneur cannot even transport his own factory produced goods
in his own transport. The Committee feels that the situation is a serious reflection on the State Government and urgent
remedial action is required to ensure that the truck transport unions does not continue to hold the entire State industries
to ransom. Cheap and efficient transport will make the products competitive and for this the State Government should
take steps to facilitate the transport of goods. The State Government may also review the entry tax rates with a view to
reduce its impact on freight charges. The Government of India may also consider exemption of export tax on the goods
produced in the State. The Committee feels that lack of political will is a major reason for this sorry state of affairs and
hopes something concrete would be done to provide relief to the entrepreneurs.
                                                                                                                                            (Para: 3.7)
Action Taken
3.3.2   The Transport Department has the mandate to grant permits to the individual applicants as well as business
concerns for carriage of goods. As per the present policy regime, the Goods Carriage permits are granted freely on
request to both the above categories without-any restriction Alongwith grant of permit, the Department also fixes freight
rates for carriage of goods within the State and has the responsibility to enforce the freight rates fixed by the
Government. However, for any penal action under the Motor Vehicles Act, the Department requires a complaint from
the aggrieved party. So far the State Government has not received even a single complaint from any industrial unit
against any particular truck for charging higher freight rates than what have been fixed by the Government. However,
the Government is ready to take action as soon as any complaint is given in writing by any industrial unit.
3.3.3   In so far as the role of truck unions and obstruction caused to the industrial houses from transporting their
product in their own trucks is concerned, the truck unions are extra constitutional bodies not recognised under the Motor
Vehicles Act. Their actions constitute a law and order problem, which is to be handled at the District level by the
District Administration. The Transport Department generally has no role to play. Not withstanding the above limited
role of the Transport Department, the State Government is aware of the problem and propose to initiate stringent
measures to curb the exploitative tendencies of truck unions and the truck operators Under the new Transport Policy,
provisions are being made to cancel the permits of the truck operators, which are found to be over charging. Likewise,
the Transport Department in consultation with the Industry Department will take up the issue with the District
Administration to control the activities of the truck unions The Department also proposes to discuss the above problem
in a meeting likely to be fixed shortly in which Industries Department, representatives of Industry and representative of
the Truck Unions will be invited to sort out the matter across the table.
3.3.4   Regarding exemption of the export tax on the goods produced in the State, the only tax on export levied by the
Department of Revenue is export duty and applies only to hides, skins, leathers (tanned and untanned), when exported
out of India. As this levy is to encourage export of value added products, it is not possible to exempt export duty on such
products if made in Himachal Pradesh.
Further Recommendation
3.3.5   The Committee feels that the Transport Department should popularize the, provision for the grant of the permits
to the industrial houses from transporting their products in their own trucks. The Committee desires that the State
Government should ensure the protection against the truck unions causing obstruction to the industrial houses from
transporting their product in their own trucks. A grievances cell should be set up for lodging complaint against the
activities of truck unions. The Committee is of the view that if the State Government is aware of the problem caused by
truck union, that it is the onus of the State Government to combat the menace of truck unions/operator by endowing
vigilant administration for tackling the law and order problem and ensuring in practice a SMART (Simple, Moral,
Accountable, Responsive and Transparent) Government as claimed by State administration in response to the
Committee’s recommendation Vide Para 2.48 of 130th Report, now placed in Chapter-I of the present Report). An
effective co-ordination among the State Transport Department, Industry Department and the District Administration
would generate accountability and responsiveness among the truck operations/unions.
3.3.6   The Committee understands that revenue-generation is essential to run the Government in meeting its financial
requirements. The export-tax on the goods produced in the State is one of the source of revenue generation. However,
the Committee feels that export-tax should be reasonable and intended to encourage export of value added products.
Recommendation
3.4      Institute on the terms of BIFR

155th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/155threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:24]
3.4.1   The Committee recommends that an institute on the terms of BIFR should be set up for SSI sector with specific
powers for revival of sick SSI units.
                                                                                                                                          (Para: 3.27)
Action Taken
3.4.2   The Group of Ministers on SSI had decided that RBI should draw up revised, detailed, transparent and non-
discretionary guidelines for the rehabilitation of sick and potentially viable SSI units. Accordingly, the RBI constituted a
Working Group under the Chairmanship of Shri S.S. Kohli, the then Chairman of IBA. Based on the recommendations
of the Working Group, the RBI issued revised guidelines for the rehabilitation of sick and potentially viable SSI units on
16th January, 2002. The revised guidelines covering change of definition of sick SSI units, norms for deciding on the
viability of sick SSI units, illustrative list of warning signals of incipient sickness as also the norms of assistance to sick
units is expected to bring about improvement in the rehabilitation of potentially viable units. In case of potentially viable
units, the individual financing banks need to take suitable measures for their rehabilitation.
3.4.3   In order to deal with the problems of coordination for rehabilitation of sick SSI units, the State Level Inter-
Institutional Committees (SLIICs) under the Chairmanship of the Secretary (Industries) have been constituted by the
RBI in all the States. A Sub-Committee of SLIIC also exists to look into the problems of individual sick SSI units.
3.4.4   As regards institutionalized arrangements on the lines of BIFR for revival of sick SSI units, the Working Group
recommended that the ultimate authority on credit decision should be the bank and not any other agency. The Working
Group also opined that SLIIC in its present form should continue to deal with cases of sick SSI units.
Further Recommendation
3.4.5   The basic concern of the Committee is the rehabilitation of sick and potentially viable SSI units. The Committee
is of the view that if the institutional arrangement already exists as per the recommendation of the Working Group under
the Chairmanship of Shri S.S. Kohli the State Level-Inter-Institutional Committees (SLIICs) under the Chairmanship of
the Secretary (Industries) in each State. These SLIICs can play proactive role in dealing with cases of sick SSI units.
The Committee desires that the Ministry of Small Scale Industries should accordingly communicate to the Committee
the performance of SLIICs in ameliorating sick SSI units in Himachal Pradesh.
Recommendation
3.5      Review of the upfront charges
3.5.1   The Committee recommends a review of the upfront charges, processing fee, requirement of margin money etc.
with a focus to provide relief and impetus for growth of SSI units. The Committee understands that financial
institutions, banks cannot go against the basic tenets of commercial viability but still preferential treatment to the small
scale entrepreneurs needs to be provided.
                                                                                                                                          (Para: 3.30)
Action Taken
3.5.2   As informed by the RBI, the banks have the discretion to fix the service charges for various services provided to
customers, with the approval of respective Board of Directors. Under the Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme for Small
Industries, a one time guarantee fee of 2.5% of the credit facility sanctioned (comprising term loan and / or working
capital facility) is payable upfront to the Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Small Industries (CGTSI) by the Member
Lending Institution (MLI) availing of the guarantee. Besides this, the MLI has to pay annual service fee of 1% p.a. on
the amount of credit facility outstanding in the borrower’s account as on 31st March, each year. The MLIs have the
discretion to either pass on the fees to the borrowers or to bear it by themselves. The guarantee fee and annual service
fee at the rates as above have been specified considering the long-term sustainability of the Trust.
Further Recommendation
3.5.3  The Committee is of the considered view that Small Scale Industries have the potential to generate employment
and proliferation of the network of SSI units would accelerate the growth of economy and improvement in standard of
living of people. Therefore, facilitating smooth credit flow to Small Scale Industries at reasonable rate of interest would
boost the SSI entrepreneurs to set up new units. It is in this context, the Committee reiterates for the rationalisation of
upfront charges. The Committee further recommends that RBI should come out with a guideline instructing the banks to
charge uniform service charges.
Recommendation
3.6     Problems of collateral security
3.6.1  The Committee during the course of its visits to different parts of the country has come across the same problems
of collateral security. The Committee is distressed to note that despite repeated recommendations, RBI directives and
promises made by Banks the problem of collateral security seems to be the major road blocks in the growth of SSI units.
The Committee reiterates that banks should be more flexible in lending loans and not insist upon collateral security so as

155th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/155threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:24]
to encourage entrepreneurship in the State of Himachal Pradesh.
                                                                                                                                          (Para: 3.39)
Action Taken
3.6.2  The RBI has advised the banks in January, 2002 to extend the benefit under the increased exemption limit of
borrowal accounts for obtention of collateral securities of Rs. 5 lakh to all SSI units so as to ensure flow of credit to this
sector. Further, the RBI in April, 2002 has advised the banks that they may, on the basis of good track record and
financial position of the units, increase the limit of dispensation of collateral requirement for loans from the existing Rs.
5 lakh to Rs. 15 lakh (enhanced to Rs. 25 lakh as per announcement made in the Mid-Term Review of Monetary and
Credit Policy 2003-04). All the banks in the State of Himachal Pradesh are adhering to the guidelines issued to them.
For loans covered under the Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme for Small Industries, collateral securities are not required
upto a borrowal limit of Rs. 25 lakh.
Further Recommendation
3.6.3  The Committee understands that the RBI has instructed the banks for waiving of collateral securities upto a
borrowal limit of Rs. 25 lakh. However, SSI entrepreneurs are facing the problem of collateral securities as banks are
continuing to insists for collateral securities. The Committee recommends that an enquiry Committee should be set up to
look into the matter and investigate as how many branches of various commercial banks have sought collateral security
while sanctioning the loan and the branch manager should be held responsible. Moreover, each branch should be
instructed to display the board showing collateral securities are not required upto a borrowal limit of Rs. 25 lakh under
Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme. The Committee may also be informed periodically of the progress made in this regard.
Recommendation
3.7     Faster clearance of loan proposals
3.7.1 The Committee feels that the time taken to clear loan proposals is very long and hence it acts as a deterrent. The
Committee recommends that faster clearance of loan proposals would help in providing timely loans to the
entrepreneurs.
                                                                                                                                          (Para: 3.40)
Action Taken
3.7.2 The Reserve Bank of India has informed that in order to make available timely credit to the sector a time frame
has been fixed for disposal of loan applications, i.e., up to Rs. 25,000 within 2 weeks, and upto Rs. 5 lakh within 4
weeks provided the loan applications are complete in all respects and accompanied by a ‘check list’ and banks have
been instructed to adhere to the guidelines.
Further Recommendation
3.7.3 The Committee desires that the timeframe should be fixed for disposal of loan application like upto Rs. 25,000
within 2 weeks and upto Rs. 5 lakh within 4 weeks is strictly adhered to by all banks. The Committee feels that faster
clearance of loan proposal would encourage SSI entrepreneurs to set up SSI units.
Recommendation
3.8     Simple time bound objective assessment pattern
3.8.1  The Committee is of the opinion that loan proposals are not objectively assessed and the entrepreneurs are
subjected to all kinds of queries and technicalities. The Committee strongly recommends that a simple time bound
objective assessment pattern needs to be evolved keeping in view the requirements of the SSI units.
                                                                                                                                          (Para: 3.41)
Action Taken
3.8.2  Based on the Kapur Committee recommendations, banks have been advised by the RBI to simplify the application
forms to small borrowers including SSIs. Further, banks have been advised to adopt guidelines on ‘Fair Practices Code
for Lenders’ under which banks are required to necessarily observe certain code of conduct such as issue of
acknowledgement, time bound processing / sanction / disbursement of loan proposal, intimation regarding reason for
rejection, etc. for loans upto Rs. 2 lakh, with the discretion to enhance the scope of guidelines as decided by the Board
of Directors of individual banks.
Further Recommendation
3.8.3 The Committee’s concern is that the SSI entrepreneurs should not be subjected to rigorous/procedural wrangles
and credit facilities should be extended with willing mindset to assist the entrepreneurs. That’s why the Committee
recommended a simple time bound objective assessment. The Committee does not wish to do away the RBI’s guidelines
on “Fair Practices code for Lenders”, but surely enough, desires that the time-bound processing of loan application
should be given impetus. For that sake, transparency and accountability in banking practices is required.
Recommendation

155th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/155threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:24]
3.9     Payment delays breakdown the investment cycle
3.9.1  The Committee has noted that payment delays breakdown the investment cycle of the small scale entrepreneurs
besides he is required to make necessary amendments in his tax assessment. The Committee recommends that tax
assessment be made simpler and may also account for situation arising out of delayed payment.
                                                                                                                                          (Para: 3.42)
Action Taken
3.9.2  The Government enacted Interest on Delayed Payments to Small Scale and Ancillary Industrial Undertakings Act
in 1993. However, the problem of delay in payment of bills for supplies made by Small Scale Industrial (SSI) units to
large industries continued despite enactment of a separate law. The Act was therefore, amended in 1998. In the amended
Act, the State Governments have been given an active role in the implementation of the provisions of the law with a
view to providing speedy relief to the SSI suppliers. The most important change that has been brought about by the
amendment Act is that the SSI suppliers can now approach the Industry Facilitation Councils (IFCs) for settlement of
their disputes with the buyers in regard to delay in payment etc. of the supplies made by them. The provisions of the
Companies Act have been amended making it mandatory for the large enterprises to show in the entries of their Balance
Sheets the amount due for payment to the SSI units. Further, the banks have been advised to fix sub-limits within the
overall working capital limits to the large borrowers specifically for meeting the payment obligation in respect of
purchases from SSI.
3.9.3 Regarding amendments in tax-assessment, the matter has been taken up with the Central Board of Direct Taxes,
Ministry of Finance.
Further Recommendation
3.9.4 Taking into consideration the Action taken notes of the Ministry of SSI in response to the Committee’s
recommendation pertaining to the problem of delayed payment and simplification of tax-assessment procedures the
Committee feels that the Ministry of SSI should take follow-up action with the Central Board of Direct Taxes, Ministry
of Finance regarding amendment in tax-assessment. There is a need for assessment of services rate and the
implementation of the provision of the Delayed Payment Small Scale and Ancillary Industrial Undertaking Act 1993 as
amended in 1998 and the relevant provisions of the Companies Act (i.e. mandatory provision requiring the large
enterprises to show in the entries of their balance sheets the amount due for payment to the SSI units.
Recommendation
3.10    Capital from the stock market
3.10.1 The Committee is of the view that large industries are able to raise huge capital from the stock market through
public issues whereas SSI units are hampered in this regard. The Committee recommends that Government should
endeavour to bring about a process to facilitate the SSI units to raise capital from the stock market and also the
minimum required limit of Rs. 5.0 crores may be done away with in case of SSI units.
                                                                                                                                          (Para: 3.43)
Action Taken
3.10.2The Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) has informed that the entry norms stipulated in
Chapter-II of the SEBI (Disclosure and Investor Protection) Guidelines, 2000 laying down the eligibility norms for
companies proposing to issue securities through an offer document are flexible and do not prohibit small issuers from
accessing the market.
Further Recommendation
3.10.3The Committee notes that Chapter-II of the SEBI (Disclosure and Investor Protection) Guidelines, 2000 laying
down the eligibility norms for companies proposing to issue securities throughan offer document are flexible and do not
prohibit small issuers from accessing the market. The Committee desires that the Ministry of SSI should encourage the
SSI units to raise capital from the stock market.

155th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/155threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:24]
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
Recommendation
4.1      Industrial sickness in the SSI sector
4.1.1   The Committee feels that a survey of the extent of industrial sickness with reference to the SSI sector would
enable the State Government to obtain valuable insights and to accordingly take remedial measures.
                                                                                                                                          (Para: 2.41)
Action Taken
4.1.2   As per the Final Report of the Third All India Census of the Small Scale Industries conducted by the Office of
the DC(SSI), Ministry of SSI, the total number of sick/ incipient sick units (both registered and unregistered) in the State
of Himachal Pradesh was 8,967 on 31st March, 2001. The detailed data of the Census supplied by the Office of DC(SSI)
to the State for preparation of State report would provide valuable insights on the nature of industrial sickness in the
State and remedial action will be taken accordingly.
Recommendation
4.2     Ecological conservation
4.2.1  The Committee is appreciative of the fact that ecological conservation is an essential issue and ban on polythene
bags would go a long way in preserving the ecological balance of the State. However, the Committee feels that the SSI
entrepreneurs who had set up polythene bag units need to be compensated so that they can set up alternative means of
livelihood. The State Government should make the necessary financial compensation in the interest of the SSI sector in
the State.
                                                                                                                                            (Para: 3.9)
Action Taken
4.2.2 The State Government has informed that a meeting was held with the Himachal Polybags Manufacturers
Association under the Chairmanship of Director of Industries. In the meeting, it was intimated that 8 cases of Polybags
manufacturing units financed by the Himachal Pradesh Finance Corporation (HPFC) are having outstanding loans. It
was decided that the cases of these units for diversification would be considered by HPFC on case-to-case basis, i.e., on
the merit of each case. The State Government will provide all possible assistance to such units in product diversification
as and when such proposals are received.
Recommendation
4.3     Review of the upper limit of Rs. 3.0 crore for extending Excise Duty Concessions
4.3.1  The Committee feels that a review of the upper limit of Rs. 3.0 crore for extending Excise Duty Concessions
needs to be done away with. Besides that, the Committee feels that putting up an upper limit would act as a disincentive
for the growth of SSI units. The Committee also strongly recommends that the Government should take up the matter
regarding the issue of notification as per the Special Package announced by Hon’ble Prime Minister with the concerned
authorities.
                                                                                                                                          (Para: 3.24)
Action Taken
4.3.2 The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance.
Recommendation
4.4     Specialized SSI branches
4.4.1  The Committee is of the opinion that Banks need to be more flexible with its approach of lending to SSI units in
Himachal Pradesh. The Committee feels that in order to boost credit to the SSI sector specialized SSI branches need to
be opened by all the banks.
                                                                                                                                            (Para: 4.3)
Action Taken
4.4.2  The Reserve Bank of India has informed that the Banks have been advised to open at least one Specialised SSI
branch in each district. Further, banks have been permitted to categorise their general banking branches having 60% or
more of their advances to SSI sector as Specialised SSI branches in order to encourage them to open more Specialised
SSI branches for providing better service to this sector as a whole. Most of the banks in public sector have been advised
for exploring feasibility of opening full-fledged Specialised SSI branches/conversion of existing general banking
branches to Specialised SSI branches.
Recommendation

155th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/155threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:24]
4.5     Encouragement to entrepreneurship
4.5.1 The Committee feels that the issue of collateral free loans is a very critical input if SSI sector has to grow and
survive. The Committee feels that banks need to be more flexible and should try and encourage entrepreneurship to the
maximum extent possible. The Committee is of the opinion that the ball is in the court of the Banks and they need to
come forward in this area.
                                                                                                                                          (Para: 4.16)
Action Taken
4.5.2 The RBI in April, 2002 has advised the banks that they may, on the basis of good track record and financial
position of the units, increase the limit of dispensation of collateral requirement for loans from the existing Rs. 5 lakh to
Rs. 15 lakh (enhanced to Rs. 25 lakh as per announcement made in the Mid-Term Review of Monetary and Credit
Policy 2003-04).
4.5.3  The Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme for Small Industries launched by the Government is a useful instrument in
lending collateral-free credit particularly when the guarantee cover mitigates 75% of the risk. The banks now have
comfortable liquidity and SSI projects could be supported by the banks under the guarantee scheme provided the same
are viable and bankable.
Recommendation
4.6     Lower interest rate
4.6.1 The Committee recommends that SSI advances should have lower interest rate in comparison to general category
advances and banks should also consider further rationalizing of the rate of interest structure for SSI advances to put a
cap of PLR +2% as maximum rate of interest
                                                                                                                                          (Para: 4.29)
Action Taken
4.6.2  RBI has initiated the following measures to reduce interest for advances to SSI sector.
          (i)      As per the decision of the 3rd meeting of Standing Advisory Committee on Credit flow to SSI sector, banks
have been advised to set the interest rate on advances keeping in view prevailing general downward
movement in interest rate.
          (ii)      As per the announcement made by the Hon’ble Finance Minister in the Union Budget 
2003-04, IBA have already advised the banks to adopt the interest rate band of 2 per cent above and below
their Prime Lending Rate (PLR) for secured advances. All the public sector banks have been advised for
issuing necessary instructions to their controlling offices/branches in this regard.
          (iii)     As per the decision of the 4th meeting of the Standing Advisory Committee on Credit flow to SSI sector,
banks have been advised to examine having at least 3 slabs of rate of interest for loans up to Rs. 50,000
between Rs. 50,000 and Rs. 2 lakh and above Rs. 2 lakh respectively.
4.7     Further recommendation of the Committee in respect of interim replies of the Ministry.
4.7.1 The Committee observes that in respect of the recommendations placed in Chapter-IV, the Ministry has furnished
the interim replies, therefore, the Committee desires that in respects of these recommendations, the Ministry should
furnish the final replies, in detail and to the point, alongwith the outcome of action taken, as per the intention and spirit
of the recommendations of the Committee.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

155th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/155threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:24]
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
IMPLEMENTATION OF INCENTIVES GRANTED BY THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
        The Committee is pleased to observe that as a result of announcement of the Special Package, 2003 granting
various incentives, concessions and facilities to the industrial units the State has received 256 proposals in medium and
large scale sector and 1930 proposals in SSI sector with proposed investment of Rs. 4,195 crore and generating
employment to the tune of 84,086 persons. However, the Committee desires that the efforts should be continued for
giving impetus to further industrialization and employment generation in the State. But what is necessary is the
equitable development of Industrial activities in every part of the State for balanced industrialization of the State. The
Stale Government should come out with Additional Package for “industrially backward areas” for inducement of
investment and exploring employment generation. The State Department of Industries should acquire undeveloped
patches of land as soon as possible for promotion of cluster industries in industrially backward
areas.                                                                             (Para 3.1.3)
ISSUE OF COLLATERAL SECURITY
        The Committee is aware that the Mid-Term Review of Monetary and Credit Policy 
2003-04, as per the RBI guidelines, provided that no collateral security should be insisted upon for loan upto Rs. 25 lakh
for SSI Sector. The provision exists there but the practical experience shows that banks vision has been conservative and
they still insist upon collateral security and third party guarantee. The condition of "good track record and financial
position" of borrower unleashes discretionary power/understanding of branch manager towards the borrower. The
practical experience shows that the branch manager doubts the repaying capacity of the borrower. The Committee
wonders as to how the branch manager would examine the condition of the “good track record and financial position” of
borrower in the situation where the borrower is dealing with the bank for the first time. Therefore, the Committee
recommends that the clause of the “good track record and financial condition “of the borrower as the condition for
extending loan should be examined.(Para 3.2.4)
TRUCK UNIONS
        The Committee feels that the Transport Department should popularize the, provision for the grant of the permits to
the industrial houses for transporting their products in their own trucks. The Committee desires that the State
Government should ensure the protection against the truck unions causing obstruction to the industrial houses from
transporting their product in their own trucks. A grievances cell should be set up for lodging complaint against the
activities of truck unions. The Committee is of the view that if the State Government is aware of the problem caused by
truck union, that it is the onus of the State Government to combat the menace of truck unions/operator by endowing
vigilant administration for tackling the law and order problem and ensuring in practice a SMART (Simple, Moral,
Accountable Responsive and Transparent) Government as claimed by State administration in response to the
Committee’s recommendation Vide Para 2.48 of 130th Report, now placed in Chapter-I of the present Report). An
effective co-ordination among the State Transport Department, Industry Department and the District Administration
would generate accountability and responsiveness among the truck operations/unions.      (Para 3.3.5)
        The Committee understands that revenue-generation is essential to run the Government in meeting its financial
requirements. The export-tax on the goods produced in the State is one of the source of revenue generation. However,
the Committee feels that export-tax should be reasonable and intended to encourage export of value added products.
(Para 3.3.6)
INSTITUTE ON THE TERMS OF BIFR
        The basic concern of the Committee is the rehabilitation of sick and potentially viable SSI units. The Committee is
of the view that if the institutional arrangement already exists as per the recommendation of the Working Group under
the Chairmanship of S.S. Kohli the State Level-Inter-Institutional Committees (SLIICS) under the Chairmanship of the
Secretary (Industries) in each State. These SLIICS can play proactive role in dealing with cases of sick SSI units. The
Committee desires that the Ministry of Small Scale Industries should accordingly communicate to the Committee the
performance of SLIIC in ameliorating sick SSI units in Himachal Pradesh.                                                   (Para 3.4.5)
REVIEW OF THE UPFRONT CHARGES
        The Committee is of the considered view that Small Scale Industries have the potential to generate employment
and proliferation of the network of SSI units would accelerate the growth of economy and improvement in standard of
living of people. Therefore, facilitating smooth credit flow to Small Scale Industries at reasonable rate of interest would
boost the SSI entrepreneurs to set up new units. It is in this context, the Committee reiterates for the rationalisation of
upfront charges. The Committee further recommends that RBI should come out with a guideline instructing the banks to
charge uniform service charges.                                                                                                                             (Para

155th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/155threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:24]
3.5.3)
PROBLEMS OF COLLATERAL SECURITY
        The Committee understands that the RBI has instructed the banks for waiving of collateral securities upto a
borrowal limit of Rs. 25 lakh. However, SSI entrepreneurs are facing the problem of collateral securities as banks are
continuing to insist for collateral securities. The Committee recommends that an enquiry Committee should be set up to
look into the matter and investigate as how many branches of various commercial banks have sought collateral security
while sanctioning the loan and the branch manager should be held responsible. Moreover, each branch should be
instructed to display the board showing collateral securities are not required upto a borrowal limit of Rs. 25 lakh under
Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme. The Committee may also be informed periodically of the progress made in this
regard.                (Para 3.6.3)
FASTER CLEARANCE OF LOAN PROPOSALS
        The Committee desires that the time frame should be fixed for disposal of loan application like upto Rs. 25,000
within 2 weeks and upto Rs. 5 lakh within 4 weeks is strictly adhered to by all banks. The Committee feels that faster
clearance of loan proposal would encourage SSI entrepreneurs to set up SSI units.                                        (Para 3.7.3)
SIMPLE TIME BOUND OBJECTIVE ASSESSMENT PATTERN
        The Committee’s concern is that the SSI entrepreneurs should not be subjected to rigorous/procedural wrangles and
credit facilities should be extended with willing mindset to assist the entrepreneurs. That’s why the Committee
recommended a simple time bound objective assessment. The Committee does not wish to do away the RBI’s guidelines
on “Fair Practices code for Lenders”, but surely enough, desires that the time-bound processing of loan application
should be given impetus. For that sake, transparency and accountability in banking practices is required.
                                                                                                                                          (Para 3.8.3)
PAYMENT DELAYS BREAKDOWN THE INVESTMENT CYCLE
        Taking into consideration the Action taken notes of the Ministry of SSI in response to the Committee’s
recommendation pertaining to the problem of delayed payment and simplification of tax-assessment procedures the
Committee feels that the Ministry of SSI should take follow-up action with the Central Board of Direct Taxes, Ministry
of Finance regarding amendment in tax-assessment. There is a need for assessment of services rate and the
implementation of the provision of the Delayed Payment Small Scale and Ancillary Industrial Undertaking Act 1993 as
amended in 1998 and the relevant provisions of the Companies Act (i.e. mandatory provision requiring the large
enterprises lo show in the entries of their Balance sheets the amount due for payment to the SSI
units.                                                                            (Para 3.9.4)
CAPITAL FROM THE STOCK MARKET
        The Committee notes that Chapter-II of the SEBI (Disclosure and Investor Protection) Guidelines, 2000 laying
down the eligibility norms for companies proposing to issue securities through an offer document are flexible and do not
prohibit small issuers from accessing the market. The Committee desires that the Ministry of SSI should encourage the
SSI units to raise capital from the stock market.                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                        (Para 3.10.3)
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMITTEE IN RESPECT OF INTERIM REPLIES OF THE
MINISTRY
          The Committee observes that in respect of the recommendations placed in Chapter-IV, the Ministry has furnished
the interim replies, therefore, the Committee desires that in respects of these recommendations, the Ministry should
furnish the final replies, in detail and to the point, along with the outcome of action taken, as per the intention and spirit
of the recommendations of the Committee.                                                                                                               (Para
4.7.1)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------
MINUTES
I
FIRST MEETING
        The Sub-Committee-IV for Action Taken Reports (of Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Industry) met at 3.30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 8th December, 2004 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House,
New Delhi.
        PRESENT

155th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/155threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:24]
   1.  Shri Santosh Bagrodia  ----  Chairman
   2.  Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato  ----  Convenor
        RAJYA SABHA
   3.  Prof. M.M. Agarwal ----  Convenor
   4.  Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
   5.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
        LOK SABHA
   6.  Shri Sunil Khan
        SECRETARIAT
        Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
        Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
        Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
        Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
2.     At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the Chairman of the Committee and Members of the Sub-Committee-IV to
the meeting. The Sub-Committee, therefore, took up the following Reports for consideration:---
        (i)     154 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee's 129 th
Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in the Regions of Delhi, Noida and Ghaziabad (Ministry of Small Scale
Industries).
        (ii)    155 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Committee's
130th Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in Himachal Pradesh (Ministry of Small Scale Industries).
        (iii)   156th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendation contained in the Committee’s
131th Report on constraints in Industrial Development of North-Eastern Region (Ministry of Heavy Industries
and Public Enterprises).
        (iv)   157 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendation contained in the Committee’s
141st Report on Potential of Coir Industries in West Bengal and Andaman and Nicobar (Ministry of Agro and
Rural Industries).
        (v)    158 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee's 143 rd
Report on  Level Playing Field for the Indian Capital Goods Industry (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises).
        (vi)   159 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee's 145 th
Report on Problem being faced by Small Scale Industries in the Procurement of Steel (Ministry of Small Scale
Industries).
3.     After a brief discussion, all the above reports were adopted by the Sub-Committee.
4.     The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M.
X
TENTH MEETING
        The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 9th
December, 2004 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
        PRESENT
   1.  Shri Santosh Bagrodia  ----  Chairman
        RAJYA SABHA
   2.  Prof. M.M. Agarwal
   3.  Shri Surendra Lath
   4.  Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
   5.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   6.  Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
   7.  Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
        LOK SABHA
   8.  Shri Swadesh Chakraborty

155th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/155threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:24]
   9.  Shri Subhash Desmukh
10.  Shri Sunil Khan
11.  Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato
12.  Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel
13.  Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
14.  Shri Ganesh Singh
15.  Shri Chandramani Tripathi
16.  Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
        SECRETARIAT
        Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
        Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
        Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
2.     At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting. The Committee, thereafter,
took up following Reports for consideration:---
        (i)     154 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee's 129 th
Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in the Regions of Delhi, Noida and Ghaziabad (Ministry of Small Scale
Industries).
        (ii)    155 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Committee's
130th Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in Himachal Pradesh (Ministry of Small Scale Industries).
        (iii)   156th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendation contained in the Committee’s
131th Report on constraints in Industrial Development of North-Eastern Region (Ministry of Heavy Industries
and Public Enterprises).
        (iv)   157 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendation contained in the Committee’s
141st Report on Potential of Coir Industries in West Bengal and Andaman and Nicobar (Ministry of Agro and
Rural Industries).
        (v)    158 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee's 143 rd
Report on  Level Playing Field for the Indian Capital Goods Industry (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises).
        (vi)   159 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee's 145 th
Report on Problem being faced by Small Scale Industries in the Procurement of Steel (Ministry of Small Scale
Industries).
3.     After a brief discussion, all the reports were adopted by the Committee without any modification and decided to
present/lay from 154th to 156th Reports on 16th December, 2004 and from 157 th to 159th Report on the following day
i.e. 17th December, 2004.
4.     The Chairman, then, nominated Prof. M.M. Agarwal, in his absence Shri Surendra Lath and in their absence of
Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra for Rajya Sabha and Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato and in his absence Shri Sunil Khan for Lok
Sabha for presenting/laying154th to 156 th Report to both the Houses of the Parliament on 16 th December, 2004. The
Chairman nominated Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy and in his absence Shri Suresh Bhardwaj and in their absence of Dr. K.
Malaisamy in Rajya Sabha and Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria and in his absence Shri Swadesh Chakraborty in Lok Sabha for
presenting/laying 157th to 159 th Report of the Committee to both the Houses of the Parliament on 17 th December,
2004.
5.     The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------