PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
  
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
  
ONE HUNDRED – THIRTY FIFTH REPORT  
  
ON 
  
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN COMMITTEE ' S 120TH   REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR 
GRANTS (2003-2004) PERTAINING TO DEPARTMENT OF HEAVY 
INDUSTRIES  
(MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES)   
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 22ND    DECEMBER, 2003) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 22ND   DECEMBER, 2003) 
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2003/PAUSA, 1925  (SAKA) 
C O N T E N T S 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                   
INTRODUCTION                                                                                          
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE        
MINUTES                                                                                                                                            
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
(Date of Constitution - 1st January, 2003  ) 
 Dr. P.C. Alexander      —Chairman 
                         RAJYA SABHA 
2.      Prof. M.M. Agarwal 
3.      Shri Jayantilal Barot 
4.      Dr. M.N. Das 
5.      Smt.  Saroj Dubey 
6.      Shri Faguni Ram 
7.      Shri Lajpat Rai 
8.      Smt. Sumitra Mahajan 
Page 1 of 28135th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/135threport.htm

9.      Shri P.K. Maheshwari 
10.  Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil 
11.  Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy 
12.  Shri S. Sivasubramanian 
13.  Smt. Sushree Devi 
14.  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
15.  Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
  
LOK SABHA 
16.  Smt. Jayashree Banerjee 
17.  Shri Ajoy Chakraborty 
18.  Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary 
19.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das 
20.  Shri K Francis George  
21.  Shri Thomas Hansda 
22.  Md. Anwarul Haque 
23.  Shri A.C. Jose 
24.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
25.  Shri Mansoor Ali Khan 
26.  Shri Sunil Khan 
27.  Shri Deepak Kumar 
28.  Shri Manjay Lal 
29.  Dr. K. Malaisamy 
30.  Shri A. Narendra 
31.  Shri Ananta Nayak 
32.  Shri Dayabhai V. Patel 
33.  Shri Uttamrao Patil 
34.  Shri Malyala Rajaiah 
35.  Shri P. Rajendran 
  
  
36.  Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
37.  Shri Tarachand Sahu 
38.  Shri Ramanand Singh 
39.  Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh 
40.  Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur 
41.  Shri V. Vetriselvan 
42.  Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumar 
43.  Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
44.   Shri Vijay Sankeshwar 
  
  
SECRETARIAT 
  
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary 
Shri  A.K. Singh, Deputy  Secretary 
Shri  K.P. Singh, Under   Secretary 
Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer 
I N T R O D U C T I ON 
Page 2 of 28135th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/135threport.htm

  
I,  the Chairman of the Department-related Par liamentary Standing Committee on Industry,  having  
 been authorised  by the Committee, hereby pres ent this One Hundred – Thirty-fifth Report on the 
Action Taken by the Government on the recommenda tions contained in  the  Committee ' s 120 th  
Report  on the  Demands for Grants  (2003-04) pertaining to the Depa rtment of Heavy Industries ( 
Ministry of  Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises).   
  
2.The Committee   examined and  considered  the Action Taken Notes on re commendations contained 
in the   Committee ' s 120th  Report  on the  Demands for Grants (2003-04) pertaining to the Department 
of Heavy Industries (  Ministry of  Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises . 
  
3.  This Action Taken Report has b een prepared on the basis of the action taken note furnished by the
Department of Heavy Industries  (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises) on the
recommendations contained in the Committee’s 120 th Report.  The Committee adopted the analytical 
and descriptive approach to examin e the action taken notes and after assessing the action taken note as 
furnished by the Department of Heav y Industries  (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises)
and judging the same in the true spirit of the reco mmendations, the Committee has prepared the present
Action Taken Report. Action taken notes have been an alyzed and suitably categorized in four chapters
in the Action Taken Report and the Observations/C onclusions and Recommendations of the Committee
have been placed in Chapter – V. 
  
4.         The Committee at its meeting held on 18th   December, 2003 considered and adopted the Report. 
  
  
REPORT 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Heavy
Industries  (Ministry of Heavy I ndustries and Public Enterprises) on the Recommendations contained in
the  120 th  Report (of the Department -related Parliamentary Standi ng Committee on Industry) on 
Demands for Grants (2003-2004)pert aining the Department of Heavy Industries  (Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises)   .The Report  was presented /laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha and
Lok Sabha on  the 8th  May, 2003. 
2.         Action Taken Notes have been received from the Department of H eavy Industries  (Ministry o f
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprise s) in respect of the   recommendations contained in the Report.  
These have been categorized as follows: 
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Department of Heavy Industries
(Chapter - I). 
Recommendations:- 4.2, 14.3, 16.4, 18.3,  19.4,  
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not de s i r e  t o  p u r s u e  i n  v i e w  o f  t h e
Government's replies : (Chapter - II) 
NEW DELHI 
December 18, 2003      
                                     
DR.P.C. ALEXANDER
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary   Standing Committee 
on Industry 
Page 3 of 28135th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/135threport.htm

Recommendations:- 10.2, 23.2 
 Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted  
replies of the Department of Heavy Industries:. (Chapter - III). 
Recommendations:- 2.2, 2.4, 5.1, 6.4, 7.2, 8 .2, 9.1,  9.3,  12, 14.4, 14.6, 14.8, 15.3, 15.5, 17.3, 17.4, 
17.5, 20.4, 21.4,  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  final replies of the  Department of Heavy 
Industries   have not been received. (Chapter - IV).  
Recommendations:-. 3.4, 3.5, 9.5, 10.5, 22.2 
3.         The Committee is pleased to observe that  the   Department of Heavy Industries has accepted its 
recommendations as  mentioned in Chapter –I of the  Report.   
4.      In respect of the recommendations made in paras  10.2  and 23.2   in Chapter-II  the Committee is  
convinced  with the logic and expl anation  advocated by the Department  of Heavy Industries  (Ministry
of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises) and therefore   does not want to  pursue  further .  
5.         The Committee expresses its concern over th e non-implementation  of recommendation 
contained in  Chapter-III  an d therefore  the Commi ttee desires that the Department of Heav y 
Industries  (Ministry of Heavy Indu stries and Public Enterprises)  should furnish  lo gical  
explanation  in respect of these recommendations 
6.         In respect  of recommendations  pl aced in Chapter-IV, Departme nt of Heavy Industries  
(Ministry of Heavy Industries and P ublic Enterprises) has  either   furnished the in terim replies o r
couched its language in  vague term s like  noted for compliance/guida nce,  therefore, the Committee
desires  that the Department of Heavy Industries  (Ministry of Heav y Industries and Public Enterprises)
should furnish Action Taken Note in  respect of reco mmendations categorized   in Chapter-IV  in detail 
and to the point, as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee. 
7.         The details of the Action Taken is being discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages. 
 
Page 4 of 28135th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/135threport.htm

CHAPTER - I 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
  
RECOMMENDATION 
1.1       Functions of the FCRI 
            The Committee hopes that functions of the FCRI are commensurate  with the grants to the
Institution in the current year. 
                                                                                                                        (PARA 4.2) 
ACTION TAKEN 
            1.1.1    During the current financia l year, Fluid Control Research  Institute (FCRI) has been
allocated funds under Plan head fo r implementing the Plan Schemes.  No funds have been provided
under Non-Plan head.  The Institute has been working satisfactorily.  
  
RECOMMENDATION 
  
1.2       Power manufacture sector accounts for major business of BHEL 
            The Committee observes that power  manufacture sector account s for major business of BHEL
(70%) apart from Industry (20%) and international ma rket (10%).  There is a great potential in powe
r
sector due to gap between demand and supply of pow er.  But due to low investment, projects are not
coming up fast.  State Electricity Boards are major handicap in this regard. 
                                                                                                                        (PARA 14.3) 
ACTION TAKEN 
1.2.1    Planning Commission has assessed 41110 MW of  new power generation capacity addition to be
feasible during 10 th FIVE YEAR PLAN. This together with the power sector reforms, setting up o f
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission/State Electricity Regulatory Co mmission (CERC/SERCs),
reducing Transmission   & Distribut ion (R&D) losses etc., are expected  to improve investment in this
sector and also to fill up the gap between demand and supply of power. 
RECOMMENDATION 
1.3       Shortage of orders resulting into HEC’s performance 
            The Committee observes that shorta ge of orders resulting into low capacity utilization has
affected HEC’s performance.  The Company faced shortage of cash and the cash credit facility with 
bank remained fully utilized.  As a result, the Company is facing difficulty in arranging fund fo r
operation, payment of statutory dues and salary/w ages.  The Committee re commends that Fund fo r
discharging statutory dues and pe nding salary/wages needs to be provided by Government till the
revival plan is approved as conversion of HEC’s assets into resources may take some time. 
                                                                                                                        (PARA 16.4) 
ACTION TAKEN 
1.3.1    The Group of Ministers, under the Chairmanship of Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission, 
have considered the issue of payment of arrears towards salaries and stat utory dues and has given its
Page 5 of 28135th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/135threport.htm

recommendations and necessary action has been initiated in line with  the recommendations for clearing
dues of  various PSEs including HEC.  
  
RECOMMENDATION 
  
1.4       Scooters India Limited (SIL) 
The Committee observes that  the Company’s plant and machinery is more than 45 years old and
has outlived its life, the Company was not been able to upgrade its manufacturing facilities. The
Committee, therefore, recommends  that modernization of the plan t may be taken up under additions,
modifications and renovation scheme of the Ministry of Heavy Industries. 
                                                                                                                  (PARA 18.3)
ACTION TAKEN 
1.4.1    Government approved the modernization of the Paint Shop of SIL at a cost of Rs. 14.00 Crores.
Accordingly a sum of Rs. 6.00 cror e was released to SIL during 2001 -2002 for the Phase – I of the 
project and SIL was to contribute Rs. 2.00 cores from Internal Sources. Balance amount will be released
for the Second Phase of the Project. 
1.4.2    During the current financial year f unds to the tune of Rs. 2.00 crore have been
allocated/budgeted for renewal/replacement and SIL is likely to spend an additional amount of Rs. 0.75
crore from its internal generation. 
RECOMMENDATION 
1.5       Cement Corporation India Limited (CCI) 
            The Committee, therefore, recomme nds that Government should expedite the sale process o f
Cement Corporation of India and release salary to employees of the Cement Corporation of India
considering the humanitarian aspect of it. 
                                                                                                                        (PARA 19.4) 
ACTION TAKEN 
1.5.1    Sale process of Cement Corp oration of India (CCI) is  already at an advanc e stage. Assets Sales
Committee constituted, as per the directions of BIFR has already held its five meetings. The last meeting
was held on 4 th August 2003. Due diligence by pot ential bidders has already been completed in respect 
of all the Units except Bokajan. Pr e-paid meet has been organized in  respect of potential bidders. The 
potential bidders have shown interest  for all the plants of CCI. Financial bid was e xpected to be invited
by the last week of July 2003. Asse ts Sales Committee has requested BIFR for extension of time by
three months.  As per the decisi on of the Government, CCI has al so taken   the matter with BIF R
seeking their approval to initiate advance action for process of closure of seven non-operational units, in 
case sale process do not materialize, Permission of BIFR is awaited. 
1.5.2    As regards the release of salary to the employees of CCI, an amount of Rs. 9.68 crore has already
been released to CCI for the salary for the period July, 2002 to March, 2003.  
CHAPTER - II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
RECOMMENDATION 
2.1       Interest Subsidy / Guarantee Fee Subsidy
Page 6 of 28135th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/135threport.htm

            The Committee is constrained to not e that the DHI has provided fo r the provision of guarantee
fee subsidy of only three PSEs in 2003-04 but Hi ndustan Cables Ltd., has failed to avail of the
assistance.  The Committee impr esses upon the De partment of Heavy Industries to apprise the
Committee of the reasons why HCL failed to avail assistance.  Th e Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Government should prov ide guarantee fee subsidy to the n eedy PSEs for leveraging finance fo r
sustaining their operations. 
                                                                                                                        (PARA 10.2) 
ACTION TAKEN 
2.1.1    HCL was unable to avail the assistance, as there was no budget provision for guarantee fee
subsidy during the year 2003-04.  
RECOMMENDATION 
2.2       Photo Sensitive Goods 
The Committee recommends that the DHI should vigorously pursue the matter with Ministry of Finance.
                                                                                                                        (PARA 23.2) 
ACTION TAKEN   
2.2.1    The matter was taken up wi th Ministry of Finance for pr oviding various duty concessions.
However, Ministry of Finance, have not agreed to the proposal because of the following:-     
 (a)       Increase in Customs duty on semi finished photographic goods. 
The suggestion to increase th e Basic Customs duty on semi-fin ished photographic goods to 40% fo r 
importers other than Integrated ma nufacturers (presently HPF is the only Integrat ed manufacturer) goes
against the Central Government’s commitment to progr essively reduce the peak rate of Basic Customs 
duty. Duty increase will also have an adverse impact  on the user industries, apart from hurting a large
number of professional photographers as well as a large segment of public. 
  
(b)               Reduction in Customs duty on raw materials only for Integrated  manufacturers.  
  
            The other Raw materials like Po lyester Subbed base (for all photo-goods), base paper fo r 
manufacture of B&W printing paper,  cellulose triacetate, silver and organic ch emicals & sensitizers
attract peak rate of Customs dut y (except silver whic h attracts specific ra te of Rs. 500 per kg.).
Exemption on Silver will not be feas ible as its use in this industry is miniscule compared to its othe r
uses. Grant of end-used based ex emption only to the Integrated ma nufacturers, would be against the 
principle of horizontal equity and policy of rationalization, besides being administra tively difficult and
prone to misuse. 
  
(c) Reduction in excise duty. 
            Reduction of excise duty is not goi ng to benefit HPF in any way, since the benefit of reduced
duty will be available to its competitors also including the imported products (by way of lesser CVD). 
CHAPTER – III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE HEAVY 
INDUSTRIES 
  
Page 7 of 28135th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/135threport.htm

RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.1       Plan Outlay 
  
            The Committee is constrained to note that the expenditure incurred during last year was less than
30 percent of approved outlay.  The Committee considers the informati on supplied by the DHI
incomplete in as much as it does not spell out th e reasons/circumstances explaining why there was such
a low release of the fund.  The Committee impresse s upon the DHI to provide the said information in
their ATNs, so that Committee can look into the issue and suggest remedial measures. 
                                                                                                                        (PARA 2.2) 
ACTION TAKEN  
3.1.1    Against the provision of Rs. 100 crore under Plan in BE 2002-2003, an amount of Rs. 29.20 
crore was provided under the Reve nue Section and balance Rs. 70.80 cr ore under the Capital Section o f
the Demand. However, an expenditure  of Rs. 47.95 crore only was incurr ed during the year against this
provision owing to the reason that most of th e PSEs under Department of  Heavy Industry are unde r
Disinvestment and it is not consid ered prudent by the Government to make heavy capital investment in
these PSEs. Also, a number of PSEs are carrying unspent balances from the previous years due to which
further funds could not be released during the year. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION  
3.1.2    The Committee is of the vi ew that the revival of the PSEs ca n not be linked wi th the conditions
of the disinvestments which is genera lly put off due to legal and politi cal wrangles.  Since the PSEs are
itself bleeding, keeping them on wait further would mean ciphering off last ounce of blood where the
disinvestments process would hardly extract substantial proceeds.   
RECOMMENDATION 
3.2              Allocation of more plan funds for the PSEs 
            The Committee finds that though the projections of the PSEs were  higher, only limited support
was provided by the Government.  The Committee, ther efore, recommends that allocation of more plan
funds for the PSEs may be made by the Government so that these funds coul d be utilized for capital
investment in various PSEs of the De partment of Heavy Industries.  In view of the resource crunch, this
assistance could be given in the form of working capital, non-plan lo an, government guarantee etc.  The 
Committee also impresses upon the Government to  fully utilize the funds provided and avoid the
previous years experience in this regard. 
                                                                                                            (PARA 2.4)
ACTION TAKEN  
3.2.1    Based on the requirement of funds of PSEs for capital i nvestment 2003-2004 this Department 
had projected a requirement of Rs. 214.10 crore as budgetary suppor t. However, Planning Commission
approved a budgetary support of Rs . 100 crore for 2003-2004. If necessa ry, further funds will be 
requested at RE stage. As most of the PSEs are either loss making/sick or are under reference to BIFR or
in the process of disinvestment, it  is not considered prudent by the Government to make heavy capital
investment in the PSEs.  
  
3.2.2    Government have been providing non-plan budgetary support to PSEs for salary/wages, VRS 
and statutory dues based on their requirement. Also government Gu arantees have been provided,
Page 8 of 28135th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/135threport.htm

wherever considered necessary. Adequate f unds for the purpose were  provided through budget o r
supplementary demand. 
 Further Recommendation 
3.2.3    The Committee is of the vi ew that either the process of di sinvestments should be accelerated o r
the PSEs should be provided with suff icient funds for capital investment .   Sitting over the decision is
neither going to resurrect the sick PSEs nor it is goi ng to enhance the sale proceeds of PSEs through the
disinvestments rather it would increase the liability  of the PSEs towards statutory dues and payment o f
salaries.  Therefore, the Committ ee recommends that the Government should come out of slumber, the
sooner the better not only in the business interest of the PSEs but also in the overall economic interest of
the nation.  A firm policy with effe ctive implementation is required at the moment.  It’s a now or neve r 
situation.  The Government must expedite its policy decisions without further delay. 
  
RECOMMENDATION 
3.3       Outlay For North East Region 
            The Committee expresses its concer n over the under-utilization of the amount earmarked for the 
NE region and Sikkim.  Out of the allocation made during the annual plan 2002-03 proposal for Rs. 4.35 
crores only was identified.  Thus, there is a vast gap be tween the outlay and util ization of money.  The
Committee, is, however, not aware of the reasons and, therefore, wa nts the Ministry to apprise the
Committee as to why the propos als were not coming forward fr om the N.E. Region and Sikkim
alongwith the steps taken or being ta ken to promote the utilization  of  funds. N.E region is an important
part of the country, which needs special and preferential treatment. The Ministry, should therefore, chalk
out both short-term and long-term development schemes for that re gion and apprize the Committee o f
the same within next three months time. 
                                                                                                             
(PARA 5.1)
ACTION TAKEN 
3.3.1    There  was a plan provision of Rs. 100 cr ore in BE 2002-2003, out of which Rs. 10 crore was 
earmarked for the schemes for No rth East and Sikkim. The budge t provision of Rs. 100 crore was
subsequently reduced to Rs. 50 crore. Actual Expenditure in 2002-2003 was however Rs. 47.95 crore. 
Out of this an amount of Rs. 4.34 crore was released for capital inve stment schemes for Tea Gardens o f
Andrew Yule & Company in Assa m. In the current year 2003-2004 schemes worth Rs. 4.50 crore have 
already been identified and release of funds is under consideration. 
  
3.3.2    It needs to be mentioned that being responsible for basically  the administration of 49 PSEs, the
scope of schemes is confined to the  needs of these PSEs for plans relating to NE region (for NE outlay).
As such, any balance left unutilized from the allocati ons for NE is transferred to the Department of NE
affairs. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
3.3.3    The fact that the non-utiliz ation of funds remains and the me re transfer of money from the
Department of Heavy Industries  to the Department of North East  Affairs does not justify the non-
utilization of funds.  
3.3.4    The Ministry is absolutely silent about the Committee’s recommendation regarding chalking out 
short term and long term schemes for North East Region.  The Committee recommends that the schemes
i.e.  short term and lon g term , be formulated for N.E re gion and  Sikkim so that atleast  the allocation
Page 9 of 28135th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/135threport.htm

made in budget is fully utilized.  
RECOMMENDATION 
3.4       Investment in Public Sector Enterprises 
            The Committee observes that perfor mance of PSE generally has been below the projected
levels.  The shortage of working capital, has been one of the reasons  for low performance.  The funds
provided by the Government are not sufficient to run them smoot hly.  Government should evolve some
mechanism to tide over this diffic ulty by making more plan allocati on.  As the Plan scheme of PSEs
mainly relate to programs of renewals/ replacements , additions, modifications and to cater to emergent
requirement of PSEs, Minist ry should analyze the need- based fund requirement of PSEs and accord top 
priority to them. 
                                                                                                                        (PARA 6.4) 
ACTION TAKEN 
3.4.1    Based on the requirement of funds of PS Es for 2003-2004, this Depa rtment had projected a 
requirement of Rs. 214.10 crore as  budgetary support. However, Planning Commission approved a
budgetary support of Rs. 100 crore fo r 2003-2004. If necessary, further f unds will be requested at RE 
stage.   
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
 
            The Committee is of the considered vi ew that the Department of Heavy Industries must have the
objective analysis of the basic financial requirement  of PSEs and project the same to the Planning
Commission and the Ministry of Finance for the appr oval so that none of the PSE’s performance should 
suffer for the want of the working capital.  That is why the Committee obser ved that  since the Plan
scheme of PSEs mainly relate to programs of re newals/ replacements, addi tions, modifications and to
cater to emergent require ment of PSEs, Ministry should analyze the need- based fund requirement o f 
PSEs and accord top priority to them. The Committee is constrained to note  that during  (2002-03) there 
was plan  provision of Rs.100 crores which  was  re duced to Rs.50 crores only  because the Department
of Heavy Industries was  not able to utilize the funds properly.   And out of Rs.50 crores the Department
of heavy Industries utilized Rs.47.95 crores  only wh ich might be the reason for allocation of  Rs.100
crores  only  in  BE  2003-04   against the projection of Rs.214.10 crores. 
  
RECOMMENDATION 
3.5       Turning around of Sick Industries 
            The Committee recommends that decisi on of the Government to enable sick industries to turn
around should be expedited.  This becomes all the more  imperative when reviva l/restructuring of PSEs
is being undertaken in an atmosphere of global competitiveness. 
  
                                                                                                                        (PARA 7.2) 
ACTION TAKEN   
3.5.1    Government always support viable revival/ restructuring plans. Government provide fresh
infusion of funds/relief and concessions as envisaged in the revival plan sanctioned by BIFR. Manpower
rationalization is a continuous pr ocess for making the PSEs more vi able and competitive by way o f
reduction in employment and overhead cost. Governme nt also provides support for reservations o f
orders. 
Page 10 of 28135th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/135threport.htm

FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
3.5.2    The Committee further desires that the Minist ry of Heavy Industries to apprise the Committee of
the details of PSEs wise revival/restructuring pl ans and concession given to  PSEs and the status o f
implementation along with its impact  on injecting the competitive re silience and comparative edge o f
the PSEs.  The short replies of th e Government hardly serves the purpose and rather raise the doubts on
the intention and efficiency of restructuring plans of PSEs. 
  
RECOMMENDATION 
3.6       Utilization of Funds  for Restructuring 
            The Committee takes note of the fund s utilized by the PSEs towards their revival/restructuring
plans.  The Committee would certainly like to know  the outcome of the mo ney spent during the yea r
2002-03.  Department of Heavy Industries is accordingly advised to critically examine the effect of such
investment.  The Committee hopes that outlay earmark ed for the year 2003-04 will be fruitfully utilise d 
for implementing the restructuring plan and impresses upon the DHI to furnish th e status of plans while
furnishing their ATN in this regard. 
                                                                                                                        (PARA 8.2) 
ACTION TAKEN  
3.6.1    During 2002-2003, an amount of Rs. 150.00 Crores  was released to various PSEs for working 
capital support, restructuring/revival of HMT (Chinar Watches), and for manpower rationalization under
Voluntary Retirement Scheme including liquidation of outstanding stat utory dues and salary/wages.  As
a result of manpower rationalization employment cost and overhead expenditure has reduced. An
amount of Rs.4.58 crore was utilized for revival /restructuring of HMT (Srinagar unit). 
3.6.2    During the current financial year 2003-2004 al so, an amount of Rs. 150 Crore has been provided 
as lump-sum for revival/restructuring schemes.  
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
3.6.3    The Committee desires the following details from the Ministry of He avy Industries and Public
Enterprises as regards the utilization of funds for restructuring plan:-  
  
(i)                  Details of Financial Ratio as a result of Investment including Return on Investment (ROI). 
(ii)                PSEs wise distribution of Funds for waiving capital support during 2002-03 and 2003-04. 
(iii)               Impact of rationalization of manpower on Labour productivity and consequent   reduction 
in Wage Bill.  
  
  
  
RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.7       Voluntary Separation Scheme & Statutory Dues 
  
Page 11 of 28135th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/135threport.htm

            The Committee observes that though the Ministry of Heavy Industries had requested the Finance
Ministry to give the flexibility to  make the allocation PSE-wise, the requirement of funds for salaries 
and statutory dues was to the tune  of Rs. 2000 crores which is a huge  amount.  The Ministry of Finance
may not provide the same in one go.  In case of non-payment of statutory dues the payment burden 
would keep on accumulating with interest thereon.  The Committe e, therefore, recommends that
Ministry of Heavy Industries should pursue with the Ministry of Fi nance for more allocation and also
expedite the payment of dues to the extent possible.  The Committee further suggests that for making up
for fund requirements, disposable a ssets of Company should be disposed  of  without further delay so as
to settle the statutory dues of retired employees as quickly as possible. 
                                                                                                                         
(PARA 9.1) 
ACTION TAKEN 
  
3.7.1    The Group of Ministers, under the Chairmanship of Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission, 
have considered the issue of payment of arrears towards salaries and stat utory dues and has given its
recommendations and necessary acti on has been initiated in line with the recommendation for clearing
dues. 
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
3.7.2    The Committee is constrained to express its deep anguish over the manner of Department o f
Heavy Industries furnishing Action Taken Note to the recommendation of  Department related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on I ndustry.  The ATN is too short a nd half heartedly detailed as it
does not spell out the details of  the recommendations given by the Group of Ministers on the issue o f
payment of arrears towards and statutory dues.  This  was essential as the Gr oup of Ministers headed by
Hon’ble Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission had given recommendations in line with the 
observation and recommendation of the Committee.  Moreover, the Committee is unable to know as to
what necessary action has been initiated on th e issue therefore, the Committee recommends the
Department of Heavy Industries to furnish all thedetails in the Action Taken Notes on the present report
for the information of the Members of the Committee. 
RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.8       Priority to the appointment of liquidators for all PSEs 
            The Committee recommends that onc e decision has been taken for closure of the PSEs the
amount for the purpose of VSS and Statutory Dues should immediately be released without affecting the
interest of workers.  The Comm ittee further suggests that Hon’
ble courts may be requested to accor d 
priority to the appointme nt of liquidators for all PSEs recommended for winding up.  Department o f
Heavy Industries may take up with the Ministry of Law to explore the possibility of increasing the
number of liquidators/Assistant liquidators for quick disposal of the work. 
                                                                                                                         
(PARA 9.3)
ACTION TAKEN 
3.8.1    The recommendation of Standing Committee to explore possibility of  increasing the number o f
liquidators/Assistant liquidators fo r quick disposal of the work has been brought to the notice o f
Page 12 of 28135th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/135threport.htm

Department of Company Affairs, Ministry of Finance.                       
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
3.8.2    The Committee is of the view  that the workers are the most affected when a decision for the
closure of the PSEs are taken theref ore, the first and the foremost li ability of the Government should be
the payment of VSS and statutory dues.  Theref ore, the appointment of the adequate number o f
liquidators should be expedited so that dues of the workers should paid without delay out of the
proceeds of liquidation of the assets of the PSEs. The Committee expresses its displeasure at the reply of
the Ministry that the recommenda tions of the Committee has been brought to th e notice of Department
of Company Affairs and Ministry of finance, it has not spelt out what efforts are made to expedite the
decision.                    
  
RECOMMENDATION 
3.9       Vacant Posts in the Boards of PSEs 
  
The Committee feels that many PSUs remain headless without any CM D for a long time o r
without having the full strength of their Boards.  This cripples the functioning of the PSUs.  Therefore,
the Committee recommends that as and when revival plan are sanctioned for any PSU or it comes out o f
the purview of BIFR or makes a turnaround immediate action should be  taken to appoint CMD and fill
up the vacant posts in the Board preferably within three months positively. 
                                                                                                                        (PARA 12) 
  
ACTION TAKEN 
3.9.1    The decision regarding filling up of the post(s) or otherwise is being taken on a case to case basis 
keeping in view the various factors such as performa nce of the PSE, status of its reference to BIFR,
stage of the process of disinvestment etc.  In the process, additional charge arrangement is being made to
avoid situation like the PSE rema ining headless.  Howeve r, the recommendation of the Committee has
been noted.   
                         
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
3.9.2    The concern of the Commi ttee is that the functioning of th e PSEs should not suffer for want o f
regular CMDs.  As stop gap manage ment is not going to resurrect the sick PSUs, therefore, the
Committee reiterates that the vacant posts in the Board of Directors should preferably filled up within in
three months positively in general cases where the PSE s is not in the process of disinvestments and the
PSEs in process of coming out of the  purview of BIFR. 
  
RECOMMENDATION 
3.10     Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL) 
            The Committee, therefore, reco mmends that with the ta rget of achieving 10,000 MW o f
additional capacity in power generation by 2010, there is a need to make huge investments in the powe r
sector.  Government of In dia should ensure that all possible steps are taken to see that this sector does
not suffer due to resource crunch. Department of Heav y Industries should c onsider the mater re garding
Page 13 of 28135th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/135threport.htm

liquidation of outstanding dues of BHEL to be paid  by SEBs afresh.  Commit tee hopes that Electricity
Bill will be cleared by Parliament  soon which will improve the work ing of SEBs and streamline thei r
operations which will be of help  to BHEL also. As regards the import of technology and operation o f
multinational companies participati ng in bidding for large c ontracts in infrastruc ture building, suitable
measures/precautions are needed to safeguard th e Indian companies like BH EL and also reduce outflow
of capital from the country. 
                                                                                                                        (PARA 14.4) 
RECOMMENDATION 
3.11     Association of Indian Co mpanies with the Forei gn Partners to Up grade the Technology as 
per the Local needs 
            The Committee, therefore, r ecommends that when technologies are outsourced, Indian
Government should make it mandatory that an Indian Company is asso ciated with the foreign partner in
order to absorb the technology to th e local needs.  The foreign firm s hould have a tie-up with an Indian 
Company.  Multinational corporations are often bidding for large contracts of infrastructure building etc.
in the country.  The Government should consider imposing conditions requiring involvement of at least
one Indian business entity. 
                                                                                                                        (PARA 14.6) 
ACTION TAKEN  
3.11.1  This Department is taking up the matter regarding liquidati on of outstanding dues of Bharat
Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL) by the State Electricity Boards (SEBs) in consultation with BHEL. 
  
3.11.2  In so far as the import of technology and operation of multinat ional companies participating in
bidding for large contracts in infr astructure building is concerned, the matter has been referred to
Department of Economic  Affairs, Ministry of Fina nce, Minister of Power,  Department of Industrial
Policy & Promotion and Department of Science and Technology, for taking a view in the matter. 
  
 FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
3.11.3  The Committee is of the view that BHEL is one of  the shining jewels in the Government’s 
crown, therefore, keeping the financial strength of the BHEL in good shape should be the prime concern
of the Government.  Therefore, it is but natural that  the Department  of Heavy Industries must take up
the matter regarding liqui dation of outstanding dues of Bharat Heavy Electric als Limited by the State
Electricity Boards without further delay.  The Ministry of Heavy Indus tries and Public Enterprises must
undertake the follow up actions in this regard and a pprise the Committee of th e outcome of the efforts
undertaken.  
  
RECOMMENDATION
 
3.12     Work order to BHEL in Advance 
            The Committee, therefore, recommends  that Department of Heavy I ndustries should ensure that
orders for creating capacity for pow er generation is given well in advance to BHEL, so that BHEL is
able to achieve the target in time. 
                                                                                                                        (PARA 14.8)
ACTION TAKEN 
Page 14 of 28135th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/135threport.htm

3.12.1  Planning Commission has si nce approved capacity addi tion of 41,110 MW during the 10 th Five 
Year Plan. However, orders for about 18,000 MW out of these are yet to be tendered. The mater relating
to placing of orders and clearances prior to it, con cerns Ministry of Power, Ministry of Environment &
Forests, Ministry of Coal and Mi nistry of Water Resources. These Ministries have been requested to
expedite the issue.  
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
3.12.2  The Committee understands th at DHI being the Administrati ve Ministry for BHEL,  BHEL
would look forward to DHI for ensuring order for creating capaci ty for power generation.  The
Committee recommends that the Depa rtment of  Heavy Industries must ensured that order is given well
in advance to BHEL so that BHEL is able to achieve th e target in time.  DHI must play its effective role
as a facilitator and Coordinator and interact with the Ministry of Po wer, Ministry of Environment and
Forest, Ministry of Coal and Ministry of Water Resources etc and do  whatsoever is required to ensure
the procurement of work order to BHEL in advance. 
  
RECOMMENDATION 
3.13     Bridge and Roof Company 
            The Committee, therefore, observes th at there is a need for the fi nancial restructuring of the
Company to clean its balance sheet.   It has working cap ital problem.  Whatever money it was able to
generate, it has not been able to put it in the working capital for equipments.  Therefore, there was
hardly any investment in equipm ent. The deployment of most mode rn equipment replacing the old
conventional equipment is need of the hour as th e method of construction ha s totally changed.  The
award of package, has also changed from conventional to Lump Sum Turnkey Projects (LSTK) package.
So are the fund requirement for working capital and equipment etc.  The turnover would increase,
provided it is able to inve st more in equipment etc.  The Compan y is not able to ra ise money from the
market because of its outstanding loan.  If the loan amount is converted into equity, no fund is required. 
The interest rate is as high as is 18 percent.  If the Company fails to repay th e loan, penal rate would be
Rs. 22.5 percent for a loan that was taken almost 15 years ago.  The Committee recommends that the
Company’s Rs. 11.00 crores of loan which has an interest burden of Rs. 27 cror es should be converte d
into equity.  Since the interest ra tes are coming down, to ta ke advantage of the lo w interest rate, it is
necessary to clear the bala nce-sheet so that its credit rating im proves and it can rais e money at a lowe r 
rate of interest.  If it is able to  raise money from the market, it would be able to invest in the machinery
and plant.  This year a budgeta ry support of Rs. 3.00 cror es has been provided to the Company.  The
Committee recommends that this support may be increased till loan is c onverted into equity or financial
restructuring is approved. 
                                                                                                                        (PARA15.3) 
RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.14     Waiving of the Conditions of IEBR for B & R Company 
  
The Committee, therefore, reco mmends that condition of IEBR should be waived so that B & 
R
Co., is able to utilize the allocation of Rs. 3 crores made in B.E. 2003-04. 
                                                                                                                        (PARA15.5)     
ACTION TAKEN 
Page 15 of 28135th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/135threport.htm

  
3.14.1  The Company in the first week of August, 2003 has forwarded both the proposal for the financial
restructuring and release of funds of Rs. 3.00 crore for capital invest ment.  The proposals for financial
restructuring and release of funds are being examined in the light of joint venture formation, exercise for
which is underway.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
3.14.2  The Committee is of the view that the Bridge and the Roof Company requires the attention of the
Government without further delay.   The Compa ny is under deep trouble because of the problem o f
working capital therefore, there is need for the fi nancial restructuring  of  the Company to clean its
balance sheet.    The Committee is of the view that  the DHI should expedite the process of undertaking
follow up actions for the release of funds to the tune of Rs. 3 crore for Capital Investment besides the
financial restructuring. 
RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.15     Hindustan Machine Tools Limited (HMT) 
            The Committee observes that machine t ools, is very important for st rategic needs.  Even today,
40% of machine tools goes to the Defence Industry and with the kind of sanctions that are now on India,
our defence industry is una ble to import machine to ols from some of the developed countries. The
Committee therefore, recommends th at machine tools should be consid ered as a strategic sector and
should be given a preferential treatment in view of its importance to the defence industry of the country. 
(PARA 17.3)
ACTION TAKEN
 
3.15.1  There is no doubt that the Machine Tools Indus tries does play an important role in strategic
sector. Machine Tools manuf acturers are existing both in  public & priv ate sectors.
Ministries/Departments such as Defence & Railways procure their requirements by following the tender
system.    
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
3.15.2  The Committee is of the cons idered view that DHI should ap prise the Committee about  the
status of the Machine Tools Industry and whether th e Industry can be given th e status of a strategic
sector and if so, what are the benefits of conferring the status of the strategi c sector i.e. in terms o f
preferential treatment which are likel y to be accorded to the machine t ools industry (both in Public and
Private Sector for combating the problems being faced by this Indust ry and obtain the excellence in its
performance to cater to the needs of the Defence Indus try of the Country.  That  is so, prima-facie to 
strengthen the Defence Mechanism of the nation, besides improving the status of Machine Tools
Industry, at least. 
  
RECOMMENDATION
 
3.16     Finance Assistance to HMT 
            The Committee further observes that  while bidding for machine t ools in the defence industry,
HMT has to compete with both inland and foreign companies.  It does not get any advantage in terms of
advance orders, whereas the foreign companies get LCs.  The Committee,  therefore, feels that special
attention is required from the Government in the strategic sector particularly in defence, railways and
Page 16 of 28135th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/135threport.htm

automotive.  If financial assist ance is provided, HMT will be able to invest in R&D and upgrade the
product technology, which is the need of HMT’s ma nufacturing sector.  The Committee, therefore,
recommends that Department of Heavy Industries s hould ensure that 40% of the Government order be
paid as advance alongwith the order to HMT to place it in a better position. 
                                                                                                                        (PARA 17.4) 
ACTION TAKEN 
 3.16.1The Government have provided fr om time to time financial assi stance to HMT to invest into up-
gradation of its capability cum capacity.  This year, Government have made provision of plan assistance
of Rs. 5 crore to HMT and its subs idiaries within the budget allocate d to PSEs of Depa rtment of Heavy
Industries.  During the last two years, the Department has request ed/taken up the matter with the
Ministry of Defence/Director Ge neral Ordnance Factories to provide  advances to HMT against the
orders.    
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.16.2  The Committee is of the firm  view that the DHI is not onl y  a facilitator but being the
administrative Ministry it shoul d monitor the performance of HMT.   The Committee while appreciates
the efforts of DHI for procuring financial assistance to HMT, but at the same time the Committee desires
that the DHI must facilitate and coordinate effect ively with the Ministry of  Defence / DG Ordinance
factories to provide advances to the HMT against the order so that HMT can use that money as a
working capital.  Moreover,  HMT will be able to invest in R&D and upgr ade the product technology,
which is the need of HMT’s manufacturing sector.   
  
RECOMMENDATION 
3.17 Investment in R & D in HMT 
            The Committee further observes that HMT needs to invest in R&D but the assistance  provided
by the Government is not sufficient.  In the proposed plan outlay only Rs. 4.00 crores have been
provided for tools and bearings.  Th e Committee, therefore, recommends  that more financial assistance
should be provided by the Government to HMT. 
  
                                                                                                                        (PARA 17.5) 
ACTION TAKEN 
3.17.1  In the past, Machine Tools Business Group was provided financial assistance for capital
investment.  However, a sum of Rs. 12.35 crore has remained unutil ized for this purpose since 1998-99. 
Further, financial assistance will be considered only after utilization of earlier funds.  
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
3.17.2  The Committee is constrained to express its concern that HMT is on the one hand under finance
soup and on the other a sum of Rs. 12.35 crore earmarked as fina ncial assistance for capital investment
remained unutilized since 1998-99.  This is a severe case and the Co mmittee would like to know the 
reasons for the non-utilization of the funds. 
  
Page 17 of 28135th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/135threport.htm

RECOMMENDATION 
3.18     Waiving of Liquidated Damages for HCL 
  
The Committee recommends that  Department of Heavy Industr ies should ensure that HCL is
empanelled by TCIL as supplier to Telecom Cables and take s up with the Department o f
Communications & IT to waive the liquidated damages amounting to Rs. 40 crores. 
                                                                                                                        (PARA 20.4) 
ACTION TAKEN 
3.18.1  HCL has taken up with Teleco mmunication Consultants (India) Limited to empanel it for supply
of Telecom cables. This De partment is also taking this matter with Department of Telecommunications
& IT. The matter regarding waiver of the liquidated damages amounting to approximately Rs. 42 crores
has been taken up by the Department of Heavy Industries with Department of Communications & IT. 
   
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.18.2  The Committee recommends that  DHI in its Action Taken Note to  the present report to apprise
the Committee the outcome of  its efforts undertaken with the Department of  Telecomunication and IT
for waiving liquidated damages of approximately Rs. 42 crore of HCL. 
  
RECOMMENDATION
 
3.19     Reasons for Losses of BOGL 
The Committee would like to know the outcome of response of M/s.  Tyzpharon in this regard. 
Further, BOGL is reported to have been incurring losses since it very incep tion.  The Committee would
like to know the reasons therefor and the steps taken to make the Company profitable. 
                                                                                                                        (PARA 21.4) 
ACTION TAKEN 
  
3.19.1  During the discussions with the representativ es  of M/s Tyzpharon, it transpired that M/s
Tyzpharon, is a Russian Company engaged in the business of providing consultancy on projects. It is not
the original supplier of technology to BOGL as we were informed ear lier. They also do not have latest
know how for manufacturing glasses by continuous process. 
  
3.19.2  BOGL has been incurring losses from it s inception because of high cost of production,
inefficient operations, high power consumption, low productivity and la tely cheap imports. The present
plant is based on batch processing technology, which is inefficient in  terms of power consumption and
quality of product. This technology is obsolete. 
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.19.3  The Committee observes that th e DHI has not apprised the Co mmittee the steps taken to make
Page 18 of 28135th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/135threport.htm

the Company (BOGL) profitable, therefore, the Comm ittee recommends that DHI in its Action Taken
Reportmust furnish the requisite information. 
Page 19 of 28135th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/135threport.htm

                  CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE  DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES    
HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
RECOMMENDATION 
  
4.1       R & D of Automotive Industry  
            The Committee observes that with the introduction of new and stricter emission norms as well as
safety standards, upgradation of auto motive testing facilitie s is critically needed for further growth o
f
automotive industry in the country.   There is also a need to look at other ar eas of product and process
related research with a view to propelling India’s automotive indus try into a higher league and for 
surviving the import surge under WTO regime.  The required level of R&D can be achieved only by
enhanced funding.  It is a fact that the Government  is collecting automotive cess at the rate of 0.125%
per cent over and above excise duty on vehicles.  But since inception in 1984-85, allocation of funds has
been meager and much less than the actual collec tion.  Now a comprehensive project on upgrading the
testing infrastructure in the count ry is proposed to be implemented at a cost of Rs. 1500 crore.  The
Committee, therefore, recommends  that the Government should e nhance allocation under cess to the
extent of full amount collected.  The Government should also allocate in tw o instalments the entire
unallocated sum of Rs. 347.38 crore.  The Ministry should strive to attain the International level in R&D
so that 100% indigenisation in manufacturing of  components takes place and import bill on auto
components is reduced. 
                                                                                                            (Para 3.4)
RECOMMENDATION 
  
4.2       Enhancement in the rate of levy of cess from 0.05% to 0.25% for R & D 
The Committee also notes that at present the cess for R&D is levied @ 1/8% i.e. 0.125% over and above
the excise duty. Department of Heav y Industries has, however, taken up the matter with the Ministry o
f
Finance for enhancement in the rate of levy of cess from 0.05% to 0.25%. Th e Committee strongly
supports the view point of  Department of Hea vy Industries  and hopes Mini stry of Finance would 
respond to the demand. The Committee would also like to  be apprised of the pr ogress made in regard to
the enhancement of rate of levy of cess from 0.05% to 0.25%. The Committee also recommends that the
administration of cess should be done by Department of Heavy Industries (Ministry of Heavy Industries
and Public Enterprises). 
                                                                                                (Para  3.5)
ACTION TAKEN  
  
4.2.1    The matter has been take n up with Department of  Economic Affairs, Mi nistry of Finance. 
Response is awaited. 
                                                                                                 
RECOMMENDATION
 
  
4.3       Formation of National Company Law Tribunal
Page 20 of 28135th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/135threport.htm

            The Committee welcomes the fo rmation of National Company Law Tribunal fo r looking afte r
the work of BIFR.  The Committee hopes that the Tribunal when form ed will expedi te the decision
making process and will be able in serving more purposefully in respect of Public Sector Enterprises. 
                                                                                                                        (PARA 9.5) 
ACTION TAKEN 
4.3.1    Observations of the Committee have been  conveyed to the Banking Division, Department o f
Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance. 
 RECOMMENDATION 
4.4       Additional allocations for Interest Subsidy / Guarantee Fee Subsidy 
            The Committee further recommends th at in case the amount earmarked  is not sufficient for this
purpose, the additional allocations may be sought at RE stage. 
  
                                                                                                            (PARA 10.5)
ACTION TAKEN 
4.4.1    The Committee’s recommendation is noted. 
  RECOMMENDATION 
4.5       Restructuring of AYCL 
The Committee recommends that the restructuring of AYCL should be carried out at the earliest. 
                                                                                                            (PARA 22.2)
ACTION TAKEN  
 
4.5.1    The issue of restructuring of AYCL is under the considerati on of Department in consultation
with the other agencies of the Government.  
 
Page 21 of 28135th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/135threport.htm

CHAPTER-V 
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT 
A GLANCE.  
Plan Outlay 
            The Committee is of the view that the revival of the PSEs can not  be linked with the conditions
of the disinvestments which is genera lly put off due to legal and politi cal wrangles.  Since the PSEs are
itself bleeding, keeping them on wait further would mean ciphering off last ounce of blood where the
disinvestments process would hardly extract substantial proceeds.   
(3.1.2)
3.3              Allocation of more plan funds for the PSEs 
  
            The Committee is of the view that either the process of disinvest ments should be accelerated o r
the PSEs should be provided with suff icient funds for capital investment .   Sitting over the decision is
neither going to resurrect the sick PSEs nor it is goi ng to enhance the sale proceeds of PSEs through the
disinvestments rather it would increase the liability  of the PSEs towards statutory dues and payment o f
salaries.  Therefore, the Committ ee recommends that the Government should come out of slumber, the
sooner the better not only in the business interest of the PSEs but also in the overall economic interest of
the nation.  A firm policy with effe ctive implementation is required at the moment.  It’s a now or neve r 
situation.  The Government must expedite its policy decisions without further delay. 
(PARA 3.2.3)
3.3       Outlay For North East Region 
            The fact that the non-utilization of  funds remains and the mere transfer of money from the
Department of Heavy Industries  to the Department of North East  Affairs does not justify the non-
utilization of funds.  
(PARA 3.3.3)
            The Ministry is absolutely silent about the Committee’s recommendation regarding chalking out 
short term and long term scheme for North East  Region. The Committee reco mmends that the schemes
i.e. short term  and long te rm be  formulated  N.E. Region and  Sikkim  so that atleast  the allocation
made in the budget is fully utilized.   
(PARA 3.3.4)
3.4       Investment in Public Sector Enterprises 
  
            The Committee is of the considered vi ew that the Department of Heavy Industries must have the
objective analysis of the basic financial requirement  of PSEs and project the same to the Planning
Commission and the Ministry of Finance for the appr oval so that none of the PSE’s performance should 
suffer for the want of the working capital.  That is why the Committee obser ved that  since the Plan
scheme of PSEs mainly relate to programs of re newals/ replacements, addi tions, modifications and to
cater to emergent require ment of PSEs, Ministry should analyze the need- based fund requirement o f 
PSEs and accord top priority to them . The Committee is constrained to  note  that during 2002-03 there  
was plan provision of Rs.100 crores which was reduced  to Rs.50 crores only  b ecause the  Department 
of Heavy Industries  was not able to utilize the funds properly.  And out of Rs.50 crores  the Department
of heavy Industries  utilized Rs.47. 95 cores   only which might be th e reasons for allocation of  Rs.100
crores only in BE  2003-04 against the projection of Rs.214.10 crores.
Page 22 of 28135th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/135threport.htm

(PARA 3.4.2)
3.5       Turning around of Sick Industries 
The Committee further desires that the Ministry of Heavy Industries to apprise the Committee of
the details of PSEs wise revival/restructuring pl ans and concession given to  PSEs and the status o f
implementation along with its impact  on injecting the competitive re silience and comparative edge o f
the PSEs.  The short replies of th e Government hardly serves the purpose and rather raise the doubts  on
the intention and efficiency of restructuring plans of PSEs.   
  
(PARA 3.5.2)
3.6       Utilization of Funds  for Restructuring 
            The Committee desires the following details from the Ministry of  Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises as regards the utilization of funds for restructuring plan:-  
  
(i)                  Details of Financial Ratio as a result of Investment including Return on Investment (ROI). 
(ii)                PSEs wise distribution of Funds for waiving capital support during 2002-03 and 2003-04. 
(iii)               Impact of rationalization of manpower on Labour productivity and consequent   reduction 
in Wage Bill.  
(PARA 3.6.3)
  
3.7       Voluntary Separation Scheme & Statutory Dues 
  
            The Committee is constrained to express its deep anguish over the manner of Department o
f
Heavy Industries furnishing Action Taken Note to the recommenda tions of Department related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on I ndustry.  The ATN is too short a nd half heartedly detailed as it
does not spell out the details of  the recommendations given by the Group of Ministers on the issue o f
payment of arrears towards and statutory dues.  This  was essential as the Gr oup of Ministers headed by
Hon’ble Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission had given recommendations in line with the 
observation and recommendations of th e Committee.  Moreover, the Co mmittee is unable to know as to
what necessary action has been initiated on th e issue therefore, the Committee recommends the
Department of Heavy Industries to furnish all the details in the Action Taken Notes on the present report
for the information of the Members of the Committee. 
(PARA 3.7.2)
3.8       Priority to the appointment of liquidators for all PSEs 
  
The Committee is of the view that the workers are the most affected when a decision for the closure o f
the PSEs are taken therefore, the first and the foremost liability of the Government should be the
payment of VSS and statutory dues.  Therefore, the appointment of the adequate number of liquidators
should be expedited so that dues of the worker s should paid without dela y out of the proceeds o f
liquidation of the assets of the PSEs.   The  Committee expresses its displeasure  at  the reply of Ministry
that the recommendation  of the Co mmittee has been   brought to the notice of Department of Company
Affairs and the Ministry of Finance,  it has not spelt out  wh at efforts are made to  expedite the decision.
               
Page 23 of 28135th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/135threport.htm

(PARA 3.8.2)  
3.9       Vacant Posts in the Boards of PSEs 
  
            The concern of the Committee is th at the functioning of the PSEs should not suffer for want o f
regular CMDs.  As stop gap manage ment is not going to resurrect the sick PSUs, therefore, the
Committee reiterates that the vacant posts in the Board of Directors should preferably filled up within in
three months positively in general cases where the PSE s is not in the process of disinvestments and the
PSEs in the  process of coming out of the  purview of BIFR.  
(PARA 3.9.2)
3.10     Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL) 
             
3.11     Association of Indian Companies with the Foreign Partne rs to Upgrade the Technology as pe r
the Local needs 
             
The Committee is of the view th at BHEL is one of  the shini ng jewels in the Government’s 
crown, therefore, keeping the financial strength of the BHEL in good shape should be the prime concern
of the Government.  Therefore, it is but natural that the Department of Heavy Industries must take up the
matter regarding liquidation of out standing dues of Bharat Heavy El ectricals  Limited by the State
Electricity Boards without further delay.  The Ministry of Heavy Indus tries and Public Enterprises must
undertake the follow up actions in this regard and a pprise the Committee of th e outcome of the efforts
undertaken.  
(PARA 3.11.3)
3.12     Work order to BHEL in Advance 
  
            The Committee understands that DHI being the Administrative  Ministry for BHEL,  BHEL
would look forward to DHI for ensuring order for creating capaci ty for power generation.  The
Committee recommends that the Depa rtment of  Heavy Industries must ensured that order is given well
in advance to BHEL so that BHEL is able to achieve th e target in time.  DHI must play its effective role
as a facilitator and Coordinator and interact with the Ministry of Po wer, Ministry of Environment and
Forest, Ministry of Coal and Ministry of Water Resources etc and do  whatsoever is required to ensure
the procurement of work order to BHEL in advance.  
  
(PARA 3.12.2)
3.13     Bridge and Roof Company and 
  
3.14     Waiving of the Conditions of IEBR for B & R Company 
  
            The Committee is of the view that the Bridge and the Roof Company requires the attention of the
Government without further delay.   The Compa ny is under deep trouble because of the problem o f
working capital therefore, there is need for the financial restructuring of  the Company to clean its
balance sheet.    The Committee is of the view th at the DHI should expedite  the process of undertakin g
Page 24 of 28135th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/135threport.htm

follow up actions for the release of funds to the tune of Rs. 3 crore for Capital Investment besides the
financial restructuring. 
(PARA 3.14.2)
3.15     Hindustan Machine Tools Limited (HMT) 
            The Committee is of the considered view that DHI should apprise the Committee about the status
of the Machine Tools Industry and whether the Industry can be given the status of  a strategic sector and
if so, what are the benefits of conf erring the status of the strategic se ctor i.e. in terms of preferential
treatment which are likely to be accorded to the machine tools indus try (both in Public and Private
Sector for combating the problems being faced by this Industry and obtai n the excellence in its
performance to cater to the needs of the Defence Indus try of the Country.  That  is so, prima-facie to 
strengthen the Defence Mechanism of the nation, besides improving the status of Machine Tools
Industry, at least. 
(PARA 3.15.2)
3.16     Financial Assistance to HMT 
            The Committee is of the firm view  that the DHI is not only  a facilitator but being the
administrative Ministry it shoul d monitor the performance of HMT.   The Committee while appreciates
the efforts of DHI for procuring financial assistance to HMT, but at the same time the Committee desires
that the DHI must facilitate and coordinate effect ively with the Ministry of  Defence / DG Ordinance
factories to provide advances to the HMT against the order so that HMT can use that money as a
working capital.  Moreover,  HMT will be able to invest in R&D and upgr ade the product technology,
which is the need of HMT’s manufacturing sector.   
(PARA 3.16.2)
3.17  Investment in R & D in HMT 
            The Committee is constrained to e xpress its concern that HMT is  on the one hand under finance
soup and on the other a sum of Rs. 12.35 crore earmarked as fina ncial assistance for capital investment
remained unutilized since 1998-99.  This is a severe case and the Co mmittee would like to know the 
reasons for the non-utilization of the funds. 
( PARA 3.17.2)
3.18     Waiving of Liquidated Damages for HCL 
The Committee recommends that DHI  in its Action Taken Note to the present report to apprise
the Committee the outcome of  its efforts undertaken with the Department of  Telecomunication and IT
for waiving liquidated damages of approximately Rs. 42 crore of HCL. 
(PARA 3.18.2)
3.19     Reasons for Losses of BOGL  
            The Committee observes that th e DHI has not apprised the Co mmittee the steps taken to make
the Company (BOGL) profitable, therefore, the Comm ittee recommends that DHI in its Action Taken
Report must furnish the requisite information. 
MINUTES 
  
XIV 
Fourteenth Meeting 
  
            The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry met at 3.30 p.m. on 
Page 25 of 28135th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/135threport.htm

Thursday, the 18th December, 2003 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi. 
  
  
PRESENT 
     Dr. P.C. Alexander              -- Chairman 
  
                        RAJYA SABHA 
  
2.                  Prof. M.M. Aggarwal 
3.                  Shri Faguni Ram 
4.                  Shri P.K. Maheshwari 
5.                  Shri KhanGhufran Zahidi 
6.                  Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
  
LOK SABHA 
  
7.                  Smt. Jayashree Banerjee 
8.                  Shri Nepal Chandra Das 
9.                  Shri K. Francis George 
10.              Shri Thomas Hansda 
11.              Shri A.C. Jose 
12.              Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
13.              Shri Sunil Khan 
14.              Shri Manjay Lal 
15.              Dr. K. Malaisamy 
16.              Shri P. Rajendran 
17.              Smt. D.M. Vijayakumari 
18.              Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
            Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary 
            Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary 
Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary 
Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer 
  
2.                  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee and 
recalled the work transacted by the Committee during the year 2003.  The Committee also took note
of the work transacted by the four Sub-Committees. 
  
3.                  The Committee then took up the following reports for its consideration:- 
  
(i)                  130th Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in  Himachal Pradesh (Ministry of Small 
Scale Industries); 
(ii)                131st Report on constraints in Industria l Development of North Eastern Re gion
Page 26 of 28135th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/135threport.htm

(Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
(iii)               132nd Report on  MoU performance in respec t of PSUs of Power Sector (Ministry
of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises); 
(iv)              133rd Report on Action Taken by the Govern ment on Recommendations containe d
in the Committee’s 117 th Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry o f 
Small Scale Industries; 
(v)                134th Report on Action Taken by the G overnment on the Recommendations 
contained in the Committee’s 119 th Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) o f 
Department of Public Enterprises (M inistry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises); 
(vi)              135th Report on Action Taken by the G overnment on the Recommendations
contained in the Committee’s 120 th Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) o f 
Department of Heavy I ndustries (Ministry of H eavy Industries and Public
Enterprises); 
(vii)             136th Report on Action Taken by the Govern ment on Recommendations contained 
in the Committee’s 127 th Report on MoU performance in respect of PSUs o f 
Shipping Industry, (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises); 
(viii)           137th Report on Action Taken by the Gove rnment on Recomme ndations contained 
in Committee’s 122nd Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of Steel; 
(ix)              138th Report on Action Taken by the Govern ment on Recommendations contained 
in the Committee’s 111 th Report on Operational Efficiency and Survival of Alloy
Steel Plan ( ASP) Durgapur (Ministry of Steel); 
(x)                139th Report on Action Taken by the Govern ment on Recommendations containe d
in the Committee’s 125 th Report on Implementation St atus of Modernization
Expansion and Financial-cum-Business Re structuring Programme of SAIL at a 
Glance (Ministry of Steel); 
(xi)              140th Report on Action Taken by the Govern ment on Recommendations contained 
in the Committee’s 126 th Report on Revival of Nagaland Pulp and Paper Mills 
(Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises); 
(xii)             141st Report on Potential and Promotion of Coir Industries in West Bengal an d
Andaman and Nicobar (Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries); 
(xiii)           142nd Report Action Taken by the Government on Recomm endations contained in
the Committee’s 123 rd Report on Demands for Grants  (2003-04) of Ministry o f 
Mines; 
(xiv)           143rd Report on level Playing Field for the Capital Goods Indus tries (Ministry o f 
heavy Industries and Public Enterprises); and 
(xv)            144th Report on Action Taken by the Gove rnment on Recommendations containe d
in the Committee’s 124 th Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry o f 
Agro and Rural Industries. 
4.         The Chairman requested the Members to give any suggestion or change in the Report, i f
required.  After a brief discussion all the Reports were adopted. 
  
5.         The Committee authorized Prof. M.M. A ggarwal and in his absence Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi,
members Rajya Sasbha, to present th e Reports to the Rajya Sabha.  It also authorized Smt. Jayashree
Banerjee and in his absence Shri  A.C. Jose, Members Lok Sabha, to present the Reports in the Lo
k
Sabha on 22nd and 23rd December, 2003. 
Page 27 of 28135th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/135threport.htm

  
  
6.                                 *                                    *                                            * 
  
  
  
7.         The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 p.m. 
                                     
***relates to other matters. 
Page 28 of 28135th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/135threport.htm