PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/205threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:16:21]
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
                                               
                                                                                                                         
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
                
                                         TWO HUNDRED AND   FIFTH  REPORT
 
ON
 
ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE 202ND   REPORT OF THECOMMITTEE ON THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2007-08)
PERTAINING TO THE  DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES (MINISTRY OF HEAVY  INDUSTRIES & PUBLIC
ENTERPRISES)
                                        
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON    29.04.2008   )
   (LAID ON THE TABLE  OF THE  LOK SABHA ON  29.04.2008 )
 
 
 
            RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
           NEW DELHI
 
            APRIL, 2008/ VAISAKHA, 1930 (SAKA)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
         RAJYA SABHA
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/205threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:16:21]
 
 
         
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
                                         TWO HUNDRED AND   FIFTH  REPORT
 
ON
 
ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE 202ND   REPORT OF THECOMMITTEE ON THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2007-08)
PERTAINING TO THE  DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES (MINISTRY OF HEAVY  INDUSTRIES & PUBLIC
ENTERPRISES)
____________________________________________________________________________
( PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29.04.2008.  )
(LAID ON THE TABLE  OF THE  LOK SABHA ON 29.04.2008  )
 
 
 
          RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
           NEW DELHI
 
 
         APRIL, 2008/ VAISAKHA, 1930 (SAKA)
 
C O N T E N T S
 
                                                                                                                                PAGES
       
 1.       COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                ( i )                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                  
 2.        INTRODUCTION                                                                                                  ( ii)                                                                                                        
                                                
 3.        REPORT                                                                                                                 1 -  22
   (i)      CHAPTER – I                                                                                                               2 -  2
      Recommendations/observations, which have been
      accepted by the Ministry.                                                                                     
 
(ii)            CHAPTER–II                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                           
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
does not desire to pursue for now in view of the
Government's replies                                                                                        3 -
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/205threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:16:21]
(iii)              CHAPTER–III                                                                                             
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the
Committee has not accepted replies of the Ministry                                  
and has asked the Ministry to review the reply or has
raised queries over the reply furnished by the Ministry.                                                 
   
(iv)    CHAPTER – IV                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Ministry have not been received                                                    
 
 
 
         
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Date of constitution 5th August, 2007)
 
                  Shri V. Hanumantha Rao                       —        Chairman
   
     RAJYA SABHA
2.       Shri  G. Sanjeeva Reddy
3.       Shri Kalraj Mishra       
4.       Smt. Hema Malini       
5.       Dr. K. Malaisamy       
6.       Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
7.       Shri O.T.Lepcha
8.       Shri Rahul Bajaj
9.       Vacant
10.   Vacant
                   
                           LOK SABHA
 
11.   Shri Guharam Ajgalle
12.   Shri Rajnarayan Budholiya
13.   Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary        
14.   Shri Ajoy Chakraborty 
15.   Shri Swadesh Chakraborty                  
16.   Shri Mohan S. Delkar
17.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan          
18.   Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria          
19.   Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani                                     
20.   Shri Kishanbhai V.  Patel
21.   Shri P.Rajendran         
22.   Shri Badiga  Ramakrishna
23.   Shri  Gurjeet Singh Rana

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/205threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:16:21]
24.   Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
25.   Shri K.C. Pallanisamy
26.   Shri Ganesh Singh                   
27.    Kunwar  Manvendra Singh                 
28.   Shri V.K. Thummar                
29.   Shri Girdhari Yadav
30.   Shri Umakant Yadav
31.   Shri Subhash  S. Deshmukh     
      SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Director
Shri Girija Shanker Prasad,  Assistant  Director
Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Research Officer
                          Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Committee Officer
 
 
(i)
INTRODUCTION
 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having   been  authorized  by the Committee, hereby present this  Two
Hundred and Fifth  Report on Action taken Report submitted by the Government on the Two Hundred Second Report  of   the  Committee  on  the  Demand  for   Grants  to
Department of  Public Enterprises (2007-08)
 
2.         The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry considered and adopted the Draft report at its meeting held on the  28
th  April, 2008.
 
3          I thank the Department of Public Enterprises for providing valuable inputs to the Committee. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                                            V. HANUMANTHA RAO   
29 April , 2008                                                                                         Chairman                                                                                            
                                      Department -related Parliamentary
                                                                                               Standing Committee on Industry
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/205threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:16:21]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report
 
 
1.         This Two Hundred Fifth Report  deals with action taken by the Government on the Two Hundred Second  Report of the Committee.
 
2.         Action Taken Notes have been received from the Department of Public Enterprises in respect of the recommendations contained in that Report. These have been
categorized as follows:-
Chapter -I- The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Department.
Chapter -II- The recommendation/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies.
Chapter -III- The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has either not accepted replies of the Department or has asked the Department to review
its reply.
Chapter -IV- The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Department have not been received. In respect of recommendations placed in
Chapter-IV. The Department has either furnished the interim replies or mater has been forwarded to other agency/Department whose reply is awaited or couched its language
in vague terms like noted for compliance/guidance.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/205threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:16:21]
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – I
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Department.
 
 
 
 
 
None
CHAPTER – II
Recommendation/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies.
 
 
Observation of the Committee
 
1.         The Committee observes that in most of the nodal agencies the rate of redeployment has been rather poor, in certain cases none of the trainee could be
redeployed. As such the Governments’ investment has gone waste. Given the poor rate of redeployment, the Committee apprehends the quality of training being
imparted in these nodal agencies. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the DPE must start ranking the nodal agencies in terms of redeployment and
grants should be given according to the performance in redeployment. The Committee also reiterates its recommendation that the CRR should be aligned with the
existing employment schemes of the Central Government. The benefits of these schemes should also be available to CRR trainees.
(Para 7.18)
 
Reply of the Government
 
2.         For the 11 th Plan period modifications have been proposed in the existing CRR Scheme. The revised Scheme is being considered by the EFC.  As far as converging
CRR Scheme with existing employment schemes is concerned, DPE had taken up with Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation and Ministry of Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises for exploring the possibility of extending the benefits of Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) and Pradhan Mantri Rojgar Yojana (PMRY)
respectively to CRR beneficiaries.  DPE has been informed that SJSRY is meant for benefit of urban poor. As the retired employees of CPSEs are not Below Poverty Line, it
will not be possible to include them under SJSRY. Similarly, PMRY scheme is meant for providing self-employment to educated youth of economically weaker sections of
the society.  VRS optees cannot avail of the benefits of PMRY.
 
Committee’s Further Recommendations
 
3.         The Committee desires that the CRR Scheme should be linked with other existing skill development/employment schemes or schemes to promote skilled
entrepreneurs.
 
Observation of the Committee
 
4.         The Committee observes that the money is not given as per the requirement of the North Eastern region but for the sake of a norm that stipulates 10% of
funds be earmarked for North East. A larger part of the funds remain unutilized and transferred to a non lapsable central resource pool. The Committee expresses
its reservation over such under utilization of scarce resources and recommends that allocation of funds should be a function of need and not an administrative fiat.
(Para No. 8.3)
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/205threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:16:21]
Reply of the Government
 
5.         To ensure that developmental activities would take place in the North East along with rest of the country, there is a stipulation to spend 10% of budgetary allocation
for planned activities for the North East. It provides that if the Ministry/ Department is not able to spend 10% of the funds in the North East, the difference would be
transferred to the non-lapsable pool which can be utilized by different Department/ Ministry for taking up activities in the North East subsequently. It cannot, therefore, be
stated that the funds remain un-utilized, as these funds are especially earmarked for the North East and will be utilized for projects taken up there
 
6.         So far as CRR Scheme is concerned, number of VRS optees is limited in the North Eastern States. When those who opt for VRS from CPSEs located in the North
East, many of them return back to their States of domicile on retirement. In many cases, it may also be true that these VRS optees who have come back from the North East
are taking advantage of this Scheme within their State of domicile. DPE is, however, making all out efforts to reach the VRS optees of the North East. More nodal agencies
have been identified for north eastern region, particularly in Assam.
 
Committee’s Further Recommendations
 
            The Committee does not propose to pursue the issue for now in view of the constraints as suggested in the reply of the Government. However, the
Committee considers that non-utilisation of scares resources. The Committee may be informed if such un-utilised funds are assigned to non-lapsable pool meant of
North - Eastern region.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER - III
Recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has either not accepted replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its reply
 
 
Observation of the Committee
 
1.         The Committee observes that maximum PSEs for which revival has been recommended by the BRPSE belonged to the capital goods sector under
Department of Heavy Industries followed by the chemicals and fertilizer sector.  The Committee expresses serious concern over the costly revivals that largely
entail waivers and conversions of the secured loans and interest dues towards Government of India. The Committee notes that as per the revival plan, the revived
units are likely to earn meager profits by the 2009-10.  The Committee seeks information from the DPE that of the fresh cash infusions how much would be in the
form of secured loans, unsecured equity and grants respectively.   The Committee also seeks information regarding the steps taken to secure the government loans
and interest there on.
(Para 4.6)
 
Reply of the Government
 
2.         Government has so far approved revival proposals of 26 PSEs pertaining to different administrative ministries/departments. Out of these 26 cases of the proposals

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/205threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:16:21]
approved for revival, there is cash infusion in 16 cases from GOI involving an amount of Rs.1941.30 crores. The cash infusion comprises of Rs.636.08 crores in the form of
loans, Rs.354.32 crores in the form of equity share capital, Rs.756.00 crores in the form of redeemable preference share capital and the balance of Rs.194.90 crores in the
form of grant.
 
 3.        The loans that are sanctioned for PSEs by the Government are generally unsecured loans since the entire /majority of the holding or ownership of the PSEs is held by
the Government. The competent authority while granting reliefs and concessions in the form of waivers/conversion of loans/interest takes into account the need of the PSE,
the quantum of accumulated losses, net worth position, debt equity ratio, and liquidity position and the capacity of the sick PSE to pay the loans/interest and decides, case by
case, the infusion of funds in the form of equity, loan, grant or a mix of them. The PSEs are expected to turn around and post net profit (profit after meeting interest and other
liabilities) after implementation of the revival package. The loans are to be repaid by the PSE  as per revival package approved.
 
Committee’s Further Recommendations
 
4.         The Committee underscores that out of the cash infusion of Rs.1941.30 crores approved for 16 PSUs, only Rs. 636.08 are in form of loans, 194.30 are in
terms of Grants, remaining amount is insecure share capital.  Even the Loans are unsecure. The Committee finds the logic untenable that the loans given by the
Government out of Budget, should have been unsecure as the majority of holding in a PSE, were held by the Government.  The Committee wonders if it is a fair
and prudent practice even when the  PSEs are loosing money and have not been found credit worthy enough by the market.  In any case there have been recurring
instances where the loans are eventually   converted into equity.    The Committee would also like to know the strategic difference between equity share capital and
preferential share capital. How does such a difference make a PSE financially sound and Government’s investment more secure?
 
5.         The Committee is of the view that Government should secure its loans and large part of cash infusion should be done through loans from the market
against surplus assets or Government’s guarantee instead of unsecure equities. 
 
 
Observation of the Committee
 
6.         The Committee also observes among the administrative Ministries, the practice of using the recommendations of the BRPSE as the alibi without actually
justifying the revival package.  The Committee recommends that once a revival package is approved by the competent authority, the onus of justifying the revival
package must be on the administrative Ministries.   The NCMP states “While every effort will be made to modernize and restructure sick public sector companies
and revive sick industry, chronically loss-making companies will either be sold-off, or  closed, after all workers have got their legitimate dues and compensation”. 
However, the Committee observes that the revival plans have been largely confined to the manpower rationalization, cutting the wage cost and liquidating the
liabilities for the accounting adjustments.  The Committee wonders that after such accounting adjustments the PSEs will be earning only the notional profits or the
actual profit.  Taking lesson from the earlier failed attempts of revival such as HMT etc. it is evident that such window dressing of accounts will result only in
notional revival that may not be sustainable in longer run.  The Committee wonders if measures to secure Government investments are built in the revival
package.  The BRPSE must suggest measures to secure Government’s investments as a substantial part of Government’s investments are in form of unsecured
equity.  The Committee suggests that instead of waiving the loans and interests dues towards Government, they can be deferred till a prescribed period till such
time PSE should attain profitability.
(Para 4.7)
 
Reply of the Government
 
7.         The National Common Minimum Programme states that “while every effort will be made to modernize and restructure sick public sector companies and revive sick
industry, chronically loss-making companies will either be sold-off, or closed, after all workers have got their legitimate dues and compensation”.      The administrative
Ministries / Departments prepare a comprehensive package for revival/rehabilitation /closure of loss making PSEs after due consultations with all stakeholders. The reasons
for sickness/losses in PSEs are manifold and may vary from unit to unit. The revival plan prepared for sick PSEs looks into the ways and means to address the suboptimal
performance of PSE which inter alia includes manpower rationalization, reducing the manpower cost, liquidating the liabilities, technological up-gradation, modernization,
diversification, capital restructure etc. The competent authority also takes into account the accumulated losses, net worth position, debt equity ratio, liquidity position and
working capital requirements of the PSE, while drawing the revival plan. The Board may, after consultation with all relevant authorities including Ministry of Finance, and
Labour, Banking and other Financial Institutions and State Government(s),as may be necessary, in each case, recommend concessions as considered appropriate for
revival/restructuring of the PSE. Deferment of loans and interest dues towards Government till a prescribed period till such time PSE should attain profitability as suggested
by the Committee instead of waiving these loans and interest will keep the accumulated losses, negative net worth, high debt etc will remain in books which may pre-empt
the prospects of revival of sick PSE. Waivers of loans, interest etc. are included to clean the balance sheet, make the net worth positive and to improve profitability in future.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/205threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:16:21]
It also enables the PSE to get working capital requirements funded from Banks FIs etc.
 
Committee’s Further Recommendations
 
8.         The Committee does not accept the argument of massive waivers to acquire only notional profitability through book manipulations.  The fact remains that
such packages do not make any fundamental change in corporate prospects and management or technological modernisation of the Company. It has been
observed that while budgetary sources are used for clearing the balance sheets, for the capital investments the PSEs have to look for strategic partners. The
Committee would like to know that of the revival packages approved for PSEs how much is allocated for capital expenditure in each case and also give the detail of
such capital expenses.
 
 
Observation of the Committee
 
9.         The Committee is constrained to note the tardy progress made after passage of two years. The Secretary, M/O HRD has not even responded to the DPE’s
reminder, whereas the DG, ICPE has not followed up on the advice to contact the CSIR. The Committee recommends that India as the prominent contributor and
founder member of the ICPE, must persuade the ICPE for such academic cooperation between CSIR and ICPE. The Committee strongly disapproves the
lackadaisical approach of the M/O HRD. DPE must secure an early and elaborate response from the M/O HRD in this respect.
(Para No. 5.8)
Reply of the Government
 
10.       The matter was taken up with CSIR and Ministry of HRD for utilizing the expertise of Indian Management Institutes and Institutes of Technology to impart training
to the participants of member countries of ICPE. The response from HRD is still awaited whereas CSIR has given its positive response. ICPE is being reminded with
reference to response received from CSIR. Ministry of Human Resource Development is also being reminded.
 
Committee’s Further Recommendations
           
11.       The Committee takes serious view of inaction by various Departments of the Government and failure of DPE to follow up with ICPE.   The response
indicates             lack of earnestness. The Committee desires the DPE to pursue the issue with greater earnestness than its defence for the retention of membership
of ICPE.
CHAPTER – IV
Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry have not been received
 
Observation of the Committee
 
1.         In its interaction with the respective Ministries over the compliance of certain guidelines issued by the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE), the
Committee is constrained to observe recurrent violations. The Committee therefore reiterates its recommendation that the DPE must also be proactive and
persuasive in collecting, collating and monitoring the performance and progress of the guidelines for PSE. In this regard the Committee further recommends that
the DPE must undertake thematic consultancies and studies, seminars and workshop on the issues concerning PSEs more regularly. And that the Planning
Commission should be approached to allocate more funds for this purpose. The DPE must also conduct annual survey of allocate more funds for this purpose. The
DPE must also conduct annual survey of the State PSEs with the help of Institute of Public Enterprises, Hyderabad. The Committee also recommends that
Institute of Public Enterprises, Central Manufacturing Technology Institute, Bangalore should be brought under the administrative control of Ministry of HI &
PE. The Department must also contribute funds to the National Foundation for Corporate Governance. The Committee also recommends that DPE must be
represented on the Boards of Governors of the premier management institutes in consonance with the autonomy of these institutes. The Committee believes that
greater interaction with the professional academia will help the DPE to evolve modern management practices for the PSEs. The Committee suggests that DPE
should contact these institutions to conduct periodic surveys on the constraints faced by the PSEs and bring out recommendations that could become a useful input
for the BRPSE.
             (Para No. 1.4)

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/205threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:16:21]
 
Reply of the Government
 
2.         DPE is nodal Department in respect of CPSEs for issuing non-financial guidelines.   DPE  guidelines  are advisory in nature whereas presidential directives are in the
nature of mandatory. DPE has also submitted a proposal to Planning Commission for providing funds for undertaking thematic consultancies and studies, seminars and
workshop on the generic issues. The proposal also includes requirements on account of annual survey of state PSEs to be conducted by Institute of Public Enterprises,
Hyderabad. DPE has already taken up the matter with Ministry of Human Resource Development for transfer of IPE, Hyderabad. to this Department.. With regard to
contribution to National Foundation for Corporate Governance, DPE had taken up the matter with Planning Commission. They have informed that a corpus amount of Rs.10
crore has already been sanctioned through Ministry of Company Affairs when it was set up. Further the matter is being taken up with the Department of Industrial Policy &
Promotion for transfer of Central Manufacturing Technology Institute, Bangalore  under the administrative control of Ministry of HI&PE. DPE has already taken up the
matter with the Ministry of HRD for inducting a nominee of DPE on the Board of Governors of Indian Institutes of Management. Secretary(HI&PE) has already been
inducted on the Board of Governors of IIM Kolkata.
 
Committee’s Further Recommendations
 
3.         The Committee considers that DPE’s guidelines must have the force of a Government’s policy and not remain only an advisory where implementation is
voluntary.   The DPE must therefore jointly monitor the implementation and performance of its guidelines with the administrative Ministries/Departments and
collect and analyze the data accordingly. Without regular monitoring such guidelines will remain as ineffective.
 
 
Observation of the Committee
 
 
4.         In view of absence of Department’s specific reply on the query regarding the impact of costly courses of ICPE and also considering the depleting
membership of the ICPE, the Committee feels if the erstwhile members of ICPE did not consider the organization as worthwhile, the rationale for continuing with
the costly contribution should be more robust than were survival of a moribund organization. The Committee therefore, desires DPE to review its stand on ICPE
and inform the Committee the outcome thereof.
(Para No.5.3)
Reply of the Government
 
5.         International Centre for Promotion of Enterprises (ICPE) was founded in 1974 on the initiative of the UN for promoting public enterprises in developing countries. It
is an inter-governmental organization of developing countries for improving the performance of their public enterprises, a strategic instrument of economy and social
development. The ICPE has now been mandated to promote and support enterprises development in the developing and transitional economies with a view of fostering their
economic development in the regional and global context. India is a founder Member Country and it gives contribution to this organization as a member country. The
financial position of ICPE has deteriorated mainly on account of non-payment of annual contribution by the Member Countries and depletion of its membership. The new
Director General has attempted to revamp the organizational set up of ICPE. A drive has been launched to vigorously follow up with the defaulting Member Countries for
payment of their membership fee. After restructuring activities of ICPE, the Standing Committee of Public Enterprises (SCOPE) of operation of this organization has been
enlarged and it is now focusing more on transitional economies and enterprises in both public as well as private sector. The Ambassador of India for Slovenia  strongly
advocated for the strengthening of the financial position of ICPE. The strengthening of the organization will provide a link between Slovenia/European Union and South
Eastern Europe with India and South Asia in particular and developing countries in general. The Slovenian experience of economic reforms and transmission to market
economy has considerable relevance for  countries of EU and other European countries that are seeking membership. The importance of Slovenia has considerably enhanced
as it would be tipped of for the President of EU in 2008. In view of this it has been decided to continue with the membership of ICPE for the time being. However, a matter
could be reviewed after next General Assembly & Council Meeting of ICPE likely to be held in November 2007.
 
Committee’s Further Recommendations
 
6.         The Committee considers that the Indo-Slovenia or Indo-EU relations are at different bilateral plains whereas ICPE is a multilateral institution.    The
argument that a costly membership of the ICPE was significant to sustain and strengthen the essentially bilateral relations with   EU, whose Chairmanship were to
be assumed by Slovenia, is facile and far fetched.  Keeping in view the depleting membership of ICPE, the Committee does not find Ministry’s reply convincing.  

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/205threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:16:21]
The Committee desires that the outcome of November meeting of General Assembly and Council of ICPE may be informed it.
 
 
Observation of the Committee
 
 
7.         The Committee observes that over and above annual contribution an amount of Euros 15450 (about Rs. 8 lakhs per candidate) is spent on every candidate.
The Committee feels that performance of the Company must justify this expenditure. However no assessment based on tangible benchmarks regarding the impact
of such courses was given to the Committee. The Committee considers such cost-benefit assessment is essential given the financial stakes involved in such training.
The DPE may inform the Committee if such an assessment has at all been formulated. The DPE must initiate a survey of the efficacy of ICPE training.
(Para No. 5.5)
 
Reply of the Government
 
8.         The ICPE designs, develops and imparts tailor made and standardized programmes to meet the requirements of Managers and Administrators. These programmes are
offered to Civil Servants, Executives and Entrepreneurs in the Public and Private Sector. India is a founder member country. Besides, in the field of management
development and training, ICPE regularly conducts an International one year MBA programme  for practicing managers and policy makers of organizations from various
countries in which India has been taking an active part. So far, about 250 executives from PSEs, Government of India and other organizations in India have availed the
benefits of this programme . Training is a part of carrier of Executives of CPSEs. DPE has requested Chief Executives of CPSEs who had sent their executives for MBA
programmes to ICPE to indicate the efficacy of the programme.
 
 
Committee’s Further Recommendations
 
9.         The reply does not respond to the Committee’s query about a cost benefit assessment of such courses given the high financial stakes involved in training.
The Committee reiterates that such analysis is essential for the continuance of such programme.   The Committee should be informed of the basis of such an
anlysis.
 
Observation of the Committee
 
10.       The Committee finds the reply too general without any specific information. Given the up gradation of tools and machines and increasing computer-based
automation it is necessary that the supervisory and lower levels of workers must be trained to align their skill sets with new modifications on floor shops and in
production processes. Absence of such skill upgradation will seriously jeopardize the redeployability of the workers and may cause redundancies leading to
possible protest against modernization, which in itself is essential for retaining competitive edge in the open market. The Committee is constrained to note that
while  DPE and concerned PSEs facilitate expensive trainings for middle and higher management levels, the lower cadre remains vulnerable to changes in
company structures and modernization in technology due to lack of regular training. A fact glaringly borne out by the number of rationalized employees in these
cadres and low redeployment rate of employees even after CRR Scheme. The Committee finds such large redundancies a telling example of poor HR management
practices and lack of sufficient emphasis on training/skill upgradation and therefore recommends a more structured approach to this issue. The DPE should
formulate comprehensive guidelines in this respect in consultation with the stakeholders and independent resource agencies. The Committee feels that HR
management should be held accountable for large redundancies in the PSEs resulting in large liability towards VRS/VSS cases.
(Para No. 6.3)
 
Reply of the Government
 
11.       The Department of Public Enterprises conducts Executive Development Programme relating to issues of CPSEs in collaboration with Premier Management
Institutions in the country. Training is being conducted by respective CPSEs for various categories of employees keeping in view of the requirement of technology. Based on
the recommendation of the Committee, the management of CPSEs was advised to take immediate action for the training of their employees. CPSEs have informed this
Department about the steps taken by them in this regard. They conduct training programmes  as per their requirements. In the competitive environment up gradation of
technology is single important factor which can not be ignored by any enterprise. Technology up gradation necessitates training in shop-floors. SCOPE being an apex body

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/205threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:16:21]
of CPSEs  is being consulted to formulate  comprehensive guidelines for Skill Development / training programmes  specially for shopfloor employees of CPSEs, supervisors
and workmen.
Committee’s Further Recommendations
 
12.       Committee may be informed of the outcome of consultations with SCOPE on formulating comprehensive guidelines of Skill Development/ training
programme for shop-floor    employees, supervisors and workmen. 
 
 
Observation of the Committee
 
13.       The Committee recommends that DPE must collect full information as sought by it to give a complete picture of the redundancies and its social cost. The
DPE must maintain dis-aggregated information regarding VRS optess and monitor the trend. Such high redundancies are indeed a telling remark of the poor HR
management in the PSEs. On one hand the PSEs have to borrow from the Government and open market to liquidate the costly VRS and statutory dues of the VRS
optees on the other hand further money is spent on their training under CRR which in any case does not result in redeployment. However, no apparent efforts
have been made to upgrade the skill sets of these workers. The Committee observes that the DPE, concerned PSEs and the administrative Ministries have been
rather insensitive towards redeployability of VRS/VSS optees and corrective measures have to be taken in this regard.
 
(Para No.7.4)
 
Reply of the Government
 
14.       Manpower restructuring in CPSEs is a continuing process. Therefore, VRS in CPSEs is to continue in future. Under the CRR Scheme training on skill development
and entrepreneurship development is imparted to VRS optees. It is to be kept in view that CRR Scheme basically deals with negative consequences of manpower
rationalization and aims at rehabilitation of VRS optees of CPSEs. Under the Scheme VRS optees upto 58 years of age are covered. At the fag end of the career it is difficult
for the individuals to get finance from banks in absence of collateral guarantee and start a business or take up a new employment and support the family. As such, the
existing average rate of redeployment of around 42% should be considered satisfactory. V.V. Giri Institute which evaluated the Scheme in the year 2004 has also mentioned
that the rate of redeployment is quite commendable. Dependants of VRS optees are proposed to be included in the CRR Scheme. Belonging to a younger age group they
would be more keen and capable to go through intensive skill development or entrepreneurship development training to engage themselves in self-employment activities.
The CRR Scheme is being reviewed in 11
th Plan for bringing out further improvements.
 
 
Committee’s Further Recommendations -IV
 
15.       Committee may be informed of the final outcome of the  proposal to  include younger  dependents of VRS optees.            The Committee may be provided a
tabular presentation of the age wise  break up of the VRS optees  vis a vis CRR trainees so as to indicate their redeployment.   The Committee has also taken note
of the fact that since 2002-03 VRS incidents in Non-executive cadre is much higher then Executive and Supervisory  cadres combined.
 
16.       It has also been observed that VRS among Executives has been highest in Schedule A and B as compared to Schedule C and D Company.  The Committee
would like to have DPE’s view over such a trend.    Similarly the VR has been highest from the PSEs in sunrise areas like petroleum, telecom, Coal, Steel which are
opening up for private players.  Some of such PSEs are profit earning.     In case of NTC the incidence of VR in the maximum, the gap between Executives and Non
Executive Cadre is the maximum.  Considering that textile sector is a labour intensive sector, such trends  reaffirm the view that manpower rationalizations has
taken place at the peril of semi skilled and skill non executive workers of PSEs.
 
 
Observation of the Committee
 
 
17.       Despite an elaborate monitoring mechanism to review the performance of CRR Scheme, the Committee observes the gap between the VRS optees and the
CRR trainees and the redeployed employees. With less than half employees trained getting redeployed, the performance of the Scheme is indeed doubtful and
corrective measures need to be taken thereon.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/205threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:16:21]
(Para No. 7.8)
 
Reply of the Government
 
18.       The position in regard to redeployment of VRS optees has been explained in reply to para 7.4.  above. Based on suggestions of Planning Commission, further
modifications have been proposed in the CRR Scheme. The modified proposal is being considered by the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC).
 
Committee’s Further Recommendations
 
19.       The Committee may be informed of the decision of the Expenditure Finance Committee on such modifications.
 
Observation of the Committee
 
20        Keeping in view the importance of retraining and redeployment of the VRS optees to avoid any financial hardship due to manpower rationalization, and
that most of the nodal agencies are Government run, the Committee feels that real test of  the efficacy of this lies in the  redeployment of the trained employees.
Lack of efficacy of the Scheme is brone out by the fact that none of some 1100 trainees of four nodal agencies namely CDAC, Mohali; CIPET, Guwahati; SISI,
Chennai and SISI , Indore could be redeployed. The performance of most of the nodal agencies has remained indifferent despite significant allocations by DPE
under the CRR Scheme. The Committee recommends that DPE should redesign the scheme commensurate with the requirements of the job market. The
Committee also directs the DPE to extend the coverage and scope of the Scheme to include one of the dependent of the VRS optee. Further the DPE must ensure a
better performance from nodal agencies in redeployment and link the allocation with the performance.
(Para No.7.19)
 
Reply of the Government
 
21.       The proposed modifications in CRR Scheme lay greater emphasis on redeployment.   The separated VRS optees and their dependants if combined together would
have higher level of skill which will yield more productivity as well as adaptability in the changing environment. More market oriented trades would be pursued and
inclusion of unemployed spouses and family members of VRS optees is likely to result in higher redeployment.
 
Observation of the Committee
 
22.       The Committee is of view that the Planning Commission should have given adequate reasons for reducing the funds  from the CRR Scheme which is important to
fulfill the Government’s commitment with the VRS optees. In its previous reports the Committee has been recommending to expand the scope of the CRR Scheme to cover
the families of the VRS optees to raise the family income, instead the Planning Commission has even reduced the allocation. The Committee finds the reduction
unacceptable. Instead the Committee recommends that the Scheme should be accordingly redesigned to increase its coverage and scope.
(Para No. 7.20)
 
Reply of the Government
 
23.       Planning Commission have provided budget allocation of Rs. 10 crore for CRR Scheme for the year 2007-08. CRR Scheme is under review for the 11 th Plan period.
The Scheme is to be reviewed by the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC). After review by EFC, allocation for 11th Plan will be approved.
 
Committee’s Further Recommendations
 
24.       Committee may be informed of the outcome of review by EFC and Planning Commission.  The Committee also recommends that the performance of the
Nodal Agencies in producing the redeployment to the trainees, be reviewed.
 
 
Observation of the Committee
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/205threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:16:21]
25.       The Committee recommends that the PSEs should impart on-job or in-campus training for skill upgradation  or vocational training to its employees to facilitate a
smoother transition to new vocation. The Committee further recommends that the HR Department of the concerned PSE should be made accountable and responsible for the
VRS optees not availing the CRR Scheme. The gap between VRS optees and CRR trainees and their redeployment suggest that the PSEs are seriously lacking in their
efforts. The Committee recommends that beyond customary communication with the PSEs and the Ministries, the DPE must make pro-active efforts to persuade the PSEs
about CRR Scheme.
(Para No. 7.21)
 
Reply of the Government
 
26.       PSEs have been advised to counsel VRS optees even before they actually quit the organisation. Some of CPSEs have taken initiative to get the counselling session
conducted within the premises of the company itself. However, wherever there is sporadic voluntary retirement, the optees sometimes contact the Nodal Agency directly also
and take advantage of the Scheme. It has also been seen that all those who are counselled  do not take up training as it might not suit the temperament of all the VRS optees.
Hence, there is a gap between the number of VRS optees and number of CRR trainees.
 
27.       As regards redeployment, it may be emphasized that short duration training towards the fag end of the career may not be expected to achieve 100% redeployment.
Only the enterprising among the VRS optees really take advantage of the Scheme, the training imparted by the Nodal Agency and set up a self employment unit or takes up
wage employment. It must be kept in mind that VRS optees are generally 50 years and above and sometimes it may be difficult for them to start a new unit.  DPE is making
efforts to sensitize CPSEs towards the need to counsel and train the VRS optees. The modifications in the existing Scheme and newly introduced interactive web enabled
software will have a positive effect on the VRS optees.
 
Committee’s Further Recommendations
 
28.       The Committee takes note that DPE by its own admission is not optimistic about the efficacy of the CRR Scheme.  Considering the fact that number of non
executive VR is much higher than the Executives, it must be assessed if executives too opt for CRR Schemes and if so what is the rate of their redeployment.  It is
disturbing that the skilled and semi-skilled non-executive cadre of the PSEs are not able to deploy their skills in open market.
 
 