157thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/157threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:25]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON
INDUSTRY
 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY SEVENTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE COMMITTEE'S
145ST REPORT ON POTENTIAL AND PROMOTION OF COIR
INDUSTRIES IN WEST BENGAL AND
ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS
(MINISTRY OF AGRO AND RURAL INDUSTRIES)
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 17TH DECEMBER, 2004)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK  SABHA ON17TH DECEMBER, 2004)
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
2004, DECEMBER/AGRAHAYANA, 1926 (SAKA)
E-mail:rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
 CONTENTS
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2. COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE-IV
3. INTRODUCTION
4. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
5. OBSERVATIONS CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE ---- AT A
GLANCE
6. MINUTES
 
 COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
(Date of Constitution – 1st January, 2003 )
   1.  Dr. P.C. Alexander    –    Chairman
        RAJYA SABHA
   2.  Prof M.M. Agarwal
   3.  Shri Jayantilal Barot
   4.  Dr. M.N. Das
   5.  Shrimati Saroj Dubey
   6.  Dr. Faguni Ram
   7.  Shri Lajpat Rai
   8.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   9.  Shri P.K. Maheshwari
10.  Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil

157thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/157threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:25]
11.  Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
12.  Shri S. Sivasubramanian
13.  Shrimati Sushree Devi
14.  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
15.  Shri K. Chandran Pillai
        LOK SABHA
16.  Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
17.  Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
18.  Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
19.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das
20.  Shri K Francis George
21.  Shri Thomas Hansda
22.  Md. Anwarul Haque
23.  Shri A.C. Jose
24.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
25.  Shri Mansoor Ali Khan
26.  Shri Sunil Khan
27.  Shri Deepak Kumar
28.  Shri Manjay Lal
29.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
30.  Shri A. Narendra
31.  Shri Ananta Nayak
32.  Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
33.  Shri Uttamrao Patil
34.  Shri Malyala Rajaiah
35.  Shri P. Rajendran
36.  Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
37.  Shri Tarachand Sahu
38.  Shri Ramanand Singh
39.  Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
40.  Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
41.  Shri V. Vetriselvan
42.  Shrimati D.M. Vijaya Kumar
43.  Shri Radha Mohan Singh
44.  Shri Vijay Sankeshwar
        SECRETARIAT
        Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
        Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
        Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
        Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
        Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
 
COMPOSITION OF PRESENT COMMITTEE
(Date of Constitution – 5th August, 2004 )
   1.  Shri Santosh Bagrodia–    Chairman
        RAJYA  SABHA
   2.  Prof. M.M. Agarwal
   3.  Shri Surendra Lath
   4.  Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
   5.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
   6.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

157thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/157threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:25]
   7.  Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
   8.  Dr. Vijay Mallya
   9.  Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
10.  Shrimati Vanga Geetha
        LOK  SABHA
11.  Shri Guharam Ajgalle
12.  Shri Kailash Baitha
13.  Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
14.  Shri Subhash Deshmukh
15.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
16.  Dr. Vallabbhai Kathiria
17.  Shri Sunil Khan
18.  Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato
19.  Shri Prakash Paranjpe
20.  Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel
21.  Shri Rajnarayan
22.  Shri Bagida Ramakrishna
23.  Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
24.  Shrimati Rubab Sayeda
25.  Shri Rana Gurjeet Singh
26.  Shri Manvendra Singh
27.  Shri Ganesh Singh
28.  Shri Suraj Singh
29.  Shri Chandramani Tripathi
30.  Shri Girdhari Yadav
31.  Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
        SECRETARIAT
        Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
        Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
        Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
        Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
        Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE -IV
   1.  Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato     -----     Convenor
        RAJYA SABHA
   2.  Prof. M.M. Agarwal
   3.  Dr. Vijay Mallya
   4.  Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
   5.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
        LOK SABHA
   6.  Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria
   7.  Shri Sunil Khan
   8.  Shri Suraj Singh
INTRODUCTION
        I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having been authorised
by the Committee, hereby present this One Hundred Fifty Seventh Report on the Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in the Committee’s 141st Report on Potential and Promotion of Coir Industries in West
Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar Islands (Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries).
2.     The Committee examined and considered the Action Taken Notes supplied by the Government (Ministry of Agro
and Rural Industries) on the recommendations contained in its 141st Report on Potential and Promotion of Coir

157thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/157threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:25]
Industries in West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar Islands.
3.     The Sub-Committee-IV for the Action Taken Reports at its meeting held on 8th December, 2004 considered and
adopted the Report.
4.     The Committee at its meeting held on 9th December, 2004 considered and adopted the Report.
NEW DELHI ;
9th December, 2004
SANTOSH BAGRODIA
 Chairman,
Department-relatedparliamentary  Standing
Committee on Industry.
 
REPORT
         The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Agro and Rural
Industries on the Recommendations contained in the 141st Report (of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Industry) on the Potential and Promotion of Coir Industries in West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar
Islands pertaining to the Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries . The Report was presented / laid on the Table of Rajya
Sabha and Lok Sabha on the 23rd December, 2003.
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as follows:
Chapter - I- The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry. The Committee is pleased
to observe that the Ministry has accepted its recommendation as mentioned in Chapter -I of the Report.
Chapter - II- The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies. In respect of these recommendations the Committee is convinced with the logic and explanation
advocated by the Ministry and therefore does not want to pursue further.
Chapter - III- The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies of the
Ministry. The Committee expresses its concern over the non­-implementations of recommendations contained in
Chapter-III and desires that the Ministry should furnish logical explanation in respect of these recommendations.
Chapter - IV- The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry have not been
received. In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV, the Ministry has either furnished the interim replies or
couched its language in vague terms like noted for compliance/guidance, therefore, the Committee desires that the
Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in respects of recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to
the point, as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee.
3. The Details of the ATR is being discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.
CHAPTER - I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH  HAVE  BEEN  ACCEPTED
BY  THE  GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
1.0    ROLE OF COIR BOARD
l.l      The Committee in its 91 st Report on ‘Coir Board-A Performance Review’ has made a detailed study of
performance of Coir Board. However, the Committee appreciates the role of Coir Board and the West Bengal
Government in chalking out action plan for the promotion and proliferation of coir industries in West Bengal and
Andaman & Nicobar Islands on the suggestion and guidelines of the Sub-Committee of Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry for the Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries during its study visits to
Kolkata and Port Blair. The Committee desires that the Coir Board should emphasize on the participation of the Private
Sector and NGOs in the development of the Coir Industry for optimum utilization of resources, exploitation of untapped
export market, national level project for creation of awareness about Coir Products, up-gradation of technology, brand
endowment, institutionalization and co-operativisation of Coir Sector, development of Coir Industry, adequate stress on
R&D activities, sketching of appropriate marketing strategy for development of Coir Industry as a whole.

157thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/157threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:25]
Action Taken
1.1.1Efforts would be made to attract more and more Private parties and NGOs to Coir industry so that optimum
utilisation of resources can be made. Introduction of the Reform Policies of the Government, adoption of liberal
Promotional Regime and abolition of the controls have encouraged more private participation in the development of coir
industry. Assistance is being provided to the private sector for market delegations/ participation in various international
exhibitions etc. for exploitation of untapped export market under the Ministry of Commerce’s Scheme of “Marketing
Development Assistance” and Coir Board’s scheme of “External Market Development Assistance”. For domestic
market development, showroom and sales depots have been established in important cities all over India and publicity
for Coir products is being given through electronics and print media. The R & D activities have resulted in notable
achievements in manufacturing technology and development of new products. The Coir Board developed a new
technology for reducing the retting period of husk in the manufacturing process of white fibre from 12 months to 3
weeks. Another notable achievement in R & D was the development of a technique to convert the waste material Coir
pith, generated in the process of manufacturing Coir fibre into an organic manure. It was also possible to develop some
new coir processing machinery. Anugraha, a low cost handloom made of mild steel which could even be operated by
women workers is the latest addition. Joint collaborative projects with academic institutions and private sector
participation resulted in product diversification for new applications such as packaging materials, wood substitute etc.
New technologies developed by the Coir Board are being disseminated to the industry through extension services.
Under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Co-operativisation, assistance is being given to Coir producing States
including West Bengal for developing co-operative societies and to undertake Coir related activities.
Recommendation
1.2    ENHANCEMENT OF THE PERFORMANCE AND OPERATIONAL EFFICIENCY OF COIR SECTOR
1.2.1The Committee recommends that the following measures may be undertaken for the enhancement of the
performance and operational efficiency of coir sector in West Bengal and Andaman and Nicobar Islands:­
i.      Restructuring of the Coir Industry, Creation of Utility Demand, modernisation for increased productivity to
face price competition, encouraging Brand based Publicity, Quality improvement;
ii.     Market Survey to understand the market demand, market trend, market potential etc; Encouraging SSI Coir
Exporters to obtain ISO certification;
iii.    Creation of a Guidance Cell to collect, compile and disseminate information on quality standards;
Participation in Exhibitions/ Fairs abroad; Product Promotion Programmes; Catalogue Shows;
iv.    External Market Development Assistance; Assistance for Sales Promotion Tour and for Participation in Fairs
and Exhibitions abroad;
v.     Organisation of specialized exhibitions in India like IITF, Carpet Expo, Heimtextil etc.;
vi.    Production of Brochures/Folders/Catalogues/Directory of Exporters/ Interactive CD-Rom etc.;
vii.   Awards to be instituted by the State/UT Government/ Coir Board for outstanding performance in different
fields would have positive impact on the performance and operational efficiency of Coir Sector.
Action Taken
1.2.2Some of the steps identified by the Committee and recommended for implementation for enhancing the
performance and operational efficiency of coir sector in West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar Islands are the measures
already undertaken for the development of the industry and its domestic and export market on the whole. For example,
quality improvement, increased productivity through modernisation to face price competition, participation in trade fairs
and exhibitions in India and abroad, participation in Product Promotion Programmes, Catalogue Shows etc., extending
External Market Development Assistance to the exporters for participation in trade fairs and undertaking sales
promotion tours, organisation of specialized exhibitions in India like India International Trade Fair, Carpet Expo. Etc.
production of publicity literatures, brochures, folders, catalogues, directory of exporters, presentation of coir industry
awards in recognition of excellent performance in various fields of the industry etc. are promotional measures
undertaken on continuous basis under the annual plan programmes of the Coir Board. Such measures will be made
applicable in the case of coir sector in West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar Islands also.
1.2.3As suggested by the Committee, market surveys will be undertaken to assess market demand, market trend,
potential etc. It may be noted that there is already a scheme included in the annual plan proposals for 2004-2005
providing for encouraging coir exporters to obtain ISO certification.
Recommendation

157thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/157threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:25]
1.3    EXPORT PROMOTION
1.3.1The Committee recommends that the Coir Board should explore the potential of growth in export of coir and coir
products both in terms of quantity and value as produced in West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar Islands. The
Committee recommends that the Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries should take promotional steps to enhance the
export potential of Coir Products. The Committee recommends that necessary infrastructure in the form of offices of the
Coir Board may be set up in Kolkata for arranging awareness programmes and training programmes for the benefit of
private entrepreneurs and labourers.
1.3.2The Committee recommends that a thrust may be given to boost export of coir products and assistance of Export
Credit Guarantee Corporation (ECGC) may be sought in the matter. The Committee also recommends that possibility of
mutual cooperation in possible area between India and other neighboring countries like Sri Lanka, Vietnam, Thailand
and Philipines may be explored. The Committee understands that the promotion of export market for coir and coir
products is of vital importance for the growth of Indian coir industry, therefore, there should also be an attempt to
develop the brand image for the Indian coir, which should instantly evoke a sense of unique craftsmanship and assured
quality.
Action Taken
1.3.3There is potential for developing West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar Islands as export centres of Coir and Coir
products like Kerala and Tamil Nadu. In the post yarn sector, coir industry in those areas is in the nascent stage. The
industry needs to be developed to make itself capable of producing exportable products of international standards. This
requires concerted efforts towards skill development through intensive training and infrastructure development. Besides
active co-operation of the concerned State Governments, Coir Board should have sufficient budgetary support in the
annual plan allocation for achieving this mission. The Committee recommended setting up of Office of the Coir Board
in Kolkata for arranging awareness programmes and training programmes for the benefit of private entrepreneurs and
labourers.
1.3.4Coir Board has established a Regional Office at Bhubaneswar in Orissa in February, 2004. Development of Coir
Industry covering West Bengal, Orissa, North Eastern and Northern States comes under the jurisdiction of this Regional
Office.
1.3.5There have been some attempts in the past to explore areas of co-operation between India and other Coir producing
countries. In fact, the R & D and market development projects being implemented under the auspices of Inter
Governmental Group on Hard Fibres of FAO, taken into consideration these aspects of mutual co­operation between
different coir producing countries.
1.3.6As recommended for by the Committee, creation of a brand image for Indian Coir in the overseas market and
thereby instantly evoking a sense of unique craftsmanship and assured quality will go a long way in promoting our
export to the overseas market. Keeping this objective, a study on the possibility of introducing brand image for Indian
Coir through M/s. A.F Fergusan & Co., Chennai has already been undertaken. A proposal in this regard is being framed
.
Recommendation
1.4    Collection of Coconut Husk
1.4.1The Committee observes that the Coir Industry gravely suffers from shortage of fibre both white and brown which
sometime has to be imported. The shortage is mainly because of absence of adequate machinery for collection of
coconut husk from consumers of coconuts in the States in general and West Bengal and Andaman and Nicobar in
particular. In the State of West Bengal only the coconut traders or Goldars collect the husk from the primary coconut
agriculturist market. The Committee feels that existing arrangements are able to collect only 180 tonnes brown fibre
annually. With the available husks there is scope of at least 10 modern markets brown fiber manufacturing units to
enhance the production to the level 200 mt. per annum. The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Coir Board and the
Government of West Bengal to make serious efforts for the intensive collection of husk and the system needs to be
institutionalized.
1.4.2The Committee further impresses upon the Government to take a holistic view of the problems being faced in the
Car Nicobar area. A serious planning is the need of the hour to provide logistic support to the Car Nicobar Islands. In
order to solve the problem of the husk collection, the Committee suggests if it is not possible at the local level the
outside agencies may be brought in to do the job even on commercial line.
1.4.3The Committee further recommends that the Government also facilitate the Governments of West Bengal and

157thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/157threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:25]
Andaman and Nicobar Islands the logistic support for import of brown fibre from the neighbouring country like Sri
Lanka and Philipines in order to meet the shortage of brown fibre.
Action Taken
1.4.4 Concerted efforts are being made to alleviate the problem of fibre shortage in coir producing States through
various measures. The efforts have yielded positive results and the availability of Coir fibre has improved resulting in
stabilisatioin of prices. It is expected that the position would improve in West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar Islands
when the Action Plan, already drafted, gets implemented. When the industry in West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar
Islands develops in the post fibre/yarn sector with the development of infrastructure and skilled manpower, the problem
of fibre shortage could be suitable addressed; if necessary through outsourcing.
Recommendation
1.5    COIR INDUSTRIAL INFRASTRUCTURE
1.5.1The Committee recommends that in all major coconut growing areas in the state of West Bengal and the Union
Territory of Andaman & Nicobar, more clusters may be identified where coir industrial activities may be established. In
these clusters coir industrial infrastructure should be set up preferably in the private sector. Basic techno-economic
feasibility/consultancy can be given by the Coir Board for setting up such production infrastructure. The Committee
further recommends that suitable state level project may be evolved for creation of awareness about coir products,
development of market, production of new and diversified goods of mass consumption and quality assurance. A
Regional Coir Trade Information Centre may be opened for collection analysis its dissemination of information in the
state of West Bengal, Andaman & Nicobar, Orissa, Jharkhand and Bihar. It should become one of the principal
activities of the Coir Board in the region. Coir sector can be developed in West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar
through flow of information especially marketing and technology, which is possible through IT assisted programmes.
Action Taken
1.5.2In order to develop Coir industrial infrastructure in non-traditional areas, certain programmes have already been
chalked out one of the programmes is “Suvarnajayanthi Coir Cluster Vikas Yojana”. The scheme also aims at overall
development of Coir industry including welfare of workers and artisians, enhancement of export, generation of
additional employment in non-traditional areas etc. All over India, 50 Coir industrial clusters will be identified for
appropriate interventions under the Scheme. To begin with, 11 clusters have been identified in different States for this
purpose. 24 South Parganas in West Bengal is one of the Coir producing centres identified for provision of
infrastructural facilities in this scheme. Some other programmes identified for implementation in these clusters are
organisation of Entrepreneurship Development Programmes, Extension of R & D results, Exposure Tours, Workshops,
Orientation Training Programmes, Skill Development Programmes etc.
Recommendation
1.6    TECHNOLOGY  UP-GRADATION
1.6.1 The Committee reiterates its observation as made in its 91st Report that Technological upgradation is a sina qua
non for the development of the coir industry. Eco-friendly process and production technologies, development of cost-
effective and efficient machinery with higher productivity, which reduces drudgery will have to be developed. Progress
in the development of coir machinery has been very tardy. The Committee understands that once the potential of the
coir industries in West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar are being assessed the next step should be to strengthen the R &
D projects. In this regard, the Committee recommends that special efforts have to be made to identify the potential coir
machinery manufacturers who can be supported with appropriate technology transfer from any available areas. This
activity may be taken up as joint venture programmes with greater emphasis on private sector participation ensuring
faster commercialization.
1.6.2The Committee feels that the State Government of West Bengal and UT Government of Andaman & Nicobar in
consultation with the Coir Board should aim at rapid modernization for the overall sustainable development of the coir
industry, focusing on research and development, quality improvement, human resource development, better marketing
of products and welfare support to the needy, particularly the less-privileged group like women coir workers who
constitute more than 80 per cent of the work-force. The Committee stresses the need for greater emphasis on the
involvement of the private sector as well as the concerned state government. The Committee recommends that the Coir
Board, in coordination with State Governments should make an endeavour to undertake more sponsored R & D projects
in association with reputed agencies in both the public and private sectors.

157thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/157threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:25]
Action Taken
1.6.3The R & D activities of the Coir Board are mainly carried out at the Central Coir Research Institute, Alleppey
(Kerala) and Central Institute of Coir Technology, Bangalore (Karnataka). Results of the R & D activities are promptly
passed on to the trade through its extension service activities. In fact, one of the important assignments of the Regional
Offices of the Coir Board in various Coir producing States is extension of the results of its R & D activities. The Coir
Board has been awarded the prestigious National Research and Development Corporation (NRDC) Technology Awards
twice for its research investigations and development of new technologies. Development of COIRRET, to reduce the
retting period, development of PITHPLUS to convert Coir pith into organic manure, development of POLYCOIR, a
wood substitute, and development of a number of cost effective and efficient machinery with higher productivity like
“Anugraha”, a compact metallic handloom for weaving Coir geo-textiles even by women workers were some of its
achievements. Some of the R & D works of the Board have been done in collaboration with reputed outside agencies.
Most of the technologies developed in its R& D institutes have been transferred by the Board to reputed
agencies/private entrepreneurs for commercialization. No efforts would be spared in developing new technologies in the
processing and production technology and dissemination of the same to the trade in traditional as well as non traditional
Coir products manufacturing States.
CHAPTER - II
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation
2.0    MODEL COIR VILLAGE SCHEME
2.1.1The Committee is of the view that the model coir village scheme would go a long way in the industrialization
process in the coir sector in West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar . The Committee agrees with the views of Institute of
Rural Management, Anand, Gujarat for continuance of Model Coir Village Yojana for effective proliferation and wide
promotion of coir industries in West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar.
Action Taken
2.1.2A new Scheme named “Production Oriented Welfare Scheme for Coir Workers” has been formulated. The scheme
has two components. The first component aims at development of necessary infrastructural facilities needed for
development of Coir industry and the aim of the second component is improvement of productivity of the workers. An
insurance scheme against hospitalisation of Coir workers has also been incorporated in the scheme. It is believed that
the scheme will go a long way in the development of Coir industry in all Coir producing States. Most of the salient
features of the erstwhile Model Coir Village Scheme have been retained in the new scheme. Through the scheme it is
proposed to provide production oriented infrastructural facilities in all Coir producing States/UTs.
CHAPTER - III
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE
HAS NOT ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY OF AGRO AND RURAL INDUSTRIES
Recommendation
3.0    RESILIENT MONITORING-MECHANISM
3.1.1 The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries must guide the Coir Board in the execution
of action plan meant for West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar. A resilient monitoring mechanism is required for timely
implementation of developmental programmes and for achieving the cherished objectives and mission underlining each
and every scheme. The Committee recommends that the Coir Board should be guided by the principle of management
by objectives (MBO) and not merely management by activities. The Committee is of the view that Khadi and Village
Industries as well as the coir industries can facilitate agro and rural base of economic development of West Bengal.
Therefore, the State Department of Industries has to play the pivotal role in guiding the developmental pattern within a
determined economic policy. By having statistical information at the grass root level, that is at the block and the district
level, the District Magistrate or the Development Commissioner of the region should come out with a strategy for the
economic development of the State preferably chalking out district wise action plan. At the same time, officials at the
helm of affairs at the State and the Central level should encourage and facilitate the officials at the grass root level for

157thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/157threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:25]
effective implementation of policies and action plan at the grass root level. Therefore, better coordination and
collaboration between the Central and the State Government and effective implementation machinery at the grass root
level is desirable.
Action Taken
3.1.2The recommendations of the Committee are noted for compliance.
Further Recommendation
3.1.3The Committee would like to know from the Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries the following informations:- ­
(i)    whether the Ministry of ARI has chalked out any guidelines for the Coir Board for the timely execution of
Action Plan meant for West Bengal and Andaman and Nicobar, if yes, the details thereof and if not the
reasons therefor.
(ii)    the details of monitoring mechanism for implementation of  developmental programmes and achievement of
objectives and missions of each and every scheme.
(iii)   steps taken and outcome thereof identifying various facets and dimension of Khadi and Village Industries
and Coir Industries in West Bengal; so and to widen the ARI’s base and enhancing its contribution to State’s
economy.
(iv)   steps taken and the details thereof regarding collection of data and information at the grass root level
pertaining to status, problems and prospects of Coir Industries.
(v)   district- wise details of development strategies and Action Plan thereon.
(vi)   the details of linkage machinery for co-coordinating and collaboration between the central and state
Governments to work as effective implementation machinery.
3.1.4The Committee understands that the Action Plan meant for proliferation of Coir Industries contains noble ideas but
need is to streamline the implementation machinery.
Recommendation
3.2    POTENTIAL  OF  EMPLOYMENT  GENERATION  BY  COIR  MANUFACTURING  UNITS
3.2.1 The Committee knows that since Coir Industry is an employment intensive industry, efforts should be made for
searching avenues for generating sustainable and regular employment in the Coir Sector. Employment of large number
of women in the Coir Sector would fulfill the dreams of empowerment of women and due share to the economically and
socially backward classes (SCs/STs/OBCs) would enhance the standard of living of people of weaker section of society.
Action Taken
3.2.2 There is a potential for development of Coir industry in West Bengal and it can serve as a source of employment
generation for economically and socially backward rural people. At present, only 20% of coconut husk is made
available for Coir industry and only about 3140 workers are engaged by the industry in West Bengal. Mahila Coir
Yojana, a self -employment scheme of the Board for women is given adequate thrust in the plan of actions being
implemented in various States for generation of more employment to women.
Further Recommendation
3.2.3The Committee is of the opinion that national economy must be capable of generating employment which is
concomitant to poverty alleviation, general improvement in standard of living, savings, credit formation, investment and
further opening of avenues for employment generation potential. Since the Coir Industry is employment intensive
industry, the Committee thought it pertinent to recommend for searching avenues for generating sustainable and regular
employment in the Coir Sector. At the same time the employment generation potential of Coir Industries can be utilised
for empowerment of women and weaker section of society of general improvement in standard of living.
3.2.4 The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry of ARI is in agreement with the employment generation
potential of Coir Industries. However, the Committee is constrained to express its displeasure that in response to
Committee’s recommendation for generating employment in Coir Industries in West Bengal, the Ministry of ARI in its
Action Taken Note merely enumerated the existing fact that only 3140 workers are engaged by the Coir Industry in
West Bengal as there is only 20% collection of coconut husk in West Bengal. What the Committee desired in the Action
Taken Note is in fact the plan envisaged and action taken in regard to harness the potential of employment generation
which remains to be utilized at least by the five fold as accepted by the Ministry of ARI itself. The Committee desires
that the Mahila Coir Yojana needs to be strengthened so as to be result oriented, on similar line Sarvodaya Coir Yojana

157thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/157threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:25]
may be launched for employment of weaker sections of the society in Coir Industries. What the Committee desires is in
fact the objective increment in employment generation in actual number through Coir Industries in West Bengal for
general improvement in living standard in the State. The Committee therefore, impresses upon the Ministry of ARI and
Coir Board to work out a time bound programme for employment generation by utilizing the potential available in the
State of West Bengal.
Recommendation
3.3    A  SEPARATE  CELL  FOR  THE  COIR  INDUSTRY  IN  THE  RESPECTIVE  DEPARTMENTS OF 
INDUSTRY.
3.3.1 The Committee recommends that both the State and UT Governments may be advised to set up a separate cell for
the coir industry in their respective Departments of Industry, preferably under the SSI sector. The District Industries
Centre or the District Rural Development Agencies of the concerned districts may be made the nodal agency for the
development of coir where there is coconut cultivation, and entrusted with the responsibility of imparting training,
entrepreneurship development, assistance in getting micro credits, and organizing the workers into Self Help Groups for
production and marketing. The technical inputs may be provided by the Coir Board in extending training, especially in
the production of value-added goods and in getting trade information. Kolkata and Port Blair as well as Car Nicobar
should have at least one outlet of the Coir Board and exhibitions may be held periodically in all cities and small towns
of the State/UT for awareness as well as marketing.
Action Taken
3.3.2The Government is prepared to provide all technical support for the development of this industry in the State
especially in the production of value added goods and in getting trade information. There is already a showroom cum
sales depot of the Coir Board in Calcutta (established in 1959) for popularization of Coir products. Coir Board can also
be allowed to participate in leading exhibitions in the State/Union Territory for awareness as well as marketing..
Further Recommendation
3.3.3 The Committee made recommendation for advising the respective State and UT Government for setting up a
separate cell for the Coir Industries in their Department of Small Scale Industries and endowing district industries center
or the district rural development agencies of the concerned districts to act as nodal agency for accelerated proliferation
of Coir Industries in West Bengal and Andaman and Nicobar. The Committee would like to know whether the Ministry
of ARI has communicated to the Government of West Bengal and Andaman and Nicobar in line-with recommendation
of the Committee, if yes, the response of those Government and if not, the reasons therefor. The Committee would also
like to know whether the Coir Board had approached the State and UT Government for providing technical support for
development and production of Coir Industries. The Committee would like to know further as to what actions have been
taken for renovating and modernization of showroom - come sales depot at Kolkata and setting up of a outlet of the Coir
Board at Port Blair and Car Nicobar.
Recommendation
3.4    STEPS TO PROMOTE FAIR COMPETITION AMONG PRODUCERS AND EXPORTERS OF                 
COIR AND COIR PRODUCTS
3.4.1The Committee desires that the Coir Board should promote fair competition from among the exporters and
manufacturers. The suggestion for formation of Manufacturers Consortia and Setting up of Common Facility Centres
(CFC) to reduce unfair competition may be acceded to, as the same would encourage the coir manufacturers and
exporters in new found land like West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar.
Action Taken
3.4.2All assistance to producers and exporters is being extended for fair competition through improvements in quality
standards. Formation of Manufacturers Consortia and setting up of Common Facility Centres (CFC) are two activities
for which the Coir Board gives maximum priority.
Further Recommendation
3.4.3 The Committee is pleased to note the readiness of Coir Board for extending all assistance to producers and
exporters regulating fair competition through improvement in quality standards, at the same time the Committee would
like to know as to what action have been taken on the part of the Coir Board for formation of manufacturers consortia
and setting up Common Facility Centre (CFC) for which the coir board is giving maximum priority. An early decision
in this regard on the part of the coir board would be helpful in promoting and in fact ensuring fair competition among
producers and exporters in exporting coir and coir products.
Recommendation

157thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/157threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:25]
3.5    MARKETING AND SALES OF COIR PRODUCTS IN THE DOMESTIC MARKET
3.5.1The Committee is of the view that Coir Board should chalk out effective marketing strategy for promotion of Coir
Products in the domestic market by undertaking the popularization of use of new Coir Products like coir geo-textiles,
garden articles, coir pith based products through awareness creation programmes. The effort on the part of the Coir
Board is essential for the marketing of the coir products produced in West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar and
particularly of Andaman & Nicobar as demand of coir products has not surged upto expected level in the union territory.
Action Taken
3.5.2Efforts for popularisation and marketing of Coir products through showrooms are being made through Coir Board .
The Coir Board has also been trying to promote the domestic market for Coir through electronics and print media
publicity however, subject to the availability of funds under the Plan Programmes. Its activities can be widened further.
Further Recommendation
3.5.3The Committee reiterate that the Coir Board should chalk out effective marketing strategy for promotion and
enhancement of Sale turn over of coir products in the domestic market so that the incremental change in total sales
turnover can be quantified and measured in realistic and observable terms. The Committee desires that the Coir Board
should come out with massive strategy and make an all out efforts for the marketing of the Coir products of Andaman &
Car Nicobar as there is a problem in the local consumption of coir products in the Union Territory.
3.5.4The Ministry of ARI may assess the requirement of Funds under the plan programme for the purpose of
popularising and marketing of coir products through electronics and print media publicity and accordingly approach the
Ministry of Finance for the budgetary support.
Recommendation
3.6    COOPERATIVISATION SCHEME
3.6.1The Committee is of the view that the potential of the co-operativisation scheme i.e. formation of viable coir co-
operatives and revitalization of the potentially viable dormant societies and bringing the coir workers in to the co-
operative fold for improving the quality and quantity of production and putting industry on a sound footing may be
explored in West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar Islands. The suggestion of the Institute of Rural Management that the
Scheme of Co-operativisation in Coir Industry West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar Islands needs attention of the
Government. The National Co-operative Development Corporation (NCDC) may be entrusted with greater role for
implementation of co-operativisation scheme in West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar and the services and guideline of
the Coir Board may sought.
Action Taken
3.6.2Necessary support in West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar Islands for the expansion of scope of Co-
operativisation Scheme can be provided matching funds are provided by the State Government; National Co-operative
Development Corporation.
Further Recommendation
3.6.3The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of ARI in tandem with the Coir Board should chalk out the detailed
course of Action for the purpose of making the co-operativisation scheme a social movement for revitalisation of Coir
Industries in West Bengal and Andaman and Nicobar Islands. As regards the matching funds for the purpose the
Ministry of ARI and the Coir Board may estimate the requirement of fund and approach the concerned government
department for approval and release of fund without delay.
Recommendation
PROBLEMS BEING FACED BY COIR INDUSTRY
3.6.4The Committee observes that Coir Industry is facing some acute problems which needs to be solved immediately
for providing suitable infrastructure for the growth and development of Coir Sector in West Bengal and Andaman &
Nicobar Islands. For optimum utilization of husk State Govemment may enact suitable legislation to prevent the use of
coconut husk as a fuel. By strengthening R&D and collaborative projects to devise coir processing equipments with
higher productivity, technological upgradation and modernization of existing equipments, the productivity of the Coir
Industry may be enhanced. The Committee desires that the Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries should chalk out

157thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/157threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:25]
strategy for eradicating the problems being faced by the Coir Industry. The Committee is pleased to observe that the
Coir Board have identified the key concern areas of Coir Sector and has understood the ways and means to remove the
problems. The only thing is employing right strategy at the right time under the supervision of right person for
extracting effective results.
Action Taken
3.6.5The Government is prepared to provide all support to the Governments of West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar
Islands for development of Coir Industry. But at the same time for the optimum utilisation of husk, the State
Government has to enact suitable legislation to prevent the use of coconut husk as fuel and also to ensure its more
productive and judicious use as raw material to the coir industry. An element of awareness creation among the coconut
growers and common man highlighting the socio­-economic importance of coconut would yield some results. The
productivity of Coir Industry in the State and the UT can be enhanced by technological upgradation, modernisation of
existing equipments, training and employment of more rural artisans in association with the governments concerned.
Further Recommendation
3.6.6Although the Committee is pleased to note the preparedness of the Ministry of ARI for extending all support to the
Government of West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar Islands for the development of Coir Industry but the Committee
would like to observe that the Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries has to play pro-active role to take initiative steps in
identifying problems being faced by the units engaged in coir industries and providing suitable solutions including the
infrastructural facilities. The Committee would like to know whether the Ministry of ARI had forwarded the
recommendation of the Committee to the Government of West Bengal and the Andaman & Nicobar Islands for enacting
the suitable legislation to prevent the use of coconut husk as a fuel, if yes the response of the respective government and
if not the reason therefor.
3.6.7The Committee feels that the Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries should come out with detailed course of Action
for ‘Awareness Creation Programmes’ among the coconut growers and the common man highlighting the socio-
economic importance in consultation with the Coir Board and forward it to the Government of West Bengal and
Andaman and Nicobar Islands. A co-ordination mechanism contriving of the representatives of Coir Board and the
representatives of State and UT Government may be set-up and the participation of NGOs in the Awareness programme
may be promoted.
3.6.8 The Committee would like to know as to what course of action were taken/could be taken for technological
upgradation, strong thing of R&D, modernisation of existing equipments and training and employment of rural artisans
to enhance the productivity of coir products.
Recommendation
3.7    HRD- RELATED ACTIVITIES
3.7.1The Committee feels that appropriate manpower development programme for skill up-gradation in various fields,
especially in non-traditional areas, is to be devised. Efforts for upgradation of the skill of artisans and
technical/managerial personnel required for the industry are to be organized in coordination with NGOs, cooperative
societies and other state government institutions. State level training institutions should also be revitalized to enable
them to undertake HRD-related activities.
Action Taken
3.7.2Coir Board is having one institute for imparting training on latest technologies of processing and manufacturing of
Coir at Alleppey (Kerala) namely National Coir Training Design Centre. Earlier, the Board also had four Regional Coir
Training and Development Centres in Tanjavur in Tamil Nadu, Arsikerc in Karnataka, Bhubaneswar in Orissa and
Rajamundry in Andhra Pradesh and field training units attached to Regional Coir Training and Design Centres. When
these training institutes had been established in the concerned States, it was expected that subsequently the institutes
would be taken over by the State Governments concerned. However, since the State Governments did not come forward
to take over the centres even after much persuasion, most of these Centres had to be closed. However, field level
training under various schemes is still being imparted. Quality Improvement Camps and Entreprenuership Development
Programmes for development of human resource are also being organised.
Further Recommendation

157thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/157threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:25]
3.7.3The Committee is pleased to note that the field level training under various scheme and Quality Improvement
Camps and Entrepreneurship Development Programmes for development of human resources are under way, however,
the Committee feels that the effectiveness of these programmes need to be re-examined objectively in terms of total
outcome of these programmes i.e. no. of persons trained, no. of entrepreneurs initiating coir units and product
diversification.
3.7.4The Committee feels that one institution namely, National Coir Training Design Centre at Alleppey (Kerala) for
imparting training on latest technologies of processing and manufacturing of coir is not sufficient for whole of India.
Therefore, the Committee recommends that the four Regional Coir Training and Development in Tanjavur in Tamil
Nadu, Arsikerc in Karnataka, Bhubaneswar in Orissa and Rajamundry in Andhra Pradesh and field training units
attached to Regional Coir Training and Design Centres should be re-opened in consultation with the Governments of
respective States enplaning the head for training for proliferation of coir industries.
Recommendation
3.8    CREDIT  FLOW  TO  COIR  INDUSTRIES  IN  WEST  BENGAL  AND  ANDAMAN  &  NICOBAR
ISLANDS
3.8.1The Committee feels that the financial assistance for technology upgradation, revitalization and augmentation of
training centers in West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar Islands is required . Such assistance should also be given for
cluster development programmes and marketing both for internal consumption and export. Since there is total absence
of credit plan for the coir industries in most of the States including Kerala and West Bengal as coir industries is not
being identified as the Key Industry, the Committee recommends that all the bankers and the district collectors in the
State of West Bengal and UT of Andaman & Nicobar Islands should ensure that credit plan for coir industries is shown
in the district level credit plan. In this regard the Committee recommends that Reserve Bank of India should ensure that
all the banks at the apex level must be given direction to the state level unions to provide credit to coir industries. Once
the outlay is provided then it is to be decided for each district, as to how adequate credit flow has to be earmarked for
priority sector and non-priority sector. The Government has to ensure in co-ordination of banks and financial institutions
that the credit flow to coir industry should be made available without procedural hassles. It is only then there would be
maximum utilization of the potential of the coir industries in West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar Islands because coir
industry in the said region are in the dire need of smooth credit flow for getting more fibre manufacturing activities and
markets the products which is essential for the survival of the industry.
Action Taken
3.8.2Serious efforts for ensuring adequate credit flow to Coir Industry in all States are being made. To begin with, a
number of meetings of District Collectors, Lead Bank Officers, Industries Department Officers and prospective
entrepreneurs in Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Pondichery etc. have been held. The need for segregated allocation for coir
industry in the Banks’ Credit Plan has also been taken up with the Reserve Bank of India. The credit flow to this sector
in West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar Islands can be improved if the State/UT Governments concerned initiate
necessary action in association with Coir Board.
Further Recommendation
3.8.3The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries are making serious efforts for
ensuring adequate credit flow to Coir Industry for technology up-gradation, opening new avenues for fresh
entrepreneurs, revitalization and augmentation of training centers, promotion of cluster development programmes etc.
The Committee desires that the Ministry of ARI should take-up follow-up action with the Reserve Bank of India for
segregated allocation for coir industry in the Bank’s credit plan. Once the segregated allocation for Coir Industries in the
Bank’s Credit Plan is made the district level credit plan may be chalked out by the Banks. The Ministry of ARI in
tandem with the Coir Board should chalk out the requirement of credit for the coir industry for expansion and
proliferation of coir units in various States including the West Bengal and Andaman and Nicobar Islands. The Ministry
of ARI should communicate to State and Union Territory Governments to initiate necessary action in association with
Coir Board for optimum utilisation of credit earmarked for coir industries. A co­operative and communicative centre-
state relation is essential for the furtherance and proliferation of Coir industries. It is the Coir Board and the Ministry of
ARI which must undertake the lead role in associating and motivating the State Government for chalking out district
level credit plan and involving the NGOs for expansion and promotion of Coir Industries in various states including the

157thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/157threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:25]
non­-traditional coir States.
Recommendation
3.9.   TRANSPORT SUBSIDY TO THE COIR INDUSTRIES IN ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR ISLANDS
3.9.1The Committee is of the considered view that for the promotion and proliferation of coir industries in Andaman
and Nicobar Islands transport subsidy and freight subsidy should be given to the areas which are at some locational
disadvantages. The Ministry of ARI may take up this issue with the Ministry of Finance. There is a need to formulate
graded level of transport subsidy i. e. somebody who is at the Car Nicobar should be given higher level of subsidy than
the one at Port Blair. That is because there are some inherited challenges in the Island with the population of 3,57,000
out of that the so called urban population at Port Blair is 2,56,000 having a different population composition than the
population composition of the main land. The island has a very small market. Any industry which needs to be sustained
has to look at the main land for the market. There is very high freight cost handling cost and labour cost. The price index
is very high when the products come to main land market, they become uncompetitive. Therefore, the Island needs to be
treated at a separated footing as comparing to the other main land State because of connectivity problem, labour cost etc.
Action Taken
3.9.2The recommendations of the Committee are noted for compliance.
Further Recommendation
3.9.2The Committee reiterates that Andaman and Nicobar Islands being at locational disadvantages must be granted
transport subsidy and freight subsidy for the promotion and proliferation of Coir Industries in the union territory. The
Committee reiterates that the Ministry of ARI should take-up this issue with the Ministry of Finance without further
delay.
CHAPTER - IV
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE MINISTRY OF AGRO AND RURAL INDUSTRIES HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
Recommendation
4.1    COST REDUCTION OF COIR PRODUCTS
4.1.1The Committee is of the view that under the cluster development activities there should be promotion for formation
of consortium among the small scale manufacturers and small and medium exporters so as to have a common approach
in sourcing of raw material, marketing of products etc. because these measures would enable to reduce the selling cost
of the products in the non-traditional coir producing region like West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar.
Action Taken
4.1.2Formation of consortium among small scale manufacturers and small and medium exporters is an activity for
which maximum priority is being given. In the light of the recommendation, more thrust will be given to the above
activities especially in non-­traditional areas so that cost of coir products can be brought down. Through the Coir Board
it is proposed to implement some programmes in 24 Parganas of West Bengal for providing infrastructural facilities and
demonstration of technology for prospective entrepreneurs.
Recommendation
4.2    R&D ACTIVITIES BEING CONDUCTED BY COIR BOARD
4.2.1 The Committee hopes that the R & D studies conducted are evaluated and implemented in the coir industry for the
overall development of the coir sector. Studies organised for assessing the market potential for coir and coir products in
the West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar Islands in order to prepare a strategy for developing a market for coir and
coir products in the West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar Islands would yield positive result. The Committee opines
that the study for exploring the potential for diversified products in coir industry especially for agri-horti purposes
would go a long way in transforming the Coir Industry at sustainable rate in West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar
Islands.
Action Taken

157thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/157threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:25]
4.2.2The recommendation of the Committee to explore the potential for diversified products in coir industry especially
for agri-horticultural purposes are being noted and will be given due importance and proposals/schemes would be
drafted.
Recommendation
4.3   MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING (MOU) SIGNED BETWEEN COIR BOARD AND NATIONAL
RESEARCH DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION (NRDC).
4.3.1The Committee hopes that Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) signed between Coir Board and National
Research Development Corporation (NRDC) would benefit the Coir Industry in product diversification and design for
further popularization of Coir Products in the non-traditional coir zones like West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar
Islands.
Action Taken
4.3.2The recommendations are noted.
Recommendation
4.4    MAHILA COIR YOJANA
4.4.1 The Committee is of the opinion that the Mahila Coir Yojana in West Bengal is a unique programme for providing
self employment to women in rural areas and thus a step towards economic empowerment of women which has now
become a national policy and priority. Execution mechanism may be undertaken to implement this national policy and
priority in West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar Islands for greater role of women in Coir Industry. The Mahila Coir
Yojana Scheme can play a big role in providing self employment to rural women in coconut growing States. The
recommendation of the Committee to undertake an execution mechanism for economic empowerment of women, which
has now become a national policy and priority, will be given top priority and efforts will be made to extend the benefits
of the scheme to more womenfolk in West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar Islands. In fact, this is an important
component of the Action Plan for development of coir industry in West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar Islands.
Action Taken
4.4.2Mahila Coir Yojana Scheme can play a big role in providing self employment to rural women in coconut growing
States. The recommendations of the Committee to undertake an execution mechanism for economic empowerment of
women, which has now become a national policy priority, are noted and efforts will be made to extend the benefits of
the scheme to more womenfolk in West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar Islands. In fact, this is an important
component of the Action Plan for development of coir industry in West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar Islands.
Recommendation
4.5    SWOT - ANALYSIS OF COIR INDUSTRIES
4.5.1The Committee is of the view that the Coir Board should sketch out the SWOT analysis of status of coir industries
in West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar Islands. The objective understanding of SWOT analysis by the Coir Board and
the Ministry of ARI would prove instrumental in scaling the growth and development of Coir Industries to a new height.
Massive actions may be taken to overcome the weaknesses and combating the threats to the Coir Industry and availing
each and every opportunity that come on its way. Similarly, the policy maker and the implementing agencies should
reap the benefits of strength of the Coir Industry for enhancing productivity, exploring avenues for export of coir
products and undertaking measures for product development and product diversification and dwelling upon
popularization and publicity of coir products in the domestic as well as international market.
Action Taken
4.5.2The recommendations of the Committee are noted for compliance.
Recommendation
4.6    ASSISTANCE OF COIR BOARD TO THE COIR INDUSTRIES IN ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR
ISLANDS.

157thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/157threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:25]
4.6.1 The Committee recommends that the Coir Board should start the training activities and then promote
establishment of coir industries in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands. The Coir Board has to chalk out a net work of
marketing tie-ups and organize co-operative sort of show-room. Andaman and Nicobar Islands needs holistic schemes
for the promotion and proliferation of coir industries.
Action Taken
4.6.2 Steps for the development of coir industry in Andaman & Nicobar Islands, as per the directives of the Committee,
will be taken. In the light of the assessment made by two officials of the Coir Board on the requirement for promoting
coir industry in Andaman & Nicobar Islands, a proposal is being framed by the Coir Board for reviving the training
institutes of the Union Territory which is defunct now through provision of machineries and equipments.
4.7   FURTHER RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMITTEE IN RESPECT OF INTERIM REPLIES OF
THE MINISTRY
4.7.1The Committee observes that in respect of the recommendations placed in Chapter-IV, the Ministry has furnished
the interim replies, therefore, the Committee desires that in respects of these recommendations, the Ministry should
furnish the final replies, in detail and to the point, along with the outcome of action taken, as per the intention and spirit
of the recommendations of the Committee.
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMEDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
AT A GLANCE
RESILIENT MONITORING-MECHANISM
         The Committee would like to know from the Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries the following informations:- ­
(i)    whether the Ministry of ARI has chalked out any guidelines for the Coir Board for the timely enecution of
Action Plan meant for West Bengal and Andaman and Nicobar, if yes, the details thereof and if not the
reasons therefor.
(ii)    the detaits of monitoring mechanism for implementation of  developmental programmes and achievement of
objectives and missions of each and every scheme.
(iii)   steps taken and outcome thereof identifying various facets and dimension of Khadi and Village Industries
and Coir Industries in West Bengal; so and to widen the ARI’s base and enhancing its contribution to State’s
economy.
(iv)   steps taken and the details thereof regarding collection of data and information at the grass root level
pertaining to status, problems and prospects of Coir Industries.
(v)   district-wise details of development strategies and Action Plan thereon.
(vi)   The details of linkage machinery for co-coordinating and collaboration between the central and state
Governments to work as effective implementation machinery.                                             (Para 3.1.3)
         The Committee understands that the Action Plan meant for proliferation of Coir Industries contains noble ideas
but need is to streamline the implementation machinery.                                             (Para 3.1.4)
POTENTIAL  OF  EMPLOYMENT  GENERATION  BY  COIR  MANUFACTURING  UNITS
         The Committee is of the opinion that national economy must be capable of generating employment which is
concomitant to poverty alleviation, general improvement in standard of living, savings, credit formation, investment and
further opening of avenues for employment generation potential. Since the Coir Industry is employment intensive
industry, the Committee thought it pertinent to recommend for searching avenues for generating sustainable and regular
employment in the Coir Sector. At the same time the employment generation potential of Coir Industries can be utilised
for empowerment of women and weaker section of society of general improvement in standard of
living.                                       (Para 3.2.3)
         The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry of ARI is in agreement with the employment generation
potential of Coir Industries. However, the Committee is constrained to express its displeasure that in response to
Committee’s recommendation for generating employment in Coir Industries in West Bengal, the Ministry of ARI in its
Action Taken Note merely enumerated the existing fact that only 3140 workers are engaged by the Coir Industry in
West Bengal as there is only 20% collection of coconut husk in West Bengal. What the Committee desired in the Action

157thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/157threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:25]
Taken Note is in fact the plan envisaged and action taken in regard to harness the potential of employment generation
which remains to be utilized at least by the five fold as accepted by the Ministry of ARI itself. The Committee desires
that the Mahila Coir Yojana needs to be strengthened so as to be result oriented, on similar line Sarvodaya Coir Yojana
may be launched for employment of weaker sections of the society in Coir Industries. What the Committee desires is in
fact the objective increment in employment generation in actual number through Coir Industries in West Bengal for
general improvement in living standard in the State. The Committee therefore, impresses upon the Ministry of ARI and
Coir Board to work out a time bound programme for employment generation by utilizing the potential available in the
State of West Bengal.    (Para 3.2.4)
A SEPARATE CELL FOR THE COIR INDUSTRY IN THE RESPECTIVE DEPARTMENTS OF INDUSTRY.
         The Committee made recommendation for advising the respective State and UT Government for setting up a
separate cell for the Coir Industries in their Department of Small Scale Industries and endowing district industries center
or the district rural development agencies of the concerned districts to act as nodal agency for accelerated proliferation
of Coir Industries in West Bengal and Andaman and Nicobar. The Committee would like to know whether the Ministry
of ARI has communicated to the Government of West Bengal and Andaman and Nicobar in line-with recommendation
of the Committee, if yes, the response of those Government and if not, the reasons therefor. The Committee would also
like to know whether the Coir Board had approached the State and UT Government for providing technical support for
development and production of Coir Industries. The Committee would like to know further as to what actions have been
taken for renovating and modernization of showroom - come sales depot at Kolkata and setting up of a outlet of the Coir
Board at Port Blair and Car Nicobar.     (Para 3.3.3)
STEPS TO PROMOTE FAIR COMPETITION AMONG PRODUCERS AND EXPORTERS OF COIR AND
COIR PRODUCTS
         The Committee is pleased to note the readiness of Coir Board for extending all assistance to producers and
exporters regulating fair competition through improvement in quality standards, at the same time the Committee would
like to know as to what action have been taken on the part of the Coir Board for formation of manufacturers consortia
and setting up Common Facility Centre (CFC) for which the coir board is giving maximum priority. An early decision
in this regard on the part of the coir board would be helpful in promoting and in fact ensuring fair competition among
producers and exporters in exporting coir and coir
products.                                                                                                        (Para 3.4.3)
MARKETING  AND  SALES  OF  COIR  PRODUCTS  IN  THE  DOMESTIC  MARKET
         The Committee reiterate that the Coir Board should chalk out effective marketing strategy for promotion and
enhancement of Sale turn over of coir products in the domestic market so that the incremental change in total sales
turnover can be quantified and measured in realistic and observable terms. The Committee desires that the Coir Board
should come out with massive strategy and make an all out efforts for the marketing of the Coir products of Andaman &
Car Nicobar as there is a problem in the local consumption of coir products in the Union Territory.                 (Para
3.5.3)
         The Ministry of A&RI may assess the requirement of Funds under the plan programme for the purpose of
popularising and marketing of coir products through electronics and print media publicity and accordingly approach the
Ministry of Finance for the budgetary support.                                                                                             (Para 3.5.4)
COOPERATIVISATION SCHEME
         The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of A&RI in tandem with the Coir Board should chalk out the
detailed course of Action for the purpose of making the co-opertivisation scheme a social movement for revitalisation of
Coir Industries in West Bengal and Andaman and Nicobar Islands. As regards the matching funds for the purpose the
Ministry of A&RI and the coir Board may estimate the requirement of fund and approach the concerned government
department for approval and release of fund without delay.                                                                                        (Para
3.6.3)
PROBLEMS BEING FACED BY COIR INDUSTRY
         Although the Committee is pleased to note the preparedness of the Ministry of ARI for extending all support to the
Government of West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar Islands for the development of Coir Industry but the Committee
would like to observe that the Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries has to play pro-active role to take initiative steps in
identifying problems being faced by the units engaged in coir industries and providing suitable solutions including the
infrastructural facilities. The Committee would like to know whether the Ministry of ARI had forwarded the

157thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/157threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:25]
recommendation of the Committee to the Government of West Bengal and the Andaman & Nicobar Islands for enacting
the suitable legislation to prevent the use of coconut husk as a fuel, if yes the response of the respective government and
if not the reason therefor.         (Para 3.6.6)
         The Committee feels that the Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries should come out with detailed course of
Action for ‘Awareness Creation Programmes’ among the coconut growers and the common man highlighting the socio-
economic importance in consultation with the Coir Board and forward it to the Government of West Bengal and
Andaman and Nicobar Islands. A co-ordination mechanism contriving of the representatives of Coir Board and the
representatives of State and UT Government may be set-up and the participation of NGOs in the Awareness programme
may be promoted.       (Para 3.6.7)
         The Committee would like to know as to what course of action were taken/could be taken for technological
upgradation strong thing of R&D, modernisation of existing equipments and training and employment of rural artisans
to enhance the productivity of coir products.                                                                                        (Para 3.6.8)
HRD- RELATED ACTIVITIES
         The Committee is pleased to note that the field level training under various scheme and Quality Improvement
Camps and Entrepreneurship Development Programmes for development of human resources are under way, however,
the Committee feels that the effectiveness of these programmes need to be re-examined objectively in terms of total
outcome of these programmes i.e. no. of persons trained, no. of entrepreneurs initiating coir units and product
diversification.         (Para 3.7.3)
         The Committee feels that one institution namely, National Coir Training Design Centre at Alleppey (Kerala) for
imparting training on latest technologies of processing and manufacturing of coir is not sufficient for whole of India.
Therefore, the Committee recommends that the four Regional Coir Training and Development in Tanjavur in Tamil
Nadu, Arsikera in Karnataka, Bhubaneswar in Orissa and Rajamundry in Andhra Pradesh and field training units
attached to Regional Coir Training and Design Centres should be re-opened in consultation with the Governments of
respective States enplaning the head for training for proliferation of coir
industries.                                                                 (Para 3.7.4)
CREDIT FLOW TO COIR INDUSTRIES IN WEST BENGAL AND ANDAMAN & NICOBAR
         The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries are making serious efforts for
ensuring adequate credit flow to Coir Industry for technology up-gradation, opening new avenues for fresh
entrepreneurs, revitalization and augmentation of training centers, promotion of cluster development programmes etc.
The Committee desires that the Ministry of ARI should take-up follow-up action with the Reserve Bank of India for
segregated allocation for coir industry in the Bank’s credit plan. Once the segregated allocation for Coir Industries in the
Bank’s Credit Plan is made the district level credit plan may be chalked out by the Banks. The Ministry of ARI in
tandem with the Coir Board should chalk out the requirement of credit for the coir industry for expansion and
proliferation of coir units in various States including the West Bengal and Andaman and Nicobar Islands. The Ministry
of ARI should communicate to State and Union Territory Governments to initiate necessary action in association with
Coir Board for optimum utilisation of credit earmarked for coir industries. A co­operative and communicative centre-
state relation is essential for the furtherance and proliferation of Coir industries. It is the Coir Board and the Ministry of
ARI which must undertake the lead role in associating and motivating the State Government for chalking out district
level credit plan and involving the NGOs for expansion and promotion of Coir Industries in various states including the
non­-traditional coir States.                                (Para 3.8.3)
TRANSPORT SUBSIDY TO THE COIR INDUSTRIES IN ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR
         The Committee reiterates that Andaman and Nicobar Islands being at locational disadvantages must be granted
transport subsidy and freight subsidy for the promotion and proliferation of Coir Industries in the union territory. The
Committee reiterates that the Ministry of ARI should take-up this issue with the Ministry of Finance without further
delay.    (Para 3.9.2)
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMITTEE IN RESPECT OF INTERIM REPLIES OF THE
MINISTRY
         The Committee observes that in respect of the recommendations placed in Chapter-IV, the Ministry has furnished
the interim replies, therefore, the Committee desires that in respects of these recommendations, the Ministry should
furnish the final replies, in detail and to the point, along with the outcome of action taken, as per the intention and spirit

157thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/157threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:25]
of the recommendations of the Committee.                                                                                                         (Para 4.7.1)
MINUTES
I
FIRST  MEETING
         The Sub-Committee-IV for Action Taken Reports (of Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Industry) met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 8 th December, 2004 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House,
New Delhi.
         PRESENT
   1.   Shri Santosh Bagrodia   —   Chairman
   2.   Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato   —   Convenor
         RAJYA  SABHA
   3.   Prof. M.M. Agarwal - Convenor
   4.   Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
   5.   Dr. K. Malaisamy
         LOK SABHA
   6.   Shri Sunil Khan
         SECRETARIAT
         Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
         Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
         Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
         Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
2.      At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the Chairman of the Committee and Members of the Sub-Committee-IV to
the meeting. The Sub-committee, thereafter, took up the following Reports for consideration:-
(i)    154 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 129th
Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in the Regions of Delhi, Noida and Ghaziabad (Ministry of Small Scale
Industries).
 (ii)   155 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 130th
Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in Himachal Pradesh (Ministry of Small Scale Industries).
(iii)   156th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 131th
Report on constraints in Industrial Development of North Eastern Region (Ministry of Heavy Industries and
Public Enterprises).
(iv)   157 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 141st
Report on Potential of Coir Industries in West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar (Ministry of Agro and Rural
Industries).
(v)   158th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 143rd
Report on Level Playing Field for the Indian Capital Goods Industry (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises).
(vi)   159 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s I45th
Report on Problem being faced by Small Scale Industries in the Procurement of Steel (Ministry of Small Scale
Industries).
3.      After a brief discussion, all the above reports were adopted by the Sub-Committee.
4.      The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M.
X
TENTH  MEETING
         The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 9 th
December, 2004 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

157thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/157threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:25]
         PRESENT
   1.   Shri Santosh Bagrodia    —    Chairman
         RAJYA  SABHA
   2.   Prof. M.M. Agarwal
   3.   Shri Surendra Lath
   4.   Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
   5.   Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   6.   Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
   7.   Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
         LOK  SABHA
   8.   Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
   9.   Shri Subhash Desmukh
10.   Shri Sunil Khan
11.   Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato
12.   Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel
13.   Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
14.   Shri Ganesh Singh
15.   Shri Chandramani Tripathi
16.   Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
         SECRETARIAT
         Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
         Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
         Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
2.      At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting. The Committee, thereafter,
took up following Reports for consideration:
(i)    154 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 129th
Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in the Regions of Delhi, Noida and Ghaziabad (Ministry of Small Scale
Industries).
(ii)    155 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 130th
Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in Himachal Pradesh (Ministry of Small Scale Industries).
(iii)   156th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 131st
Report on constraints in Industrial Development of North Eastern Region (Ministry of Heavy Industries and
Public Enterprises).
(iv)   157 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 141st
Report on Potential of Coir Industries in West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar (Ministry of Agro and Rural
Industries).
(v)   158th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 143rd
Report on Level Playing Field for the Indian Capital Goods Industry (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises).
(vi)   159th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 145th
Report on Problem being faced by Small Scale Industries in the Procurement of Steel (Ministry of Small Scale
Industries).
3.      After a brief discussion, all the reports were adopted by the Committee without any modification and decided to
present / lay from 154th to 156th Reports on 16th December 2004 and from 157th to 159th Reports on the following day
i.e. 17th December, 2004.

157thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/157threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:25]
4.      The Chairman, then, nominated Prof. M.M. Agarwal, in his absence Shri Surendra Lath, and in their absence of
Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra for Rajya Sabha and Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato and in his absence Shri Sunil Khan for Lok
Sabha for presenting / laying 154th to 156th Reports to both the Houses of the Parliament on 16th December, 2004. The
Chairman nominated Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy and in his absence Shri Suresh Bhardwaj and in their absence of Dr. K.
Malaisamy in Rajya Sabha and Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria and in his absence Shri Swadesh Chakraborty in Lok Sabha for
presenting / laying 157 th to 159 th Reports of the Committee to both the Houses of the Parliament on 17 th December,
2004.
5.      The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M.