PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 229
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 27 MARCH, 2012)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 27 MARCH, 2012)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 27 MARCH, 2012)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 27 MARCH, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2012/CHAITRA, 1934 (SAKA)MARCH, 2012/CHAITRA, 1934 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY 
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON INDUSTR Y
TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY-NINTH REPORT
ON
THE CREDIT FACILITIES TO MS AND ME SECTOR
PERTAINING TO
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY-NINTH REPORT
ON
THE CREDIT FACILITIES TO MS AND ME SECTOR
PERTAINING TO
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 27 TH MARCH, 2012)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 27 TH MARCH, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2012/CHAITRA, 1934 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—10
4. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ....................... 1 1—12
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 13—16

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Tiruchi Siva — Chairman
2. Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy
3. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
4. Shri Ashk Ali Tak
5. Shri K.B. Shanappa
6. Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor
7. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
8. Shri Srinjoy Bose
9. Shri Nandamuri Harikrishna
10. Dr. Vijay Mallya
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
12. Shri Kamlesh Balmiki
13. Shri Sabbam Hari
14. Shrimati Poonamben Veljibhai Jat
15. Shri Ramsingh Kaswan
16. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar
17. Shrimati Putul Kumari
18. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
19. Shrimati Ingrid Mcleod
20. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal
21. Shri Somen Mitra
22. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey
23. Shri Kishn V . Patel
24. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
25. Shri B.Y . Raghavendra
26. Shri Ramsingbhai Patalbhai Rathwa
27. Shri Ijyaraj Singh
28. Shri E.G . Sugavanam
29. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai
30. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
31. Shri Subhash Bapurao Wankhede
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry,
having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred and Twenty-Ninth
Report on Credit Facility to MSME sector pertaining to Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises.
2. I thank the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, representatives of the Public
Sector Banks, SIDBI, Associations in MSME sector and Department of Financial Services for
furnishing their valuable inputs for incorporating the same in this report.
3. The Committee in its meeting held on the 19
th January, 2012 considered and adopted the
report.
TIRUCHI SIV A
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
January, 2012 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry

1
REPORT
The micro, small and medium enterprises constitute the backbone of our economy. The
buoyancy and dynamism of economic growth and its inclusiveness greatly depend on vibrant and
competitive micro, small and medium enterprises. In fact, some of the developed countries of the
world such as Japan and Switzerland owe their phenomenal economic success to robust medium
and small enterprises which not only provide employment opportunities to vast sections of
population but also significantly boost their exports.
2. In India, the commitment of the Government, particularly the Union Government, to foster
a culture for the growth and expansion of energetic micro, small and medium enterprises was best
demonstrated when a separate Ministry for dealing with such enterprises was created in the year
2007. Mindful of the fact that such enterprises constitute the engine of economic growth and are
at the heart of equitable and inclusive development of economy, the Government has taken several
steps for their onward progress. The numerous benefits of medium, small and micro enterprises in
terms of their employment potential at low capital cost and the scope for greater absorption of labour
underline the significance of these enterprises over large scale industries and corporate giants. It is
noteworthy that the MSME segment of our economy is almost 90% of the total enterprises and their
contributions for industrial production and exports is quite huge. The dispersal of such enterprises
across the diverse regions of our country, including the remote areas, invests them with locational
advantage to further the cause of industrialization and industrial production thereby strengthening our
industrial economy. The notable feature of the MSME sector is that its growth rate is much ahead
of the growth of the overall industrial sector. In the context of the financial crisis which originated
in the USA and resulted in economic downturn and recession in large parts of the world, the MSMEs
in India helped our economy to withstand such crises and thereby underlined their adaptability,
flexibility and innovativeness in the face of such problems and challenges. The resilience of our
economy, therefore, critically depends on the resilience of the MSMEs.
3. The magnitude of importance of the medium small and micro enterprises for our economy
can be assessed from that fact that these enterprises are responsible for almost 40% of the total
industrial production, 95% of the industrial units and 30% of the exports. It has been irrefutably
recorded that the MSMEs grow at a higher rate than the growth rate of the industrial sector. The
figures below from 2002-08 provide the comparative growth rates of production of MSMEs in
relation to the industrial sector which prove the point that MSMEs have comparatively have higher
growth rate than the industrial sector.
Year Growth rates of 2001-02 base IIP Over  all Industrial Growth
(%age) rates of sector (%age)#
2002-03 8.68 5.70
2003-04 9.64 7.00
2004-05 10.88 8.40
2005-06 12.32 8.20
2006-07 12.60 11.60
2007-08 13.00* 8.50
2008-09 Not available 2.80
2009-10 Not available 10.40
* Projected, IIP-Index of Industrial Production
# Source Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation website-http://www.mospi.gov.in

2
4. The significance of the MSMEs has to be understood not only from the point of view of
the growth of GDP but also from the perspective of inclusive growth which would be of critical
relevance for women, minorities and Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. It is well-known that
the MSME sector provide the maximum opportunities for both self-employment and jobs after
agriculture sector. The all embracing scope of the MSMEs can be understood from the fact that
over 65 million people spread across towns, cities, slums, villages and hamlets have been working
in these enterprises employing their traditional wisdom and practices, cultural resources, skilled
hands and business acumen. In spite of the overwhelming importance of the MSMEs for our
economy and people these did not get deserved attention. In fact, the Eleventh Five Year Plan
document for the period 2007-12 noted that, “... in successive Five Year Plans this sector has not
received its due”. In spite of the fact there are wide varieties of MSMEs in India they always have
common problems and challenges which are listed below:–
• Lack of availability of adequate and timely credit;
• High cost of credit;
• Collateral requirements;
• Limited access to equity capital and venture capital;
• Problems in supply to Government Departments and Agencies;
• Problems of storage, designing, packaging and product display;
• Lack of access to global markets;
• Inadequate infrastructure facilities, including power, water, roads, etc.;
• Low technology levels and lack of access no modern technology;
• Lack of skilled manpower for manufacturing, services, marketing, etc.,
• Multiplicity of layout laws and complicated procedures associated with compliance of
such laws;
• Absence of a suitable mechanism which enables the quickly revival of viable sick
enterprises and allows unviable entities to close down speedily;
• Issues relating to taxation, both direct and indirect, and procedures thereof;
• Limited buyers with rigid terms mostly in favour of buyers; and
• Procurement of raw material at a competitive cost.
5. Of all the challenges enumerated above, the access to credit facility constitutes the key
challenge. It is rightly said that credit is the lifeline of the MSMEs. If this lifeline is blocked and
chocked the MSMEs would collapse resulting in breakdown of our economy, loss of livelihood of
our people and high unemployment rate. People working in the MSMEs in the remote frontiers of
our country or in the small towns, urban areas and cities and engaged in variety of activities such
as food processing, weaving and establishment of small industrial enterprises always complain of
dearth of credit and necessary capital to sustain their economic activities.
6. The Eleventh Five Year Plan document observed that, “The percentage share of the MSEs
(erstwhile small scale industries) in non-food Bank Credit declined from 15.1% in 1990-91 to 8%
in March, 2007. The fall in the percentage share of credit to MSEs under priority sector can, in
part, be attributed to the expanding scope of the priority sector lending to accommodate fast-
growing areas such as housing, exports, etc. As per the Third All-India SSI Census (2001-02), only

3
14.2% of the registered and 3.09% of the unregistered MSEs availed of bank finance. Though the
Nayak Committee (set up by RBI in 1991-92) had recommended working capital to the SSEs at
20% of their annual turnover, SSI and KVI units together received only 13.3% of their production
value from scheduled commercial banks (SCBs) in 2005-06.”
7. By successfully addressing the issues of credit facility to MSME sector, the problems faced
by this sector can be greatly solved. It is heartening to note that a shift has taken place from
welfare approach to empowerment approach to deal with the MSMEs. This means that the MSMEs
need to be empowered to stand on their own and successfully face the competition. Access to
credit by the MSMEs will greatly empower them as the engines of economic and inclusive growth.
8. Presently, the MSMEs face host of problems to get adequate credit from the financial
institutions. First and foremost is their low capital base. It is compounded by the complex
procedures to apply for loans and credit. There is also the issue of cumbersome method of listing
an MSME enterprise. The compliance requirements are also quite strict and stringent. The cost of
credit is also high. There is the persistent issue of high cost of raising funds through Initial Public
Offering (IPO). A strong mindset has been formed within the scheduled commercial bank which
favorably aligns with the interest of the corporate sector. It has generated an outlook that the
MSMEs are financially unviable as compared to the large corporate sector. As a result of this
mindset, the banks have an inbuilt bias for the corporate sector as opposed to the MSME sector.
9. The Prime Minister of our country Dr. Manmohan Singh while giving away the National
Awards to Micro Small and Medium Enterprises on 28 August 2009 had said, “Our Government
is committed to double the flow of credit to MSMEs in five years. I note with some satisfaction
that loans outstanding to this sector from the public sector banks have registered a growth of close
to 25% during the one year. Today we have felicitated some public sector banks for their
commendable role in providing credit to MSMEs. I would urge other banks also to ensure higher
flow of funds to these enterprises. Greater availability of credit can contribute to the faster
modernization and expansion of these enterprises and the augmentation of their productivity and
competitiveness. I would urge MSMEs to also explore new and emerging sources of finance such
as venture capital and private equity.”
10. In spite of such pronouncements at the highest level of the Government, the MSMEs
always find it difficult to avail of the credit facilities from banks and financial institutions.
11. One of the reasons for such restricted access to credit is lack of information on the matter.
This is particularly so for the tiny segments of the small and medium enterprises which because
of non-formal business practices remain in a disadvantageous position to get opportunities for
credit facilities available through network of banks.
12. However, it is worthwhile to quote here the guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank of India
for ensuring sufficient credit to the micro enterprises within the MSME sector.
a. 40 per cent of the total advances to MSE sector should go to micro (manufacturing)
enterprises having investment in plant and machinery up to Rs. 5 lakh and micro
(service) enterprises having investment in equipment up to Rs. 2 lakh; and
b. 20 per cent of the total advances to MSE sector should go to micro (manufacturing)
enterprises with investment in plant and machinery above Rs.5 lakh and up to Rs. 25
lakh, and micro (service) enterprises with investment in equipment above Rs. 2 lakh and
up to Rs. 10 lakh. (Thus 60 per cent of MSEs advances should go to the micro
enterprises).
c. Banks are advised to achieve the 60% target as above, in terms of the recommendations
of the Prime Minister Task Force, the allocation of 60% of the MSE advances to the

4
Micro Enterprises is to be achieved in stages viz. 50% in the year 2010-11,55% in the
year 2011-12 and 60% in the year, 2013.
13. The Committee has been informed that in August 2005, Government of India had announced
a ‘Policy Package for stepping up credit to SME sector which emphasized all Public Sector Banks
have to fix their own targets for funding Micro and Small Enterprises in order to achieve 20% year
on year growth in the sector. The details of the No. of accounts and outstanding credit to MSE
from Public Sector Banks for the year 2008-09 and 2010 are shown below:–
(No. of A/cs in lakh, amount in Rs. crore)
2007-08 (at the end 2008-09 (at the end 2009-10 (at the end
of March, 2008) of March, 2009 of March, 2010)*
No. of MSE 39.12 43.02 74.41
Accounts
Amount 1,51,137 1,91,307.35 2,78,397.86
outstanding
* Provisional
14. Banks were also advised to make 10% increase in number of units under Micro Enterprises.
In addition to these, banks have to grant collateral free loans to MSEs upto Rs. 10.00 lakh and
cover all such eligible accounts under Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme for Micro and Small
Enterprises (CGMSE).
15. With the objective to make available credit to Micro and Small Enterprises particularly Micro
Enterprises for loans upto Rs. 1 crore without collateral/third party guarantee Government of India
launched the Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme in August, 2000 jointly with SIDBI.
16. The Scheme covers credit facilities extended by MLIs (Member Lending Institutions) to a
single eligible borrower as under:–
Category Upto Rs. 5 Above Rs. 5 lakh Above Rs. 50 lakh
Lakh Upto Rs. 50 lakh upto Rs. 100 lakh
Micro Enterprises 85% of the 75% of the amount Rs. 37.50 lakh plus
amount in in default subject to 50% of amount in
default subject to a maximum of default above Rs. 50
a maximum of Rs. 37.50 1akh lakh subject to overall
Rs. 4.25 lakh ceiling of Rs. 62.50 lakh
Women Entrepreneurs/ 80% of the Rs.40 lakh plus 50%
Units located in North amount in default of amount in default
East Region (incl. subject to a above Rs. 50 lakh
Sikkim) (other than maximum of subject to overall
credit facility upto Rs. 40 lakh ceiling of Rs. 65 lakh
Rs. 5 lakh to Micro
Enterprises)
All other category of 75% of the amount Rs. 37.50 lakh plus
borrowers in default subject 50 % of amount in
to a maximum of default above Rs. 50
Rs. 37.50 lakh lakh subject to overall
ceiling of Rs. 62.50 lakh

5
17. The upper limit for Credit Facility in the Micro and Small Enterprises is Rs. 50 lakh for
Regional Rural Banks/Financial Institutions and Rs. 100 lakh for Scheduled Commercial Banks and
select Financial Institutions. As a Member Lending Institutions, the cost of CGTMSE cover loan
upto Rs. 5 lakh is borne by SIDBI and in the Financial Year 2010-11 was Rs. 4,39,15,037 as
Guarantee fee whereas Rs. 1,90,76,164 towards Service Fee has been paid by the SIDBI.
18. The Committee was informed that in the event of default by the borrower in payment of
the guarantee fee and annual service fee on the due dates thereof, SIDBI may in its absolute
discretion (but shall not be bound), pay the guarantee fee and/or annual service fee to CGTMSE
by debiting the same to the loan account of the Borrower. In the event of payment of the guarantee
fee and/or annual service fee by SIDBI to CGTMSE, the Borrower is liable to pay to SIDBI the
said amount(s) forthwith together with interest and other charges at the rate and in the manner
payable on the amount of the loan from the date of such payment by SIDBI. The payment(s) or
any part thereof so made by and remaining unpaid by the Borrower shall be payable/recoverable
along with the other dues/outstanding in the account and all the securities created for the due
payment of all the amounts dues on account of the loan is available therefor. Default in payment
of guarantee fee and or annual service fee is treated as a breach of terms and conditions of the
loan agreement for all purposes.
19. SIDBI is operating refinancing scheme through a network of over 900 Primary Lending
Institutions (PLIs) which includes State Financial Corporations, State Industries Development
corporations, State Industrial Investment corporations, Scheduled Commercial Banks, Regional
Rural Banks and Scheduled & Urban Co-operative Banks. The Government of India from time to
time has provided funds to SIDBI viz. Rs. 2000 crores MSME Refinance Fund in 2008-09,
Rs. 2000 crores Risk Capital Fund in 2008-09 and 2009-10, Rs. 7000 crores from RBI for
indirect lending through Banks and State Financial Corporation as well as direct lending to MSMEs
in 2008-09, Rs. 4000 crores as MSEs Refinance Fund in 2009-10 to incentivise Banks and State
Financial Corporations to lend to MSMEs, Rs. 4000 crores MSEs Refinance Fund for period of
three years in 2010-11.
20. On a query to SIDBI to minimize the NPAs, the Committee was informed that SIDBI has
taken initiatives of setting up of India SME Asset Reconstruction Company Ltd. for resolving the
issue of Non-Performing Assets. It is country’s first MSME focused Asset Reconstruction
Company striving to maximize recovery through innovative resolution methods. The Committee was
also informed that SIDBI has no direct link with the NPAs of banking system.
21. In reply to a question regarding engagement of SIDBI in refinancing business, it was
informed that it is a primarily Refinancing Institute as categorized by RBI and providing
Refinancing support to Banks, State Financial Corporation, State Industries Development
Corporation having branches all over the country. Further, it was informed, that SIDBI cannot
compete with banks as the funds it lends directly to the MSME sector, in the first place are
obtained from banks and hence, it would largely have a higher cost structure.
22. It is felt that the role of SIDBI as a refinancing bank under the RBI guidelines may be
relooked at to provide more direct financing to the MSMES. This argument flows from the
proposition that the SIDBI as the apex financial institution for the MSME sector should be directly
involved in lending to such sector. However, the SIDBI representatives argued before the
Committee that it did not have adequate branches like other commercial banks to undertake
responsibilities for direct lending to the MSME sector. However, the Committee feels that if
SIDBI resorts to  direct financing then the quantum of credit flow for the MSME sector would
be vastly increased.

6
23. It is a fact that the large amount of SIDBI is used for refinancing the scheduled
commercial banks for the purpose of disbursing loans to MSME sector. It is also a fact that
SIDBI is also engaged in direct financing to the MSMEs. However, it is using less amount
of money for direct financing. The Ministry of MSME feels that the role of SIDBI in direct
financing should be increased for augmenting the volume and value of credit to the MSME
sector. Since the credit facility to the MSMEs has to be expanded, it is important to relook
at the role of SIDBI as an institution to directly finance the MSME sector. This requires
a major policy decision to reorient the functioning of the SIDBI from a refinancing
institution to a direct financing institution. It means that the capacity of the SIDBI in this
respect has to be augmented. The paramount concern of the MSME sector is access to
credit. If the reorientation of SIDBI as discussed above would accelerate the credit to
MSMEs it is worthwhile to give that much needed reorientation.
24. There is a provision, as per the Reserve Bank of India directive that collateral free loans
upto Rs. l0 lakhs would be given by the banks. The relevant portion of the circular of the RBI
is reproduced below:
“Banks are mandated not to accept collateral security in the case of loans upto Rs.I0 lakh
extended to units in the MSE sector. Banks are also advised to extend collateral-free loans
upto Rs. 10 lakh to all units financed under the Prime Minister Employment Generation
Programme of KVIC.
Banks may, on the basis of good track record and financial position of the MSE units,
increase the limit of dispensation of collateral requirement for loans up to Rs.25 lakh (with
the approval of the appropriate authority). Banks are advised to strongly encourage their
branch level functionaries to avail of the Credit Guarantee Scheme cover, including making
performance in this regard a criterion in the evaluation of their field staff.”
25. No bank is giving such loans without taking resort to credit guarantee fund. While the RBI
directive refers to the collateral free loan, it at the same time, stresses on credit guarantee fund
to disburse such collateral free loan. The Committee was informed that till September, 2011
over 6.39 lakh guarantees for an amount of Rs.28,600 crore have been approved under CGS,
out of which 90% guarantees were for loan up to Rs.10 lakh. It is evident that the banks
have been using the credit guarantees funds to issue collateral free loans.  There is thus an
apparent contradiction in the RBI directive. It thus appears that collateral free loan seems to be a
misnomer. The Secretary, Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises while deposing before
the Committee stated that, “... cases upto ten lakh have absolutely no other way except this
particular guarantee fund because no bank is actually following the RBI directive of not taking
collateral. So, it has been substituted by a credit guarantee by the Government.”
26. The Committee regrets that collateral free loans are not issued to the MSME sector
without use of the credit guarantee fund. In other words, the banks require some
guarantee from the Government to issue collateral free loans. The banks must develop a
healthy culture to examine the request for credit from the MSME and actually lend them
such credit without collateral and that too by not getting support from the credit
guarantee fund. The Reserve Bank of India should also seriously consider this issue and
monitor the Banks whether they are adhering to the instructions. Accordingly, the RBI
must revise its directive. The banks must put on their website the number of loans
sanctioned by them without collateral security. The Secretary, Ministry of MSME informed
the Committee that there is a fair degree of sensitivity at the higher level officers of the banks
to the issue of credit to MSMEs without collateral. The problem is manifested at the branch level
of the banks. There is persistent feeling at the branch level that the entire risk of giving such
loans is taken by the Branch Manager. The Committee feels that if the senior officers of

7
banks support the branch level officers in this regard then the problems would be greatly
addressed.
27. The MSME sector has been accorded status of a priority sector for the purpose of giving
credit to it. It is important, therefore, to diversify the credit base for the MSMEs. Till last year
there was no opportunity available for the MSMEs to mobilize funds from the open market and
raise capital from investors. Unlike the big business which rely on stock exchange the MSME had
no such institutional mechanism at the market level to get capital resources for their sustenance
and growth. The Committee notes with satisfaction that a new exchange called SME
exchange has been approved for mobilizing capital for small and medium enterprises. This
will help to source funds beyond banks and financial institutions.  It provides valuable
opportunity to get access to equity financing. In most of the developed economies of the world
the medium and small enterprises established their stock exchange for strengthening their financial
strength by raising equity capital from investors in the market.
The Committee notes with satisfaction that a decision has been taken to bring down
the size of the company which can come forward to use the stock exchange for mobilizing
money from the market. It also notes with satisfaction that a campaign has been launched
to generate awareness about the existence of such an exchange for the small and medium
enterprises. In availing of the stock exchange facility, the medium and small enterprises will not
only augment their financial capability but also enhance their credibility before their customers. It
will also create competition among small and medium enterprises and thereby expand the scope of
their growth. The representative of the Bombay Stock Exchange while deposing before the
Committee informed that the Exchange for the medium and small enterprises will adopt a cluster
based approach to help the sector for mobilization of public equity. The Committee
wholeheartedly welcomes the decision to establish such an Exchange and hopes that it would
meet the long felt need of the MSME sector for access to finance and resources of the
market.
28. During 2011, the Committee took up the issue of credit facility to MSME sector very
vigorously and interacted with the officials of the several banks, viz., Canara Bank, Vijaya Bank,
Union Bank of India, SIDBI, Syndicate Bank, State Bank of Mysore, Indian Overseas Bank, Central
Bank of India, Dena Bank, Bank of Baroda, Bank of India, State Bank of India and State Bank of
Bikaner & Jaipur. These interactions took place in cities like Mumbai, Bangalore, Chennai, Goa,
Calcutta, etc. During the examination of the policies of these banks vis-a.-vis the MSME sector,
it was found that mostly the bankers and lending institutions do not adopt a helpful attitude for
disbursing loans to the MSMEs. The Committee strongly feels that the bankers and lending
institutions have a legal and moral duty to support the entrepreneurs who are willing to
take risk to do business and employ their skills.  It is extremely important to extend the helping
hand to such entrepreneurs who would like to be self-employed and minimize their dependence on
Government for earning their livelihood. Availability of credit to such entrepreneurs without much
complication will go a long way in addressing the unemployment problems of our country. The
courteous behaviour on the part of the branch manager of a bank to the entrepreneur who is
willing to establish an MSME unit will encourage and generate hope in him/her to look forward
to a bright and secure future. It has been noted by the Committee that the experience of the
entrepreneurs with the bank officials are not heartwarming. The Members of the
Committee felt that the branch manager has to warmly deal with the entrepreneurs and
adopt a friendly approach to them for setting up medium, small and micro enterprises.  At
a time when employment opportunities at the Government level are shrinking and the State is
withdrawing for many activities, it is important that people should be encouraged to get self-
employed. It is in this context that the adequate flow of credit to the MSME sector assumes critical
significance.

8
29. It is also worthwhile to note that gradual opening of the economy and the reforms it
underwent created more challenges to the MSME sector. For instance, the integration of Indian
economy with the global economy or the globalization process. itself has affected the operations
of banks and other institutions. We have witnessed the progressive deregulation of interest rates.
There has been liberalization of domestic capital market and entry of new private sector banks. All
these developments have made our banking sector more competitive. It is, therefore, important that
the credit flow to the MSME sector must improve by withstanding the influence of globalization
process.
30. One of the reasons behind inadequate flow of credit to the MSME sector is the
unavailability of information and guidelines in this regard to the people who are owning or manning
the MSME. The policies and guidelines formulated by the boards of banks and the instructions and
guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank of India concerning credit facility to MSME sector must be
displayed in the websites of the bank including the Small Industry Development Bank of India
(SIDBI). This proactive disclosure of the policies would go a long way in sensitizing the
entrepreneurs about the financial facility provided by the banks to start a business venture. The
Committee therefore recommends that the banks may also prominently display all the
facilities/schemes offered by them to small entrepreneurs at each of their branches.
31. The Committee was informed by the office of the Development Commissioner, MSME
that Small Enterprises Financial Centres (SEFCs) have been set up since, 2005 to advance
the research and practices of SME financing and growth in India. But it observes that out
of the total 34 States including Union territories only 18 have been covered till date by
setting up 31 SEFCs.
32. The cause of greater credit facility to MSME sector can be better served by bringing about
the introduction of electronic tracking system whereby all the applications right from their initiation
to the culmination can be monitored electronically both by the banks and the applicants. In fact,
the Prime Minister’s Task Force on the MSME sector recommended for the widespread adoption
of the electronic tracking system for greater transparency and effective disposal of such
application. The Committee therefore is of the view that all the banks must adopt this
approach and display in their websites the number of applications received for credit for
MSME sector, the number rejected, the number of applications approved and the reasons for
rejections or approval. The Reserve Bank of India must take the lead in this regard and
ensure that all banks show such details in their websites.  The Committee was informed by
the Secretary, MSME that such electronic tracking systems have been very effectively adopted in
case of implementation of Prime Minster Employment Generation Programme. The RBI must make
a structural arrangement so that an applicant could track its application by electronic means and
would come to known about its fate.
33. The Committee was informed by the MSME Ministry that the RBI and Commercial Banks
which provide data to the Ministry concerning credit flow to the MSMEs at the end of the year
should provide such data on a quarterly or half yearly basis. It is felt by the MSME Ministry that
if such information could be made available to them then it would be possible to understand the
volume and value of the credit and accordingly take measures for expanding the flow of such
credit. The Committee strongly recommends that the RBI must provide such information to
the Ministry of MSME. RBI and Commercial Banks which provide data concerning credit
from Banks to MSMEs at tile end of the year should provide such data on a quarterly or
half yearly basis to MSME Ministry.
34. The Committee strongly recommends for implementation of the recommendations of
the PM’s Task Force on MSME concerning the credit issue.

9
35. On NPA the Committee was informed that a unit becomes NPA when it is not able to
service instalment and or interest for a period of 3 months on the loans availed from the Bank.
The reasons for default varies from case to case and generally may be listed as under:–
• Inability to market the products
• Longer realization period for goods supplied to buyers
• Diversion of funds for non productive purposes
• Technological obsolescence
• Non availability of raw materials, power, etc.,
• Labour problems
• Management problems
36. It was also informed that NPA can be checked by monitoring the account from the
beginning. Signs of irregularities should be detected at the early stage and remedial
measures should be taken. If the irregularities are due to the shortage of working capital
funds then Bank can review the sanctioned limit and enhance the same to meet the just
requirement of the borrower. If the irregularities are due to any other reason, Bank can
give suitable advice to the borrower for overcoming the problem. A periodical monitoring by
the banks could reduce the NPA.
37. The Committee was informed regarding the difference between a defaulter by circumstances
and willful defaulter. A willful default would be deemed to have occurred due to any of the
following reasons:–
1. The unit has defaulted in meeting its payment/repayment obligations to the lender even
when it has capacity to honour the said obligations.
2. The unit has defaulted in meeting its payment/repayment obligations to the lender and
has not utilized the finance from the lender for the specific purposes for which finance
was availed of but has diverted the funds for other purpose.
3. The unit has defaulted in meeting its payment/repayment obligations to the lender and
has siphoned off the funds so that the funds have not been utilized for the specific
purpose for which finance was availed of nor are the funds available with the unit in
the form of other assets.
4. The unit has defaulted in meeting its payment/repayment obligations to the lender and
has also disposed off or removed the movable fixed assets or immovable property given
by him or it for the purpose of securing a term loan without the knowledge of the bank/
lender.
38. Where as a default by circumstances is a situation wherein a borrower becomes defaulter
merely not to intentionally default his payment. He becomes defaulter for various reasons which
are beyond his control. The circumstances relate to external factors mainly demand/supply
conditions which pertains to poor demand of his product affecting his income, high input cost but
low income generation or less sales realization, changes in Government Policies, economic
meltdown, strikes in the company, death of the partners/directors, natural calamity etc.
39. On a query on safe exit route to MSEs declared unviable and not considered for revival and
rehabilitation, the Committee was informed to give safe exit route to MSEs declared non-viable,
Banks initiates action for recovery and in genuine cases even considers some concession in

10
contractual liability within the framework of Bank’s Recovery Policy. The basic concept of
Recovery Policy is to frame guidelines with a view to encourage compromise settlements and
accelerate recoveries within a reasonable period since legal measures for recovery result in long
drawn process involving huge cost.
40. Bank follow a very simple, scientific and transparent approach of negotiated Compromise/
One Time Settlement proposal to ensure recovery of dues to the maximum extent possible at a
minimum expense and within shortest possible time-frame.
41. As far as possible, settlement amounts are recovered in a lump sum. However, in case the
borrower is not in a position to repay the same in one lump sum and desires to repay in
instalments, maximum agreed period from the date of approval of compromise proposal is allowed
as per the policy. However, in certain cases where the borrowers need more time for repayment,
the cases are considered on a case to case basis and in genuine cases more time can be allowed
for payment of OTS amount.
42. The Committee interacted with the representatives of the associations of the MSMEs who
persistently placed before the Committee that the banks always ask for collateral security for giving
loans to them. They also informed the Committee that the paper works for the purpose of applying
for and getting a loan was too cumbersome and long drawn out. They further stated that many
banks demanded same documents time and again thereby delaying the processing of the applications
for loan and credit. One of the major problems highlighted by them was that the banking system
is not favourably disposed towards the MSME sector except those which can afford deposit and
collateral. The delay in the inter-bank communication vis-a-vis the applications for credit was also
placed before the Committee. It was stated that long time was taken to transmit instructions from
head office/regional office to the branch level. The Committee feels that it is a highly avoidable
delay when we have at our disposal information technology which can accelerate the flow
of information instantly without any cost.
43. It has been observed that banks adopt a common approach in dealing with large scale and
small scale units. The very nomenclature, medium small and micro enterprises, suggests that these
are small units and, therefore, a discerning attitude has to be adopted to deal with them. The usual
common approach adopted by banks to deal with large scale and small scale units for the purpose
of sanctioning loans to them must be altered. The banks must be sensitive to handle the MSMEs
and understand their credit requirements. It is a proven fact that the extent of default in paying
back the loan is less in case of MSMEs than the default at national level. Therefore it is not
prevalent to club both the large and small industries in one category for the purpose of giving them
credit.
44. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of MSME and various other departments
of the Central Government and the State Governments including the Department of Financial
Services should adopt a co-ordinated approach to compile the data concerning credit to the MSME
sector. In fact, in the absence of such data, it is impossible to assess the credit requirements of
the MSMEs which is so critical for inclusive economic growth.

11
11
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
1. The Committee observes that there should be adequate delegation of powers to the
officer working at branch level. Regular meetings with MSME entrepreneurs should be
conducted and procedural formalities to procure the credit should be simplified. Besides, a
time bound action for setting up of specialized branches and conducting sample surveys
pertaining MSME accounts is required on priority.
2. The Committee finds that the banks some time show reluctance in coming forward
to consider the credit requirement of the units under MSME sector. This attitude needs to
be changed and on the basis of the financial position of the units and their track record,
the flow of credit to MSME units should be made more smooth.
3. The Committee is of the view that as per RBI guidelines, credit flow to women
entrepreneurs must be augmented to bring more and more women to the mainstream of the
economic development. Keeping this in mind the women entrepreneurs should be allowed
loans on liberal and relaxed terms.
4. Keeping in view the global development in industrial sector and the competition
which has resulted in the improved working of the banks, the Committee is of the view that
RBI should adopt more liberal approach to encourage the banks for opening branches
specifically in industrial belts.
5. The Committee is of the opinion that the credit rating and risk assessment of the
SMEs should be taken into consideration by the bankers for reduction of their cost on loans
and structuring the rate of interest depending on the ratings.
6. The Committee understands that a Task Force under the Prime Minister has
prepared and submitted a report for the overall development of the MSME sector and made
a number of recommendations. The Committee therefore recommends that these
recommendations of the Task Force should be implemented in true spirit to support the
MSME sector at the earliest so that many more entrepreneurs could be benefitted.
7. Revival of sick SME has to be considered with sympathy by the banks and financial
institutions. The Committee, therefore, recommends that every State Government should come
forward with a support scheme, through District Industries Centres for revival of such units.
8. The Committee endorses the cluster based approach for growth and expansion of the
MSME. The banks must deal with such clusters to reduce their transaction cost and improve
their infrastructure and other facilities.
9. The Committee feels that each Bank should identify the branches having potential
for financing Micro and Small Enterprises for greater credit flow to this critical sector.
Online registration of application and tracking system should be made operational at the
earliest so as to check the status of such applications and speedy disposal of proposals from
Micro and Small Enterprises.
10. The Committee recommends that limit of the composite loan sanctioned by the
Banks and Financial Institutions should be fixed for all banks and both term loan and
working capital loan should be approved along with the project loan.

12
11. The Committee understands that the rating of the MSME sector as done by the
various credit rating agencies in co-ordination with NSIC and SIDBI should be more
transparent. The entrepreneur should be made to understand the shortcomings so that it
could try to improve its performance. It means that the rating scores should be discussed
with the borrower by the banker/credit rating agency without which improvement in rating
on the part of borrower would be difficult and could hinder the credit prospects and growth
of SMEs.
12. The Committee feels that to provide real advantage of finance and credit to MSME,
seminars, workshops, etc., should be organized on financial management as to enable the
MSME to effectively manage their funds, ensure regular repayments to the financial
institutions, avoid misuse of funds and prevent creation of non performing assets. It will
enable the MSME to apply for credits for establishing new ventures and expanding projects.
13. SIDBI has been created exclusively for promotion, financing and development of
MSME sector. It now operates under the administrative control of the Ministry of Finance.
The Committee feels that the Government should explore the possibility to bring SIDBI
under the Ministry of MSME so that its functions could be monitored by it for ensuring its
greater flow of credit to the MSME sector.
14. There is a general lack of publicity for the availability of the collateral free credit
facilities to MSME sector. The Committee, therefore, stresses upon all bankers to
prominently display the particulars of the concerned credit schemes at all the branches and
provide due publicity to them in electronic and print media. The Committee also
recommends that a campaign must be launched to spread awareness among entrepreneurs
about availability of such credit facilities.
15. When there is a dispute between entrepreneurs and banks concerning loans, the
entrepreneurs are driven from pillar to post to resolve the issue. As a matter of fact, the
entrepreneurs do not get relief at a reasonably short time. The Committee is of the opinion
that there should be a proper redressal mechanism at the circle level of the banks to
dispose of the cases quickly and effectively.
16. As a general practice, the banks expect account holders to provide all the papers in
multiple sets and that too on several occasions. The Committee is not happy with this
practice and urge upon all the banks to get rid of this cumbersome procedure and adopt a
simple and easy method so that entrepreneurs could apply for loans without much problem.

13
MINUTES

V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 19 th January, 2012 in Committee Room No.
53, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri Tiruchi Siva — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Sanjeeva Reddy
3. Shri Ashk Ali Tak
4. Shri K.B. Shanappa
5. Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor
6. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Kamlesh Balmiki
8. Shrimati Poonamben Veljibhai Jat
9. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
10. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar
11. Shri Somen Mitra
12. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey
13. Shri Ramsinhbhai Patalbhai Rathwa
14. Shri Bhihu Prasad Tarai
SECRETARIAT
Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Assistant Director
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and briefed them that the agenda of
the meeting was to consider and adopt the draft 229
th Report of the Committee on the Credit
facilities to MSME sector. He appraised that the Report was based on the findings of the
Committee’s study visits during 2011 and interactions with various Public Sector Banks and MSME
associations on the subject. Further, the draft report was placed before the Committee for
discussion and adoption. Thereafter, a brief discussion took place on the draft report and some
points were added to it and some others were deleted. The draft report was then unanimously
adopted.
15

16
2. The Chairman of the Committee apprised the Members about the efforts of the Committee
taken with the Ministry of Steel and Ministry of Heavy Industries that the Refractory unit of Burn
Standard Company Ltd. at Salem was undertaken by the Ministry of Steel which gave a great relief
to the employees of the unit of BSCL which was about to be closed. He informed the Members
that this was the great achievement of the Committee.
3. The Committee also decided to undertake a study visit to Thiruvanathapuram–Kochi–
Lakshadweep or to Kolkata–North East during the month of February, 2012.
The meeting adjourned at 11.50 
P.M.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.