104th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/104threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
ONE HUNDRED – FOURTH REPORT
 
ON
 
ACTION TAKEN  BY THE GOVERNMENT ON RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED  IN  COMMITTEE '
S  85TH   REPORT ON IMPLEMENTATION STATUS OF FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE-CUM-
RESTRUCTURING PACKAGE AND REVIVAL OF HINDUSTAN STEEL WORKS CONSTRUCTION 
LTD. (HSCL)  MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2002)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 19TH DECEMBER.,  2002)
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2002/AGRAHAYANA, 1924  (SAKA)
                                                       E-mail: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in
                                                              Website: http//parliamentofindia.nic.in
 
C O N T E N T S
 
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
                                                                       
2.         INTRODUCTION                                                                                                    
3.         REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                              
4.         OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE      
5.         MINUTES                                                            
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE
(Date of Constitution - 1st January, 2002  )
 
Dr. P.C. Alexander       — Chairman @
 
RAJYA SABHA
 

104th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/104threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
2.      Prof. M.M. Aggarwal
3.      Dr . Abrar Ahmad
4.      Shri Jayantilal Barot
5.      Shri Prasanta Chatterjee 
6.      Smt. Saroj Dubey
7.      Shri Faguni Ram
8.      Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
9.      Shri P.K. Maheshwari 
10.  Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
11.  Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
12.  Shri S. Sivasubramanian
13.  Smt. Sushree Devi
14.  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
15.  Vacant
 
LOK SABHA
 
16.  Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
17.  Kumari Mamata Banerjee
18.  Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
19.  Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
20.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das
21.  Shri Deepak Kumar
22.  Shri Thomas Hansda
23.  Dr. S. Jagathrakshakan
24.  Shri A.C. Jose
25.
  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
26. Shri Brijlal Khabri
27. Shri Sunil Khan
28. Shri Manjay Lal
29.
  Dr. K. Malaisamy
30.  Shri A. Narendra
31.  Shri Ananta Nayak
32.  Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
33.  Shri Dharam Raj Singh Patel
__________________________________________________________________________
@ Appointed Chairman and Member of the Committee w.e.f.12th .November, 02 vice Shri T.N. Chaturvedi who  ceased
to be the Member of the Committee and Rajya Sabha with effect from 20th August, 02
 
(i)
34.  Shri Uttamrao Patil
35. Shri Malyala Rajaiah
36. Shri P. Rajendran
37.
  Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
38.  Shri Tarachand Sahu
39.  Shri Ramanand Singh
40.  Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
41.  Chowdhary Talib Hussain
42. Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
43.
  Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari
44.  Shri Beni Prasad Verma
45.vacant
 

104th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/104threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta,  Joint  Secretary
Shri  A.K. Singh,  Deputy  Secretary
Shri  D.P. Ahuja ,Under Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
I N T R O D U C T I ON
 
 
I,  the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry,  having   been
authorised  by the Committee, hereby present this One Hundred – fourth Report on the Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in  the  Committee ' s  85
th Report  on Implementation Status of
Financial  Assistance-cum-restructuring Package  and Revival of Hindustan Steel Works  Construction Ltd. (HSCL) .
 
2.         The Committee   examined and  considered  the Action Taken Notes on recommendations contained  in the  
Committee ' s  85
th Report  on Implementation Status of Financial  Assistance-cum-restructuring Package  and Revival
of Hindustan Steel Works  Construction Ltd. (HSCL) .
 
3.         The Committee at its meeting held on  17th  December,  2002 considered and adopted the Report.
 
NEW DELHI
December 17, 2002
DR.P.C. ALEXANDER
 Chairman
Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Industry
REPORT
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Steel  on the recommendations
contained in  the  Committee ' s  85
th Report  on Implementation Status of Financial  Assistance-cum-restructuring
Package  and Revival of Hindustan Steel Works  Construction Ltd. (HSCL) . 
2.         Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Steel   in respect of the   recommendations
contained in the Report.   These have been categorized as follows:
 
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry of Steel  
 
(Chapter - I).
Recommendations:- 2.2 ,  3.2,  4.2 , 4.8, 5.2, 5.4, 5.10,  and  6.4 ,
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government's
replies : (Chapter - II)
Recommendations:- 4.4
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies of the Ministry of
Steel   :. (Chapter - III).
Recommendations:- 5.6 , 5.8, 6.2 ,7.3 ,8.3 , 8.6 , 8.9, 8.14 , 9.4, 13.3 and 16.3.
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  final replies of the  Ministry of Steel   have not been
received. (Chapter - IV).
Recommendations:-  1.4,  8.12,  10.2, 12.2, 15.3, 16.2, and 16.5.

104th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/104threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
3.         The Committee is pleased to observe that  the   Ministry of Steel has accepted its  recommendations  as 
mentioned in Chapter –I of the  Report. 
4.                  In respect of the recommendation made in Para 4.4  in Chapter-II  the Committee is  convinced  with the logic
and explanation  advocated by the Ministry of  Steel  and therefore   does not want to  pursue  further .
5.         The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementations  of recommendations contained in  Chapter-
III  and therefore  the Committee desires that the Ministry of Steel should furnish  logical  explanation  in respect of
these recommendations.
6.         In respect  of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV, the Ministry of Steel has  either   furnished the interim
replies or couched its language in  vague terms like  noted for compliance/guidance therefore, the Committee desires 
that the Ministry of Steel would furnish Action Taken Notes in  respects of recommendation categorized   in Chapter-
IV  in detail and to the point, as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee.
7.         Observations/recommendations of the Committee  are given in Chapter (V)
8.         The Details of the Action Taken Notes is being discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.
 
 
CHAPTER - I
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
 
           
Recommendation (Para 2.2 )
 
Financial Performance of HSCL
 
            The Committee, while taking note of the current financial performance of HSCL expresses its concern
over its pathetic condition, and is of the view that HSCL needs improvement for better financial performance. 
HSCL requires a new vision, new managerial will and effective strategy for the continuance of its existence.
           
Action Taken
 
The Ministry of Steel has noted the observation of the Committee.  The financial performance of the Company
improved during 2001-02 over the previous Financial Year  2000-2001.  Major parameters are indicated below:
(Rs. in crore)
FACTORS 2000-01 2001-02 IMPROVEMENT
Turnover 242.95 257.89 14.94 (6%)
Gross Margin (PBIDT)  (-) 117.32 (-) 58.74 58.58 (50%)
Net Margin (-) 127.69* (-) 72.89* 54.80 (43%)
Salary & Wages 105.72 73.66 32.06 (30%)
* Excluding terminal benefits
            .
This improvement is continuing  during the present Financial Year 2002-03 also.  The Company has engaged the
services of a consultant to prepare a strategic plan for its further operation and management.
 
Recommendation (Para 3.2)
 
Revival Package to HSCL
 
            The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Government for approving the financial restructuring
proposal.  Considering the fact that resources are limited the sanctioning of revival package having financial implication
is a considered decision of the Government.  Committee also appreciates the Ministry of Steel for its consistent efforts
in persuading the Ministry of Finance for giving revival package to HSCL.  The Committee notes the provisions of

104th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/104threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
revival package for HSCL.
 
Action Taken
 
            The comment/observation of the Committee is noted.
 
Recommendation (Para 4.2. )
 
Implementation of   the provision of  revival package
 
            The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry of Steel has taken action on all provisions contained in the
revival package.  The Committee hopes that efforts of the Ministry of Steel in persuading the Department of Revenue
for exempting of corporate tax for HSCL would have a positive impact on the financial performance of HSCL.  The
Committee further hopes that consequent upon the separation of 7,106 employees and reduction in the wage bill, the
financial ratio of the Company would further improve.
 
Action Taken
 
Consequent upon separation of 7373 employees during 2000-01 & 2001-02, expenditure towards Salary &
wages  has come down by Rs. 32.06 crore in 2001-02 over 2000-01. Further reduction in cost towards wages and
salaries is expected after implementation of a fresh VRS package.
 
            Exemption from payment of Corporate Tax in 1999-2000 is within the provision of Restructuring Package.  No
demand from Income Tax Department for payment of Corporate Tax has been received.
 
Recommendation (Para 4.8:)
 
Savings on the Specified Overheads
 
            The Committee is happy to note the savings on the specified overheads due to measures undertaken by HSCL
management to rationalise administrative expenditure.  The Committee hopes that the efforts to rationalise
administrative expenditure would continue.
 
Action Taken
 
All actions are being taken to reduce administrative expenditure.  During Financial Year 2001-02,
Administrative expenditure was reduced by Rs.17 crore over the previous Financial Year  2000-01.
 
Recommendation (Para 5.2) 
 
Financial Assistance-cum-restructuring package
 
            The Committee observes that financial assistance-cum-restructuring package as proposed by the Ministry of
Steel and so approved by the Government was not as comprehensive so as to mitigate the accumulated loss and total
liability of HSCL.  The Company continues to rein in adverse financial scenario and disadvantages in general because
implementation of the revival package would respond only if approved measures are taken in time for total and
comprehensive restructuring of the Company.  HSCL needs total overhauling and complete and comprehensive
restructuring in one go as partial package and delayed implementation defeats the whole idea, approach and action.
 
Action Taken
 
Subsequent to the Financial Restructuring Package, granted by Government of India during July, 99, a proposal
for further revival of the Company was submitted in June, 01 to the Finance Ministry by Ministry of Steel.
 

104th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/104threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
Details of the proposal are as under:-
 
1.                  Grant of non-plan assistance for settlement of outstanding salaries and other statutory liabilities amounting to
Rs.182.28 crore.
2.                  Increase the existing Government of India guarantee by Rs.250 crore to facilitate further loan from commercial
banks for separation of another 5000 employees.
 
The Ministry of Finance has sanctioned Rs. 89.44 crore towards outstanding salaries and other statutory
liabilities of separated employees.  The balance liability stands at Rs. 133 crore as on August 1,.2002.  Ministry
of Steel is examining the objections of Finance Ministry with regard to pay revision in the Company which is
coming in the way of Finance Ministry releasing adequate financial assistance to clear all dues towards
wages/salaries.
 
            Out of the required Rs.250 crore for VRS Rs.50 has already been drawn from Indian Overseas Bank  in
July, 2002.  Another Rs.50 crore has been sanctioned by Canara Bank.  Efforts are on to ensure that the entire
Rs.250 crore is raised for effecting VRS of 5000 employees.
 
            The Company has also engaged a consultant for preparing a strategic plan and a plan for organisational
restructuring.
 
Recommendation  (Para 5.4)
 
Sufficient resilience and synergy to work
 
The Committee is of the view that once the comprehensive restructuring package is effectively implemented
HSCL would acquire sufficient resilience and synergy to work even against fierce competition.  The Committee
recommends that HSCL management should strive in this regard.
 
Action Taken
 
HSCL Management has already renewed its thrust on the impending changes in strategies of Execution,
Marketing, Financial operation and all round development.  New areas of operation, such as, Power, Roads and Bridges,
Railway projects and repair, Airport development, Residential and Commercial Buildings etc. have been identified to
compensate for the decline in steel sector.  All the units will be made to function as separate profit centres for their
existence.  HRD will be a high thrust area.  Action is already on for computerization of project monitoring system at a
faster pace.  In addition as stated above a strategic plan and a plan for organisational restructuring is being prepared.
 
Recommendation ( Para 5.10)
 
Rationalisation  of  expenditure toward contract payment.
 
            The Committee is of the view that the HSCL management should have undertaken necessary steps to
rationalize expenditure toward contract payment.
 
Action Taken
 
            HSCL Management is taking all steps to reduce expenditure towards contract payment.  This is evident from the
fact that direct expenditure during 2001-02 has reduced to 82% from 92% in 2000-01.
 
Recommendation (Para 6.4) :
 
Delay  by Commercial bank in the sanction and disbursement of the first phase of loan to HSCL
 
The Committee is perturbed to note the delay of about eleven months by Commercial bank in the sanction and

104th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/104threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
disbursement of the first phase of loan to HSCL to the tune of Rs. 210  crore for VRS purpose on the plea of adverse
financial fundamentals of HSCL.  The delay in sanctioning of loan of HSCL have rather adversely affected the so called
financial fundamental  of HSCL during that span of eleven moths in the form of payment of wage and salaries given to
HSCL employees during the span of eleventh months.  The Committee opines that idle wages and salaries given to
HSCL employees during said eleven months is a criminal wastage of money so far as the financial state of the Company
is concerned and the matter needs to be inquired into.
 
Action Taken
 
Reasons for delay in sanction of 1 st phase loan by SBI have already been explained.  HSCL Management has
tried to compensate for the delay by stepping up the VRS process.  Against the directive of separating 6000 employees
in three years, 7373 employees were separated in one and a  half years.  The Company is being asked to ensure that
there is no unreasonable delay in future.
CHAPTER –II
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE
 
Recommendation (Para 4.4)
 
Accumulated loss of the Company
 
            The Committee understands that it is but natural that the accumulated loss of the Company would come down
once the Government grants waiver of interest Government loans, so far the same is a book-entry and it hardly has any
reflection on the actual financial performance of the Company.
 
Action Taken
 
The comment/observation of the Committee is noted.
 
CHAPTER-III
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE HAS NOT
ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY OF STEEL.
                                   
Recommendation (Para 5.6 )
Failure of financial and  revival package
 
            The Committee is constrained to express its concern over the fact that financial assistance given for restructuring
package could not be implemented in the expected manner and the outcome thereof is not as expected.  The Committee
notes the reasons for failure of revival package, although it is not fully envisaged with the reasons for failure of revival
package as advocated by the Ministry of Steel.  For the revival of the Company HSCL management has to procure work
order despite ups and downs in steel industry and HSCL management should not face much difficulties as Government
is giving due importance to the construction sector.  The Committee is of the view that optimum utilisation of
manpower and resources at the disposal of Company is the responsibility of HSCL management.
      
Action Taken
 
Despite continued decline in steel industry, HSCL secured orders worth Rs.242 crore during 2001-02 as
compared to Rs.201 crore during 2000-01.  The target for 2002-03 has been set at Rs.300 crore.
 
            HSCL Management has already taken suitable actions to ensure that the physical performance of the Company
does not slide due to drastic reduction in manpower.  This is clearly evident from the fact that the Turnover increased

104th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/104threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
from Rs.243 crore in 2000-01 to Rs.258 crore in 2001-02.  However, effort is on to optimize utilisation of resources by
way of increase  in Turnover and Order booking.
 
Further Recommendation
 
            The Committee is of the view that since the Government is giving impetus to the construction sector and because
HSCL is engaged in the construction works, therefore, it should not be difficult for the HSCL management to procure
work order.  Moreover, the steel industry is up swinging, it is being  hoped that HSCL would be able to meet its target
for 2002-2003 to procure the work order to the tune of Rs. 300 crore.  The Committee further recommends that
optimum utilization of manpower resources at the disposal of the Company is the responsibility of HSCL management.  
 
Recommendation  (Para 5.8)
 
Gap in the actual turnover of the Company vis-à-vis the turnover envisaged in the financial restructuring
proposal.
 
            The Committee expresses its concern over the gap in the actual turnover of the Company vis-à-vis the turnover
envisaged in the financial restructuring proposal.  HSCL management should have made an all out efforts to achieve the
target as envisaged.
 
Action Taken
 
The observations of the Committee are noted.  The gap in turnover is largely  due to the slow down in the steel
sector and poor financials of the Company which hampered its efforts to obtain more orders.
 
Further Recommendation
 
The fact that HSCL is the only Public Sector Steel Construction Company, the Company should not have been
remained without work order, that is so, because,  Steel  PSUs were on the modernisation and expansion recourse. 
However, it is felt that  HSCL management would  chalk out  effective  course of action for procurement of work order
in future.
 
Partial failure of Financial Assistance restructuring package
Recommendation ( Para 6.2 )
 
The Committee, while taking note of the detailed reasons for partial failure of Financial Assistance restructuring
package, is constrained to express its concern.  The Committee is of the view that HSCL management could have well
managed and controlled the problems being faced by HSCL.  The Committee views that replacement of obsolete
equipment in HSCL should have positive impact on the operational efficiency of Company rather than deterring the
implementation of revival package.  Moreover, HSCL management should have chalked out a strategy for better margin
of profit.  The Committee opines that HSCL management while implementing VRS should keep in mind the age profile
in the Company so as to retain capable and efficient  work force to undertake the job.
 
Action Taken
 
It is indicated at Para 5.10 that as a result of the steps taken by the management the direct cost has come down
which had a direct impact on reduction in losses.  Management’s  discretion is applied in regard to releasing on VRS
and retain capable and efficient work- force to undertake jobs.  Most of the employees are in the age group of 52 and
above,  as such, the scope of  maintaining  lower age profile of the employees on roll is limited.
 
Further recommendation
 
Since most of  the employees in HSCL  are in the age of group  of 52 and above and as such,  the scope of
maintaining   lower age   profile  of the  employees  on   the roll is limited, the HSCL management has  to apply to

104th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/104threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
added  managerial  skill  as to how   re-orient    its  workforce  for making the same efficient and effective.   The 
Committee hopes that   the strategic plan  and restructuring plan where   a consultant has been engaged, would take care 
of all these  practical aspects.
 
Recommendation ( Para 7.3)
 
System of Sub-Contracting Business Pattern
           
            The Committee understands the compelling circumstances under which HSCL has to adopt the system of sub-
contracting business pattern but it is also an open secret that sub-contracting gives low margin for HSCL than if the
work done by the Company itself.  The Committee is of the view that VRS offer by HSCL to its employees would take
care of keeping with itself the workforce consisting of productive age profile and willing to undertake work/assignment
from whatever concern its coming.  The Committee feels that direct undertaking of work by HSCL staff would give
larger margin to HSCL and thus opening scope for profitability of HSCL, therefore, it would be better that the system of
sub-contracting is replaced by direct involvement of HSCL employees, sooner than later.
 
Action Taken
 
Subsequent to the separation of manpower in accordance with the provision of the Restructuring Proposal and
MOU with Ministry of Steel,  HSCL will be left out with only about 1000 employees on its rolls.  In such
circumstances, HSCL’s function will  be of supervisory nature only.  However, execution of contracts will be carried
out as per the approved procedures of the Company.  Adequate steps will be taken to optimize margins and use of
departmental inputs.
 
Further recommendation
 
            The Committee feels that  entrusting  HSCL merely  with the supervisory role  and continuing  with   the system
of sub-contracting would not be  a  sustainable proposition  for the Company.   There is no need   for making a mini
Ministry   with in the  Ministry  of Steel .  The Ministry of Steel is already playing the  supervisory role  over the steel
PSUs,   therefore,  steel PSUs should  do the actual  work, the Committee feels .  The Committee,  therefore,   reiterates  
that   direct undertaking of work by HSCL staff would give  larger  margin to HSCL and thus opening  scope for
profitability of HSCL, therefore, it would be better that the system of sub-contracting is  replaced  by direct involvement
of HSCL employees, sooner than later.
Recommendation  (Para :  8.3)
 
Work order to HSCL
 
The Committee, while recognizing the special relationship of HSCL with SAIL, appreciates the role of HSCL in
the modernisation of SAIL’s  PSUs and hopes that SAIL would continue to award work order to HSCL on priority
basis, keeping in view that SAIL owes to HSCL’s deep rooted problems i.e. surplus manpower from Bokaro were
inducted in HSCL and helped SAIL  during the construction of plant at Bokaro.
 
Action Taken
 
The share of order booked in the  Steel sector vs-a-vis the  Non-Steel Sector is as below:
 
Sl. No. Sector 1995-96 2001-02 Apr to July 02
1. Steel 69% 21% 41%
2. Non-Steel 31% 79% 59%
 
Orders in the steel sector are mainly from SAIL Steel Plants.  It is evident from the above table that the
proportion of order from the steel sector is on the rise in the current year.  It is also felt that SAIL can help HSCL secure
orders only  within  the laid down policy of price preference to  public sector units.
 

104th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/104threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
 Further recommendation
 
            The Committee feels that,  since  HSCL  is a  steel PSUs so it is  but natural  that the proportion of  work order
from   steel sector   should be  larger  in  comparison to non-steel sector.  The Committee notes that  work order  to
HSCL  from steel sector   from  April to July, 02   was  41%  against  59% from  non-steel sector as compared to 21%
from Steel Sector   and  79%  from non-steel  sector   in  2001-02 .  The Committee wishes to highlight  the fact that ,
keeping in view   that SAIL owes to  HSCL’s  deep rooted problems  i.e. surplus manpower from Bokaro were inducted
in HSCL and helped SAIL during the  construction of plant at Bokaro, it is  the responsibility of  SAIL  to    rescue 
HSCL  when in deep trouble, by  continuing   to award  work order on priority basis.  
           
Recommendation (Para 8.6 )
 
Enhancement of  Goodwill
 
The Committee is of the opinion that HSCL should accomplish all of its assignment without time and cost
overrun in order to enhance its goodwill, which will further make it easy for HSCL to procure work- order.
 
Action Taken
 
HSCL Management is giving emphasis on completion of project without cost and time overrun.  Unfortunately,
several projects are delayed due to  reasons not attributable to HSCL.
 
Further recommendation
 
            The Committee is of the opinion that timely completion of  projects  undertaken by HSCL  would  lead to
enhancement of  its good will and  thus enriched  goodwill  would be  off immense help in procurement of  further work
order .
 
Recommendation ( Para  8.9)
Procurement of work order
 
            The Committee appreciates the efforts made by new management in procurement of work order and hopes that
such efforts would be intensified in future in order to have maximum possible work-order so that the turnover of  the
Company would be enhanced for sure survival of the Company amidst fierce competition.
 
Action Taken
 
 There has been an increase in order booking by a substantial Rs. 41.00 crore. during 2001-02 over the previous
Financial Year 2000-01.  All steps are being taken to ensure that the current year’s target of Rs. 300 crore is achieved.
 
Further recommendation
 
The Committee is of the view that   the Ministry of Steel should have apprised the Committee  of  the steps 
being  taken for achieving the target   of order booking  to the  tune of Rs.300 crore  during the current year.   However, 
the Committee recommends that  no stone should  remain  unturned for achieving the target . 
 
Recommendation (Para 8.14)
 
Time and cost overrun
 
            The Committee is of the opinion that HSCL management should take care that on the part of HSCL management
there should not be any time and cost overrun and when there is time and cost overrun due to contributive attributes of
clients, persuasive efforts on HSCL  management part should be undertaken to avoid the time and cost overrun.
 

104th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/104threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
Action Taken
 
            The Company has taken conscious efforts to avoid time and cost overrun.  In the event of time and cost overrun
for  reasons not attributable to HSCL, the Company has taken up the matter at appropriate level to eliminate the reasons
causing the delay.
 
Further recommendation
 
            The Ministry of Steel should act     as an facilitator and   help  HSCL   to accomplish all of its   assignment 
without time and cost overrun.  The Ministry  in the action taken  note  of the present   report  should furnish those
project  which are  delayed due to reasons not attributable to  HSCL  and also  the steps taken by Ministry to resolve the
issue    alongwith  outcome  thereof.
 
Recommendation ( Para 9.4)
           
Preferential treatment to HSCL in procurement of work order from SAIL and other Government’s Department
 
The Committee is of the view that HSCL deserves a better deal  in SAIL with Government mediation,
therefore the Committee recommends that all the projects as well as AMR and operational jobs, within the
execution capacity of HSCL, should be offered on nomination on priority basis to HSCL.  This would enable the
Company to utilise its infrastructure, set up over the years at SAIL plants and meet the expenses of the
Company.  Award procedure of SAIL should be relaxed suitably for preferential treatment to HSCL.  The
Company may have long term arrangement/understanding with SAIL on the basis of quantum of job assured for
award.  The Committee further recommends that a certain portion of the construction jobs in the infrastructural
sector be assigned to HSCL  on nomination basis, at least during the initial years of planned revival.  Purchase
preference to PSUs should be strictly adhered to.  Presently the PSUs/Government Department are not
uniformly following the system.  The dismal balance sheets of the Company, for several years now have made
customers apprehensive in pre-qualifying HSCL for their prospects.  Judging the merit of the situation
respective Administrative Ministries may issue necessary directives not to disqualify   HSCL for quoting, based
on the financial performance of last few years.  HSCL should be granted relaxation in registration formalities
with Government Departments for taking up work.  HSCL shouldbe exempted from submitting EMD for taking
up work with Government departments and PSUs.    HSCL’s experience in construction of roads in the
integrated steel plants should be considered as qualifying  criterion for High way work and matter may be taken
up with the Ministry of Road Transport and Highway.
 
 
 
 
Action Taken
 
SAIL like other public sector companies, is guided by the laid down Purchase Preference Policy for public sector
undertakings in its dealings with HSCL.  However, given the close relationship between SAIL steel plants and HSCL
units, SAIL has been giving substantial work to HSCL.  It may however, be noted that CVC guidelines discourage grant
of work on nomination basis.  The Ministry of Steel has been actively taking up the case of HSCL in the award of works
with other Central Government Departments and Ministries as also with State Governments.
 
Further recommendation
 
SAIL  giving  work order to HSCL 
 
While  the Committee  is happy to note that    SAIL has been giving substantial work order to HSCL  and 
Ministry of Steel  is  actively taking up  the case of HSCL in the award   of works with other Central Government
Departments   as also with the State Governments,  the Committee  reiterates  that   HSCL  should continue to get   the
preferential  treatment  in the procurement of  work order from Central and State Governments Departments .  HSCL 

104th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/104threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
should be exempted from submitting EMD for taking up  work  with Government  departments and PSUs.  HSCL’s
experience in construction of roads in the  integrated steel plants should be considered as qualifying criterion for  High
way work.  A certain portion of   the construction jobs in the infrastructural  Sector   be  assigned to HSCL.  The
Ministry of Steel may take up the  matter with the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways.
 
Recommendation  (Para 13.3 )
 
Full and final settlement
 
The Committee recommends that HSCL management should not delay in the settlement of full and final
accounts  for all HSCL employees who have opted for VRS.
 
Action Taken
 
            The Government has been informed by HSCL that in all cases (8177 cases) of employees separated under VRS
ex-gratia has been settled in full.  In 26 cases leave encashment and in 6 cases gratuity payment is still pending. 
However in 6862 cases transportation dues are pending as these are under scrutiny in view of certain audit objections
raised in the matter.  Arrears remain to be settled on account of outstanding wages and salaries for these employees. 
These remain unpaid on account of lack of financial resources on the part of the Company.  While releasing financial
assistance of Rs.89.44 crore, in the month of March, 2002, Government advised, as an interim measure, the Company to
first settle the dues of retired and separated employees based on 4
th Pay Commission pay scales.  Balance dues of the
retired/separated employees, on account of unpaid wages and salaries will be cleared after Ministry of Finance approves
a proposal made by the Ministry of Steel for releasing financial assistance for a further amount of Rs.133 crore.  The
proposal has not yet been examined by the Ministry of Finance as the Ministry of Steel is still in the process of getting
legal opinion about the implementation of the recommendations of the 5
th Pay Commission by the Company.  It may be
noted that the Ministry of Finance has not been agreeing to release financial assistance to take care of liability of the
Company arising out of implementation of the 5th Pay Commission  recommendations as the same was implemented by
the Company without the approval of the competent authority.
 
Further recommendation
 
The Committee is of the view that  HSCL management , while making  settlement  of full and final   accounts
for all HSCL employees who have opted for VRS,  should  differentiate the cases of pending settlement due to audit
objection and arrears to be settled on account of outstanding wages and salaries for these  employees due to  lack of 
financial resources on the part of  the Company.  The HSCL management and the Ministry of Steel  should  expedite  
the process of making settlement  of outstanding  wages and salaries  with the sanction of the    revival package.   The
Committee further recommends that  as soon as  the legal  wrangles    regarding   the implementation  of the 
recommendation   of the Fifth Pay Commission  gets  solved  and  the Ministry of Finance    releases  financial
assistance to HSCL ,    balance dues  of the retired /separated employees should be made .
 
Recommendation ( Para 16.3 )
 
Non-plan assistance of Rs.125.17 crore
 
            The Committee however, is of the view that the Ministry of Finance should consider the proposal of the Ministry
of Steel for grant of non-plan assistance of   Rs.125.17 crore to enable HSCL to discharge its liabilities towards payment
of arrears of wages and salaries of its employees.  The Committee is of the opinion that once a comprehensive package
for revival of HSCL is sanctioned in one go the Company would be able to come out of red.
 
Action Taken
 
            The Ministry of Steel has been pursuing the matter relating to grant of full financial assistance to the Company
to enable it to discharge its entire liability towards payment of wages and salaries to its employees.  As mentioned

104th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/104threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
above, the issue with regards to implementation of 5 th Pay Commission recommendations in the Company without the
approval of the competent authority constitutes a major obstacle in the way of Ministry of Finance granting approval for
the entire financial assistance package.  The Ministry of Steel is therefore, examining the implementation of the 5 th Pay
Commission recommendations in the Company, in consultation with Ministry of Law.  It appears that the Company had
implemented the 5th Pay Commission recommendations in pursuance of a Supreme Court order as also in pursuance of
DPE’s OMs.  It is felt that once this issue is resolved, the Ministry of Steel would take up the matter with the Ministry
of Finance for the grant of full financial assistance to liquidate the entire outstanding liability   of the Company on
account of unpaid wages and salaries.
 
Further Recommendations
 
            The  Committee   observes that    the prima-facie  stand of the Ministry of Steel , on the issue    of
implementation    of 5 th Pay Commission recommendation, that the Company  had implemented the 5 th Pay
Commission recommendations without the  approval of the  competent  authority but, ( as per the apprehension of the
Ministry of Steel)  in pursuance   of a Supreme Court order ,  as also in pursuance of  DPE’s  OMs,  constitute  the
vicious circle.  The  question arises  whether  on the issue,  the judicious  decision was  taken by the  competent
authority  but  on pursuance of  implementing the supreme court order or    simply the laid down procedure was not
followed.   The Committee is of the opinion that  the Ministry of Steel should have come forward immediately after 
passing  of Supreme Court Order for implementation  of its order as per  laid down  procedure.    Now  sitting over the  
issue  would   solve no purpose.  Therefore,  the Committee recommends that the   Ministry of  Steel should  form  the
final opinion without delay, and  if  required     may give  ex-post  facto   approval  to the decision   to implement the 5
th
Pay   Commission  and formulate  comprehensive  for revival   of HSCL    and forward the same   to the Ministry of 
Finance for the Grant of  full   financial  assistance   to liquidate the entire outstanding liability of the Company on
account  of unpaid wages and salaries.
 
CHAPTER - IV)
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL  REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
OF STEEL HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED.
 
Recommendation  (Para 1.4)
 
Lack of vision for human resource management and lack of a concrete policy
 
            The Committee notes that the reasons as placed by the Ministry of Steel, for the suffering of HSCL.  The
Committee is of the opinion that lack of vision for human resource management and lack of a concrete policy led to and
sudden increase in work force in HSCL.  The Committee further opines that HSCL’s present suffering is due to error of
judgment and some elements were beyond the control of management and Government due to prevailing circumstances,
lack of managerial vision and manpower policy added to the woes of HSCL.
           
Action Taken
 
            In accordance with  Financial Assistance-cum-Restructuring Package, the process of manpower reduction is on
to make the  Company viable.
 
            The employees strength as on September 1, 2002 stood at 5150.  After the implementation of restructuring
package, 8177 employees have been separated on VRS.  To further rationalise  Human Resources, it is planned to
separate another 4100 employees by the end of this year.
 
Recommendation  (Para 8. 12)
 
Procurement of substantial work order
 

104th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/104threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
            The Committee, while taking note of the quantum of work order received by HSCL during last three years,
opines that HSCL management should have strived to procure more work order.
 
Action Taken
 
The Government notes the comment/observation of the Committee for concerted action.  Government has been
stressing on this issue in all the reviews conducted of the operations of the Company.
 
Recommendation  (Para 10.2 )
 
Outstanding dues of HSCL to various PSUs
 
            The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Steel should examine the cases of outstanding dues of HSCL to
various PSUs and mediate with them for timely recovery of all claims of HSCL and submit a status note to the
Committee, separately.
 
Action Taken
 
Cases of long outstanding payments/claims from different PSUs,  referred to the Ministry are taken up with
respective authorities, at appropriate level, for settlement.
 
Recommendation  (Para 12.2 ) 
 
Rationalization of manpower
 
            The Committee is of the view that optimum manpower is a pre-requisite for the success of any Company and
therefore rationalization of manpower should be the first and foremost strategy of any Company desiring to attain
operational efficiency.  The Committee hopes that with the grant of second revival package to HSCL every efforts
would be made to attain optimal manpower.
 
Action Taken 
           
In accordance with  Financial Assistance-cum-Restructuring Package, the process of manpower reduction is on
to make the  Company viable.
 
                        The employees strength as on September 1, 2002 stands at 5150.  After the implementation of the
restructuring package, 8177 employees have been separated on VRS.  To further rationalise Human Resources, it
has been planned to separate another 4100 employees by the end of this year.
           
Recommendation (Para 15.3 )
 
Projected profit and loss statement for next three years.
 
             The Committee is of the view that HSCL management should make  all out efforts for achieving the targets as
projected by HSCL management for the next three years.  The Committee is of the view that HSCL management would
not face undue difficulties in achieving the target in view of the fact that second revival package for HSCL have been
approved by the Government.
 
Action Taken
 
            The HSCL Management has been asked by the Government to take all necessary steps for achieving the
projected targets for the next 3 years.  However, the Company is constrained by the fact that the Government has not
approved the full assistance required to liquidate the entire outstanding wages and salaries, which it is apprehended, will
affect the Company’s efforts to vigorously implement VRS for separating 5000 employees in the Company.  The

104th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/104threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
implementation of VRS to bring down manpower to 1000 employees is central to the Company’s efforts at containing
losses and earning cash profits over the next 3 years.  The Ministry of Steel is in the process of consulting Ministry of
Law in the matter of implementing 5th Pay Commission recommendation in the Company which is the chief obstacle in
the way of Ministry of Finance agreeing to grant the full financial assistance sought for clearing of the outstanding
wages and salaries of the Company.  However, the Company with the help of the Government is making all out efforts
at raising a loan of Rs.250 crore required for implementing VRS in the Company.  The Company has successfully raised
Rs.100 crore and is in negotiations with banks for raising the balance Rs.150 crore within December, 2002.  It is hoped
that with the implementation of VRS and reduction of manpower to 1000 the Company would be able to generate cash
profits from the next financial year onwards.
 
Recommendation ( Para 16.2)
 
Sanction of revival package for HSCL
 
            The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry of Finance has given due consideration to the proposal of
Ministry of Steel for providing Government of India guarantee for raising fund for rationalization of manpower in
HSCL.  The Committee hopes that the revival package, as sanctioned by the Government should be implemented
without delay and HSCL management would take step for separation of surplus employees  i.e.  5000 under VRS within
a time frame.
 
Action Taken
 
            Out of the planned loan of Rs.250 crore from Commercial Banks, Rs.100 crore has already been arranged by the
Company.  Negotiations with the banks for the balance Rs.150 Crore is on.  Circular for VRS has been issued on
October 7,. 2002 for further separation of 4100 employees by HSCL.
 
Recommendation (Para 16.5 )
 
Payment  of outstanding dues to its retired and separated employees without delay.
 
            The Committee hopes that HSCL would be able to make payments of outstanding dues to its retired and
separated employees without delay.
 
Action Taken
 
            As mentioned in the reply to Para 13.3, the Government had directed the Company to use the financial assistance
of Rs.89.44 crore to clear partially the outstanding dues of retired and separated employees based on 4 th Pay
Commission pay scales as an interim measure.  The clearance of balance dues of retired and separated employees would
however be dependent on approval of further financial assistance by the Ministry of Finance.
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE
 
Recommendation (Para 5.6 )
 
Failure of financial and  revival package
           
            The Committee is of the view that since the Government is giving impetus to the construction sector and because
HSCL is engaged in the construction works, therefore, its should not be difficult for the HSCL management to procure
work order.  Moreover, the Steel Industry is up swinging, it is being  hoped that HSCL would be able to meet its target
for 2002-2003 to procure the work order to the tune of Rs. 300 crore.  The Committee further recommends that
optimum utilization of manpower resources at the disposal of the Company is the responsibility of HSCL management.  
 
Recommendation  (Para 5.8)

104th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/104threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
 
Gap in the actual turnover of the Company vis-à-vis the turnover envisaged in the financial restructuring
proposal.
 
The fact that HSCL is the only Public Sector Steel Construction Company, the Company should not have been
remained without work order, that is so, because,  Steel  PSUs were on the modernisation and expansion recourse. 
However, it is felt that  HSCL management would  chalk out  effective  course of action for procurement of work order
in future.
 
Recommendation ( Para 6.2 )
 
Partial failure of Financial Assistance restructuring package
             
That  since most of  the employees in HSCL  are in the age of group  of 52 and above  as such  the scope of
maintaining   lower age   profile  of the  employees  on   the roll is limited, the HSCL management has  to apply to
added  managerial  skill  as how to   re-orient    its  workforce  for making the same efficient and effective.   The 
Committee hopes that   the strategic plan  and restructuring plan where   a consultant has been engaged, would take care 
of all these  practical aspects.
 
Recommendation ( Para 7.3)
 
System of Sub-Contracting Business Pattern
           
            The Committee feels that  entrusting  HSCL merely the supervisory role  and continuing  with   the system of
Sub-contracting would not be  a  sustainable proposition  for the Company.   There is no need   for making a mini
Ministry   with in the  Ministry  of Steel .  The Ministry of Steel is already playing the  supervisory role  over the steel
PSUs,   therefore,   Steel PSUs should  do the actual  work, the Committee feels .  The Committee,  therefore,  
reiterates   that   direct undertaking of work by HSCL staff would give  larger  margin to HSCL and thus opening  scope
for profitability of HSCL, therefore, it would be better that the system of sub-contracting is  replaced  by direct
involvement of HSCL employees, sooner than later.
 
Recommendation  (Para 8.3)
 
Work order to HSCL
 
            The Committee feels that,  since  HSCL  is a  steel PSUs so it is  but natural  that the proportion of  work order
from   steel sector   should be  larger  in  comparison to non-steel sector.  The Committee notes that  work order  to
HSCL  from steel sector   from  April to July, 02   was  41%  against  59% from  non-steel sector as compared to 21%
from Steel Sector   and  79%  from non-steel  sector   in  2001-02 .  The Committee wishes to highlights  the fact that ,
keeping in view   that SAIL owes to  HSCL’s  deep rooted problems  i.e. surplus manpower from Bokaro were inducted
in HSCL and helped SAIL during the  construction of plant at Bokaro, it is  the responsibility of  SAIL  to    rescue 
HSCL  when in deep trouble, by  continuing   to award  work order on priority basis.  
                       
Recommendation (Para 8.6 )
 
Enhancement of Goodwill
 
            The Committee is of the opinion that timely completion of  projects  undertaken by HSCL  would  lead to
enhancement of  its good will and  thus enriched  goodwill  would be  off immense help in procurement of  further work
order .
 
Recommendation ( Para 8.9 )
 
The Committee is of the view that   the Ministry of Steel should have apprised the Committee  of  the steps 

104th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/104threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
being  taken for achieving the target   of order booking  to the  tune of Rs.300 crore  during the current year.   However, 
the Committee recommends that  no stone should  remain  unturned for achieving the target . 
 
Recommendation (Para 8.14)
 
Time and cost overrun
           
            The Ministry of Steel should act     as an facilitator; and   help  HSCL   to accomplish all of its   assignment 
without time and cost overrun.  The Ministry  in the action taken  note  of the present   report  should furnish those
project  which are  delayed due to reasons not attributable to  HSCL  and also  the steps taken by Ministry to resolve the
issue    alongwith  outcome  thereof.
 
Recommendation ( Para 9.4)
           
Preferential treatment to HSCL  in procurement of  work order from SAIL and other Government’s
Department
 
 
While the Committee is happy to note that    SAIL has been giving substantial work order to HSCL  and 
Ministry of Steel  is  actively taking up  the case of HSCL in the award   of works with other Central Government
Departments   as also with the State Governments,  the Committee  reiterates  that   HSCL  should continue to get   the
preferential  treatment  in the procurement of  work order from Central and State Government’s Departments .  HSCL
should be exempted from submitting EMD for taking up  work  with Government  departments and PSUs.  HSCL’s
experience in construction of roads in the  integrated steel plants should be considered as qualifying criterion for High
way work.  A certain portion of   the construction jobs in the infrastructural  Sector   be  assigned to HSCL
 
Recommendation  (Para 13.3 )
Full and final settlement
 
            The Committee is of the view that  HSCL management , while making  settlement  of full and final   accounts
for all HSCL employees who have opted for VRS,  should  differentiate the cases of pending settlement due to audit
objection and arrears to be settled on account of outstanding wages and salaries for these  employees due to  lack of 
financial resources on the part of  the Company.  The HSCL management and the Ministry of Steel  should  expedite  
the process of making settlement  of out standing  wage and salaries  with the sanction of the    revival package.   The
Committee further recommends that  as soon as  the legal  wrangles    regarding   the implementation  of the 
recommendation   of the Fifth Pay Commission  gets  solved  and  the Ministry of Finance    releases  financial
assistance to HSCL ,    balance dues  of the retired /separated employees ,would be made .
 
Recommendation ( Para 16.3 )
 
Non-plan assistance of Rs.125.17 crore
 
            The Committee   observes that    the prima-facie  stands of the Ministry of Steel , on the issue    of
implementation    of 5th Pay Commission recommendation, that the Company  had implemented the 5th pay
Commission recommendations without the  approval of the  competent  authority but, ( as per the apprehension of the
Ministry of Steel)  in pursuance   of a Supreme Court order ,  as also in pursuance of  DPE’s  OMs,  constitute  the
vicious circle.  The question arises whether on the issue,  the judicious  decision was  taken by the   incompetent
authority  but  on pursuance of  implementing the supreme court order or    simply the laid down procedure was not
followed.   The Committee is of the opinion that  the Ministry of Steel should have come forward immediately after 
passing  of Supreme Court Order for implementation  of its order as per  laid down  procedure.    Now  sitting over the  
issue  would   solve no purpose.  Therefore,  the Committee recommends that the   Ministry of  Steel should  form  the
final opinion without delay, and  if  required     may give  ex-post  facto   approval  to the decision   to implement the 5
th
Pay   Commission  and formulate  comprehensive  for revival   of HSCL    and forward the same   to the Ministry of 

104th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/104threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
Finance for the Grant of  full   financial  assistance   to liquidate the entire outstanding liability of the Company on
account  of unpaid wages and salaries.
MINUTES OF THE MEETING
XIV
 
The Committee  met  at  3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 17th December, 2002 in Committee Room  ‘A’, Ground
Floor Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
Dr. P.C. Alexander                   - Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.      Prof. M.M. Aggarwal
3.      Smt. Saroj Dubey
4.      Shri Faguni Ram
5.      Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
6.      Shri P.K. Maheshwari
7.      Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
8.      Shri S. Sivasubramanian
9.      Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
 
LOK SABHA
 
10.
  Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
11.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das
12.  Shri Thomas Hansda
13.  Shri A.C. Jose
14.  Shri Sunil Khan
15.  Shri Majay Lal
16.  Shri A. Narendra
17.  Shri Ananta Nayak
18.  Shri P. Rajendran
19.  Dr. B.B. Ramaiah
20.  Chowdhary Talib  Hussain
21.  Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
2.         At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them of agenda for the
meeting of the day
 
3.         Thereafter, the Committee took up following draft reports for consideration:-
 
(i)
                  95th Draft Report on inter PSUs cooperation in engineering and Construction Sectors the Department of
Public Enterprises;
(ii)                100th Draft Report on performance review of National Mineral Development Corporation Ltd. (NMDC)

104th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/104threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
(Ministry of Steel);
(iii)               103rd Draft Report on the action taken on recommendations contained in Committee’s 87 th Report on
the implementation Status of Financial Assistance-cum-restructuring Package and Revival of Bharat
Refractories Ltd. (Ministry of Steel);
(iv)              104th Draft Report on the action taken on recommendations contained in Committee’s 85 th Report on
the Implementation Status of Financial Assistance-cum-restructuring package and Revival of Bharat
Refractories ltd. (Ministry of Steel)
(v)                105th Draft Report on the Action Taken on recommendations contained in Committee’s 64 th report on
Modernisation, Restructuring and Expansion Programmes and Post Disinvestment Performance of
Hindustan Zinc Ltd. (HZL) Ministry of Coal and Mines;
(vi)              106th Draft Report Globalisation and Capital Goods Industry the Department of Public Enterprises,
(Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
(vii)             107th Draft Report on Liquidated Damages and Related Issues (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises);
(viii)           108th Draft Report on the action taken on recommendations contained in Committee’s 91 st Report on
Coir Board-A Performance Review pertaining to the Ministry of agro & Rural Industries;
(ix)              109th Draft Report on the Action Taken on recommendations contained in Committee’s 84 th Report on
implementation of Prime Minister’s Rozgar Yojana (PMRY) in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Kerala,
Ministry of Agro & Rural Industries;and
(x)                110th Draft Report on the Action Taken on recommendations contained in Committee’s 86 th Report on
Performance Review of metal Scrap Trade Corporation Ltd. (MSTC) Ministry of Steel.
 
3.1       The Chairman specifically invited the attention of the Members to draft 95 th, 105th and 106th Report.  He stated
that in the 95th Report on Inter-PSU Co-operation in Engineering and Construction Sectors under Department of Public
Enterprises, where the Committee observed that presently although there was existence of permanent machinery of
Arbitration for resolving of differences in the Department of Public Enterprises but no positive progress was made. 
Therefore, the Committee recommended for setting up a Task Force for a positive thrust forward by giving
PSUs/Departments with the position of the Chairman being tenure based, by rotation to be filled by election.  The task
force shall submit periodic reports to this Committee/Parliament in significant initiations and important achievements on
a periodic basis. The Committee under stood that the task entrusted to DPE was not a small one and required
monumental effort and the Committee hoped that the Department would leave no stone unturned to bring the PSUs out
of woods.
 
3.2       Thereafter, the Chairman invited the attention of Members of the Committee to the draft 105
th Report on the
Action Taken on recommendations contained in Committee’s 64 th report on Modernisation, Restructuring and
Expansion Programmes and Post Disinvestment Performance of Hindustan Zinc Ltd.(HZL) under the Ministry of Coal
and Mines where the Committee had discussed new issue in the changing economic scenario.  The Department of Mines
stated that the Government had disinvested 20% equity of HZL and the management of the company had been
transferred on 11th April, 2002 to the Strategic Partner (S.P.) namely, M/s Sterlite opportunities and Ventures Ltd. With
these disinvestments the stake of Government in the company had c ome down to 49.92%.  Even after disinvestments
the Government stake continued to be to the tune of 49.92%, which indicated Government’s substantial stake in the
company.  The Government’s representatives would be the Members of Board of Directors’ who would participate in
the meeting of the Board and act as a link between the new management of the company in post divested phase and the
Government, and by virtue of such representatives of Government would be in the flow of the functioning of the
company and therefore the company would remain in fact under the overall supervision of the Government.  The
Hindustan Zinc Ltd. Even in the post-divested era would continue to utilize the national resources and, therefore, should
continue to be responsible and responsive to the Nation/Government and people of the country in general.  The purpose
of disinvestments was although to generate revenue, but most importantly to inject operational efficiency and
managerial effectiveness in the company and for the general benefit of the economy.  The purpose was not doing away
of accountability in the system.  In order to avoid the repetition of what happened to VSNL and TATA quagmire over a
decision regarding investment, it was suggested that the companies management should continue to be responsible to

104th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/104threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
the Government in the post divested phase and on this count Government should continue to furnish information to
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee as and when asked for.
 
3.3       Thereafter, the Chairman invited the attention of Members of the Committee to the draft 106 th Report on
Globalisation and Capital Goods Industry the Department of Public Enterprises, (Ministry of Heavy Industries and
Public Enterprises).  He stated that in view of the clarificatory notification issued by the Department of Economic
Affairs, there was no need to rescind the notification non.85/99  and the Committee hoped that the capital goods
industry of the country would be able to compete with the foreign bidders in the projects funded by international
organisations.  The Committee, however, urge upon the industry to keep vigil and watch with regard to any deviation of
the World Bank guideline by any international agency by not including the price preference clause in the NIT Notice
Inviting Tender) and thereby depriving the domestic industry to bid for the project and the industry should also
immediately bring any instance to the notice of Department of Economic Affairs in case such price preference was not
extended to domestic industry by any multinational organizations.
3.4       After a brief discussion all the reports were adopted unanimously without any modification.
3.5       The Chairman nominated two Members from Lok Sabha and three Members from Rajya Sabha to present the
reports to both Houses of Parliament.
4.         The Committee, thereafter, took up Auto Policy for discussion.  The Chairman suggested, after its reconstitution
on 1
st January, 2003, could have a meeting in Chennai with all Tyre Manufacturers.  Thereafter, the Chairman discussed
with the Members the scope of Auto Policy which aimed at to promote integrated, phased, enduring and self-sustained
growth of the Indian Automobile Industry.  Some suggestions like use of dippers at night, higher ground clearance for
car, investment of R&D, excise duty on vehicles at the reasonable level, concessions to manufacturer of multi utility
vehicles were discussed for incorporation in the report.
4.                  The Committee then adjourned at 5.45 p.m.
 
New Delhi
December 17, 2002
A.K.SINGH
DEPUTY SECRETARY