 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
July, 2013/Ashadha, 1935 (Saka) 
 
REPORT NO.  
250  
TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTIETH REPORT 
ON 
IMPACT OF FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT (FDI) IN 
MULTI-BRAND RETAIL ON MSME SECTOR 
 PERTAINING TO  
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES  
 
(PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 23.07.2013)  
  (FORWARDED TO THE HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 23.07.2013) 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 06.08.2013) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 06.08.2013 ) 
 

 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
July, 2013/Ashadha, 1935 (Saka) 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTIETH REPORT 
ON 
IMPACT OF FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT (FDI) IN 
MULTI-BRAND RETAIL ON MSME SECTOR 
 PERTAINING TO  
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES  
  
(PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 23.07.2013)  
  (FORWARDED TO THE HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 23.07.2013) 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 06.08.2013) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 06.08.2013 ) 
) 

 
 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
                                                                                                             
PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …………………………………………  ( i ) 
 
2. INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………   (ii) 
 
3. REPORT ……………………………………………………………………………    
 
4. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE – AT A  
    GLANCE…………………………………………………………………………… 
 
5. MINUTES………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
           (CONSTITUTED  W.E.F.  31 ST   AUGUST,  2012) 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
1.   Shri Tiruchi Siva   — Chairman  
2. Shri Narendra Budania 
3.   Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
4.   Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
5.   Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor 
6.   Shri Basawaraj Patil 
7.   Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel 
8.   Shri Vivek Gupta 
9.   Shri Nandamuri Harikrishna 
10. Shri M.P. Achuthan   
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
11.   Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala 
12.   Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
13. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
14. Smt. Poonamben Veljibhai Jat 
15. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
16. Shri Hassan Khan 
17. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
18. Shrimati Ingrid Mcleod 
19. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal 
20. Shri Somen Mitra 
21. Shri P.R. Natrajan 
22. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey 
23. Shri Jayaram Pangi  
24. Shri R. K. Singh Patel 
25. Shri B. Y. Raghavendra 
26. Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
27. Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
28. Ch. Lal Singh 
29. Shri Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
30. Shri E.G. Sugavanam  
31. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.      Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary 
2.      Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
3.      Shri Roshan Lal, Joint Director 
4.      Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 
(i) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamen tary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred 
and Fiftieth Report on impact of Foreign Direct Inv estment (FDI) in retail on MSME 
sector pertaining to Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. 
 
2.  The Committee heard the representatives of Mini stry of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises, Department of Industrial Policy  & Promotion. The Committee also 
sought the views of public through Press-Release an d heard representatives of select 
industry associations/experts on the issue.  
 
3.  The Committee in its meeting held on 22 
nd  July,2013 considered and adopted the 
report. 
 
 
 
 
 
TIRUCHI SIVA        
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
 
 
New Delhi,  
July, 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REPORT  
 
 
            Foreign investment denotes investment made by a non-resident entity 
in an enterprise in the host country. This can happ en through FDI (Foreign 
Direct Investment) and  Foreign Portfolio Investmen t by FIIs (Foreign 
Institutional Investors) or private equity funds et c.  The FDI denotes foreign 
capital with a longer term perspective and often in vested in productive 
enterprise and may seek managerial control over ent erprise.  Of many other 
modes of getting external finance, FDI is preferred mode due to its long term 
stable nature.  It is less volatile  and does not g enerate or add to debt  
liabilities for the host country. 
 
2. In order to discount unwarranted implications, i n India the FDI flow is 
allowed either through Government route or automatic route. The sectors not 
included in automatic route need Government's appro val and proposals are 
considered by inter-ministerial Foreign Investment Promotion Board under 
M/o Finance or Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion 
(DIPP).  Sectors in which FDI is prohibited include  lottery, chit fund, 
gambling/betting, agriculture and plantation. 
 
3.       In November, 2011 the Government of India decided to permit 51% 
foreign direct investment in the multi brand retail  sector.  The decision was 
deferred for want of broader consultation and discu ssion on the issue. 
Subsequently in September, 2012 the Government fina lly announced the 
decision through the press note no. 5 (2012 series) . A minimum investment 
of US $ 100 million, is required to enter into mult i-brand retail business, of 
which 50% will be in the back-end operations. The Back-end operations will 
not include investment in land, rental or front-end  stores.  Among other 
things the press note also mentioned: 
 
         “At least 30% of the value of procurement of manufa ctured/processed  
products purchased shall be sourced from Indian ‘sm all industries’ which 
have a total investment in plant & machinery not ex ceeding US $ 1.00 
million.  This valuation refers to the value at the time of installation, without 
providing for depreciation.  Further, if at any poi nt in time, this valuation is 
exceeded, the industry shall not qualify as a ‘smal l industry’ for this 
purpose.  This procurement requirement would have t o be met, in the first 
instance, as an average of five years’  total value  of the 
manufactured/processed products purchased, beginning 1st April of the year 
during which the first tranche of FDI is received.  Thereafter, it would have 
to be met on an annual basis.” 

 
         The Policy further states: 
  
           "Retail sales outlets may be set up only  in cities with a population of 
more than 10 lakh as per 2011 census and may also cover an area of 10 kms 
around the municipal/urban agglomeration limits of such cities; retail 
locations will be restricted to conforming areas as  per the Mater/Zonal 
Plans of the concerned cities and provision will be  made for requisite 
facilities such as transport connectivity and parki ng.  In States/Union 
Territories not having cities with population of mo re than 10 lakh as per 
2011 Census, retail sales outlets may be set up in the cities of their choice, 
preferably the largest city and may also cover an a rea of 10 kms around the 
municipal/urban agglomeration limits of such cities .  The locations of such 
outlets will be restricted to conforming areas, as per the Master/Zonal Plans 
of the concerned cities and provision will be made for requisite facilities 
such as transport  connectivity and parking." 
 
4.     The Committee decided to examine the impact of recent decision to 
allow 51%  FDI in multi-brand retail, on the MSMEs.  The Committee held 
meetings on the issue on 28th December, 2012, 14thM ay, 2013 and 11th 
June, 2013, during which it interacted with represe ntatives of Ministry of 
MSME, Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion  and representatives 
of select industry associations and experts on the subject.  The Committee 
also invited the views and opinion from public at l arge through an 
advertisement published  in prominent national and regional dailies.   
 
5.     Regarding definition of small industry with investment of US $ 1 
million in Plant and Machinery, the Committee took note of Budget 
declaration (2013-14) to extend non tax benefits fo r next three years after a 
unit graduates out of its category.  The Committee was informed by the 
Secretary, DIPP that process of taking approval fro m competent authority to 
amend existing policy provision to align it with bu dget declaration, was 
under process.   
 
6.     The Committee was informed about the gradual  evolution of the policy 
on FDI.  It was informed   that 100% FDI, through G overnment approval 
route, in wholesale trading was allowed since 1997.    In 2006, the condition 
of Government approval was removed and FDI in whole sale sector was 
allowed through automatic route. Also in 2006, 51%  FDI with Government 
approval was permitted in single brand retail tradi ng.  As per the recent 
policy decision of 2011, 100% FDI has been permitte d in the single brand 

retail trading and 51% in the multi-brand retail tr ading, both subject to 
certain conditions. 
 
7.     It has been informed to the Committee that t he FDI policy is covered 
under schedule I of the Foreign Exchange Management  (Transfer or issue of 
security by a person resident outside India) Regula tion 2000.  And that the 
relevant provision under the recent policy decision  has been notified under 
the said Regulation.  Any violation of the conditio n prescribed in the extant 
policy will amount to violation of Foreign Exchange  Management Act 
(FEMA) Regulation and the RBI and Enforcement Direc torate  could take 
necessary action.  The Committee was also informed that any violation of 
FEMA provisions will involve penalties up to three times the sum involved 
in violation or up to Rs. 2 Lakh in case amount was  the not quantifiable. 
 
8.     The Draft XII Plan document presents  an opt imistic scenario of FDI 
that “ Deeper pockets and technology, and the compu lsions to invest in 
supply chain development which is not there for domestic modern retail may 
accelerate investment in logistics, quicken consoli dation of retail trade and 
create new proprietary  supply chains.” 
 
9.       Emphasizing the positive impact of FDI par ticularly multi-brand retail 
sector, the DIPP informed that the FDI will bring m ore investment in the 
economy that will benefit domestic companies.  It w ill introduce new 
technologies, internationally accepted managerial p ractices and thereby 
facilitate gradual integration into global market. It was also informed 
that  provision of 30% mandatory sourcing from smal l industries will 
encourage value addition in small scale manufacturi ng sector.  This will link 
the domestic small industries with the global retai l chains and will increase 
export from small scale sector. 
 
10.    However, the Committee also took note of the observation made by the 
PM's Task Force on MSME which noted that the past F DI policies did not 
result in substantial technology gains. 
 
11.   Keeping in mind the above  observations of the PM's  Task 
Force  the Committee is of opinion that the FDI for  retail may not have 
beneficial impact on the MSME sector. However the C ommittee 
suggests that the Government and more particularly the Ministry of 
MS&ME should commission a survey to assess the benefits and losses of 
previous FDI policies on the MSME sector to ascerta in if FDI policy so 
far has created any back-end infrastructure, imparted skills to domestic 

manpower or upgraded managerial skills as has been envisaged in the 
recent policy. 
 
12.    In his submission before the Committee, the Secretary, DIPP, 
submitted that the domestic manufacturing sector is  declining and 
uncompetitive and there is vast scope to increase t he share of manufacturing 
sector in the country’s GDP so that more skilled wo rk force could be 
incrementally absorbed in the manufacturing sector. 
 
 
13.    Responding to apprehensions of cheap importe d goods flooding the 
domestic markets, the representative of DIPP tried to distinguish between 
the Trade Policy, which allowed cheap and liberal i mports and the FDI 
policy. Referring to perception that FDI will open up floodgates for cheap 
imported goods that will doom domestic industries a nd retail, he informed 
that goods were still being imported and sold in re tail market as per the 
extant trade policy.  Therefore, he maintained that  the  FDI policy is an 
improvement upon existing policy of liberal imports. 
 
 
       "Today anybody can import the goods. He is i mporting it.  Even in 
organized retail, there in no condition on the Indi an organized retail.  So 
here, there is a step forward that if these people come in, if they want to set 
up shops, they have to procure 30% from MSMEs." 
 
14.   The Industry associations said that in the er a of WTO and Free Trade 
Agreements (FTAs) the trade will be liberalized.  T herefore, domestic 
industry need to adopt new technologies, new busine ss practices, skills and 
build up their competitive strengths to integrate i nto global chains. 
 
15.     The Committee feels that FDI Policy is an extension  of liberal 
trade policy and that the two have hardly any subst antial differences. 
The Committee, therefore, does not accept the so ca lled nuanced 
distinction outlined before it. It is of the view t hat not enough 
safeguards have been provided for  to  insulate the  SME sector from 
sudden changes in trade policy. In view of this  th e Committee is quite 
apprehensive of the constructive and beneficial impact of the FDI policy 
on the MSME sector.   
 
16.   The Committee notes that  in the available li terature the optimistic 
projections on organized retail sector have been ou tlined. According to one 
estimate till 2006 only 4% of retail business in th e country, was done 

through organized retail. Another study suggests th at India’s retail business 
was likely to reach US $ 1 trillion by 2016 at an i mpressive annual growth 
rate of 13%. 
 
17.     The background note of the DIPP also referr ed to the study 
commissioned by the Government of India through Ind ian Council for 
Research on International Economic Relations (ICREI R), entitled “ Impact 
of Organized retailing on the unorganized Sector” (  2008). It referred to 
independent industry estimates and studies on the s ubject and observed that 
organized retail will create quality labour class a t graduate and tenth plus 
levels by providing vocational training and skills to them. As such it will 
enhance the potential of Indian economy including t he small scale 
manufacturing sector, food processing, textiles and  apparels, construction, 
IT, transport, cold chain and other infrastructure. It will replace low-end, low 
quality, underproductive jobs with high end and hig h skill jobs. 
 
18.      As per the estimates of the study 1.7 mill ion direct jobs are expected 
to be created in the front end and back end operati ons in next five years, 
with majority of jobs being created in front-end op erations. The study is 
optimistic that many more indirect jobs would be cr eated in organized retail. 
 
19.    The Committee notes the optimistic estimates given in the study 
made by ICRIER on behalf of Government. However, th e figures on 
which study is based, need to be validated. The Com mittee finds this 
arrangement rather strange where Government commiss ions a study 
with an independent research body which in turn dep ends on another 
non-Government source for data and estimates. The G overnment 
should ascertain the methodology of study and valid ate the estimates 
and figures, before taking such a major policy deci sion on the basis of 
this study. 
 
 
20.     Another significant point is that as per th e study estimates 
majority of jobs will be created in front end opera tions, whereas the 
Government is emphasizing on the integration of sma ll industries in the 
back-end supply chains. There is no clarity regardi ng employment 
potential of front end and back end operations. Fro m Policy it appears 
that 30% sourcing will be calculated on the basis o f annual front-end 
procurement. The Committee notes that the Ministry of MSME seeks 
back-end integration of small industries whereas, s tudies project 
maximum scope of job creation only in the front-end  operations. 
 

21.    In addition to the study by ICRIER, the poli cy has also been supported 
by certain industry associations. The Committee was  informed of the 
industry estimates based on a survey of different classes of SMEs and taking 
into account their turnover. The survey concluded t hat 48% of the 
respondents were of opinion that the FDI in retail  would have positive 
impact on employment and only 16% opined that it wi ll have negative 
impact on employment in SME sector, with 35% saying  that FDI will have 
no impact on employment in SME.  Another study done  by a private Bank 
too, projected 1.7 million jobs being created in 5 years, majority of them 
being in the front-end operations. 
 
22.    The Committee takes cognizance of several studies d one by 
industry bodies and refers to study note provided b y the DIPP, in 
support of prospective benefits which FDI in multi- brand retail may 
bring.  However, the Committee suggests that the Mi nistries of 
MS&ME and DIPP should have done a study on impact of FDI in single 
brand retail and wholesale sectors in the MSME segm ent  and the same 
could have been factored into the recent policy.  
 
23.   In the written submission made by the DIPP, i t is stated that certain 
challenges still exist before MSMEs are integrated into the supply 
chains.  The MSMEs need to adopt and upgrade the ex isting practices in 
areas likes designing, packaging, technology, effic ient manufacturing, bar 
coding, IT systems, quality management, ISO certifi cation and skill 
development. 
 
24 .   The Committee while acknowledging the importanc e of these 
issues   feels that adoption of these systems will increase the costs of 
MSME products.  The Committee suggests that existing schemes of M/o 
MS&ME for skill training, quality certification, pa ckaging  must be 
upgraded and strengthened keeping in view the emerg ing requirements 
for mandatory procurement from MSE sector under FDI  retail 
scheme.  In fact the Committee feels that FDI in re tail may not benefit 
the retail sector unless designing, packaging, bar coding, skill 
development, etc., are improved upon and integrated  into supply 
chain.  To achieve these objectives   increased bud getary allocation 
under the appropriate schemes would be required.   
 
25.     The Committee also raised issue of confinin g the 30% sourcing 
condition only to "Small Industries" with an invest ment if US $ 1 million in 
Plant and Machineries, while excluding other enterp rises.  The Secretary, 
DIPP informed that it was a conscious decision to p romote the 

manufacturing sector.  He also informed that within  the definition of small 
industry, the micro sector was also included.  This  explanation of DIPP is 
not acceptable because micro sector has to be given separate identity to keep 
it insulated. 
 
26.  The Committee would like the MSME Ministry to be more vigilant 
to see that micro  enterprises would not be exclude d due to conservative 
interpretation of "Small Industries" in policy.   T he Committee also 
feels that the while focus on "Small Industries" is intended to encourage 
manufacturing sector, local "Small Enterprises" inc luding the local 
service providers like IT service, Transporters, Te chnicians etc. too 
should get  the benefits of this Policy. 
 
27.    The Committee also takes note of the provision whic h states "in 
States/Union Territories not having cities with pop ulation of more than 
ten lakh as per 2011 census, retail sales outlets m ay be set up in the 
cities of their choice, preferably the largest city  and may also cover an 
area of 10 kms around the municipal/urban agglomera tion limits of 
such cities". This provision is open to interpretat ion.  It may allow the 
mega retail outlets even in or around smaller citie s which have been 
consciously excluded in the provision.  
 
28.  Upon a query, if the foreign retail players co uld source their 
procurement from State which has not allow FDI in m ulti-brand retail trade, 
the Secretary, DIPP informed Committee that embargo was only on the front 
end operations and not on the back end procurements.   
 
29.  The Committee apprehends that  the above provision of putting an 
embargo only on front end operations and not on bac k end 
procurements  would enable entry of Foreign Direct Investors to all the 
States of our Union   which is not the express inte nt of the policy.  The 
Committee notes that the policy was only an enabling provision and that 
it left the respective States to take decision for allowing the FDI in 
multi-brand retail trade.  Therefore, there is a ne ed to clarify the issue 
of back end operations in the policy itself.  The C ommittee also feels 
that such provisions may be misused to create inter necine competition 
among the inter-State small industries.   
 
30.    For wider consultations  on FDI  in retail p olicy  the Committee 
interacted with the representatives of select assoc iations and experts who 
had submitted memoranda to the Committee in response to its advertisement 
seeking opinion from public.  

 
31.    There was an apprehension regarding impact o f FDI on the small 
industries during the first five years when the 30%  annual sourcing norms 
will not be applicable.  The associations apprehend ed that predatory 
practices during the first five year may imperil th e survival of small 
industries. 
 
32 .    The Committee also found the condition of self-cert ification in respect 
of 30% sourcing norm, not helpful to the MSME secto r.  In absence of any 
previous survey on impact of FDI on the SSI sector in the country, the 
Committee feels that the implementation of policy p rovision should be 
closely monitored through an institutional mechanism in the initial year 
and must not be left to self-certification.  The Co mmittee also suggests 
that the auditor should specifically certify the ad herence to the 30% 
sourcing norm and it must be mentioned in the audit ed report of the 
companies which would invest  under FDI in retail s cheme.  These 
provisions should be provided in the relevant FEMA Regulations itself. 
 
33.     Another issue raised pertained to quantifyi ng the 30% procurement. 
There was a demand that 30% procurement should be i tem-wise instead of 
on the basis of total annual procurement. There was  apprehension that any 
ambivalence may deny SSIs, the proposed advantages of the Policy and 
instead may be used against the interests of SSIs. 
 
34.   The Committee took serious note of the apprehension s. The 
representative of the DIPP too agreed to take note of the apprehensions. 
The Committee recommends that 30% sourcing norms sh ould be 
applicable item-wise.   
 
35.    Many associations also stated that difficult ies would arise in aligning 
business model and structure of SSIs with the requi rements of big retail 
business which require standardized products at mas sive scale. These 
standards set by the retails chains can at times be misused and jeopardize the 
small industry leading to extinction of small retai l shops. It was also 
informed that in case a single SSI unit is not able  to supply, multiple 
suppliers may not be able to adhere to standardized  specifications.  
 
36.    There was also apprehension that the 'qualit y' and 'standard' may 
become tools to exclude SSIs from supplying to Mega  retails stores. In this 
regard, the Secretary, M/O MSME submitted that qual ity and standard issue 
may create adverse situation for MSMEs. He informed  that if stringent 
quality standards are applied, it may adversely impact domestic SSIs too and 

if no standard norms are fixed, the local market is glutted with cheap imports 
from China, as has been the case with Toys. The Sec retary, M/o MSME 
further added,    "For most of the products, the st andards in our country are 
not mandatory.  In fact, that is the problem which the MSMEs has been 
facing when it comes to imported products entering the Indian 
market.  Since the standards are not mandatory, the issue that arises is that if 
we make it mandatory, it will also hit the MSMEs." 
 
37.    The Committee was also informed that the com panies which were 
permitted in the wholesale business, were also digressing into retail business 
through clandestine methods in States like Tamil Na du which had not 
allowed FDI in multi-brand retail. Upon enquiring, the representative of 
DIPP informed that while FDI in wholesale was allow ed since 2006, there 
was no institutional mechanism to monitor digressio n to retail trade. The 
representative of the DIPP said: 
 
      "At the Government of India level, we do not have a formal 
mechanism.  But, if there are complaints then they are looked into." 
 
38.   In this respect the Committee takes cognizanc e of the observations and 
recommendations made in the 90th Report of the Depa rtment related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Commerce on the  issue “Foreign and 
Domestic Investment in retail sector” (2009), where in it is observed that: 
        “The Committee are also of the view that al lowing cash and carry 
wholesale in India is nothing but allowing backdoor  entry of foreign 
companies into retailing …” 
     “Government should stop issuing further licens es for ‘cash and carry’, 
either to the transnational retailers or to a combi nation of transnational 
retailers and the Indian partner, as it is mere a c amouflage for doing retail 
trade through back door.” 
 
 
39. The Committee emphasises the need for setting u p an institutional 
mechanism like a Retail Regulatory Authority.  
 
40 .   The Committee also takes note of lack of effici ent and adequate 
monitoring mechanism to enforce policy provisions a nd to discount 
violations. In such a scenario, leaving adherence o f policy provisions 
solely to self-certification, would be self defeating. 
 
41.    The representative of M/o MSME informed the Committee about lax 
monitoring standards in the country against cheap i mports. He informed that 

under the WTO regime, there were three institutiona l safeguards available, 
namely: safeguard against dumping, mechanism locate d in the office of 
Director General, Foreign Trade and another at the Customs Office. 
However, such mechanism has not been efficiently us ed due to complex 
procedures and limited capacities of SSI entrepreneurs to pursue the cases of 
violation. 
 
42.      The representatives M/o MSME confirmed tha t the Ministry would 
be very much interested in the backward operations,  but cautioned against 
any dilution in provisions. He cautioned by saying,  
 
      "We are very interested in the back-end opera tions.  Those back-end 
operations, through any clarification, must not be diluted, that money must 
be invested."  
 
43.    The Committee finds that there are still some areas , where details 
need to be elaborated and modified in interest of M SMEs.  The 
Committee finds that notwithstanding study reports,  a major section of 
industry associations and experts were apprehensive  of  FDI Policy, its 
provisions and their implementation in absence of d etailed norms and 
monitoring mechanism. As such, the Committee has se rious 
reservations over the prescribed Self-certification  norms. The 
Committee recommends that auditors must specificall y certify the 
adherence of sourcing norms by the retail companies . The Committee 
recommends that M/o MSME should conduct regular survey of MSMEs 
to monitor sickness/takeovers/mergers and other tre nds.    
 
44.     The Committee noted that on one hand there were optimistic estimates 
given in the available literature on the subject wh ich are largely shared by 
the Government and Planning Commission.  The witnes ses of various 
associations who appeared before the Committee emph asised very clearly 
the following points:   
 
Initially the game plan of foreign big retail giant s would be to 
attract the customers from the indigenous retail sh ops by offering low 
prices. In doing so they would completely eliminate  our retailers and 
create a situation where they would have monopoly o ver retail trade. 
Later they would sell the same goods at an unreason ably higher price 
which the consumers would be forced to buy in absen ce of any other 
option available to them.  Their continuing dominan ce and their direct 
dealings with farmers by giving attractive prices i n the beginning would 
cripple our Mandis and markets which form part of our rural economy. 

Once such Manids are eliminated the big foreign ret ail giants would 
manipulate prices and our farmers would be forced t o sell their 
products at a low price dictated by them. Our own s queezed out 
retailers and all those associated with the markets  and retail trade 
would lose their livelihood and become jobless. It would add to our 
already existing social and economic woes which gen erates so much 
unrest and violence. 
 
45 .    The Committee therefore, is of the view that a n institutional 
monitoring mechanism is essential to remove any unw arranted 
consequences of this policy. The Committee concurs with the 
recommendation of the Parliamentary Committee on Co mmerce in this 
respect, which suggested that “there is a need for setting up of a Retail 
Regulatory Authority, to look into the problems and  act as a whistle 
blower, in case of anti competitive behaviour and a buse of dominance.” 
 
46.     The Committee is also cognizant of the recent media  reports 
suggesting that the expected investment in multi-br and retail has not 
come yet and the retails companies are negotiating with the 
Government to dilute sourcing norms.  The Committee  cautions against 
any such dilutions.  Any consultation in respect of  FDI and its likely 
impact on SME sector, must mandatorily involve Mini stry of 
MSME.  The Committee also recommends that National Board on 
MSME, as statutory advisory body must take up the i ssue of impact of 
FTAs, Trade Policy and the FDI on MSME sector for i ts study and 
present its recommendations periodically.  Any new clarification on the 
policy must be discussed in the Board.  The Committ ee feels that 
without efficient regulatory frame work, this polic y will not give 
intended benefits to the MSME sector, instead it ma y imperil its very 
survival.   
 
 
 
 
 
 

Recommendation/observation at a glance 
 
 1.   Keeping in mind the above  observations of the PM's  Task 
Force  the Committee is of opinion that the FDI for  retail may not have 
beneficial impact on the MSME sector. However the C ommittee 
suggests that the Government and more particularly the Ministry of 
MS&ME should commission a survey to assess the benefits and losses of 
previous FDI policies on the MSME sector to ascerta in if FDI policy so 
far has created any back-end infrastructure, imparted skills to domestic 
manpower or upgraded managerial skills as has been envisaged in the 
recent policy. 
(Para 11) 
2.     The Committee feels that FDI Policy is an extension of liberal trade 
policy and that the two have hardly any substantial  differences. The 
Committee, therefore, does not accept the so called  nuanced distinction 
outlined before it. It is of the view that not enough safeguards have been 
provided for  to  insulate the SME sector from sudd en changes in trade 
policy. In view of this  the Committee is quite app rehensive of the 
constructive and beneficial impact of the FDI polic y on the MSME 
sector.   
(Para 15) 
3.    The Committee notes the optimistic estimates given in the study 
made by ICRIER on behalf of Government. However, th e figures on 
which study is based, need to be validated. The Com mittee finds this 
arrangement rather strange where Government commiss ions a study 
with an independent research body which in turn dep ends on another 
non-Government source for data and estimates. The G overnment 
should ascertain the methodology of study and valid ate the estimates 
and figures, before taking such a major policy deci sion on the basis of 
this study. 
(Para 19) 
4.     Another significant point is that as per the study estimates majority 
of jobs will be created in front end operations, wh ereas the Government 
is emphasizing on the integration of small industri es in the back-end 
supply chains. There is no clarity regarding employ ment potential of 
front end and back end operations. From Policy it a ppears that 30% 
sourcing will be calculated on the basis of annual front-end 
procurement. The Committee notes that the Ministry of MSME seeks 
back-end integration of small industries whereas, s tudies project 
maximum scope of job creation only in the front-end operations. 
(Para 20) 

5.    The Committee takes cognizance of several studies done by industry 
bodies and refers to study note provided by the DIP P, in support of 
prospective benefits which FDI in multi-brand retai l may 
bring.  However, the Committee suggests that the Mi nistries of 
MS&ME and DIPP should have done a study on impact of FDI in single 
brand retail and wholesale sectors in the MSME segm ent  and the same 
could have been factored into the recent policy.  
                                                                      
(Para 22) 
6.   The Committee while acknowledging the importance of these issues   
feels that adoption of these systems will increase the costs of MSME 
products.  The Committee suggests that existing sch emes of M/o 
MS&ME for skill training, quality certification, pa ckaging  must be 
upgraded and strengthened keeping in view the emerg ing requirements 
for mandatory procurement from MSE sector under FDI  retail 
scheme.  In fact the Committee feels that FDI in re tail may not benefit 
the retail sector unless designing, packaging, bar coding, skill 
development, etc., are improved upon and integrated  into supply 
chain.  To achieve these objectives   increased bud getary allocation 
under the appropriate schemes would be required.   
(Para 24) 
 
7.  The Committee would like the MSME Ministry to be more vigilant to 
see that micro  enterprises would not be excluded d ue to conservative 
interpretation of "Small Industries" in policy.   T he Committee also 
feels that the while focus on "Small Industries" is intended to encourage 
manufacturing sector, local "Small Enterprises" inc luding the local 
service providers like IT service, Transporters, Te chnicians etc. too 
should get  the benefits of this Policy. 
                              
(Para 26) 
8.    The Committee also takes note of the provision whic h states "in 
States/Union Territories not having cities with pop ulation of more than 
ten lakh as per 2011 census, retail sales outlets m ay be set up in the 
cities of their choice, preferably the largest city  and may also cover an 
area of 10 kms around the municipal/urban agglomera tion limits of 
such cities". This provision is open to interpretat ion.  It may allow the 
mega retail outlets even in or around smaller citie s which have been 
consciously excluded in the provision.  
 
(Para 27) 
 

9.  The Committee apprehends that  the above provision of putting an 
embargo only on front end operations and not on bac k end 
procurements  would enable entry of Foreign Direct Investors to all the 
States of our Union   which is not the express inte nt of the policy.  The 
Committee notes that the policy was only an enabling provision and that 
it left the respective States to take decision for allowing the FDI in 
multi-brand retail trade.  Therefore, there is a ne ed to clarify the issue 
of back end operations in the policy itself.  The C ommittee also feels 
that such provisions may be misused to create inter necine competition 
among the inter-State small industries.   
                                                                                                           (Para 29) 
 
10 .    In absence of any previous survey on impact of  FDI on the SSI 
sector in the country, the Committee feels that the  implementation of 
policy provision should be closely monitored throug h an institutional 
mechanism in the initial year and must not be left to self-
certification.  The Committee also suggests that th e auditor should 
specifically certify the adherence to the 30% sourc ing norm and it must 
be mentioned in the audited report of the companies  which would 
invest  under FDI in retail scheme.  These provisions should be provided 
in the relevant FEMA Regulations itself. 
(Para 32) 
11.   The Committee took serious note of the apprehension s. The 
representative of the DIPP too agreed to take note of the apprehensions. 
The Committee recommends that 30% sourcing norms sh ould be 
applicable item-wise.   
 
(Para 34) 
12. The Committee emphasises the need for setting u p an institutional 
mechanism like a Retail Regulatory Authority.  
(Para 39) 
 
13 .   The Committee also takes note of lack of effici ent and adequate 
monitoring mechanism to enforce policy provisions a nd to discount 
violations. In such a scenario, leaving adherence o f policy provisions 
solely to self-certification, would be self defeating. 
(Para 40) 
14.    The Committee finds that there are still some areas , where details 
need to be elaborated and modified in interest of M SMEs.  The 
Committee finds that notwithstanding study reports,  a major section of 
industry associations and experts were apprehensive  of  FDI Policy, its 
provisions and their implementation in absence of d etailed norms and 
monitoring mechanism. As such, the Committee has se rious 

reservations over the prescribed Self-certification  norms. The 
Committee recommends that auditors must specificall y certify the 
adherence of sourcing norms by the retail companies . The Committee 
recommends that M/o MSME should conduct regular survey of MSMEs 
to monitor sickness/takeovers/mergers and other trends.    
 
(Para 43) 
 
15.  Initially the game plan of foreign big retail giant s would be to 
attract the customers from the indigenous retail sh ops by offering low 
prices. In doing so they will completely eliminate our retailers and 
create a situation where they will have monopoly ov er retail trade. 
Later they will sell the same goods at an unreasona bly higher price 
which the consumers would be forced to buy in absen ce of any other 
option available to them.  Their continuing dominan ce and their direct 
dealings with farmers by giving attractive prices i n the beginning will 
cripple our Mandis and markets which form part of our rural economy. 
Once such Manids are eliminated the big foreign ret ail giants will 
manipulate prices and our farmers would be forced t o sell their 
products at a low price dictated by them. Our own s queezed out 
retailers and all those associated with the markets  and retail trade 
would lose their livelihood and become jobless. It will add to our 
already existing social and economic woes which gen erates so much 
unrest and violence. 
(Para 44) 
 
16 .    The Committee therefore, is of the view that a n institutional 
monitoring mechanism is essential to remove any unw arranted 
consequences of this policy. The Committee concurs with the 
recommendation of the Parliamentary Committee on Co mmerce in this 
respect, which suggested that “there is a need for setting up of a Retail 
Regulatory Authority, to look into the problems and  act as a whistle 
blower, in case of anti competitive behaviour and abuse of dominance.” 
(Para 45) 
 
17.     The Committee is also cognizant of the recent media  reports 
suggesting that the expected investment in multi-br and retail has not 
come yet and the retails companies are negotiating with the 
Government to dilute sourcing norms.  The Committee  cautions against 
any such dilutions.  Any consultation in respect of  FDI and its likely 
impact on SME sector, must mandatorily involve Mini stry of 
MSME.  The Committee also recommends that National Board on 
MSME, as statutory advisory body must take up the i ssue of impact of 

FTAs, Trade Policy and the FDI on MSME sector for i ts study and 
present its recommendations periodically.  Any new clarification on the 
policy must be discussed in the Board.  The Committ ee feels that 
without efficient regulatory frame work, this polic y will not give 
intended benefits to the MSME sector, instead it ma y imperil its very 
survival.   
(Para 45) 
*************  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat  
Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry  
 
XXIII 
 
Twenty-third Meeting  
 
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M on Monday, the 22 
nd  July, 2013 in Committee 
Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present  
 
     Shri Tiruchi Siva  — Chairman  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
1.   Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
2.   Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
3.   Shri Basawaraj Patil 
4.   Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel 
5.   Shri Vivek Gupta 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
6.     Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala  
7.     Shri Hassan Khan 
8.     Shri. Kaushalendra Kumar 
9. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal 
10.   Shri Somen Mitra 
11.   Shri P. R. Natarajan 
12. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey 
13.   Ch. Lal Singh 
14. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
15.   Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
 
Secretariat  
 
1. Shri. S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
3. Shri. Roshan Lal, Joint Director 
 
 
   Contd…………..2/ 
 
 
 

-2- 
 
 At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welco med the Members and briefed 
them that the agenda of the meeting, was to conside r and adopt the Draft 246 
th  report on 
Revival of Nagaland Pulp & Paper Company Ltd pertai ning to the Department of Heavy 
Industry, M/o Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises , 249 th report on Revival and 
Restructuring of the Fertilizers and Chemicals Trav ancore Ltd pertaining to the 
Department of Fertilizers, M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers, 250 th  and 251 st  reports on Impact 
of Foreign Direct Investment in Multi Brand Retail on MSME Sector and Implementation 
of Prime Minister’s Employment Generation Programme  (PMEGP), pertaining to the 
M/o Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises, respectively, of the Committee.  
 
2.  Thereafter, the Committee took up the reports f or consideration and after some 
discussion, affected few changes and unanimously ad opted the Draft 246 th , 249th, 250 th  
& 251 st  Reports.  
 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to pr esent the 245 th , 246 th , 247 th , 
248 th , 249 th , 250 th  & 251 st  reports to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha since  the House 
was in recess and the term of the Chairman of the C ommittee was ending on 24 th  July, 
2013. 
 
4.   The Committee also decided to present/ lay its  245 th , 246 th , 247 th , 248 th , 249 th , 250 th  
& 251 st  reports in both the Houses of Parliament during th e coming Monsoon Session. 
The Committee authorized Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu , Member, Rajya Sabha and in 
his absence, Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel, Member, Rajya Sabha, and in the absence of both  
Contd…………..3/ 
 
 
 

 
 
-3- 
 
Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu and Prof. S. P. Singh Ba ghel, Shri Vivek Gupta, Member, 
Rajya Sabha to present the 245 
th , 246 th , 247 th , 248 th , 249 th , 250 th  & 251 st  reports in the 
Rajya Sabha. The Committee also authorized Dr. Ratt an Singh Ajnala and in his absence 
Shri P. R. Natarajan, Members, Lok Sabha to lay copies of all the Reports on the Table of 
the Lok Sabha.  
 
4. Thereafter, the Members expressed their apprecia tion on the functioning and 
performance of the Committee under the leadership of the Chairman.  The Chairman then 
thanked everyone for their cooperation.  
 
The meeting adjourned at 1.45 P.M 
 
 
 
New Delhi                                                                                                          Roshan Lal  
22 
nd  July, 2013                                                                                              Joint Director 
 
 
 
 
To  
The Chairman and Members of the  
Department –Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry 
 
 