98+9 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON INDUSTRY 
  
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
Chaitra, 2023 / 1945 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 THREE HUNDRED AND NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in 
the 316th Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2022-23) pertaining to 
Ministry of Heavy Industries 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 23rd March, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 23rd March,2023) 
 
  
  REPORT NO. 
319 
 

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
Chaitra, 2023 / 1945 (Saka) 
 
 THREE HUNDRED AND NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in 
the 316th Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2022-23) pertaining to 
Ministry of Heavy Industries 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 23rd March, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 23rd March,2023) 
 

 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGES 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ……………………………………………   (i) 
 
2.  INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………………….  (ii) 
 
3.  ACRONYMS………………………………………………………………………..   (iii) – (v) 
 
4.  REPORT…………………………………………………………………………………    1-37 
 
     
       CHAPTER – I Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Ministry………………………............................. 
 
2-11 
       CHAPTER–II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does 
not desire to pursue fur ther in view of the  replies of the 
Ministry……………………………….............................. 
 
 
 12-  22          
      CHAPTER–III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the 
Committee has not accepted  the replies of the 
Ministry……………………….............................................. 
 
23-33          
 
      CHAPTER – IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of wh ich the 
final replies of the Ministry are still awaited......................... 
34-37          
 
    
4.    * Minutes…………………………………………………………………………….          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* To be appended later. 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE(2022-23) 
(Constituted  w.e.f. 13th September, 2022) 
RAJYA SABHA 
 1. Shri Tiruchi Siva         -       Chairman 
  2.  Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya     
 3. Shrimati Sulata Deo 
 4. Shri Hardwar Dubey 
 5. Shri Mithlesh Kumar 
 6. Shri Sandosh Kumar P  
 7. Shri Hishey Lachungpa 
 8. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
 9. Dr. Amee Yajnik 
 10. Dr. Sikander Kumar 
  LOK SABHA 
 11.   Shri Hanuman Beniwal 
 12.   Ms. Mimi Chakraborty 
 13.   Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
 14.   Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse 
 15.   Dr. S. T. Hasan 
 16.   Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
 17.   Shri Ravindra Kushwaha 
 18.   Shrimati Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam   
 19.   Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
 20.   Shri Ramprit Mandal 
 21.   Shri Vincent H. Pala 
 22.   Shri Chirag Paswan 
 23.   Shri T. R. V. S. Ramesh 
 24.   Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy 
 25.   Shrimati Gomati Sai 
 26.   Shri Ravi Kishan Shukla 
 27.   Shri Sunil Soren 
 28.   Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare 
 29.   Shri Su.Thirunavukkarasar 
 30.   Shri Vijaykumar (alias) Vijay Vasanth 
 31.   *Shri Kumbakudi Sudhakaran 
 
 
  SECRETARIAT 
 
1.     Dr. Vandana Kumar, Additional Secretary 
2.     Shri S.D. Nautiyal, Joint Secretary 
3.     Shri Jayanta Kumar Mallick, Director 
4.     Ms. Niangkhannem Guite, Deputy Secretary 
5.    Shri Pratap Shenoy, Under Secretary 
6.    Ms. Deepti Rana, Assistant Committee Officer 
                                                 
 Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 11.10.2022 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 13.02.2023 
 
(i) 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on  
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this  319th Report on 
Action Taken by the Ministry of Heavy Industries on the recommendations/observations 
of the Committee on Industry contained in its 316th Report on “Demands for Grants 
(2022-23)”. 
 
2.  The 316th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry was presented to the Rajya Sabha on  21st March, 2022 and laid on the Table of 
the Lok Sabha on 21st March, 2022. 
 
3.  The Ministry of Heavy Industries  furnished the Action Taken Notes on the 
recommendations contained in the Committee’s 316 th Report of the Committee o n 
Industry on 21st November, 2022. 
 
4. The Committee in its meeting held on 22nd March, 2023 considered and adopted 
the Report. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
22nd  March, 2023/ 
Chaitra 1, 1945 (Saka) 
 
Shri Tiruchi Siva 
Chairman 
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (ii) 

ACRONYMS 
 
2W - Two Wheeler 
3W - Three Wheeler 
ABS - Anti-Lock Braking System 
ACC - Advanced Chemistry Cell 
AE - Actual Expenditure 
ARAI - Automotive Research Association of India 
ATN - Action Taken Note 
AYCL - Andrew Yule and Company Ltd. 
B&R - Bridge and Roof Company Ltd. 
BE - Budget Estimates 
BHEL - Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd 
BIFR - Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction 
BPCL - Bharat Pumps and Compressors Ltd 
BS - Bharat Stage 
CCEA - Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
CCI - Cement Corporation of India Ltd 
CEFC - Common Engineering Facilities Centre 
CGD - Core Group of Secretaries on Disinvestment 
CGIT - Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
CGS - Capital Goods Sector 
CGTMSE - Credit Guarantee Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises 
CMTI - Central Manufacturing Technology Institute 
CNG - Compressed Natural Gas 
CO2 - Carbon Dioxide 
CPSE - Central Public Sector Enterprises 
CTU - City Transport Corporation 
DCAAI - Development Council for Automotive and Allied Industries 
DFG - Demands for Grants 
DIPAM - Department of Investment and Public Asset Management 
 
 
(iii) 

ECLGS - Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme 
EPI - Engineering Projects (India) 
EV - Electric Vehicle 
FAME - Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid &) Electric 
Vehicles 
FY - Financial Year  
GDP - Gross Domestic Product 
GST - Goods and Services Tax 
GWH - Giga Watt Hour 
HEC - Heavy Engineering Corporation 
HMT - Hindustan Machine Tools Ltd. 
HP - Horse Power 
HSL - Hindustan Salts Ltd. 
iCAT - International Centre for Automotive Technology 
IEBR  Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR) 
IEC - Information, Education and Communication  
IISC - Indian Institute of Science 
IIT - Indian Institute of Technology 
ILK - Instrumentation Ltd. 
IMG - Inter-Ministerial Group 
IP - Insolvency Professional 
KWh - Kilo Watt Hour 
LLP - Limited Liability Partnership 
LNG - Liquefied Natural Gas 
MoRTH - Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways 
MSME - Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises 
MSP - Minimum Support Price 
MSTC - Metal Scrap Trade Corporation Limited 
NAB - National Automotive Board 
NATRiP - National Automotive Testing and R & D Infrastructure Project 
NCLT - National Company Law Tribunal 
NIT - National Institute of Technology 
(iv) 

NITI - National Institution for Transforming India 
OEM - Original Equipment Manufacturer 
PLI - Production Linked Incentive 
PMA - Premarket approval 
PSU - Public Sector Undertaking 
R&C - Richardson and Cruddas Ltd. 
R&D - Research and Development 
RE - Revised Estimates 
REIL - Rajasthan Electronics and Instruments Limited    
RMDP - Revival and Mill Development Plan 
ROC - Registrars of Companies 
RoDTEP - Remission of Duties and Taxes on Exported Products 
SCI - Supreme Court of India 
SIL - Scooter India Ltd. 
SLP - Special Leave Petition 
SSL - Sambhar Salts Ltd. 
STU - State Transport Corporation 
UPSIDC - Uttar Pradesh State Industrial Development Corporation 
UT - Union Territory 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

 1 
REPORT  
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action 
Taken by the Ministry on the recommendations contained in the 
Committee‟s Three Hundred and Sixteenth Report on Demands for Grants 
(2022-23) pertaining to Ministry of Heavy Industries.  
 
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries in respect of the recommendations /observations as contained in 
the 316th Report. These have been categorized as follows: 
 
Chapter-I    The recommendations/observations, w hich have been accepted    
by the Ministry. 
   
Para: 9, 16, 23, 24, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 36 and 57  
(Total 11) 
  
 
Chapter-II-  The Recommendations/observations which the Committee does 
not desire to pursue further in view of the Ministry‟s replies. 
   
Para: 11, 32, 35, 39, 42, 51, 60, 67, 68, 71, 72, 73 and 75 
 (Total 13)  
 
Chapter-III- The Recommendations/observations in respect of which the  
    Committee has not accepted the replies of the Ministry.  
 
  Para: 17, 22, 78 and 79  
    (Total 04) 
 
Chapter-IV- The Recommendations/observations in respect of which  the          
    final replies of the Ministry are still awaited.  
  
Para:  47, 52, 54 and 77 (Total 04) 
 
3. The details of the Action Taken Replies of the Ministry and further 
recommendations/observations of  the Committee thereon wherever found 
necessary are given in the succeeding pages.  

 2 
CHAPTER – I 
 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE 
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee further notes that the Ministry has be en able to utilize  
99.62 percentage of the reduced revised allocation of Rs.900 crore for the 
financial year 2020-21.  As regards the present financial year 2021-22, MHI 
could utilize Rs.952.66 crore out of the RE allocation of Rs.1181 crore upto 
31.01.2022, which is ony 80% of the RE, with little time left for utilizing the 
remaining 20%. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries which oversees important CPSEs, Heavy Electrical Equipments 
and Auto Sector etc. should ensure that the en tire RE is fully utilized in the 
remaining period of the financial year and should  henceforth rationalize the 
expenditure spreading all through the year to avoid uneven spending. 
 (Para 9) 
Action Taken Replies 
Budget allocation of Rs.  Rs.995.27 crore was enhanced to Rs.1181.00 crore 
at RE stage, against which the actual expenditure was Rs.1177.98 crore 
which was 99.75% of the RE. The major portion of the Budget at RE stage 
was for FAME-India (Rs.800.00 cr.) and entire amount of Rs.800.00 cr. for 
FAME-India was incurred by the end of March, 2021. In order to ensure that 
ongoing projects/schemes/initiatives of the FAME India-II Scheme were not 
to be affected, the additional funds for FAME -India-II Scheme were 
obtained through Supplementary Demands for Grants.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. As per the written submission of MHI, the Committee notes that fund 
allocated for DCAAI under BE for 2021-22 i.eRs. 15 crores was enhanced to 
Rs. 22 crores at the RE stage. However, it is observed that the utilization of 
the funds upto 10.02.2022 has fallen short and is only 77% of the allotted 

 3 
fund of Rs. 22 crores. It is unlikely that the entire balance of 23% fund will 
be utilized in the remaining one and a half month. The Committee therefore 
recommends that MHI should adopt a rationalised approach for distribution 
of expenditure uniformally throughout the year to avoid under -utilization of 
funds which would undermine the targets set   to support R&D and study 
projects under DCAAI. 
 (Para 16) 
Action Taken Replies 
Noted for compliance. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee further notes that  the actual Expenditure under 
FAME II Scheme for the FY 2019 -20  and 2020 -21 has been satisfactory 
with full utilization of the allocated funds. However, Committee observes 
that for the BE 2021 -22 which was upscaled to Rs.800 crores at RE stage, 
MHI has utilized only Rs. 653.48 crores upto 31.01.2022, a balance of Rs. 
146.52 crores is pending unspent which needs to be utilized in the remaining 
period of FY 2021 -22 . The Committee e xpresses concerns over this poor 
usage of funds and urges the Ministry to make earnest efforts to ensure 
optimal utilisation of the unspent funds during the remaining part of the 
Financial Year 2021-22. 
 (Para 23) 
Action Taken Replies 
It is informed that the allocated fund amounting to Rs. 800 crore at RE 2021-
22 stage has been fully utilized under FAME-II scheme during the FY 2021-
22. 
 

 4 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
4. The Committee expresses concern at such a lacklustre progress in 
both physical and financi al targets set under the FAME II Scheme. The 
Committee reiterates its observation that the underutilisation of the funds 
hampers the achievements of the physical and financial targets set under the 
scheme. India being a potentially big consumer market for EVs which are 
environment friendly, provide fast acceleration and lower maintenance and 
fuelling costs, the Ministry must plan a roadmap to reap this opportunity for 
proliferation of production, sales and incentivisation of EVs.The Committee 
also hopes tha t the Ministry, with the help of its periodic reviews of the 
financial and physical performance of FAME II Scheme, will strive hard to 
achieve the targets set. 
 (Para 24) 
Action Taken Replies 
 
It is stated that  all the allocated fund for FAME -II Scheme dur ing the FY 
2019-20, 2020-21, 2021 -22 has been fully utilized to achieve the physical 
and financial targets set under the scheme. 
The details of the budgetary allocation and utilization to implement Phase II 
of FAME–India Scheme is as under: 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Financial 
Year 
Budget 
Allocation 
Fund Utilization as on 
30.06.2022 
1 2019-2020 Rs. 500.00 
Crore 
Rs. 500.00 Crore 
2 2020-2021 Rs. 318.36 
Crore 
Rs. 318.36 Crore 
3 2021-2022 Rs. 800.00 
Crore 
Rs. 800.00 Crore 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Government has pro moted clean technology and EV into public 
transport space in the Budget 2022 -23. A policy on Green Mobility, Special 
Mobility Zones has been announced to promote charging infrastructure, 
energy storage systems, R&D for clean energy and green mobility. The 
Committee notes that these measures would provide encouragement to the 
cleaner propulsion technologies, improve air quality and reduce  

 5 
consumption of conventional fossil fuels and help promote adoption of 
electric vehicle.  The Committee recommends that th ere is a need to 
encourage multiple clean technologies, along with electric vehicles, 
alternate clean vehicles including CNG vehicles, LNG vehicles, Hybrid 
Electric vehicles, Ethanol vehicles etc. With respect to adoption of electric 
vehicles into public t ransport, state transport agencies should be 
encouraged to adopt these vehicles through financial assistance and 
concessions need to be given to companies wanting to enter into the domain 
of clean technology. 
 (Para 25) 
Action Taken Replies 
Following steps have been taken by Government to encourage ethanol, flex 
engine, CNG, LPG, green hydrogen and electric vehicles: 
i. Incentives under PLI Scheme for Automobiles and Auto 
Components for flex fuel engine and components. 
ii. Incentives under PLI Scheme for Automobil es and Auto 
Components for CNG and LPG parts and components. 
iii. Incentives under PLI Scheme for Automobiles and Auto 
Components for Hydrogen Fuel Cell Vehicles and their 
components. 
 
   Further, following steps have been taken by the Government for adoption 
of electric vehicles in the country: 
i. Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid &) Electric 
Vehicles in India (FAME India) Scheme in 2015 to promote 
adoption of electric/ hybrid vehicles (xEVs) in the country. 
ii. The Government on 12th May, 2021 approved a P roduction 
Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme for manufacturing of Advanced 
Chemistry Cell (ACC) in the country in order to bring down 
prices of battery in the country. Drop in battery price will result in 
cost reduction of electric vehicles. 
iii. Electric Vehicles a re covered under Production Linked Incentive 
(PLI) scheme for Automobile and Auto Components, which was 
approved on 15 th September 2021 with a budgetary outlay of Rs. 
25,938 crore for a period of five years. 

 6 
iv. GST on electric vehicles has been reduced from 1 2% to 5%; GST 
on chargers/ charging stations for electric vehicles has been 
reduced from 18% to 5%. 
v. Ministry of Road Transport & Highways (MoRTH) announced 
that battery -operated vehicles will be given green license plates 
and be exempted from permit requirements. 
vi. MoRTH issued a notification advising states to waive road tax on 
EVs, which in turn will help reduce the initial cost of EVs. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee was informed by Automobile Associations that three 
major hurdles that  manufa cturers have been facing in the consumer 
acceptance of EVs are high upfront price, lack of confidence in new 
technology and concerns relating to charging. With Government support to 
alleviate these issues, more and more manufacturers are investing into EV 
Research & Development and setting -up local supply chain for mass 
production. The Committee is of the view that the manufacturers would need 
the support from Government on a longer term i.e until the EV market 
becomes self-sustainable, more affordable and within the reach of common 
man. The Committee therefore, is of the view that the Ministry needs to 
promote electric mobility colossaly by working towards technological 
solutions through R&D efforts with industry, research and development 
agencies. 
 (Para 26) 
Action Taken Replies 
Following steps have been taken by the Government to promote the use of 
electric vehicles in India and to resolve the issues faced by manufacturers of 
Automobile: 
 
1)         The Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid &) Elect ric 
Vehicles in India (FAME India) Scheme was implemented in 2015 with an 
aim to reduce dependency on fossil fuel and to address issues of vehicular 
emissions. At present, Phase -II of FAME India Scheme is being 

 7 
implemented for a period of 5 years w.e.f. 01 st April, 2019 with a total 
budgetary support of Rs. 10,000 crores. 
 
2)         The Government on 12th May, 2021 approved a Production Linked 
Incentive (PLI) scheme for manufacturing of Advanced Chemistry Cell 
(ACC) in the country in order to bring down prices of battery in the country. 
Drop in battery price will result in cost reduction of electric vehicles. 
 
3)         Electric Vehicles are covered under Production Linked Incentive 
(PLI) scheme for Automobile and Auto Components, which was approved 
on 15th September 2021 with a budgetary outlay of Rs. 25,938 crore for a 
period of five years. 
 
4)         GST on electric vehicles has been reduced from 12% to 5%; GST on 
chargers/ charging stations for electric vehicles has been reduced from 18% 
to 5%. 
 
5)         Ministry of Road Transport & Highways (MoRTH) announced that 
battery-operated vehicles will be given green license plates and be exempted 
from permit requirements. 
 
6)         MoRTH issued a notification advising states to waive road tax on 
EVs, which in turn will help reduce the initial cost of EVs. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee notes that introducing the new battery swapping 
policy and recognizing battery or energy as a service will help to develop 
EV infrastructure and increase the us e of EVs in public transportation. It 
would motivate businesses engaged in delivery and ride aggregation 
businesses to incorporate EVs into their fleet and would create new avenues 
for companies to venture into the business of battery swapping. Additionally, 
creating special clean zones will further accelerate the adoption of EVs and 
spread awareness amongst the citizens thereby benefitting the whole 
segment, i.e E2W, E3W, E -cars and buses. The Committee hopes that this 
policy will address the last -mile connectivity issue for both passenger and 
commercial vehicles, encourage fresh investments for indigenous 
batterymakers and provide impetus to the  entire EV Ecosystem including 

 8 
manufacturers and charging infrastructure  players. The Committee further 
desires t hat the blueprint of the scheme be worked out expeditiously and 
implemented soon by the MHI to act as game -changer in catalysing the 
migration to EVs and instilling  confidence in the potential passenger EV  
buyers. Also, the Committee is of the view that Rs . 195 bn of additional 
allocation for PLI for manufacturing high efficiency solar modules would 
create new-age infrastructure for green energy and EV ecology over the next 
decade. 
 (Para 28) 
Action Taken Replies 
It is informed that NITI Aayog has uploaded a draft policy on their website 
for stakeholders consultation for implementing the battery swapping policy. 
 
Further, to establish a larger manufacturing base for solar PV 
modules, an additional allocation of Rs.19,500 crore (Tranche II) for PLI for 
manufacture of high efficiency modules, with priority to fully integrated 
manufacturing units from polysilicon to solar PV modules, was announced 
in the Budget 2022-23, on 1st February 2022. 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee was informed by Automobile Associations that the 
lack of local supply chains for parts and components used for manufacturing 
EVs and EV batteries creates barriers for local manufacturing. The 
Committee would like to urge the Ministry to encourage  indigenous 
technologies in Electric Mobility that are suited for India from both strategic 
and economic standpoint and take favourable action thereon. The 
“AatmaNirbhar Bharat” initiative for self -reliance and sustainability, ARAI 
and NAB/ NATRIP centres should be directed to work towards e nabling 
localization and local innovation for the Automotive Industry which will 
have direct impact on reduction of imports and increase self -reliance and 
thereby increase employment avenues. 
 (Para 29) 

 9 
Action Taken Replies 
The Government has approved Prod uction Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme 
on 15 th September, 2021 to encourage manufacturing of Advanced 
Automotive Technology (AAT) Products for Auto sector in India. 
 
 The objectives behind introduction of PLI scheme for auto sector in 
the country is to boost  domestic manufacturing of AAT products & attract 
investments in automotive manufacturing value chain. Its prime objectives 
include overcoming cost disabilities, creating economies of scale and 
building up a robust supply chain in areas of AAT products. Th e scheme 
will facilitate Indian Automobile Industry to move up the value chain into 
higher value added products. This scheme is aligned with the goal of 
Aatmanirbhar Bharat by encouraging investment in setting up of 
manufacturing facilities for AAT product s in India & incentivizing AAT 
products with minimum 50% domestic value addition under this PLI 
scheme.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Ministry has informed the Committee about the evaluation of 
Phase-I of FAME Scheme done by an independent consultant . After 
analysing the main findings of the outcome report, the Committee is 
dismayed to note that the overall outcomes of key parameters of Fuel saving 
and CO2 reduction are significantly below the target for FAME.  The 
Committee recommends that subsidy st ructure provided under FAME 
scheme needs to be revised based on the power train technology to 
incentivize cleaner technologies and to establish parity across technologies. 
 (Para 30) 
Action Taken Replies 
In the Phase-I of FAME India Scheme, about 2.8 lakh hybrid and electric 
vehicles are supported by way of demand incentive amounting to about 
Rs. 359 crore resulting in saving of about 111 million liters of fuel and 
reduction of about 276 million Kg of CO2. 
 Under Phase-II of FAME India Scheme, about 6.3 lakh electric 
vehicles are supported by way of demand incentive amounting to about 
Rs. 2644.00 Cr. as on 12.10.2022 resulting in saving of about 169 million 
liters of fuel and reduction of about 385 million Kg of CO2. 

 10 
 Further, MHI has sanctioned 6315 e -buses to 65 
cities/STUs/CTUs/ State Government entities for intracity and intercity 
operations across 26 states/UT under the Scheme. T hese buses will run 
about 4 billion Kilometer during their contract period and are expected to 
save cumulatively about 1.2 bill ion liters of fuel over the contract period, 
which will result into avoidance of 2.6 million tonnes of CO2 emission. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee recommends that a medium and long term transparent 
and visible regulatory road map with stagg ered timeline of regulations  
should be made available to industry so that they can plan their investments, 
technologies and product development in a planned & efficient manner and 
cost escalation caused due to fulfilling regulatory guidelines for automobiles 
can be stabilised. Further to bring down the cost of technology, the 
Committee recommends that emphasis should be laid on faster localisation 
of manufacturing of Automobile components which shall also be supported 
by increased volumes as the installati on rates and vehicle volumes would 
grow over time.  
 (Para 36) 
Action Taken Replies 
The following steps have been taken by the Ministry of Heavy Industries to 
boost domestic manufacturing of Electric vehicles: 
i. Government has approved the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) 
Scheme for Automobile and Auto Components Industry in India to boost 
domestic manufacturing of Advanced Automotive Technology products 
and attract investments in the automotive manufacturing value chain 
with a budgetary outlay of Rs. 25,938 crores over a period of five years.  
ii. The Government on 12 th May, 2021 approved a Production Linked 
Incentive (PLI) scheme for manufacturing of Advanced chemistry cell 
(ACC) in the country in order to bring down prices of battery in the 
country. Drop in ba ttery price will result in cost reduction of electric 
vehicles and increase in their sales. 
iii. Under FAME India Scheme Phase-II, Phased Manufacturing Programme 
(PMP) has been introduced with theobjective of domestic manufacturing 
of electrical vehicles, its a ssemblies/ sub -assembliesand parts/sub-parts 
thereby increasing the domestic value addition. 

 11 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee expresses its concern that the entire allocated fund of 
Rs. 0.05 crore for development of Industry Associations and PS Us for 
undertaking promotional activities is unutilised and desires that the Ministry 
should take urgent timely action to promptly utilise the available funds for 
the purpose envisaged. Since the COVID situation has now improved, the 
Committee recommends t hat MHI should proactively fund various 
awareness/ promotional events for the Capital Goods Sector, highlight the 
capabilities/ achievements of Indian Manufacturing industries through all 
stakeholders during the FY 2022 -23. The Committee further recommends  
that the performance of the Capital Goods Sector should be assessed from 
time to time at various levels of  the Ministry by interacting with Industrial 
Associations whereby the apprehensions and issues relating to the Industry 
raised through the Industry Associations may be deliberated and addressed. 
 (Para 57) 
Action Taken Replies 
MHI takes note of the above observation of the Committee. It is however, 
mentioned that MHI has given in principle approval to various Academia / 
R&D Institutes, Industries for t he organization of the seminars/ webinars/ 
conference for promotion of the Government initiatives under CG Sector. 
The payment is made on reimbursement basis after the successful 
organization of the events by the concerned Institute/ Industry/Association 
etc.   Further, regular meetings are being held by the Ministry with 
concerned Industry Associations and their concerns are being addressed by 
the Ministry and if required, the issues are also being referred to concerned 
authorities for their redressal. 
 

 12 
CHAPTER–II 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE FURTHER IN 
VIEW OF THE MINISTRY’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
12. The Committee observes  that for the Financial Year 2022 -23,  M/o 
Heavy Industries  has been able to get a BE allocation of  Rs 3306 crore  
from M/o Finance, against the actual projection of Rs 3680.27 crore, which 
is about 90 % of the actual projection.  As such, there is a shortfall of Rs. 
374.27 crore in the BE allocation for 2022-23. The Committee also observes 
that the budgetary allocation for capital expenditure is quite inadequate and 
may pose a hindrance for infrastructure building.  Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that it should be augmented at the RE stage which will induce 
demand for services and manufactured products from heavy industries along 
with creation of better infrastructure.  The Committee is, however, pleased 
to note that important schemes of the Ministry such as FAME, PLI etc. have 
been allocated the entire funds,   as pro jected, so that the said schemes can 
be implemented successfully. The Ministry may further address the issue of 
curtailment of funds by taking up the matter with the M/o Finance for 
enhanced allocation, as per requirement, at RE stage. 
 (Para 11) 
Action Taken Replies 
It is submitted that keeping in view the additional requirement for FAME 
India-II Scheme, Budget projection of Ministry of Heavy Industries for the 
year 2022 -23 was steeply enhanced to Rs.3680.27 crore against which 
Ministry of Finance allocate d the BE provision for the year 2022 -23 of 
Rs.3306.00 crore which is about 90% of the total projection by MHI. The 
highest allocation in BE 2022 -23 in for the FAME India -II Scheme 
amounting to Rs.2908.28 crore. Demands for funds at RE stage will be 
calibrated as per the scheme requirements. 

 13 
Recommendation/Observation 
13. The Committee notes that  there is a sharp decline in the domestic 
automobile production and sales since FY 2018 -19. The Indian Auto 
Industry has faced a significant slowdown because of Covi d-19, global 
semiconductor shortage, changing global economy, Government 
regulations, market dynamics and unbridled commodity price increase.  The 
Committee appreciates the several new provisions and increased 
investments announced by the Government to get  the auto industry back on 
track. Measures such as increase in capital expenditure, focus on 
infrastructure across the board etc are expected to provide the much-needed 
impetus for the commercial vehicle sector, especially the M&HCV segment, 
which has witnessed sharp demand contraction over the past 2 years. 
 (Para 32) 
Action Taken Replies 
The Government, as a policymaker, always attempts to keep and improve 
momentum of economy through a package of  measure for comprehensive 
and continued development of the auto sector as and when required. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
14. The Committee appreciates the positive step taken by MoRTH to make 
Indian vehicles safer for the drivers as well as co -passengers and hopes that 
it would help in reducing the number of road accident fatalities. The 
Committee also takes note of the submission made by Auto Associations that 
introduction and implementation of sudden and frequent changes in 
regulations in such a short time severely impacts the growth of auto sector 
and the manufa cturing sector and is of the view that considering the 
challenges faced by OEMs, sufficient timeframe should be provided to the 
Auto manufacturers for implementation of mandatory additional airbags 
requirement.  
 (Para 35) 

 14 
Action Taken Replies 
The Ministr y of Road and Transport and Highways, vide GSR 1483 (E) 
dated 7th December, 2017, mandated the requirement of airbag for the driver, 
as per Automotive Industry Standard (AIS) 145. The Ministry has notified 
GSR 148 (E) dated 2 nd March, 2021 regarding mandat ory provision of an 
airbag for the passenger seated on the front seat of a vehicle, next to the 
driver, as per AIS 145, as amended from time to time, for vehicles 
manufactured on and after the 1st day of April, 2021, in the case of new 
models, and 31st day  of August, 2021, in the case of existing models. 
However, due to COVID 19 pandemic, MoRTH vide GSR 595(E) dated 
26th August 2021 has extended the timeline in respect of date of 
implementation of fitment of air bags on existing models upto 
31st December, 2021. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
15. The Committee was informed by MHI that a total of 115 applications 
were submitted out of which 20 have been approved under “Champion OEM 
Incentive Scheme”.  The incentives under this Scheme are applicable from 
FY 2022-23 to FY 2026 -27 and the incentive disbursement will be from FY 
2023-24 to FY 2027 -28. The Committee hopes that the Scheme will reduce 
import dependence and support the Atmanirbhar Bharat initiative by 
overcoming cost disabilities, creating economies of sca le and building a 
robust supply chain in areas of advanced automotive technology products.  
However, the Committee observes that an amount of Rs. 3.50 Cr. in RE 
2021-22 has been sought for the payment of project monitoring agency of 
PLI Scheme for automobi le and auto components but no fund has been 
utilized till date. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
should ensure utilising the funds made available for the PLI scheme before 
the end of FY 2021-22, for the purpose envisaged.  
 (Para 39) 
Action Taken Replies 
It is stated that the amount of Rs. 3.50 Cr. which was sought in RE 2021 -22 
for the payment of project monitoring agency of PLI Scheme for automobile 
and auto components has been utilized. 

 15 
Recommendation/Observation 
16. The Committee w as apprised by the Ministry that 10 
domestic/international manufacturers submitted their proposals for 
~130GWhr - as per technical bids which opened on 15 th January 2022. The 
Committee hopes that the PLI Scheme for Advanced Chemistry Cell would 
boost domes tic manufacturing of batteries, cells and develop battery 
manufacturing ecosystem for both demand and supply. The Committee notes 
that the amount of Rs. 50 Lakhs which was sought for payment to 
consultants/PMA in RE 2021 -22 has not utilised till date. The Committee 
strongly recommends that the Ministry should strive to fully utilize the 
allocated fund in the remaining two months of FY 2021 -22 so that the 
ambitious PLI scheme can be implemented seamlessly and effectively as per 
the set targets. 
 (Para 42) 
Action Taken Replies 
It is stated that the PLI Scheme for Advanced Chemistry Cell is being 
implemented seamlessly and effectively as per the set timelines. Further, it 
is informed that a letter of authorization amounting to Rs. 50 Lakhs which 
was sought for payment to consultants/ PMA in RE 2021 -22 has been 
issued to NITI Aayog for hiring of 3 consultants for PLI Scheme for 
Advanced Chemistry Cell and Battery Storage. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
17. The Committee observes that the RE for the Scheme for enhancement 
of competitiveness in Indian Capital Goods Sector for FY 2021-22 has been 
slashed to less than one-third of the allocated BE. Despite having a reduced 
allocation, the MHI has been able to utilize only 58% i.e.,  Rs. 16.87 crores 
upto 31.01.2022 out of the RE of Rs. 29 crores. From the written submission 
of the Ministry regarding the  reason for reduction in RE 2021 -22, the 
Committee understands that most of the projects of the Scheme are R&D 
based and are set up in the premises of academic institutions / research 
institutes that were closed down due to the pandemic situation in the country 

 16 
to stop the spread of COVID 19. This hindered the progress of various 
projects sanctioned under the Capital Goods Scheme leading to reduced 
demand for funds in the FY 2020-21 and consequent reduction in the RE 
2021-22. Since the COVID situation has improved, the Committee desires 
that the Ministry should strive to fully utilize the entire RE allocation in the 
remaining period of the financial year 2021-22, so that the targets set under 
Scheme does not suffer for lack of sufficient fund.  
 (Para 51) 
Action Taken Replies 
The expenditure under the CG Scheme was Rs 28.93 crores out of the RE of 
Rs 29.00 for FY 2021 -22.  Thereby Ministry was able to almost fully utilise 
the funds allocated at RE stage for the FY 2021-22. 
Recommendation/Observation 
18. The Committee finds the overall fund utilisation by the autonomous 
institutions during the years 2019 -20, 2020 -21 and 2021 -22 to be 
satisfactory which has been to the tune of 100 % which points towards a 
good track record of utilizing the fund optimally for the R&D activities of 
CMTI.  The Committee was informed by the Ministry that Covid pandemic 
has badly affected CMTI, including the conduct of training courses as well 
as onsite lab services thereby significantly reducing their revenue 
generation from services and training. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that in view of the prevailing situation in CMTI, MHI should 
convince the M/o Finance for enhanced allocation at RE stage,  so that the 
R&D Programme for developing high tech core manufacturing technologies 
are not affected. 
(Para No.60 ) 
Action Taken Replies 
The RE for 2021 -22 for Grant in Aid salaries to CMTI was Rs 18 crores 
which was fully utilized by CMTI. Now for FY 2022 -23, Rs 24.00 crores 
 was allocated.as Budgetary Estimate based on the projections received 
CMTI. However, MHI has noted the recommendation of the Committee and 

 17 
will take up the matter with M/o Finance as per the requirements of CMTI 
so that their R&D programmes are not affected. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
19. The Committee observes that the number of CPSEs under the 
administrative control of MHI i.e., 22 CPSEs in 2019 -20 has dwindled to 16 
as on date, out of which 10 are profit making, 6 are making losses  and 8 
CPSE are under closure. The Committee recommends that MHI should 
undertake a thorough appraisal of each loss making CPSEs and explore all 
possibilities to revive or restructure the CPSEs with a view to bring about a 
turnaround in its performance .Th e Committee is aware that the realm of 
CPSEs has recently under gone major changes, especially, since the 
Government has decided to restrict itself only to a few selected priority 
areas of business. Even the CPSEs that are profitable, but not belonging to 
specified areas of business, are being disinvested. In this scenario, the 
Committee is of the considered opinion that the CPSEs that would remain in 
operation, after hiving off of the earlier said non -priority companies, would 
need clear guidance regarding  efficient functioning and other inputs 
required to sustain themselves successfully. 
(Para No.67 ) 
Action Taken Replies 
NEPA:- The Revival and Mill Development Plant of Nepa Limited as 
approved by the Government has been implemented and the plant has been 
inaugurated on 23rd August, 2022 by Hon‟ble Minister of Heavy Industry. A 
reference has been made to DIPAM to initiate the process of disinvestment 
of NEPA Ltd. 
 
BBJ:-The Braithwaite Burn and Jessop Construction Company Ltd. (BBJ) is 
a profit making compan y. Profit earned by BBJ, during the last 3 years, is 
depicted below:  
                                                                               (Rs. in Crore) 
Particulars 2019-20 
(Audited) 
2020-21 
(Audited) 
2021-22 
(Provisional) 
Profit before 
Tax 
2.28 15.07 7.44 

 18 
Recommendation/Observation 
20. The Committee also observes that in its earlier report on DFG 
(306th), the Committee had desired that the outstanding dues of Bridge & 
Roof Ltd. of Rs. 74.25 crores towards MSMEs for the goods and services 
received from them be released promptly. However, the Ministry in their 
ATN Report informed the Committee that that Bridge & Roof Ltd still has a 
total pending disputed claims of Rs 35.99 crore which are yet to be paid to 
the MSMEs. The Committee therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation 
that MHI should direct the PSU concerned to expeditiously settle the 
outstanding dues of the MSMEs. 
(Para No.68 ) 
Action Taken Replies 
  Nos. Rs. in 
Crores 
Remarks 
I Total Pending 
(Application + Cases) 
56 35.99   
II Details of (I)     
A  Pending Cases 4 0.41 Cases pending and not yet 
converted into case by 
MSEFC. 
B Settled Cases     
a)  Cases rejected by 
Council 
6 3.04 Cases are rejected by MSEFC 
itself since the claims are not 
tenable. 
b)  Cases disposed by 
MSME Council 
3 0.49 The claims are disposed off 
after settling the final amount 
payable and subsequent to 
which the settled amount has 
been paid to the respective 
parties. 
c)  Cases mutually settled 
with buyer 
1 0.33 Cases are mutually settled 
with the buyers aft er 
resolution of the issues and 
accepted by MSEFC. 
d)  Payment made but yet 
to be acknowledged 
23 8.34 Payment made to MSME 
vendors but it needs to be 

 19 
by vendor on portal acknowledged by the vendors 
on the portal.  
C Balance Cases     
a) Disputed Claims 19 23.38 Disputed Claims are on 
account of extra claims not as 
per Contract, delay in delivery 
of materials, supplied 
materials not as per 
specification, defaulter in GST 
payment; incomplete 
submission of documents etc. 
which are not tenable due to 
aforesaid reasons and 
resolution of dispute is 
awaited from MSEFC. 
However, it may please be noted that the undisputed outstanding dues to 
MSMEs for the cases as on 21-09-2021 is NIL. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
21. The Committee notes that BHEL, a Maharatna Co mpany, has utilised 
only 51% of the allocated RE 2021 -22 IEBR of Rs. 226 crores which means 
that the CPSE has to spend Rs. 110 crore in the remaining two months of the 
Financial Year 2021 -22. The Committee apprehends significant 
underutilization of the bud getary funds available with the CPSE. Poor 
utilization of the funds would lead to idling of funds which should have been 
avoided. The Committee would like the Ministry to take stock of the reasons 
which caused the slow pace of utilization of funds and take  corrective 
measures to ensure optimum utilization of the allocated funds, during the 
Financial Year 2021 -22.The Committee desires that BHEL should take 
initiatives to diversify in the areas related to power, emission, 
transportation, transmission, defence , Oil & Rigs etc. and focus on Capital 
Investment projects/ schemes, modernisation & rationalisation of facilities. 
(Para No.71) 

 20 
Action Taken Replies 
With focused approach on the implementation of the on -going Capex 
projects, BHEL achieved a Capex of Rs. 231 crores against the allocated RE 
2021-22 IEBR of Rs. 226 crores. 
The outbreak of second wave of COVID -19 prompted levying of 
curbs for controlling the spread of the pandemic, which led to supply chain 
disruptions thereby hampering the delivery and commi ssioning timelines of 
the plants and machineries. The severity of the pandemic and its aftermath 
also led to unavailability of vendor manpower which impacted the progress 
in areas of civil and erection works. Consequently, utilization of budgetary 
funds remained subdued in the first 3 quarters of FY 2021-22. 
BHEL has been investing for modernisation and expansion of its 
existing facilities to ensure sustainable growth and development. For cleaner 
and greener utilization of coal  BHEL has forayed into emission control 
solutions viz. Flue Gas Desulphurization (FGD) for SOx control, Selective 
Catalytic Reduction (SCR) for NOx control and Coal to Chemicals 
technology.  BHEL is also offering high efficiency ESPs for meeting the 
revised environmental norms for ther mal power plants notified by the 
MoEF& CC. Further, for achieving highest levels of efficiency and lowest 
emissions, the design for country‟s first Advanced Ultra Supercritical 
(AUSC) technology based plant has been developed by BHEL, along with 
National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC) & Indira Gandhi Centre for 
Atomic Research (IGCAR) and government support is awaited for setting up 
its Technology Demonstration Plant (TDP). With focus on growth of non -
coal business of the company, BHEL offers comprehensiv e solutions for 
hydro power, nuclear power, transportation, transmission, defence & 
aerospace, oil & gas and new growth areas. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
22. The Committee further notes that BHEL is aligning its business 
initiatives with National Goals in  emerging technology areas vizCoal to 
Methanol and Hydrogen economy. Keeping in view the importance of 
emerging technology, BHEL should prepare a blueprint of its requirements 
vis-à-vis the emerging technology and seek additional funds at RE stage 
from the M/o Finance. 
(Para No.72) 

 21 
Action Taken Replies 
In the wake of the shift in focus towards meeting country‟s energy needs 
through a balanced mix of sources consisting of clean coal, hydro, nuclear, 
solar, BHEL is aligning its business activities in the area  of emerging 
technologies so as to capitalize on opportunities arising out of National Coal 
Gasification Mission of the Ministry of Coal and Draft National Hydrogen 
Mission report of the MNRE (Ministry of Non Renewable Energy). BHEL 
has indigenously designed, installed and demonstrated 0.25 (Tons Per Day) 
TPD Methanol Generation Technology Demonstration Plant using high ash 
Indian Coal,first of its kind in India which was dedicated to nation by 
Hon‟ble Union Minister for Heavy Industries, Dr. MahendraNath Pa ndey in 
January 2022. A dedicated Hydrogen Business Group has also been 
constituted at BHEL for exploring areas of interest in Hydrogen value chain 
viz. Electrolyser systems and Fuel Cell systems. Research and Development 
(R&D) wing at BHEL has already dev eloped and tested a 5 kW Proton 
Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell (PEMFC) and efforts are being made for 
upscaling it to 25kW. BHEL is also collaborating with other PSUs for 
indigenous technology development and commercialization in the area of 
Coal to chemicals .  Proposals of funding will be taken up suitably as per 
merit / credentials of the projects as and when required. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
23. From the written submission made by MHI in response to a query 
regarding achievements made by CPSEs under MHI , through their own  
R&D activities,  the Committee understands that  BHEL tops the list of 
CPSEs under MHI with R&D expenditure of 3859 crore, during the last 5 
years. BHEL has been granted 82 patents out of the 759 patents filed during 
this period which is commendable. The Committee appreciates the 
achievements of BHEL in R&D which would enable BHEL to improve the 
competitiveness of their products, expand its product offerings and also 
provide technological edge for long term benefit of the company.  
(Para No.73) 
Action Taken Replies 
BHEL‟s products & services are technology intensive in nature, and hence, 
Engineering & Technology are of strategic importance to the organization. 

 22 
Accordingly, Research & Development has been a continuous thrust area in 
BHEL right from the company‟s inception which has enabled the company 
for enhancing its offerings through continuous in-house development efforts. 
As on 17/06/2022, BHEL has filed 1448 Patents and Design registrations. 
Out of this, 448 Patents and Design regist rations have been granted. BHEL 
is grateful to the Hon‟ble Parliamentary Committee on Industry for 
acknowledging company‟s efforts in the field of research and development. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
24. The Committee is aware that Revival and Mill Develo pment Plan 
(RMDP) of NEPA  Ltd was approved by the Government in 2018 which was 
slated to be completed in December, 2019 with a total financial package of 
Rs 469.41 crore. However, it is yet to be implemented, despite the MHI 
constituting a monitoring Comm ittee to regularly review the progress of its 
implementation.  The Ministry has now informed the Committee that  the 
implementation of the RMDP of NEPA Ltd. is presently in final stages and 
post completion of RMDP, the CCEA  has mandated for the strategic 
disinvestment of entire Government of India (GoI) shareholding in NEPA 
Ltd. The Committee therefore recommends that the MHI  should expedite 
completion of the RMDP of NEPA by fast track monitoring as it has already 
missed multiple deadlines, in order to boost  production and enhance 
employment. The Committee further directs the Ministry to furnish the 
details of the compliance report in this regard.  
(Para No.75 ) 
Action Taken Replies 
Implementation of Revival and Mill Development Plant of NEPA Limited as 
per t he approval of CCEA is in its final stage and trials have been 
commenced. The 26 th meeting of the Monitoring Committee has been held 
on 27 th May, 2022. The plant post RMDP has been inaugurated on 23 rd 
August, 2022 by Hon‟ble Minister of Heavy Industry. 

 23 
CHAPTER–III 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH THE COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED THE REPLIES 
OF THE MINISTRY 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
25. Further, the Ministry is silent on the identified areas of action for 
supporting R&D and study project s taken up by the Ministry under DCAAI 
Scheme. The Committee would like to be apprised of the R&D 
activities/projects undertaken by the Ministry and progress made in this 
regard.  The Committee is pleased to note that BE allocation of Rs. 28.62 
crores for the year 2022-23 is the highest ever in the past several years and 
expects the full utilization of the allocated funds thereby providing fillip to 
R&D activities and reap benefits of technological advancement.  
 (Para 17) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
The Development Council constituted under the chairmanship of Secretary, 
Ministry of Heavy Industries is focused upon the issues relating to the 
growth of the sector.   This forum provides an opportunity to identify key 
areas of concern for which appropriate policy mo dulations and other 
identified areas of action can be taken up by various Ministries/Departments 
of the Government of India. 
 
The funds allocated under DCAAI to the Ministry are utilised for supporting 
R&D & study projects received from Industry in collabo ration with 
IITs/NITs, ARAI and such like  Institutions through Expression of Interest 
(EoI) issued by the Ministry. The proposals sent are evaluated by a 
Screening Committee (headed by Joint Secretary) and Main Committee 
(Apex Committee – headed by Secreta ry, MHI) considers the projects and 
accords them final administrative and financial approval.  
 
During the current financial year 2022-23, Rs. 5.00 Crore has been allocated 
to DCAAI for funding various projects under BE 2022 -23 and proposal for 
RE 2022-23 for DCAAI has been submitted. 
 
  

 24 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee notes with concern that the Ministry has not furnished 
the details of the R&D activities/projects undertaken by the m and the 
progress in that regard . Keeping in view t he enhanced BE allocation in 
2022-23, the Ministry should have given more emphasis on the 
implementation and execution of activities envisaged under the DCAAI 
Scheme so as to seek enhanced allocation of funds in future from the 
Ministry of Finance  to provide imp etus to R&D ecosystem . The 
Committee reiterates that the Ministry should make a blue print of the 
R&D activities to be undertaken under the DCAAI Scheme and apprise 
the Committee about the same. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
26. The Committee understands th at   (FAME – India) Scheme Phase -II 
was notified by MHI  on  8 th March 2019 for a period of 5 years, 
commencing from 1 st April 2019, with an outlay of Rs. 10,000 crore. 
However, from FY 2019-20 till present,  MHI has been allocated only a sum 
of Rs. 4526.64 crore which is less than 50% of the total outlay of Rs. 10,000 
crores earmarked for the FAME II Scheme. The scheme is of critical 
importance for the nation, especially in the present scenario of global 
uncertainties leading to huge fluctuations in the cr ude oil prices and 
therefore, needs to be adequately funded. The Committee recommends that 
since the flagship FAME II scheme is extended only until  31 st March,2024  
with merely one financial year remaining for the completion of Phase II, the 
Ministry should strive for optimum distribution of funds for the remaining 
period and therefore seek additional allocation in the RE 2022 -23 for 
supporting the ambitious project of encouraging faster adoption of Electric 
and Hybrid vehicles thereby addressing the issue s of environmental 
pollution and fuel security and avoiding last minute rush for spending. The 
Committee further desires that Phase II of FAME scheme be extended 
beyond March 31, 2024 so that the targets set under the Scheme can be 
achieved, along with an announcement for new incentives like tax rebates 
and cut on duties on Electric Vehicles which would accelerate Electric 
mobility. 
 
 (Para 22) 
 

 25 
Action Taken Replies 
 
The Ministry of Heavy Industries is administering phase -II of Faster 
Adoption and Manufact uring of (Hybrid &) Electric Vehicles to promote 
adoption of electric/ hybrid vehicles (xEVs) in India for a period of 5 years 
w.e.f. 01st April, 2019 with a total budgetary support of Rs. 10,000 crores. 
This phase focusses on supporting electrification of  public & shared 
transportation and aims to support, through subsidies, 7090 e -Buses, 5 lakh 
e-3 Wheelers, 55000 e-4 Wheeler Passenger Cars and 10 lakh e -2 Wheelers. 
In addition, creation of charging infrastructure is also supported to address 
range anxiety among users of electric vehicles. 
 
In this regard, proposal for RE 2022 -23(Rs.2908.28 cr.) and BE 2023 -
24(Rs.5401.00 cr.) for FAME -II Scheme has been submitted. A total of Rs. 
8,309.28crore has been sought in the proposal for implementation of the 
scheme. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee is surprised to note that the Ministry is not able to plan, 
seek and utilize the total budgetary allocation of Rs.10,000 crore for the 
FAME-II Scheme  in time period allocated and only Rs.8309.28 crore 
has been sought for the implementation of the Scheme. This reduce d 
allocation reflects the sluggish approach of the Ministry a s it would  
hamper the effective implementation of the FAME -II Scheme, which  is 
the flagship Scheme of the Ministry. Therefore, the C ommittee 
recommends that MHI should gear up to fast track the implementation 
of the FAME -II Scheme so as to be able to convince the Ministry of 
Finance for allocating sufficient funds for the FAME -II in future in 
order to provide impetus to e -mobility. The Committee recommends, if 
need be, the Phase -II of FAME Scheme may be extended beyond 31 st 
March, 2024 so that the physical and financial targets set under the 
Scheme are achieved. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
27. The Committee desires that a report may be furnished to the 
Committee updating about the status and action taken by the Ministry with 
regard to the following CPSEs which have been considered/approved for 

 26 
closure/disinvestment/ transfer/merger and long pending for final 
settlement/closing: 
 (i) Bharat Pumps & Compressors Limited 
 (ii)       Scooters India Limited 
 (iii) HMT Watches Ltd. (subsidiary of HMT Ltd.) 
 (iv) HMT Chinar Watches Ltd. (subsidiary of HMT Ltd.)  
 (v) HMT Bearings Limited (subsidiary of HMT Ltd.) 
 (vi) Hindustan Cables Ltd. 
 (vii) Tungabhadra Steel Products Ltd. 
 (viii) National Bicycle Corporation of India Limited 
  (ix)     Kota unit of Instrumentation Limited 
(Para No. 78) 
Action Taken Replies 
BPCL:-Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 09.12.2020 accorded approval 
for closure of operations of BPCL and giving VRS to its employees. All the 
employees of BPCL have since been given VRS. Moveable assets disposed 
of through MSTC (a PSU under Ministry of Steel). The immovable 
properties of BPCL include 7 flats at Mumbai and 04 flats at P rayagraj. The 
newly set up National Land Monetization Corporation (NLMC), under 
Department of Public Enterprises has been requested to take necessary 
action for disposal of these 11 flats. The 295 -acre land of BPCL is being 
given to UP Government free of cost. 
 
SIL:-Union Cabinet on 20.01.2021 approved closure of SIL. All employees 
of SIL have been given VRS by 30.06.2021. The moveable assets have been 
disposed of, through MSTC (a PSU under Ministry of Steel). The process of 
transfer of land of SIL to Uttar  Pradesh State Industrial Development 
Authority (UPSIDA) on mutually agreed rates is at an advanced stage. 
TSPL: 
(i).  M/s. Tungabhadra Steel Products Limited (TSPL) was established in the 
year 1960 at Tungabhadra Dam near Hospet in Karnataka and was a joi nt 
venture enterprise of the Government of India (79%), Govt. of Karnataka 
(9%) and Govt. of Andhra Pradesh (12%). The Company had facilities for 

 27 
design, manufacture and erection of hydraulic structures, penstocks, building 
structures, transmission line towers, EOT gantry cranes etc. 
 
(ii).   Cabinet Committee of Economic Affairs (CCEA) approved the closure 
of TSPL in its meeting held on 22.12.2015 including decisions, in respect of 
giving VRS/VSS to all the employees of the Company, settlement of secured 
creditors and sale of movable/immovable properties. The payment of VRS 
and other dues of the employees are complete. All movable assets and 
immovable assets have been disposed off. 
 
(iii).   The closure of TSPL is at advanced stage and most of the regulator y 
requirements are already complied with. The Company has filed form STK 2 
with ROC on 07.01.2021 for striking off the name of the company from 
ROC. Based on certain queries from ROC, the company resubmitted the e -
form STK-2 on 23.07.2021 with clarifications.  
 
(iv).    In the books of TSPL, an amount payable to GOI of Rs.109.1488 
crores is appearing as liability, which has become hindrance to the closure of 
the company under Sec tion 248 of the Companies Act. This Ministry has 
requested NITI Aa yog vide lett er dated 18.05.2022 to refer the matter of 
TSPL to the “NITI Aayog Oversight Committee for resolution of problems 
faced during closure process of CPSEs” for development of a framework for 
resolution of the issue. 
 
HMT:-Three loss making subsidiaries of HMT  i.e. HMT Bearings Ltd., 
HMT Chinar Watches Ltd., and HMT Watches Ltd. have been closed in 
pursuance of CCEA decision dated 06.01.2016.  
 
Status of closure companies: 
i. HMT Watches Ltd: 
 All moveable assets have been disposed off and VRS/VSS of all 
employees have been completed.  
 On 5.05.2022 , MHI has conveyed approval of transfer of all 
immovable assets from the books of HMT Watches Ltd. to HMT 
Limited. 
ii. HMT Chinar Watches Ltd:  NCLT ordered dissolution of the 
company on 10.03.2022. IP has filed application wit h RoC, J&K on 
12.04.2022. 
iii. HMT Bearings Ltd: On 20.04.2022, NCLT Hyderabad passed order 
for dissolution of Company under section 302 of the Companies Act 

 28 
2013. IP has filed closure order with RoC, Hyderabad on 11.05.2022. 
 
HCL: 
Status of Closure of Hindustan Cables Limited (HCL) 
  
Sn Activity Status as on 15.06.2022   
1 Approval of CCEA 
/Cabinet for closure 
 28.09.2016   
2 Location of CPSE/ Unit 
under closure 
Rupnarainpur & Narendrapur in West Bengal, 
Hyderabad  in  Telangana and Naini in Uttar 
Pradesh 
  
3 Total number of 
employees 
Nil   
4 Settlement of dues of 
employees 
Completed   
5 Settlement of statutory 
and other dues, 
receivables, advances, 
loans etc. 
Dues of all secured creditors have been settled 
through one-time settlement (OTS). Company did 
OTS with many unsecured creditors too. 
  
Company has obtained opinion from Advocate 
which states that validity of creditors‟ claim will 
not be there after 3 years of dissolving by BIFR 
i.e. after 01.12.2019 (if, any Court case is not 
there for the same). Ther e are about 160 court 
cases pending in different courts. 
  
6 Disposal of movable 
assets 
Movable assets including all plants and 
machineries have been disposed of (except few 
office furniture and office equipment presently in 
use). 
  
7 Disposal of immovable assets:   
A 
Narendrapur Land (2 
acres) and Gariahat 
Guest House, Kolkata 
Possession handed over to Intelligence Bureau 
(IB) on 14.09.2020. Completed registration with 
IB on 24.05.2022  
 
  
B 
Rash Behari Guest 
House, Kolkata 
IB informed on 02.08.2021 ab out non -approval 
by MHA for this property. Referred to DIPAM 
for asset monetization under Category „C‟, being 
partly under encroachment and litigation.  
  

 29 
C 4 flats at Kolkata  and 6 
flats at Allahabad 
 Listed for asset monetization under the 
supervision of DIPAM.     
D 
1 flat at Juhi, Allahabad  Flat in Juhi Housing Society became free from 
illegal occupation and litigation as on 18.08.2021. 
Referred to DIPAM for asset monetization. 
  
E 
1 flat at Asian Village, 
New Delhi 
Delhi High Court in an interim or der dated 
28.01.2019 restrained HCL from creating 
3rd party interest on the property – based on an 
application made by one unsecured creditor for 
enforcement of arbitral award dated 7.11.2009 
  
HCL filed SLP in Supreme Court on 02.07.2019. 
SCI in its order  dated 12.11.2021 dismissed the 
SLP with direction on Commercial Court, 
Allahabad to dispose HCL‟s appeal u/s 34 
challenging the arbitral award dated 07.11.2009, 
latest by 31.01.2022. However, Commercial 
Judge, Allahabad was transferred before 
31.01.2022 without disposal of case and the seat 
was lying vacant. SCI in it‟s another order, 
extended the time for completion of proceedings 
u/s 34 until 31.07.2022. A new Judge has recently 
been posted in Commercial Court, Allahabad. 
  
The unsecured creditor has rec ently filed one 
fresh application before Delhi HC for 
enforcement of arbitral award dated 07.11.2009, 
in spite of the fact that SCI has extended time for 
completion of HCL‟s application u/s 34 until 
31.07.2022. 
  
F 
Cherapally & Mallapur 
Village, Telangana  
(324.35 acres) 
 Telangana Govt. resumed the land on 16.07.2018 
& 25.07.2018. 
  Based on HCL‟s application , HC, Hyderabad 
stayed the resumption on 14.08.2018 & 
20.08.2018. 
  

 30 
G 
Rupnarainpur (947.23 
acres) 
As directed by IMG under the framework of 
DIPAM, Company wrote to Govt of WB seeking 
consent for sale of the land. Govt. of WB referred 
the issue to the concerned District Magistrate to 
conduct reconnaissance survey  and submit  a 
report. On completion of survey, requisite report 
has been submitted to the We st Bengal State 
Secretariat. The case is now under examination 
by the West Bengal State Secretariat, Kolkata. 
  
As directed by IMG under DIPAM, the company 
has appointed M/s RITES Ltd., a firm empanelled 
with DIPAM, for providing advisory services to 
study feasibility of transaction and legal issues 
associated with 947.23 acres of land at 
Rupnarainpur, West Bengal held by HCL, which 
will be of help in negotiation with the State 
Government for monetization. The advisory work 
is being carried out by M/s RITES Ltd. 
  
 
NBCIL:-National Bicycle Corporation of India Limited(NBCIL) 
The latest status and Action Taken in respect of NBCIL is as given below:- 
1.      The Order of winding up passed by BIFR (20.12.93) was recalled by 
the Hon'ble High Court of Bombay on 19 Dec. 2019. 
2.      There is no third party Creditor. 
3.      There are no employees on the rolls of the company. 
4.      The company is closed w.e.f. 21.07.2001. 
5.      All statutory requirements are being complied with. 
Court Cases: 
 6.     (i) Two cases are pending in CGIT, Delhi. (Labour court). 
         (ii) One case (appeal) is pending in Hon'ble High Court of Delhi. 
 
7.  Immovable Assests: 
(i)  Worli Land (999 year lease / 3.62 acre) - Realizable value will be 
significantly reduced due to curtailme nt of Lease period (to 30 years ) in 
case of sale. Awaiting outcome of writ petition number 1251 of 2014 on 
issue of curtailment pending for final hearing in the Hon'ble High Court 
of Bombay. 
  

 31 
(ii)  Ghaziabad Land (90 year lease / 10.46 acre ) - UPSIDC is actively 
considering a buy back proposal. Final outcome is expected shortly. 
  
(iii)  Three BHK Flat (1705 sq feet) at Napean Sea Road, Mumbai: - 
Income Tax Department, Mumbai is considering the possibility of buying 
this flat. 
 
  Instrumentation Limited (ILK), Kota:  
S 
No 
ACTIVITY STATUS OFCLOSURE 
01 Closure of Kota Unit Of Instrumentation Limited 
02 Status   Closed Kota (Rajasthan) 
03 Total no of 
employees working 
in Kota Unit  
NIL  
03 Total Number of 
Employees given 
VRS/VSS at Kota 
Unit on Closure 
408  
04 Date of Relieving 
of Employees of 
Kota Unit on 
VRS/VSS 
18/04/2017 
06 Settlement of dues 
of Employees All employee dues settled, except 6 employees 
facing CBI cases. 3 are Ex -employees and 4 
were relieved on 18.04.2017.   
07 Settlement of 
statutory and other 
dues, receivables, 
advances, loans etc. 
All settlement done for statutory dues and 
secured creditors. 
08 Disposal of 
movable assets 
All movable assets at Kota disposed off. 
09 Disposal of 
immovable assets 
A) LAND OF KOTA UNIT OF IL HANDED OVER/ 
SOLD 
a) - Lease Hold land at Kota handed over to 
Government of Rajasthan  
b) - 2 lands at MIA, Jaipur sold to IB and Ministry 
of  Ayush (MoA)  

 32 
c) - Office Space (SCOPE Delhi) sold to NMC, 
New Delhi 
d) - 13 Flats (Mumbai (12Nos) and Vadodara 
(1Nos) are under disposal from DIPAM/DPE  
   PENDING CLOSURE ACTIVITIES AS ON 14.10.2022 
1. Sale of immovable properties as above - 13 Flats (Mumbai (12Nos) and 
Vadodara (1Nos). 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry  of Heavy Industries  
should take necessary steps to amend the Government of India 
(Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961 from time to time by issuing the 
requisite Gazette notification reflecting the latest position of 
closure/disinvestment of CPSEs in the allocation of Business and 
Organisations under its administrative control . The Committee desires 
that the Ministry should  speed up the process of closure/disinvestment 
of those CPSEs for which final settlement/closure is long pending  
causing uncertainty for the employees of those CPSEs. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
28. In the Budget 2022 -23, the MSME sector in manufacturing space got 
a boost with rolling out of RAMP (Raising & Accelerating MSME 
Performance) which proposes to improve credit and market access of 
MSMEs and the extension of the ECLGS (Emergency Credit Line Guarantee 
Scheme) and its cover, revamping and infusion of funds into the Credit 
Guarantee Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE) scheme. The 
Committee notes the component manufacturers and the dealerships of auto 
OEMs are mostly MSMEs and have been severely impacted due to credit 
crunch. The Committee is of the opinion that since  MSMEs are major 
players in local auto parts manufacturing, the RAMP program would help 
address the  issues related to  delays in  payment an d access  to credit. 
Further, the Committee recommends that the RAMP program should be so 
structured so as to improve market access, access to credit, strengthen 
institutions and governance at the Central and State levels and support the 
ongoing  programmes of the Government, focusing on competitive aspect of 
MSMEs. 
(Para No. 79) 

 33 
Action Taken Replies 
 
HMT: Most of the MSMEs of the supply chain have been taken care by 
HMT. Payment of only few vendors is due over 90 days. This will be 
addressed shortly by HMT. 
 
HEC:-In spite of acute fund crisis, HEC is giving top priority in making 
payments to MSME. 
 
HSL:-Hindustan Salts Limited & Sambhar Salts Limited agrees and 
supports the programme of Government for RAMP (Raising & Accelerating 
MSME Performance), HSL & SSL is mainly in the salt business and RAMP 
will enable MSMEs for more participation in HSL & SSL. Moreover, HSL 
& SSL is already working in line with RAMP for the support and upliftment 
of MSMEs. Payments to MSME are made in a timely manner with no delay 
in payment. Further, companies salt production areas are in the rural area 
and for support of MSME, major work contracts are executed through 
MSMEs.  
 
BBJ:-Procurement from MSME by “The Braithwaite Burn and Jessop 
Construction Company Ltd.”, during the last 3 years, is depicted in the 
below table. BBJ also extends its proactive support to MSE suppliers 
through TReDS.  
                                                                                                    (Rs. in Crore) 
Particulars 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
Procurement from 
MSME 
12.45 33.64 56.38 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry  and recommends that  
strong emphasis should be laid for making delayed payments to the 
MSMEs expeditiously under the Public Procurement Policy (PPP).  

 34 
CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
THE  
FINAL REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
29. The Committee is deeply concerned to note that the MHI has been 
allocated a meagr e amount of Rs 200.25 crore for Development of Capital 
Goods Sector, one of the important sectors,  against the projection of 498.75 
crore, which is less than 50% of the actual amount demanded by the 
Ministry. The Committee is of the view that the Capital Goods sector is of 
the strategic and economic importance due to its capability to boost growth 
in the manufacturing sector and the overall economy and emphasis should 
be laid on building a globally competitive, self -reliant and sustainable 
Capital Goods Sector. The Committee therefore feels that  there is an urgent 
need for creating an ecosystem for export promotion, investment, 
technology, automation and driving new sustainable solutions which is 
crucial for accelerating India’s growth trajectory and harne ssing the full 
potential. The Committee strongly believes that Capital Goods industry is 
one of the key pillars of the Production -Linked Incentives (PLIs) to boost 
manufacturing sector growth by leveraging the emerging opportunities and 
further boosting gr owth in the Indian economy. Since the BE 2022 -23 
allocations are less than even half of the projected amount of Rs. 498.75 
crore for the Development Capital Goods Sector,  the Committee is of the 
view that to cater to the needs of the entire Capital Goods industry across 
the country, the BE allocation of Rs 200.25 crore would not be adequate. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that MHI should address the issue of 
huge curtailment of funds for Development of Capital Goods Sector and  
seek enhanced allocati on at RE stage  so as to promote the growth and 
development of the Capital  Goods  Sector. 
 (Para 47) 

 35 
Action Taken Replies 
Ministry of Heavy Industries takes note of the above observation of the 
Committee. It is mentioned that Ministry of Heavy Industries  has launched 
the Scheme for Enhancement of Competitiveness in the Indian Capital 
Goods Sector- Phase II on 25 th January, 2022. The scheme has a financial 
outlay of Rs. 1207 crores with budgetary support of Rs.975 crore and 
Industry Contribution of Rs.232 crores.  
Under the Phase 2 of the CG Scheme, a  total of 19  projects 
with project cost of Rs 542.85 crores have been approved so far and several 
projects are under consideration. The expenditure incurred as on 30.09.2022 
under the Scheme is Rs 94.11 crores.  It is expected that MHI will fully 
utilize the entire BE for FY 2022-23. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
30. The Committee further notes that for the Financial Year 2022 -23, 
MHI has got a steep hike in BE allocation of Rs 200 crore for the “Scheme 
for enhan cement of competitiveness in Indian Capital Goods Sector” as 
several new projects are likely to be initiated under various components of 
the  Scheme in the Financial year 2022 -23. The Committee hopes that MHI 
would take all out efforts for optimum utilisat ion of the budget allocation so 
that the new projects can be supported successfully. 
 
(Para 52) 
Action Taken Replies 
In this regard, it is mentioned that Ministry of Heavy Industries has launched 
the Scheme for Enhancement of Competitiveness in the Indian Capital 
Goods Sector- Phase II on 25 th January, 2022. The scheme has a financial 
outlay of Rs. 1207 crores with budgetary support of Rs.975 crore and 
Industry Contribution of Rs.232 crores. The objective of Phase II of the 
Scheme for Enhancement of Competitiveness of the Capital Goods Sector is 
to expand and enlarge the impact created by Phase I pilot scheme, thereby 
providing greater impetus through creation of a strong and globally 

 36 
competitive capital goods sector that contributes at least 25% to the 
manufacturing sector.  
A total of 19 projects with project cost of Rs 542.85 crores have been 
approved in the Financial Year 2022 -23, so far under the Phase -II of the 
Scheme for Enhancement of Competitiveness in the Indian Capital Goods 
Sector and many more pr ojects are under consideration. The expenditure 
incurred as on 30.09.2022 under the Scheme is Rs 94.11 crores.   All efforts 
are being made to ensure full utilization of the allocated funds in the FY 
2022-23. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
31. The Committee was informed by the Ministry that an expert committee 
was constituted for the third -Party Evaluation of the Scheme for 
enhancement of competitiveness in Indian Capital Goods Sector. The 
Committee is in agreement with the findings that the present Scheme has  
paved the way towards fulfilling the technological and infrastructural 
requirements of the Capital Goods sector in a limited way. Therefore, the 
Committee is of the view that the present Scheme needs to be up-scaled.  The 
Committee further recommends that  the Ministry may examine the different 
projects which can be taken up under this Scheme and come up with revised 
projections and request the Ministry of Finance to grant additional funds 
under this Scheme at the R.E. 2022-23 stage. 
 
(Para 54) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
After the Phase 2 of the Scheme for Enhancement of Competitiveness in the 
Indian Capital Goods Sector was notified on 25.01.2022, with total outlay of 
Rs. 1207 crore including Rs. 975 crore as budgetary support.   Therefore, the 
scheme is being up -scaled to fulfill the technological & infrastructural 
requirements of Capital Goods Sector in the Country. Ministry has been 
regularly examining and considering the proposals received under the Phase 
2 of the Scheme. A total of 19 projects with project cost of Rs 542.85 crores 
have already been approved so far and several projects are under 

 37 
consideration. If required, Ministry will consider to seek enhanced allocation 
at the RE stage. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
32. The Committee expresses its concern towa rds the heavy losses and 
deterioration condition of the Heavy Engineering Corporation Ltd. (HEC). 
The Committee observes that if the proposal for closure of HEC Ltd. is 
approved, the number of CPSEs under the administrative control of MHI 
would dwindle to 15. The Committee is concerned about the large rate of 
attrition of CPSEs under MHI. The Committee recommends that MHI should 
undertake a detailed appraisal of HEC and take all remedial measures to 
revive the HEC with a view to prevent its closure.  
(Para No.77) 
Action Taken Replies 
 
As per the recommendation of Core Group of Secretaries on Disinvestment 
(CGD), the matter of placing the proposal of closure of HEC before the 
Cabinet is under consideration in the Ministry. 
  
 
 
*****  