Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON INDUSTRY
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on th December , )28 2018
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on th December , )28 2018
Action taken on 288th Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2018-19) Pertaining to
The Ministry of Micro Small and Medium Enterprises
TWO HUNDRED NINETY THIRD REPORT
December, 2018/Pausa, 1940 (Saka)


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON INDUSTRY
TWO HUNDRED NINETY THIRD REPORT
Action taken on 288th Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2018-19) Pertaining to
The Ministry of Micro Small and Medium Enterprises
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 28th December , 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 28th December , 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2018/Pausa, 1940 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-31
Chapter-I Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Ministry............................. .............................................................. 2-10
Chapter-II Recommendations/Observations which the committee does not
desire to pursue further in view of the Government’s replies................ 11-22
Chapter-III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the
Committee has not accepted the replies of the Ministry
and desires the Ministry to review their replies................................... 23-30
Chapter-IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee
desire further comments of the Ministr y............................................ 31
4. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 33-36

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 1st September, 2018)
1. Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri G. C. Chandrashekhar
3. Shri Ram Narain Dudi
4. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque
5. Shri Shwait Malik
6. Shri Sanjay Seth
7. Shri Amar Singh
8. Shri Tiruchi Siva
9. Shri T. G. Venkatesh
10. Dr. Amee Yajnik
LOK  SABHA
11. Shrimati Ranjanben Dhananjay Bhatt
12. Shri Birendra Kumar Choudhary
13. Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi
14. Shri S. P. Muddahanume Gowda
15. Shri G. Hari
16. Shrimati Darshana Vikram Jardosh
17. Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena
18. Shrimati Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam
19. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato
20. Shri Mutthamsetti Srinivasa Rao (Avanthi)
21. Shri Ramsinh Pataliyabhai Rathwa
22. Shri Konda Vishweshwar Reddy
23. Shri Raj Kumar Saini
24. Shri Rajveer (Raju Bhaiya) Singh
25. Shri Rameswar Teli
26. Shrimati Savitri Thakur
27. Shrimati Dev (Moon Moon Sen) Varma
28. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare
*29. Vacant
30. Vacant
31. V acant
(i)
*Vacancy caused due to demise of Shri Asrarul Haque Mohammad on 7th December, 2018.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Director
Shri Jayanta Kumar Mallick, Additional Director
Shrimati Sreeja V ., Deputy Secretary
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Deputy Secretary
Shri Ajin. J. R., Under Secretary
Shrimati Renu Sreekanth, Committee Officer
Shri Devinder Singh Bisht, Committee Officer
Shri Anuj Verma, Assistant Research Officer

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having
been authorised by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred Ninety Third Report on Action Taken
Note furnished by the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises on the recommendations contained
in the Committee’s Two Hundred Eighty Eighth Report on Demands for Grants (2018-19).
2. I thank the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises for furnishing the Action Taken Note on
the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred Eighty Eighth Report.
3. The Committee in its meeting held on 21
st December, 2018 considered and adopted the report.
RAM CHANDRA PRASAD SINGH
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
21st December , 2018 Department-related Parliamentary
Agrahayana  30, 1940 ( Saka) Standing Committee on Industry,
Rajya Sabha.
(iii)

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Micro,
Small and Medium Enterprises on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred Eighty
Eighth Report on Demands for Grants (2018-19) pertaining to the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises.
2. Action Taken Notes received from the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises in respect of
the recommendations contained in the 288 th Report have been categorized as follows:-
Chapter I : The Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry.
The Committee is pleased to observe that the Ministry has accepted its recommendations as
mentioned in the Chapter - I of the Report.
Chapter II : The Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue further
in view of the Government’s replies.
In respect of these recommendations, the Committee is convinced with the logic and
explanations advanced by the Ministry and therefore does not want to pursue them further
for the present.
Chapter III : The Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted
the replies of the Ministry and desires the Ministry to review their reply.
The Committee is not convinced with the replies of the Ministry in respect of recommendations
contained in Chapter-III and desires that the Ministry, in the light of further Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee, furnish explanations thereof.
Chapter IV : The Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee desire further
comments of the Ministry.
In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either furnished the
interim replies, therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry may furnish Action Taken
Notes in respect of recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to the point, as
per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee.
The details of the A TR of the Ministry and Recommendations/Observations of the Committee thereon
are given in the succeeding pages.

CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS, WHICH HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY
Recommendation/Observation
1. The Committee observes that the allocations of the Ministry were either reduced or enhanced at the
R.E. stage, but the actual expenditure incurred most of the time is less than the Revised Estimate. The
Committee is therefore, of the opinion that adequate steps should be taken to monitor the output of
various Schemes, including individual components so that the output targets are achieved timely.
(Para 11)
Action Taken
Ministry has taken measures for improving expenditure. Consequently, the utilization of funds has
been 95.8% during 2017-18 as indicated below:
(
` in crore)
Years B.E. R.E. Utilization
2017-18 6481.96 6481.96 6212.58*
*Provisional
Recommendation/Observation
2. It is observed that the allocation and utilization of funds under the plan schemes of the Ministry
during the last three years have been almost equal. The Committee is of the view that the funds for meeting
the salaries and pensions should be considered suitably without affecting the funds for the development
schemes. The Committee also desires that the Ministry may follow-up with the Ministry of Finance for
release of funds timely. (Para 18)
Action Taken
The funds for Salaries and other allowances are demanded as per the entitlement of the Officers/
Officials and Staff members in accordance with the extant rules.
The suggestion regarding follow up with Ministry of Finance has been noted and is being acted upon.
Recommendation/Observation
3. The Committee is of the opinion that Micro Entrepreneurs in Indian Society finance their business
through bor rowings, cr edit from friends or through their own resource generation and are away from
access to the Capital whereas the big and powerful entrepreneurs in business sector take advantage of
loopholes in the Financial Institutions. It, therefore, desires that the entire Industrial sector should ponder
over the ways to check the slippages in the financial Institution to make the system foolproof so that the
Micro Entrepreneurs can also avail the benefit. (Para 22)
Action Taken
The observation of the Committee has been noted. The observation above would be brought to the
notice of Financial regulators.
2

3
Recommendation/Observation
4. The Committee observes that Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council (MSEFC) constituted
under MSMED Act, 2006 to resolve the delayed payment issue for MSEs have not yet been set up in all
States. There is a wide gap in the number of cases settled and reported to it. MSEFCs have not yet met the
success due to lack of any legal power for enforcing its decision. The Committee recommends that the
Ministry should take steps to constitute MSEFCs in all the States so that the issue of delayed payments is
resolved expeditiously. (Para 23)
Action Taken
The Hon’ble Committee would be pleased to note that all States have already set up such Facilitation
Councils. State governments have also been requested to consider setting up more such councils in different
zones of the State so as to expedite the resolution of such cases.
Recommendation/Observation
5. The Committee heard the Industry and MSME Associations representing enterprises from various
sectors in the country and is of the opinion that rising input cost is affecting the competitiveness of the
products of MSME sector especially, Micro and Small Enterprises, in Domestic as well as International
Market. This sector finds it very difficult to pass on the extra cost to its consumers due to which margins of
Micro and Small units decline and thus making productions unviable for them. The Committee recommends
that the Ministry of MS&ME should raise the issue with Ministry of Finance and persuade them to address
it at appropriate level so that the input cost for SMEs remain within their reach and they are not forced to
take loan at exorbitant rates. (Para 25)
Action Taken
The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee would be taken up with Ministry of Finance.
Recommendation/Observation
6. The Committee further recommends that technological and innovative preparedness of the MSME
sector need to be studied constantly and a mechanism is required to be evolved urgently to fill the gaps or
constraints being faced by MSME sector in view of various trade agreements at International level including
economic cooperation agreements. (Para 36)
Action Taken
Noted for compliance.
Recommendation/Observation
7. MSMEs engaged in International business have developed co-operation, partnerships, linkages and
network with foreign companies and institutions. By way of import and export MSME enterprises boost their
efficiencies capabilities, competitiveness and their vision. FDI thus play a prominent role for
internationalization of MSMEs. Today FDI is being attracted and invited which would certainly have
catalyzing effect on technology flow and investment consequently posing challenges and opportunity to
MSME sector. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of MS&ME in view of this should take careful
steps in co-ordination with Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department of Industrial Policy and

4
Promotion) to fine tune the FDI Policy to take its full advantage, international aid and support to make the
MSMEs growth oriented with innovative capacities and internationalization. (Para 37)
Action Taken
Recommendation of the Committee has been noted. The Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) policy for
all items and for defence-related products are brought out by Department of Commerce and Department of
Defence Production respectively. The views of the Committee have been shared with them for necessary
action.
Recommendation/Observation
8. The Committee recommends that there is an urgent and immediate need for strong innovation and
policy to develop technology with proper legalities for implementation to fulfill the demand and need of the
MSME sector . (Para 38)
Action Taken
Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. As stated above, collaboration
with CSIR laboratories and other scientific institutions is being promoted for the benefit of MSMEs.
Recommendation/Observation
9. The Committee feels that although a lot has been done for providing relief to the MSME sector in
the form of technological up-gradation and financial support but there is a need that the Ministry of
MS&ME should make further efforts in co-ordination with other Ministries/Departments to provide linkage
between Large, Small and Micro Enterprises so that the Large Enterprises owning technological
advancement share their technology with Small and Micro Enterprises to improve the standard and quality
of their pro ducts. (Para 40)
Action Taken
Noted for compliance.
Recommendation/Observation
10. The Committee recommends that with the emerging of Fourth  industrial Revolution where human
robot co-operation is growing, a policy should be framed with the joint effort of the Ministry of MS&ME,
Schools, Colleges, Universities and Industry Association’s to develop such curriculum at various levels to
make the country technologically advanced by sharpening the skills under ‘Skill India’ and for faster
growth, productivity and competitiveness in industrial sector including MSME. (Para 42)
Action Taken
The Ministry of MSME introduced Scheme for Promoting Rural Area Entrepreneurship (ASPIRE) in
March 2015. Till 31st March 2018, 62 LBIs have been approved and 30 commenced incubation, over 18000
incubates have completed incubation, 30% have set up their own enterprises and engaged in productive
employment. 8 TBIs are approved, 55 compelling ideas have been received from these TBIs. The Fund of
Fund has been enhanced to ` 310 crore.
Recommendation/Observation
11. The Committee feels that still there is a lot to be done at the level of Ministry of MS&ME by ensuring

5
that every State/Zone of the country is benefitted by its policies, programmes and Schemes along with
uniform and stable development of MSMEs. This would not only provide employment opportunities to the
people but also check migration from rural pockets to big cities in search of job opportunities. (Para 43)
Action Taken
Observations of the Committee have been noted. The Ministry is trying to upscale it’s work in the
Aspirational Districts as listed by the NITI Aayog and enhance outreach of its schemes and programmes to
the grassroots in such districts. Moreover, under ‘SC-ST Hub’, participation of SC-ST entrepreneurs in the
development process is being encouraged.
Recommendation/Observation
12. The Committee while hearing the Associations in the MSME sector was apprised of the poor Credit
Rating done by the Banks while extending credit facility to MSME units. The Committee desires that the
issue of parameters fixed for credit rating should be raised at the appropriate level, including the Department
of Financial Services, by the Ministry of MSME and a suitable solution be made to address the financial
requirement of MSMEs. (Para 46)
Action Taken
Credit rating is done by individual banks keeping in view the prevalent guidelines and guidelines issued
by the regulator i.e. RBI. The views of the Committee have been communicated to the DFS for necessary
action.
Recommendation/Observation
13. The Committee desires that the details of inadequate credit disbursement by Banks to MSMEs and
particularly to Medium Enterprises which has shown negative growth rate may be informed to the Committee
after consultation with Reserve Bank of India and Ministry of Finance. (Para 47)
Action Taken
The suggestion of the Committee has been forwarded to the Department of Financial Services for
necessary action.
Recommendation/Observation
14. The Committee was apprised about the availability of Khadi Fabrics in private retail stores at
competitive price. The Committee observes that opening up of Khadi retailing to private players are good
initiative in this regard for enhancing and expanding the market of Khadi fabrics among the customers.
Though, the issue of “Khadi” brand under unfair trade practices by private players is reported to be legally
entangled. The Committee would like that the issue should be sorted out congenially so that private players
also contribute in promoting Khadi products. (Para 52)
Action Taken
The suggestion of the Committee has been noted and the efforts are being made to promote KVIC
with private sector entities.
Recommendation/Observation
15. The Committee observes that to implement PMEGP successfully pattern of project report should be

6
simplified, long drawn process of selection of beneficiaries and banks should be further reduced, introduction
of Entrepreneurs Development Programme (EDP) at block level, Evaluation of EDP training programme
before issue of certificate, Innovations in EDP training be in the form of product or services, cost reducing
process improvements and innovative business models and methods should be followed. (Para 59)
Action Taken
In order to assist youth in setting up of projects under PMEGP, the pattern of project report has been
simplified and about 307 model project reports of various activities have been uploaded on the e-portal of
PMEGP scheme.
The training courses run by the Ministries are being aligned with standard norms put in place by the
Ministry of Skill Development Entrepreneurship (MSDE). Further improvement as suggested by the
Committee will be acted upon.
Recommendation/Observation
16. The Committee further feels that a detailed study should be undertaken to ascertain the number of
PMEGP units if any, affected by demonetization and implementation of the GST. (Para 60)
Action Taken
The suggestion of the Committee has been noted.
Recommendation/Observation
17. The Committee observes that the actual ISEC issued and funds released by Banks is not very encouraging
and creates gap in working capital requirement and actual fund availability as a result the KIs fails to
achieve the desired level performance. It also feels that norms for turnover formula on one working cycle
differs both at KVIC and Bank level, which appears to be one of the lacunas for the gap existing between
ISEC issued and Bank finance which needs to be addressed at the appropriate level. (Para 74)
Action Taken
A study on the ISEC was taken up by the Office of Chief Adviser (Cost), Ministry of Finance,
Department of Expenditure and its report is under examination.
Recommendation/Observation
18. In fact this matter had also come up for discussion during the Committee’ s visit to Mumbai and
Ahmedabad in August, 2017, wherein the Committee had desires that the Ministry, KVIC and the financial
institutions may together hold talks with RBI and come up with a workable solution. (Para 75)
Action Taken
As per the suggestion of the Committee, a meeting with KVIC and Indian Bankers Association (IBA),
Mumbai was held on 27th September, 2017 at World Trade Centre, Mumbai and it was resolved that a
Committee needs to be set up to work out a viable and programmatic working·fund formula acceptable to
KIs and Banks, which is under process.
Recommendation/Observation
19. The Committee is of the opinion that the main objective of the SFURTI Scheme is to encourage

7
Traditional Industries and Artisan clusters of the country. This scheme is likely to complete 10 years of its
inception and, by now every district of the country should have had at least one project, but the fact is that
the scheme could not make its presence felt even in 10% districts of the country. The Ministry of MSME as
well as KVIC and Coir Board appear to have failed on this front. The Committee recommends that the
Ministry should come out with tile specific targets so that each district of the country will have at least one
SFURTI project. (Para 79)
Action Taken
Even though this scheme is likely to complete 10 years of its inception, for all purposes, there was no
fund release from 2010 to 2015. During the period 2008 to 2010, 101 clusters were approved across the
country. Only after the revised guidelines were issued in 2015,72 clusters have been approved till 31
st March
2018. Further the scheme has been approved for continuation till 31st March 2020. 173 clusters have been
approved under the scheme since inception across 27 States and 134 districts, which is almost 20% of the
total number of districts in the country. Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for action.
Recommendation/Observation
20. In a recent Study Visit, The Committee came to know about the payment of low wages to the workers
in SFURTI cluster in Andhra Pradesh. The Committee therefore feels that derivation of cost norms for job
creation vis-a-vis investment and maintenance should be more realistic as minimum wages to support the
livelihood is a basic requirement. It appears that what the Government spends on Khadi units/VI units for
the benefit of artisans is not reaching them for their financial upliftment. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the payment of wages to the un-skilled, semi-skilled and skilled workers with Full Time Employment
(FTE) in KVIC in different pockets should be looked into properly. (Para 80)
Action Taken
Khadi Artisans are engaged by Khadi Institutions (KIs) and wage payment is made by KIs to artisans.
KVIC has been directed that payment of wages to Khadi artisans should be made in their Bank Accounts
only. Further, incentives on production are being passed on directly into the bank accounts of institutions
and artisans. Suggestions of the Committee regarding enhancement of employment duration has been noted.
Recommendation/Observation
21. Since the majority of rural habitants are illiterate and/or not technically qualified, there is as such a
need for creating employment opportunities in the rural area. Khadi, being a sector that required low investment,
must be vigorously persuaded in the rural areas. Although, the Government has emphasized on every occasion,
the need of support to this sector, however budget allocation for this sector shows a very notional increase
in the last 3 years. The Committee recommends that the reasons of slow progress in Khadi pro gramme
should be evaluated properly and appropriate measures be taken for its development. (Para 87)
Action Taken
The suggestion has been noted for action.
Recommendation/Observation
22. Coir Industry is a traditional industry (at the same time an export oriented one also) and using the raw
material available cheaply in the coconut producing areas. Actually, it is a process of making value added

8
products from the waste, otherwise it would have been a threat to the environment. The Committee is of the
opinion that the GST imposed on coir and coir products may be reduced further for encouraging the traditional
coir industry in which livelihood of about 7 lakhs people is based in rural sector. The matter may be taken
up with Ministry of Finance. (Para 118)
Action Taken
If imposition of GST is reduced or done away with, the price of coir products may come down and
it would become more competent vis-a-vis other competing products in the market. Products of the industry
can also help in reducing the carbon footprint considerably and earn carbon credits for the country. The
recommendation of the Committee to reduce the GST on coir products will be taken lip with the Ministry of
Finance.
Recommendation/Observation
23. The Committee is of the opinion that the skill required by the artisans in Coir sector can be acquired
easily and similarly the amount of investment required is negligible vis-a-vis other similar village industries.
Also the employment generated in the coir sector during the last 2-3 years is very negligible in view of the
vast potential available in the sector. The Committee recommends that more Entrepreneur Development
Programmes (EDPs) should be organized so that potential entrepreneurs are motivated for setting up of
their own units as a result employment opportunity is created for rural youth. (Para 119)
Action Taken
Coir Board is organising programmes like Training on Manufacturing of Value Added Coir Products,
Exclusive Training programme for women under the scheme of Mahila Coir Yojana, Entrepreneurship
Development Programmes (EDPs), Awareness Programme, Workshops and seminars etc. in almost all coir
producing states of the country for motivating entrepreneurs to enter into the coir industry. Further the
Board is providing financial assistance for setting up of new coir units and for modernisation of existing
units under different Schemes. A new scheme called Coir Industry Technology Upgradation Scheme (CITUS)
which offers financial assistance up to an amount of ` 2.5 crores, has been launched recently. As recommended
by the DRPSC, more EDPs will be organised by Coir Board for imparting information on the schemes and
for motivating the entrepreneurs to set up coir based units.
Recommendation/Observation
24. The Committee observes that the fund released to MGIRI during the last three years is always less
than the Revised Estimate for the respective years. The requirement of fund and its utilization for an
Institution engaged in rural upliftment should be monitored properly by the Ministry of MS&ME so that
the targets are achieved timely. If there is any grey area, the Ministry should take initiative to address it
immediately. (Para 125)
Action Taken
Noted for compliance during 2018-19. The absorptive capacity of MGIRI has to be significantly
increased.
Recommendation/Observation
25. The Committee is of the view that Joint Plant Committee which is looking after the procurement and

9
distribution of metals, coal etc. should ensure unhampered supply to NS1C and sees that allocation order is
released by the respective Ministries in time so that there is no dearth of raw material supply to MSME
sector . (Para 139)
Action Taken
The Joint Plant Committee is empowered by the Ministry of Steel, Government of India to collect data
on the Indian iron and steel industry, resulting in the creation and maintenance of the only basic, complete
and non-partisan databank on this industry. The observation of the Committee has been communicated to
Ministry of Steel vide our letter No. 3(l)/2018-SME dated 20.04.2018. Ministry of MSME has also requested
Ministry of Steel vide DO No. 9(25)/2017-SME (Pt.) dated 26.12.2017 to continue their scheme of rebate
on steel products for Small Scale Industries and to issue regular allocation for FY 2017-18 of Iron & Steel
material under JPC allotment for further distribution to MSMEs.
Recommendation/Observation
26. The Committee feels that despite the efforts, the problem of unemployment, poverty, drudgery and
migration still exists in rural economy. The one of solutions to address these problems is creation of
employment opportunities in rural areas by setting up of Small Enterprises in Agro based sector as nearly
56% of the population is still dependent on Agriculture. There is always a scope for innovation, value
addition and entrepreneurship development in this sector. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
skill up-gradation, handholding, credit support and incubation aiming rural zones should be considered to
provide employment in rural areas. (Para 157)
Action Taken
The observation of the Committee is noted. However, other than PMEGP, KYIC has also been imparting
training for traditional and small village industries, which helps the trainees to establish their own small unit
and start their own business.
Recommendation/Observation
27. The Committee would also like the Ministry of MSME to expedite the sanctioning and setting up of
the targeted number of LBIs and TBIs and also make the States and other organizations in world, aware of
usefulness of the Incubation Centres by holding talks with them from time to time. In this way, the States
would be encouraged to furnish more and more proposal for setting up of Incubation Centres. (Para 158)
Action Taken
Under ‘A Scheme for Promotion of Innovation, Rural Industry and Entrepreneurship (ASPIRE)” 62
LBIs and 8 TBIs were approved till 31st March 2018. In the current version, the Scheme Steering Committee
has considered 13 proposals. During the current year and next year, more LBJs would be set up for skill up-
gradation and creation of more employment opportunities. State Governments have been asked to come up
with specific proposals under the scheme.
Recommendation/Observation
28. The Committee in its Action Taken Report on 280
th Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(2017-18) expressed its dismay over the utilization and lack of performance of Schemes in NER. The
Committee observes and again reiterates that the Ministry should make concerted efforts for industrialization

10
in NER region, be it in the field of traditional art, craft and artisan work. It should try to utilize the fund
allocated to the full extent as the Committee is not convinced with the reason given by the Ministry regarding
the lack of industrialization and demands in NER. (Para 170)
Action Taken
The recommendation of the Committee is noted. Ministry will also take up this matter with State
Governments in the NER and also with Ministry of DONER for obtaining good project proposals under
various schemes. Some of the Scheme Guidelines are also being amended to provide flexibility, especially
for NER States.
Also, the Ministry has launched a scheme “Promotion of MSMEs in NER and Sikkim” under which
following proposals have been dealt:
(i) Proposal approved from Government of Nagaland for Modernisation of Tool Room Training
Centre at Dimapur, Nagaland of ` 12.86 crores. Project Approval and Monitoring Committee
has given approval for Gol grant of ` 10.0 Crore. lst Instalment of ` 2.50 Crore was released to
Government of Nagaland in the month of November 2016. 2nd instalment of ` 2.00 Crore for
GiA is in process after receiving Information from NTTC, Dimapur, Nagaland.
(ii) Proposal received from Government of Tripura for setting up of Tool Room and Training
Centre (TRTC), Agartala, Tripura of ` 19.45 crores. Project Approval and Monitoring Committee
has given final approval in the 3rd Meeting held on 08.03.2017 for Gol grant of ` 10.0 Crore.
Inauguration of the Building (Under Construction) was done on 25.06.17 by Hon’ble Minister,
MSME. 1st Instalment of ` 2.50 Crore was released to Government of Tripura in the Month of
September 2017.
(iii) Proposal received from Government of Assam for setting up of Tool Room and Training Centre
(TRTC), Tinsukia, Assam of ` 11.33 crores. Project Approval and Monitoring Committee has
given final approval for Gol grant of ` 5.80 crore in the 3rd Meeting of PAMC held on 08.03.2017.
` 1.45 crore has been sanctioned to Government of Assam (to be released after the releasing of
Government of Assam share) for Technology Centre at Tinsukia.
(iv) Proposal received from Government of Nagal and for assistance for strengthening an lnstituic
under Promotion of MSMEs in NER and SIKKIM” for Gol Grant of ` 90.72 Lakhs in respect of
Bamboo Incubation Centre at NTTC, Dirnapur, Nagaland.  The said proposal is under
examination.
Proposal received from Government of Mizoram for assistance setting up of Tool Room and Training
Centre (TRTC), Aizawl, Mizoram of ` 11.10 Crores for Gol Grant of ` 10.0 Crores. The said proposal is
under examination.

CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE FURTHER IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation/Observation
29. In the opinion of the Committee, most of the MSMEs are not paid timely by the Government
organizations and PSUs for their supply as a result of which MSMEs face serious financial crunch and it
becomes very difficult for them to survive in the market. On the other hand they have to dole out a high rate
of interest to the Banks against their loans for delayed repayment. Further , procurement from SC/ST Enterprises
has also not received adequate attention under the Public Procurement Policy. The Committee recommends
that the Ministry of MS&ME should take immediate measures with the concerned Ministries/Departments to
sort out these issues to dispel the apprehensions of MSME sector. (Para 20)
Action Taken
In order to support the MSEs in overcoming the problem of delayed payments, the Ministry of MSME
has launched MSME - SAMADHAAN portal. MSME units facing problem of delayed payments can register
their complaint directly on this portal. If the matter does not get resolved within 15 days, it automatically
gets transferred to the concerned MSE Facilitation Council. The portal can be accessed by the Heads of
CPSUs/State PSUs/Government Departments.
The Ministry of MSME has also taken following steps to facilitate procurement by CPSEs from MSEs
owned by SC/ST entrepreneurs.
(i) Establishment of National SC/ST Hub, operated by NSIC, which helps in fulfilling the mandate
given to CPSEs and Central Government Departments / Agencies for at least 4% procurement
from SC/ST MSE units.
(ii) Ministry of MSME has launched MSME SAMBANDH portal on 8th December, 2017 with a
view to promoting ease of access to upcoming procurements by CPSE/Govt. Departments.
This has yielded very good results.
(iii) Ministry of MSME has earlier launched Udyog Aadhaar registration to ensure ease in the registration
of enterprises. This registration bears details of category which facilitate easier identification of
SC/ST entrepreneurs.
(iv) S tate level conclaves are being organized across the country by the Ministry. 22 such State
conclaves have already been organised under National SC/ST Hub (NSSH) which were
participated by around 12000 existing/ aspiring SC/ST entrepreneurs.
Concerns relating to delivery of financial services have been shared with the Department of Financial
Services with a request for necessary intervention to be submitted before DRPSCI.
Recommendation/Observation
30. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the long lasting problem of delayed payment to
SMEs, although, resolved to a certain extent by introduction of a few portals for MSME sector, yet, it should
be settled effectively and a time limit for defaulting large Companies be fixed along with some penal
11

12
provisions for making delayed payments to MSME units so that both Large and Small units are enable to
flourish, side by side. (Para 21)
Action Taken
This Ministry is facilitating the resolution of the problem of delayed payments through innovative
measures like the MSME Samadhaan portal. State Govts. have been requested to further streamline the
functioning of MSEFCs. Regular video conferencing is being held with state governments to expedite the
resolution of cases of delayed payments.
Recommendation/Observation
31. The Committee further observes that MSME Exchange gives them the opportunity to raise equity
through an IPO and then get listed on the exchange. There are more than 300 companies listed on BSE and
NSE. Efficient SME platforms could prove to be a vital source of Capital for MSMEs, but the two platforms
are far behind in expansion, the way it were envisaged. It, therefore, recommends that requirement of presence
of a company in the market for three years could be considered for reduction to a shorter period by SEBI.
Tax exemption to the investors in SMEs could add to the growth of MSME sector. (Para 24)
Action Taken
The proposed action regarding efficient SME platform and tax exemptions pertain to Securities and
Exchange Board of India (SEBI) and % Revenue. The recommendation of the Committee would be conveyed
to these Authorities for taking necessary action.
Recommendation/Observation
32. The Committee observes that in the present scenario of digitalization IT professionals are in high
demand and they are getting placement with reputed MNCs and other big establishments in different sectors.
Many employees in Micro and Small sector start from ground level after working for many years they attain
a certain level of expertise. These employees may not be IT literate and often have high resistance to the
rapid changes in the working process that they are comfortable with after many years. (Para 27)
Action Taken
With regard to non-availability of IT related expertise In the MSME sector, Ministry of MSME is
conducting various IT related programmes through their field offices mainly Tool Rooms and MSME-DIs.
Ministry has also launched a scheme’ Digital MSME’ which envisages promotion of ICT applications to
make them ‘Digital’ by adopting new approach of Cloud Computing in their production and business processes.
Recommendation/Observation
33. The Committee is of the opinion that smart manufacturing is now making its place in the market
which is dependent on industrial automation including breath taking innovation viz. use of robots and
machine intelligence, smart material self learning systems etc. MSME sector requires integration of work
force and digital manufacturing and production processes for better performance. (Para 28)
Action taken
The Ministry of MSME is implementing the Technology Centre Systems Programme (TCSP) under
which 10 new Technology Centres are being set up apart from upgradation of the existing Technology

13
Centres. Smart manufacturing is now being introduced in a phased manner in the curricula of Technology
Centres. Some of the Technology Centres are already imparting training in Robotics, Internet of Things
(IoT), Industry 4.0. These Technology Centres are also using simulation software for training purpose.
Efforts are being made to provide exposure to latest technologies of Augmented Reality (AR) /Virtual Reality
(VR) /Artificial Intelligence (AI).
Recommendation/Observation
34. The Committee observes that implementation of some bigger scale IT project especially after the
introduction of GST and changes in tax structure involving business process across different Departments
which requires large amount of data entries requiring human resource during implementation. The SMEs are
often in shortage of manpower and thus it becomes difficult for them to carry out implementation as it is
always conflicting to run business on day to day basis with limited manpower and do the extra implementations
work. This affects the business enterprises in the nascent stage and forcing them to close the establishment
many a times. (Para 29)
Action Taken
Ministry of MSME is conducting various IT related programmes through their field offices mainly
Tool Rooms and MSME-DIs for the skill development to update the entrepreneurs about the latest technological
information. Ministry has also formulated a scheme for digital empowerment of MSMEs, which inter alia
aims at promotion of ICT applications such as by adoption of cloud computing in their production and
business processes.
Recommendation/Observation
35. The Committee is of the opinion that to fight with bankruptcy and insolvency, modern codes in this
area are need of the hour in the competitive markets and uncertainties in. globalization so that if an
entrepreneur is encouraged to take risk and the creditors should also have an assurance of disposal of case
quickly and repossession of assets after the failure of business. (Para 30)
Action Taken
The Ministry of Corporate Affairs has notified the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016. The concern
of the Committee as expressed above has been shared with the Ministry of Corporate Affairs.
Recommendation/Observation
36. The Committee observes that MSME sector having limited financial resources lags far behind in
adoption and acquisition of globally available expensive advanced technology and thus fails to stand
firmly in competitive and qualitative market. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a Global Technology
Acquisition Fund should be set up to enable the Indian Industries to acquire high-end technology with its
support to enhance their competitiveness globally and value addition. (Para 32)
Action Taken
The Ministry of MSME is also implementing the Technology Centre Systems Programme (TCSP)
under which 10 new Technology Centres are being set up apart from upgradation of the existing Technology
Centres. Smart manufacturing is now being introduced in a phased manner in the curricula of Technology
Centres.

14
Recommendation/Observation
37. The Committee recommends that R&D and Technology related support facilities and services including
training and skill development programme should cover optimum educated unemployed youths of the country
having qualification and talent along with inclination through IITs, ITIs, NITs and other research laboratories.
The facilities available need to be modernized and should be fine tuned and tailored as per the need and
requirement of the MSME sector. (Para 34)
Action Taken
The Ministry of MSME has involved national level premier institutes like Indian Institute of Technology
(IIT), Mumbai, Kanpur, Kharagpur, Roorkee and Guwahati, Indian Institute Sciences (lISc), Bangalore,
National Institute of Technology (NIT), Nagpur, Rourkela, Calicut and Silchar, Birla Institute of Technology
(BIT), Ranchi, College of Technology and Engineering (CTAE), Udaipur and North Eastern Regional lnstitute
of Science & Technology (NERIST), Itanagar as Technical Interfaces. Under these technical Interfaces,
various rural technologies suitable for KVI sector have been developed and also disseminated in the field.
Mahatma Gandhi Institute for Rural Industrialization (MGIRI), Wardha has been established to provide the
R & D and quality assurance input for the benefit of Khadi and V .I. Sector and to act as Hub & Spoke model
in between the technical interfaces. The Ministry of MSME is also implementing the scheme ASPIRE for
promoting incubation in rural sector. Till 31st March 2018, 62 LBIs have been approved and 30 commenced
incubation; over 18000 incubates have completed incubation; 30% have set up their own enterprises and
engaged in productive employment.
Further, in line with the recommendations of the Committee, modernization of the available facilities is
being encouraged as per the requirements of the MSME sector.
Recommendation/Observation
38. The Committee observes that the training in some cases is also imparted through NGOs who
take the training very casually and moreover, theoretical training is imparted as they lack practical
modules. (Para 51)
Action Taken
KVIC is organizing training programmes through 16 Departmental and 22 Non-Departmental Training
Centres. The NGO’s which are imparting training under the fold of KYIC are regularly being monitored by
State/Divisional Directors and their performance is being continuously reviewed. KYIC has introduced MIS
Package to monitor the performance of the training centres and the KYIC has also engaged the services of
Call Centre to get the feedback from the trainees regarding their experience in the training centre.
Recommendation/Observation
39. The recent innovative step to bring in fashion designer of repute to design Khadi fabrics is a welcome
move and it needs to be continued by bringing in more such steps. The Committee therefore recommends that
this along with good market techniques like frequent awareness campaigns among the youth and introduction
of Khadi in Schools. Hospitals and railways could be good recourse which will surely increase the demand
for Khadi products. Along with this, premier showrooms known as Khadi lounge should be opened in all the
States capitals and Airports to market designer Khadi products. (Para 53)

15
Action Taken
KVIC is promoting Khadi among the youth by participating in the events organized by Schools and
Colleges of repute. Moreover, during the exhibitions organized by KVIC, competitions like debate, essay
writing, cultural programmes, drawing competition, fashion show etc are also organized.
There are 26 items under Khadi, which have been registered in the Government e-Marketplace (GeM)
portal for supplies to Govt. Departments, PSUs, Railways etc. Railways are the largest consumer for Khadi
products with annual requirement of `60.00 crore approximately.
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India has already issued directives to AIIMS,
NEIGRIHMS, JIPMER, PGI, NIMHANS, RIMS and others for procurement of 45 Khadi and Village Industry
items.
KVIC has opened Khadi Lounge at New Delhi, Mumbai, Jaipur and Bhopal. Exclusive sales outlets at
major airports have also been opened at Visakhapatnam, Ahmedabad and Lucknow. It is also proposed to
open 5 new sales outlets in major airports.
Recommendation/Observation
40. The Committee is of the view that the economic empowerment of the poor artisans can be enhanced by
more intervention by KVIC by allowing the spinners and weavers need to be allowed to work with the
private designers without the approval of KVIC so that they could earn more wages directly from these
designers. (Para 54)
Action Taken
The spinners/weavers are self-employed artisans of Khadi Institutions. There is no restriction by
KVIC on any Khadi Institution and artisans to associate themselves with private designers. Under the KVIC-
Raymond agreement many Khadi Institutions have been encouraged to supply directly, to enable the artisans
to get better wages.
Recommendation/Observation
41. The Committee observes that the urban youths are not inclined to work in this sector due to low wages
and the hardships involved in it. The Committee recommends that the issue of low wages of unskilled, semi
skilled artisans needs to be addressed on priority as the availability of more willing workers will bring in more
quality outcome in Khadi sector . This would help in increasing the benefits to the artisans. (Para 55)
Action Taken
Recently, Ministry of MSME approved a proposal of KYIC to enhance the wages of spinners from
` 5.50 to ` 7.50 per hand to attract more youth to Khadi sector. With the initiatives taken by- KVIC, to
associate the private sector players and setting up of franchisees, it is expected that the youth will be more
attracted to this sector.
Recommendation/Observation
42. The Committee is of the opinion that the minimum educational qualification prescribed under the
PMEGP and absence of the option of regional language in publicity/procedural formality may be the probable
reasons hampering the proper implementation of the flagship scheme as a potential entrepreneur with low

16
education profile may be prone to face difficulties in completion of all procedural formalities including
filling up of form. In this regard, necessary steps should be taken to address the problem. (Para 66)
Action Taken
As regards publicity, the advertisements are published allover the country in regional languages also.
For the filing the online application and procedural formality, the option of English and Hindi language is
available on the e-portal of flagship scheme of Prime Minister’s Employment Generation Programme
(PMEGP).
To solve the difficulties of potential entrepreneurs in completion of all the procedural formalities
including filling up of form due to low education profile, RUDSETI/RSETI offer handholding services to the
trainees for a period of 2 years to address teething problems if any and to facilitate the sanction of loan and
to ensure that the units are properly grounded.
Recommendation/Observation
43. The Committee also observes that only half the targeted projects set up by KVIC have been approved/
disbursed by the Banks which does not portray a rosy scenario. The Committee desires that the Ministry
may step in to r esolve the problems in consultation with KVIC and financial institutions so that targets set
forth are achieved. (Para 67)
Action Taken
KVlC invites online application under PMEGP scheme. The applications received are placed before the
District Level Task Force Committee (DLTFC). Further, DLTFC takes interview of the candidates and
assess the capability according to type of project to be set up by the entrepreneur. The projects of candidates
recommended by DLTFC are forwarded to the financing banks as per the choice of candidate. The financing
banks assess the techno-economic viability of the projects and sanction the funds according to banking
norms after assessment of the credit profile of the borrowers.
The KVIC and the Ministry hold meetings with the Banks and Nodal officers of Banks on a regular
basis to ensure that the targets are achieved.
Recommendation/Observation
44. The Committee is of the opinion that MSMEs are an integral part of the economic development of the
country and therefore their growth and survival is vital for the Government. Hence, it recommends that more
and more MSME exposition, MSME Haats and MSME National/International trade fairs/Exhibitions should
be organized, including at District level, with the participation of people’s representatives, to enhance the
market accessibility of MSMEs. (Para 91)
Action Taken
Various steps are taken by the Ministry [or MSME to give a better exposure to MSMEs in domestic
and international market for their products/ services. Under the existing Marketing Assistance Scheme and
Special Marketing Assistance Scheme of NSSH, National Small Industries Corporation Ltd. (NSIC) a PSU
under this Mini stry acts as a facilitator to promote marketing efforts and enhance the competency of the
micro, small and medium enterprises for capturing the new market opportunities by way of organizing!
participating in various domestic and international exhibitions/trade fairs, buyer-seller meets, intensive-

17
campaigns and other marketing events. NSIC helps micro and small enterprises to participate in International/
National exhibitions/trade fairs at the subsidized rates to exhibit and market their products. Participation in
the marketing events provides micro, small and medium enterprises an exposure to the National/International
markets.
Further, under International Cooperation Scheme, financial assistance is provided on reimbursement
basis to the State/Central Government organizations, industries/enterprises Associations and registered
societies/trusts and organizations associated with MSME for deputation of MSME business delegation to
other countries for exploring new areas of MSMEs, participation by Indian MSMEs in international exhibitions,
trade fairs, buyer seller meet and for holding international conference and seminars which are in the interest
of MSME sectors.
Recommendation/Observation
45. Deforestation is one of the major threats for the maintenance of ecological balance. The Committee,
in order to avoid grave threats which are endangering the climatic conditions and human life, recommends
that the production of substitutes for wood, such as coir wood, has to be encouraged and more coir
clusters under SFURTI have to be established to meet the demands of coir based furnishings and building
materials from the domestic as well as international market. To achieve this, more funds should be
allocated by the Ministry of MS&ME to the Coir Board with proper monitoring and utilization of allocated
funds. (Para 106)
Action Taken
Against the BE 2017-18 of  `75 crore, an allocation of `125 crore has been earmarked under SUFRTI..
Automatically, the share of Coir Board will be higher than the previous year. Under the Scheme of Fund for
Regeneration of Traditional Industries (SFURTI), the Government of India has sanctioned financial assistance
for establishment of two clusters for production of Needled Felt coir composite panels. Further, Coir Board
has proposed establishment of another cluster in Tamil Nadu viz. Salem, for production of needled felt based
coir composite panels. In addition to this, Coir Board is taking all out efforts to take up new cluster proposals
under SFURTI 2nd Phase exclusively for manufacturing coir wood and related products.
Recommendation/Observation
46. The Committee is of the firm opinion that in order to have a better co-ordination of export promotion
of coir and its by products for aiding in multifarious activities such as soil erosion control, landscaping,
river embankment etc., establishment of overseas offices of the Coir Board may be considered. This way, the
Coir Industry would also grow internationally side by side with the Khadi Industry. (Para 107)
Action Taken
Coir Board is regularly participating in the Annual Conference and Expo of International Erosion
Control Association in America which is a global platform for addressing erosion control issues. Application
of coir geo-textiles in erosion control, landscaping and rural road construction have immense potential
world over because of the eco-friendly nature when compared to synthetic products and other natural
fibers. In order to popularize the use of coir gee-textiles abroad, Coir Board has plans for organizing field
demonstrations on the application of coir gee-textiles and such other initiatives for capturing potential markets
abroad. The proposal for establishing overseas offices has already been included in the future action plans of
the Board. For meeting the expenditure involved the possibilities of convergence with the Market Access

18
Initiative (MAI) scheme of the Ministry of Commerce and the support of the Ministry of External affairs will
be explored.
Recommendation/Observation
47. The Coir Board is implementing multifarious developmental and promotional activities when in
turn is providing employment to a large number of people mostly in the rural areas of the country.
Sufficient manpower is however required for implementation and monitoring the programmes and for
providing research data/statistics in time for MIS. Hence, the Committee recommends that in view of the
increased activities of the Board. the necessary qualified manpower should be provided to the Board for
its smooth functioning. (Para 108)
Action Taken
It is to mention that a High Level Official Committee was constituted for reviewing and assessment of
the direct recruitment vacancies existing in Coir Board, creation of new posts, posts to be provided as
matching savings towards creation/upgradation of posts etc. The Committee, after assessment of the relevant
factors, recommended to impress upon the Ministry the essentiality for immediate filling up of the direct
recruitment vacancies, which include a number of technical posts to be positioned in Field Offices like
Regional Offices/ Sub Regional Offices, through which Plan programmes are implemented and accord
sanction for the same. Similarly, it has also been recommended to follow up the proposal for creation of 20
senior level new posts, already under the consideration of the Ministry, which are also equally important
against the necessity for more effective implementation of the schemes in coir sector with increased budgetary
support.
Recommendation/Observation
48. The Committee is aware that there are various other schemes implemented by the Government under
which technology developed is transferred to the beneficiaries without any charges. The Committee is therefore
is of the view that the technology developed by the Coir Board should be transferred to entrepreneurs,
traders, clusters etc. free of cost to encourage potential entrepreneurs to get into the coir sector. Besides,
steps should also be taken to explore the potential overseas markets for export of coir products particularly
innovative coir products. Also, 100% modernization of coir industry has to be encouraged with high funding
support to popularize the innovative coir products in domestic market as well. (Para 115)
Action Taken
The Government of India has from time to time emphasized the need of its organizations becoming
self-supporting through income generation activities. Earnings through transfer of technology are a source
of income for Coil’ Board. However, free transfer of technology can be considered on a case to case basis
depending on the category of beneficiaries, area of improvement, etc. For instance, technologies that could
improve the productivity of workers, quality of products, etc. could be transferred free of cost. In order to
expand the overseas markets for Indian coir products, the Coir Board is implementing programmes like
participation in international exhibitions and buyer seller meets. Under this programme, the Board undertake
the following activities:
(i) Organise national participation in international fairs abroad.
(ii) Organise participation in international fairs in India.

19
(iii) Organise exclusive international fairs for coir in India and abroad.
(iv) Or ganise Buyer Seller Meets abroad for coir.
(v) Organise reverse Buyer Seller Meets in India.
(vi) Or ganise participation in Seminars, Conferences, Workshops etc. abroad.
(vii) Organise display of coir products in the premises of Indian Missions.
(viii) Undertake demonstrations projects on a pilot scale, conducting seminars etc based on a focus
product/ focus market approach with a view to educate and establish the end use applications of
specific products like coir gee-textiles, coir wood etc. among the target audience.
In addition to the above, the Board is implementing the External Market Development Assistance
scheme with the objective of encouraging the small scale exporters to enter global market and to expand the
export of Indian coir products. Under this scheme, the eligible entrepreneurs will get reimbursement of
space rent, air fare, freight charges, etc. for participation in international exhibitions/buyer seller meets as
per the eligibility conditions and scale of assistance prescribed in the scheme.
Recommendation/Observation
49. The Committee is also of the opinion that Buyer Seller meets and Vendor Development Programmes
may be organized overseas to popularize coir products and to tap the virgin overseas markets. (Para 116)
Action Taken
Ministry of MSME is already organising International Trade Fair to popularize the various product
including coir product and to see the opportunity for marketing of their products.
Recommendation/Observation
50. The Committee was informed about the Solar Charkha Mission for which an allocation of 
` 50 crores
has been made for the first time during 2018-19. Though the Solar Charkha mode will surely remove
drudgery, the Committee is of the view that the KVlC should ensure that there is no conflict in the definition
of Khadi which originally was totally ‘hand spun’, but with the introduction of Solar Charkha, it would
become ‘motorized’. (Para 121)
Action Taken
Solar cloth produced out of solar yarn from Solar Charkha has been categorized under Village Industries
activities by the Ministry vide Ministry’s letter bearing No.A54/ 711/2015-KVlC-P dated 14.01.2016 and
subsequent Commission’s Circular No. RID/New Development of Solar Charkha/2015-16 dated 06/
08.02.2016.
Ministry of MSME has made an allocation of `50.00 crore for the Solar Charkha Mission for the year
2018-19, as detailed below:
Grant-in-Aid General : ` 13.00 crores
SCC : ` 18.00 crores
STC : ` 09.00 crores

20
NER : ` 10.00 crores
TOTAL : ` 50.00 crores
Hence, there is no conflict in the definition of Khadi (Hand spun and Hand woven), as Solar Vastra
(Solar power spun and woven) has been categorized under Village Industry.
Recommendation/Observation
51. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of MS&ME should consider other available options to
provide necessary raw materials required by the MSMEs and for this, the other concerned Ministries/
Departments be persuaded for allocation of raw materials like, aluminum, copper, paraffin wax, cement
and bitumen etc. to fulfill the requirement of MSME sector. (Para 140)
Action Taken
In order to provide necessary raw materials required by the MSMEs certain quantities of raw materials
should be allocated by the main producers under Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) with special
discount for distribution to MSMEs through NSIC. Materials like Polymer Products, Bitumen, Copper,
Zinc, Paraffin Wax and Pig Iron should be provided so that MSMEs can be benefitted.
Recommendation/Observation
52. The Committee is of the considered opinion that the Incubation Centres run by NSIC provide training
to the prospective entrepreneurs by imparting training in the manufacturing as well as service sector for skill
development. In view of the huge skill demand existing in the country, the Committee recommends that more
Incubation Centres should be established in co-ordination with State Government so that training in
conventional trade as well as hi-tech areas are imparted to entrepreneurs to accure skill in all areas of
business operation for gainful employment. (Para 141)
Action Taken
In order to expand the setting up of Incubation Centres, ‘A Scheme for Promoting Innovation, Rural
Industry and Entrepreneurship (ASPIRE)’ is being implemented to promote Innovation and Rural
Entrepreneurship through rural Livelihood Business Incubator (LEI), Technology Business Incubator (TEI)
and Fund of Funds for start-up creation. The awareness of ASPIRE Scheme is being created among State
Governments as well as academic institutions. Also, under TCSP, 15 new Technology Centres are being
established in 14 States of the country including North-Eastern State. All these new Technology Centres
have provision for setting up of Manufacturing Incubation Centre (MIC) to develop (incubate) innovative
ideas of MSMEs/new entrepreneurs. Manufacturing Incubation Centre in 10 Technology Centres are scheduled
to commence in by June, 2019.
Recommendation/Observation
53. The Committee observes that as per reply furnished by the Ministry under the Single Point Registration
Scheme (SPRS), there are 527 MSMEs registered upto 15
th February, 2018. However , as per the Annual
Report, 2017-18, there were 21922 cumulative numbers of units registered under SPRS upto 31st December,
2017. The Committee desires that mismatch between the figures should be clarified and placed before the
Committee. (Para 143)

21
Action Taken
A total number of 21515 units (upto 31.03.2018) were registered under Single Point Registration
Scheme of NSIC including units belonging to SC/ST category registered with 100% fee subsidy under
National SC/ST Hub with 100% fee subsidy.
Under National SC/ST Hub, 100% subsidy on fee of NSIC for fresh registration/renewal of registration
for SC/ST entrepreneurs is being provided under SPRS. The figure of 527 MSMEs registered upto 15.02.2018
under SPRS was the MSMEs registered with special subsidy under SPRS of National SC/ST Hub.
Recommendation/Observation
54. The Committee feels that use of standard raw material consistently; possible design development,
process and product development including planning for maximum output, maximum efficiency, better
finishing with accuracy can sharpen the competitiveness in manufacturing and production sector. MSMEs
face competition from developing countries due to globalization and increased international trade but most
of the Micro and Small Enterprises do not see financial competition as major deterring factor but tend to
face stiff competition in quality rather than prices. (Para 152)
Action Taken
The new Technology Centres being established under the TCSP will be equipped with latest technology/
manufacturing processes, which will assist MSMEs in the development of quality product and enhance their
competitiveness. Further, the various components of the NMCP scheme would assist in enhancing the
competitiveness of the MSMEs in the relevant sector.
Recommendation/Observation
55. To enhance the marketing, targeted advertising through social network sites may prove a right
platform to reach out to prospective customers. The Committee feels that Ministry of MS&ME should
emphasize on setting up of more LBIs and TBIs with modern practice and procedure for skill up-gradation
of MSMEs. (Para 153)
Action Taken
Under ‘A Scheme for Promotion of Innovation, Rural Industry and Entrepreneurship (ASPIRE)” 62
LBIs and 8 TBIs were approved till 31
st March 2018. In the current version, the Scheme Steering Committee
has considered 13 proposals. During the current year and next year, more LBIs would be set up for skill up-
gradation and creation of more employment opportunities.
Recommendation/Observation
56. The Committee observes that benefits under CLCSS are extended to the beneficiaries only through 11
Banks. The Committee recommends that more Banks should be added to the list of banks. Moreover, the list
of 51 subsectors should be increased in consultation with Industry Associations and GTAB. The Ministry of
MS&ME should also ensure release of timely payment to scheduled Banks. (Para 165)
Action Taken
Under the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS), II Nodal banks/Financial institutions have
been identified as the nodal banks/agencies who implement the scheme in collaboration with the co-opted

22
Scheduled Commercial Banks, Scheduled Cooperative Banks [including the urban cooperative banks co-
opted by the SIDBI under the Technological Up-gradation Fund Scheme (TUFs) of the Ministry of Textiles],
Regional Rural Banks (RRBs), State Financial Corporations (SFCs), the North Eastern Development Financial
Institution (NEDFI) who are eligible as Prime Lending Institutions (PLIs) under this scheme only after they
execute a General Agreement (GA) with any of the nodal agencies, i.e. the Small Industries Development
Bank of India (SIDBI) and National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD).
In regard to the list of 51 sub-sectors, it is to submit that the proposal of the continuation of the CLCS
Scheme is underway, wherein it has been specified that the list of the sectors will be updated dynamically.
Further, it is also submitted that the proposal of the inclusion of some more new sector/sub-sector was
placed before the 7th GTAB held on 27.09.2016, but the proposal could not be approved due to inadequate
availability of funds.

CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS  IN  RESPECT  OF  WHICH  THE  COMMITTEE
HAS  NOT  ACCEPTED  THE  REPLIES  OF  THE  MINISTRY  AND  DESIRE  THE  MINISTRY
TO  REVIEW  THEIR  REPLIES
Recommendation/Observation
57. The Ministry of MSME submitted during the examination of Demands 2018-19, that the budget under
certain Schemes could not be utilized properly as the schemes are demand driven. The Committee therefore
suggests that proper assessment regarding financial requirement of the demand driven Schemes should be
made by the Ministry before sending the Budget proposals. Hence, it should be ensured in future that the
budget allocation made is utilized properly and overrated demands are not projected by any of the organization/
Institution under its jurisdiction. (Para 17)
Action Taken
The suggestion of the Committee has been noted. The Ministry of MSME has taken following measures
in order to enhance the demand of its schemes:
 Organising of Udyam Samwad (dialogue with various associations and enterprises), Interaction
with Heads/Representatives of field institutes and regular meetings with Industry Associations
& Chamber of Commerce.
 Visits by Nodal Officers and their representatives to the selected 115 Aspirational Districts across
the country to assess the needs of the area in terms of skilling, employment generation and
enterprise development. The nodal officers hold interactions with different stakeholders to get
suggestions for better implementation of schemes of the .Ministry.
Launch of various Portals like Udyog Aadhar Memorandum (UAM) on 19.09.2015, MSME SAMADHAN
(to address delayed payment to MSEs) on 30.09.2017, MSME SAMBANDH (for Public Procurement
from MSEs) on 08.12.207 and UDYAM SAMPARK to facilitate development of various aspects of
enterprises.
Further Recommendation/Observation
The Committee may be informed about the impact of various measures such as launching of
varoius e-portals, visits to 115 Aspirational districts, organising Udyog Samwad etc. taken by the M/
o MSME to monitor the financial requirements of the demand driven schemes. Further, the
Committee may be informed whether there has been better utilisation of funds as a result of the
said measures under-taken by the Ministry.
Recommendation/Observation
58. The Committee feels that there is an urgent need to evaluate the Research and Development system
to make it more effective and beneficial to the MSME sector which is crawling far behind in technology
adoption in comparison to MSMEs of developed countries. The Committee recommends that Ministry of
MS&ME being the protector of the units in this sector should allocate more funds for R&D and
qualified people working in the field be motivated and encouraged through the best possible ways and
means. (Para 35)
23

24
Action Taken
Evaluation of the Research and Development projects has been periodically undertaken by KVIC
through various reputed agencies. Collaborative action with CSIR laboratories is also being taken for the
promoting MSME centric research and technology transfer.
Further Recommendation/Observation
In view of fast and new technological innovations and advancements taking place across the
world in MSME and related sectors, the Committee recommends that a dedicated fund should be set
up for the Research & Development purposes only for adoption of improved technology and
innovations in the field of MSME to keep the pace with the MSMEs of the developing and developed
countries. Further, evaluation of the R&D projects should be undertaken on a regular and time
bound basis by reputed agencies under the strict monitoring of the M/o MSME through a team
having a nodal officer for the purpose.
Recommendation/Observation
59. The Committee notes that the constraint faced by KVIC/KVIB is mainly due to procedural delays,
inadequate technology up-gradation, improper utilization of funds etc. Despite providing technical guidance
to the units in KVI, the problems of the units remain inadequately addressed. This is one of the reason for sub
optimal functioning of institutions/units and high drop outs among new entrants, low employment generation.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that KVIC in view of the expansion of its area of operation in every
nook and corner of the Country, should come forward with a more holistic and unified policy in co-ordination
with the Ministry of MS&MEs and other stakeholders as regards the successful operation of the units is
concerned. Proper planning, monitoring and implementation in each scheme is required to meet the primary
objective of employment generation along with proper utilization of the budgetary support in view of year
on year enhancement in it. (Para 49)
Action Taken
The KVIC implements various programmes with a view to generating sustainable employment under
the Prime Minister’s Employment Generation Programme (PMEGP). 48398 projects have been set up and
employment opportunities have been provided to 3.87 lakh persons with Margin Money subsidy amounting
` 1312.40 crore during the year 2017-18.
The BE for 2018-19 has been fixed at `1800.64 crore to facilitation larger coverage under the flagship
scheme.
Further Recommendation/Observation
The Committee reiterates its suggestion that the KVIC, in co-ordination with the Ministry
and other stakeholders, should come up with an effective mechanism for proper planning, monitoring
and implementation of each scheme under it.
Recommendation/Observation
60. The C ommittee feels that in face of stiff competition in the market from Organized industries
KV1s should concentrate more on its technology improvement and products upgradation. It therefore
recommends that regular training by efficient staff having experience and expertise should be imparted

25
to the ar tisans through its network of training institutions. A r egular study on the functioning of the
training institutions sh ould be conducted as the present methods and practices may be outdated and not be
that much effective. The Committee recommends that the process of revamping and reorientation of KV1s
should also- be done wherever required so that it helps in productivity and development of Khadi and
Village Industries. (Para 50)
Action Taken
Under the Khadi Reform and Development Programme, selected Khadi Institutions have been given
funds tor up-gradation of infrastructure, sales outlets and capacity building of artisans. This has led to
increase in production and turnover of KVI sector in the last two years.
Further Recommendation/Observation
The Committee recommends that modern practices and technology prevailing in the global
markets should be studied and adopted for KVIs and manpower employed in the KVIs should be
equipped with necessary skills and training for better performance of the KVIs in every aspect.
Lack of raw material and equipment should not hinder their performance in any way. The wages of
the artisans should also be adequate enough so that they can live satisfactorily, respectfully and
contribute their 100% for betterment of KVIs because a satisfied employee contributes immensely
for an establishment. Modern marketing practices and strategies should also be adopted in the
wake of cut-throat competition in the market.
Recommendation/Observation
61. The Committee observes that KVIC is not working impressively in North Eastern Region and has a
very small set up in these areas. The number of ISEC issued under Khadi and Polyvastra is almost negligible
except in Assam and Manipur in the last financial year. The Committee desires that the reasons for the same
other than the hardships faced due to hilly terrain should be placed before it. (Para 76)
Action Taken
KVIC has extended necessary support to KIs of NER region. KVIC is also encouraging Khadi and V .I.
institutions to implement Khadi Reform and Development Programme (KRDP) and Honey Mission
programmes.
Further Recommendation/Observation
The Committee desires that the root cause of the poor performance of the KIs in NER should
be ascertained by the Ministry of MSME and appropriate remedial steps be taken to address the
problem as it will help in addressing the problem of unemployment and insurgency in NER. A
special roadmap keeping in view the geographical features/difficulties of the NER should be prepared
by the Ministry for improving the performance of KVIC in NER as already apprised to the Committee.
The Ministry should also find out the shortcomings in the implementation of its policies specifically
in NER.
Recommendation/Observation
62. The Com mittee is of the Opinion that KYIC which is mandated for providing employment
opportun ities across the country must come out with a comprehensive plan considering the local need for

26
the Khadi as well as for village industries sector along with developing a marketing network for rural
Khadi artisans. (Para 86)
Action Taken
The KVIC is enhancing its footprint across the country. The funding of khadi and village industries
projects is also being taken up under PMEGP across the country. It is proposing a comprehensive scheme
for providing employment opportunities in 117 aspirational districts.
Further Recommendation/Observation
New marketing strategies and policies should be devised by the Ministry in consultation with
KVIC and KVIB for Khadi artisans keeping in view the rural set up of the country. The Committee
would like to know about the details of the comprehensive scheme for providing employment in 117
Aspirational Districts mentioned by Ministry.
Recommendation/Observation
63. The Committee observes that first and foremost requirement is overhauling of the marketing strategy
for KVI products. Product development and marketing need a professional approach. Even the attempts
to boost sales using Khadi as brand name is unlikely 10 succeed unless some fundamental changes arc
introduced. Bringing in, the private sector for marketing and product development may be a good attempt
and may be initiated as a pilot project. KVIC and M/o MS&ME should think over the cost cutting and
stoppage of rebate on sale. The Committee desires that an enhanced B.E. of 
` 65 crores under MPDA for
2018-19 may be utilized judiciously for organizing Trade Fairs, Vendor Development Programmes etc. at
domestic and international levels so that a need to bring down the funds drastically at the RE stage does
not arise. (Para 90)
Action Taken
KVIC is engaging professional agencies to develop strategies for boosting marketing and product
development the new Marketing trends and avenues for KVI products. For promotion of Khadi products
exclusively by the private partners, KVIC has entered into agreement with M/s Raymonds, M/s Aditya Birla
Group and M/s Arvind Textiles.
For better marketing of KVI products KVIC has also entered into agreement for shop-in-shop model
“Khadi Korner” with M/s Globus Stores and Mis Apna Bazaar. Discussions are underway with M/s Big
Bazaar and Indian Merchant Chambers. During the year 2018-19, KVIC proposes to open 15 new “Khadi
Korner” stores.
Apart from this, KVIC has opened 6 exclusive KVI products franchisees at Pune, Mumbai,
Thiruvananthapuram and New Delhi. During the year 2018-19 KVIC proposes to organize and participate in
number of exhibitions in the domestic market. Participation in International Exhibitions is also encouraged.
Further Recommendation/Observation
The Committee is of the opinion that to increase profitability of the KVI products, the current
marketing trends and practices should be adopted. Internet can be a very good platform for
marketing and promotion of KVI products. The Ministry is advised to make full use of the internet
as a marketing platform for increasing saleability of KVI products. Further, tentative schedule of

27
Domestic/International exhibitions should be included in the Annual Report of the Ministry of
MS&ME in order to increase the number of participants in such exhibitions for popularizing KVI
products.
Recommendation/Observation
64. The Committee feels that one of the most important objectives of the implementation of various
Schemes under Coir Board is the employment generation especially in rural areas. For this, an organization
like Coir Board is providing training on various aspects of production and development of new/innovative
products. The Committee recommends that Ministry of MS&ME should give a consideration for recognition
of such training courses/training institutions so that younger generation will be attracted to such training
and the status of such training will be elevated to the next level. (Para 100)
Action Taken
As recommended by the Committee, giving recognition to training courses offered by Coir Board and
other training institutions by the Govt. of India will authenticate the value of the course and encourage
potential employers to hire the successful trainees.
Further Recommendation/Observation
The Committee recommends that effective training programmes/courses be introduced by
professionals/experts to provide quality training for various schemes under Coir Board to attract
prospective trainees from younger generation, which will create more job opportunities in rural
areas. In this regard, the Ministry of MSME should take up the issue of authentication of courses,
in consultation with Coir Board, with the.Government. Adequate steps should also be taken to
improve the working conditions and wages in Coir Industry so that more people become part of it.
Recommendation/Observation
65. The Committee also desires that the Ministry in consultation with the Coir Board should make all out
efforts to reach out to the Coir Udyami Yojna applicants whose accounts arc frequently turning to NP As
resulting in Banks shuwing reluctance to sanction loans under the Scheme. The Ministry of MSME should
make efforts to ascertain the root cause of increasing rate of NP As under the Scheme. (Para 101)
Action Taken
Coir Board had initiated several steps to address the issue of NPA under the erstwhile Scheme of Coir
Udyami Yojana. The Board, in association with the Banks, conducted awareness/sensitization programmes
for the applicants on the need of prompt repayment of the loan and successful functioning of the unit
established under the Scheme. Besides, Adalats/recovery camps were organized in association with the
Banks for the defaulters and the Banks have been able to recover the dues to some extent. Having regard to
these difficulties, the Scheme was modified by including provisions for working capital and marketing
support assistance. The scheme has been merged with the PMEGP for better provisions/reach and will be
implemented from the financial year, 2018-19.
Further Recommendation/Observation
Apart from organizing Adalats/recovery camps, the Ministry is advised to find out the root
cause of rising cases of NPAs and take remedial steps immediately as it adversely affects the whole

28
scheme. The Committee would also like to know about the considerations, which have influenced
the merger of the scheme with PMEGP and likely positive outcome thereof as the Scheme was
modified earlier also.
Recommendation/Observation
66. A maximum numbers of coir industries are in Micro and Small category and these are dependant
heavily on the Banks and other financial institutions for funds. Natural calamities like. tsunami/cyclones
etc. which are beyond the control of human being, sometimes badly effects the coir industries destroying
them seriously. The Committee therefore, recommends that in such cases, the coir sector should be supported
financially in order to provide some relief to the affected artisans/ units and, for the purpose, a corpus fund
specifically, for Coir Board may be a good solution and could be considered positively. (Para 117)
Action Taken
The recommendation of the DRPSC to provide relief to coir industrial units when destruction is
caused by natural calamities would go a long way in stabilizing the coir industry. The industry is more or less
spread across the coastal belt of the country where natural calamities affect most. There have been many
instances of wiping out of coir industry due to cyclones in the past. If funds are allocated to meet such
exigencies in the annual budget of Coir Board, the needy stakeholders can be assisted promptly and the
industry can be saved from setbacks. If unutilized, the Corpus fund allocated for the purpose can be carried
forward to the next year.
Further Recommendation/Observation
The Committee is of the view that necessary steps may be taken up with Ministry of Finance
for- allocation of funds in the annual budget of the Coir Board to meet such exigency for assistance
of stakeholders.
Recommendation/Observation
67. The Committee observes that NSIC through its Vendor Development Programme sensitize and facilitate
MSEs, including SC/ST MSEs, to become qualified vendors to public sector units and other Government
Departments as per the provision of 20% mandatory procurement under Public Procurement Policy. Of this,
4% should be from SC/ST MSEs. While the PSUs and Government procurement from MSEs has been gradually
improving, procurement from SC/ST units is still very low. Therefore, the Committee recommends that there
should be more VDPs organised to publicise Public Procurement Policy among MSEs including SC/ST
units. (Para 142)
Action taken
In order to improve the procurement of CPSEs from SC/ST MSEs the Corporation organized 60 nos.
of Special YDPs for SC/ST entrepreneurs across the country during FY . 2017- 18. A total of 1889 SC/ST
entrepreneurs participated in these SYDPs. In addition to the above, 22 State Conclaves were organized
under National SC/ST Hub during F.Y . 2017-18 with the-objective to create awareness on Public Procurement
Policy 2012 (PPP-2012) and provide common platform for SC/ST entrepreneurs, CPSEs, Industry
Associations and Bankers for enhancing participation of SC/ST MSEs in Public Procurements.
Further Recommendation/Observation
The Committee is of the opinion that procurement from SC/ST MSEs is not very impressive

29
and encouraging despite organising Vendor Development Programmes and taking various other
measures by the Ministry to .sensitize the SC/ST entrepreneurs. The Committee recommends
that the Ministry may pay special attention to this issue and take measures to increase the
participation of SC/ST entrepreneurs under the Public Procurement Policy and apprise the Committee
accordingly.
Recommendation/Observation
68. The Committee is pleased to note that the launch of the UAM has proved to be a stepping stone for the
ease of doing Business by the MSMEs. However, at the same time it also observes that the online filling
system under UAM based on self declared information shows an uneven geographical distribution of UAMs
across all Indian States and Union Territories. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry
should take the required steps to encourage MSMEs, especially, the Small and Medium Enterprises to
register under UAM. In this direction, the stakeholders from the States/UT Governments, Industry Associations
and Public at large should also be encouraged to contribute significantly for the purpose, especially in the
NER, in order to afford ease of doing business in the MSME sector. (Para 148)
Action Taken
State conclaves are being organized in various parts of the country under National SC/ST Hub scheme.
Through these conclaves this Ministry is creating awareness of various endeavors undertaken by the Central
Government including Udyog Aadhaar Memorandum (UAM). The Ministry is coordinating with States/UTs/
industry associations to increase awareness about UAM and facilitate registration under UAM. These State
Level Conclaves also provide helpdesk for enrolment of UAM.
Further Recommendation/Observation
The Committee recommends that Ministry should pay special attention to get maximum Udyog
Aadhar Memorandum (UAM) registrations from NER as the registraions in NER are still very low
and there is clearly a geographical imbalance in UAM registrations. The Ministry should organise
special camps/prog rammes with the support of local bodies and Industry Associations to create
awareness among the entrepreneurs of NER and create a conducive environ m cut for
entrepreneurship in NER.
Recommendation/Observation
69. The Committee finds that there is a tangible gap in subsidy claims received and settled every year.
There is also a declining trend in the number of MSEs benefitted. The Committee is constrained to note the
decreasing trend in subsidy claim amount. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of MS&ME should
come out with a concrete plan to get sufficient allocation from the Ministry of Finance for clearance of
subsidy claims. (Para 164)
Action Taken
The tangible gap in subsidy claims received and settled every year and decreasing trend in subsidy
claim amount is due to lack of allocation of the funds in the appropriate head. This Ministry has taken up the
matter of additional fund allocation at various levels with M/o Finance to liquidate the pendency of ` 985.00
Crore. The Committee may like to also direct M/o Finance in this regard.

30
Further Recommendation/Observation
The Committee expresses its grave concern over the pending claims of MSME under CLCSS
to the tune of ````` 985 crores. The Committee recommends M/o MSME should convey the feelings of
the Committee to the M/o Finance and request them to provide budget allocation for full settlement
of pending claims. The Committee may be informed of the response of the M/o Finance by the first
week of January, 2019.
Recommendation/Observation
70. The Committee expresses its reservation over low employability under PMEGP during 2017-18
and feels that without raising the employability, the Scheme would be wastage of resources. The
Committee expects the Ministry to inform it about the concrete steps taken to improve employability
in NER. (Para 172)
Action Taken
 Targets under PMEGP are set in terms of Margin Money (MM) allocation. Projects are indicative.
 During the year 2017 -18, the employment rate was estimated eight persons per project under PMEGP.
While fixing the targets average MM per project was taken as `2.00 lakh, however, in actual the MM
per project comes to `2.70 lakh due to increase in project size which results in less number of projects
set up during 2017-18 and proportionately less projects.
 The fixation of targets in terms of number of projects will be set up taking average margin money at-
least ` 2.5 lakh per project during 2018-19.
 As per the scheme guidelines the employment is expected to be generated as per the capital expenditure
(plant/machinery/building) and working capital varies from project to project.
 The quantum of beneficiary’s contribution and rate of subsidy (MM) admissible to the NE region
under the PMEGP scheme is as under:
Category Beneficiary’s Rate of Subsidy
Contribution (percentage )
(on project cost) Urban Rural
All categories in N.E Region 5% 25% 35%
Further Recommendation/Observation
The Ministry has furnished only data and has not apprised the Committee about the steps,
which would be taken to increase employability in NER. The Committee desires the details of the
steps to be taken or have already been taken by the Ministry for increasing the employability in
NER.

CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE DESIRE
FURTHER COMMENTS OF THE MINISTRY
Recommendation/Observation
71. The Committee notes that the MGIRI is the only Institution under the Ministry of MSME which is
working on empowerment of traditional artisans through R&D projects for alternative technology using
local resources and it has given excellent results, especially, with regard to the project based on cow urine
and waste human hair producing Amino acid as a plant growth promoter. The Committee observes that the
success of this pilot project would go a long way in increasing employment generation in the rural areas of
the Country. The Committee is of the view that there should not be any shortage of funds for the institution
rather it should be promoted and motivated. (Para 126)
Action Taken
Mahatma Gandhi Institute for Rural Industrialization (MGIRI) has put a lot of efforts to develop
various innovative technologies/products in the area of Khadi & Textile, Food-processing, herbal, Panchgavya,
agri-inputs, chemical based industries, rural craft & engineering, rural energy & infrastructure. Few
remarkable technologies such as Amino acid mixture, Panchgavya based various products, Flavored Soya
milk & Calcium rich tofu, Potter’s wheel, Blunger, Solar Charkha, Ponduru tool, Soft and stiff finish
technology etc. have been commercially disseminated successfully and there is marked improvement in the
number of rural enterprises, benefitted through skill development/ entrepreneurship development programmes
conducted in last few years. MGIRI has also got success in filling 26 patents on various technologies/
products and in publication of research papers in reputed national and international journals. MGIRI is also
working in collaboration with KYIC in the field of S&T, SFURTI cluster development and KRDP programmes
etc..
MGIRI can support in Prime Minister’s flagship programmes such as “Make In India”, “Start Up
India” etc. and KVIC’s schemes like PMEGP, SFURTI etc. more effectively by way of widen rich of
MGIRI as focus institute for rural industrialization, entrepreneurial development, facilitating marketing,
testing and financial support to prospective entrepreneurs.
31

MINUTES

35
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Friday, the 21st December, 2018 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh   —    Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Sanjay Seth
3. Shri Tiruchi Siva
4. Shri T. G. Venkatesh
5. Dr. Amee Yajnik
LOK  SABHA
6. Shri Birendra Kumar Choudhary
7. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato
8. Shri Ramsinh Pataliyabhai Rathwa
9. Shri Raj Kumar Saini
10. Shri Rameswar Teli
11. Shrimati Savitri Thakur
12. Shrimati Dev (Moon Moon Sen) V arma
13. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare
SECRETARIAT
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Director
Shri J. K. Mallick, Additional Director
Shrimati Sreeja V ., Deputy Secretary
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Deputy Secretary
Shri Ajin. J. R., Under Secretary
Shrimati Renu Sreekanth, Committee Officer
Shri Divender Singh Bisht, Committee Officer
At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting.
The Committee, then, took up for consideration and adoption the draft 291st, 292nd, and 293rd Action
Taken Reports of the Committee based on the replies provided by the Ministry/Department to the
recommendations of the Committee as contained in its 287th, 286th and 288th Reports on Demand for
Grants (2018-19) pertaining to Department of Public Enterprises, Department of Heavy Industry and Ministry
of MSME, respectively. After a brief discussion, the Committee adopted the draft 291st, 292nd, and 293rd
Reports without any change.

36
2. The Committee decided to present the Reports in both the Houses of Parliament on the 28th December,
2018 and accordingly, authorised the Chairman of the Committee to decide the names of the Members who
would present the Reports in both the Houses of  Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned at 10.25 A.M.