 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
         December, 2013/ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) 
TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
 
ACTION TAKEN ON THE 243 rd  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON  
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-14) 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
(DEPARTMENT OF HEAVY INDUSTRY) 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on10th December, 2013)  
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  10 th  December, 2013 ) 
 REPORT NO.  
256  

 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
         December, 2013/ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
 
ACTION TAKEN ON THE 243 rd  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON  
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-14) 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
(DEPARTMENT OF HEAVY INDUSTRY) 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10 th  December, 2013)  
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  10 th  December, 2013 ) 

C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………………………………..      (i) 
 
2. INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………………………        (ii) 
 
3. REPORT …………………………………………………………………………………..         
 
(i)  CHAPTER – I 
 Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry …………...  
 
(ii)  CHAPTER–II 
  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view 
  of the Government's replies…………………………………………………………     
 
(iii)  CHAPTER–III 
   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  the Committee has not                        
accepted the replies of the Ministry and has asked the Ministry to review its                
replies…………………………………………………… ………………………… 
 
(iv)  CHAPTER – IV 
  Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry have 
not been received…………………………………………………………………... 
 
4. * Minutes……………………………………………………………………………..     ……   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
* to be appended at printing stage. 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Date of Constitution 31 st  August, 2013)  
 
   RAJYA SABHA  
     
1.   Shri K.C. Tyagi     — Chairman  
2. Shri Narendra Budania 
3. Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
4.   Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
5.   Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor  
6.   Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
7.   Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel 
8.   Shri Vivek Gupta 
9.   Dr. V. Maitreyan 
  
10.  Shri M.P. Achuthan 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
11.  Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala 
12.  Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
13.  Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
14.  Shrimati Poonamben Veljibhai Jat 
15.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
16.  Shri Hassan Khan 
17.  Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
18   Shrimati Ingrid Mcleod  
19.  Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal 
20.  Shri Somen Mitra 
21.  Shri P. R. Natarajan 
22.  Shri Gorakhnath Pandey 
23.  Shri Jayaram Pangi 
24.  Shri R. K. Singh Patel 
25.  Shri B. Y. Raghavendra 
26.  Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
27.  Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
28.  Ch. Lal Singh 
29.  Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
30.  Shri E. G. Sugavanam 
31.  Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri A.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
Shri Roshan Lal, Joint Director 
Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 (i) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred 
and Fifty-sixth Report on Action taken Notes furnis hed by the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of He avy Industry) on the 
recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hu ndred and Forty-third Report on 
the Demands For Grants (2013-14) pertaining to Department of Heavy Industry. 
 
2.  I thank the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Pu blic Enterprises (Department of 
Heavy Industry) for furnishing the Action Taken Not es on the recommendations 
contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred and Forty-third Report. 
 
3.  The Committee in its meeting held on the 27 
th  November, 2013 considered and 
adopted the report. 
 
 
 
 
 
SHRI K.C Tyagi        
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
New Delhi 
November, 2013  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 

REPORT 
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with  the Action Taken by the 
Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises  (Department of Heavy Industry) on 
the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two hundred and Forty- third Report 
on the Demands For Grants (2013-14)  pertaining to Department of Heavy Industry. 
 
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Heavy Industries 
and Public Enterprises (Department of Heavy Industr y) in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as follows: 
 
Chapter I -  The recommendations/observations which have been  accepted by the 
Ministry. 
 The Committee is pleased to observe that the Minis try has accepted its 
recommendations as mentioned in the Chapter – I of the Report. 
 
 
Chapter -II -  The recommendations/observations which the Commi ttee does not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government's replies. 
 In respect of these recommendations the Committee is convinced with the logic 
and explanations advanced by the Ministry and there fore do not want to pursue them for 
the present. 
 
 
Chapter -III -  The recommendations/observations in respect of w hich the Committee has 
not accepted replies of the Ministry and has asked the Ministry to review its reply. 
 The Committee expresses its concern over the non-i mplementation of 
recommendations contained in Chapter – III and desi res that the Ministry should furnish 
logical explanations thereof. 
 
 
Chapter -IV - The recommendations/observations in respect of wh ich final replies of the 
Ministry have not been received. 
 In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either 
furnished the interim replies or couched its langua ge in vague terms therefore; the 
Committee desires that the Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in respects of 
recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention 
and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee. 
 
3. The details of the ATR are being discussed in the succeeding pages. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER – I 
 
The Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry 
 
Recommendation/observation 
 The Committee notes that during 2011-12 the Departm ent of Heavy Industry 
managed to utilize the funds allocated to them in a  relatively efficient manner. However, 
during 2012-13, the utilization of the total money allocated has not been up to the mark. 
With only a month left of the financial year, the D epartment could muster only an 
utilization of 71.40%. In view of this, the Committ ee recommends that Department of 
Heavy Industry, as the nodal department, having ove rsight of one of the most important 
sectors of the Indian industry, should improve thei r fund utilization. If the Department 
lags in this area, there can be a possible negative  cascading effect on the allocation of 
funds during the ensuing years and many important i nitiatives planned by the 
Department will be left without sufficient funding.  
                                                                                              Para No.7 
Action Taken Reply 
 
 Observation has been noted and will be complied wit h.  All efforts are being 
made to improve fund utilization in 2013-14. 
 
 
Recommendation/observation 
 The Committee strongly recommends that decision in  such matters must be taken 
on time. 
Para No.43 
Action Taken Reply 
 
 Observation has been noted and will be complied with.  
 
 
Recommendation/observation 
 The Committee commends such initiative and recommen ds that the Government must 
take measures for standardization of auto components.  
Para No.47 
Action Taken Reply 
 
 DHI is supporting UNIDO-ACMA projects which aims to  provide practical 
services to Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) for  enhancing the performance of 
domestic SMEs in the automotive component industry to facilitate their inclusion into 
national, regional and global supply chains require ments (quality, cost and delivery), to 
upgrade and enhance the competitiveness of an incre asing number of target companies 
along the supply chain in India, including lower tier suppliers. The Development Council 
of Automobile & Allied Industry (DCAAI) has also gi ven approval to Phase-I of 
UNIDO-ACMA Cluster Development Project in the year at a cost or Rs. 11.25 crore 
spread over the next three years. A MoU has been si gned between DHI, UNIDO and 
ACMA.  

CHAPTER–II 
 
The Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee observed that there are many problem s involving BHEL, 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd., Neyveli Lignite Corpora tion, etc. It is understood that the 
orders placed by many PSEs with BHEL are not being completed in time. As a result, 
several PSEs are not able to improve their performa nce. The Committee is constrained to 
note that the inter PSE coordination is missing. Ho wever, the Committee was informed 
by the officials of the DHI that instead of going t o the court the inter-departmental 
dispute mechanism available in the Cabinet Secretar iat may be used to sort out the issues 
among Ministries. The Committee got the assurance f rom the Secretary, DHI that he 
would look into it. The Committee strongly recommen ds that the matters involving 
several PSEs must be resolved in a time bound manne r for the completion of the projects 
and for improving the efficiency and performance of  the PSEs. The Committee would 
like to get a detailed report in this respect from the DHI. 
Para No.38 
 
Action Taken Reply 
 
 BHEL is currently executing an order of 6.3 MPTA e xpansion project of 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL) for supply of STG  and Boiler, and an order of 2x250 
MW Circulating Fluidized Bed Combustion (CFBC) boil er based Neyveli Thermal 
Power Station (TPS)-II Expansion project of Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC). 
 
 The progress of each project is inter-alia monitor ed continuously through site 
visits by concerned officials, interaction between the project developers and various 
associated agencies / contractors / suppliers, and progress reports. In addition, regular 
review of progress of power projects is done at the  highest level in the Central Electricity 
Authority (CEA) and Ministry of Power. Furthermore,  Department of Heavy Industry 
(DHI) undertakes performance reviews of BHEL includ ing issues related to supply of 
equipment by the Company. As such, an underlying in tent of these mechanisms is for 
resolving interface issues, if any, coming in the way of project implementation. 
 
 Besides, the concept of Group Targets was envisage d in MOU of 2012-13 by the 
Department of Public Enterprises (DPE). In this reg ard, DPE “Guidelines for MoU 
between CPSE and Government Department/Ministry” states that in the circumstances of 
performances of some CPSEs being inter–dependent be cause their operations cut across 
different Ministries/Departments, MoU targets of th e concerned CPSEs should be so 
fixed that they are jointly and severally responsib le for their performance, and for 
achievement of the targets. Accordingly, group targ ets of BHEL are included with NTPC 
/ NHPC for MoU 2012-13, and with NTPC / NHPC / NLC for MoU 2013-14 comprising 
of various project milestones and targets which hav e been jointly agreed between the 
concerned CPSEs. 

 
 Additionally, a Permanent Machinery of Arbitration  (PMA) has been set up in the 
Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) since 1989 f or resolving commercial disputes, 
except taxation between CPSEs inter-se as well as b etween CPSEs and a Central 
Government Department/ Ministry/ Banks etc.  
 
 As such, the Committee on Disputes (CoD) that had been functioning in the 
Cabinet Secretariat for pursuing litigation by PSUs/Govt. Department has been wound up 
in accordance with the Order dated 17.2.2011 of the  Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in 
Civil Appeal No. 1883 of 2011 (arising out of S.L.P .(C)No. 2583 of 2009) in the case of 
Electronics Corporation of India Ltd. Vs. Union of India & others. 
 
          
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee suggested that the industry associati ons should interact with the 
educational institutions to develop curricula to mi nimize the gap between skill 
requirement and availability. The Committee also su ggested that a core group of the 
industry consisting of selected skilled people may draft educational curricula and send it 
to all educational institution for their adoption a nd incorporation in the syllabus for 
engineering students. 
Para No.45 
 
Action Taken Reply 
 
 DHI has apprised the Industry Associations in gener al and particularly those 
associations directly associated with different sub  sectors of domestic Capital Goods 
Industry of the observation and suggestion of the C ommittee. The skill gap study in the 
Capital Goods Sector has already been undertaken by Nation Skill Development Council. 
Representatives of the premier institutions like Indian Institute of Technology etc. will be 
co-opted as Members in the Capital Goods Skill Coun cil for development of educational 
curricula to address the issue of skill gaps. 
 
 
DHI has taken an initiative for “Formulation of Ski ll Development Plan” with a 
view to make available adequate, trained manpower f or sector like machine tools, heavy 
electrical, auto industry etc. so as to ensure prop er, streamlined and high growth rate in 
future. As far as auto sector is concerned, the tas k of identifying the skill gaps in the 
industry was undertaken through the specialized gro up formed during the framing of 
AMP 2006-16, as per which the industry is expected to require an additional 25 million 
workforce by 2016. Based on the deliberations held in the Department on various 
occasions, the Society of Indian Automobile Manufac turers (SIAM) prepared a Detailed 
Project Report (DPR). Accordingly, an Automotive Sk ill Development Council (ASDC) 
has been set up under the oversight of NSDC. An ini tial sum of Rs.75 lakh was also 
made available for the pilot project for the 1 st  year. Pilot project was implemented 
covering 3 trades related to the auto sector. The f ull project covering 24 trades in under 
submission with the NSDC. The observation has been noted for guidance and necessary 
action.    

 
 IEEMA has intimated that curriculum finalized by A ICTE is not keeping pace 
with the latest technology development. AICTE shoul d, therefore, enhance the 
involvement of industry experts in review and upgra dation of curriculum on an ongoing 
basis. 
 
 There is a need to promote greater linkage and int erface between the industry and 
academia / technical institutes, which requires con certed action by the three critical 
agencies — technical institutes, industry and government. 
 
 A Power Sector Skill Council (PSSC), proposed by C entral Electricity 
Authority (CEA) under Minister of Power, Ministry o f New & Renewable Energy 
and IEEMA, is in the process of becoming operationa l. PSSC will cover three 
distinct segments (1) Power Sector — Power Generati on, Transmission, System 
Operation and Distribution; (2) Renewable Energy Se ctor; and (3) Power 
Equipment Manufacturing Sector.  
 
 PSSC has been registered as a society under the So cieties Registration Act, 
1860, with IEEMA as one of the 7 founding members. The NSDC Board approved 
the funding assistance to the PSSC on 22n 
d August, 2013. 
 
 The objectives of PSSC are to collate and dissemin ate Labour Market 
Information; conduct research and aggregate Skill r equirements of the industry; 
create skill database; identify changing technologi es in the sector and collate 
technology specific skills; regulate the skill deve lopment activities; build capacity 
for training delivery; provide quality assurance vi a accreditation & certification; 
develop Centre of Excellence (COE).  
 
 
Further Recommendation/ observation 
 
 
 The Ministry may apprise the Committee of the outc ome of “Formulation of 
Skill Development Plan” of DHI and also that of “Power Sector Skill Council 
(PSSC)”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER–III 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not                        
accepted the replies of the Ministry and has asked the Ministry to review its                
replies 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee takes notes of the fact that funds ea rmarked for Lumpsum 
provision for the benefits of NER & Sikkim has been  going unutilized for the last two 
years. Taking cognizance of the submission of Depar tment of Heavy Industry about the 
revival plan for NPPC, the Committee recommends tha t the Department should do 
everything in its power to expedite the necessary a pprovals for the revival package for 
NPPC and consider utilizing the funds of Rs. 58.50 Crore allocated under the lumpsum 
scheme for 2013-14, for the revival of NPPC. The Co mmittee also observes that the 
trend of funds earmarked for NER gong unutilized is  highly worrisome. Considering that 
there are 4 CPSEs under Department of Heavy Industr y in the NER, it is difficult to 
conceive that there can be a dearth of proposals fo r their modernization, upgradation and 
other similar requirements. Therefore, the Committe e is of the considered opinion that 
the Department has to be more proactive for proper utilization of the funds for NER. It 
should not be a difficult task to plan the utilizat ion of the fund as it is a given fact that 
10% of Plan funds of the Department have to be set aside for the NER every year. 
Para No11 
 
Action Taken Reply 
 
 Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) has ap proved the revival of 
NPPC and upgradation plan of NPPC through infusion of funds and increasing the 
authorized capital of NPPC from 150 Crore to 250 Cr ore. The CCEA also gave approval 
to avail term Loan of Rs.156.50 Crore from commercial Banks against Govt. Guarantee. 
 
 AYCL has informed that in view of the company’s im proved financial 
performance for the year 2010-11 and ensuing follow  on public offer, Company may not 
require any plan assistance for the scheme of plant ation and augmentation of production 
and infrastructure related facilities at Assam Tea Gardens as these can be met through 
internal resources of the Company.   
 
Further Recommendation/ observation 
 
 
 The reply of the Ministry is silent on the measures  adopted for improving 
utilization of NER funds.  The Committee reiterates  its recommendation of effective 
utilization of the fund earmarked for NER. Also, th e allocation of NER should be 
indicated upfront in the Expenditure Budget as also  the expenditure proposed. This 
allocation of NER should be in addition to revival /modernisation plans approved by 
the Government for the PSEs in the NER. The Committ ee finds incredible that the 
PSEs in NER do not need Budget support for their operations. 
 

Recommendation/ observation 
 
 Though the Committee takes into consideration that funds for 2011-12 (Rs. 18.30 
crore) were released in the last month of the finan cial year, it remains a fact that the 
Department could not fully utilize this amount till  November, 2012. The Department has 
quoted this under utilization as the reason for cur tailment of funds for the year 2012-13. 
In this context, the Committee is of the opinion th at if DHI faced any problem for the 
release of funds from the Ministry of Finance that could have been taken up at the 
appropriate juncture. Once funds are released there  cannot be an excuse for 
underutilization as the attainment of the defined o bjectives would be affected, especially, 
in an area as important as R&D. Further, under this  scheme till February, 2013 out of the 
Rs. 20.crore (RE), no money has been actually alloc ated. Accordingly, the Committee is 
constrained to note that the R&D has been compromis ed by not getting the amount 
released for the year 2012-13. Therefore, the Commi ttee recommends that the 
Department should take strong measures to avoid a r epetition of this mistake in future 
and impress upon the Ministry of Finance for prompt  release of funds. Also, the 
Committee is hopeful that the review of the ongoing  scheme will help the Department to 
grapple with the problems that it faced earlier.  
Para No.16 
Action Taken Reply 
 
 Observation has been noted. The amount released fro m the Cess Fund could not 
be released due to pending utilization certificate of the previous release of funds. The 
concerned organizations have been advised for timel y submission of utilization 
certificates of the previous releases, so that the further funds may be released at the 
earliest. It is further mentioned that all R&D proj ects related to automobile sector are 
cyclical in nature. Quick release of fund may not n ecessarily ensure its effective 
utilization. The new release of the funds is subjec t to the earlier released funds being 
fully utilized under the particular project. Each p roject has year-wise schedule of fund 
requirement so that annual/periodical assessment of  progress is made and a considered 
view is taken every time the Screening Committee /C ess Committee examines the status 
of the on-going projects.  
 
 However, all efforts will be made to ensure timely  utilization of funds and timely 
& periodical reviews of ongoing schemes. The Financ e Ministry will be requested for 
timely release of funds too. 
 
Further Recommendation/ observation 
 
 
 Though the Committee takes note that the release o f funds depends on the 
furnishing of Utilization Certificates (UC) by the utilizers, the reply of the 
Government is devoid of any clear cut measures take n /to be taken for timely 
furnishing of UCs by the field organization. It is,  therefore, recommended that the 
Government should devise effective ways to encourag e and, whenever necessary, 
cajole the implementing agencies to furnish UCs in time. The Committee 
apprehends that the delayed implementation of schem es, delayed furnishing of UCs 

and resultant curtailment of funds is becoming a vi cious cycle affecting 
developmental activities. The reply appears to just ify underutilization and delay in 
realise of funds without informing the measures tak en by DHI to resolve the 
bottlenecks. 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee notes that DHI’s flagship project of  NATRiP has been severely 
plagued by delay and cost overruns. The main reason s for the delays as cited by 
Department of Heavy Industry are delay in acquisiti on of land and clearance and shifting 
of utility. Moreover, the Committee is extremely di sturbed to observe that the Actual 
expenditure year wise since 2005-06 for NATRiP has been abysmal. Barring one year 
(2008-09), the Actual expenditure has been well bel ow 50% of the corresponding RE 
figures. After an analysis of this scenario, the Co mmittee observes that the performance 
of the planning machinery for NATRiP has not been s atisfactory and lack of long term 
vision has crippled the implementation of the schem e, which has been one of the most 
awaited projects of the automobile sector. The Comm ittee recommends that at least at 
this late point in time, in comparison with the ori ginal date of completion, NATRiP 
should strictly adhere to the revised completion da te of December, 2014 and also avoid 
cost escalation in the attainment of the remaining targets.  
Para No.20 
Action Taken Reply 
 
 NATRiP has faced hurdles in the initial stages on a ccount of delays in acquisition 
of land at various sites, delays in clearances, shi fting of utilities, contractual 
complications etc. Later, after commencement of the  project, design changes on the 
original conceptual designs, due to site specific a nd equipment specific conditions also 
led to time and cost overrun. These factors led to escalation of the project cost and also 
necessitated revision in the scheduled completion d ate. The CCEA in its meeting held on 
31-04-2011 approved the revised cost of Rs. 2288 cr ore and 31 st  December, 2012 as the 
new completion date for the project and all efforts  are being made to speed up 
implementation. 
 
Further Recommendation/ observation 
 
 
 The reply of the Government gives 31/12/2012 as the  revised date of 
completion of NATRiP, which is now almost a year be hind.  The status of NATRiP 
as on date does not find a mention in it. The Commi ttee expects a more cogent reply 
in such an important matter. The lackadaisical atti tude reflecting in the reply, can 
been seen in the implementation of NATRiP also, the  effective planning and 
implementation of which could have made it much lig hter on the public exchequer 
and the result would have been cost effective.  In view of the above, the Committee 
very strongly recommends that a comprehensive upto date note on the 
implementation of NATRiP shall be furnished, showin g the present status and 
efforts taken for effective implementation after th e receipt of the Committee’s 
recommendations as contained in the 243 rd  Demands for Grant report on the 
matter.   

                                                                                                                                                                                            
Recommendation/ observation 
 
 
The Committee finds that BHEL’s IEBR figures during  2011-12, 2012-13 and 
2013-14 are at variance with the corresponding figures in expenditure budget supplied by 
DHI. Accordingly, the Committee observes that such difference in figures should have 
been reconciled with the department and thereafter presented before the Committee along 
with an explanation. The Department also, on their part should have noticed the variance 
in figures and taken it up with BHEL. 
Para No.34 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 
 
Since, the IEBR figures BHEL are at variance, the C ommittee refrains from 
commenting on it. But the reasons quoted for the sh ortfall in IEBR figures for 2011-12 
and 2012-13 are common. The Committee observes that  the BHEL should take measures 
to address the problem which has caused shortfall. The Committee feels that the 
avoidable delay cited by the BHEL should not be all owed to spill over to another year by 
a Maharatana Company like a BHEL. 
Para No.35 
 
Action Taken Replies on Para No. 34 and Para No.35. 
 
   The IEBR figures of BHEL are tabulated below: 
(Figures in Rs. Crore) 
IEBR BE 
(as 
per 
DHI) 
BE (as 
per 
BHEL) 
RE 
(as 
per 
DHI 
) 
RE (as 
per 
BHEL) 
Actual 
(as per 
DHI) 
Actual 
(as per 
BHEL) 
Remarks 
2011-
12 
1401 1401 1401 
 1410 1068 
 
(Refer 
Remarks 
column) 
1122 
 
(Refer 
Remarks 
column) 
• The figure of Rs. 1068 
Crore was Provisional 
 
• Actual of Rs. 1122 Crore 
is after Audit 
2012-
13 
1696 1696 1220 
 1220  
&  
1070  
 
(Refer 
Remark 
s 
column 
) 
- 564 
(till 
Feb.’ 
2013) 
• RE of Rs. 1220 Crore 
was tentative 
 as of 
Nov.’2012 
• RE was reworked  to Rs. 
1070 Crore as of 
Dec.’2012 
2013-
14 
1375 1375 
& 
- - - - • BE of Rs. 1375 Crore 
was as of Dec.’2012  

IEBR BE 
(as 
per 
DHI) 
BE (as 
per 
BHEL) 
RE 
(as 
per 
DHI 
) 
RE (as 
per 
BHEL) 
Actual 
(as per 
DHI) 
Actual 
(as per 
BHEL) 
Remarks 
1055 
 
(Refer 
Remarks 
column) 
• BE was revised to Rs. 
1055 Crore in Feb.’2013 
mainly due to delays in 
land acquisition for 
setting up of a 
manufacturing Unit of 
BHEL at Bhandhara and 
delay in Cabinet approval 
for Nuclear JV  
 
 The BE of IEBR of BHEL includes ongoing schemes, a nd planned proposals 
which are anticipated to take off during the year. The latter are however subject to timely 
clearances / approvals including from external agen cies. The extenuating reasons for 
shortfall in the IEBR of BHEL during 2011-12 and 20 12-13 were different, while a few 
(i.e. in 3 reasons) are similar, as follows:- 
 
IEBR Remarks / Reasons for shortfall 
2011-12 • delay in supplies of equipment from Romania 
• delay in enabling services due to hold & slow progr ess at project sites by 
the contractors/ suppliers/ customer of BHEL  
• competitive procurement resulting in savings 
2012-13 • Cabinet clearance delayed for Joint Venture between  BHEL, NPCIL and 
Alstom for Nuclear Power Projects 
• environment clearance & establishment of coal/ fuel  linkage delayed for 
Thermal Power Projects promoted by BHEL with State Power Utilities  
• Tamil Nadu Government terminating a JV Company prom oted by BHEL 
and Tamil Nadu Electricity Board (TNEB)  
• deferment of equity investment by NTPC-BHEL Power P rojects Private 
Ltd. (NBPPL) 
• Indian Railways defering their proposals for settin g up factories through 
JV approach  
• delay in land acquisition by Maharashtra Industrial  Development 
Corporation (MIDC) in respect of land required for setting up of a 
manufacturing Unit of BHEL at Bhandara  
• delay in supplies of equipment from China & Romania 
• delay in enabling services due to hold & slow progr ess at project sites by 
the contractors/ suppliers/ customer of BHEL 
• competitive procurement resulting in savings  
 

 As can be seen from the above, the reasons cannot be attributed as avoidable , as 
they were mainly due to factors beyond the control of BHEL . In respect of delay in 
supply and/or commissioning of equipments from Chin a and Romania, the matter has 
been pursued at the Embassy level and also the Mini stry level by BHEL to contain the 
delays, and all efforts are being made by the Compa ny to prevent such delays. As such, 
BHEL has made / is making necessary system improvem ents based on the experiences 
gained and as advised by the Committee. 
 
Further Recommendation/ observation 
 
 
 While taking into account the reasons furnished by  BHEL for the short falls 
in performance during 2011-12 and 2012-13, the Comm ittee expects that measures 
submitted to have been adopted by BHEL bear fruit a nd the performance of BHEL 
for the ensuing years are free of such shortfalls.  
 With regard to the variation in IEBR figures, the C ommittee recommends 
that while furnishing figures to the Committee if t he figures are not final, the actual 
nature of the figures have to be mentioned unambigu ously.  It is not acceptable that 
BE figures proposed during the third quarter of the  preceding year, are provided to 
the Committee as the final BE in the DFG of the cur rent year. It shall be the 
responsibility of DHI to ensure the accuracy of the figures.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER – IV 
Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry 
have not been  received 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee finds that though the scheme for Enh ancement of the 
Competitiveness of the Capital Goods Sector was ori ginally slated to have been in 
operation during 2012-13, the in principle approval  of the Planning Commission was 
obtained only in January, 2013. Now that a beginnin g has been made, it is expected that 
DHI will strive to attain all the parameters intend ed for 2013-14 by effective use of Rs. 
70.00 crore provided for the Scheme. The Committee observes that considering the 
magnitude of the problem faced by the CG Sector in India and the enormity of the steps 
to be taken to counter these problems, the 12 
th  Five Year Plan allocation of Rs.1081.22 
crore looks highly inadequate. Meanwhile, it is fel t that while Government can play the 
role of facilitator and take the initiatives as it has already done, the participation of the 
private sector can also to be roped in to achieve t he modernization of the CG Sector of 
the country at appropriate juncture. The committee also takes into cognizance the 
apprehensions expressed by various industry associa tions about the Free Trade 
Agreements (FTAs) and Preferential Trade Agreements  (PTAs) being inked by the 
Government of India with various countries. Therefo re, it is recommended that the 
Government should take all necessary steps to prote ct the interests of our Capital Goods 
industry as well as the domestic industry as a whol e, while entering into such 
agreements.  
           Para No 25 
Action Taken Reply 
 The Department has already interacted with academi a for exploring the 
possibility of establishing Advanced Centre of Exce llence in Technology & Product 
Development at least at 4 premier institutes, i.e. at IITs at Delhi, Chennai, Mumbai & 
Kharagpur. Initially a high level delegation compri sing of all capital goods industry 
associations led by Joint Secretary, Department of Heavy Industry visited IIT Delhi, 
Chennai, Mumbai & Kharagpur in the months of April- May, 2013. The follow up 
meetings were held by the Technical Officers at dif ferent IITs several times. This has 
been included in the EFC Note. The sub-sectors prop osed to be covered under IIT 
Advanced Centre of Excellence are Machine Tools, Te xtile machinery, process plant 
machinery, metallurgical machinery and heavy electr ical machinery and their 
components. There is no proposal received for Const ruction Machinery & Mining 
Machinery. However, there is an intervention for se tting up a Test Center for 
construction & mining machinery.   
 
 Other intervention of the Scheme is Technology Acq uisition Programme for units 
who purchase/ acquire the new technology, for upgrading the machine quality.  
 
 Regarding FTAs and PTAs, the Department supports t he industry against the 
inclusion of machinery for reducing the import duty  further under various FTAs in the 
inter ministerial meetings held in the Department o f Commerce as the current rate of 
import duty of Capital Goods is as low as 7.5%. 

 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee strongly recommends that the Governme nt of India must impose 
duties on imported capital goods as per the WTO agr eement. It is understood that by 
adhering to the provisions of the WTO agreement, we  can protect the domestic capital 
industry which is central to our industrial activit ies and technological capability and 
security. The Committee wants the Department of Hea vy Industry to place the 
recommendation of the Committee while taking up thi s issue with the concerned 
Ministries.  
Para No.26 
Action Taken Reply 
 WTO bound rate of customs duty for the Capital Goo ds varies between 25% to 
40% as against the prevailing rate of customs duty of 7.5% which is much lower than the 
WTO bound rate. In order to protect the domestic Ca pital Goods industry, Department 
would like to recommend the higher rate of customs duty of 15% which is still much 
lower than the WTO bound rates. However, as directe d by the Committee, the same is 
being taken up with the Ministry of Commerce.  
 
Further Recommendation/ observation 
 
 The Committee expects to be informed of the progres s made on following the 
WTO norms on customs duty for Capital Goods from th e Ministry of Commerce. 
Also, the Committee is of the view that there shoul d be a ban on the import of 
second hand Capital Goods.  
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 Regarding the revival of SIL, the Committee feels t hat along with prompt and 
time bound execution of the revival plan, it is imp ortant that the matter of three wheeler 
permits controlled by the Regional Transport Author ities of State Governments is also 
given urgent attention. The Committee recommends th at the following two requests of 
SIL shared with the Committee shall be examined and  given due consideration as these 
aspects are important for the future business prospects of SIL. 
 a) The permits for 3 wheelers in passenger categor ies (6+1) may be released 
as per the demand/need of the city/town and in a wa y should be deregulated and 
decontrolled as is the case with 4 wheelers and 2 wheelers. 
 b) The State Government and Registration authoriti es may be advised to 
release passenger permits for 3 wheelers in 6+1 cat egory for outside city limits areas 
where Hon’ble Courts has enforced a ban. This assum es significance as the city buses 
which occupy more volume/space on roads because of its designs features could not 
provide last mile solution to common man and where only three wheelers can approach 
because of its design and constructional advantages.  
Para No.30 
Action Taken Reply 
 A revival plan as submitted by this Department in r espect of Scooters India 
Limited (SIL) was considered and approved by the Ca binet in its meeting held on 
31.1.2013, thereby providing for infusion of fund a mong others. Following the decision 
of the Cabinet and orders of BIFR given in a Miscel laneous petition filed by the 

Company, funds to the tune of Rs.20 crores as inter est free plan loan for working capital 
and Rs.31.90 crores as equity for Capex have alread y been sanctioned and released. The 
DRS is yet to be approved by the BIFR. As regard ta king up the matter with the State 
Govt. authorities in respect of deregulation of per mits, the issue is under consideration in 
consultation with the company.  
 
Further Recommendation/ observation 
 
 
 The Committee desires to be informed about the progress regarding the final 
approval and implementation of the revival plans fo r Scooters India Limited (SIL) 
and also on State Governments response to deregulation of permits. 
 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 In view of the above, the Committee recommends tha t the DHI, which is the 
administrative Department for BHEL should extend al l support to the efforts of the 
company to convince the Ministry of Defence regardi ng the relevance and utility of the 
BHEL for the defence sector. It is expected that th e presentation to be made by BHEL 
before the Ministry of Defence, in presence of Hon’ ble Minister of HI & PE would be a 
beginning in this regard. Besides, the BHEL must fu rther expand its activities for 
generating power from renewable sources of energy.  
Para No.37 
Action Taken Reply 
 
 A.  Defence Business  
  The observation / recommendation of the Committee  regarding providing 
impetus for the defence sector business of BHEL are  noted. BHEL will make a 
presentation on its capabilities to MoD as per convenience of Hon’ble Ministers. 
 
B. Renewable Energy  
  BHEL has been making efforts for expanding its ac tivities in the field of 
renewable energy. The Company currently has an inst alled manufacturing capacity of 26 
MW per annum of Solar Photo-voltaic (SPV) modules, including 8 MW per annum of 
solar cells. BHEL has also developed capabilities t o supply complete SPV systems on a 
turnkey basis.  
 
  BHEL is currently executing orders of NTPC Ltd. f or setting up SPV 
based power plants of capacity 10 MW each at Unchah ar and Talcher. In addition, BHEL 
has also setup SPV plants at its various Units, and further, a 5 MW SPV plant is currently 
under installation at the Ranipet Unit of BHEL. 
 
  In respect of wind energy 
, BHEL was earlier engaged in the manufacture 
of 250 kW wind turbines based on design of Nordex, Germany. These were supplied till 
late 1990s, but were discontinued due to drop in de mand. BHEL is currently examining 
the possibility of re-entering the wind energy busi ness with a technology tie-up for a 
suitable higher size and efficient machine. However , the re-entry in the wind energy 

business by BHEL is dependent on the market potenti al and Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy (MNRE) policy in this regard. As s uch, MNRE has constituted a 
Committee to assess the potential of off-shore wind  energy, and the report of this 
Committee is awaited. 
 
Further Recommendation/ observation 
 
 
 
The Committee desires to be appraised of the respon se of the Ministry of 
Defence on the capabilities of BHEL in expanding th eir activities to Defence Sector 
and also the opinion and suggestions of Committee s et up by MNRE on the 
potential of BHEL in exploring power from various renewable sources of energy.   
 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee views the case of HEC as a classic ex ample of turnaround of a 
CPSE, through a revival package. The progress the H EC has achieved despite obsolete 
technology and machinery inspires confidence that t he PSEs can do much better with up 
gradation of plant and machinery. Accordingly, the Committee is of the firm opinion that 
HEC has earned the right to seek budgetary support and necessary funds for capital 
expenditure without which it would not be possible for the HEC to increase its 
production. The Committee strongly recommends that the Government and the Planning 
Commission must extend all support to the HEC to em erge as a role model in the public 
sector. If the HEC can show impressive results by u sing obsolete technology then it is 
quite sure that it can show much better results by using modern and updated equipments. 
The Committee therefore recommends that the Departm ent of Heavy Industry, Ministry 
of Finance and the Planning Commission should exped ite the requisite approval for 
timely infusing of funds to the HEC. Timely support  to HEC will send a positive 
message to all CPSEs. The HEC, on their part should  be ready with the TEV and DPR at 
the earliest.  
Para No.42 
Action Taken Reply 
 
 Modernization project of HEC partially financed thr ough budgetary support from 
DHI has been envisaged in the 12 th  Five Year Plan. HEC has already appointed a 
consultant for finalization of DPR/ FAR (Financial Appraisal Report) of the project 
which will help in establishing bank ability of the project. 
 
Further Recommendation/ observation 
 
 
 
The Committee wishes to be kept abreast of the deta ils of the Modernization 
project of HEC. 
 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 Having heard the grievances of both the industry an d auto associations, the Committee 
understands that certain problems cut across all se ctors of industry be it in the private or in the 

public sector of the most pressing issues is the lo w duty on imported goods, in adequate R&D, 
import of secondhand Capital Goods, free trade agre ements and skill deficit. The Committee 
recommends that the domestic industry must be prote cted and in this regard the Government can 
take sufficient measures by following the WTO norms . The Committee is also of the firm 
opinion that due consideration should be given to t he suggestions put forth by the Committee of 
Secretaries in its meeting held on 23 rd  May, 2012 for letting NMCC separately examine the 
impact of FTAs on domestic industries and thereafte r to have an inter-ministerial consultations 
on those findings. The Committee, in tune with the industry’s interests, favours non-tariff trade 
barriers and effective implementation of the Scheme  for Modernization of the Capital Goods 
Sector to strengthen the indigenous industry.      
Para No.49 
Action Taken Reply 
 
 WTO bound rate of customs duty for the Capital Good s varies between 25% to 
40% as against the prevailing rate of customs duty of 7.5% which is much lower than the 
WTO bound rate. In order to protect the domestic Ca pital Goods industry, Department 
would like to recommend the higher rate of customs duty of 15% which is still much 
lower than the WTO bound rates. However, as directe d by the Committee the same is 
being taken up with the Ministry of Commerce. 
 
 In the case of second hand import the discussion w ith user Ministries namely 
Ministry of Textiles and Ministry of Road Transport  & Highways is underway and the 
same will be finalized shortly.  
 
 Regarding FTAs and PTAs, the Department supports t he industry against the 
inclusion of machinery for reducing the import duty  further under various FTAs in the 
inter-ministerial meetings held in the Department o f Commerce as the current rate of 
import duty of Capital Goods is as low as 7.5%. 
 
Further Recommendation/ observation 
 
 
 
The Committee expects to be informed of the progres s made subsequent to 
the discussions with Ministries concerned on follow ing the WTO norms and 
restriction on second hand import. 
 
******* 
 
 
 
 
 