  
        PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
         RAJYA SABHA                  
                        
                                                                                                                            
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY TWO  REPORT 
 
ON 
 
ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE 217 TH  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
ON 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2010-11 
 
PERTAINING TO 
 
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES 
____________________________________________________________________________  
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON  8 th  March, 2011 ) 
   (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 7 th  March, 2011) 
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
MARCH, 2011, PHALGUNA 1932 (SAKA) 
222 

  
                      PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
  
  
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY TWO REPORT 
 
ON 
 
ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE 217 TH  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
ON 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2010-11 
 
PERTAINING TO 
 
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES 
____________________________________________________________________________  
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA  ON 8 th  March, 2011) 
   (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 7 th  March 2011) 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
MARCH, 2011, PHALGUNA 1932 (SAKA) 

  
CONTENTS 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………………………(i) – (ii) 
2.  INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………………..  (iii) 
3.  REPORT 
(i)  CHAPTER-I 
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by 
the Ministry………………………………………………………………… 
 
(ii)  CHAPTER-II 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies……………………………. 
 
(iii)  CHAPTER-III 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has 
either not accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry 
to review its replies………………………………………………………… 
 
(iv)  CHAPTER-IV 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the  
Ministry have not been received…………………………………………… 
 
 4. MINUTES ………………………………………………………………………………. 
                  
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Date of Constitution 31 st  August , 2010) 
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
    
 1.   Shri Tiruchi Siva                —                Chairman  
2.  Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy 
3.  Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4.  Shri Ashk Ali tak 
5.  Shri K.B. Shanappa 
6.   Shri Natuji H. Thakor 
7.  Shri S.P. Singh Baghel 
8.  Shri K.V. Ramalingam 
9.  Shri  Nandamuri Harikrishna 
10.  Dr. Vijay Mallya  
          LOK SABHA 
 
11.   Shri Suvendu Adhikari 
12.   Shri Badruddin Ajmal 
13.   Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
14.    Shri Bansagopal Chowdhury 
15.    Shri Sabbam Hari 
16.    Smt. Poonam Veljibhai Jat 
17.    Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
18.    Shri M. Krishnaswamy 
19.    Shri Pakauri Lal 
20.    Smt. Ingrid Mcleod 
21.    Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal 
22.    Shri Devendra Nagpal 
23.    Shri Gorakhnath Pandey 
24.    Shri Kishanbhai V. Patel 
25.    Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
26.    Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
27.    Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
28.    Shri Raju Shetti  
29.    Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware 
30.    Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
31.    Smt. Putul Kumari 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary 
Smt. Sunita Sekaran,  Director 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint  Director 
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Assistant Director  
 
  
(i) 
 
 
 

  
INTRODUCTION 
  
  
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliame ntary Standing Committee on Industry, 
having   been authorized by the Committee, hereby p resent this Two Hundred and Twenty Two 
Report on Action Taken Notes furnished by the Minis try of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred and Seventeenth Report on the 
Demands for Grants (2010-11) pertaining to the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises.  
 
2. I thank the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises for furnishing the Action 
Taken Notes on the recommendations contained in the  Committee’s Two Hundred and Seventeenth 
Report. 
  
3. The Committee in its meeting held on 3 
rd  March, 2011 considered and adopted the report. 
 
  
 
  
Tiruchi Siva 
Chairman                                                                                   
                                     Department -related Parliamentary  
                                                                                                        Standing  Committee   on    Industry  
 
New Delhi 
3
rd  March, 2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 

  
CHAPTER-I 
 
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
1.  The Committee considered the views of associations  in MSME sector and   recommends 
that the recommendations of the Task Force should b e implemented in letter and spirit on 
priority basis.  
Para (9)   
 
Action taken/Comments 
 
 
 The Ministry of MSME has initiated action for impl ementing the recommendations of the 
Task Force in a time-bound manner. The report has b een circulated to all the Departments/agencies 
concerned and the State/UT Governments for implemen ting the recommendations, as per the time 
lines laid down in the report. The Ministry has als o organized a one-day meeting on 11 
th  May, 2010 
with the State Ministers and Secretaries (Industrie s/MSME) to discuss the recommendations 
concerning the State/UT Governments.  A Council on MSMEs under the chairmanship of Hon’ble 
Prime Minister has been constituted to lay down the  broad policy guidelines and review the 
development of the MSME sector. Further, for ensuri ng timely/speedy implementation of the 
recommendations of the Task Force and follow-up on the decisions of the Prime Minister’s Council 
on MSMEs, a Steering Group under the chairmanship o f Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister 
has also been constituted. The Steering Group has reviewed the progress made in the implementation 
of the recommendations in its meetings held on 6 th  April 2010 and 29 th  July, 2010.  Of the 85 
recommendations, action has been completed in respe ct of several recommendations and other 
recommendations are at various stages of implementation. 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
2. The  Committee  recommends  that  the  seminars/wor kshops  and  other  awareness 
programmes  should  be  intensified  and  started.  Even  universities  and  business  schools 
are  to  be  sensitized  to  create  more  awarenes s  among  the  MSME  entrepreneurs  and 
persons working in the managerial field.  
 
Para (54)  
 
 
 
-1- 

  
Action taken/Comments  
 
 Besides organizing Packaging for Exports Programme s through MSME-DIs, IIFT, IIP and 
FIEO have been requested to conduct training progra mmes on Packaging for Exports for MSE 
entrepreneurs to promote exports. Likewise, WTO awa reness programmes are being organized 
through field offices all over the country every ye ar so as to prepare MSEs to face challenges of 
globalization.   
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
3. The Committee observe that the main problem in impl ementation of any scheme 
pertains  to  low  level  of  awareness  about  the   schemes  and  negative  mind  set  of  field 
officers  dealing  with  the  entrepreneurs. The Co mmittee  therefore  recommends  that these  
problems  need  to  be  seriously  addressed  by  t he  management  be  it  Commercial 
Banks/Financial Institutions/Ministry.  
Para (55)  
Action taken/Comments 
 
 
 MSME-Development Institutes (MSME-DIs) located in different States are organizing 
Intensive Motivational Campaigns, Entrepreneurial S kill Development Programmes and 
Entrepreneurial Development Programmes. In the Inte nsive Motivational Campaigns, awareness on 
the MSME schemes such as MSE-Cluster Development Pr ogrammes, National Manufacturing 
Competitiveness Programme, Credit Guarantee Scheme,  Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme, 
Prime Minister’s Employment Generation Programme, R ajiv Gandhi Udyami Mitra Yojana, etc. is 
being created amongst the participants/entrepreneur s. MSME-DIs are also conducting Skill 
Development Programmes for weaker sections/women an d for the general category. In these 
programmes,  training is imparted to the prospectiv e entrepreneurs for setting up micro and small 
enterprises (MSEs), covering the aspects like finan cial management and procedures/formalities for 
availing loans from banks/financial institutions. 
The matter was discussed in the 11 
th  Standing Advisory Committee (SAC) on Flow of Credi t 
to MSME Sector held on May 5, 2010 and it was decid ed that the outcome of the special SLBC 
meetings on MSEs should be closely monitored to ens ure their efficacy.  CEOs of banks have been 
advised to sensitise the branch level functionaries  on various policies and schemes for the benefit of  
MSEs for effective implementation at the branch level. 
 
-2- 

  
For the wide publicity and creation of awareness am ong the beneficiaries, a number of steps 
are being taken by KVIC and Coir Board.  Towards th is direction they organise awareness camps, 
workshops, seminars and also participates in variou s exhibitions in the country. This is also 
supplemented by efforts made through advertisement in print and electronic media and people’s 
education programme.  As reported, some professional agencies have been empanelled by KVIC and 
publicity works are carried out through them from t ime to time. Advertisements of the schemes are 
also being made in the national as well as local ne ws papers from time to time. It is also under 
consideration for placing hoardings in Metro rails, important Railway Stations, Airports, Bus Stands, 
and Collectorate offices in the District levels.   
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
4. In  order  to  sustain  the  Khadi  sector  in  the   country  the  committee  recommends 
that all the Ministries, Departments, PSEs and othe r organizations should opt for Khadi items 
for curtains of  doors  and  windows,  dusters,  to wels,   dress material for the employees and 
give their annual requirements to  KVIC.  This will certainly boost the Khadi sector .  
Para (69)  
Action taken/Comments 
 
 
 With regard to procurement of KVI products by Gove rnment Departments, PSUs, Defence, it 
is to mention that a number of KVI items are covere d under the Rate Contract System of the 
Directorate General of Supply and Disposals, Govern ment of India and Government supply 
activities are undertaken in the Khadi Gramodyog Bh awans of KVIC. Based upon DGS&D Rate 
Contract, the items like dasuti khadi, dungari clot h, dusters, long cloth, bunting cloth and sheeting 
cloth, etc., are being supplied to Government Agenc ies and bed rolls, curtains, pillow covers, etc., 
are being made available to the Indian Railways.  T he instructions have been issued by Government 
of Kerala to all State Government Departments and s chools to instruct the employees and the school 
children to wear khadi at least for one day in a we ek.  Further to boost the khadi sector, KVIC has 
been insisting on the use of khadi and khadi produc ts in all State Government Departments and 
schools.  A target to supply KVI products was fixed  Rs.25 crore under DGS&D contract and against 
the target the supply was Rs.18 crore (provisional)  in 2009-10.  KVIC has been asked to achieve a 
two fold increase in Govt. Supply of Khadi and enco urage procurement of supply orders from 
Government Agencies, through a well planned strategy. 
 
-3- 

  
Recommendation/Observation  
 
5. While deposing before the Committee one of the w itness said that the Khadi has spread over 
in all those villages and huts which are in the tri bal areas, in the hill and border areas and in thos e 
remote areas where no industry is willing to go.  I n this field 75 per cent workers are women and 70 
per cent of them are Scheduled Castes and Scheduled  Tribes.  All of them are below poverty line.  
Majority of them are having traditional charkha on which they are spinning.  So their out put is very 
very low and they get meagre amount as wage.  The n eed of the hour is that the traditional charkhas 
should be replaced by new eight spindle charkha whi ch will increase their out put tremendously and 
naturally their wage will also increase substantially.  
 The Committee feels that the suggestion for replacement of traditional charkhas by new 
eight spindle charkha  is worth consideration and recommends that  a  sepa rate  fund  with  
substantial  funds  be  created  for  replacing  th e  traditional charkhas  of  the  poor  weavers  
throughout  the  country  within  a  time  frame  t o  improve their lot on priority basis as  the 
Khadi has spread over in all those villages and hut s which are in the tribal areas, in the hill 
and border areas and in those remote areas where no industry is willing to go.  
Para (72)  
 
 
Action taken/Comments 
 
 
 Khadi activity is spread all over the country incl uding those remote areas where setting up of 
Industries is extremely difficult. In this field mo st of the workers are from BPL and women and 
majority categories  are having traditional charkha s on which they are spinning yarns  and their 
output  also is very low and they get meagre amount  as wage.  With regard to the suggestion of the 
Committee for creation of a separate fund for replacing the traditional charkhas of poor weavers, it is 
submitted that a new scheme titled ‘Enhancing Produ ctivity and Competitiveness of Khadi Industry 
and Artisans’ has been launched in 2008-09 for  rep lacement of obsolete and old machinery and 
equipment and repair to/renovation of existing/obso lete machinery and equipment to make khadi 
industry more competitive with more market-driven, profitable, production and sustained 
employment for khadi artisans with a total plan out lay of Rs. 84 crore for a period of four years i.e. , 
2008-09 to 2011-12. Provisions for replacement of o bsolete charkhas/looms have also been made 
under Scheme for Strengthening of Infrastructure of  Existing Weak Khadi Institutions and 
Assistance for Marketing Infrastructure introduced in 2009-10 and the Scheme of Funds for 
Regeneration of  Traditional  Industries (SFURTI).   Besides, the ADB-assisted Khadi Reforms  and  
-4- 

  
Development Programme also has a sizable component of the outlay to provide improved 
equipments to artisans and upgradation of technolog y. KVIC/Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Rural 
Industrialization has also launched a pilot project  of testing solar charkhas for reducing drudgery of  
spinners. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
6. Looking at the performance of the KVIC in North Eas t Region the Committee is of the   
opinion  that KVIC should set up more central slive r plants in North East Region and  provide  
them  support  in  the  form  of  grant  in  lieu  of  working  capital  so  that  the production   
activities   in   North   East   Region   are   enh anced   and   thus   creating   more employment 
and development of economic conditions.  
Para (106)  
 
Action taken/Comments 
 
 
 Necessary measures have been initiated by the Gove rnment through the Khadi Reform 
Programme which includes production of quality raw- material in the Central Sliver Plants operated 
in PPP mode, besides sliver production at institutional level, opening of new sliver plants, opening of 
new sales, renovation, and modernization of institutional sales outlets, etc.  It is proposed to establish 
a new CSP in North East Region for timely availabil ity of quality raw materials to the khadi 
institutions located in these States.   
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
7. The  Committee  noted  during  the  course  of  in teraction  that  in    2009-2010,  the 
target  assigned  for export  of  coir industry  wa s  Rs.  700  crore  whereas  the  Industry  has 
surpassed  the  target  by  exporting  coir  and  c oir  products  to  the  tune  of  Rs.  707 crore 
during the February, 2010.   It is indeed  a health y  trend that  the Industry has  been  growing 
during  the  last  two  decades  due  to  the  effo rts  put  in  by  the  Government  of  India  by 
sanctioning   schemes   and   the   programmes   fo r   development   of   this   industry   and 
meticulously implemented by Coir Board which is praiseworthy.  
Para (140)  
Action taken/Comments 
 
 
 During 2009-10, 2,94,508 MT of coir products value d at Rs.804.05 crore were exported from 
India as against 1,99,925 MT valued at Rs.639.97 cr ore exported in 2008-09 with a substantial 
increase of 47.31% in quantity and 25.64% in value.   This was possible due to the aggressive 
promotion strategy adopted by the Government of Ind ia as well as Coir Board and also by the 
collective and strenuous efforts undertaten by the exporting community and the Board. 
-5- 

  
During 2009-10, the Board organized participation o f Indian coir sector in nine international fairs 
and 6 catalogue shows to showcase the capabilities and popularize the innovative designs, patterns 
and products developed by the industry.  The Board had also distributed an amount of Rs. 44.65 lakh 
as External Market Development Assistance to 76 exp orters/entrepreneurs to undertake various 
export promotion activities like participation in fairs, buyer seller meets, delegation, conduct of sales 
tour, production of publicity catalogues etc.   Coi r Board proposes to continue this aggressive 
promotion strategy during 2010-11 also.  Already th e Board has got in principle approval from the 
Ministry for participation in 12 international fairs targeting USA, UK, Netherlands, Germany, China, 
Japan, Australia, Hong Kong, Turkey, Israel, etc.  In the case of participation in fairs, focus-countr y 
and focus-product based approach is being followed in order to yield maximum advantages from 
such events.  It is expected that the export target  of Rs. 800 crore fixed for the year 2010-11 would 
be fully achieved. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
8. The  Committee  feels  that  had  there  been  an  increase   in  the  Budget     the  Coir 
Board would have been able to go in for effective i mplementation of schemes /plants.  It also 
urges upon the Coir Board to utilise the fund alloc ated under the various schemes / plans 
within the stipulated time limit.  
Para (142) 
 
Action taken/Comments   
 
 The budget for Coir Board has been increased manif old during the XIth Plan period.  New 
schemes viz. REMOT, SFURTI etc. are also implemente d by the Board with the existing staff 
strength.  The Regional Offices of the Board are th e nerve centres for the implementation of the 
scheme and the staff strength of these offices are very limited.  In order to cope up with the increased 
budget outlay, the Board is taking all initiative w ith the support of the coir producing state 
governments.  The budget already allocated to the B oard will be spent within the stipulated time 
limit as per the action plan framed by the Board.   
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
9. The  Committee  is  of  the  opinion  that  the  Ma hila  Coir  Yojana  is  a  good  scheme 
for self employment  to  women  in  rural area  and   a  positive  step towards  empowerment of 
women which  has now become national policy.   Grea ter role of women in coir sector should 
be explored and pondered over by involving the private sector and NGOs in this field.  
Para (149)  
 
-6- 

  
 
Action taken/Comments 
 
 
 Mahila Coir Yojana is the only women oriented self  employment scheme in coir industry. 
Coir industry being a labour intensive industry, wo men employment is predominant.  In view of 
empowering the women folk, Mahila Coir Yojana is be ing implemented in all coir producing states 
of the country.  Training is being imparted to wome n artisans in the field through sponsoring 
agencies inclusive of coir co-operatives, NGOs, pri vate sector etc.  The successfully trained women 
artisans are eligible for getting motorized/ motori zed traditional ratt with a subsidy of 75% of the 
cost of the equipment. To make the scheme more attr active, stipend to the Trainees has been 
increased from Rs. 500 p.m. to Rs. 750 p.m.   
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
10. The  Committee  desires  that  its  recommendations   should  be  given  a  concrete 
shape in the form of affirmative Government actions.  
Para (173)  
 
Action taken/Comments 
 
 
 The Committee’s recommendations have been noted fo r compliance. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-7-

  
CHAPTER-II 
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do es not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
1. The   Committee   is   of   the   firm   opinion   that   these   stimulus   packages   of   the 
Government  have  immensely  helped  the  MSME  sec tor  to  withstand  the  worst  of  the 
recession in the world economy and in the over all interest of this sector these packages needs  
to  be  continued  for  some  more  time  at  least   till the  recession  is completely  over. Even  i f 
the  Government  intends  to  withdraw  them  in  f uture  these  should  be  gradually 
withdrawn and certainly not in one go.  
 
Para (16)  
 
Action taken/Comments 
 
 
 The issue was examined by the Reserve Bank of Indi a (RBI) and it has advised that in view 
of the improvement in overall market liquidity and calibrated exit from excessively accommodated 
monitory stance, it has not been possible to extend  the special refinance facility of Rs.7,000 crore 
provided to SIDBI beyond 31 st  March, 2010. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
2. The  Committee considered the views of association s in MSME sector on credit to this 
sector and  recommends  that  Ministry  of  MSME  s hould  take  up the  issues  of  credit  
problems  and  subsidized  rates  of  interest  at  par  with  agriculture sector for MSME sector 
with the Ministry of Finance and Reserve Bank of In dia in right earnest so that the 
entrepreneurs of MSME sector get  hassle free loans   from the Banks and they too are given 
the benefit of subsidized rate of interest on their  Bank loans.  The Committee expects that it 
will be informed about the outcome in this regard.  
Para (23)  
 
Action taken/Comments 
 
  
 The Ministry had taken up the recommendation of th e Committee with the Reserve Bank of 
India (RBI). The RBI has informed that as the Credi t Guarantee Scheme covers all collateral free 
loans to the MSE sector, it would cover the risk of  bank lending to this sector. Moreover, with the 
recommendation of the Working Group to review the C redit Guarantee Scheme under the 
chairmanship of the Executive Director, RBI, it is expected that the scheme would  pick up  resulting 
-8- 

  
 in higher coverage. In order to make credit pricin g more transparent, RBI has issued guidelines on 
the Base Rate on 9 th  April, 2010. The Base Rate system has replaced the  BPLR system with effect 
from July 1, 2010. The Base Rate system is aimed at  enhancing transparency in lending rates of 
banks and enabling better assessment of transmission of monetary policy. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
3. The cluster development programme for MSME is qu ite lendable but during the discussion 
with MSME associations, the Committee was informed that in a particular area we can have cluster 
formation, the technology is very high.  For exampl e we have banana fibres, we have areas where 
banana is grown and it can be made as fibre but the  appropriate technology is too high  to buy for 
any cluster group.  If there is a scheme for subsid y for this technology with repayment after five 
years of production etc., it will be of great help to the people.  
 
 The Committee feels that this is very good suggesti ons and therefore recommends that 
Government should give a serious thought and formul ate a scheme for subsidy etc. for  having  
appropriate  technology  for  cluster  formation  in  the  country  for  MSME sector.  
Para (45)  
 
Action taken/Comments 
 
 
 The Ministry of MSME is already administering Micr o & Small Enterprises-Cluster 
Development Programme with GoI grant of 70% upto a project cost of Rs. 15.00 crore for setting up 
Common Facility Centres (CFCs). The CFCs may instal l appropriate technology, plant and 
machinery/equipment for the benefit of the cluster. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
4. The Committee does not approve the reduction in pla n outlay at RE stage.   This trend 
is against the growth of MSME sector. The Committee  feels that this leads to dropping of 
schemes /programmes for want of fund.  
Para (50)  
 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry should foresee the pros and cons of the 
schemes before earmarking the funds.  Funds should be allocated looking into the feasibility of 
the scheme. 
Para (51) 
 
 
 
 
-9- 

  
Action taken/Comments  
  
 The Ministry had taken up the observation of the C ommittee with the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Economic Affairs). As suggested by Ministry of Finance, this Ministry would plan  
and accelerate the expenditure evenly during the co urse of year and also ensure timely utilization of 
funds released to the implementing agencies, to avo id large unspent balances/parking of funds with 
the entities. These factors would ensure utilizatio n of budgeted amount without any substantial 
reduction at RE stage. 
  Further, in order to ensure that the funds under developmental schemes actually reach 
intended beneficiaries in minimum time leg, the Min istry has adopted a very stringent approach as 
far as utilization is concerned.  To avoid reductio n/savings, a number of steps have been taken.  
Budgetary demand for 2010-11 was projected with more accuracy as well as realistically.  KVIC and 
Coir Board have asked to gear up their machinery to  boost the implementation of programmes.  
Under PMEGP, process for utilization of margin money subsidy is proposed to be simplified through 
online settlement of margin money.  Towards this, ‘ one bank one nodal branch’ formula is under 
implementation as pilot basis.  EDP training for th e projects sanctioned under PMEGP which was 
mandatory before disbursement of first instalment h as been delinked and for smaller projects it has 
been exempted.  Secretary (MSME) has also written l etters to all the Chief Secretaries of NER to 
gear up the PMEGP progragmme as these States have v ery low performance under PMEGP.  
Performance under various schemes is reviewed by th e Secretary (MSME) at regular intervals and 
appropriate instructions have been issued to KVIC, Coir Board, and State Governments. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
5. The Committee therefore feels that the steps are re quired to be taken to get rid of the 
inspector raj. The Committee also recommends that t he Rules,  Regulations  and Acts/labour  
laws  should  be  simplified  and  a  comprehensive   law  is  required  so  that MSME is not 
subjected to unnecessary harassment.  
Para (52)  
Action taken/Comments 
 
 
 The erstwhile procedure of SSI registration has be en further simplified.  Section 8 of the 
MSMED Act, 2006 provides for filing of Entrepreneur s Memorandum (EM) which is a one way 
communication from enterprise to the District Industries  Centres  (DIC).  It has been stipulated  that  
 
-10- 

  
acknowledgement of the EM after allotting EM Number  will be provided by the GM, DIC within 
five days of the filing of EM, if sent by post or s ame day if the form of EM is submitted in person as  
well as on line.  The Prime Minister’s Task Force o n MSMEs has made recommendations, inter alia, 
on labour issues which have been taken up with Mini stry of Labour & Employment. On the 
recommendation concerning compliance costs, a commo n challan form for depositing EPF & ESI 
dues by the employers has been devised. Further, re ceipt of subscription through a single cheque for 
all the three schemes of Employees Provident Fund O rganisation (EPFO) has been implemented. As 
regards, separate (single and comprehensive) legisl ation for MSE sector, Ministry of Labour & 
Employment has not found it feasible or desirable to have a separate labour law for MSE sector. 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
6. The  Committee  feels  that  rationalization  and  simplification  of  tax  structure  to 
enhance  the  competitiveness  of  MSME  sector  is   needed  on  priority.  While  the  budget 
has  made  all  out  efforts  to  rationalize  the  tax  structure  some  anomalies  still  remains. 
Problems with respect to tax structure should be so rted out as brought to the notice of the 
Committee.  
Para (53)  
Action taken/Comments  
 
 The Department of Revenue has informed that introd uction of Goods & Services (GST) 
would subsume various indirect taxes by the Union/S tate Governments and would lead to 
simplification and unifications of the various tax laws. The unified tax laws in the form of GST 
would reduce the compliance cost for MSMEs to a great extent. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
7. The  Committee  recommends  that  banks  and  the  Financial  Institutions  should 
meet the fund requirement of MSME sector by providi ng  more lending facilities looking into  
the  contribution  of  MSME  sector  in  country’s  economy.   They  should  develop positive  
attitude  so  that  new entrepreneurs  and  exporte rs  may  feel  encouraged  and welcomed to 
this sector.  
Para (56)  
Action taken/Comments  
 
 Pursuant to the recommendations made by the Prime Minister’s Task Force on MSMEs, 
scheduled commercial banks have been advised by the RBI to achieve the share of Micro enterprises 
in MSE lending to 60% in stage viz. 50% in the year  2010-11, 55% in the year 2011-12 and 60% in 
the year 2012-13 with 10% annual growth in the number of micro enterprise accounts.  The RBI  has  
 
-11- 

  
also issued instructions to all banks regarding enh ancing the limit for collateral free lending to the  
MSE sector to Rs.10 lakh from the present level of Rs.5 lakh. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
8. The  Committee  observes  that  the  limit  of  in vestments  in  small  sector  has  been 
increased from Rs. 100 lakhs to Rs. 500 lakhs under  MSMED Act whereas the limit of eligible  
loans  for  calculation  of  subsidy  under  the  s cheme  is  still  Rs.  100 lakhs. The Committee  
therefore recommends that such facilities  should  be extended to proportionate  enhancement  
so  that  maximum  number  of  small  units  could  avail  the benefits of the scheme to the full 
extent.  
Para (57)  
 
Action taken/Comments 
 
 
 The matter was discussed in the 6 
th  Governing & Technology Approval Board meeting. It 
was discussed that raising the ceiling on loans eli gible for subsidy from Rs. 1 crore to Rs. 5 crore 
will bring larger size firms under the ambit of the  scheme which may deprive the small units of the 
benefits under the scheme. Since there were limited funds available under the scheme, it was to keep 
the focus on the smaller units which were more in need of assistance.  
Recommendation/Observation  
 
9. The Committee views with concern that non utilizat ion of money earmarked for a 
specific purpose is the poor reflection on the face  of the premier institution like KVIC. The  
Committee  recommends that  the  money  allocated  should  be  utilized  properly  and put to 
better use.  
Para (102)  
Action taken/Comments 
 
 
 As stated in the comments under Para No. 50&51, bu dgetary demand for 2010-11 was 
projected with reasonable accuracy.  KVIC and Coir Board have been asked to gear up their 
machinery to ensure timely implementation of the programmes.  Performance under various schemes 
is reviewed by the Hon’ble Minister and Secretary ( MSME) at regular intervals through new 
initiatives like formation of core groups and appro priate instructions/guidance are issued to KVIC, 
Coir Board and State Governments.  Physical and fin ancial progress under various schemes are 
reviewed and monitored by CEO, KVIC and FA, KVIC on  monthly basis.  Further, process for 
utilization of margin money subsidy under PMEGP is being streamlined through online settlement of 
margin  money.  Towards  this, ‘one bank one nodal  branch’ formula  is under  implementation on a  
-12- 

  
pilot basis. EDP training for the projects sanction ed under PMEGP which was earlier mandatory 
before disbursement of first installment has been d elinked and for smaller projects have been 
exempted.  Hon’ble Minister has written to all Chie f Ministers and Secretary (MSME) has written 
letters to all Chief Secretaries to gear up the PME GP progragmme. It is expected that the money 
allocated to KVIC for 2010-11 will be utilized in t ime and the pace of and demand for the scheme 
has picked up in 2009-10.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
10. The  Committee  recommends  that  KVIC  should  ta ke  steps  to  generate  internal 
resources on its own so that its dependency on budg etary resources of the Government is 
reduced by evolving suitable  mechanism  like  aggressive  marketing  of  KVI  products, brand   
building   and   so  on  to  become   self  reliant    which   is  still  lacking  and   is  not freque ntly  
seen  either  in  print  media  or  electronic  media  despite  the  claims  made  by KVIC.  
 
Para (104)  
 
Action taken/Comments 
 
 
 KVIC is in the process for adopting the policies o f aggressive marketing of KVI products 
through Government supply and a wide marketing chai n of outlets numbering around 7050 taking 
into consideration Institutional outlets. KVIC has also been attempting to widen the production base 
in order to develop a vibrant and strong supply cha in for the purpose of enhancing the sales target 
under Government supply.  Recently Bhawans, Khadi I nstitutions are being motivated like the ones 
in Chandigarh and Saharanpur to go for large scale renovation and aggressive marketing leading to a 
complete turn around.  
 Similarly, under the ADB funding programme, brand building is a major component under 
KVI Marketing which will be attended with due care and caution so that a clear marketing strategy is 
evolved for bringing brand concept, brand promotion , and brand establishment for KVI product, in 
the long run.  A Marketing Organization with involv ement   of professionals in the field of design, 
packaging, and marketing will also be set up in this direction.  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
11. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry and KVIC  to make all out efforts in the 
form of special drive in the states/districts where it is not so successful.  
Para (105)  
 
-13- 
 

  
Action taken/Comments  
 
 All out efforts are made by KVIC for successful im plementation of various KVI 
programmes/schemes being implemented through KVIC.  There is a separate directorate of publicity 
in the Central Office, KVIC to give wide publicity of khadi and village industry 
activities/programmes undertaken by KVIC among the masses.  It publishes and distributes booklet 
on KVI programmes, organises press conference, give  advertisement in various News papers, 
Souvenirs and magazines, organization of awareness camps, workshops etc., time to time.  KVIC 
also participates/organizes exhibitions to boost th e sale of KVI products as well as to create the 
awareness of KVI programmes among the beneficiaries.  
 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
12. The  Committee  recommends  that  KVIC  should  st rive  hard  to  bridge  the  gap 
between  sanctioned  cases  and  actual  disbursal  of  loans.  The number of beneficiaries 
should be increased and if deemed fit the allocation may be increased at RE stage.  
Para (107)  
 
Action taken/Comments  
 
 Banks have their own credit decision depending upo n the viability of project. Rejections of 
applications by banks recommended by District Level  Task Force Committee (DLTFC) are reported 
due to various reasons which include incomplete doc umentation/information and exceeding project 
cost limit, etc. However,  with regard to arbitrary rejection of cases by bank s under PMEGP, KVIC 
has been asked to request DLTFC for carry out a reg ular review of cases rejected by banks in a 
serious manner, so that there is no arbitrariness o n the part of banks in rejection of recommended 
cases. State Governments have also been  requested to instruct the District Magistrates (being head 
of DLTFC) to specifically review the cases recommen ded by DLTFC which are rejected by banks, 
in coordination with State KVIC officials and bank officials. Provision for mandatory EDP training 
before disbursal of first installment to the PMEGP beneficiaries also caused non or delayed 
disbursement in some cases which has been delinked and for smaller projects it has been exempted. 
Further, KVIC has requested the Chief Managing Dire ctors (CMDs) of All Public Sector banks to 
issue  suitable  instructions to all  their branches  across the country to speed up the disbursement of 
-14- 

  
 margin money subsidy for the cases already sanctio ned by Banks under PMEGP. These steps are 
expected to reduce the gap between the cases sancti oned and disbursement in the current financial 
year.Keeping in view the successful implementation of the scheme, the additional funds are likely to 
be sought in REs     2010-11.  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
13. The  Committee  recommends  that  the  Market  Dev elopment  Assistance  Scheme 
should  be  promoted  in  a  way  so  that  it  may   replace  the  rebate  on  khadi  slowly  and 
gradually.   Since  the   common  men's  sentiments   attached  to  khadi  for  a   long  time,  it 
may not be possible to abolish rebate on khadi totally.  
 
Para (108) 
 
Action taken/Comments 
 
 
 The Government of India after necessary appraisal and stakeholders consultations,   and 
giving adequate time for switch over to MDA, has al ready conveyed the approval on introduction of 
Market Development Assistance (MDA) Scheme for Khadi and Polyvastra in place of earlier Rebate 
Scheme w.e.f. 01.04.2010 which has also been commun icated to all concerned.  The guidelines on 
implementation of MDA have also been issued.  KVIC has conducted awareness workshop on MDA 
on different occasions and geared up its machinery for a smooth transition to MDA. 
Under MDA, financial assistance @ 20% of production  value on khadi and polyvastra are 
provided to producing institutions which is shared among artisans, producing institutions and selling 
institutions in the ratio 25:30:45 respectively. Im plementation of MDA is expected to improve the 
marketing of khadi and polyvastra with improved qua lity & designs, sales price delinked from cost 
chart, innovative marketing strategies, and artisan s getting better wages and khadi institutions 
graduating into independent business outfits in kee ping with khadi ethos.  It will also increase 
transparency and prevention of any possible manipul ation of sales, prevention of leakage of subsidy 
to non-khadi products, encouragement to market/demand based production, etc.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
  
14. The   Committee   is   constrained   to   note   t hat   the   quality   of   khadi   does   not 
commensurate with the prices and thus it is no long er within the reach of the poor man. The 
idea of making khadi available to poor and common man has thus become obsolete. The  
 
 
-15- 

  
Committee views this very seriously and recommends for necessary steps to reduce the cost 
and also improving the quality of khadi products simultaneously.  
Para (109)  
 
Action taken/Comments 
 
 
 Khadi being hand woven and hand spun fabric, to ma ny, appears costly in comparison to mill 
made products because of the higher wages component  in the production of khadi, Govt. of India 
through KVIC provides financial assistance @ 20% of  production value on khadi under MDA 
scheme that aims to bring down the price as well as  of improving design, quality and appeal of the 
product as per the demand.  
  
Khadi is a fabric for the masses, even today.  It c onsist almost all the items of textiles, 
particularly home-apparel.  Khadi can cater to peop le of all categories, rural and urban, rich and 
poor, starting from lungi/towels, dhotis to costly silk sarees.  However, khadi is a healthy and eco-
friendly fabric and above all, a heritage fabric.  Although, in the changing environment, khadi is 
being positioned as a fabric for the niche segment,  maximum return is ensured for the rural artisans 
engaged in the activity.  Input costs are however e scalating.  Since khadi provides employment to 
vulnerable sections of the society to ensure a fair  wage, cost of khadi becomes high and needs 
support. 
Khadi activity, is undertaken on the principle of ‘ No’ profit ‘No’ loss.  The Central 
Certification Committee constituted by KVIC, keeps close vigil on the price line of khadi.  
Moreover, khadi uses only natural raw-materials lik e cotton, wool, and silk, which are pure and 
comparatively expensive than cheaper bended raw-mat erials used by textile mills.  Also, khadi 
production is entirely labour intensive and this pr ocess, also adds to the cost.  ADB programme is 
also an attempt to improve the effectiveness, produ ctivity as well as to reduce the cost of sliver and  
Khadi. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
15.  The  Committee  is  of  the  considered  view  tha t  KVIC  should  be  abreast  of  the 
marketing strategy so that the KVI could compete, flourish and grow in open market.  
Para (110)  
 
 
 
-16- 
 

  
Action taken/Comments  
 
 Marketing of khadi is presently done through a netw ork of about more than 7000 sales 
outlets belonging to Khadi and Village Industries C ommission (KVIC), State Khadi and Village 
Industries Boards (KVIBs) as well as institutions t hemselves, besides 12 Departmental Bhawans 
spread over the country.   
 
Under the Khadi Reform and Development Programme (K RDP)  with ADB assistance 
introduced recently will  explore/develop markets for khadi products and will  enhance sustainability 
of khadi.  Marketing reform has been envisaged as a n important component of KRDP with private 
participation by setting up a professionally run Marketing Organization to harness the brand value of 
khadi, focus on product development on the basis of  changing demands of market, leveraging the 
unique selling proposition of being a heritage prod uct besides being eco-friendly.  Identity of khadi 
is sought to be preserved through development of ‘Khadi Mark’ also.  
 
Implementation of MDA would also improve the market ing of khadi and polyvastra with 
improved quality & designs, sales price delinked fr om cost chart, innovative marketing strategies, 
artisans getting better wages and khadi institution s graduating into independent business outfits in 
keeping with khadi ethos. It will also increase tra nsparency and prevention of any possible 
manipulation of sales, prevention of leakage of sub sidy to non-khadi products, encouragement to 
market/demand based production, etc.  The selling i nstitutions will have the flexibility to utilize th e 
MDA portion received by them, interalia, in improving its marketing infrastructure. 
The scheme ‘Strengthening of Infrastructure of Exis ting Weak Khadi Institutions and 
Assistance for Marketing Infrastructure’ introduced  in July 2009 also envisages renovation of 
selected 30 khadi sales outlets and providing assistance for strengthening of infrastructure of existing 
100 weak selected khadi institutions with a total plan outlay of Rs. 12.58 crore. 
Exhibitions are also organized by KVIC at national and sub-national levels from time to time 
to promote sale of KVI products which is expected t o enhance the acceptability and sale of KVI 
products.  These exhibitions have proved to be a co st effective method for publicity as well as 
opening marketing opportunities to the products. Th ese have also created awareness about KVI 
products among the people.  
 
-17- 

  
Recommendation/Observation  
 
16. The  Committee notes that  against  the  requireme nt  of  rupee  1000  crores  Margin 
Money  for  2010-11  KVIC  has  been  allotted  a  target  of  Rs.  906 crores only.   Since the 
targets are expected to cross the figure of Rs.  10 00 crores equal margin   money should be 
given to KVIC. The Committee therefore recommends t hat KVIC should be given Rs. 1000 
crores  for  2010-2011  under  PMEGP  towards  Marg in  Money  to  continue  its impressive 
performance.  
Para (119)  
 
Action taken/Comments 
 
 
 The total availability of funds under PMEGP for 20 10-11 is Rs. 998.81 crore   (Rs. 92.81 
crore – unspent balance of previous years and Rs. 9 06 crore – in BE 2010-11).  However, allocation 
of additional funds would be considered keeping in view performance in RE stage in terms of pace 
of actual disbursement of subsidy into the bank accounts of beneficiaries. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
17. The Committee was informed that in the coir indust ry spinning is the main area where 
women are working. The  industry  need  upgradation   of  spinning  machines  by making  lot 
of changes,  removing  the drudgery and have higher  income  for the workers. The Committee 
feels that this is the genuine demand of the Coir s ector and recommends that  sufficient  funds  
be  allocated  separately  to  upgrade  the  spinni ng  sector of the  Coir industry  at  the  RE    
stage  later  this  year  and  at  BE  stage  every  year  till  satisfactory results are achieved .  
Para (128) 
 
Action taken/Comments  
 
 The Central Coir Research Institute (CCRI), Kalavo or functioning under Coir Board has 
taken up the work of development of an automatic spinning machine.  Rs.7 crore have been provided 
in BEs 2010-11 under Plan (S&T) for carrying out research activities by the Coir Board.  Out of this, 
sufficient funds have been earmarked for carrying o ut research on this aspect by Coir Board.   It will  
be a stepwise process to develop the spinning machi ne beginning from carding, drawing, spinning 
and doubling.  It is on the top priority of the CCR I to develop the spinning machine.  The issue of 
enhancement of budget outlay at the RE State would be considered based on the utilization of funds 
provided in BEs and progress in implementation of the research projects. 
 
-18- 
 

  
Recommendation/Observation  
 
18. The Committee was informed that capital investment  subsidy for coir industry is only 
up to Rs. 1  crore  but  according  to  Ministry  o f  MSME  it  should  be  upto  Rs.  10 crores.   
The  Committee therefore   recommends that  this is sue  should be examined  and the  capital  
investment  subsidy  should  be  increased  to  Rs.   10  crores  and  the  capital investment  
subsidy  and  the interest subsidy  should be allowed  in  the Coir sector for its overall growth.  
Para (131)  
 
Action taken/Comments  
 
 The Ministry of MSME is implementing a Scheme ‘Cre dit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme’ 
for technology Upgradation of micro and small enter prises by providing 15% capital subsidy on 
institutional finance availed by them for induction  of identified technology in selected sub-
sectors/products.  The maximum limit of eligible lo an for calculation of capital subsidy under the 
revised scheme has been raised from Rs. 40 lakh to Rs. 100 lakh w.e.f. 29.09.2005.  The ceiling of 
capital subsidy under the Scheme is Rs. 15 lakh.  T he scheme is not coir sector specific and all the 
micro and small enterprises including khadi village and coir units are covered under the scheme. The 
suggestions of the Committee would be kept in view as and when the parameters of the Scheme 
would be considered for revision.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
19. The  Committee  also  takes  note  of  the  domest ic  and  export  market  promotion 
which  are  important  for Coir Industry.  The fund  allocated under the Budget market 
promotion both for domestic and export is inadequat e to meet the demands of the trade and 
industry. Wide publicity can only  improve  marketa bility  of  the  products as there are  
competitive  products  available  in  the  market  at  better  prices. The Committee therefore   
recommends   that   the   Budget   outlay   for dom estic   and   export   market promotion 
should be enhanced for the Coir Board.  
Para (144) 
 
Action taken/Comments 
 
 
 Funds are allocated to the Coir Board under Budget  Heads Plan (S&T), Plan General and 
Rejuvenation Modernisation and Technology Upgradation (REMOT).  Under Plan General funds are 
utilized by the Coir Board for implementation of va rious Schemes viz. Export Market Promotion, 
Domestic  Market  Promotion,  Development  of  Production  Infrastructure, Skill  Upgradation  and  
-19- 

  
Quality Improvement including Mahila Coir Yojana et c. as per their requirement. During the XI 
Plan, allocation of funds under Plan General has be en increased to Rs.140.41 crore as compared to 
Rs. 80.65 crore during X Plan.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
20. The  Committee  feels  that  exporters  of  the  C oir  Sector  play  major  role  for  the 
development of this industry. The efforts of Coir e xporters have helped the industry to surpass  
the  target  for  the  year  2008-09  and  2009-201 0  but  the  assistance  and  benefits provided 
to Jute and Textile exporters by the Government are very limited.  
Para (145)  
 
Action taken/Comments 
 
 
 The Ministry of MSME do not have mandate to promot e jute and textile industry. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
21. The  Committee  strongly  recommends  that  more  showrooms  /sale  depots  should be 
opened across the country which would surely enhanc e the sale and this could only be done  
with sufficient  staff strength and Budget  which  the Committee feels is still lacking in Coir 
Board though a long time has elapsed since its existence in 1950s  
Para (148) 
Action taken/Comments  
 
. At present, Board is having 30 Coir Bhavans and t wo sub depots throughout India.  The total 
sales generated by the above coir Bhawans and sub d epots for the year 2009-10 was Rs.14.06 crore 
as against the sales target of Rs.14.00 crore.  Coi r Bhavans are being established and re-located 
throughout the territory of India as per the demand and viability of such sales outlets. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
22. The  Committee  feels  that  NSIC  should  broaden  its  resource  base  to  give  better 
services  to  MSME  sector  and  compete  with  oth er  institutions  and  Banks  engaged  in 
financing  this sector. The Committee desires that NSIC and Ministry should devise the ways 
to compete with other Financial Institutions.  
Para (170)  
 
Action taken/Comments 
 
 
 The banks and other financial institutions have st rong financial base and expertise for lending 
to industrial and service enterprises. As NSIC is n ot in the business of direct lending to the MSMEs, 
it does not have to compete with banks and other financial institutions. NSIC has been playing a role  
-20- 

  
of facilitator in meeting the credit requirement of  MSMEs and in this regard made tie-up 
arrangements with 11 commercial banks to facilitate  the credit needs (long term as well as working 
capital requirements) of the MSMEs. Under these arr angements, NSIC mobilizes the credit 
proposals from the MSMEs and forwards the same to t he banks with whom tie-up arrangements 
have been made, for the purpose of disbursement of the loans by the banks at their end to the 
applicant units as per their lending norms. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-21- 
 
 

  
CHAPTER-III 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has either not accepted the 
replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its replies 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
1.  As per reports received, most of the States/UTs are  holding regular meetings of the State 
Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC)/Special SLBC to rev iew the flow of credit to the MSME sector, 
restructuring of MSME accounts under stress, prompt  payments of dues to MSEs by the large limits 
etc.  The review mechanism through SLBC has helped considerably in addressing the liquidity 
problem faced by the MSME sector.   
 
 The Committee desires that members of this Committ ee from State may also be invited in the 
meetings of SLBC of that particular state because o f their vast knowledge about MSME sector 
which will immensely help the SLBC in this regard.  
(Para 17) 
 
Further Recommendations 
 
 The Committee is disappointed to note that the Mini stry has not forwarded its Action 
Taken/Comments.  It takes a serious view of this Ca sual approach and is of the opinion that 
the matters highlighted in the said para is of grav e concern which requires immediate 
attention.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates it s earlier findings as stated in the said para 
and expects the Ministry to come out with a suitable action taken/reply.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
2. The   Committee   appreciates   the   measures   of   CGTMSE   for   creating awareness  
about  Credit  Guarantee  Scheme  (CGS)  but  the  scheme  has  not  percolated well at  the 
grassroots level.    Still a very large segment of the youth who wish to be self employed are not 
aware of this scheme.    As  such  the  scheme  has   to  be  given  more publicity  through  the  
electronic  and  print  media  of  particularly  in   regional  languages. Posters  about  the  scheme  be  
displayed  at  conspicuous  place  in  the  Banks  and  their branches  throughout  the country.   Hel p 
of the representatives of the people such as MPs, M LAs,   MLCs,   Corporators   etc.   may be   
sought   for  awareness   campaigns   in   their respective areas.  
Para (36)  
Action taken/Comments 
 
 A concerted advertisement campaign targeting the M SE entrepreneurs at district level in 
vernacular/ regional languages is being devised and  is proposed to be released through DAVP.  
Bank/their branches would again be supplied with po sters of the scheme with a request to display 
them at prominent place in the Banks and their Bran ches. Awareness campaigns are proposed to be 
conducted in areas where the coverage under the scheme is low. 
-22- 

  
 
 
Further Recommendation  
 
 The Committee appreciates that some positive effor ts are being made in this direction 
but feels that a lot is still need to be done as al l the efforts are at the proposal stage.  The 
Committee therefore, desires that an aggressive adv ertising campaign for MSME be expedited 
on priority besides awareness campaign in the low coverage areas under the Scheme.   
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
3. There is another general complaint about Credit Guarantee Scheme (CGS)   that the Banks 
particularly at the Branch level are still hesitant  in extending loans under the scheme despite having  
the major guarantee component.   There  is also confusion  on  the limit  of  Credit  as  collateral  free  
under  the  scheme.    The  Committee  appreciates  the efforts  of  Ministry  of  MSME  and  
CGTMSE  in  this  regard  but  the  issues  need  t o  be further discussed with the Ministry of 
Finance, Reserve Bank of India and Indian Banks Ass ociation  so  that  the  CGS  is  made  a  grand  
success  for promoting  MSME  sector in  a big way.  
Para (36) 
Action taken/Comments 
 
 
 The issues regarding enhancing of coverage under C redit Guarantee Scheme was discussed 
during the 11 
th  Meeting of the RBI Standing Advisory Committee to Review the Flow of 
Institutional Credit to the MSE Sector held at Mumb ai on May 05, 2010. To sensitise the branch 
level officials of Member Lending Institutions incl uding banks on advantages of Credit Guarantee 
Scheme and operational matters training programmes are regularly conducted by Credit Guarantee 
Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE) . There is now greater awareness about the 
Scheme amongst the banks at operational level. 
A Working Group set up by RBI has examined the Cred it Guarantee Scheme and made 
recommendations for improving the coverage under th e Scheme.  The Committee has also given 
greater clarity on the concept of collateral free l ending and also recommended raising of the 
mandatory ceiling for collateral free lending from Rs.5 lakh to Rs.10 lakh.  The recommendation has 
been  accepted by  the  RBI  and a  circular  has  been  issued to  all  scheduled  commercial  banks  
-23- 

  
mandating the banks not to accept collateral securi ty in case of loans upto Rs. 10 lakh to units in th e 
MSE sector. Under Credit Guarantee Scheme, the coll ateral free loans upto Rs.100 lakh per 
borrower are eligible for coverage. 
Further Recommendation 
 
 
 The Committee further recommends that recommendations of working group set up by 
RBI to examine the Credit Guarantee Scheme should b e followed without any further delay 
and instructions in this regard be issued to Member  lending institution  so that units in the 
MSE sector may start availing this facility as soon as possible. 
 Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
4. To tackle the problems of revival of sick indust ries, the Committee recommends that   
rehabilitation   package   for   potentially   viable   sick   units   should   be   considered favorably.  A  
special  corpus  should  be  earmarked  for  the  p urpose  and  more  so  the commercial banks  may 
be urged upon  to earmark   a portion  to ailing  u nits. Further a survey  of  sick  units  should  be   
done  annually  so  that  the  problem  of  sickness  could  be taken care at initial stage.  The Ministry 
should also take action on the findings of various studies by various Governmental and non-
Governmental agencies to improve the lot of this vital sector.  The Committee desires to be informed 
in this regard. 
Para (48)  
Action taken/Comments  
 
 Guidelines to all scheduled commercial banks have been issued vide RBI’s circular RPCD: 
SME&NFS.BC. No. 102/06.04.01/20.08.09 dated May 4, 2009 on timely restructuring and 
rehabilitation of potentially viable sick MSE units  based on the recommendations of the Working 
Group headed by Dr. K.C. Chakrabarty, on Rehabilita tion of sick MSE.  The Prime Minister’s Task 
Force on MSMEs in its report has recommended puttin g in place an administrative mechanism at 
district level to re-examine the viability of sick MSMEs not being rehabilitated by the banks under 
their existing mechanism and implementing a rehabil itation package, wherever necessary. Further, 
rehabilitation funds specially set up by the State Governments could part-finance promoters’ margin 
money requirement and the Central Government may support the setting up of rehabilitation funds in 
the  States  to  facilitate  and  encourage  rehabilitation  of  potentially viable  sick units.  It has been 
-24- 

  
 recommended that an appropriate scheme should be f ormulated by Ministry of MSME with an 
estimated outlay of Rs.1,000 crore.  Accordingly, b ased on the consultations with the State 
Governments and Banks, the Ministry of MSME has pre pared a draft scheme on “Rehabilitation of 
sick Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs)” which is under consideration. 
Further Recommendation  
 The Committee while noting the comments of the Mini stry recommends that the salient 
features of draft Scheme on Rehabilitation of sick Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises be 
placed before it after the approval  so that the Committee can have a future track of record.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
5. Role of the Ministry is very   important   as   it   has   to   evolve mechanism / directives 
/guidelines  which  goes  a  long  way  in  shaping   the  things  in  future  in  the industrial  scen ario  
of  the  country. The  Committee  therefore  feels  that  Government should  ensure   level  playing   
field   for  MSME  sector  to   meet  the  challenges of  stiff competition in global players.  
Para (49)  
Action taken/Comments  
 
 The Ministry of MSME is implementing various schem es/programmes for promotion and 
development of MSMEs. The ten schemes under Nationa l Manufacturing Competitiveness 
Programme (NMCP), out of which nine are in operatio n, are for enhancement of competitiveness 
and productivity of MSMEs. Further, with a view to create awareness among the MSMEs, MSME 
Associations and other stakeholders on WTO Agreemen ts and its implications thereof, Ministry of 
MSME is organizing one day Sensitization workshops/  seminars all over the country since the year 
2000.  77 such workshops/ seminars have been organi zed.  As part of this endeavour, seven 
awareness programmes on various aspects of WTO have  been organized benefiting 464 
entrepreneurs during 2008-09.  Nine such WTO awaren ess workshops were organized benefiting 
665 entrepreneurs during the financial year 2009-10.   
Further Recommendation 
 
 
 The Committee notes that though there has been prog ress in organising the 
sensitization workshops/seminars benefiting the entrepreneurs but feels that time is still a long 
way to go.   The Committee is of the considered view that more a nd more such sensitizations  
workshops should be organised by enhancing therein coverage to bring in more and more 
entrepreneurs keeping in view the growth and development of this sector.  
-25- 

  
 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
6. KVIC has a plan to renovate these sales outlets ste p by step as per availability of funds.  As 
first step, 5 deptt. sales outlets have been propos ed in the budget demand of 2010-11, Khadi haats at 
Guwahati and at Dimapur have been sanctioned to est ablish under the new sales technology.  The 
Committee desired that more funds be allocated for renovation of the outlets and employees be 
trained for effective salesmanship.  
(Para 100) 
 
Further Recommendations 
 
 
 The Committee is disappointed to note that the Mini stry has not forwarded its Action 
Taken/Comments.  It takes a serious view of this Ca sual approach and is of the opinion that 
the matters highlighted in the said para is of grav e concern which requires immediate 
attention.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates it s earlier findings as stated in the said para 
and expects the Ministry to come out with a suitable action taken/reply.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
7. The  Committee  observes  that  the  Budget  out lay  has  increase  around  Rs.  70 crores 
whereas  the infrastructure and staff strength are the same as earlier days despite the  fact  that  n ew  
schemes  and  programmes  have  been  approved  by  the  Ministry  and these  are  in  progress. The  
Committee,  therefore,  recommends  that  the  Coir   Board should  increase  its  staff  strength  as  
the  shortage  of  staff  is  adversely  affecting  the process of implementation and development of 
the Coir Industry.  
Para (141) 
Action taken/Comments 
 
 
 Creation of new posts requires prior approval of M inistry of Finance, Department of 
Expenditure. Coir Board has been asked to furnish n ecessary details for creation of such details and 
thereafter the matter will be taken up with the Department of Expenditure appropriately.  
 
-26- 

  
Further Recommendation  
 
 The Committee is of the view that Ministry should closely monitor the entire process 
with the Ministry of Finance, Department of Expendi ture as well Coir Board for creation of 
new posts and Committee may be informed of the progress made. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-27- 

  
 CHAPTER-IV 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which fi nal replies of the Ministry have not been 
received 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
1. The Committee was informed that Member Lending I nstitutions (MLIs) of CGTMSE are 
advised about the revision in ceiling amount under Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme (CGS) through 
circulars issued by CGTMSE.  All circulars on CGS i ssued by CGTMSE since its inception are 
placed on the website of CGTMSE for ready reference .  Initially, when the CGS was introduced, the 
ceiling amount was fixed at Rs. 10 lakh per borrowe r.  It was increased to Rs. 25 lakh in September 
2000 and further to Rs. 50 lakh in July 2007 and to  Rs. 100 lakh in December, 2008.  Bilingual and 
posters on CGS in English, Hindi and regional langu ages like Bengali, Marathi, Gujarati, etc. have 
been printed and sent to MLIs and their Zonal, Bran ch Offices.  Individual MLIs in turn, have also 
issued internal circulars on CGS and have been updating the same from time to time.  
 
 The Committee desires that all the circulars, broc hures, posters, etc., on revised ceiling 
amount under Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme should be  printed in all the languages  of 
Eighth Schedule to the Constitution and sent to Mem ber Lending Institutions (MLIs) for 
compliance.  
Para (27)  
Action taken/Comments 
 
 
 Brochures on Credit Guarantee Scheme have already been translated and printed in six 
regional languages viz. Assamese, Bengali, Gujarati , Marathi, Tamil and Hindi and distributed to all 
Member Lending Institutions.  Translation of brochu res in some more languages viz. Malayalam, 
Telgu, Kannada and Oriya, has since been undertaken and on completion of the same, they would be 
printed and sent to Member Lending Institutions for  distribution at their end.  Translation of 
brochures would thereafter be carried out in other languages as well.   
Recommendation/Observation  
 
2. The  Committee was informed  that  SSI  Sector car pet  weaving  units of Bhadoi  in 
Uttar Pradesh are providing  employment to a large number of people particularly women and 
youth from the weaker sections of Society and earni ng precious foreign  exchange  for  the  
Country  by  exporting  the  carpets  of  the  area  but  the  carpet units are not being extended  
credit by the Banks and Financial Institutions and the large number of workers of these units 
have not been covered under various welfare measure s as  such  the  condition  of  carpet  
weaving  units  is  precarious  and  their  conditi on  can  be improved  if  these  units  are  
brought  in  the  ambit  of  KVIC,  this  Committee   therefore recommends  that  a  feasibility  
study  of  bringing  the  Carpet  units of  Bhadoi  area  of  UP under  KVIC  should  be  
conducted  and  if  found  feasible  should  be  br ought  under  the purview  of  KVIC. The  
Committee  expects  that  it  will  be  informed  of  the  outcome thereof.  
Para (46)  
 
-28- 

  
Action taken/Comments  
 
 Carpet Weaving units are generally falling under t he domain of Ministry of Textiles.  KVIC 
is implementing the Prime Minister’s Employment Gen eration Programme (PMEGP) for providing 
employment opportunities to first generation entrep reneurs by setting up micro enterprises including 
carpet units throughout the country.  As per PMEGP guidelines, units costing upto Rs. 10 lakh each 
in service/business sector and Rs. 25 lakh each in manufacturing sector can be assisted with Margin 
Money Subsidy etc.  Assistance is provided in the f orm of margin money subsidy upto 25 per cent 
(35 per cent for the beneficiaries belongs to weake r sections viz., SC/ST/OBC/women/ disadvantage 
sections, etc.) of the project cost in rural areas while it is 15 per cent (25 per cent for weaker 
sections) for urban areas. Entrepreneurs of Bhadoi area could approach KVIC, State KVIBs or DICs 
the implementing agencies of PMEGP for financial assistance as well as bank credit for setting up of 
new carpet units.  KVIC has been asked to work out an appropriate strategy within its existing 
mandate to support/promote existing carpet weaving units in coordination with Office of DC 
(MSME) and Ministry of Textiles. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
3. The Committee recommends that role of all the agen cies/organizations should be 
evaluated from time to time and clearly defined. Th ere should be no encroachment and 
overlapping of their activities. All these agencies  should provide effective service in a 
coordinated way to each entrepreneur of MSME be it Micro, Small or Medium.  
Para (47)  
 
Action taken/Comments  
 
 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted  for compliance. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
4. The Committee observes that the schemes of SFURTI was introduced in the year 2006-
07 but has not yet taken the desired momentum.  In order to implement the scheme in  a  
better  way  the  Committee  recommends   that  the   Ministry  should  consider  the 
appointment of Cluster Development Executive (CDE) from amongst the eminent Khadi 
workers having a good understanding of Khadi sector ,  so that CDE could play an active and  
catalyst  role  in  this  regard.  This  role  will   further  strengthened  if  the  technical agency  
appointed  under  the  scheme  provides  suitable  technical  support  at  the  same time.   In 
view of the important  role played by  SFURTI  sche me for cluster development the  
Committee  desires  that  it  should  continue  for   2010-11  and  should  be  extended  to 
continue further.  
Para (101)  
-29- 

  
Action taken/Comments  
 
 The implementation guidelines of Scheme of Fund fo r Regeneration of Traditional Industries 
(SFURTI) were issued in October 2005 for developmen t of around 100 clusters from khadi, village 
industries, and coir sectors over a period of five years.  Rejuvenation of traditional industries through 
cluster  approach under SFURTI was a new initiative  undertaken by the Ministry of MSME 
(erstwhile Ministry of ARI).  Accordingly,  some ch allenging parts of the process such as analysing 
the various issues on criteria of selection of clus ters, selection of technical agents/implementing 
agencies/cluster development executives, scope, volume of work involved, advertisement of scheme, 
etc.  which Nodal Agencies were not used to, took t ime to  stabilize.  Thus, the scheme picked up 
only during the last two years and over the years, the NAs have gathered sufficient experience in 
cluster methodology and performance has improved si gnificantly.  Production, sales and 
employment as well as artisan’s earnings in the ful ly/partially developed clusters have shown an 
encouraging and increasing trend. 
Cluster Development Executives (CDEs) have been app ointed in most of the khadi clusters 
by the Implementing Agency (IA) concerned keeping in view of his suitability/experience.  CDE has 
to be located in the cluster full time and responsi ble for implementation of the scheme in the 
assigned cluster. His responsibilities  includes co nducting the diagnostic study, preparation and 
implementation of cluster action plan, promoting li nkages with institutions, building the local 
governance framework, etc. However, suggestion of t he Committee for appointment of CDE, from 
amongst eminent khadi workers having good understan ding of khadi sector, is highly appreciated 
and communicated to IA through NAs.  
Further, the feedback and experience received from the clusters which have started 
production indicates that the introduction of new i mplements, new marketing interventions, CFC 
facilities in these clusters have made a significan t improvement and make a perceptible  change in 
the lives of the artisans involved  in the clusters .  SFURTI has also generated enthusiasm among 
governmental and non-governmental agencies to take up the challenge for developing more 
traditional artisans’ clusters. Keeping in view abo ve, the Scheme Steering Committee (SSC)  in its 
10 
th  meeting held on 19 February 2010, recommended  con tinuation of the scheme for 2011-12 
onwards and inclusion of more clusters following du e procedure.  Accordingly, Nodal Agencies 
have been advised to carry out independent evaluati on of the scheme at the earliest and submit 
proposal for its continuation alongwith evaluation report.  
-30- 

  
Recommendation/Observation  
 
5. The  Committee  observes  that  inspite  of  KVIC' s  repeated  request,  funds  flow  to 
KVI Institutions from commercial Banks under ISEC i s not up to the desired level.  The 
committee  while  discussing  the  issue  with  som e  commercial banks   found  to  its dismay 
that  the  scheme  has  not  been  properly  public ized  and  even  top  brass  of  banks  and 
financial  institutions  providing   loans  to  ent repreneurs  are  not  aware  of  this.  The 
Committee  is  therefore  concerned  to  note  that   KVIC  is  not  pursuing  all  its  schemes 
/policies seriously and strictly to reach out to the entrepreneurs properly.  
Para (103)  
 
Action taken/Comments  
 
 The Interest subsidy Eligibility Certificate (ISEC ) Scheme is the major source of funding for 
the khadi programme.  Under ISEC Scheme, credit at the concessional rate of interest of 4 percent 
per annum for capital expenditure as well as workin g capital is given as per the requirement of the 
institutions.  The difference between the actual le nding rate and 4 percent is paid by the Central 
Govt. through KVIC to the lending banks and funds f or this purpose are provided under the Khadi 
Grant Head to KVIC.   
It has been observed that availment of bank finance  by the Institutions has been around 50% 
of the total amount of ISEC issued by KVIC.  To imp rove the situation the issue has been taken up 
with the RBI.  The RBI has issued instructions to a ll public sector banks reiterating the special 
consideration that should be given to KVI as a part  of priority sector.  KVIC has again issued 
detailed guidelines to its field offices to take up  the issue related to ISEC at appropriate level to 
make ISEC issue as a regular agenda of SLBCs and DL BCs all these steps would result in the better 
availment of the bank finance under ISEC scheme in the coming years.  KVIC has constituted a Task 
Force Committee (TFC) to study the issue and to rec ommend steps to be taken to redress the 
problems.  KVIC has been asked to undertake special  seminars/workshops to give more publicity to 
the scheme of ISEC.  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
6. The  Committee  finds  that  in  view  of  cost  o f  civil  construction  going  up  day  by 
day the  limit  for group  and  individual  workshe d  under  Workshed  Scheme  for Khadi 
Artisans is very low.  The Committee therefore urge  upon  the KVIC to ponder  over the 
enhancement of  amount   of   assistance   being   provided   at   present   as   assistance   for 
construction of workshed is being given to the arti sans belong to the BPL(below poverty line)  
category .  
Para (111)  
 
 
-31- 

  
Action taken/Comments  
 
 Under this scheme, financial assistance for constr uction of worksheds is provided to those 
khadi artisans who belong to BPL category through t he khadi institutions with which these khadi 
artisans are associated. For individual workshed, t he assistance is upto Rs. 25,000/- or 75% of the 
cost of the workshed, whichever is less and  for gr oup worksheds (for a group of minimum 5 and 
maximum 15 khadi artisans) it is Rs. 15,000/- per beneficiary of the group or 75% of the total cost of 
the project, whichever is less.  The performance is  under review for considering the suggested 
enhancement in assistance. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
7.  The Committee notes with serious concerns that BPL  Cards have not been issued to a 
number of Khadi Artisans due to which they are not able to avail the benefit of the workshed 
scheme though they are otherwise eligible. The  Com mittee   therefore recommends  that  the  
matter should  be  taken  up  with the  respective  State  Government to expedite the issue of 
BPL Card so that the eligible artisans can avail the benefit of the schemes.  
Para (112)  
 
Action taken/Comments 
 
 
 KVIC has been directed to pursue the matter with t he concerned State Governments and to 
ensure the availability of BPL Cards to each of eli gible khadi artisans. Ministry has also requested 
State Governments suitably. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
8. The  Committee  was  informed  that  the  Coir  un its  in  Kerala  want  to  have  a 
common  Effluent  Treatment  Plant  for that  entire  area  and  for that  seeking  permission to  
transport  the  coir  waste  in  closed  Trucks  from  the  factories  to  the  plant  but  the matter   
is   pending   with   the   Kerala   Pollution   Co ntrol   Board   for  quite   long. The Committee   
desires   that   the   Ministry   of   MSME   take   up   the   issue   with   the   State Government 
of Kerala to solve the problems of Coir units in the State.  
Para (132)  
Action taken/Comments 
 
 
 The coir processing units in Kerala generate sludg e during the process of bleaching and 
dyeing of coir.  It has been proved to be non hazar dous through various tests done at the specialized 
testing institutes in the country. 
The Coir Board had set up a sub committee to look i nto the problems of sludge arising out of 
the Dye Houses of coir industry.  This committee has met several times and has drawn samples from 
-32- 

  
 different Dye Houses in the coir industry in the S tate of Kerala and those samples were sent to the 
reputed institutes like Shriram Institute of Techno logy, Bangalore Indian Toxicological Centre, 
Lucknow.  The tests proved that the Dye House sludg e is far below the prescribed limits of 
hazardous nature of the substance. 
The matter has been taken up with the Kerala State Pollution Control Board to declare the 
sludge coming from the Dye Houses in the coir indus try as non hazardous and the matter is being 
closely followed up by the Coir Board.  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
9. The  office  bearer  of  Coir  Association  gave  a  good  suggestion  to  the  Committee 
regarding solid waste management. The Coir industry  has lot of material lying as waste which  
can  be  converted  into  gas through  gasification   system  which  is  very  costly.   If a big  
plant  is  set  up  by  the  Government  the  power   problem  of  the  coir  industry  can  be 
solved and Government can also generate revenue.   The committee desires that Ministry of  
MSME  take  up  the  issue  with  the  State  gover nment  of  Kerala  in  this  regard  and 
pursue the matter for positive conclusion.  
Para (133)  
Action taken/Comments 
 
 
 The matter has been taken up with the State Govern ment of Kerala. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
10. The  Committee  feels  that  the  activities  of  the  Board  are    extended    to  other 
coconut  growing  states  viz.  Tamil  Nadu,  Karna taka,  Andhra  Pradesh,  Orrisa,  West 
Bengal,  and  Assam  etc.,  The  Committee  in  vie w  of  the  extended  activities  feels  and 
recommends  that  Coir Board should have  training  -cum-extension  centre  at  important 
coconut  growing States to cater the need of entrep reneurs and artisans   and the existing 
centre  need  to  be  reviewed  by  strengthening  the  infrastructure  or  providing   better 
training    facilities    on    modern    machineri es    and    equipments for improving  the 
productivity    quality    and profitability of the units  setup  by  the  prospective entrepreneurs.  
Para (143)   
 
Action taken/Comments  
 
The Board is taking action in consultation with the  Ministry for strengthening the erstwhile 
Regional Coir Training and Development Centres (RCT &DCs) as Regional Extension Centres viz. 
Thanjavur in Tamil Nadu, Rajahmundry in Andhra Pradesh and Bhubaneswar in Orissa.  Coir Board 
conducts training in all coir producing States incl uding non-traditional areas as per approved norms 
of the skill upgradation and quality improvement scheme.  
-33- 

  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
11. The  Committee  therefore  hopes  that  the  incen tives  would    be  provided    to  all 
handloom  products,   as  it  is  essential  for  s ustainability  of  tiny/household  sector. The 
exporters   of   the   coir   Industry   should   b e   given   support   by   providing technology 
upgradation fund on the similar line with other tex tile exporters.   The Committee also 
recommends that the Ministry   of MS& ME should tak e up the issue of enhancement of 
incentives for coir exporters with the Ministry of Commerce.  
Para (146)  
Action taken/Comments  
 
 Coir mats constitute 72% of total export of coir p roducts. While Jute floor covering gets 8% 
duty drawback, the coir floor covering including co ir mats get only 2.5% duty drawback.  
Enhancement of duty drawback to coir products (mat and floor covering) at par with the jute 
products needs to be considered. Further, under Dut y Entitlement Pass Book Scheme, different jute 
products get benefit ranging from 3% to 6% while th ere are no specific rates for coir products.  Coir 
products exported in packed form only get DEPB rate  of 1.5% under miscellaneous category.  There 
is a need for prescribing specific rates for coir p roducts on the lines of jute products.  Accordingly , 
the issues are being taken up at inter-ministerial level to redress the grievances of the coir sector.  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
12. The  Committee  notes  that  the  Coir  Clusters  Programme  under  SFURTI  has given  
boost  to  coir  industry  and  families  of  the  coir  artisans  are  benefited  by  this scheme. 
The  Scheme  should  be  continued  and  more  coir   clusters  should be identified for 
extending the facilities under the scheme for future development of  Coir Clusters.  
Para (147)  
 
Action taken/Comments 
 
 
 SFURTI Scheme was introduced for a period of five years beginning 2005-06.  The Scheme 
is under consideration for continuation during the remaining period of the XI Plan.  Inclusion of 
more coir clusters will be considered at the approp riate time while implementing the Scheme during 
extended period. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
13. The  Committee  recommends  that  Government  shou ld  provide  more  Financial 
Support  if  possible  to  NSIC  and  in  the  mean  time  NSIC  should  also  take  steps  to 
 
-34- 

  
 increase IEBR (Internal  Extra Budgetary Resources ) and  explore some other ways  for more 
revenue generation and creating self reliance.  
Para (171)  
 
Action taken/Comments 
 
 
 NSIC carries out various commercial schemes/activit ies for the benefits of MSMEs. Raw 
material assistance to MSMEs is one of the main act ivities of the Corporation. NSIC has made 
arrangements with the bulk manufacturers for provid ing their raw materials to the MSMEs at 
competitive rates. In case any unit needs credit su pport for procurement of raw materials, NSIC 
helps MSMEs by providing financial assistance again st the Bank Guarantee to be provided by the 
MSMEs. To meet this business requirement, funds are  mobilized through Internal and Extra 
Budgetary Resources. The Internal Resources are acc ruals from the business operations as well as 
realization of outstanding dues. The IEBR comprises  extra budgetary resources in the form of 
borrowings of approx. Rs. 135 crore during the year 2010-11 to be raised by NSIC from its banks.  
As the limited resource base may restrain from rais ing additional resources from the market 
which in turn may impede its growth in its scale of  operation, there is  a proposal of further equity 
infusion in NSIC and the same is under active consi deration with the Government so as to provide 
adequate leverage to the Corporation to enhance its borrowings. 
The Corporation has been making all out efforts to increase the revenue from its various 
schemes, which has resulted into growth of income and improvements in the profitability position. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
14. The Committee  further observes confusion  over  t he credit   rating   system of MSME 
sector is still prevailing.  While credit rating co mpanies under take this activity the problem 
does not get resolved because bankers undertake the credit rating based on their   format   and   
internal   risk   management   process.  The   Comm ittee therefore recommends  that  the  
Ministry  in  coordination  with  RBI  and  Indian  Bank  association should dispel this 
confusion  and work out a uniform credit rating for mat and process to bring about 
transparency, uniformity and speedy disposal.  
Para (172)  
Action taken/Comments  
 
 A dedicated Rating Agency for SME sector i.e. SME Rating Agency of India Ltd. (SMERA) 
has been operationalised by SIDBI w.e.f. September 5, 2005.  SMERA’s comprehensive, transparent 
and reliable ratings provide comfort to the lenders, thereby chanellising  increased  funds  flow to the  
-35- 

  
MSME sector and enables the lenders to differential ly price their financing depending on the credit 
rating obtained by the MSMEs. SMERA has entered int o 31 MoUs with Banks, Financial 
Institutions and leading Industrial Associations. T hese MoUs enable SMERA as well as the lending 
institutions and industrial bodies to promote exter nal ratings and its benefits amongst MSME 
accounts for various monetary as well as non-moneta ry benefits. Cumulatively, SMERA has rated 
over 6500 MSME as on March 31, 2010. 
The National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) ha s been implementing “Performance & 
Credit Rating Scheme” for micro and small enterpris es (MSEs).  The scheme is being operated 
through six accredited rating agencies viz., CRISIL , SMERA, ONICRA, CARE, FITCH and ICRA.  
All rating agencies have been following a uniform r ating scale based on the rating methodology 
which covers a combination of credit and performanc e factors measuring operation, financial, 
business and management risks.  The rating under th e scheme serves as a trusted third party opinion 
on the capabilities and creditworthiness of the MSEs. 
  The scheme was formulated in consultation with In dian Banks’ Association (IBA), which 
forwarded a copy of the scheme to all its member ba nks with a request to promote the rating of 
micro and small enterprises. The RBI also in its ci rcular advised all banks to consider the rating 
assigned under this scheme and to structure their r ates of interest depending on the ratings assigned 
to the borrowing MSE units.  
 
 
****** 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-36- 