146th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/146threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:17]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
  COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
ONE HUNDRED FORTY-SIXTH REPORT
 
ON
 
CREDIT FLOW TO SSI SECTOR IN MAHARASHTRA
(MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES)
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 26TH AUGUST, 2004)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 26TH AUGUST, 2004)
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2004/Bhadrapada, 1926 (SAKA)
E-mail:rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
 
CONTENTS
  
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2. INTRODUCTION
3. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
4. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
5. MINUTES
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
(Date of Constitution 5th August, 2004)
   1.  Shri Santosh Bagrodia–    Chairman
        RAJYA  SABHA
   2.  Prof. M.M. Agarwal
   3.  Shri Surendra Lath
   4.  Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
   5.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
   6.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   7.  Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
   8.  Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
   9.  Dr. Vijay Mallya
10.  Vacant

146th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/146threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:17]
        LOK  SABHA
11.  Shri Guharam Ajgalle
12.  Shri Kailash Baitha
13.  Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
14.  Shri Subhash Deshmukh
15.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
16.  Dr. Vallabbhai Kathiria
17.  Shri Sunil Khan
18.  Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato
19.  Shri Prakash Paranjpe
20.  Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel
21.  Shri Rajnarayan
22.  Shri Bagida Ramakrishna
23.  Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
24.  Smt. Rubab Sayeda
25.  Shri Rana Gurjeet Singh
26.  Shri Manvendra Singh
27.  Shri Ganesh Singh
28.  Shri Suraj Singh
29.  Shri Chandramani Tripathi
30.  Shri M. Anjan Kumar Yadav
31.  Shri Girdhari Yadav
        SECRETARIAT
        Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
        Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
        Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
        Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
        Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
(Date of Constitution – lst January, 2004)
   1.  Dr. P.C. Alexander     –     Chairman
        RAJYA  SABHA
   2.  Prof. M.M. Agarwal
   3.  Shri Jayantilal Barot
   4.  Dr. M.N. Das
   5.  Shrimati Saroj Dubey
   6.  Dr. Faguni Ram
   7.  Shri Lajpat Rai
   8.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   9.  Shri P.K. Maheshwari
10.  Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
11.  Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
12.  Shri S. Sivasubramanian
13.  Shrimati Sushree Devi
14.  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
15.  Shri K. Chandran Pillai
        LOK  SABHA
16.  Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
17.  Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
18.  Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary

146th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/146threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:17]
19.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das
20.  Shri K. Francis George
21.  Shri Thomas Hansda
22.  Md. Anwarul Haque
23.  Shri A.C. Jose
24.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
25.  Shri Mansoor Ali Khan
26.  Shri Sunil Khan
27.  Shri Deepak Kumar
28.  Shri Manjay Lal
29.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
30.  Shri A. Narendra
31.  Shri Ananta Nayak
32.  Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
33.  Shri Uttamrao Patil
34.  Shri Malyala Rajaiah
35.  Shri P. Rajendran
36.  Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
37.  Shri Tarachand Sahu
38.  Shri Ramanand Singh
39.  Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
40.  Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
41.  Shri V. Vertiselvan
42.  Shrimati D.M. Vijaya Kumari
43.  Shri Radha Mohan Singh
44.  Shri Vijay Sankeshwar
        SECRETARIAT
        Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
        Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
        Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
        Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
        Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE
(Date of Constitution – lst January, 2003 )
   1.  Dr. P.C. Alexander     –––      Chairman
        RAJYA  SABHA
   2.  Prof M.M. Agarwal
   3.  Shri Jayantilal Barot
   4.  Dr. M.N. Das
   5.  Shrimati Saroj Dubey
   6.  Dr. Faguni Ram
   7.  Shri Lajpat Rai
   8.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   9.  Shri P.K. Maheshwari
10.  Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
11.  Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
12.  Shri S. Sivasubramanian
13.  Shrimati Sushree Devi
14.  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi

146th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/146threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:17]
15.  Shri K. Chandran Pillai
        LOK  SABHA
16.  Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
17.  Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
18.  Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
19.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das
20.  Shri K. Francis George
21.  Shri Thomas Hansda
22.  Md. Anwarul Haque
23.  Shri A.C. Jose
24.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
25.  Shri Mansoor Ali Khan
26.  Shri Sunil Khan
27.  Shri Deepak Kumar
28.  Shri Manjay Lal
29.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
30.  Shri A. Narendra
31.  Shri Ananta Nayak
32.  Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
33.  Shri Uttamrao Patil
34.  Shri Malyala Rajaiah
35.  Shri P. Rajendran
36.  Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
37.  Shri Tarachand Sahu
38.  Shri Ramanand Singh
39.  Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
40.  Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
41.  Shri V. Vertiselvan
42.  Shrimati D.M. Vijaya Kumari
43.  Shri Ram Prasad Singh
44.  Shri Radha Mohan Singh
45.  Shri Vijay Sankeshwar
        SECRETARIAT
        Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
        Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
        Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
        Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
        Shri Rakesh Naithani Committee Officer
 
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE
(Date of Constitution – lst January, 2002 )
@1.  Dr. P.C. Alexander    ––       Chairman
        RAJYA  SABHA
   2.  Prof M.M. Agarwal
   3.  Dr. Abrar Ahmed
   4.  Shri Jayantilal Barot
   5.  Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
   6.  Shrimati Saroj Dubey
   7.  Dr. Faguni Ram
   8.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

146th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/146threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:17]
   9.  Shri P.K. Maheshwari
10.  Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
11.  Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
12.  Shri S. Sivasubramanian
13.  Shrimati Sushree Devi
14.  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
15.  Vacant
        LOK  SABHA
16.  Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
17.  Kumari Mamta Banerjee
18.  Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
19.  Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
20.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das
21.  Shri Deepak Kumar
22.  Shri Thomas Hansda
23.  Dr. S. Jagathrakshakan
24.  Shri A.C. Jose
25.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
26.  Shri Brijlal Khabri
27.  Shri Sunil Khan
28.  Shri Manjay Lal
29.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
30.  Shri A. Narendra
31.  Shri Ananta Nayak
32.  Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
33.  Shri Dharam Raj Singh Patel
34.  Shri Uttamrao Patil
35.  Shri Malyala Rajaiah
36.  Shri P. Rajendran
37.  Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
38.  Shri Tarachand Sahu
39.  Shri Ramanand Singh
40.  Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
41.  Chowdhary Talib Hussain
42.  Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
43.  Shrimati D.M. Vijaya Kumari
44.  Shri Beni Prasad Verma
45.  Vacant
        SECRETARIAT
        Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
        Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
        Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
        Shri D. P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
        Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
 
 
SUB-COMMITTEE-II FOR
MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES OF THE PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
   1.  Prof. M.M. Agarwal   -----            Convenor

146th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/146threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:17]
        RAJYA  SABHA
   2.  Dr. Faguni Ram
   3.  Shri Lajpat Rai
   4.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
        LOK  SABHA
   5.  Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
   6.  Md. Anwarul Haque
   7.  Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
   8.  Shri P. Rajendran
   9.  Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
10.  Shri Ramanand Singh
 
 
INTRODUCTION
         I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having been authorised
by the Committee, hereby present this One Hundred Forty-sixth Report of Sub-Committee-II for Ministry of Small
Scale Industries on the Credit Flow to SSI Sector in Maharashtra pertaining to the Ministry of Small Scale Industry.
2.      The Sub-Committee for Ministry of Small Scale Industries ( of Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Industry ) visited Mumbai from 6
th to 9th July, 2002 to interact with the representatives of various SSI
Associations in the State of Maharashtra , Banks, Ministry of SSI and State Government of Maharashtra. Thereafter, a
follow up meeting was held with them at New Delhi on the 27 th January, 2003. The present report is analytical and
based on the interaction with the representatives of various organizations and the suggestions emerged out of that.
3.      The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry considered and adopted the Draft report at
its meeting held on the 25th August, 2004.
 
NEW DELHI
25th August, 2004
SANTOSH BAGRODIA
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry
 
 
REPORT
         Small Scale Industry (SSI) Sector is playing a vital and self-motivated role towards generation of the employment,
removal of poverty, enhancement of modernization, reformation of technology and globalisation of the Indian Economy
in terms of low investment, high potential for employment generation and wider dispersal of industries in rural and
semi-urban areas preventing migration to big cities. This sector offers and ensures a more equitable distribution of
national income and facilitates effective mobilization of resources of capital and skill , which might otherwise remain
underutilised or even unutilised. It further stimulates the growth of industrial entrepreneurship and promotes and
diffuses the pattern of ownership and location. Over 40% of the gross turnover in manufacturing activities as also
around one-third of our exports are contributed by SSI sector. In the area of employment generation, significant
contribution is made by SSI sector both modern and traditional units which account for employment of over 192.23
lakhs workers and production in rupee terms is projected to reach Rs.7, 42,021 crore during financial year (2002-03).
2.      During the course of examination of Demand for Grants 2003-04 pertaining to the Ministry of Small Scale
Industries, the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry took up the issue of credit flow to SSI
sector in detail. The Committee was informed that the SSI sector, producing a wide range of products, accounts for
around 95 per cent of the Industrial units in the country, contributing to 40 per cent of the manufacturing sector output
and approximately one third of the Nation’s exports. As on March, 2002, there were 34.42 lakh SSI units providing

146th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/146threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:17]
direct employment to around 192.23 lakh persons. As per the estimates of the office of the Development Commissioner
(SSI), the output of SSI sector at current prices aggregated Rs.6,90,316 crore during the year 2001-02 and exports at the
level of Rs.69.797 crore during the 2000-01 . During the financial year 2002-03, the production of SSI sector is
projected to reach at Rs.7,42,021 crore. The sector also acts as a nursery for promoting entrepreneurial talents and as a
catalyst in the industrial growth.
3.      The Ministry of SSI has apprised the Committee that the total advance to SSI       from the Public Sector Banks
went up in absolute terms from Rs. 48,445 crores in March, 2001 to Rs.49,743 crores in March, 2002.        The
percentage of SSI advances to Net Bank Credit (NBC) however, declined from 14.2 % as at the end of March, 200I to
12.5 % at the end of March, 2002. The RBI’s study of the specialized            SSI/general branches however, revealed
that adequate credit was being made available to all viable projects.
4.      The potential of SSI sector as a core area for growth and development of economy has been well recognized by the
Government. The Government has taken steps to remove the bottlenecks and thereby pave the way for accelerating the
growth of this sector. Amongst the bottlenecks to be removed for the growth of SSIs, the major factor has been the
problem of bank credit to this sector. The streamlining of flow of bank credit has been a constant challenge not only
before the Government but also to the banking and financial institutions. The Committee on Industry deliberated on the
aspect of Credit Flow to SSI Sector at length in its 45
th Report which was presented to the Parliament on 8 th August,
2001. Having gone through the Action Taken Notes submitted by the Ministry of SSI on that report the Committee
through its Sub­ Committee on SSI took up the scrutiny of practical problems being faced by SSI at the ground level as
far as the credit flow to these units is concerned. The Committee identified certain regions/states like Maharashtra,
Himachal Pradesh, Delhi and adjoining Noida, Ghaziabad , Modinagar and Bulandshahar area to understand the
problems of the units and also suggest the remedial measures. In the process, the Committee/Sub Committee had
opportunities to interact not only with the representatives of the Ministry of SSIs, Government of India but also with the
State Governments, Banking and Financial Institutions and the representatives of National/Regional/Local SSI
Federations. As a sequel to this process of study the Committee took up the scrutiny of the problems being faced by the
SSI units in the state of Maharashtra . The Committee visited Mumbai from 6
th to 9th July, 2002 to study the situation.
Many issues were raised in the meetings held there. A joint Memoranda was also received from the SSI Associations on
which the comments of the Ministry of SSI were obtained. Thereafter, a follow up meeting of the SSI Associations,
Banks and the concerned officials of the Government of India and the State Government of Maharashtra was held at
New Delhi on 27
th January, 2003.
INDUSTRIAL SCENARIO IN THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA
5.      The Maharashtra State has succeeded in achieving high level of industrial progress and has been identified as the
country’s industrial powerhouse. The State accounts for nearly 1/4
th of the gross value added to India’s industrial sector.
The industrial sector in Maharashtra  has played a crucial role in the rapid and balanced economic development of the
State.
6.      Among the various industrial groups chemicals and chemical products, food products, refined petroleum products,
machinery and equipments, textiles, basic metals, motor vehicles, trailers etc. and other transport equipments contribute
substantially to the industrial production of the State at All-India level. Their contribution together was more than 80 per
cent in the total net value added in the manufacturing sector in the State and at All-India level it was 68 per cent in the
year 2000-0l. Based on the average index number of industrial production in India in respect of these industry groups, it
is surmised that the industrial production (manufacturing) in the State in the first nine months of 2002-03 (April to
December) has improved and registered a growth of 5.1 per cent over the corresponding period of 2001-02. In the
decade prior to the beginning of economic reforms (1991-92) the production in the sector recorded an average annual
growth of 8 per cent and in the post reforms period the same was 6 per cent.
7.      The strength of Maharashtra State  lies in the fact that it has a broad-based industrial structure. The State also has
good infrastructural facilities. Railways and roads have a broad netwark throughout the State. Trained labour force is
readily available due to the presence of good educational facilities. The State also has a large coastline which opens up
various business opportunities. Some of the major areas of strength in Maharashtra are Power generation capacity
highest in the country, at more than 14,000 MW; More than 215 iridustrial estates including nine five star industrial
estates and 63 growth centers developed by the Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation (MIDC), the country’s
largest industrial infrastructure provider and; specialized industrial estates for chemical, textile, leather and gems and
jewellery set up at strategic locations. The country’s largest and most diverse infrastructure for the IT industry has

146th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/146threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:17]
emerged along the ‘Knowledge Corridor’ between Mumbai; Navi Mumbai and Pune and at Nagpur, Aurangabad and
other places. There is a well spread network of roads and railways with two major ports, one international airport and
four domestic airports. Two international airports at Navi Mumbai and Pune, and an international passenger and cargo
hub at Nagpur are in pipeline. The HRD infrastructure is strongest in the country in terms of educational institutions -
301 engineering degree/diploma colleges, 616 ITIs with turnout of 1,60,000 technocrats every year. 50,000 youth are
trained in the state to take up self employment ventures every year by the Maharashtra Centre for Entrepreneurship
Development (MCED), Aurangabad. The literacy rate is 75 per cent. Highest number of patents have been filed in the
State, setting the pace for innovation in the country. There is a well-diversified and highly productive industrial base
with positive work culture. It may be noted that 40 % of India’s Internet users are in Maharashtra and the State accounts
for around 30 % of software export.
8.      Maharashtra opens up ample opportunities for hi-tech knowledge based industries like information technology and
biotechnology. There are specialized industrial areas and Special Economic Zones which offer opportunities for
industrial units to grow and be competitive. The textile industry related ancillary units could be developed into
international suppliers.
9.      The State has entered into the phase of second-generation economic reforms with the emphasis on structural
changes in addition to fiscal incentives for the promotion of industry and balanced regional growth. The new package
scheme of incentives which was introduced with effect from 1st April, 2001 would be in operation upto 31st March,
2006.
EMPLOYMENT GENERATION
10.    As per the Third All India Census of Small Industries, at the end of March, 2002, in Maharashtra State 20,51,494
persons were employed in the Small scale sector. In order to enhance avenues for further employment generation, the
Government is implementing self employment schemes like PMRY, and Seed Money Assistance. Under PMRY, in the
year 2001-02, loans of Rs 162.70 crore were sanctioned to 27,763 beneficiaries. Under Seed Money Assistance Scheme,
during the year 2001-02 Rs. 4.37 crore was given to 963 beneficiaries. With a view to motivate and train the educated
unemployed youth to take up self employment, training programmes are conducted by SISI and MCED. During the year
2001-02, 9096 youth were trained by MCED and 5I5 persons were trained by SISI under EDP. During the year 2002-
03, upto the end of December, 2002, 4129 youths were trained by MCED. The SISI trained 474 persons during the year
2002­-03.
CONTRIBUTION OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES OF MAHARASHTRA TO INDIAN ECONOMY
11.    The SSI sector of Maharashtra is a vital segment of the economy, contributing substantially in the form of
production, employment and export. The sector contributes substantially in the exports from engineering, chemical,
testing, pharmaceutical and IT industry. The SSIs of Mahrashtra contribute substantially in metal -based engineering
industries, machinery & parts except electrical, Food products, paper products & printing, rubber & plastic products.
Out of 25 major industry divisions at 2 digit level (NIC 98) covered under ASI, in as many as 18 industry divisions
Maharashtra was among the first three leading states in the country in respect of value of output. Of these 18 industry
divisions, the State occupied first position in 10 industry divisions which included food and beverages, publishing &
printing, petroleum, rubber & plastic, metal products, machinery, accounting / computing machine, electrical
machinery, furniture etc.
SICKNESS IN SSI SECTOR
12.    According to the results of the Third All India Census of Small Industries , conducted by the Ministry of Small
Scale Industries, the total number of registered and unregistered units in Maharashtra during 2001-02 was 8,03,568
providing employment to 20,51,494 persons. The total production in SSI sector was worth Rs.41,019.85 crore. The
fixed investment in these units was Rs. 27981.82 crore. As per the results of the Third All India Census of Small
Industries, the total number of sick units in Maharashtra during 2001-02 was 60,161.
13.    The State Level Inter Institutional Committee of Reserve Bank of India monitors rehabilitation of sick SSI units.
As on 30.03.2003, there were 4,762 sick SSI units as per the data provided by RBI, which pertains to units which have
availed bank finance. Of these, 277 units have been found to be potentially viable and 71 units have been put under
nursing. Rehabilitation Programme for 71 SSI units is being undertaken by the banks / financial institutions.
14.    Although the rehabilitation of sick SSI units is primarily the responsibility of banks/financial institutions, however,

146th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/146threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:17]
for the rehabilitation of sick SSI units, the Government of Maharashtra has set up District Level Sick Unit Rehabilitation
Committee under Chairmanship of the District Collectors. The General Manager of the concerned District Industrial
Centre is Member Secretary of this Committee. The Sick SSI units and Industries Associations are informed to approach
the District Level Committee, in case they need any support from Government of Maharashtra, for facilitating speedier
rehabilitation of their units.
15.    The case of SSI units who approach the District Level Committees are taken up with the concerned financial
institutions/banks to coordinate for rehabilitation. The sickness certificate are granted by the Government of
Maharashtra to the units which are considered potentially viable for rehabilitation, by the banks / financial institutions
and wherein the rehabilitation schemes are commenced by banks. The sickness certificate enables sick units to obtain
reschedulement of the outstanding State Government / Agency dues of Sales Tax and Energy charges over a period of
maximum 60 months, payable in monthly installment with interest @ 10% p.a. The Directorate issued 539­ Sickness
certificates to sick SSI units, since inception.
IMPACT OF LIBERALISATION ON THE SSI SECTOR
16.    Although liberalization has exposed the SSI units to stiff competition, it has led to new opportunities also. Small
Scale Industries have enough competitive strength to withstand the impact of the phasing out of Quantitative
Restrictions (QRs) and implementation  of WTO agreements. Government is fully aware of the WTO environment and
has taken appropriate measures for preparing the small scale sector to meet the challenges of liberalization and
globalization. Government is also constantly monitoring the impact of the removal of QRs and WTO Agreements on the
economy including the SSIs in the country.
17.    Export Performance of Maharashtra State in the past few years is as follows:
 
 (Rs. in Crores)
Year Exports
1995-96 26,588
1996-97 29,704
1997-98 32,525
1998-99 35,40I
1999-2000 40,685
2000-01 50,627
2001-02 66,938
 
         From the above table it is evident that exports from the State have continuously been increasing. The State has
significant presence in country’s total exports, as its share in the country’s total exports during 2000-2001 was nearly 35
%.
18.    One of the main characteristic of industrial development after economical liberalization is participation of Non-
Resident Indians (NRIs) / Foreign Direct Investors. Since adoption of liberalization policy (August 1991), upto
November, 2002 under Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), 3,055 projects with an investment of Rs. 49,320 crore have
been approved by the Government of India for setting up industries in the State. Of these approved projects, 1,097 (36
per cent) projects with an investment of Rs. 30,191 crore (61 per cent) have already been commissioned by November,
2002. Of the total proposed investment in the country under FDI since liberalization, Maharashtra continued at the top
position with 17 per cent share in the investment.
19.    With a view to create awareness among the SSI units/Associations on WTO Agreements and their implication for
them, Ministry of SSI organised 28 Sensitization Workshops all over the country, which includes the Workshops held at
Pune on 26
th June, 2000 and at Mumbai on 28 th June, 2000. Workshops on Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) were

146th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/146threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:17]
organized by the Ministry, in Maharashtra, at Pune on 3rd October, 2001 and in Mumbai on 5 th October, 2001 and 20th
May, 2003. The Ministry organized seminars on Anti-Dumping investigations at Mumbai and Pune on 28th August,
2001 and 27th July, 2001 respectively. The Ministry of SSI is financially supporting industry Associations to develop
monitoring mechanisms on the performance of four selected product clusters in terms of growth, removal of
Quantitative Restrictions surge in imports. etc. for the State of Maharashtra. CII has been identified for development of
Cluster for Food Processing, at Pune.
COMMITTEE’S INTERACTION WITH SSI ASSOCIATIONS, STATE GOVERNMENT OF
MAHARASHTRA, BANKS AND MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES
20.    The issues raised by the SSI Associations, State Government and Banks broadly cover the areas of concern related
to globalisation, liberalisation, credit, technology upgradation, marketing, infrastructure, delayed payments, sickness,
quality awareness, labour problerns and various Policies of the Government. The issues and comments of the Ministry
of Small Scale Industries thereon are as follows:
IMPACT OF LIBERALISATION AND GLOBALISATION
21.    The Small Scale Industries Associations demanded that as the goods reserved for SSI sector are being imported,
import tariffs might be imposed / increased on such items and the SSI sector could be opened up gradually. In response,
the Ministry of Small Scale Industries informed that in the Union Budget 2001-2002, the tariff was increased in case of
certain products and our tariffs had been bound at fairly high levels enabling us to intervene effectively wherever any
unusual increase in imports was noticed. Even the Bound rates which were initially set at certain levels can be
renegotiated, if considered necessary. De-reservation of SSI products is being effected in phased manner only. Out of
836 reserved items in 1989, 15 items were de-reserved on 3.4.1997, 9 items on 3.2.1999, 1 item on 1.1.2001, 14 items
on 29.6.2001 and 51 items on 20.5.2002.
22.    The SSI Associations further demanded that the Export oriented units might be granted concessions in air-fares to
attend buyer-seller meets. The Ministry then informed the Committee that a Market Development Assistance (MDA)
Scheme to enhance the exports by the SSIs had been formulated. Under the Scheme, financial assistance is given for
participation in international exhibitions, overseas study tours, assistance towards the production of publicity material,
market studies etc.
23.    Most of the SSI Associations demanded for a Separate organization to be set up to monitor Export formalities of
SSI units. The Ministry of SSI informed the Committee that the SSI units enjoy benefits of various concessions,
relaxations and exemptions for exporting their products. The units availing facilities provided by the Trading Houses
and Export Houses get the benefit of reduced export formalities wherever such Houses are set up.
24.    As regards marketing of SSI products the Associations demanded for preparation of data bank of exports and
imports with the help of reputed Industrial Associations. However, the Ministry of SSI stated that the Ministry of
Commerce and Industry is already maintaining such data. Regarding the demand for training/awareness it was informed
that the Ministry of SSI runs training course on packaging which imparts training for acquiring international standards
in packaging in a cost effective manner.
CREDIT RELATED ISSUES
25.    The Committee was apprised that re-finance to the Maharashtra State Financial Corporation (MSFC) from SIDBI
and IDBI is available at higher rates of interest. SIDBI and IDBI should reduce the interest rates so that the latter may
provide credit to the SSI units at affordable interest rates. SIDBI effected downward revision in the interest rate
structure at various intervals during 2001-02. The interest rates for all the slabs under Refinance Scheme have been
reduced by 25 basis points effective from December, 2001. Further, in order to give impetus to tiny sector, an additional
tier for loans above Rs. 2 lakhs and upto Rs. 25 lakhs was introduced for which rate of interest on refinance has been
fixed at 11 % p. a.
26.    Most of the SSI associations demanded that the one time upfront fee on the loans from the Credit Guarantee Fund
Trust for Small Industries (CGTSI) be reduced from 2.5 % to 1 % ; annual fee be reduced from 1 % to 0.5 % ; ceiling
for coverage of loans be increased to Rs. 50 lakhs without collateral and extension of coverage for processing and
servicing activities. The limit for collateral free loans therefore be raised from Rs. 5 lakhs to Rs. 50 lakhs. All SSI units
new or old be covered under CGTSI and all the documents pledged be returned. ‘The corpus be raised to Rs. 500 crore

146th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/146threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:17]
and adequate publicity needs to be given to this scheme. It should be made compulsory for every nationalized and
Commercial Banks to join this trust.
27.    The Ministry of SSI informed the Committee that the scheme envisages one time guarantee fee at specified rates
(currently 2.5 % ) of the credit facility sanctioned to be paid upfront to the Trust by the eligible institution availing of
the guarantee. Besides this, annual service fee at a specified rate (currently 1 % p.a.) on the outstanding loan amount, as
on March 31 of each year, shall be paid by the lending institution. It is at the discretion of Member Lending Institutions
(MLI) whether to bear the guarantee fee/service fee on its own or recover the same from the SSI borrower. Further,
since borrowers get credit facility from MLIs without having to provide any collateral security/ third party guarantee,
the incidence of one time guarantee fee of 2.5 % and service fee of 1 % p.a. is reasonable. For a loan period of 5 years it
comes to 1.5 % p.a. The Guarantee Scheme facilitates access of formal banking credit without collateral security.
Hitherto, the entrepreneurs have been finding it difficult to arrange for collateral security, cost of which has been far
higher than 1.5% p.a. Nevertheless, it is at the discretion of the lending institutions to pass on the guarantee fee and/or
service fee to the borrowers. Certain banks do not pass on the guarantee fee to the borrowers. The problem of collateral
security is more prevalent in the case of smaller among the SSI units. Keeping this in view, the Scheme was formulated
with borrowal limits upto Rs.25 lakhs.
28.    So far as extension of coverage under Credit Guarantee Scheme is concerned the Ministry stated that as per the
existing scope of scheme, only manufacturing and IT units, including units engaged in software development, are
eligible to be covered under the Credit Guarantee Scheme. CGTSI has been pursuing a liberal policy while determining
the eligibility of the units under the Scheme. In line with this policy CGTSI has been extending guarantee cover to units
engaged in activities like processing, printing etc. considering them to be a part of the manufacturing sector. Regarding
adequate publicity to the scheme, the Ministry informed that the awareness about the scheme is created among the first
generation SSI entrepreneurs/units through advertisements in Hindi. English and regional/local newspapers throughout
the country, apart from various forums like seminars, meetings convened by MLIs, industry associations etc. The
scheme is open to all banks/financial institutions to join as MLI of the Trust. As on 3l
st July,2003, 23 public sector
banks, 4 private sector banks, 3 RRBs and 2 Institutions namely NEDFI and NSIC have joined the Trust. On the
demand for Raising of corpus of Credit Guarantee Scheme, the Ministry informed that the corpus of the CGTSI was Rs.
686.19 crores at the end of financial year 2003-04. The Budget Estimate for 2004-05 is Rs.196.29 crores , of which Rs.
65 crore has already been released to the Trust and with the contribution of SIDBI to the tune of Rs.16.25 crore the
corpus has now been enhanced to Rs.767.44 crore till date.
29.    Further the Associations cutting across their status demanded that the credit delivery to SSI sector be improved by
ensuring that all new generation private sector banks and foreign banks are involved in lending to Small Scale Sector;
enhancing the ad-­hoc sanctioning power of branch managers from 20% to 25% of the existing limits, Mutual Credit
Guarantee Scheme be promoted at the earliest, lowering of interest rates, waiver/concessions in processing charges;
setting up of more specialized SSI bank branches; representation of SSI Associations on bank management; need for
sub-target within priority sector lending for SSIs equal to that of agriculture; establishment of · independent credit rating
agency for SSIs; application of Nayak Committee norms regarding working capital (20% of projected turnover) and;
frequent meetings with bank, reducing the high cost of credit. The Associations specifically pointed out that under
schemes like the PMRY, the Reserve Bank of India has issued directives to banks for not insisting on collateral
securities and guarantees if the credit to be supplied is within certain specific limits. However, in practice, these
directives are not being followed and the field offices insist on collateral securities and/or guarantees. The Reserve Bank
of India should strictly monitor compliance of its directives and hold accountable the concerned banks for incidences of
failures.
30.    With regard to lowering the interest rates, the Ministry of SSI informed the Committee that the lending rates had
come down after the deregulated interest rate regime. As per extant guidelines PLR (charged to the best borrower of the
bank) serves as the ceiling rate for credit limit up to Rs. 2 lakh and as a floor rate for loans or credit limits above Rs. 2
lakh on which the banks are free to apply a rate within the maximum band fixed by them. However, keeping-in view the
international practice and provide operational flexibility to commercial banks, the requirement of PLR being the floor
rate for loans above Rs. 2 lakh has been relaxed and the banks are allowed to offer loans at below-PLR rates to exporters
or other credit worthy borrowers including public enterprises on the lines of a transparent and objective policy approved
by their Boards. Thus the banks are free to charge lower or higher rates on loans given by them to any category of
borrowers. The RBI has also advised banks that units with good track record may be lent at lower spreads over PLR. As
regards implementation of Nayak Committee norms regarding working capital the Ministry of SSI informed that the
RBI has advised banks regarding computing and sanctioning working capital to SSIs up to a borrower limit of Rs.5
crores on the basis of minimum 20% of the projected annual turnover, and this is found to be generally observed by
banks. It has also been clarified to the banks that the norm of 20% of the projected annual turnover is the minimum limit
and they are free to sanction higher working capital limits at their discretion to the SSIs. RBI studies of specialized SSI

146th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/146threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:17]
branches/general branches where sizeable advances have been extended to SSIs revealed that 93/73 per cent
respectively of the proposals have been considered by banks and amount sanctioned by banks formed 96 to 97 per cent
of the amount assessed, on the basis of 20% turnover norm. It was further stated that at present there is no fixed
percentage for lending to SSI under priority sector lending. However, banks have been advised by the RBI to ensure
maintenance of level of credit to SSI sector by self setting target for the year on year growth.
31.    On the issue of insistence on collateral securities the Ministry informed that as per the announcements made in
Mid-Term Review of Monetary and Credit Policy for 2003-04, the Reserve Bank of India has advised the Banks in
November, 2003, that on the basis of good track record and financial position of the SSI units, they may increase the
limit of dispensation of collateral requirements for loans from the level of Rs.15 lakh to Rs.25 lakh . Further, the banks
have been advised by the RBI to display in their branch premises the limits up to which the collateral free loans are
available and other relevant information relating to financing of SSI sector.
32.    The Ministry had also informed that the banks have been permitted to categorise their general branches having
60% or more of their advances to SSI sector as specialized SSI branches and regular training programmes be organized
by banks for staff/officers so as to improve their work performance. The training progrannne conducted is also reported
through the 7 point Action Plan submitted by the banks. The banks have been advised by the RBI to conduct
Entrepreneurship Development training programmes and also give exhaustive training to their staff members sensitizing
them towards the needs of SSI sector.
33.    Further, there was a demand that there was a need for strengthening Factoring Services. Enactment of factoring
law will help in growth of factoring business. Also, there can be a guarantee scheme from SIDBI for non-recourse
factoring. Factoring service be encouraged with lower interest rate. Factoring Services (without recourse) can also be an
alternative to timely payment of bills. On the issue of Factoring services, the Ministry of SSI informed that they had
discussed the matter with various Small Scale Industries Associations, RBI, SIDBI, Ministry of Law and Factoring
Companies and a draft note was prepared for the consideration of the Committee of Secretaries. However, it was felt
that the proposed Act on “The Factoring of Debts due to Industrial and Commercial Undertakings” over all industrial
and commercial undertakings including large units, therefore, the appropriate Ministry to take up the matter may be
Ministry of Finance (Banking Division). The Ministry of Finance (Banking Division) have now sent a copy of the draft
Bill to this Ministry of S.S.I and the Comments of the Ministry will be conveyed to the Ministry of Finance (Banking
Division).
34.    The Associations demanded need for revamping of State Level Inter Institutional Committees (SLIICs) to be
vested with powers to deal with cases of delayed payments and complained that the decisions of SLIIC Committee were
not honoured by the banks. The Ministry informed the Committee that Reserve Bank of India had set up, on the advice
of the Government of India, State Level Inter-Institutional Committees in all States under the Chairmanship of
Secretary, Industries Department of the concerned State Governments and the local officer-in-charge of the RBI’s Rural
Planning and Credit Department as convener to provide a useful forum for exchange of information and discussions on
problems faced by small and medium scale industrial units. The Committee includes representatives of the Small
Industries Service Institute, Small Industries Development Corporation, State Financial  Corporation, Industrial
Development Bank of India and banks with major  involvement  in the concerned  State. Other banks/organisations
whose association may be considered necessary for deliberation of the Committee are extended special invitation for a
particular meeting. The Committee meets once in a quarter and brings different parties connected with rehabilitation of
viable sick units together so that detailed parameters for rehabilitation based on consensus can emerge. Generally, the
Committee deals with cases where terms of credit are linked with other problems such as deferment of sales tax,
electricity dues, etc. RBI has advised its regional offices that representatives of local Small Scale Industries Association
may be invited for SLIIC meeting at half yearly intervals in which the issue of policy nature  concerning  SSI units
would only be taken up for discussion.  The State  Governments have been requested to chair the meetings exclusively
by senior officers .
35.    The Associations also brought to the notice of the Committee that the Lead Bank Scheme had become very
ineffective and dysfunctional. To make this arrangement effective and result oriented it was proposed that supervisory
powers and authority over the Nationalised Banks should be given to the concerned lead bank and Lead Bank Officers.
However, the Ministry informed that there was an effective monitoring mechanism in existence in the designated Lead
Banks in the Districts. The issues related to credit availability are also discussed regularly at the District Level Co-
ordination Committee (DLCC) meetings. The Lead Banks function to co-ordinate with other Nationalised Bank
branches in the districts for effective implementation of various credit related policies and programmes.

146th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/146threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:17]
36.    The Associations present in the meeting unanimously demanded for infrastructure of international standards to
reduce transportation time and ensure timely deliveries. Industrial townships and Special Economic Zones (SEZs) may
be declared in alI State owned Industrial Estates to revitalize the industries. The Ministry of Small Scale Industries in
response to their demand informed that to promote and strengthen small and tiny village enterprises the Government
launched the Integrated Infrastructural Development (IID) Scheme for small scale industries to facilitate location of
industries in rural/backward areas and to promote stronger linkages between agriculture and industry. The scheme
covers backward districts/rural areas, which were not covered under the Growth Centres Scheme. The aim of the IID
Scheme is to create infrastructural facilities like developed sites, power distribution network, water, telecommunication,
drainage and pollution control facilities, roads, banks, raw materials, storage and marketing outlets, common service
facilities, technological back up services ete. The Scheme also provides for upgradation/strengthening of the
infrastructural facilities in the existing old industrial estates.
37.    Almost all the SSI Associations demanded that leading SSI entrepreneurs be sent on exploratory mission abroad
and the changes in trends in foreign market be flashed in newspaper/media to equip SSI entrepreneurs to adjust
themselves to changes. SISIs should augment marketing efforts of SSI Sector, like securing sub-contracting jobs for SSI
ancillary units; for tiny units, forward and backward linkages in SSI clusters may be developed; consortium approach
may be adopted for marketing of products by sponsoring/organizing exhibitions-cum-sale periodically at Taluk and
District Centres. Need for better co-ordination among various Government agencies for conducting of exhibitions across
the country and abroad with intention of subsidizing participation cost for SSIs; tying up with world renowned
organizations to provide market information at concessional rates; sponsoring marketing studies within the country and
abroad; 50 % of Government purchases be made through the SSI units; incentives for expenditure on research and
development for export-oriented units, Government tenders, need for marketing Organisation to market the product of
small scale industries. However, it was clarified by the Ministry that under Marketing Development Assistance (MDA)
Scheme, SSI Associations are given financial assistance for carrying out studies/market surveys and also to participate
in International fairs which help them to get exposure to the global changes. Regarding the various suggestions for
extending marketing support to SSI units, it was stated that there already existed a Government Purchase and Price
Preference Policy, wherein certain facilities/benefits were being provided to the SSI units as a marketing support
measures. Revision of this policy is also under consideration in the draft "Small Enterprises Development Bill-2004"
which is under the active consideration; of the Government. The Bill, inter alia, has provision of specific percentage of
procurement from small enterprises. Under the SSI MDA scheme, 81 SSI/Tiny units have been reimbursed for adoption
of bar-coding (barcode certificate) during 2003-04.
38.    In addition, a number of vendor Development Programme-cum-Buyer Seller Meets and Exhibitions are organized
to promote development of business linkages between Buyers (Large enterprises), Central Government/State
Government/Departments, Public Sector Undertakings, Defence establishments, Railways etc. and sellers who are
mainly small scale units. The vendor Development Programmes-cum-Buyer Seller Meets and Exhibitions provide a
common platform to Buyers and Sellers to interact with each other to establish long-term business linkages. 30-40
Vendor Development Programmes are being conducted every year at Regional level and National level by Small
Industries Services Institutes all over India that facilitate augmenting the marketing efforts of the small scale sector and
securing Sub­contracting jobs for small scale and ancillary units. Further there are 34 Subcontracting Exchanges at
SISIs/Br. SISIs are keeping the data detail pertaining to capacities/capabilities of the small scale industries and the
requirements of large industries/purchasing organizations and disseminate the same to each other for benefiting the
small scale industries to get the marketing avenues.
39.    The SSI Associations further asked for enhancement in ceiling of investment in plant and machinery to Rs. 3 crore
and the limit for tiny units be enhanced from Rs. 25 lakhs to Rs. 50 lakhs because removal of Quantitative Restrictions
and de-reservation of certain items calls for technology upgradation. The Ministry informed the Committee that the
investment ceiling for SSI sector was reviewed from time to time and the items requiring higher investment limit to be
able to face the global competition and meet the WTO requirements were identified. The necessary action is initiated
after having in-depth consultation with the stakeholders. Accordingly, investment limit in respect of 41 items belonging
to hand tools and knitwear has been raised to Rs.5 crores from 9th October, 2001. Similarly, draft order for
enhancement of investment limit in respect of stationery sector and drugs and pharmaceutical sector has been placed on
the Table of the House in the month of July, 2002.
40.    The Association demanded that the SSIs should be allowed the freedom to adopt technology of their choice. Only
very small number of SSI units have taken advantage of the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme. Adequate publicity
needs to be given to this scheme. Implementation of the scheme should be entrusted to the State Governments on the
lines of poverty alleviation schemes. Regarding the demand for technology up­gradation the Ministry of SSI informed
that presently, there are 14 specified sub-sectors for technology upgradation. Further additions to the list may be made

146th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/146threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:17]
by the Governing and Technology Approval Board (GTAB) set up for the purpose. The Scheme is being implemented
by SIDBI, designated as Nodal Agency for the Scheme through a countrywide network of Commercial Banks. The
implementation of the scheme through the State Governments may lead to the problem of monitoring the progress
centrally.
41.    On the steps taken for Application of IT in the SSI sector, the Ministry informed that several steps are being taken
to promote SSI units in the application of Information ‘Technology by conducting training & sensitization programmes
in “E business” through the field offices all over the country. The autonomous bodies like Institute for Design of
Electrical Measuring Instruments, Mumbai and Electronics Service & Training Centre, Ramnagar, are also imparting
training in these areas for the benefit of SSI units in the IT sector.
42.    Another important demand presented by the SSI Associations was that assistance from banks for reviving sick
units should be closely monitored by the Reserve Bank of India and the Ministry of Small Scale Industries and Agro and
Rural Industries, Government of India. For revival of existing sick SSI units and to prevent incidence of sickness in
future, institutionalized arrangements on, the lines of BIFR (for Large-Scale Industries) should be set up. The
Committee was then informed by the Ministry that RBI complies/monitors the data on sick SSI units as also on the units
potentially viable. RBI also convenes SLIIC meetings to discuss the rehabilitation packages for potentially viable sick
units. With a view to revise the guidelines for revival of sick SSI units, RBI set up Kohli Committee. Based on the
major recommendations of the Committee detailed, transparent guidelines on rehabilitation of sick SSI units have been
issued by RBI vide circular dated 16
th January, 2002. These guidelines contain change of definition of sick SSI units,
norms for deciding an the viability of sick SSI unit besides providing an illustrative list of warning signals of incipient
sickness. The banks have been advised to take sympathetic attitude and strive for rehabilitation in respect of units in the
SSI sector, particularly wherever the sickness is on account of circumstances beyond the control of entrepreneurs .
43.    It was further stated that the Nayak Committee had considered the demand for BIFR type of authority to deal with
the cases of sick SSI units. Ministry of Finance did not agree to the recommendation of setting up BIFR type Tribunal
on the grounds that SSI units are scattered all over the country and their problems are entirely different from those of
large units and the record of performance of BIFR tribunal itself is not very satisfactory. It recommended, instead,
strengthening of State Level Inter- Institutional Committees (SLIICs).
44.    The another important demand from the SSI Associations is that the limit of 120 days for payment to SSI units
should be brought down to 30 days by suitable amendments in the Act. The Ministry informed the Committee that a
meeting was held with representative of Small Scale Industry Associations, officials of Ministry of Law, CBDT and
Department of Company Affairs on 4th June, 2002 to discuss amendments to the Interest on Delayed Payments to Small
Scale and Ancillary Industrial Undertakings (Amendment) Act, 1998. The suggestion of reduction in the period of delay
has been received from many organisations earlier also. However, before any amendments are taken up participants
suggested that since Industrial Facilitation Councils (IFCs) were set up after the Act was amended and these are now
working in most of the States and are giving awards, it would be appropriate that some feed back on IFCs working be
obtained viz. number of cases of delayed payments received by them, number of awards given, type of awards such as
Principal and Interest, average time taken to decide a case. constraints faced by the IFCs in their working and
suggestions, if any, to make them effective. Accordingly, the States have been requested to furnish the above
information. It has now been informed by the Ministry of SSI that in view of the general consensus that this Act has
failed to give the desired results, it was felt that certain amendments should be carried out in the Act so as to make it
more effective. Therefore, the Ministry of SSI after detailed discussions with various Government Departments,
Industrial Groups and Small Scale Industries Associations has proposed certain amendments to enable SSI
units/suppliers to get payments as agreed upon. The proposed amendments address the issue of bringing down the time
limit of payment of SSI units besides change in the penal interest rate and disclosures norms in Annual Statement of
Accounts. A draft Cabinet Note was circulated to all concerned Ministries/Departments for soliciting their
views/comments in this regard . All the Ministries/Departments have concurred the proposal except the Department of
Legislative Affairs.
45.    It was also stated that with a view to mitigating the hardship faced by SSI on account of delayed payment by large
corporate borrowers, certain legal provision should be enacted such as not allowing income tax concessions in respect of
corporates who have dues to SSI over 90 days. Compliance to these provisions should be commented upon by auditors
in audited Balance-Sheets wide publicity of these measures would go a long way in addressing these age-long hardship
faced by SSI units. SSIs have complained that the provisions of the Act are not getting complied. The Committee was

146th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/146threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:17]
informed by the Ministry that the Secretary, SSI had requested Secretary, Department of Revenue vide D.O. dated 9 th
August, 2002 to get a circular issued to Income Tax officials making them aware of the provisions of Interest on
Delayed Payment Act for its compliance.
46.    The SSI Associations were unanimously of the view that the delayed payments to SSI units was the major reason
for sickness. Delayed payments by customers, usually large industries, have been the scourge of SSIs and, in fact, a
significant cause of sickness. Ironically; it seem as if it is the large industries, which are surviving on credit extended by
their vendors in the SSI sector. The Interest on Delayed Payment Act of 1993 has not provided the intended relief, nor
has the RBI stipulation to banks that at least 25 per cent of the credit purchases should be through bills drawn by the
sectors. To solve the problem of delayed payment it is suggested that a regulatory framework be framed, linking the
Interest on Delayed Payments. The Ministry of SSI informed the Committee that the Interest on Delayed Payment Act
was enacted at the behest of SSI Associations and subsequently the Act was amended keeping in view the suggestion of
SSI Associations. A separate regulatory framework linking Interest on Delayed Payment to cover all large industries and
SSIs may not be administratively feasible.
47.    On the issue of Cluster Development the Ministry of SSI informed that the objectives of the Cluster Development
Programme include development of cluster-based brands. Some progress in this regard has been made by Ludhiana  and
Tirupur-based clusters .
48.    On the demand for Re-defining of Factories Act, 1948, the Ministry of SSI stated that a Group has been
constituted under the Cabinet Secretary to suggest/recommend streamlining of inspections and repeal of redundant laws
and regulations applicable to the small scale sector. On its recommendation and after the Ministry of Labour, Minister
of State for Small Scale Industries issued instructions to all State Governments for submission of returns under various
labour laws by SSI units through self certification and restrict the visit of Inspectors to the units except only when
complaint from stakeholders is there. In addition, the National Commission of Labour has recommended enactment of a
Bill called the consideration of Small Enterprises Employment Relations Act which is under consideration of Ministry
of Labour.
49.    On the issue of SSIs to be defined in terms of employment, the Ministry informed the Committee that the draft
Small Enterprise Development Bill among other things includes alternative definition of SSI. The comments of Board
Members have been sought on the draft bill as presented by ASCI, Hyderabad. Any final action on the subject can be
taken only after the suggestions are received from all concerned and submission. of a final draft by ASCI after
considering them.
50.    The Association also demanded for separate Ministry for Small Scale Sector at State Level. In reply the Ministry
of SSI stated that the State/UT Governments pursue their own SSI policies, keeping in view the specific circumstances
within their State/UT. many States have a Department headed by Secretary (SSI). They pursue their own policies and
implement the central sponsored policy programmes through their Directorate of Industries and DICs. In addition, there
are agencies like State Industrial Development Corporations and State Financial Corporations etc. which take care of
development and promotion of small scale industries in the States/UTs
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
IMPACT OF LIBERALISATION AND GLOBALISATION
51.    The Committee is of the view that to face the challenges emanating from the WTO agreement, SSI units
irrespective of their size need technology up-gradation and modernisation. An awareness about the implications of
WTO agreement has to be created and SSI entrepreneurs needs to be educated in this regard. Technology is the key
element contributing to productivity quality, competitiveness and market acceptability of products. The preparation for
competitiveness needs to done by the Government as well as entrepreneurs and the corporate sector.
52.    The Committee recommends that to achieve compatibility with WTO provisions, there is need for the sector to
develop and cement subcontracting/outsourcing arrangements. The Sector -specific association can play an active role in
creating mechanisms for studying the impact of WTO developments and to keep pace with the challenges of change.
Collaborative efforts on the part of different partners of the SSI sector are expected to yield better results than isolated
endeavours. A product-wise market research on the implications of WTO and other related aspects should be done. The

146th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/146threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:17]
outcome of such studies could be made available to Industry Associations Entrepreneurs for wider market understanding
and use by the members and SSIs at large.
53.    The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Ministry to make the SSIs to meet the global standards,
however, the Committee is of the view that to tackle the paradoxical situation  of upgradation of technology and at the
same time fund constraints in the SSI sector the Government must consider subsidising the cost of upgradation by way
of fiscal/financial incentives to help SSI for the adoption of new technologies/ modernisation. Further the Ministry
should initiate the opening of technology exchanges for providing necessary information on technology and bench
marking the international quality standards, so as to integrate domestic markets with the international markets.
Knowledge networking through linkage of research institutes with the SSI sector would be effective too for integration
of the sector with the broader markets.
CREDIT RELATED ISSUES
54.    The Committee takes note of the information provided by the Ministry of Small Scale Industries regarding impact
of Globalization and Liberalization on Small Scale Sector and Role of Banks. The Committee appreciates that
considering the funds constraints with SSI sector, the Government has introduced the credit linked capital subsidy
scheme for Technology upgradation of Small Scale Industries under which 12% back ended capital subsidy would be
admissible on the loans advanced to the SSIs by the scheduled commercial banks/designated State Financial
Corporations for technology upgradation in certain select sectors. The Committee understands that a Study Group on
development of Small Scale Enterprises made a number of recommendations like setting up of a Technology Bank,
providing of finance to units for entering into collaboration for technical know-how and technology upgradation etc.
The Committee therefore recommends that these recommendations of the study group should be implemented in true
spirit to support SSI Sector. Having taken note of the fact that only a small number of entrepreneurs took the advantage
of the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme . The Committee feels that many more entrepreneurs could be benefited.
 
MINUTES
 
IV
FOURTH  MEETING
         The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry met at 4.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 25
th
August, 2004 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
         PRESENT
   1.   Shri Santosh Bagrodia      —       Chairman
         RAJYA  SABHA
   2.   Shri Surendra Lath
   3.   Dr. K. Malaisamy
   4.   Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   5.   Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
         LOK  SABHA
   6.   Shri Kailash Baitha
   7.   Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
   8.   Shri Subhash Desmukh
   9.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
10.   Shri Sunil Khan
11.   Shri Rajnarayan
12.   Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
13.   Shri Chandramani Tripathi
         SECRETARIAT
         Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
         Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
         Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
         Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer

146th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/146threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:17]
2.      The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the Meeting and apprised them of the agenda of the
Meeting.
3.      Thereafter, The Committee,  took up following Reports for consideration :----
(i)    146th Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in Maharashtra (Ministry of Small Scale Industries);
(ii)    147th Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in the Region of Bulandshahar, Uttar Pradesh (Ministry of Small
Scale Industries);
(iii)   148 th Report on MoU performance in respect of select Public Sector Undertakings, Department of Public
Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
(iv)   149th Report on MoU performance in respect of select Public Sector Undertakings in Civil Aviation Sector,
Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises);
(v)   150 th Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to the Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry
of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
(vi)   151st Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to the Department of Heavy Industries (Ministry of
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);.
(vii)  152nd Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries; and
(vii)  153rd Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Ministry of Small Scale Industries.
3.1    After a brief discussion, all the above Reports were adopted by the Committee with some modifications in the
151st  Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to the Department of Heavy Industries (Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises).
4.      *                                                                  *                                                                      *
4.1    *                                                                  *                                                                      *
5.      *                                                                  *                                                                      *
6.      *                                                                  *                                                                      *
7.      The Committee then adjourned at 4.35 P.M. to meet again on 1
st September, 2004.
 
 
 
 