147th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/147threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:17]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
ONE HUNDRED FORTY-SEVENTH REPORT
 
ON
 
CREDIT FLOW TO SSI SECTOR IN THE REGION OF
BULANDSHAHAR, UTTAR PRADESH
(MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES)
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 26TH AUGUST, 2004)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 26TH AUGUST, 2004)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2004/Bhadrapada, 1926 (SAKA)
E-mail:rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
 
CONTENTS
  
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2. INTRODUCTION
3. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
4. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
5. MINUTES
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
(Date of Constitution 5th August, 2004)
   1.  Shri Santosh Bagrodia–    Chairman
        RAJYA  SABHA
   2.  Prof. M.M. Agarwal
   3.  Shri Surendra Lath
   4.  Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
   5.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
   6.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   7.  Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
   8.  Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
   9.  Dr. Vijay Mallya

147th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/147threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:17]
10.  Vacant
        LOK  SABHA
11.  Shri Guharam Ajgalle
12.  Shri Kailash Baitha
13.  Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
14.  Shri Subhash Deshmukh
15.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
16.  Dr. Vallabbhai Kathiria
17.  Shri Sunil Khan
18.  Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato
19.  Shri Prakash Paranjpe
20.  Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel
21.  Shri Rajnarayan
22.  Shri Bagida Ramakrishna
23.  Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
24.  Smt. Rubab Sayeda
25.  Shri Rana Gurjeet Singh
26.  Shri Manvendra Singh
27.  Shri Ganesh Singh
28.  Shri Suraj Singh
29.  Shri Chandramani Tripathi
30.  Shri M. Anjan Kumar Yadav
31.  Shri Girdhari Yadav
        SECRETARIAT
        Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
        Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
        Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
        Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
        Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
(Date of Constitution – lst January, 2003 )
   1.  Dr. P.C. Alexander     –     Chairman
        RAJYA  SABHA
   2.  Prof M.M. Agarwal
   3.  Shri Jayantilal Barot
   4.  Dr. M.N. Das
   5.  Shrimati Saroj Dubey
   6.  Dr. Faguni Ram
   7.  Shri Lajpat Rai
   8.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   9.  Shri P.K. Maheshwari
10.  Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
11.  Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
12.  Shri S. Sivasubramanian
13.  Shrimati Sushree Devi
14.  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
15.  Shri K. Chandran Pillai
        LOK  SABHA
16.  Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
17.  Shri Ajoy Chakraborty

147th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/147threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:17]
18.  Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
19.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das
20.  Shri K Francis George
21.  Shri Thomas Hansda
22.  Md. Anwarul Haque
23.  Shri A.C. Jose
24.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
25.  Shri Mansoor Ali Khan
26.  Shri Sunil Khan
27.  Shri Deepak Kumar
28.  Shri Manjay Lal
29.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
30.  Shri A. Narendra
31.  Shri Ananta Nayak
32.  Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
33.  Shri Uttamrao Patil
34.  Shri Malyala Rajaiah
35.  Shri P. Rajendran
36.  Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
37.  Shri Tarachand Sahu
38.  Shri Ramanand Singh
39.  Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
40.  Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
41.  Shri V. Vetriselvan
42.  Shrimati D.M. Vijaya Kumari
43.  Shri Radha Mohan Singh
44.  Shri Vijay Sankeshwar
        SECRETARIAT
        Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
        Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
        Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
        Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
        Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
 
SUB-COMMITTEE-II
MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES OF THE PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
   1.  Prof M.M. Agarwal    –     Convenor
        RAJYA  SABHA
   2.  Dr. Faguni Ram
   3.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
        LOK  SABHA
   4.  Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
   5.  Md. Anwarul Haque
   6.  Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
   7.  Shri P. Rajendran
   8.  Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
   9.  Shri Ramanand Singh
10.  Shri Sunil Khan
11.  Shri K. Malaisamy

147th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/147threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:17]
 
INTRODUCTION
 
         I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having been authorised
by the Committee, hereby present this One Hundred Forty-seventh Report of Sub-Committee-II for Ministry of Small
Scale Industries on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in the Region of Bulandshahar, Uttar Pradesh pertaining to the Ministry of
Small Scale Industry.
2.      The Sub-Committee for Ministry of Small Scale Industries (of Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Industry) heard views of the representatives of SSI Associations in the Region of Bulandshahar,
Government of Uttar Pradesh and the Ministry of SSI at New Delhi on 23rd August, 2003. This report is based upon the
views emerged out of the deliberations held on that day.
3.      The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry considered and adopted the Draft report at
its meeting held on the 25
th August, 2004.
 
NEW DELHI
25th August, 2004
SANTOSH BAGRODIA
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry
 
REPORT
         Small Scale Industry (SSI) Sector is playing a most important and self-motivated role to generate the employment,
remove the poorness, modernization, reformation of technology and globalisation of the Indian Economy in terms of
low investment, high potential for employment generation and wider dispersal of industries in rural and semi­-urban
areas preventing migration to big cities. This sector offers and ensures a more equitable distribution of national income
and facilitates effective mobilization of resources of capital and skill, which might otherwise remain unutilised.
2.      This sector offers and ensures a more equitable distribution of national income and facilitates effective
mobilization of resources of capital and skill, which might otherwise remain unutilised. It further stimulates the growth
of industrial entrepreneurship and promotes and diffuses the pattern of ownership and location. Over 40% of the gross
turnover in manufacturing activities as also around one-third of our exports are contributed by SSI sector. In the area of
employment generation, significant contribution is made by SSI sector both modern and traditional units which account
for employment of over 192.23 lakhs workers and production in rupee terms is projected to reach Rs.7,42,021 crore
during financial year 2002-03.
3.      During the course of examination of Demand for Grants 2003-04 pertaining to the Ministry of Small Scale
Industries, the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry took up the issue of credit flow to SSI
sector in detail. The Committee was informed that the SSI sector, producing a wide range of products, accounts for
around 95 per cent of the industrial units in the country, contributing to 40 per cent of the manufacturing sector output
and approximately one third of the Nation’s exports. As on March, 2002, there were 34.42 lakhs SSI units providing
direct employment to around 192.23 lakhs persons. As per the estimates of the Office of the Development
Commissioner (SSI), the output of SSI sector at current prices aggregated Rs.6,90,316 crore during the year 2001-02
and exports at the level of Rs.69.797 crore during the 2000-01. During the financial year 2002-03, the production of SSI
sector is projected to reach at Rs.7,42,021 crore. The sector also acts as a nursery for promoting entrepreneurial talents
and as a catalyst in the industrial growth.
4.      The Ministry of SSI has apprised the Committee that the total advance to SSI from the Public Sector Banks went
up in absolute terms from Rs.48,445 crores in March, 2001 to Rs.49,743 crores in March, 2002. The percentage of SSI
advances to Net Bank Credit (NBC) however, declined from 14.2 % as at the end of March, 2001 to 12.5 % at the end
of March, 2002. The RBI’s study of the specialized SSI/general branches has revealed that adequate credit is being
made available to all viable projects.
5.      The potential of SSI sector as a core area for growth and development of economy has been well recognized by the
Government. The Government has taken steps to remove the bottlenecks and thereby pave the way for accelerating the

147th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/147threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:17]
growth of this sector. Amongst the bottlenecks to be removed for the growth of SSI the major factor has been the
problem of bank credit to this sector. The streamlining of flow of bank credit has been a constant challenge not only
before the Government but also to the banking and financial institutions.
6.      The Committee on Industry has deliberated on the aspect of Credit Flow to SSI Sector at length in its 45 th Report
which was presented to the Parliament on 8th August, 2001. Having gone through the Action Taken Notes submitted by
the Ministry of SSI on that report the Committee through its Sub-Committee on SSI took up the scrutiny of practical
problems being faced by SSI at the ground level as far as the credit flow to these units are concerned.
7.      The Committee identified certain regions/states like Maharashtra, Himachal Pradesh, Delhi and adjoining NOIDA
and Ghaziabad area to understand the problems of the units and also suggested the remedial measures. In the process the
Committee and its Sub-Committee had opportunities to interact not only with the representatives of the Ministry of
SSIs, Government of India but also with the State Governments, Banking and Financial Institutions and the
representatives of National/Regional/Local SSI Federations. As a sequel to this process of study the Committee came to
know about the problems being faced by the SSI units in the District Bulandshahar in western Uttar Pradesh region. The
Committee interacted with the representatives of SSI Federation of that area, representatives of Government of Uttar
Pradesh and Ministry of SSI, Government of India in this connection on 23rd August, 2003 at New Delhi.
INDUSTRIAL  SCENARIO  OF  THE  BULANDSHAHAR
8.      Bulandshahar is an agriculture dominated district of Western Uttar Pradesh. The industrial scenario of
Bulandshahar (except Sikandarabad area) does not reflect very high industrial growth. There are mainly small, tiny,
cottage and handicraft units spread over the district. The District has branches of 17 banks for fulfilling the credit
requirements. The main products manufactured in the District include sugar, paint, dairy products, flour, animal feed,
edible oils, pottery and ceramics and various types of chemicals etc. The handicraft works include zari , pottery and
handlooms.
9.      The gross output of the SSI units in Bulandshahar District during 2001-02 was to the tune of Rs.260.35 crore. The
industry-wise break-up of these units engaged in manufacturing mainly comprise of following goods:
(i)   wooden industrial goods;
(ii)   articles of Porcelain or China, earthenware, imitation Porcelain or common pottery, including earthen statues;
(iii)  bricks;
(iv)  basic iron and steel items; and
(v)  pumps, compressors, taps and valves including hand-pumps, vacuum pumps, air and other gas-compressors
etc.
10.    Khurja Tehsil of this district is famous for its pottery, where a significant number of exporting units are set up. The
Office of Development Commissioner for SSI has taken up modernisation  programme of Pottery Industry cluster in
Khurja under UPTECH Scheme (now called Small Industry Cluster Development Programme). The Implementing
Agency is Khurja Pottery Manufacturers Association (KPMA), Khurja and monitoring agency is Central Glass &
Ceramic Research Institute (CGCRI). Three interventions, namely, replacement of Saggar by Decker Plate, reduction in
Dead weight of Trolley and installation of Auto Off-On Burner have been taken up for implementation with an
objective to obtain quick results from the above interventions.
11.    Milk and milk products, especially milk powder apart from catering to the domestic market have export potential
also. If the milk processing industry is modernized its export potential will increase further. Similarly, agro and food
based industries also have a great export potential in the district. It may be noted that Bulandshahar is amongst the
leading districts of the country in terms of milk production. It produces 45 lakhs litres  of milk every day, 60% of which
is used by the industrial units.
IMPACT  OF  WTO  NORMS
12.    According to the Third All India Census of SSI units conducted by the Government of India, out of 8745 units in
the district, 5653 are closed or not traceable. Presently, nearly 3117 units are working. The detailed analysis, showed
that these units were very tiny units, and a very few of them had taken any credit facility from any financial institution
or availed any facility extended by the Government. The units in the districts cater to the domestic market and there is
hardly any competition from large producers or multinational corporations. Thus, there is no direct impact of WTO
visible on the SSI units in the district but the rate of setting up of SSI units has slowed down during the last five years.
13.    Although liberalization has exposed SSI units to stiff competition, it has led to new opportunities also. Small Scale

147th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/147threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:17]
Industries in India have enough competitive strength to withstand the impact of the phasing out of Quantitative
Restrictions (QRs) and implementation of WTO agreements. Government is fully aware of the WTO environment and
has taken appropriate measures for preparing the small scale sector to meet the challenges of liberalization and
globalization. Government is also constantly monitoring the impact of the removal of QRs and WTO Agreements on the
economy including the SSIs in the country.
14.    With a view to create awareness among the SSI units Associations on WTO Agreements and their implication for
them, Ministry of SSI organised 28 Sensitization Workshops all over the country. Workshops on Intellectual Property
Rights (IPRs) are also being organized. The Ministry is also organizing seminars on Anti-Dumping investigations. The
Ministry of SSI is financially supporting Industry Associations to develop monitoring mechanisms on the performance
of four selected product clusters in terms of growth, removal of QRs, surge in imports, etc.
REHABILITATION  OF  SICK  UNITS
15.    According to the Third All India Census of working of SSI units the number of working units in Bulandshahar
district, as on 31
st March, 2001, was 3117. Out of these 78 units have outstanding loans. According to the census, the
number of sick units in the district was 17 and the number of incipient sick units was 59. The sick units and incipient
sick units taken together form 2.44 % of the total working units. Though the incidence of sickness is not very serious in
Bulandshahar, however, it is a matter of concern that financial institutions have not come forward for providing
rehabilitation package for the revival of sick units.
SSI  ASSOCIATIONS
Bulandshahar Industries Association
16.    The President, Bulandshahar Industries Association informed that they were not getting the benefits out of the
Credit Guarantee Fund Trust (CGFT) and added that none has been sanctioned any loan in the area. He suggested that a
committee of the leading banks in the district should be formed and it should meet once in a quarter. This Committee
should also have representatives from Industrial Associations, Banks and other related Departments. They should have
first hand knowledge regarding the loans sanctioned and if not the reasons thereof. It was further added that people were
interested in setting up small industries but they were ignorant of collateral security, which was not required to be
furnished while seeking bank loans it should have been accorded wide publicity and the information must have been on
the notice board, containing the details of the schemes being implemented. It was further suggested that the website of
the CGFT and banks should have updated information regarding loan applications received and the action taken thereon.
17.    The Committee was apprised that the association was starting an awareness programme  and a seminar was to be
conducted shortly. This seminar is for promoting the small industries and all banks and officials of the industries
department are required to cooperate. He also suggested that 2.5 % of guarantee money should be reduced to 1% so that
the Small Industries will feel comfortable.
Kutir Chini Patra Utpadak Sangathan, Khurja
18.    The President, Kutir Chini Patra Utpadak Sangathan, Khurja informed that Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme is a
very useful scheme and it has achieved the significant results. On an average Rs.65,000 per unit were sanctioned by
twelve Banks in Uttar Pradesh and in the present scenario no small industry could be run in such a meagre  amount. It
seems that the finance under PMRY and poverty alleviation schemes was transferred by the banks to this scheme which
in their view has now become NPA.
19.    The President Kutir Chini Patra Utpadak Sangthan further stated that one big problems is regarding marketing. If
the marketing facilities are not increased even after adopting modern technology that will again turn out to be an NPA .
For this NSIC should organise exhibition in big cities for the display of the products so that the exporters could visit
such exhibition and place their orders.
20.    He also stated that the Bulandshahar  area should be attached with Delhi as lot of facilities are available there
thereby they may develop and increase export. One SSI branch should be set up in Khurja and Bulandshahar . Power
crisis, lack of infrastructure and railways add to their problems.
21.    The General Secretary, Kutir Chini Patra Utpadak Sangathan, Khurja stated that the Banks were demanding the
collateral security and the witnesses are converted into the guarantor even without their knowledge. Banks call the
applicant on such a day when the Manager is busy in some meeting or is on leave. The process of sanctioning the loan
should be made simple and harassment of the applicants therefore needs to be stopped.
Sikandarabad Industries Association

147th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/147threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:17]
22.    The Secretary, Sikandarabad Industries Association raised the problems regarding lending rates which in his view
should be brought below the prime lending rates. Bank guarantee should be renewed every year as processing fee is
charged every year in the name of renewal. Once the loan is sanctioned the Banks ask for collateral security. He further
stated that there must be a branch exclusive for the industrial area and the existing branches should not be wound up.
23.    The Secretary, Hand Pump Manufacturers Association raised the problems regarding declaration of industrial area
and the development thereof. He stated for the hand pump units in the Bulandshahar, earlier 8 % sale tax was being
charged which has now been waived. Hand pump units are scattered all over the area because of lack of development of
industrial area. He further stated that the rate of interest is another problem. This is a small scale industry and they don’t
get loan from the Banks and even income tax exemption is not granted.
Bulandshahar Cold Storages Association
24.    The President, Bulandshahar Cold Storages Association raised the issue regarding development of Industrial area
so that the fruit and vegetables could be sold at a moderate rate and for this modern technology is required. The other
problem is regarding preservation and food processing zones, which is at present absent. The road and train facilities
should be developed so that more export could be undertaken.
Nut Bolt Manufacturing Association
25.    The President, Nut Bolt Manufacturing Association stated that there was ample scope for this industry but the
problem was regarding raw material which was being procured at higher rates.
Mahila Udyami Sangthan
26.    The President, Mahila  Udyami Sangthan highlighted the problems regarding lack of loan facilities and Banks
guarantee.
BANKS
Punjab National Bank
27.    The representatives of Punjab National Bank informed that they were supporting the SSI Sector to the maximum
extent and the specific problems faced by SSI Sector should be brought to the notice of the Bank. Punjab National Bank
is the lead Bank in Bulandshahar. There are 54 branches of which 41 branches are in the rural area. He further informed
that Bank charged not more then 2% as far as PLR is concerned. SSIs having good rating is being charged half percent
less then PLR. Two lakhs to 25 lakhs is being charged @ PLR and above 25 lakhs maximum 2% above PLR is being
charged. As far as credit guarantee fund scheme is concerned a Committee should be set up to look into it. An
awareness programme about the technology upgradation in each unit should be conducted. The Bank is not asking for
collateral security and they are ready to process and they are proactive in this matter.
State Bank of India
28.    The representatives of Bank informed the Committee about the rate of interest which has now been brought down
to 10.5% from 11.5% . In priority sector financing is 74.7% which includes a major share of agriculture.
Bank of Baroda
29.    The representatives of Bank of Baroda informed that the mandatory ratio for priority sector is 40 % but banking
systems provides 47% to 48%. Banks are maintaining that minimum commitment to priority sector. In SSI sector the
ratio is 16.5 % of net credit and Bank of Baroda is giving 16% though there is no mandatory ratio.
30.    The representatives of Bank explained that they were trying their best to dispose of the pending applications,
simplify the procedure for obtaining the loans, lower down the rate of interest and opening of more and more branches.
Some branches have already implemented the Banks instructions to facilitate easy loans to SSIs of that area. More
powers are being delegated to Branch Manager so that they could work with free hand. They are conducting awareness
programme for technology upgradation and finance thereon. They are liberalizing the process of collateral security.
31.    It was further informed that the Bank of Baroda did not take collaterals except the assets created out of the loan. If
there are any problems being faced by SSIs it can be brought to their notice. As far as the interest rate is concerned,
most of it, upto Rs.2 lakhs, is below the PLR. Otherwise, it is at the PLR.
Oriental Bank of Commerce
32.    The representative of Oriental Bank of Commerce stated that there are two branches in Khurja, other two branches
are one each in Bulandshahar and Sikandrabad. There were Rs.2.17 crore outstanding upto March, 2003 in the total four

147th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/147threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:17]
branches. They had already taken steps to increase the advances, and also steps had been taken to encourage the Small
Scale Industries. They are giving one per cent less than PLR upto Rs.25.00 lakhs from 1 st July, 2003. This is the
cheapest rate as compared to other Banks. In order to encourage to Laghu Udyog no margin money is levied upto
Rs.25,000.
Syndicate Bank
33.    The representative of Syndicate Bank informed that there are six branches in Bulandshahar out of them three
branches are in the Bulandshahar town. The Bank has advanced finances to about 60 SSIs. The prime lending rate of
interest is 11.50%.
Canara Bank
34.    The representative of Canara Bank stated that it has five branches in the industrial city. The rate of interest is 10%
upto Rs. 2 lakhs for industrial loan.
SIDBI
35.    The representative of SIDBI apprised the Committee that SIDBI was primarily financing agency and the role of
Bank was financing through State Finance Corporation. SIDBI has total financing of about 34.6 crore in Bulandshahar.
Reserve Bank of India
36.    The representative of the Reserve Bank of India informed that the Bank has issued the circular relating to the
interest rates that for an amount of Rs.2 lakhs, they should not charge an interest rate exceeding the PLR. They had also
requested the Banks to have targets set by them so that the credit flow to the SSI can be made easy.
37.    He further informed that they had also issued a circular that upto Rs.5 lakhs no collateral security was to be
insisted. If the track record of the borrower is good, they can go up to Rs.15 lakhs without collateral security. Out of the
40% of the loans extended the agricultural sector and the SSI sector constitute 30 per cent. In absolute term, the
advances are increasing to the SSI. But the per centage-wise it is decreasing.
Representatives of Government of India and the State Government of Uttar Pradesh
Ministry of Small Scale Industries
38.    The representative of Ministry of SSI stated that the guidelines given by RBI were not meticulously being
followed by the Banks. The Ministry is aware that in December, 2002 the Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission
called a meeting with all member Banks, Ministry of Finance, Members of SSI and P.M. Office official. RBI promised
that it would call for the meting of the Standard Advisory Committee on Credit Flow to discuss the matter again.
39.    The decision was reviewed on 15
th February, 2003 that all Banks would be fixing the target as per last year credit
flow accounts. As per guidelines Rs.25 lakhs is counted as a composite loan. Most of the Banks agreed to increase this
loan upto Rs. 50 lakhs apart from this, all Banks assured to adopt the 2 % Industrial Bank Rate. The collateral amount is
being covered at present upto Rs.25 lakhs. The Ministry of SSI issued directions that for cluster base fund development,
they had identified about 60 clusters the list has been sent to RBI with the request that they should raise the issue of
awareness of the Credit Guarantee Scheme, under State Credit Plan.
State Government of Uttar Pradesh
40.    The Commissioner and Director of Industries, Government of Uttar Pradesh acknowledged the problems regarding
infrastructure in Bulandshahar. He admitted that there is no proper road and rail link and it should be developed
properly so that the whole area could be benefited. As far as milk is concerned it comes under the non-cooperative area
but it is far ahead of Gujarat if the Government comes forward with an industry in public sector in this field then it will
be very beneficial. As regard roads are concerned, if the Government of India could give some help the problems may
be solved to a great extent since the G.T. Road and National Highway, a direct link, is very congested, as a result the
traffic jams occur every now and then.
41.    It was further stated that if the bankers are also brought under the Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme loan upto Rs.25
lakhs without guarantee could be granted. As regards the slaughter houses, some of them have already been shifted to
other places . Their main concern was problem of marketing, the rate of interest being charged by the Banks, problems
of guarantee being sought by the banks, technology upgradation, number of cases pending for approval of loan.
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS/CONCLUSIONS

147th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/147threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:17]
42.    The Committee is constrained to note that benefit of the Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Small Industries (CGFT )
are not reaching to the SSI entrepreneurs. The Committee recommends that the Government and the SIDBI to ensure
that all the requisite steps be taken for its success and an action taken report be furnished to Committee within three
months.
43.    The Committee understands that there is a lack of awareness amongst the SSI entrepreneurs about the various
schemes/facilities being offered by the Government and financial institutions. It has resulted in largely under financing
of various schemes. The Committee therefore recommends that the Government and financial institutions should give
wide publicity and conduct awareness campaigns on the loans schemes amongst the SSI entrepreneurs so that the
benefits of various schemes percolate down to the grass-root level. The Committee also directs that all the Banks in the
area should invariably display in every branch the facilities being offered by them as well the websites of Banks and
Government Organisations should be updated, especially in respect of the information regarding the Credit Guarantee
Fund Scheme.
44.    The Committee was informed that the SSI sector is under constant threat due to globalisation and their products
required to be marketed efficiently. The Committee appreciates the efforts and assistance extended by the NSIC.
However, the SSI associations demand that in addition to their existing activities, the NSIC should organize exhibitions
for promoting the marketing of the goods produced in the area is justified. The Committee also feels that NSIC should
certainly help the SSIs in this respect. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the NSIC should come forward to
organize exhibitions for displaying products of the SSI units in various metros so as to enable to get more orders to
make viable the existing units which suffer from the under utilization of capacities for want of orders.
45.    The Committee took note of the complaints of the apathetic attitude of the officers and staff of the State
Government and Banks. The entrepreneurs are harassed in the guise of rules and procedures and thus setting up of an
unit becomes a Herculean task. The Committee strongly feels that it has to be done away with if industry has to grow. It
is therefore required that a Committee be set up by the lead Bank i.e., Punjab National Bank consisting of Banks’
representatives, Director of Industries, local MP’s and MLA’s and members of the SSI associations to resolve the
problems of SSI entrepreneurs and monitor the lending of loans. This Committee should meet quarterly to review the
position. The Committee therefore recommends for constitution of the said Committee at the earliest.
46.    The Committee is very much concerned about the declining trend in credit flow to SSIs. The steps taken by the
Ministry of SSI to enhance credit flow to SSI sector are not adequate. The Committee is of the view that non-
compliance of the RBI guidelines is the major reason which has resulted in the decline of credit flow. The Committee,
therefore, impress upon the Government to take serious measures to arrest this trend. Further, the Committee
recommends that the Standard Advisory Committee on Credit Flow should be given more powers to monitor the
situation and advise the Government in this regard.
47.    The Committee was informed that the industrial units are scattered and there is no developed industrial area in the
district. The Committee therefore recommends that the State Government of Uttar Pradesh should be approached to
develop industrial estates to shelter the SSI units with necessary infrastructure.
48.    The Committee was also informed that the roads and transport facilities are grossly inadequate and the district has
no direct railway link. Moreover, by­pass roads are required to resolve the problem of traffic jam in Dadri and
Sikandrabad towns in the district. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government of India should extend
necessary support to the State Government of Uttar Pradesh to develop the necessary road and rail links for proper
growth of SSIs in the area.
49.    The Committee notes that taking into account the quantum of milk produced in the district which is next to Gujarat
and is in the non-cooperative sector, there is a strong demand for an organisational  support for procurement, processing
and transportation of the milk and also to provide the best price to the producers. The Committee therefore, recommends
that considering the quantum of milk produced the Government should provide necessary support either through
cooperative sector or by setting up a public sector unit to tap the potential available in the area in an organized manner.
50.    The Committee also observes that the SSI sector comprises of lot of units engaged in the food processing and there
is no exclusive zone for food processing in the area. It was also informed that adequate cold storage facility is not
available for these units. The Committee, therefore, recommends that necessary steps should be taken to set up food
processing zone in the area to assist the SSI units engaged in food processing and also to enhance cold storage facilities.

147th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/147threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:17]
51.    As regards the support from the NSIC it was demanded that this district should be attached to Delhi instead of
Agra. The NSIC may identify at least five units in consultation with the District Industries Officer and project them as
model for others to follow. The Committee is of the view that the Government should explore the possibilities to attach
Bulandshahar with Delhi instead of Agra so as to encourage the entrepreneurs. It is also of the view that the NSIC
should develop some units in consultation with the DIO as model units.
52.    There is no SSI Bank branch in the district and it should be immediately set up. The normal bank branches are also
not located in all the industrial clusters. Each industrial area should have at least one branch. The Committee is of the
view that SSI branch exclusively to cater to the needs of the entrepreneurs and SSI units in the area be set up at the
earliest.
MINUTES
IV
FOURTH  MEETING
         The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry met at 4.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 25 th
August, 2004 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
         PRESENT
   1.   Shri Santosh Bagrodia     —     Chairman
         RAJYA  SABHA
   2.   Shri Surendra Lath
   3.   Dr. K. Malaisamy
   4.   Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   5.   Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
         LOK  SABHA
   6.   Shri Kailash Baitha
   7.   Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
   8.   Shri Subhash Desmukh
   9.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
10.   Shri Sunil Khan
11.   Shri Rajnarayan
12.   Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
13.   Shri Chandramani Tripathi
         SECRETARIAT
         Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
         Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
         Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
         Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
2.      The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the Meeting and apprised them of the agenda of the
Meeting.
3.      Thereafter, the Committee,  took up following Reports for consideration :
(i)    146
th Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in Maharashtra (Ministry of Small Scale Industries);
(ii)    147th Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in the Region of Bulandshahr, Uttar Pradesh (Ministry of Small
Scale Industries);
(iii)   148 th Report on MoU performance in respect of select Public Sector Undertakings, Department of Public
Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
(iv)   149th Report on MoU performance in respect of select Public Sector Undertakings in Civil Aviation Sector,
Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises);

147th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/147threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:17]
(v)   150 th Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to the Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry
of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
(vi)   151st Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to the Department of Heavy Industries (Ministry of
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
(vii)  152nd Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries; and
(viii)153rd Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Ministry of Small Scale Industries.
3.1    After a brief discussion, all the above Reports were adopted by the Committee with some modifications in the
151st Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to the Department of Heavy Industries (Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises).
4.      *                                                                  *                                                                      *
4.1    *                                                                  *                                                                      *
5.      *                                                                  *                                                                      *
6.      *                                                                  *                                                                      *
7.
           The Committee then adjourned at 4.35 P.M. to meet again on 1st September, 2004.
 
 
 