Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON INDUSTRY
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on th August, )9 2018
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on th , )9 2018August
Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS)
Pertaining to Micro,
Small and Medium Enterprises
the Ministry of
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY NINTH REPORT
August, 2018/Shravana, 1940 (Saka)


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON INDUSTRY
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY NINTH REPORT
Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS)
Pertaining to the Ministry of Micro,
Small and Medium Enterprises
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th August 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th August 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2018/Shravana, 1940 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (iv )
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-10
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE .......................................................... 1 1-13
6. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 15-18

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 1st September, 2017)
1. Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh  —    Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
*2. Shri Tiruchi Siva
**3. Dr.  Amee Yajnik
4. Shri Ram Narain Dudi
**5. Shri G.  C. Chandrashekhar
6. Shri Shwait Malik
7. Shri Sanjay Seth
8. Shri Amar Singh
**9. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque
10. Shri T. G. Venkatesh
LOK SABHA
11. Shrimati Ranjanben Bhatt
12. Shri Birendra Kumar Choudhary
13. Shri S. P. Muddahanume Gowda
14. Shri Mohd. Asrarul Haque
15. Shri G. Hari
16. Shrimati Darshana Vikram Jardosh
17. Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena
18. Shrimati Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam
19. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato
20. Shri Tapas Paul
22. Shri Mutthamsetti Srinivasa Rao
23. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa
24. Shri Konda Vishweshwar Reddy
26. Shri Raj Kumar Saini
27. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya)
28. Shri Rameshwar Teli
29. Shrimati Savitri Thakur
30. Shrimati Dev Varma
31. Shri Rajan Vichare
##30. Shri Baijayant Jay Panda Resigned from the Lok Sabha w.e.f. 18.07.18 and 20.06.18
##31. Shri Y .V . Subba Reddy respectively
(i)
* Nominated w.e.f. 21st February, 2018 in place of Ms. Anu Aga, MP, Rajya Sabha
** Nominated w.e.f. 2nd June, 2018.
## V acant
⎭
⎬
⎫

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Director
Shri J. K. Mallick, Additional Director
Shrimati Sreeja. V ., Deputy Secretary
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Renu Sreekanth, Committee Officer
Shri Devinder Singh Bisht, Committee Officer

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry,
having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred and Eighty Ninth
Report on the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS) pertaining to the Ministry of Micro,
Small and Medium Enterprises.
2. The Committee took up the subject for detailed examination and as part of its examination, in a series
of meetings, the Committee heard the views/suggestions of Secretaries of M/o MS&ME, Department of
Financial Services (M/o Finance) and representatives from SIDBI, CII, ASSOCHAM, FISME, CIMSME,
CWEI, DICCI etc.
3. The Committee while drafting the report has mainly relied upon the following documents:- (i) Background
Notes from the M/o Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises; (ii) Views/suggestions from Industrial Associations
and Nodal Agencies like SIDBI, CII, ASSOCHAM, FISME, CIMSME, CWEI, DICCI etc. taken during the
course of meetings; (iii) Oral presentation made before the Committee by the M/o MSME and various
Industrial Associations; and (iv) Replies furnished by M/o MS&ME on the points/issues raised by the Members
during the meetings of the Committee and to the questionnaire sent by the Secretariat.
4. I, thank the M/o Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises and various Industrial Associations for furnishing
Background notes, written replies and their inputs during the meetings.
5. The Committee in its meeting held on the 6th August, 2018 considered and adopted the Report.
RAM CHANDRA PRASAD SINGH
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
6 August, 2018 Department-related Parliamentary
Shravana 15, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Industry
Rajya Sabha
(iii)

     ACRONYMS
AS&DC : Additional Secretary & Development Commissioner
BE : Budget Estimate
CII : Confederation of Indian Industry
CLCSS : Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme
DC : Development Commissioner
DIC : District Industries Centres
DICCI : Dalit Indian Chamber of Commerce & Industry
EFC : Expenditure Finance Committee
GDP : Gross Domestic Product
GeM : Government e-Marketplace
GT AB : Governing and Technology Approval Board
IOB : Indian Overseas Bank
KVIC : Khadi and Village Industries Commission
MNCs : Multinational Companies
MSMEs : Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
NABARD : National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
NEDFI : North East Development Finance Institute
NMCP : National Manufacturing Competitiveness Programme
NEIP : North Eastern Industrial Policy
NER : North Eastern Region
NILERD : National Institute of Labour Economics Research and Development
NSIC : National Small Industries Corporation
PLI : Primary Lending Institutions
RE : Revised Estimate
RRBs : Regional Rural Banks
SC : Scheduled Castes
SIBC : State Level Bankers’ Committee
SIDBI : Small Industries Development Bank of India
ST : Scheduled Tribes
TUPS : T echnology Upgradation Fund Scheme
UAM : Udyog Aadhar Memorandum
(iv)

1
REPORT
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise is the pillar of economic growth in many developed and developing
countries in the world. Often rightly termed as “the engine of growth” for India, MSME has played a
prominent role in the economic development of the country in terms of creating employment opportunities,
scaling manufacturing capabilities, curtailing regional disparities, balancing the distribution of wealth, and
contributing to the GDP. It is the biggest employer after the agriculture sector and presently, nearly 120
million people are employed under this sector. Though India is still facing infrastructural problems, lack of
proper market linkages, and challenges in terms of flow of institutional credit, it has seen a tremendous
growth in this sector.
2. The advantage of this sector is that it requires less investment, thus creating employment on a large
scale, and reducing the underemployment problems. However, the sector faces stiff challenges too and one
of the biggest challenges is technology adoption and technology upgradation. Further, the adoption of modern
technologies is itself dependent on availability of finance and is a major challenge for MSEs as regards to
competition from large enterprises and MNCs and Increasing exports as well as global footprints. Moreover,
this sector has survived almost all threats emerging out of technology upgradation and adoption from both
domestic and international market.
3. To tackle these problems Ministry of MSME implements the following three Schemes/Programmes:
a) Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS)
b) National Manufacturing Competitiveness Programme (NMCP)
c) Tool Rooms and Technology Centres
4. In order to promote the adoption and up-gradation of technology in the MSE sector, the Government
of India through the Ministry of MSME implements a capital subsidy scheme called the Credit Linked
Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS).
5. The Scheme aims at supporting technology up-gradation of Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs) by
providing up front capital subsidy to MSE units, including khadi, village and coir industrial units, on institutional
finance (credit) availed of by them for modernisation of their production equipment (plant and machinery)
and techniques.
6. Under the Scheme, subsidy is provided for induction of well-established and improved technologies.
It provides 150/0 (subject to maximum of `15.00 lakhs) up front subsidy on capital investment for technology
up-gradation to micro and small enterprises for modernization of their production equipment. The above
scheme was launched in October, 2000 and has been revised w.e.f. 29
th September, 2005. As per the
guidelines of the scheme, technology up-gradation means induction of state-of-the-art or near state-of-the-
art technology. In other words, technology up-gradation would mean a significant step up from the present
technology level to a substantially higher one resulting in improved productivity, and/or improvement in
the quality of products and/or improved environmental conditions including work environment for the
unit. It would also include improved packaging techniques as well as anti-pollution measures and energy
conservation machinery. Furthermore, the units in need of introducing facilities for in-house testing and
inline quality control equipments would qualify for assistance, as the same are considered technology up-
gradation.

2
7. For implementation of CLCSS the eligible PLI (All scheduled Commercial Banks, Scheduled co-
operative Banks, RRBs State Financial Corporations and North East Development Finance Institute (NEDFI),
will execute a general agreement for availing capital subsidy under the scheme with any of the nodal agencies
i.e., SIDBI and NABARD. However, the PLIs will have to produce an undertaking to either of nodal agency
that subsidy claimed in respect of beneficiary unit has not been claimed from other nodal agency. The PLIs
will also execute an agreement on behalf of the Government of India with Micro or Small units, as the case
may be. The information on subsidy would be furnished on quarterly basis through Head Office of the PLIs
to Regional Office/Branch Office of the nodal agencies located in the region. The subsidy forecast information
for each quarter would be published on 1st of the preceding month in respect of the quarter for which it is
claimed i.e., on or before 1st March for April-June quarter and so on. The PLIs would ensure furnishing of
details of release of subsidy on quarterly basis and this would be ensured by nodal agencies on receipt of
complete details of subsidy released to beneficiary units.
8. As per the information given by the Ministry of MS&ME to the Committee, Online application and
tracking system was introduced from October, 2013. To claim subsidy under CLCSS eligible MSEs are
required to apply online through PLIs from where MSEs can avail term loan. The completed application is
being uploaded by PLI through Online Application and Tracking System to the attached Nodal Agency,
which, in turn, recommends the application online to Office of DC (MSME) for release of subsidy. After
processing of application and subject to availability of funds, due approval is accorded by competent authority
after obtaining concurrence of Internal Finance Wing, after which funds are released to Nodal Agencies.
Funds are then transferred by the Nodal Agencies to the PLIs where the account of the MSE is operated.
9. The Ministry of MS&ME informed the Committee that as is the case with MSE sector in general, the
SC/ST owned MSEs in particular continue with outdated technology and plant/machinery and due to lack of
awareness and inadequate finance, the problem gets further compounded and puts them in a disadvantageous
position as they lose out on economy of scale. In view of this, the existing CLCSS has been able to benefit
only a negligible number of SC/ST MSEs. Although it aims at facilitating purchase/upgradation of plant and
machinery by providing 25 per cent upfront capital subsidy to the existing as well as new SC/ST owned
MSEs on institutional finance availed of by them. Sole Proprietorships (In case of proprietary MSE, proprietor
shall be SC/ST), Partnerships (In case of partnership MSE, the SC/ST partners shall be holding at least 51
% shares in the unit), Co-operative societies, Private and Public limited companies (In case of private limited
companies, at least 51 % shares shall be held by SC/ST promoters) owned by SC/ST Entrepreneurs of
Micro Small Enterprises sector engaged in the manufacturing activities are eligible for seeking assistance
under this scheme. The existing enterprises should have obtained registration under Udyog Aadhar
Memorandum as well as have enrolled in MSME Data Bank.
10. The objective of this scheme is to promote new enterprises and support the existing enterprises in
their expansion for enhanced participation in the public procurement. However, the Public Procurement
Policy mandates each Central Ministry/Departments/PSUs to procure atleast 4 per cent (out of the 20
per cent quota) of the total annual procurement required from SC/ST MSMEs.
11. Regarding the utilization of Government assistance i.e., subsidy, the Committee was apprised that it
cannot be utilized for the purpose other than for which it has been sanctioned, no deviation is allowed in this
regard. In case a beneficiary unit is found to have availed the subsidy on false information, action would be
taken against the unit and the unit would have to refund the capital subsidy availed with penal interest on

3
prime lending rate from the date of disbursal to the date of refund. A suitable condition to this effect has to
be ensured by PLIs in their documents for agreement with MSE units. The Committee took note that online
onus of credit risk would be with PLIs and it has to make its own judgment at the time of appraising the
project and decision of PLIs would be final in this regard.
12. The Committee was also informed that the proposal covered under CLCSS need not get any sanction
from Government of India and also that there is no such binding obligation on the Nodal Banks/Agencies for
the purpose. However Nodal agencies i.e., SIDBI and NABARD may always inspect the books and accounts
of PLIs and call for any information including amount of capital subsidy in respect of assessee as required
by the Government of India from time to time if it is found that there is a deviation from policies, procedures
and guidelines laid down under CLCSS. A beneficiary unit has to remain in commercial production for a
period of at least three years after installation of eligible plant and machinery on which subsidy under CLCSS
has been awarded.
13. Further, the Committee was informed that under the pre-revised Scheme, 12 per cent capital subsidy
used to be provided to Small Scale Industrial units, including tiny units, on institutional finance availed of by
them for induction of well-established and improved technology in selected sub-sectors/products approved
under the Scheme. The eligible amount of subsidy calculated under the pre-revised scheme was based on
the actual loan amount not exceeding `40 lakh. The Scheme was revised with a 15 per cent upfront subsidy
up to a subsidy cap of `15 lakh (up to total cost of plant & machinery of ` 1 crore) with effect from the 29
th
September, 2005.
14. As submitted by the M/o MSME, following are the information related to the BE/RE/Expenditure and
the performance profile related to the CLCSS since the FY 2012-13 till date:-
Budget Estimates (BE)/Revised Estimates (RE)/ Expenditure during 12th Five Year Plan and in the
Current Financial year 2018-19
Financial Year BE RE Expenditure
2012-13 369.00 352.05 311.03
2013-14 387.75 436.73 438.27
$
2014-15 387.75 394.77 396.30 $
2015-16 290.00 258.04 258.04
2016-17 298.00 534.55* 256.34*
2017-18 441.40 404.25 255.09**
(General/ONER- (General/ONER- (General/ONER-
261.64) 253.75) 253.75)
2018-19 326.85 N A 155.75
(as on date)
$ Savings under subsidy head from the other scheme was utilized.
*The funds at RE stage were received on 31 51 March, 2017, just few hours before the end of the Financial Year. The process for
release of the subsidy could not be completed due to overload on PFMS Portal.
**The disbursement under the ONER was slightly above 100%.

4
15. The performance of Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS) since FY 2012-13 is as under:
Sl.No. Financial Year No. of MSEs benefitted
1. 2012-13 5713
2. 2013-14 6279
3. 2014-15 7246
4. 2015-16 5047
5. 2016-17 4011
6. 2017-18 4081
7. 2018-19 2347
(as on 31.05.2018)
16. Since inception, 51019 MSEs have benefitted by availing capital subsidy of ` 3066.18 crore under
CLCSS till date. The Ministry however submitted before the Committee and clarified that on allocation of
adequate budgetary support, the pending liabilities under CLCSS will be dispensed off.
17. The Committee was also apprised that a budgetary demand of ` 2235.25 crore has been submitted to
the Ministry of Finance through the first supplementary demand note, the details of which comprises pending
claims of subsidy of ` 829.25 crore (approx.) and relates to FY 2016-17 and Q-1 of 2017-18. On continuation
of CLCS Scheme, the estimated subsidy demand in General category may increase further.
18. The Committee is concerned to note that there has been the steep fall in the number of MSEs
benefitted under CLCSS from the Financial Year 2014-15 onwards which is mainly on account of
lack of adequate budgetary resources allocated under the scheme. The Committee accordingly
desires that adequate budget allocations should be made under the Scheme to cover more MSEs
under the Scheme.
19. The Committee heard the Ministry of MS&ME and various associations working for MSME sector
viz. Confederation of Indian Industry, Confederation of Indian Micro Small and Medium Enterprises,
Consortium of Women Enterpreneurs of India, Dalit Indian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Federation
of Indian Micro and Small Enterprises on the issues related to CLCSS and their suggestions on the Scheme.
The representatives from the Ministry also supported the views of all associations for sustainable growth of
the MSME sector. The representatives from DICCI submitted that the computation of the eligible cost
should be calculated for capital invested on the fixed assets such as land, building and machinery in the
project as per the rates certified by chartered engineer. On the basis of the information, the representative of
the Ministry of MS&ME explained various issues and clarified almost all queries raised by the Committee
and the representatives of various associations of industries.
20. On a query raised by the Committee as to what strategy is being adopted by the Ministry to step up
the outreach of the Scheme to the 115 aspirational districts, identified by the NITI Aayog, the Ministry
clarified that officials of its Ministry and Nodal officers from NSIC, KVIC, Coir Board and MSME-DIs
visit the aspirational districts for close co-ordination with State Governments and concerned district
authorities.

5
21. The Ministry of MS&ME informed the Committee that MSEs are lacking information and awareness
on quality standards and access to newer technology. In this regard, the Committee wanted to know as to
how the Government is planning to spread awareness about technology up-gradation and also about the
features of the CLCS Scheme among the MSEs.
22. The Committee desires that the outcome of such visits may be disclosed to the Committee
and whether the visits have had any lasting impact the percolating the benefits of the Scheme to
the grass root levels in these Aspirational Districts or not.
23. Further, the Committee desires that Ministry of MSME should works in tandem with the
State Governments of the more populous States, where there is less off take of the CLCSS to
encourage more and more promising entrepreneurs to set up industries and also to take part in the
scheme for technical upgradation.
24. The Committee appreciated the efforts/measures being taken by the Ministry of MSME to
step up the penetration of CLCS Scheme to the underprivileged sections (SC, ST and Women), 115
Aspirational Districts identified by NITI Ayog, and also the NE Region.
25. Further, the Committee was of the opinion that the M/o MS&ME should utilised the UAM data of
entrepreneurs to create awareness, in every nook and corner of the country regarding the scheme by using
the available mobile numbers with them.
26. The Committee after discussions with various associations In the MSE sector, observed that M/o
MS&ME should give a serious thought on erasing the cost ceiling on the Machines as it appears impractical
without any prescribed specification and listed plant and machinery supplier. The Committee felt that
requirement of each and every Micro and Small Entrepreneur may vary in different sectors and products.
27. In order to popularize the scheme, the representatives from CII suggested that the Ministry of MS&ME,
if it deems fit, may consider propagation of scheme through Non Banking Finance Companies and Fintech
Companies. Even the private sector may be asked to come forward to give impetus and benefit to more and
more people under the CLCSS.
28. The Committee noted the reply of the AS&DC of the M/o MS&ME on coverage of all sectors under
the CLCS scheme along with pending liability which is to the tune of `829 crores requiring liquidation on
priority. Against the budgetary allocation of `326 crores in 2018-19, `155.75 crores were released and
utilized. It was also informed that the M/o MSME is making all out effort to ensure proper utilization of
funds under the scheme by introducing flexibility in the Listed Sectors for SC/ST, women and NER
Entrepreneurs by removing the cap of 51 Sectors/Sub-Sectors or Technologies, keeping in view the
requirement of specific technology for them. Regarding the expansion of 51 Sectors/Sub-sectors, the
Committee was also apprised by the Ministry that these Sectors are not limited or restrictive as prima facie
it appears. There are numerous technologies available under the sectors. The Committee is of the opinion
that the Ministry of MSME has to ensure that in future, appropriate/measures should be taken for
induction of more sectors/Sub-Sectors/technologies under the CLCS scheme in addition to the
existing 51 Sectors/Sub-Sectors for all categories of entrepreneurs.
29. The Committee is of the opinion that the CLCS scheme should be made applicable for all
sectors (including plant and machinery) for subsidy under CLCSS. The Committee, therefore is of

6
the view that the M/o MS&ME should also ask the Ministry of Finance for more budgetary allocation
for betterment of MSE sector as a whole as well as to liquidate pending liabilities under the
scheme.
30. On the enhancement of subsidy limit, some of the associations favored increase in the limit of term
loan from `1 crore to `5 crore. In response the M/o MS&ME informed the Committee that most of the
enterprises fail to touch even the prescribed subsidy limit of ` 15 lakh ( i.e. 15%) since MSEs are small
entrepreneurs and their needs are limited rather they need timely disbursement for availment of loan or
subsidy amount. It has been the experience of the Ministry that at the most MSEs touch `6.4 lakh as subsidy
under the scheme. Even the loan amount has not crossed a maximum of `52 lakh as of now. During the
course of presentation the Committee was also apprised about the availment pattern of subsidy by MSEs in
past years. In this regard, the Ministry of MS&ME clarified the entire scenario of subsidy utilization and
accrual of maximum benefit to few States before the Committee.
31. In this connection, the Committee undertook a study visit to Bengaluru, Tirupati and Chennai from
15
th to 19th January, 2018 to examine the issue of the overall performance and applicability of Credit Linked
Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS) in the MSE sector. During the discussion, the Committee desired to know
the mechanism adopted by PLIs/Banks/Nodal Agencies while appraising the applications for release of
subsidy by Office of the DC(MSME). The Members of the Committee also asked about the return of the
loan amount to PLIs/Banks. The Committee further raised the query about the how the Scheme has benefitted
the Coir units in modernization process etc. and the status of revision in the Scheme. In this regard, the
Committee was informed about the technologies under the Scheme.
32. The Committee observed from the presentation given that the performance of NABARD is not very
encouraging in these States as far as the number of units benefitted and subsidy released is concerned. The
representatives from the banks informed the Committee that they have not been able to process the applications
because of paucity of funds under the scheme. The Committee was also apprised that thrust of the scheme
has been the more coverage of MSEs with reasonable subsidy per unit within the overall budgetary limits. It
was informed to the Committee by some of the Associations that CLCSS is available only to micro and small
entrepreneurs for whom modernization is the biggest challenge, unlike the other technology upgradation
schemes like TUFS of the Ministry of Textiles. Besides, it is available only for projection up to a cost of ` 1
crore. So it is really serving the enterprises under the bottom of the manufacturing pyramid. When the
Government is continuing with TUFS scheme under which even large corporates are given subsidy up to 25
per cent of the project cost for modernization of textile and apparel units, the reason for throttling this
scheme for the MSEs only who are the largest employer is not justified. However, the Committee was
informed by the Ministry that the objectives of both the schemes are different. TUFS is to achieve the vision
of employment generation and promotion of export through ‘Make in India’ with zero effect and zero
defects in manufacturing of Textile sector and is open to all including large scale industries whereas CLCSS
aims to facilitate technology upgradation by providing capital subsidy on institutional finance availed by
MSEs.
33. The Committee is of the considered view that taking into account the rate of inflati on, the
M/o MSME should gradually consider to enhance the limit of subsidy i.e., from `````15 lakh to `````25 lakh
inprescribed sectors/sub-sectors which would prove to be more helpful for MSEs to cater to their
needs for upgradation of machinery and plants.

7
34. The Committee was informed by some of the Associations that the scheme is linked with credit
facility availed by the entrepreneurs in MSE sector which should not be a binding obligation on the Micro
and Small entrepreneurs as availment of credit sometimes take time. The scheme therefore should be available
even for the expenditure made by the entrepreneurs out of their own savings if they do not want to avail
credit facility under the scheme. However, the Ministry of MSME apprised the Committee that this could
only add to liabilities and fiscal imbalance. One of the suggestion from the associations present during the
meeting was regarding the Third Party Evaluation of the Plant and Machinery genuinely required by the
entrepreneur; to which the Ministry of MSME responded that aggregation of plant and machinery at their
level as suggested by one of the MSME associations would only lead to a kind of indirect licensing and may
attract allegations and criticism.
35. The Committee after hearing the Ministry of MSME is of the view that M/o MSME taking the
practical aspect into consideration may ensure or ascertain the genuineness of the claim by MSEs
for subsidy against the purchase of machines or requirement of the machines for technology up-
gradation, the M/o MSME may consider about the possibility of a Third Party Evaluation by some
rating agency or NSIC or SIDBI who can report directly to the M/o MSME in this regard and
thereafter the Ministry may take necessary action without delaying the process.
36. The Committee further noted that in the North East Region, there is considerable proliferation of the
NEIP Scheme, which offers a subsidy of 30%. More and more people prefer the NEIP Scheme due to the
larger subsidy involved. The Committee observes that less intake under CLCSS in NER is perhaps
due to the existence of the NEIP scheme offering more subsidy vis-a-vis CLCSS.
37. The Committee accordingly desires that Ministry may chalk out measures to make the CLCSS
more attractive by perhaps increasing the subsidy in order to woo the NE entrepreneurs.
38. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of MSME should regularly monitor the progress
in the matter in co-ordination with State Governments so that the Scheme reaches out to more
entrepre neurs. The Committee also suggests that subsidy for women entrepreneurs of all
categories should be raised to 25 per cent as is the case of SC/ST entrepreneurs after exploring
the feasibility.
39. The Ministry of MSME informed the Committee that during the implementation of the scheme, the
performance of the MSE increased in terms of productivity turnover, energy efficiency, profits etc. whereas
the pollution reduced substantially. About 88.9% and 98.4% of MSE units from Eastern and Western regions
reported that CLCSS technology has helped to improve their quality of products. In other regions, all MSE
units have reported in favour of improvement of quality of products owing to CLCSS. About 88.3 % of
beneficiaries reported that the listed technology under CLCSS is very effective.
40. An independent Third Party Evaluation of Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS) was carried
out by National Institute of Labour Economics Research and Development (NILERD) an Autonomous
Institute under NITI Aayog, Government of India in 2016-17 which submitted its Report in August, 2017.
In the evaluation report the continuation of the Scheme further beyond the Twelfth Five Year Plan Period has
been recommended.
41. The Committee took note of the status of implementation of the CLCS scheme in NER and amongst
women entrepreneurs along with the pattern of utilization of maximum subsidy benefit by few selected

8
States. It also observes that there is a general complaint of lack of awareness about the scheme among the
PLIs and even the Micro and Small entrepreneurs.
42. The Committee therefore is of the view that serious efforts with practical approach and result
oriented goals should be made to dispel the confusion and lack of awareness about the scheme in
MSE sector as well as among the PLIs and Financial Institutes. Technology Exhibitions may be one
of the measures to create awareness. However, there must be a unified attempt by the Ministry of
MS&ME and different Industrial Associations to create awareness among the MSEs about the Schemes.
The M/o MSME should make all out efforts for the growth of the MSEs on a uniform pattern across
the country for the overall development resulting in creation of various job opportunities for the
masses and dispelling the geographical imbalance of industrial set up. Therefore, there is a need of
continuance of the scheme for a longer period.
43. The Committee observes that to popularize the CLCS Scheme it should be discussed at
appropriate levels i.e., SLBC, Districts Heads, DIC, industry associations and grass root level etc.
for better off take under the scheme.
44. The Committee observed during the course of the presentations that the scheme is beneficial, good
and has been acclaimed across all MSE Sector. However, the Committee noted that the women entrepreneurs
availing this scheme is negligible.
45. The Committee was of the view that when a woman entrepreneur is eligible in any sector, the
benefit of subsidy should be credited to her individual account or account of the enterprise, as the
case may be without any delay. The subsidy should be extended as margin money rather than
granting it at the completion of 3 years.
46. The Committee notes that the CLCS scheme is still devoid of service sector under its umbrella. It also
observed that the EFC had already given its approval to include the service Sector under the CLCSS.
However, it is still awaiting the approval of the Cabinet. The Committee took note of the issue of shifting of
the small and medium industries to far away locations from their present premises due to energy and
environment related issues as these sectors have not been able to avail the benefits of subsidies as compared
to large industries.
47. The Committee is of the opinion that if the SMEs are shifted from their present location on
the plea of energy or environmental pollution, adequate infrastructural facility viz. power, road,
easy labour etc. should be provided to them before shifting them.
48. The Committee desires that M/o MSME may pursue the matter and the Committee may be
apprised as soon as Cabinet approval is accorded.
49. The Committee recommends that the timeline for application process and disbursement of
subsidy should be reduced by the M/o MS&ME by co-ordinated effort with the Department of Financial
Services.
50. The Committee is of the considered opinion that besides Technology up gradation before granting
subsidy the basic difficulties being faced by the MSEs viz., land, power, -water, communication and
road facilities etc should also be taken care of appropriately to make the MSEs globally competitive
and grow in a hindrance free environment.

9
51. The Committee was constrained to note the pathetic picture of subsidy utilization under CLCSS in
Eastern Zone (only 2%), Northeastern States (only 0.l %) and worst case of Jammu and Kashmir where
only one Unit is availing the subsidy even after 17 years of the implementation of the scheme.
52. The Committee is of the opinion that the Ministry of MS&ME should conduct a study in all
States to know as to how the awareness could be created to get the optimum out of the Scheme. The
Ministry may also undertake a research study to know the reason as to how five States achieved a
stupendous target of 77% while the rest of India lagged behind.
53. The Committee noted the fact that budget under the scheme allocated for SC/ST category/NER
remain unutilised whereas for general category the budget is entirely exhausted. On being inquired as to
what steps are being taken by the Ministry to resolve the problem of the benefits of the Scheme not percolating
to the SC/ST and probable entrepreneurs from the North East Region, it was informed that the norms for
eligibility under the Scheme are being revised. It was also informed that a proposal is in the anvil to make
subsidy admissible to the aforecited categories for investment in technological up-gradation on acquisition/
replacement of plant and machinery etc.
54. The Committee desires that it may be apprised of as soon as norms of the Scheme are revised.
55. The Committee therefore, is of the view that M/o MSME should approach the M/o Finance for
diversion of allocated budget from other schemes and allocate this fund for benefit of Micro and
Small Enterprises under CLCSS at last quarter of the financial year. The Committee also feels that
delays in release of budget under the scheme delay the process of disbursement of subsidy which
should be taken up with M/o Finance for timely allocation.
56. During the course of discussions, the Secretary, Department of Financial Services informed the
Committee that GeM platform has been initiated by the Government to onboard all MSMEs so as to ensure
their participation in GeM and procure online orders. CLCSS facilitates credit release to micro and small
enterprises and the Government subsidy under CLCSS projects is providing additional comfort to the Banks
to finance the MSEs. However, as per the RBI data, the net credit flow to the MSE sector is stagnating for
quite a few quarters since the Banks are bogged down by big corporate defaults. Now the 15% up front
subsidy released by the Government is held by the Banks till the loan is not completely paid, which provides
additional comforts to the Banks to take the ‘risk’ of financing MSEs. This is proven by the fact that
projects worth thousands of crores are already sanctioned by the Banks.
57. The Committee also took cognizance of the fact that under SIDBI there are 109 PLIs which included
Public Sector banks too and it has released `1648 crores towards subsidy. The-online application and
tracking system has been a big success. The Committee also noted that the CLCSS is also subject to C&AG
audits and among the top PLIs besides SIDBI there are Central Bank of India, Oriental bank of Commerce,
Dena Bank and IOB.
58. The Industry Associations have informed the Committee that sometimes MSEs suffer due to the delay
in submission of their cases by respective banks i.e. PLI and Nodal Agency, thereby leading to rejection of
their cases by the Ministry of MSME.
59. The Committee is of the view that subsidy should be released to MSEs in such cases where the
delay in submission of cases occurs on the part of PLls and Nodal Agency. Further, the Ministry

10
should develop an online mechanism to monitor the applications and identify whether delay occurred
on the part of MSEs or banks.
60. The Committee desired to know whether the eligible technology/machinery under all approved sub-
sectors fulfilled the intended objective of the CLCS Scheme. The Committee was informed that overall
monitoring on the Scheme is done by Governing and Technology Approval Board (GTAB) chaired by Secretary
Ministry of MSME and AS and DC and Member Secretary. The Scheme is reviewed on quarterly basis. A
Technical Sub-Committee is also there to consider inclusion of sub sector/production and well established
improved technology under the scheme. Further, the Committee was informed that four Technical Committee
meetings and one meeting of the GTAB were held during last three years and all proposals were placed
before Technical Sub Committee and GTAB.
61. The Committee while hearing the presentation from industrial associations found that there were
certain confusions regarding continuance of the Scheme etc. which were duly addressed after the response
from the AS&DC of the Ministry of MSME.
62. The Committee is of the opinion that to provide smooth corridor for the betterment of MSEs
for having a flourishing business, there is always a need for concerted efforts at every level. On the
whole, the Committee feels that though enough measures have been taken for overall development
of Industrial sector, yet there is a lot more to be done for making a New India.
63. In the opinion of the Committee, the Ministry may consider setting up of a Grievance
Committee or an Ombudsman to oversee all aspects of the Scheme and where an aggrieved
entrepreneur could turn too to make his grievances/problems heard for resolution thereof.
Alternatively they may consider setting up of a web portal to review feedbacks/grievances regarding
the Scheme and other related problems pertaining to MSME Sectors.

RECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
The Committee is concerned to note that there has been the steep fall in the number of MSEs
benefited under CLCSS from the Financial Year 2014-15 onwards which is mainly on account of
lack of adequate budgetary resources allocated under the scheme. The Committee accordingly
desires that adequate budget allocations should be made under the Scheme to cover more MSEs
under the Scheme. (Para No. 18)
The Committee desires that the outcome of such visits may be disclosed to the Committee
and whether the visits have had any lasting impact the percolating the benefits of the Scheme to
the grass root levels in these Aspirational Districts or not. (Para No. 22)
Further, the Committee desires that Ministry of MSME should work in tandem with the State
Governments of the more populous States, where there is less off take of the CLCSS to encourage
more and more promising entrepreneurs to set up industries and also to take part in the scheme for
technical upgradation. (Para No. 23)
The Committee appreciated the efforts/measures being taken by the Ministry of MSME to
step up the penetration of CLCS Scheme to the underprivileged sections (SC, ST and Women), 115
aspirational districts identified by NITI Ayog, and also the NE Region. (Para No. 24)
The Committee is of the opinion that the Ministry of MSME has to ensure that in future,
appropriate /measures should be taken for induction of more sectors/ Sub-Sectors / technologies
under the CLCS scheme in addition to the existing 51 Sectors/Sub-Sectors for all categories of
entrepreneurs. (Para No. 28)
The Committee is of the opinion that the CLCS scheme should be made applicable for all
sectors (including plant and machinery) for subsidy under CLCSS. The Committee, therefore is of
the view that the M/o MS&ME should also ask the Ministry of Finance for more budgetary allocation
for betterment of MSE sector as a whole as well as to liquidate pending liabilities under the
scheme. (Para No. 29)
The Committee is of the considered view that taking into account the rate of inflation, the
M/o MSME should gradually consider to enhance the limit of subsidy i.e., from `````15 Lakh to `````25
Lakh inprescribed sectors/sub-sectors which would prove to be more helpful for MSEs to cater to
their needs for upgradation of machinery and plants. (Para No. 33)
The Committee after hearing the Ministry of MSME is of the view that M/o MSME taking the
practical aspect into consideration may ensure or ascertain the genuineness of the claim by MSEs
for subsidy against the purchase of machines or requirement of the machines for technology up-
gradation, the M/o MSME may consider about the possibility of a Third ‘Party Evaluation by some
rating agency or NSIC or SIDBI who can report directly to the M/o MSME in this regard and
thereafter the Ministry may take necessary action without delaying the process. (Para No. 35)
The Committee observes that less intake under CLCSS in NER is perhaps due to the existence
of the NEIP scheme offering more subsidy vis-a-vis CLCSS. (Para No. 36)
The Committee accordingly desires that Ministry may chalk out measures to make
11

12
the CLCSS more attractive by perhaps increasing the subsidy in order to woo the NE
entrepreneurs. (Para No. 37)
The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of MSME should regularly monitor the progress
in the matter in co-ordination with State Governments so that the Scheme reaches out to more
entrepre neurs. The Committee also suggests that subsidy for women entrepreneurs of all
categories should be raised to 25 percent as is the case of SC/ST entrepreneurs after exploring
the feasibility. (Para No. 38)
The Committee therefore is of the view that serious efforts with practical approach and result
oriented goals should be made to dispel the confusion and lack of awareness about the scheme in
MSE sector as well as among the PLIs and Financial Institutes. Technology Exhibitions may be one
of the measures to create awareness. However, there must be a unified attempt by the Ministry of
MS&ME and different Industrial Associations to create awareness among the MSEs about the Schemes.
The M/o MSME should make all out efforts for the growth of the MSEs on a uniform pattern across
the country for the overall development resulting in creation of various job opportunities for the
masses and dispelling the geographical imbalance of industrial set up. Therefore, there is a need of
continuance of the scheme for a longer period. (Para No. 42)
The Committee observes that to popularize the CLCS Scheme it should be discussed at
appropriate levels i.e, SLBC, Districts Heads, DIC, industry associations and grass root level etc.
for better off take under the scheme. (Para No. 43)
The Committee was of the view that when a woman entrepreneur is eligible in any sector, the
benefit of subsidy should be credited to her individual account or account of the enterprise, as the
case may be without any delay. The subsidy should be extended as margin money rather than
granting it at the completion of 3 years. (Para No. 45)
The Committee is of the opinion that if the SMEs are shifted from their present location on
the plea of energy or environmental pollution, adequate infrastructural facility viz. power, road,
easy labour etc. should be provided to them before shifting them. (Para No. 47)
The Committee desires that M/o MSME may pursue the matter and the Committee may be
apprised as soon as Cabinet approval is accorded. (Para No. 48)
The Committee recommends that the timeline for application process and disbursement of
subsidy should be reduced by the M/o MS&ME by co-ordinated effort with the Department of Financial
Services. (Para No. 49)
The Committee is of the considered opinion that besides Technology up gradation before granting
subsidy the basic difficulties being faced by the MSEs viz., land, power, water, communication and
road facilities etc should also be taken care of appropriately to make the MSEs globally competitive
and grow in a hindrance free environment. (Para No. 50)
The Committee is of the opinion that the Ministry of MS&ME should conduct a study in all
states to know as to how the awareness could be created to get the optimum out of the Scheme. The
Ministry may also undertake a research study to know the reason as to how five States achieved a
stupendous target of 77% while the rest of India lagged behind. (Para No. 52)

13
The Committee desires that it may be apprised of as soon as norms of the Scheme are
revised. (Para No. 54)
The Committee therefore, is of the view that M/o MSME should approach the M/o Finance for
diversion of allocated budget from other schemes and allocate this fund for benefit of Micro and
Small Enterprises under CLCSS at last quarter of the financial year. The Committee also feels that
delays in release of budget under the scheme delay the process of disbursement of subsidy which
should be taken up with M/o Finance for timely allocation. (Para No. 55)
The Committee is of the view that subsidy should be released to MSEs in such cases where the
delay in submission of cases occurs on the part of PLIs and Nodal Agency. Further, the Ministry
should develop an online mechanism to monitor the applications and identify whether delay occurred
on the part of MSEs or banks. (Para No. 59)
The Committee is of the opinion that to provide smooth corridor for the betterment of MSEs
for having a flourishing business, there is always a need for concerted efforts at every level. On the
whole, the Committee feels that though enough measures have been taken for overall development
of Industrial sector, yet there is a lot more to be done for making a New India. (Para No. 62)
In the opinion of the Committee, the Ministry may consider setting up of a Grievance
Committee or an Ombudsman to oversee all aspects of the Scheme and where an aggrieved
entrepreneur could turn too to make his grievances/problems heard for resolution thereof.
Alternatively they may consider setting up of a web portal to review feedbacks/grievances regarding
the Scheme and other related problems pertaining to MSME Sectors. (Para No. 63)

MINUTES

17
XV
Fifteenth Meeting
The Committee met at 04.00 P.M. on Monday, the 6th August, 2018 in Committee Room ‘A’,
First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh   —    Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Amee Yajnik
3. Shri G.C. Chandrashekhar
4. Shri Shwait Malik
5. Shri Sanjay Seth
6. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Birendra Kumar Choudhary
8. Shri Mohd. Asrarul Haque
9. Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena
10. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato
11. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa
12. Shri Rameshwar Teli
13. Shrimati Savitri Thakur
14. Shrimati Dev Varma
15. Shri Rajan Vichare
SECRETARIAT
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Director
Shri J. K. Mallick, Additional Director
Shrimati Sreeja. V ., Deputy Secretary
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Renu Sreekanth, Committee Officer
Shri Devinder Singh Bisht, Committee Officer
At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting.
Then, the Committee took up the consideration and adoption the Draft 289
th and 290 th Reports on Credit
Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS) and Professionalization of Boards of CPSEs pertaining to the
Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises and Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises), respectively. Thereafter, the Committee adopted the Draft 289th and 290th
Reports without any change.

18
3. Thereafter, the Committee also decided to present the Reports in both the Houses of Parliament on the
8th August, 2018. It authorised the Chairman of the Committee and in his absence Shri G.C. Chandrasekhar,
MP and in the absence of both, Shri Md. Nadimul Haque, M.P to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha.
Similarly, the Committee authorised Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena, MP and in his absence Shri Bidyut Baran
Mahato to lay the Reports in the Lok Sabha.
The Committee then adjourned at 04.25 
P.M.