PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 228
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 27 MARCH, 2012)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 27 MARCH, 2012)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 27 MARCH, 2012)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 27 MARCH, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2012/CHAITRA, 1934 (SAKA)MARCH, 2012/CHAITRA, 1934 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY 
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON INDUSTR Y
TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT
ON
TH
ACTION TAKEN NOTE ON THE 219  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
ON
REVIVAL AND RESTRUCTURING OF 
CEMENT CORPORATION OF INDIA LTD.
PERTAINING TO
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES
(DEPARTMENT OF HEAVY INDUSTRY)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN NOTE ON THE 219 TH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
ON
REVIVAL AND RESTRUCTURING OF
CEMENT CORPORATION OF INDIA LTD.
PERTAINING TO
THE MINISTRY OF HEA VY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES
(DEPARTMENT OF HEA VY INDUSTRY)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 27 TH MARCH, 2012)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 27 TH MARCH, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2012/CHAITRA, 1934 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—8
(i) Chapter – I
Recommendations/observations, which have been  accepted by  the
Ministry.................................................................................................................... 2
(ii) Chapter – II
Recommendations/observations which the Committee does  not desire to
pursue in view of the Government’s replies... ................................................. 3—4
(iii) Chapter – III
Recommendations/observations in respect of which the  Committee  has
either not accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the  Ministry
to review its replies .............................................................................................. 5—7
(iv) Chapter – IV
Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies  of the
Ministry have not been received ........................................................................ 8
4. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 9—12

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Tiruchi Siva — Chairman
2. Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy
3. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
4. Shri Ashk Ali Tak
5. Shri K.B. Shanappa
6. Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor
7. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
8. Shri Srinjoy Bose
9. Shri Nandamuri Harikrishna
10. Dr. Vijay Mallya
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
12. Shri Kamlesh Balmiki
13. Shri Sabbam Hari
14. Shrimati Poonamben Veljibhai Jat
15. Shri Ramsingh Kaswan
16. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar
17. Shrimati Putul Kumari
18. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
19. Shrimati Ingrid Mcleod
20. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal
21. Shri Somen Mitra
22. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey
23. Shri Kishn V . Patel
24. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
25. Shri B.Y . Raghavendra
26. Shri Ramsingbhai Patalbhai Rathwa
27. Shri Ijyaraj Singh
28. Shri E.G . Sugavanam
29. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai
30. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
31. Shri Subhash Bapurao Wankhede
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry,
having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred and Twenty-Eighth
Report on Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises
(Department of Heavy Industry) on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two
Hundred and Nineteenth Report on the Revival and Restructuring of Cement Corporation of India
Ltd. pertaining to Department of Heavy Industry.
2. I thank the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of Heavy
Industry) for furnishing the Action Taken Notes on the recommendations contained in the
Committee's Two Hundred and Nineteenth Report.
3. The Committee in its meeting held on the 29
th February, 2012 considered and adopted the
report.
TIRUCHI SIV A
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
February, 2012 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of Heavy Industry) on the recommendations
contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred and Nineteenth Report on the Revival and Restructuring
of Cement Corporation of India Ltd. pertaining to Department of Heavy Industry.
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises (Department of Heavy Industry) in respect of the recommendations contained in the
Report. These have been categorized as follows:
Chapter–I The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry.
The Committee is pleased to observe that the Ministry has accepted its recommendations
as mentioned in the Chapter–I of the Report.
Chapter–II The recommendation/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s replies.
In respect of these recommendations the Committee is convinced with the logic and
explanations advanced by the Ministry and therefore do not want to pursue them for the present.
Chapter–III The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has either not
accepted replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its reply.
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of recommendations
contained in Chapter–III and desires that the Ministry should furnish logical explanations therefore.
Chapter–IV The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry
have not been received.
In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either furnished the
interim replies or couched its language in vague terms like noted for compliance/guidance,
therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in respects
of recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention and
spirit of the recommendations of the Committee.
3. The details of the ATR are being discussed in the succeeding pages.

2
2
CHAPTER-I
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry
The Eleventh Five Year Plan document also takes note of the point and observes “The
production of cement is a continuous process requiring uninterrupted power supply. Since the
availability and quality of grid power supply continue to be a problem, the use of captive power
has been increasing. Most of the cement units have installed captive power generation capacities
to the extent of 60% to 100% of their requirement. The captive power generation capacity of
cement industry is estimated to be 1825 MW at present, of which 61 % is based on diesel and
the rest 39% on coal. With growing uncertainties of grid power availability, it is estimated that 2000
MW captive power would be required during Eleventh Plan”.
Recommendation
The Committee strongly recommends both to the Planning Commission and the DHI
to pay heed to the above observations of the Eleventh Five Y ear Plan document and
seriously undertake efforts for establishing captive power plants in the plants of the CCI.
(Para 29)
Action Taken Note
In Tandur unit, CCI is getting power supply from APGPCL (14 MW) and APCPDCL
(8MW), which is sufficient for the existing plant, in addition, CCI has 4 MVA DG Set to
supplement the requirement. As regards the other two operating unit at Bokajan and Rajban,
capacity of these units is too small to set up captive power plants of economic size. CCI has
already 4 MVA DG Set at Bokajan also to supplement the power requirement. Establishment of
captive power plants in the operating units of CCI is, therefore, neither necessary nor feasible at
this stage.

3
CHAPTER-II
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies
Recommendation
The Committee while taking note of the measures of the Government of India for
revival and restructuring of the CCI, would like to know the outcome of the money spent.
It recommends that the Department of Heavy Industry (DHI) must closely monitor the way
in which money is being spent for achieving the targeted goal and submit a detailed report
in this regard to the Committee.
(Para 22)
Action Taken Note
As per recommendations of BIFR, the Govt. of India had provided funds as under:–
(i) Non-Plan Loan : Rs. 128.62 crore
(Out of sanctioned funds of
Rs.153.62 crore only Rs.128.62
crore were availed by the Company
(ii) Plan loan and equity : Rs. 30.67 crore
Rs. 159.29 crore
The above amount has been spent as under:–
Sl. No. Description Amount
1. Secured creditors Rs. 22.27 crore
2. Consortium Banks Rs. 52.83 crore
3. Unsecured creditors like public deposits,
Indira Gandhi Foundations, etc. Rs. 49.26 crore
4. Dues of employees Rs. 4.25 crore
5. Expansion of Rajban Unit Rs. 6.80 crore
Rs.135.41 crore
Further, work of up gradation/modernization of Tandur Unit and expansion of Bokajan Unit
is to be carried out by funds available out of sale proceeds of the non-operating units. It is also
stated that a monitoring system of the Company has been devised by the Hon’ble BIFR which is
stated under General Terms and Conditions of the Scheme vide para No. (iii), (iv) & (v) and are
reproduced below:–
3

4
(iii) The company shall constitute a management committee in a form satisfactory of
BIFR/Monitoring Agency (MA), to review, on monthly basis, the operation of the
company in all aspect and closely monitor the implementation of the project and
rehabilitation scheme till such time dues of secured creditors are paid in full. BIFR’s
special director shall also be member of the Committee along with one
representative each from the Institutions and Banks.
(iv) The company shall submit to the MA/BIFR, on quarterly basis, the progress
Reports, in the prescribed format, regarding the implementation of the scheme. MA
shall monitor the implementation of the scheme in all its aspects and shall submit
a review of the implementation of the scheme to BIFR on half-yearly basis along
with the audited/provisional result duly signed by the managing director of the
company.
(v) The package of reliefs and concessions shall be subject to annual review and the
MA/secured creditors shall have the right to step up rate of interest/right to
recompense for the sacrifices as specified in the scheme/accelerate the payment
should be profitability cash flow and other circumstances of the company warrant,
based on such annual review, subject to prior approval of the BIFR.
The system is being followed scrupulously. Department of Heavy Industry is also
monitoring closely by holding Performance Review Meetings periodically at the levels of Hon’ble
Minister (Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises), Secretary (Heavy Industry) and Joint Secretary
concerned, for achieving the targeted goals of the Company.

5
CHAPTER-III
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has either not
accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its replies
Recommendation
1. The Committee notes with concern that the Cement Corporation of India which was
established to be a leading player in manufacturing cement and promoting balanced regional
development had to go through such tragic state of affairs. It also notes with concern that no
attempt was made for renovation, replacement and modernisation of its plants.  In the background
note supplied to the Committee, it has been stated under the heading ‘Future Strategy for Sustainable
Revival’ that “The company learning from past mistakes plans to continue to invest a part of its profit
for renovation, replacement, modernisation of its plants so as to keep them updated and avoid
occurrence of obsolescence of technology in future”. The Committee feels that the Corporation
committed a costly mistake. It is heartening to note that the Corporation has adopted a future
strategy for sustainable revival one of the key components of which is to use part of its profit
for modernisation and renovation.  In fact, the Eleventh Five Year Plan dealing with the cement
industry has observed that “The industry has been modernising and some units can now boast of having
the state of the art technology plants with energy consumption comparable with the best in the world”.
The Committee is happy to note that the officials of the Corporation are hopeful to not only
register profit but also compete with the key players in the market. In fact, in its presentation
before the Committee, the Corporation outlined the measures taken to turn around the
company. The Committee sincerely feels that the stress given on expansion and modernisation
of the operating plants would result in its revival and progress.
(Para 15)
Recommendation
The Committee notes that the host of measures adopted to support the CCI has
helped it to transform this ailing Corporation and bring it to a level of profitable company
at present. This is a noteworthy success. It has to be carried forward and the momentum
of its revival has to be sustained.
(Para 20)
Further Recommendations
The Committee is disappointed to note that the Department has not forwarded its
Action Taken/Comments on para nos. 15 and 20. It takes a serious view of this Casual
approach and is of the opinion that the matters highlighted in the said paras are of great
importance. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier findings as stated in the said
paras and expects the Department to come out with a suitable reply.
Recommendations
2. On the basis of the information supplied to the Committee it is evident that the
recommendation of the BIFR to close down the aforementioned seven unviable units (at
para 18) was revisited. Based on the revised assessment it was found that it would be
5

6
possible to revive the five non-operating units (Adilabad, Kurkunta, Nayagaon, Akaltara and
Mandhar Plants) and other three remaining non-operating units such as Charkhi Dadri,
Delhi Cement Grinding Unit and Bhatinda Cement Grinding Unit would be sold out after the
re-evaluation of their assets.
(Para 23)
3. The Committee felt that it is a worthwhile effort as the aforementioned five non-
operating units have access to vast reservoir of limestone which is essential for
manufacture of cement. The Techno Economic Feasibility Report for revival of these units
have been prepared and such reports indicate the possibility of their revival to address the
rising demand for cement in our country. The feasibility report outlines the plan for next
ten years which would enhance the capacity of the cement plants and increase its economic
operations.
(Para 24)
4. The Committee strongly recommends that due attention must be paid to the  Techno
Economic Feasibility Reports for the revival of non-operating plants either by starting
production process there through joint ventures or by leasing them to  the other cement
manufacturing bodies.  The Committee would like to get a  detailed report in this regard,
both from the Cement Corporation of India and the  Department of Heavy Industries.
(Para 27)
Action Taken Note of Paras 23, 24 & 27
The Sanctioned Scheme issued by the Hon’ble Board for Industrial and Financial
Construction (BIFR) in May, 2006 for the revival of the company provides, inter-alia, for closure
and sale of the seven non-operating units and expansion/modernisation/technological upgradation of
the three operating units to be funded from the sale proceeds of the closed units. Besides, the sale
proceeds will also be utilized for re-payment to the unsecured creditors, settlement of liabilities of
Yerraguntla unit, repayment of Government loans etc.
There was a thought of restarting 5 of these units through either by Joint Venture or CCI
itself. The matter has, however, been re-examined and it has been decided to abide by the BIFR
Sanctioned Scheme for sale of all the 7 non-operational units.
The assets of the non-operating units have since been got revalued in 2010 by following
the directions of Hon’ble BIFR as per the Sanctioned Scheme for sale of non-operating units. The
Asset Sale Committee (ASC), in its meeting held on 7
th December, 2010, decided that the sale of
the non-operating units will be pursued and expedited through e-auctioning. BIFR has approved this
proposal and the sale of non-operating units is being pursued through e-auctioning by the company.
Further Recommendation
The Committee views that the reply of the Ministry is not satisfactory. The reply
states that the Asset Sale Committee (ASC) took a decision on 7
th December, 2010 for the
expedient sale of non-performing Units through e-auction. Since then more than one year
has passed but nothing concrete has come out. It would have been highly appreciated if the
Ministry would have conveyed the current status of the e-auctioning/revival of non-
performing Units. The Committee, therefore, expresses deep concern over the lackadaisical
approach of the Ministry and strongly reiterates its earlier recommendations by stating that
the Ministry either revive the non-performing Units or put them for e-auctioning by fixing
a time frame and intimate the Committee accordingly.

7
Recommendation
5. The Committee strongly approves the demand of the CCI seeking  enhancement of
retirement age from 58 to 60. The Committee also strongly supports the stand of CCI for
immediate posting of board level executive in the key area of  operations and marketing. It
is understood that the public enterprises selection board is considering a proposal in this
regard for creation of such posts. The  Committee strongly recommends that the Public
Enterprises Selection Board must clear such proposals immediately. The Committee also
would like to have a report  from the PESB in this connection.
(Para 31)
Action Taken Note
The retirement age of the employees of the CCI was 60 years. Due to sickness of the company
retirement age was reduced to 58 years as per guidelines issued by the Department of Public Enterprises
(DPE). There are three conditions, stipulated by DPE for enhancement of retirement age to 60 years
in the sick Company. CCI does not fulfil one of these conditions, namely positive net worth for the
last three years. DPE was consulted for relaxation of this condition. DPE informed that guidelines were
issued on the basis of decisions of the Cabinet. DPE does not have the authority to relax the condition.
However, the Hon’ble Minister (HI&PE), in a performance Review Meeting of the CPSE taken on
16.3.2011, has desired that DPE may, through a Cabinet Note, seek general relaxation on condition on
enhancement of retirement age of employees from 58 to 60 years in respect of all such sick CPSEs
which have turned around but are not meeting all the conditions.
The Company has initiated the process for recruitment of 21 Executives at various levels.
Further Recommendation
The Committee is of the view that Department of Public Enterprises may closely
monitor the entire process for enhancement of retirement age of employees from 58 to 60
years and submit an updated status on CCI including all sick CPSEs which have turned
around but not meeting all conditions.
Recommendation
6. The Committee feels that the demands and concerns of the CCI for posting  of board
level executives in the key area of operation and marketing and the immediate enhancement
of retirement age from 58 years to 60 years to retain the  qualified and experienced manpower
are valid in the context of the articulation of the Prime Minister of our country who has
strong faith on the ability of our public  sector to face the taste of market scrutiny.
(Para 33)
Action Taken Note
The posts of Chairman and Managing Director and Director (RR) have since been filled up.
The post of Director (Fin.) has fallen vacant consequent upon appointment of Director (Fin.) as CMD,
CCI on 26.11.2010. This Deptt. has initiated the process for filling up of this post through Public
Enterprises Selection Board (PSEB), the recruiting agency for the Board level Posts in the CPSEs.
Further Recommendation
The Committee acknowledges with satisfactions this coordinated move of DPE and PSEB
and appreciates that the positive efforts being made in the right direction. Keeping in view the
sensitive stage the CCI is going through the DPE and PSEB should accelerate this process.

CHAPTER-IV
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of the Ministry have not been received
Recommendation
The Committee takes note of the fact that company’s Board in its 298 th meeting held
on 22 nd July, 2010 has authorized C&MD of the company to take necessary action for filling
up of vacant posts arising out of normal retirement, resignation, death, etc., at Operating
Units and Corporate Office with effect from the year 2010 as per Recruitment Rules and
guidelines issued from time to time and the process of recruitment to fill up these posts
is under progress. The Committee would like to have the status of progress made in this
regard.
(Para 39)
Action Taken Note
The Company has initiated the process for recruitment of 21 Executives at various levels.
8

MINUTES

VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 29 th February, 2012 in Committee Room
No. 63, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Tiruchi Siva — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy
2. Shri Ashk Ali Tak
3. Shri K.B. Shanappa
4. Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor
5. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
7. Shrimati Poonamben Veljibhai Jat
8. Shri Ramsingh Kaswan
9. Shrimati Ingrid Mcleod
10. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal
11. Shri Somen Mitra
12. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey
13. Shri Kishn V . Patel
14. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
15. Shri Ramsingbhai Patalbhai Rathwa
16. Shri Ijyaraj Singh
17. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai
18. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
SECRETARIAT
Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and briefed them that the agenda of
the meeting, was to consider and adopt the 228
th and 230 th reports of the Committee on Action
11

12
taken Notes on the 219 th report on Revival and Restructuring of Cement Corporation of India Ltd
and on the 225 th report on Revival and Restructuring of Hindustan Machine Tools Ltd., respectively.
3. Thereafter, the 228th and 230 th reports were taken up by the Committee for consideration,
separately. After some discussion, Members of the Committee suggested a few points to be
incorporated in both the draft Reports. At the end of the discussion, the Committee unanimously
adopted the 228
th and 230 th Draft Reports along with the suggestions.
4. Further, the Committee also decided to undertake a study visit to Jammu- Srinagar-
Chandigarh during the month of June, 2012. Accordingly, it has been directed to take necessary
permissions for the abovementioned study tour.
The meeting adjourned at 12.30 
P.M.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.