PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
Ind. 28198 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKE N REPORT OF MINISTRY OF MI~ES 
ON THE 19TH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
(PRESENTED ON THE lOTH DECE.~1BER , 1998) 
RAJY A SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
D ECEMBER , 1998/AGRAHA YANA, 1920 (SAKA) 

,, 
<.:01\TEI\TS 
J:-;TROOUCnO:-: 
II. Co:-ll'osJTION oF 1 1 112 CoM~urrnu ......................................... •... 
Ill. Rt; I'ORTO F T H!Z COM~ I I TTCI.i ............................................... .. .. . 
IV . 1\:'>:"EXURE·I ...... . ........................................ . . ... . . .... .. ...... . .... . 
V , 1\:--:-<CXURE·II ........................................... . . .. . ... .. . . . . . . .... . .. .. .. . 
J> A tit::-. 
(I) 
(iii)-(\ \ 
1 -1~ 
15-17 
11'-I'J 

lNTRODUCfiO:-: 
!, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standm·g Commiuee on lntlu,try 
havtng been aut homed by the Committee, hereby pre,cnt this Twenty-ci;;htl: Rer · •r' <. ~ 
Action Taken by the Ministry of Mines on the rccommendationslob.,ervallons contained 111 
the 19th Report of the Committee on Demands for Grunts of Mini,try of :.Olincs for !996-97. 
2. The 19th Report of the Committee Wa$ latd on the Table of the Lok Sabha on the :!9th 
August, 1996, and presented to the Rajya Sabha on the 30th Augu•t, 19% . The Mim, try of 
M1nes was requested to furnish action taken replies again'! the rcwmmend.1tionsl 
observauons contained tn the Report. The replies of the Miniwy m n:,pect of all the 
recommendations/observation~ were received. 
3. Subsequently, the Committee at its meeting held on the 28th July. 1997 con'>tituted utter 
aim Sub-Committ ee-Ill to examine and report on the Action T:tkcn Report of the !v!ini,tt y 
of :.hne> on tts 19th Report. The Sub-Commiltec cons1dered and adopted it> draft Rep •r• 
on the 22nd September, 1997. The s:•me Report could not be adopted by the full Commiuee 
as it became defunct with the di~olut10n of the lllh Lok Sabha. 
The newly constiiUted Commiltee met on the 14th August, 1998. and adopted th•· Report 
of the Sub-Commmee. Minutes of the meeting arc appended a> Anne~urc-11. 
Nt ... DIOLHt; 
14th August, 1998 
(i) 
R'\C.HAVJJ 
Chmrmnn, 
Departm/!111 relm~d Parliom('lltory 
Swnding Comnuuee 011 Industry. 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
I. Shri Raghavji-Cir airmnn 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Govindrao Adik 
3. Shri Maurice Kujur 
4 Shri Karma Topden 
5. Shri Rajubh;oi A. Parmar 
6. Shri Ramd;os A,;arwal 
7. Dr. Ranbir Singh 
8. Shri C.O. Poulose 
9. Shri P.Prabhaka r Reddy 
10. Shri Nagmani 
II. Shri Bh;og<~ban Majhi 
12. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
13. Shri Santo~h Bagrodia 
14. Shri Shibu Soren 
.1 5. Shr·i Gaya Singh 
LOK SABHA 
1(1 Shri Muni Lull 
17 Shri M. Srin1vus 
18. Shri Vij;oy Shank:ir 
19. Shri Gyan Singh 
20. Shri Tar<tthand Sahu 
21. Shri R;un;onand Singh 
22. Shri Annasahcb M. k. Patil 
23. Shri Jual Orarn 
24. Shri An and Ratna Maurya 
25. Shri Punnuk1l Mohale 
26. Shri Nadcndla Bhaskar Rao 
27. Shri K. H. Muniyappa 
28. Shri Dutta Meghc 
29. Shri Konijeti Rosuiuh 
30. Shri Bijoy Krishna Handique 
31. Dr. Shakeel Ahmad 
32. Shri Sunil Khan 
33. Shri Ananda Pathak 
34. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
35. Shri K. Palaniswamy 
36. Shri Surendra Prasad Yadav (Jahanabad) 
37. Shri Shakuni Choudhury 
38. Shri Malyala RajHiah 
39. Shri Prabhat Kumar Samantaray 
40. Shri Ajay Chakarbo rty 
41. Shri Zora Singh 
42. Shri Ajit Kumar Panja 
43. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
44. Pi'oL Jogendra Kawade 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar , Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Dire<ZtOr 
Shri P.C. Paikray, Under SecretaiY 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Officer 
(iii) 

SUB-COMMITTEE-III ON ACTION TAKEN RE PORTS OF MINISTRY OF 
MINES ON 19TH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
The Department-re lated Parliamemary Standi ng Committee on Industry at its Meet ing 
held on the 28th Jul y, 1997 const ituted , inter alia Sub-Comminee-111 to exami ne and report 
on the Action Taken Reports on the 19th Report of the Committee on the Demand for 
Gra nts 1996-97 of the Ministry of Mines. The composition of the Sub-Com mittee is given 
below: 
1. Shri Bh;lkta Charan Das-Convenor 
2. Shri Kana k Mal Katara 
"3. Shri Ram Deo Bhandari 
4. Shri Anil Kumar 
5. Shri Ritlal Pd. Verma 
6. Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
7. Shri Nitish Bbaradwaj 
s·. Shri Ananth Kumar 
9. Kumari Frida Topno 
10. Shri K.l-1. Muniyappa 
11. Shrimati Usha Meena 
12. Shri Naval Kishore Rai 
13. Shri M. Ramananrhan 
14. Shri Chand ra Sekhar 
2. The 19th Report of the Committee was presented to the Rajya Sabha on the 30th 
August , 1996 and was laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on the same day . Government 
have furnis hed replies indicating the action take n on the various recommendations of the 
Committee . 
3. ll1e Sub -Committee met on the 5th August , 1997 and considered the ARTs furnis hed 
by the Ministry of Mines on the various recommendations of the Committee and decided to 
have certain clarifications. It again met on the 21st August, 1997 and heard the or<tl evidence 
of Secretary. Ministry of Mines alongwi th Hea ds of subordinate officeSIPSUs unde r Ministry 
of Mines in this connect ion. 
4. The Sub-Comm ittee considered and adop ted its dra ft Report at its meeting held on 
the 22ncl September. 1997. Minutes of the sitti ngs of the Sub-Comm ittee are appended as 
Annexure -!. 
5. The Comments/observations of the Sub-Comrnirtec on the va.rious ARTs as received 
from the Ministry of Mines are containe d in the succeeding p~ragraphs : 
·ceased to be a member of the Committee w.o.f. the 12th September . 1997. 
(v) 
( fiiC)rM(j() l 

• 
• REPORT 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO. No. 4 AND 5) 
l. The major aspect of the demand for grants of the Ministry of Mines, which m the view 
of the Committee should call for concern is its relatively small magnitude. The !11inimy is 
responsible for the exploration, developmen t and exploitation of all minerals barring atomic 
minerals, coal, natural gas and crud e petroleum. The rich ness and variety of underground 
mincr31 wealth the country possesses boggle the imaginati on. That apa rt, the country is 
stated to be on the threshold of a vastly accelerated process of industrial growth . It ts at the 
same time endeavouring to enlarge ats export potenti al. These factors together ~hould have 
persu aded the Government, the Ministry of Mines and the Planning Commission 10 place. at 
this junct ure, maximum emphasis on a massive development of mining operations. In this 
area of activity, the long·term return on investment cannot but be exceptionally high. The 
need to reduce fiscal deficits is offered as justification for economizing on budgetary outlay for 
different Ministries, including for tbe Ministry of Mines, in tbe immediate period. Such 
economizing, in the view of the Commitlee, is somewhat irrational if a "ider time fram e is 
taken into account. Whether it is zinc. bauxite, chromite, gruph ite, gold or other precious 
metu ls or stones, the pos,~ibili ties of mineral-based industri al expan>~on in the country are 
indeed immense, provided adequate technological and infrastructural support does not lag 
behind. The validity of this point of view is illustrated by the strides madi> by the alwninium 
industry in recent yeilrS. Where such domestic processing of mineral products is not yet 
considered feasible, the scope for exports to countries hungry for receiving them is practically 
limitless. And yet, in the o'·erall scheme of thing, the explora tion and exploitation of minerals 
for contr ibuting toward the notion's prosperity appear s to occupy a very modest space. The 
prop osed budgetary allocation of less than Rs. 250 crore for the Ministry of Mines is an 
eloquent testimony to the miniature scale of official thinking. 
During the span of the past five decades the authorities have mostly cont inued to lean on 
the constricted , colonial edifices or the Geological Survey of India and the Bureau of Mines 
in the matter of mineral use and exploitation. The only addition to the twosome has been 
the Mineral Exploration Corporation. Eve n if the activities of the Corporation are 
considered togetherwith those of the other two bodies , the sum total of the thrust is most 
modest. On the Government's own reckon ing, the aggregate value of extraction of minerals 
corning under the purview of the Ministry of Mines exceeds Rupees 30.000 crorc per annum. 
This return is on the basis of an annual budgetary outlay of less than 1 per cent of this 
amount. The allocation for the Ministry, in the view of the Committee, should be doubled and 
tripl ed; in case this be done, the return to the nation is likely to incre ase not just pari passu, 
but five or six times higher than what It Is at present. 
Action Taken 
The Government is fully alive to the need for stepping up budgetary allocations in favour 
of GSI and the MECL subject to the overall budgetary constra ints of the Ministry of 
Finance. It may be noted that the total budgetary allocation for GSl in 1997·98 is 
1 

proposed to be raised to Rs. 200.00 croie as compared to the provision made in the 
preceding year which was Rs. 176.92 crore. 
While enhanced allocations are welcome, it is at the same time appreciated that these 
allocations will not be enough to meet the growing requirements fully. Induction of 
investible funds from outside the budget is necessary to step up the tempo of exploration 
and exploitation of minerals in this sector. To this end in view, a new mineral policy was 
announced in M:rrch, 1993 which envisaged induction of foreign technology and foreign 
panicipation in exploration and mining of high value and scarce minerals. To ensure 
generation of adequate interest in prospecting of new reserves by aerial surveys and other 
means, the area which can now be made available to any investor, domestic or foreign will 
be 5000 Sq. Km. as compared to 25 Sq.Km. which was the position earlier. The guidelines 
also envisage that foreign direct investment in the equity participation by investors can be 
allowed up to 50% of equity. Higher equity participation may also be allowed on a case to 
case basis. However, this limit of 50% would not apply to captive mining of any mineral 
processing industry. In keeping with the new policy, the FIPB has already approved 33 
projects worth Rs. 2312.31 crore. 
Progress has also been made in the matter of processing of minerals. Steps have been 
tallen to augment export potential of raw minerals in semi-processed form like bauxite, 
alumina, chrome, ferro-chrome, charge chrome, iron ore, magnesia ore and mica. Attention 
is paid more to export or minerals in a value added form so as to maximise gains to the 
economy. 
Comments I Observations 
The Sub-Committee appreciates the efforts made and the steps taken by the Ministry of 
Mines to strive Cor higher budgetary allocations and higher private as well as fordgo 
investment in !be mining sector. The Sub-Committee hopes that Government would not only 
maintain but try to enhance this tempo of investment. The Sub-Committee, however, desires 
that the foreign collaboration should be governed by country's terms and conditions and in 
accordance with Indian laws so as to safeguard the national interests. 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO. 6) 
2. The Committee has not the least dobut that, in the context of the country's 
requirements and the global possibilities that await for mineral processing and exports, the 
allocations for the Geological Survey of India and the Mineral Exploration Corporation arc 
altogether meagre. The appropriation sough! for the MECL for 1996-97 is only to the extent 
of Rs. 16 crore. The suggested allocation for the Geological Survey of india , while higher , is 
still Rs. 169.80 crore only. The GSI needs lo expand its activities all over the country and 
lake in hand, simultaneously, the exploration of several types of stones and minerals. It must 
invest in the latest technology; wherever necessary sophisticated equipment must be imported. 
II should, besides, engage scientists and technologists as well as skilled and uuskmed 
manpower on a liberal scale to back up its expanded activities. The acUvities of the Mineral 
Exploration Corporation should expand in tandem. The Committee is therefore disturbed to 
Jenrn that the GSI, instead or planning for a major broadening of its activities, has in fact 
been proposing a gradual reduction in the number of its employees on the reported ground or 
lack of finance. 
Action Taken 
The recommendations of the Commi!!ee are noted for guidance. 
2 

Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee expressed its displeasure over the DlliDDtr in which Government han 
responded to the Committee's recommendation. The Sub-Committee expects the Ministry to 
take some "concrete steps in pursuance of the recommendations rather than simply noting the 
same for guidance. In the opinion of the Sub-Committee, the GSI and MECL do not seem to 
move in the direction envisaged by the Committee. 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO. 8) • 
3. In the circunl61.ances, the Committee will strongly endorse proposals for sharply 
increasing the outlays, both on capital and maintenance accounts, for both the Geologica.l 
Survey of India and the Mineral Exploration Corporation. Whatever additional 
apporpriations are made for the Geological Survey of India are likely to be redeemed within 
the space of a few years because of the extra output likely to be generated in the wake of 
the expanded nature of investigative and exploratory work to be undertaken by the 
organisation. U, for argument's sake, it is assumed that the task of vastly expanding the .scale 
of exploitation is not, for a number of reasons, practicable in the immediate period within 
the ambit of the GSI, the authorities might even consider leasing out, on a experimental 
basis, some proven property to private parties on a contractual basis. Past expe rience h'as of 
course not been uniformly encouraging in such matter. Some parties which were offered 
mines on lease but have not exploited them in a proper manner should hnve their leases 
revoked. The Committee is aware of the sensitive nature of leasing out operations; norms and 
procedures must be carefully worked out and adhered to and must be demonstratively 
transparent. The need for caution here cannot be over-stated in view of certain disturbing 
reports regarding a number of contracts signed in recent years. There is however enough 
intcmalional experience available in this area from which Ute authoriti es, including lh0$4! in 
the Geological Survey of India, could draw profitable lessons from. 
Action Taken 
Private parties do apply for prospecting licences in respect of a number of minerals and 
PL.s are granted for a periOd o.f 3 years extendable upto 5 years. Thereafter they. may or may 
not be interested in a mining lease for the same area depending on results. 
The Ministry has opened up the mineral exploration for all the minerals including those in 
the reserved category to private entrepreneurs including foreign companies. lt has also 
increased the area for which prospecting lease may be granted for undertaking agro-geo­
physical surveys to 5000 sq.km. to one single party. 
Contments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes that the domain of tnineral exploration has been thrown open. 
The Sub-Committee is however, unhappy .over the fact thai the Ministry have not responded 
to the Committee's recommendation regardation transparency in the award of mining 
contracts. Tbe Sub-Committee hopes that the Ministry of Mines would keep the Committee's 
recommendation in view. The Sub-Committee further desires that Utere should ~ a time 
frame within which lease agreements are fmalised. 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO. 9) 
4. Even apart from the possibility of entering into contractual arrangements with private 
agencies, the scope exists for increasing several-fold the activities of the Mineral Exploration 
Corporation. lf the Corporation is assumed the right kind of technical and administrative 
infrastructure, as well as sympathy and support (rom the Ministry, promotional and 
3 

developmental work undertaken by it could promise an exceptionally high rate of return . 
The CorpOration Is at present, being run on almost a shoestring basis nod its technological 
base is almost non·existent. There is, the Committee understands, no operational head in the 
Corporation for tbe past few months; it does not even have a Technical Director. AU this will 
have to change it the challenge of mineral exploration is to be met on beba ll of the nation. 
Action Taken 
The Ministry is m.aking all out efforts tO revitalise Mineral Exploration Corporation. It 
had constituted a Revival Committee Cor MECL, the recommendations of which, both in 
terms of administrative action and financial implications, are under examination. All the full­
time functional Director's posts i.e. CMD. Director (Tech.) and Director (Finance) have 
been filled up and incumbent arc in position. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub·Committ~ expresses its serious concern over the delay on the part of Government 
in accepting and implementing the recommendations of the Revival Committee. It hopes that 
speedy action will be taken by Government in this matter. 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO. JO) 
S. In the course of the present fiscal year itself, the Ministry, the Committee is strongly of 
the opinion, should hold consultations with both the Planning Commission and the Ministry ol 
Finance and post its demands for a significantly expanded scale of activities for both the 
Mineral Exploration Corporation and the Geological Survey of India. It Is desirable that both 
organisations formu late a perspective plan spanning over ten to fifteen yean and dovetail U 
into the country's live year plans. Additional appropriations sanctioned for the current year 
could be taken care of at ihe time of the presentation of the supplementar y estima tes. 
Action Taken 
With Ministry's pers istent efforts, it was possible to have more funds (non-plan+plan) as 
compared to last year as may be seen from the statement below: 
GSI 
RE 96-97 
176.92 
(ln crores) 
BE 97-98 
200.00 
The GSI & MECL submitted l.Xth Five year Plan proposal which has indicated its 
expanded range of activities and also the requirements of personnel as well as equipment. 
These aspects will be taken up with the Planning Commission at the time of the discussion of 
lXth Five Y car Plan. 
Comments/Observations 
Although there has been a marginal increase in the budgetary support to GSI in BE 1997· 
98, but, in the cue of MECL, the Grants have come down from Rs. 8 crore {BE 1996·97) to 
Rs. 4 crore {BE 1997-98). The state or affairs, in t he opinion of the Sub-Committee, Is sorry 
as the Budgetary allocations for these two organisations have not been ubnc.,j wpiM 
repealed recommendations of the Commi•tee. The Sub-Committee reiterates the Committee's 
view U1al Ministry of Mioet; sboul d have detetleG discussions witlt Planning ComJMissiea 1w 
earmarking a sluable chunk of bud&etacy aMocaaion• for bo&la IIMM w•aiu:'nn. 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO. 11) 
6. The liberat.ion from claustrophobic budgetary constraints should enable the GSI and the 
Mineral Exploration Corporation to break new ground, including extraction and exp loitation 
of minerals on a truly commercial scale. The range could cover graphite, gnnite, dolomite, 
4 

lignite, wolfram, gold, diam onds. precious stones of various descriptions and categories. 
True, all this will call for extra money on a continuous basis. The GeQiogical Survey of India , 
the Committee understands has recently set up a consultancy djy~ion. '11\is division"~ activities. 
deserve to be enlarged so thnt the GSI ean generate its own res!iurc es for furiher e'iql~SiOJo of 
work in different spheres. The GS[ must be enabled to acquire the. very latts&, and best 
equipftlents available anywhere so that its work does not suffer. ·' . . 
Action Taken 
GS! has already indicated emphasis for exploration of graphite, granite, dolomite, lignite, 
gold and diamond and precio us stones, etc. in its !Xth Five Year Plan proposals. 'l'he 
Consultancy Division of the GSl had been receiv ing enquiries from private entrep reneurs 
regarding information about various minerals prospects and the resources generated were of 
the order of Rs. 4.42 crore (1995-96), Rs. 3.33 crore (1994-95) and Rs. 2.57 c:rore (1995-94). 
These resources have been generated through sale of GS[ data, Geotechnical Services, 
Exploration of Coal, Training. Geophysical Surveys, sale of Publications and Maps, Marine 
Geology Surveys and Laboratory Stud ies including gem testing. These amounts have been 
received by the Geological Survey of India. The GSI has also compiled mineral com modity 
publications wherein geo logical details about specific mineral prospects have been included. 
It has also undertaken pricing of mineral exploration reports and about 1200 reports !lave 
already been priced which are available for use by private entrepreneurs. 
Cemme ntsoObscrvati ons 
The Sub-Committee notes that the Ministry or Mi~s are aclinll on the lines sueges ted by 
the Committee in~orar as the additio" of metals and minerals for the purpose or extraction 
and txploration is concerned. The Sub-Committee al.so notes the acti\ •ities or the censultancy 
dhisioft or the GSI. As regards the activities of Consultancy division or CSI, the Sub­
Committee is unhappy to Rote that there has been a llecline in the resources generated by it. 
The S ub-Committ~e is, however, or the opinion that the consultnncy di,·ision can generate 
muclt more resources with lite advent or liberalisation in the country. The Sub-Committee afso 
desires lllat a strict secrecy Jboukl be 111aintained by the consult::mcy division in the 
dissemination or information. Tlte Sub-Committee is, further I or the opinion that the financial 
constraints continue to create hurdles in GSI's activities, be that exploration of a varied range 
of minerals or acquisition of new technology. Government, in the opinion of the Sub­
Committee, should place sufficient funds at the disposal of CSI. 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO. 12) 
7. Some of the minerals newly extracted will need a certain degree of industrial processing 
before they are ready for sale or export. Such procnsing may be organised either by a wing 
of the Miacral Explorat ion Corporatio n itself or by private panies via contractual 
arrangemenls with the Government. Given lhe extremely depressed condition of the 
hinterland from where the minera ls are extracted and the potent ial for large -scale 
employment in mineral processing, it should be the centerpiece of official policy to encourage 
the establishment of processing units in the proximity of the mines. [n case this arrangement 
is not immediately feasible, the minerals will. of course, need to be transported to locations 
where mineral processin .g units already operate. The Minis try or Mine,, the Committee feels, 
sl1ould noRelhele$5 actively encoura ge endeavours in the mineral-rai sing States to set up smali­
SC2le Mineral p<"ocessinc units under either cooperative or private auspices. Where necessary, 
tbe l\liJiistry may operate a scheme for advanci11g seed capital kr such venture s. Were the 
experiment successful even partially, it would be a blow as mudt for industrial dispersal as 
ror employment ~:eneration. 
5 
, 
•' 

Aclion Taken 
All the industries using minerals/ores as their raw materials stipulate certain specification 
in terms of chemical composition and physical characteristics. The mineraVores as they 
nGturally occur do not generally conform to the specifications of user industries, thereby 
necessitating its processing to meet requi rements of consuming industries. It is also well 
known that no two mineral deposits are alike in its chemical composition and mineralogy 
and, therefore, require different processing techniques. 
With the identification of new promising mineral deposits it becomes imperative to focus 
our auention on installation of small scale mineral processing plants with efficient cost 
effective technology in the proximity of such small depositS'tnines, and this objective will be 
well served with the recent liberalisation in the policy which permits investmen t of private 
capital, both domestic and foreign. 
CommentS'Observaj..ions 
Tbe Sub-Committee is not fully convinced with Government's view point that the policy of 
liberallsation will take care of the requirement or setting up of Small Scale Mineral processing 
units. The Sub-Committee expects the Ministry of l'vtines to take some inltialive in this 
dir~ction. 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO. 13) 
8. It will be pertinent to consider in this connection yet another possibility. ln a number of 
States, the respective State Governments have promoted Mineral Development Corporations 
directly under their own auspices. Most of these organisations have tended to operate on a 
modest scale and the bureaucratic overhang bas been much too pronounced to permit them 
a respectable level of technical and managerial efficiency. Whatever minerals they have been 
able to locate have generally remained beyond the pale of commercial exploitation primarily 
because pf lack of resources at the State level. The nation 's c.apital stock, the Committee is 
firmly of the opinion, should be considered as belonging to a common pool. The 1\iinistry of 
Mines may, therefore, consider coordinating the activities of the CSI and the MECL wilh the 
funct ioning of such mineral development agencies at the Slate level and offer them wherever 
called for, technical and maoage rial assistance and advice. A common pool of technologists, 
drawn from Central and Stnte level agencies, could perh aps be made available to advise small 
scale operators in the coopernlive aud pri vate sector, engaged in mineral processing activities. 
Action Taken 
The suggestion of the Standing Comminee to draw upon a common pool of technologists 
to advise small scale operators in the cooperative and private sectors eqgaged in mineral 
processing activities has been taken note of for future guidance. 
Mineral Exploration Corporation has already developed contacts with some of the mining 
corporations of the State Governments and has tried to collaborate and develop prospects as 
j:Jint ventures in exploration of minerals leading to exploitation. GSl had been providing its 
technical reports free of cost to the State Governments with the condition that the cost of 
the report may be reimbursed to the GSI on its commercial utilisation. The State 
Governments and the GSI and MECL are interacting with each other through State 
Geological Programming Boards to finalise the programmes of mineral exploitation in the 
country. 
6 

' I 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee hopes that Government would formulate a concrete poUcy In terms of 
lbe Committee's recommendation to draw up a common pool of technocrats for advice to the 
small scale operators. 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO. 14) 
9. Of the public sector units under the administrat ive control of the Ministry actively 
engaged in commercia l operations, the Hindustan CopRer Corporati on and Hindustan Zinc 
Limited are currently experiencing some difficulties. For both units, the lowering of import 
tariffs in recent years in the wake of economic liberalisation has been an issue of major 
concern. "The further reductions proposed in this year's budget have aggravated this concern. 
The predicament these two units face, the Committee feels, calls for some sympathy and 
understanding at higher levels. The units may be Invited to prepare a development 
programme spanning over the next five to ten years elaborating details of planned e2pacity 
restructuring or expansion leading to reduction of unit cost on a step t-y step basis in the 
course of the years. They could also suggest a pattern of lowering of import duties they could 
live with. After examination and vetting, these schemes may be discussed with the 
Ministry of Finance; recommendation for some adjustments in the import duty schedule could 
then follow. On one parti cular Issue, the Committee would like to express Its views in 
categorical terms. As a matter or principle, the rate or duty, whether excise or Import, on 
basic Inputs in any branch of production must not exceed the rate of duty for a finished 
product; a situation where things are otherwise cannot but hinder domestic industrial growth. 
Action Taken 
Hlndustlln Copper Limi~d (HCL) 
It is true that the profitability of HCL has recently been under severe strain due to crash 
in LME prices. LME prices of Copper crashed from an average of US S 2844 per toone in 
1995 to less than US S 2300 per tonne recently. The movement of Copper prices in L.\ll£ 
during the year 1996-97 upto December, 1996 as against average LME of last year i.e. 1995-
96 is reflected in the table given below:-
1995-96 (Average) 
April, 1996 
May, 1996 
June 1996 
July, 1996 
August, 1996 
September, 1996 
October, 1996 
November, 1996 
December, 1996 
April-Decembe r, 1996 (Average) 
(US S per Tonne) 
2844 
2596 
2658 
2173 
1986 
2009 
1941 
1961 
2230 
2268 
2203 
Despite this negative trend which is beyond the control of HCL, the Company bas taken 
various steps internally to minimise the impact of falling prices on its profitability. Capacity 
expansion of its smelter is also being contemplated so that its profitability further improves. 
LME prices have started firming up recently and the Company is reviewing its options 
almost continually. 
7 

lfladustan Zinc Limited (HZL) 
H2L has already drawn up short term and medium term proposals to augment its Zinc 
-eltin& capacity. The short term proposals include addition of smelling capacity of 10.000 
MT (metric tonnes) each to the Company's hydro-metallurgical smelters at Dariba and Vizag 
by debottlenecking the existing u.nits at a cost of Rs. 80 crore within two years i.e. by 1997· 
98. After completion of de·bottlenecking, the production capacity of the Zinc metal at 
Dariba will increase from existing 40,000 MTPA (Metric! Tonnes per annum) to 50,000 
MTPA and that at Viz.ag from 30,000 l'viTPA to 40,000 MTPA. Simultaneously. the 
Company is undertaking the expansion of the Company's most modem and cost effective 
mine at Rampura Agucha from the existing capacity of 3000 TPD (Tonne~ per day) to 4500 
TPD at a cost of about Rs. 50 crore. 
There is also a proposal to set up a new smelter of 60,000-1,00.000 TPA capacity, based 
on the hydro-metallurgical technology, at a tentative cost of Rs. 655 crore for smelter 
capacity of 60,000 TPA, which is under consideration. 
Comments/Observations 
Tile Sltb-Committee is Ullhappy to Mte that the Mtnktry have not responded to the 
recomme ndation of the Committee re&arding (i) preparation of development programmes for 
HCL 1111d BZL spannin&: ovu five to ten years; and (ii) s~tiea o( a pattern for lowering of 
import duties so as to minimise the difficulties for tltese two coapanies on account of lo"ering 
of imparl olulies. It bGpu IJiat the Ministry or Mines are taking action on these 
NCOanlendations. 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA. NO. 15) 
10. As far as Hindustan Zinc is concerned, rhe smelter at Udaipur llftds wholes3!e 
overhauling. This work should be taken up on a priority basis in case necessary through 
infusion ol b!HigetKy at~il!anee. Thil: task should proceed hand in hand with a process of 
"PPJ"&datiotl of teclutical and managerial manpower capallle of liftinc \he level of 
performance several I'IOtcllei high. Tile ~uee ~ lUke a. identical sugutioa for 
the Dariba Mines. 
Actiea Taken 
As mentioned itt comments on para 14, HZL is planning to increase capacity of Dariba 
Smelter by 10,000 MT through de-bottleoecking operations. The Company is also trying to 
improve quality of ores from Rampura·Dariba Mines through R & D efforts and 
development of better indigenous beneficiation processes like column flotation in place of 
conventional flotation which will result in lower power consumption to the tune of 33"!., 
red~ction in silica, incr~se in metal recovery, improvement in concentrate grade by 2 to 
3~ •• lower capital COil (upto 40% savin,s), low4r space sequirame.u, and even sav~ ia 
clacuNcal,, etc. 
Co~lltlo. 
Tile Sett-Cemmittee notes*...._ ~ing ~by G'efft-·t iii tloe .-~end 0 3 
tht l:>erilta S..•Mer. It il, IMwever, unhappy ever lk ..._ ef the Miwistry .. llle 
ComMittee's rMeOUlleo~ 1e ev..ttaul liM 1111e1Mr o( IIZL a1 Udaip-.r. Tbe S... 
ComMIM ~ that Gove:r=•ac w payin& dMe atteloloiu IOwarlli \lie everllauling .C *e 
smeltu- at UUip ~&r also. 
' 

I 
' 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO. 16) 
11. The Commiuee's attention has been drawn to the fact that in the case of a number of 
public sector undertakings processing mineral products, the head office and the registered 
office happen to be located remotely from the site of the mines and main processin& 
activities. This pracllc~ should be discontinued; unless there are compelline circumstances, the 
headquarter s of such comparues should be located in close proxiDlity to tlte site. Meetines or 
boards or directors should also lak e place in offices ·close to the site. 
Action Taken 
Location of the registered office is generally guided by several considerations, such as 
suitability o[ the place for easy and effective interaction with customers within the country/ 
abroad, availability of infrastructure, etc. Even where it is not possible to locate the 
registered office very close to the Mines, an effective interaction with the local units is 
always ensured to see that they do not feel neglected. However, the Committee's 
observatio ns are noted for guidance. 
Conunenls/Observat.ions 
The Sub·Committe~ is not convinced with the Ministry's viewpoint. In the opinion of the 
Sub·Committee, Government should lake steps to provide for infrastructural facilities at the 
site rath er than to set up the bead office at a distant place on arounds of lack of such 
facilities. The Sub-Committee reiterates the Commllt•e's recommendation for locating the 
Headquarter s and the registered offices near the sites. 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO. 17) 
12. The Committee feels compelled to append a separate paragraph on the Ministry's 
apparent lack of decision making on the future of the Bharat Gold Mines. In at least two of 
its earlier reports, the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Commi ttee on industry 
had occasion to refer to plans of revival for this mine, which had been in the past a most 
profitable enterprise. There are, the Committee understands, two separate revival 
packages currently under consideration, but the Government has been unable to make up its 
mind on either. Such procrastination serves the nation ill. The workers continue to be paid 
out wages each month or at intervals of two to three months. Since other working capital 
requirements are not met, actual production is however negligible or nil. The Committee h~s 
satisfied itself that if only the funds the Government have dispersed over the past half a 
dozen years to meet contractual obligations to the workers had been invested in one lot, the 
entity could, in all probability, have been by now put back on its feet. The reference to tile 
Board of Industrial and Financial Reconstruction has nO( yielded any result, because 
whether the unit will or will not be revived depends, in the final round, upon the 
Government's own decisios. Ia llle view of the COMI'IIHtee, It wovld make urue lo withdi'&W 
1M rel'erHCe frOM the BIPR u4, witllwt .. ,. furtloer lOK of time, 111iti.se rNOw~ dirtctly 
,._ llle National Re.ntwal Fwad ~ fieeev aod 1111)110l't ~ lfli 1M nvlval )llaas udow 
c.eosidu~ for tile BGML. 
Adioa T Ilk til 
Jkcar<linc Bharat Gold Mines Ltd. ('BGML) - fact61 eetails - uplained bfiow: ­
(i) It has been Slated that Mines had been a JDOSt profitable enterprise . Howev«, Jin<:e 
1956 when the enterprise was taken over by the Government and since 1972 (wl!oell 
9 

the unit was incorporated as a U>mpany under the U>mpanies Aet) and till date, the 
U>mpany has not been able to earn any profit each year except for 2 years namely, 
1979-80 and 1980-81. 
Details of Budgetary Support (information since 1990-91, only indicated, even though 
Budgetary Support provided in earlier years) given to the U>mpany are as under:-
(Rs. in Crores) 
Year Plan Non-Plan Total 
1990-91 2.42 54.82Pt 57.24 
1991-92 9.30 13.38 22.68 
1992-93 8.50 14.20 22.70 
1993-94 5.00 14.00 19.00 
1994-95 6.00 14.00 20.00 
1995-96 6.00 14.90 20.90 
1996-97 6.00 14.00 20.00 
1997-98 6.00 10.00 16.00 
Pc R.s. 30.82 crores not released to BGML out of Rs. 54.82 eror<s 
(ii) In 1994, the Operating Agency submitted a revival package. Meanwhile, in 
accordance with the new mineral policy, opening the mineral sector to private 
companies, BGML floated two global tenders, one for exploration for gold in the 
lease hold areas of BGML and lhe other tender for extraction of gold from tailings 
by CIP process. In response to the global tenders many parties mostly from Au~tralia 
submitted their bids. After evaluating two parties were short-listed, namely, 
Nonnandy Anglo American Limited, Australia , and Mine Project Investment, 
Australia. After negotiations with NAAL, an MOU was signed but later, NAAL 
withdrew from the proposal. In the same way after negotiations even MPI also did 
not show interest for a joint venture with BGML. 
(iii) The Operating agency ICICI has submitted the revised rehabilitation package on 
29.10.96 which is under consideration of the Government. Thus only the revised 
rehabilitation package submitted by the OA is under consideration of the 
Government. 
(iv) Even though the Company is a sick unit and is facing severe financial crunch, there 
has been no .default in payment of wages and statutory payments such as PF, 
Gratuity, etc. The monthly wages are also disbursed mostly on due dates. TI1ere have 
been on! y six occasions since August , 1992 when the payment of wages was del a ycd 
by a few days (i.e. 2 days to 8 days on each occasion). 
(v) It has been mentioned in the report that the capital needs are not met and actual 
production is negligible or nil. Though it is a fact that the U>mpany is incurring cash 
losses year after year and is hard pressed for capital needs, the company is producing 
650 kg. to 700 kg. of gold every year resulting in an earning of revenue of Rs. 30 
crore to Rs. 35 crore from gold production alone. ln addition, the company is able to 
achieve a turnover of Rs. 6 crore to Rs. 8 crore per annum from diversification 
activities. This include execution of turn key jobs in the Mining Sector and also from 
sale of engineering products. 
10 

Comments/Obse r vations 
The Sub-Committee is unhap py to note that there has been a reduction in the budgdary 
support to the BGML over the years. The Ministry have also not indicated the total quantity of 
gold deposits in the Bbarat gold mines. The Sub-Committee expresses its displeasure over the 
delay that Is taking place in the matter or revival of BG!\'IL. The Sub-Committee recommends 
that Government should consider and take a decision on the revised rehabil itation package of the 
'Operating Agency' expeditiously, within a definite time frame. 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO. 18) • 
13. The other two public undenakin gs under the umbrella of the Ministry, Bharat Aluminium 
and National Aluminium Corporation, have had their ups and downs in recent years. 
Fluctuating international prices arc a factor needing constant watch on the part of these 
enterprises. In their case too, a prospective plan which integrates production planning, cost 
reduction efforts and adjustments in the tariff structure will be a worthwhile experiment. Both 
BALCO and NALCO have however often been victims of disruption in power supply in the recent 
period, thereby affecting their ability to keep up with commitments entered into in the orde r 
book. The Committee hopes these problems will be resolved with the Ministry's advice and help 
and consultations with the State Governments concerned. 
Action Taken 
(a) ln order to increase its share in the market BALCO constantly monitors production costs 
so as to be competitive. BALCO's approach has been to have an integration of 
production planning with market preference , reduction in input costs and period ically 
optimising the product-mix and its pricing. 
(b) NALCO has fomnllaled a strat egic plan for production and marketing upto 2002. The 
Compa ny inter-alia seeks to increase production and improve productivity in the existing 
units by maximising capacity utilisation of existing facilities, optimising operational 
efficiency and de-bottlenecking and development of replacement and renewal plans. In 
its effort to maintain leadership in the domestic market, NALCO is planning to give due 
priority to optimisation of product mix and development of new products for improving 
its turnover and profits. As regards power interruption, the Company does not face any 
problem since it has its own Captive Power Plant to meet its full requirement. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the information furnished by the Ministry of Mines on the 
Committee's recommendations/obs ervations. 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO. 19) 
14. A reference was made in the Committee to the large scale availability of graph ites and 
granites of rare specifications which offer enormous scope for commercial exploitation, 
including for exports. The Ministr y and the Mineral Exploration Corporation may be urged to 
enquire into the possibilities regarding the extra ction and exploitation of such stones, and oversee 
infrastructural activities, including technical and commercial linkage, that may be called for. A 
separate promotional fund at the disposal of the Ministry would be helpful for such purposes. The 
Committee will have no hesitation to recommend the establishment or such a fund either directly 
at the disposal of the 1\'linistry or delegated to the care of the Mineral Exploration Corporation. 
Occasional complaints have been made that sanctions for mining plans are held up for an 
inordinate period in the Bureau of Mines. This matter deserves to be looked into. 
11 

Action Taken 
The recoverable reserve of graphite and granite as on 1st April, 1990 are 3 million tonnes 
and 607 million cubic metres respectively. Both gJ"apbite and granite are minerals with 
export potential and during 1993-94 w 1995-96 the total export of natural graph ite was only 
2034 tonnes (Value Rs. 6.50 crore) and granite 3.333 million cubic metres (valued at about 
Rs. 2658 crore). While the quantity of export of graphite remained more or less same during 
the period but that for granite increased steadily from 9.23 lakh cubic metres in 1993-94 to 
11.33 lakh cubic mutres in 1994-95 and to 12.77 lakh tubic metres in 1995-96. From these 
figures it is evident that exports of granite have shown a substantial rise in the recem past 
and stood third in mineral export from India after diamond and iron ore . 
Government of India, has, therefore, duly identified granite as a thrust sector for boosting 
the country's exports. The Geological Survey of India (GSI) has taken up the work of 
regional assessment of granite resource for whole of the country. State exploration agencies 
are ulso involved in this work. Government of India has set up a Granite Development 
Council to study the various problems of granite industry and to suggest appropriate 
measures for the development of this sector. This was also discussed in the recently held 
conferen ce of State Ministers and Secretaries of Mines and Geology held in New Delhi on 
26th and 27th December , 1996. A separate promotional fund is not being proposed for the 
present. 
As for complaints regarding some delays in approval of mining plans it may be mentioned 
that the approval of a mining plan is preceded by "field-visit" by an 113M officer and the 
requirement of submission of a modified mining plan, depending on the extent of 
modification needed consequent to the "Scrutiny comments'' during the field visit. A mining 
plan could also require approval by Dir~or of Mines Safety. In view of the prOcedural 
requirements arising out of technical and safety considerations, there could be occasional 
cases of delay. However, the effort always is to minimise the time taken for according 
approval. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes that Government are showing a lot of initiative in the extraction 
and ex-ploitation of both graphite and granite and that there has been a steady increase in the 
export of granite. The Sub-Committee however, reiterates the Committee's recommendations 
for the setting up of a separate promotional fund in order to take care of the infrastructural 
activities required in the process of giving impetus to the exploitation and export of these 
minerals. 
RECOMIVfEI'I'DATION (PARA NO. 20 AND 21) 
15. The Committee will now refer to · an issue which it considers to be of outstanding 
importance. Mine workers, while working in mineral quarries, coal pits or elsewhere, belong 
to the most underprivileged and exploited sections of U1e community. The nation's attention 
is drawn to their plight only when an accident takes place; in other words a vast sheet of 
oblivion blankets any discussion of the miserable human condition at this level. Mining is a 
high-risk economic activity, full of hazards and hazards not just to health, death stalks them 
at eash moment. Workers engaged in such longevity eroding and life risking jobs can 
ju~1ifiab1y <hmland ~he introduction and maintenance of safety measures and devices of the 
highest quality and specifications. That apart, the housing, education and health care 
arrangements for their families need to be on a most generous scale. There should also be 
no penny-pinching in providing these families with blanket insurance cover. The Committee 
hopes the Ministry will squarely meet its obligations in these matters. 
12 

A tvrthar mauer deserve5 to be mentioned in this connection. Where work force is 
arranged through comracten, women and children who arc put to work by the contracto rs 
are exploited in various marmers. It should be the responsibility of the authorities to exercise 
vigil so that such exploitation is brought to a halt and the regime of contractors is phased 
out. It is for consideration whether a vigilance conunlttee functioning within tbe Ministry 
could not easure that welfare facilities inteQded for the workers do io fact rencb them. 
Action Taken 
Noted for guidance. 
Comments/Observation s 
The Sub·Co mmittee hopes that Government would be payinc ad-eq11ate al1ention toward$ 
the healthcare, safety, housing and other welfare activities for the workers engaj:ed in mining. 
The Sub·CommHtee reiterates the Committee's .recommendation to set up a 'Vigilance 
Commitlee' within the Ministry to ensure that the benefit of welfare activities actually reach 
the workers . 
RECOJ\.1MENDATION (J>ARA NO. 22) 
16. A final matter, it is ent irely fair that even as the responsibility for economic and 
industrial growth in the country is shared evenly between the Union and State Governments , 
resources that enable the fulfilment of this objective is also shared in a just manner. The 
royalty on mining operations. which is a prerogative of State Governments, is supposed to 
be paid by the Centre to the States o n a regular basis and at rates that are adjustable from 
time to time. The Union Government reportedly has not been honouring this practice; the 
rates are not beiog adjusted every two yea.rs as per standing rules and there is also a certain 
reluctance to cross over to an ad-valorem system of royalty payments. The Committee feels 
that whatever is due to the States ~hould be paid in an equitable manner. The Committee 
further hopes that a part of the prOC«ds of royalty, once made available to the full 
satisfaction of the parties concerned, is made available for the welfare of the people in tile 
mining areas. It is equally important that payment to the villagers as compensation for their 
land taken over for mining activities is paid on immediate basis. The record in this respect is 
most dismal. 
Action Token 
Under Sections 9 of the MMRD Act, 1957' every holder of a mining lease is required to 
pay to the concerned State Government royalty in respect of the mineral removed or 
consumed by him at the rates specified in the Second Schedule tO the ACL ft may thus be 
seen that Royalty is not released by the Central Government to the States. It is collected by 
the States themselves at rates as notified under Sec.9 of MMRD Act, 1957 in the case of 
major minerals and at rates as decided by the State Government in case of minor minerals. 
Further Section 24A of the MMRD Act, 1957 requires the lessee to provide proper 
compensation to occupier of the surface of the land for any loss or damage which is likely lO -.. 
arise or has arisen as a consequence of mining operatio n. Compensation to be paid 01 the 
rehabilitation to be provided by the lessee is determined by the State Government as per 
Rule 72 & 73 of MCR, 1960. As regards ope n-cast mining projects, the displaced person~ 
are paid proper compensation as determined by the State Land Acquisition authorities in 
accordance with the Land Acquisition Act and Central Government Directives . Employment 
is also provided as far as possible to one of the members of the displaced families. 
13 

Comments/Obse(vations 
The Sub-Committee fs unhappy to note lhnt the Ministry of Mines hnve not rencted to some 
of the recommendations of the Committee , viz, (i) adjustment of rates of royalty every t\\o 
years; (ii) reluctance to cross over to ad-valorem system of royalty payment; (iii) making 
available part of the proceeds of royalty for the welfare of the people in the mining arens; and 
(iv) immediate payment of Compensation to the villages for their land taken over for mining 
activities. The Sub-Com mittee hopes tlult the !11inislry of mines will give a serious 
considerati on to these recommendations of the Committee. 
Recommendation (l'ara No. 23) 
17. ln its report on the Demands for Grants for the Ministry for the year 1995-96, the 
predecessor of this Committee made a number of recommendations in regard to the 
operation of the Sikkim Mineral Corporation. It docs not appear that matters have moved at 
all in this respect. Given the exceptionally under-developed nature of the State and its 
strntegic importance for the country's North Eastern region, the Committee hopes that 
Government will be stirred to action at least during the current year. 
Action Taken 
Sikkim Mining Corporation have initiated following steps for improving the working of the 
Corpora tion:-
(i) For increasing the actual working hours, man-winding system is being installed and 
80% of the installation work is completed. 
(ii) Modernisation of the existing plant and machineries is being carried out in the Mill 
and the Mines. 
(iii) Pt"Of)Osal for increasing the p roduction of copper at Pacheykhani coppe r h as been 
approved by the State Government and final approval from Forest Department 
(Centra l) is awaited. Later on, it is proposed that Dikchu Mines will also be 
explored. 
(iv) Share capital has been increased from Rs. 3 crores tO Rs. 6 crores in the first phase, 
jointly funded by Government of Sikkim and Government of India in the ratio of 
51:49. Already Rs. 72 lakh has been released by the Government of India dur ing 
1995-96 and Rs. 63 lakh has been provided in the Budget for 1996-97. 
Comm~nts/Observations 
The Sub-Comm ittee hOI>CS that Government would follow up the various steps being taken 
by them for im(lroving the working of the Sikkim Minera l Corporation. 
14 

ANNEXURE-I 
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS 
I 
FffiST MEETING 
The Sub-Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 5th August, 1997 in Committee 
Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
l. Shri Bhakta Charan Das - Convenor 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Ritlal Pd. Verma 
3. Kumari Frida Topno 
4. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
5. Shrimati Usha Meena 
6. Shri M. Ramanathan 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Om Parkash, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Deepak Goyal, Under Secretary 
Shri Momraj Singh, Committee Officer 
2. The Sub-Committee considered the A TRs received from the Ministry of Mines on the 
19th Report of the Committee and after some discussion decided to hear the Secretary, 
Ministry of Mines alongwith the heads of the GSI, MECL and the concerned PSUs under 
the Ministry . The Sub-Committee decided to meet for the purpose at 11 A.M. on Thursday, 
the 21st August, 1997. 
3. The Sub-Committee further desired the Secretariat to seek certain clarifications from 
tbe Ministry of Mines in the light of the discussion, in the meantime. 
4. The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 4.40 P.M. to meet again on Thursday, the 21st 
August, 1997. 
15 

n 
SECOND MEETING 
The Sub-Commiuee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 21st August 1997 in Commiuee 
Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexc, ~w Delhi . 
PRESENT 
l. Shri Bhakta Cbaran Das-Convtnor 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Kanak Mal Katara 
tOK SABHA 
3. Shri Ritlal Pd. Verma 
4. Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
5. Kumari Frida Topno 
6. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
7. Silrimati Usha Meena 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Om Parkash, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Deepak Goyal, Under Secretary 
Shri Momraj Singh, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
Representatives of Ministry of Mines 
1. Shri B.B. Tandon, Secretary 
2. Shri M.L. Majumdar, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Akbar H. Jung, AS & FA (Steel & Mines) 
4. Shri P. Parvathisem, C.M.D., H.C.L. 
5. Shri S.D. Prasad, C.M.D., M.E.C.L. 
6. Shri K. V.K. Seshavataram, C. M.D., H.Z.L. 
7. Shri R. Gupta, M.D., B.G.M.L. 
8. Dr. S.K. Acharya, D.G., G.S.l. 
2. The Sub-Committee heard the oral evidence of the above noted wilnesses. They were 
asked to furnish in writing the information promised by them during the course of oral 
evidence. A verbatim record of · the oral evidence was kept. 
3. The Sub-Commiuee then adjourned at 1.30 P.M. 
16 

m 
THIRD MEETING 
The Sub-Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 22nd September, 1997 in Committee 
Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Anncxc, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Bhakta Charan Das-Convenor 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Ritlal Pd. Ve1·ma 
3. Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
4. Kumari Frida Topno 
5. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Om Prakash, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Deepak Goyal, Under Secretary 
Shri Momraj Singh, Committee Officer 
2. The Sub -Committee considered the draft Report on the action taken by the Min istry of 
Mines on the 19th report of the Comm ittee and adopted the same with certain 
modifications. 
3. The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 3.45 P.M. 
17 

ANNEXURE-0 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING 
vm 
EIGFITH MEETING 
The Department-related Parliamentery Standing Committee on Industry met at 3.00 P.M. 
on Friday, the 14th August, 1998 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Raghavji-Chainnan 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Govindrao Adik 
3. Shri Karma Topden 
4. Shri Rajubhai A. Parmar 
5. Dr. Ranbir Singh 
6. Shri Nagmani 
7. Shri Bhagaban Majhi 
8. Shri Saojay Nirupam 
9. Shri Santosh Bagrodia 
LOK SA.BHA 
10. Shri M. Srinivas 
11. Shri Vijay Shankar 
!2. Shri Gyan Singh 
13. Shri Tarachand Sahu 
14. Shri Ramanand Singh 
15. Shri Annasaheb M.K. Patil 
16. Shri Anand Ratna Maurya 
17. Shri Punulal Mohale 
18. Shri Nadendla Bhaskar Rao 
19. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
20. Shri Dutta Meghe 
21. Shri Konijeti Rosaiah 
22. Shri Sunil Khan 
23. Shri Ananda Pathak 
24. Shri K. Palaniswamy 
25. Shri Shakuni Choudhury 
26. Shri Malyala Rajaiah 
27. Shri Prabhat Kumar Samantaray 
28. Shri Zora Singh 
29. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
30. Prof. Jogendra Kawade 
18 

SECRETARIAT 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director 
Shri P.C. Paikray, Undet Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Officer 
2. • 
3. • 
• • 
• • 
4. The Committee then took up the Reports of three previous Sub-Committees on 
Action Taken Reports of Ministries of Steel, tvGnes and [ndustry on its 17th, 18th, 
19th, and 20th Reports for discu.ssion. After brief deliberations, all the Report were 
adopted. The Committee authorised the Chairman to nominate the Members for the 
presentation of the Reports to the both Houses of Parliament in the Winter Session. 
5. • • • 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 P.M. 
• • • Rcl•••s 10 01her mailers. 
19 

SECRETARIAT 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director 
Shri P. C. Paikray, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Officer 
2. 
3. 
• 
• 
• • 
• • 
4. The Committee then took up the Reports of three previous Sub-Committees on 
Action Taken Reports of Ministries of Steel, Mines ·and Industry on its 17th, lSth, 
19th, and 20th Reports for discussion. After brief deliberation s, all the Report were 
adopted. The Committee authorised the Chairman to nominate the Members for the 
presentation of the Reports to the both Houses of Parliament in the Winter Session. 
5. • • • 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 P.M. 
•••Relates to other matters.. 
19 