 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
July, 2013/Ashadha, 1935 (Saka) 
REPORT NO.  
24 6 
TWO HUNDRED AND FORTY SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
REVIVAL OF NAGALAND PULP AND PAPER CO. LTD. 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC 
ENTERPRISES (DEPARTMENT OF HEAVY INDUSTRY) 
 
         ( PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 23.07.2013) 
             (FORWARDED TO HON’BLE SPEAKER LOK SABHA ON 23.07.2013) 
PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 06.08.2013 
LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 06.08.2013 
 

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
July, 2013/Ashadha, 1935 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND FORTY SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
REVIVAL OF NAGALAND PULP AND PAPER CO. LTD. 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
(DEPARTMENT OF HEAVY INDUSTRY) 
                
               ( PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 23.07.2013) 
             (FORWARDED TO HON’BLE SPEAKER LOK SABHA ON 23.07.2013) 
PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 06.08.2013 
LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 06.08.2013 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
                                                                                                               PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …………………………………………  ( i ) 
 
2. INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………   (ii) 
 
3. REPORT ……………………………………………………………………………    
 
4. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE – AT A  
    GLANCE…………………………………………………………………………… 
 
5. MINUTES………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
           (CONSTITUTED  W.E.F.  31 ST   AUGUST,  2012) 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
1.   Shri Tiruchi Siva   — Chairman  
2. Shri Narendra Budania 
3.   Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
4.   Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
5.   Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor 
6.   Shri Basawaraj Patil 
7.   Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel 
8.   Shri Vivek Gupta 
9.   Shri Nandamuri Harikrishna 
10. Shri M.P. Achuthan   
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
11.   Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala 
12.   Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
13. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
14. Smt. Poonamben Veljibhai Jat 
15. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
16. Shri Hassan Khan 
17. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
18. Shrimati Ingrid Mcleod 
19. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal 
20. Shri Somen Mitra 
21. Shri P.R. Natrajan 
22. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey 
23. Shri Jayaram Pangi  
24. Shri R. K. Singh Patel 
25. Shri B. Y. Raghavendra 
26. Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
27. Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
28. Ch. Lal Singh 
29. Shri Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
30. Shri E.G. Sugavanam  
31. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.      Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary 
2.      Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
3.      Shri Roshan Lal, Joint Director 
4.      Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 
(i) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamen tary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred 
and Forty Sixth Report on Revival of Nagaland Pulp and Paper Company Ltd. pertaining 
to Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of Heavy Industry). 
 
2.  The Committee heard the representatives of Depa rtment of Heavy Industry and 
Nagaland Pulp and Paper Company Ltd during study vi sit at Kohima and also received 
valuable inputs from them.   
 
3.  The Committee in its meeting held on 22 
nd  July, 2013 considered and adopted the 
report. 
 
 
 
 
 
TIRUCHI SIVA        
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
 
 
New Delhi,  
July, 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Report   
 
The Nagaland Pulp and Paper Company Limited located  in Tuli in 
Nagaland State is a classic case of a state owned c ompany which became a 
non-starter from its very inception.  The founders of this company 
articulated a bold, forward looking and lofty visio n by stating that it would 
be the market leader in the manufacture of world cl ass eco-friendly paper by 
adopting innovative technologies for sustainable development and to strike a 
harmonious relationship between nature and industry .  Established as a joint 
venture company of the Government of Nagaland and H industan Paper 
Corporation Limited (A Government of India Enterprise) it was incorporated 
on 14 th  September 1971 for production of pulp and paper by  using abundant 
bamboo of the north-eastern region.   
2. It took ten years for the completion of the proj ect and the original cost 
estimated at Rs.18.72 crores went up to Rs.83.73 cr ores.  The four fold 
increase in the cost of construction of the project  was indicative of the 
problem of cost overruns which plagued the company and became awe of 
the major factors behind its collapse.   
3. It started commercial production on 1 
st  July 1982 in face of 
insurmountable challenges and difficulties.  It is well known that the State of 
Nagaland faced insurgency problem and the insurgent s through their anti-
national activities posed a threat to India’s unity  and integrity.  The NPCC 
being located in Nagaland was seriously affected by  the law and order 
problem arising out of activities of the insurgents .  Besides, the poor 
performance of boilers and inadequate power availab ility paralyzed its 
operation and functioning.  The company did not hav e its captive power 
plant.  The 6 mega watt of power required by the pl ant could not be assured 
by the NED Grid.  As a result, the company within t he range of 3 per cent 
and 20 per cent. such low capacity utilization was a barometer of its sordid 

performance belying its vision and mission.  The pr oblem was further 
compounded when the skilled and experienced manpowe r bid good bye to 
the company.  Such depletion of human resources and  expertise struck a 
fatal blow to the very existence of a company which  is the only one of its 
kind in the State of Nagaland.  As a result, the Mi ll operations were 
suspended from 1 st  October, 1992.   
4. But, six months before the suspension of operati on, the company was 
returned to the BIFR.  It was done so on April 17, 1992.  As a result the 
financial restructuring of the company its net wort h became possible and the 
BIFR discharged the company from its purview on 13 th  November, 1995.   
5. However, within two years the net worth started declining and by 31 st  
March, 1997 it yet again became negative.  As a res ult, for the second time 
the company was referred to the BIFR in May 1998.  On exploring 
numerous options and possibilities and finding the non-viability of the 
company the BIFR issued orders on 4 th  March, 2002 for winding up of the 
company.  The Committee was informed that “The Government of Nagaland 
and the Company appealed before the Appellate Autho rity for Industrial and 
Financial Reconstruction (AAIFA). 
6. In April 2002, the Department-related Parliament ary Standing 
Committee on Industry examined the issue of NPCC an d recommended for 
its revival.  As part of the exercise to revive it the Committee recommended 
for preparation of a Draft Project Report.  The M/s  Development Consultant 
Limited, Kolkata, was commissioned by the HPC to pr epare a Draft Project 
Report which was submitted to DHI in December 2002 for its consideration.  
It recommended the projected cost of Rs.552.44 cror es for the revival of the 
company.  The background note supplied to the Commi ttee stated the 
following:                
 

7. “The DPR was updated several times along with th e corresponding 
financial appraisal by M/s UTI Bank Ltd. with the l ast such exercise 
undertaken in June 2006.   
 
8. The revival plan as approved by the Cabinet Comm ittee on Economic 
Affairs was conveyed on 5 
th December, 2006.  Based on the Government of 
India’s approval, BIFR sanctioned the Rehabilitatio n Scheme on  27 th  June, 
2006. 
 
9. The Committee was informed that increase in glob al prices of paper 
manufacturing plant & machinery as also increase in  interest rate on term 
loan resulted in cost escalation of the project to Rs.1102.85 crores.  With the 
augmented production capacity of 66,000 TPA, the pr oject was found to be 
unviable.  
 
10. However, the revival of the NPPC was again refe rred back to the 
earlier consultant M/s DCPL to ascertain the viabil ity of the project.  To 
retain its viability, a technically feasible maximu m production capacity of 
89,100 TPA was envisaged by the Consultant DCPL and  estimated revised 
project cost worked out to be Rs. 1479.54 crores.” 
 
11. The Committee was informed that “A review was t aken at the level of 
Minister of State (HI&PE) in February, 2010 wherein  it was decided to 
explore the possibility of turning NPPC to a pulp producing factory.” 
 
12. It is also mentioned in the background paper, “ Accordingly, 
HPC/NPPC engaged another consultant M/s. SPB-PC, Ch ennai in  October 
2010 to re-visit of existing DPR with various optio ns to be considered for 
rehabilitation of NPPC.  M/s. SPB-PC, Chennai submi tted its report in 

January 2011 with a projected cost of Rs.679 crores  to be accomplished in 
two phases.  The production envisaged in first phase is 50000 tonnes of Pulp 
and 19800 tonnes of paper with a cost of Rs 489 cro res.”  The Committee 
also understood that a captive power plant would be  set up for the 
functioning of the plant.  From the documents suppl ied to the Committee it 
is also understood that “In second phase 66000 tonn es of paper including 
16500 tonnes of unbleached glazed craft paper and 1 0097 tonnes of pulp 
(with a cost of Rs 190 crores) would be produced.  The excess pulp 
produced in NPPC will be sold to other HOC units. T he revival plan also 
envisages export of surplus power after meeting Company’s requirement.  
 
13. The proposal has been passed through Public Inv estment Board (PIB) 
in its meeting held on 5 
th  October, 2012.”   
 
14. The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA ) on 4 
th  June, 
2013 approved the Revival and Upgradation Plan of NPPC. 
 
15. T he Committee notes that with every successive Draft  Revival Plan, 
the projected cost for revival increased exponentia lly. With delay the 
accumulated liabilities increased, thereby raising the   cost of revival 
further. The Committee also notes that the original  cost of the renewed 
revival was quoted as Rs 879 crores which was reduc ed by Rs 200 
crores to Rs 679 crores. The Committee expects that this reduction of Rs 
200 crores, would not hamper the present revival process.   
 
16. As part of revival Plan, the authorized capital  of NPPC has been 
increased from Rs.150 crore to Rs.250 crore through  infusion.  The CCEA 
also gave its approval to avail Term Loan from Comm ercial Banks against 
Government Guarantee. 

 
17. In the context of failure of previous revival p lans due to procedural 
delays and with the approval of the new revival pla n, the Committee 
interacted with the representatives of the HPC, NPPC, the State Government 
of Nagaland and the Department of Heavy Industry, d uring its study visit to 
Nagaland on 19 
th  June, 2013. 
 
18. The Committee noted that proposed erection of power  plant of 
higher capacity and related sub-system too added to  cost stated that 
those huge costs have not been envisaged in the DPR .  Therefore, the 
Committee is expects that the Government will provi de every assistance 
for setting up the power plant of higher capacity a nd related sub-
systems.       
 
19.  The Committee was informed that the latest revival plan included cash 
infusion of Rs 552.44 crores through a GoI equity of Rs 261.26 crores out of 
which Rs 10 crores is to be contributed by HPC. The  Government of India 
will also give guarantee to commercial banks to giv e a term loan of Rs 
252.99 crores. Also the DHI had also sanctioned the  writing off all the dues 
towards loans and interest. The Committee sought to know the terms and 
conditions on which the Government would give its guarantee to Banks.  
 
20. The Committee was informed that in addition to infusing equity worth 
Rs 10 crores, the holding Company HPC  will  also have to write off loans 
and interest to the tune of Rs. 134.74 crores.   
 
21. Apart from cash infusion, the revival plan also  gives fiscal incentives 
to the company for 10 years from the date of commer cial production under 
NE Industrial and Investment Promotion Policy (NEII PP), 2007. It allows 

100% exemption from excise duty and corporate incom e tax, an interest 
subsidy at the rate of 3% on the working capital and reimbursement of 100% 
insurance premium on plant and machinery.  The Committee has also 
learnt that the provisions of NEIIPP have been grad ually diluted. These 
concessions have been factored into comprehensive r evival plan of the 
Company.  If this be so any further dilution of the  provisions of NEIIPP 
will adversely impact the revival of the Company.  
 
22. It was informed that of Rs 552.44 crores that w ill be infused afresh, 
major part of Rs 514.25 crores will be spent on capital expenditure, Rs 24.49 
crores will be spent of paying to creditors and Rs 3.50 crores for the VRS to 
100 employees. Rs 10.20 crores has been provided fo r the cash loss from 
production.  In the written reply the Company infor med that most modern 
equipments will be used in the mill and that Compan y proposes to induct 
skilled people in place of unskilled labour force. Preference will be given to 
local educated youth to ensure their retention for longer period. However, 
for initial period, skilled and experienced personn el from HPC will be 
borrowed on deputation. The Committee notes that there is no 
engineering college and polytechnics in the State o f Nagaland.  The 
Company may have to induct local youth trained in o ther parts of the 
country. For long term sustained supply of skilled manpower for 
industrialization and gainful self employment, there was urgent need for 
setting up quality professional institutions.  
 
23. As part of revival plan, the State Government o f Nagaland too agreed 
to increase its shareholding from 5% to 10%. It wro te off liabilities 
amounting Rs 3.31 crores and electricity dues worth  Rs 2.59 crores. A 
tripartite agreement between NPPC, HPC and the Stat e Government ensures 
uninterrupted supply of raw material from the State  for 30 years. There will 

be exemption of royalty on bamboo and other cess fo r initial 10 years.  
These gestures from the State Government  are encou raging factors for the 
revival of NPPC.  
 
24. In addition to reconstruction of plant and mach inery and clearing of 
books, the Company also required enabling surroundi ng infrastructure. The 
Company seeks that the unproductive jhum areas may be gradually 
converted into bamboo plantation. Uninterrupted sup ply of coal and lime 
stone will be required. Construction of reliable ro ad network in the vicinity 
of the Mill and feeder roads was essential for the efficient transportation of 
bamboo and other inputs. The Company was also looki ng for State 
Government’s support to purchase surplus power gene rated by its captive 
power plant. Further the Company seeks that the Tul e Railway station may 
be made operational and that the railway line may b e extended to the Mill 
for easy and cost effective transportation of raw m aterial and finished 
products. The Committee recommends that the Department of Hea vy 
Industry should take up the issues with the State G overnment, Ministry 
of Railways and other concerned Union Ministries. T he Committee also 
suggests that the State Government may extend this support to the 
Company. The Committee is of the view that the Comp any, in addition 
to being a commercial entity, is also an instrument  of inclusive 
development of the region and empowerment of local people. It will give 
an expression to the talent and skill of local prof essionals and gradually 
mitigate the residual traces of alienation among small section of people. 
 
25. The Nagaland Pulp and Paper Company is the only in dustrial 
unit existing in the State of Nagaland.  Therefore,  the Government of 
Nagaland is keen to revive this unit.  It is important to extend support to 
the State Government, the Hindustan Paper Corporati on and the 

Nagaland Pulp and Paper Company to sustain the unit .  However, close 
monitoring on the part of DHI is necessary for impl ementing revival 
plan and making the company financially viable and profitable.    
   
26. The Committee appreciates the support being offere d by the State 
Government. It was informed that there will be regu lar interaction 
between the MD of the Company, and the Chief Secret ary of State, to 
resolve remaining bottlenecks in smooth operations of the Company. 
The State Government was also keen to provide neces sary 
infrastructure and linkages and also to address the law and order issues.  
The Committee supports the resolve of the Central a nd State 
Governments in reviving the Company. Revival and su stainability of 
NPPC will improve the investment climate in the Sta te and the region 
and will expedite process of normalisation after pr olonged phase of 
disturbance. The Committee therefore, reiterates its recommendation to 
revive the NPPC. 
 
*********  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE  
  
1.    The Committee notes that with every successive Draft  Revival Plan, 
the projected cost for revival increased exponentia lly. With delay the 
accumulated liabilities increased, thereby raising the   cost of revival 
further. The Committee also notes that the original  cost of the renewed 
revival was quoted as Rs 879 crores which was reduc ed by Rs 200 
crores to Rs 679 crores. The Committee expects that this reduction of Rs 
200 crores, would not hamper the present revival process.   
(Para No. 15) 
 2.  The Committee noted that proposed erection of powe r plant of 
higher capacity and related sub-system too added to  cost stated that 
those huge costs have not been envisaged in the DPR .  Therefore, the 
Committee is expects that the Government will provi de every assistance 
for setting up the power plant of higher capacity a nd related sub-
systems.                                                                  (Para No. 18) 
 
3.  The Committee sought to know the terms and conditions on which 
the Government would give its guarantee to Banks.  
(Para No. 19) 
4.  The Committee has also learnt that the provisions o f NEIIPP 
have been gradually diluted. These concessions have  been factored into 
comprehensive revival plan of the Company.  If this  be so any further 
dilution of the provisions of NEIIPP will adversely  impact the revival of 
the Company.  
 
(Para No. 21) 

5.     The Committee notes that there is no engineering co llege and 
polytechnics in the State of Nagaland.  The Company  may have to 
induct local youth trained in other parts of the co untry. For long term 
sustained supply of skilled manpower for industrial ization and gainful 
self employment, there was urgent need for setting up quality 
professional institutions.  
(Para No. 22) 
 6.   The Committee recommends that the Department of Hea vy 
Industry should take up the issues with the State G overnment, Ministry 
of Railways and other concerned Union Ministries. T he Committee also 
suggests that the State Government may extend this support to the 
Company. The Committee is of the view that the Comp any, in addition 
to being a commercial entity, is also an instrument  of inclusive 
development of the region and empowerment of local people. It will give 
an expression to the talent and skill of local prof essionals and gradually 
mitigate the residual traces of alienation among small section of people. 
(Para No. 24)  
7.  The Nagaland Pulp and Paper Company is the only in dustrial 
unit existing in the State of Nagaland.  Therefore,  the Government of 
Nagaland is keen to revive this unit.  It is important to extend support to 
the State Government, the Hindustan Paper Corporati on and the 
Nagaland Pulp and Paper Company to sustain the unit .  However, close 
monitoring on the part of DHI is necessary for impl ementing revival 
plan and making the company financially viable and profitable.    
 
  (Para No. 25 
8. The Committee appreciates the support being offere d by the State 
Government. It was informed that there will be regu lar interaction 
between the MD of the Company, and the Chief Secret ary of State, to 

resolve remaining bottlenecks in smooth operations of the Company. 
The State Government was also keen to provide neces sary 
infrastructure and linkages and also to address the law and order issues.  
The Committee supports the resolve of the Central a nd  State 
Governments in reviving the Company. Revival and su stainability of 
NPPC will improve the investment climate in the Sta te and the region 
and will expedite process of normalisation after pr olonged phase of 
disturbance. The Committee therefore, reiterates its recommendation to 
revive the NPPC. 
 
(Para No. 26) 
*********  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
  
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat  
Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry  
 
XXIII 
 
Twenty-third Meeting  
 
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M on Monday, the 22 
nd  July, 2013 in Committee 
Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present  
 
     Shri Tiruchi Siva  — Chairman  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
1.   Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
2.   Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
3.   Shri Basawaraj Patil 
4.   Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel 
5.   Shri Vivek Gupta 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
6.     Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala  
7.     Shri Hassan Khan 
8.     Shri. Kaushalendra Kumar 
9. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal 
10.   Shri Somen Mitra 
11.   Shri P. R. Natarajan 
12. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey 
13.   Ch. Lal Singh 
14. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
15.   Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
 
Secretariat  
 
1. Shri. S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
3. Shri. Roshan Lal, Joint Director 
 
 
   Contd…………..2/ 
 
 
 
 

-2- 
 
 At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welco med the Members and briefed 
them that the agenda of the meeting, was to conside r and adopt the Draft 246 
th  report on 
Revival of Nagaland Pulp & Paper Company Ltd pertai ning to the Department of Heavy 
Industry, M/o Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises , 249 th report on Revival and 
Restructuring of the Fertilizers and Chemicals Trav ancore Ltd pertaining to the 
Department of Fertilizers, M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers, 250 th  and 251 st  reports on Impact 
of Foreign Direct Investment in Multi Brand Retail on MSME Sector and Implementation 
of Prime Minister’s Employment Generation Programme  (PMEGP), pertaining to the 
M/o Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises, respectively, of the Committee.  
 
2.  Thereafter, the Committee took up the reports f or consideration and after some 
discussion, affected few changes and unanimously ad opted the Draft 246 th , 249th, 250 th  
& 251 st  Reports.  
 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to pr esent the 245 th , 246 th , 247 th , 
248 th , 249 th , 250 th  & 251 st  reports to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha since  the House 
was in recess and the term of the Chairman of the C ommittee was ending on 24 th  July, 
2013. 
 
4.   The Committee also decided to present/ lay its  245 th , 246 th , 247 th , 248 th , 249 th , 250 th  
& 251 st  reports in both the Houses of Parliament during th e coming Monsoon Session. 
The Committee authorized Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu , Member, Rajya Sabha and in 
his absence, Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel, Member, Rajya Sabha, and in the absence of both  
Contd…………..3/ 
 
 
 
 
 

-3- 
 
Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu and Prof. S. P. Singh Ba ghel, Shri Vivek Gupta, Member, 
Rajya Sabha to present the 245 th , 246 th , 247 th , 248 th , 249 th , 250 th  & 251 st  reports in the 
Rajya Sabha. The Committee also authorized Dr. Ratt an Singh Ajnala and in his absence 
Shri P. R. Natarajan, Members, Lok Sabha to lay copies of all the Reports on the Table of 
the Lok Sabha.  
 
4. Thereafter, the Members expressed their apprecia tion on the functioning and 
performance of the Committee under the leadership of the Chairman.  The Chairman then 
thanked everyone for their cooperation.  
 
The meeting adjourned at 1.45 P.M 
 
 
 
New Delhi                                                                                                          Roshan Lal  
22 
nd  July, 2013                                                                                              Joint Director 
 
 
 
 
To  
The Chairman and Members of the  
Department –Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry 
 
 
 