79th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/79threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:42]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
SEVENTY-NINTH REPORT
 
ON
 
ACTION TAKEN  BY THE GOVERNMENT ON RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED  IN  COMMITTEE '
S  65TH   REPORT ON MODERNISATION , RESTRUCTURING AND EXPANSION PROGRAMMES OF
HINDUSTAN COPPER LIMITED (HCL).
 
DEPARTMENT OF MINES (MINISTRY OF COAL AND MINES )
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 20TH AUGUST, 2002)
(LAID ON THE TABLE  OF THE  LOK SABHA ON 20TH AUGUST, 2002)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
AUGUST, 2002/SRAVANA, 1924  (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
 
                                                                                                                                   
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
                                                     
2.         INTRODUCTION                                                                                     
3.         REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                  
4.         OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS  AND   RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE  COMMITTEE AT A
GLANCE
5.         MINUTES                                                                                          
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
(Date of Constitution - 1st January, 2002  )
            Shri T.N. Chaturvedi — Chairman @
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
Prof. M.M. Aggarwal
 @@3.   Dr . Abrar Ahmad
 $ 4.   Shri Jayantilal Barot
 @5.   Shri Prasanta Chatterjee 
Smt. Saroj Dubey
Shri Faguni Ram
  ☼ 8.   Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
Shri P.K. Maheshwari

79th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/79threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:42]
Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
Shri S. Sivasubramanian
 #13. Smt. Sushree Devi
14. Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
 
LOK SABHA
 
Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
Kumari Mamata Banerjee
Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
Shri Nepal Chandra Das
Shri Deepak Kumar
Shri Thomas Hansda
22. Dr. S. Jagathrakshakan
Shri A.C. Jose
Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
25. Shri Brijlal Khabri
26. Shri Sunil Khan
27. Shri Manjay Lal
Dr. K. Malaisamy
Shri A. Narendra
Shri Ananta Nayak
Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
 Ø 32. Shri Dharam Raj Singh Patel
@ Appointed Chairman and Member of the Committee w.e.f. 15
th April, 02 vice Sh Ramdas Agarwal who ceased to be
a member of the Committee w.e.f. 09th April, 02 consequent upon his cessation to be Member of the Rajya Sabha
@@Nominated w.e.f. 22nd April, 02 vice Ms. Frida Topno who  ceased to be a  Member of the Committee w.e.f. 02nd
April, 02 consequent upon her cessation to be a Member of  the Rajya Sabha
$ nominated w e.f 14
th May, 02
@nominated w.e.f. 22nd May, 02 vice Shri Jibon Roy ceased to be a Member of the Committee # nominated w.e.f. 14th
May, 02 vice Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 09th April, 02 consequent upon
his cessation to be Member of  the Rajya Sabha
*nominated w.e.f.  15
th May, 02 vice Shri G. Mallikarjunappa ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  25th
February, 02
Ø nominated  w.e.f. 10
th June, 02
☼ nominated w.e.f 11th June, 02
 
33. Shri Uttamrao Patil
34.Shri Malyala Rajaiah
35.Shri P. Rajendran
Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
Shri Tarachand Sahu
Shri Ramanand Singh
Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
Chowdhary Talib Hussain
Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari
Shri Beni Prasad Verma
 
SECRETARIAT

79th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/79threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:42]
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director
Shri  D.P. Ahuja , Under Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
 
I N T R O D U C T I ON
 
 
I,  the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry,  having   been authorised  by
the Committee, hereby present this  ........  Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in  the   Committee's  65
th   Report on Modernisation , Restructuring and Expansion Programmes of  HCL
which is under the administrative control of Department of Mines (Ministry of Coal and Mines) .
2.         The Committee examined and  considered  the Action Taken note on recommendations contained  in the  
Committee's  65th   Report on Modernisation, Restructuring and Expansion Programmes of HCL which is under the
administrative control of  the Department of Mines (Ministry of Coal and Mines ) .
3.         The Committee at its meeting held on  ..............., 2002 considered and adopted the Report.
 
                                                          
 
NEW DELHI;
........., 2002
 
T.N. CHATURVEDI
Chairman
Department -related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry
 
 
REPORT
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Mines (Ministry of coal and Mines) on
the Recommendations contained in its 65th   Report (of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Industry) on Modernisation, Restructuring, and Expansion Programmes of Hindustan Copper Limited (HCL) which was
presented /laid to  on the Table of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha on  8
th March , 2002.
 
 Action Taken Notes have been received from the Department  of Mines in respect of the recommendations contained in
the Report.   These have been categorized as follows:
 
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry of Mines
(Chapter - I).
 
Recommendations:-    7.3 ,15.3 ,16.3 ,18.3 ,22.4 ,22.5 .
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the government’s replies :
(Chapter - II)
 
Recommendations:-    5.2 ,6.3 ,6.4 ,9.2 ,11.2 .
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies of the Ministry of Mines:.
(Chapter - III).
 
Recommendations:-   3.7 ,3.8 ,3.9 ,8.5 ,12.6 ,13.3 ,17.3 ,19.6 ,19.7 ,19.8 ,19.9 20, 21.2 ,
 

79th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/79threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:42]
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the  Ministry of Mines   have not been received. (Chapter
– IV).
 
 
NIL
(Chapter - I)
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
 BY THE MINISTRY OF MINES
Recommendations        (Para 7.3)
MANPOWER OF HCL
Rationalisation of manpower   is  an essential   factor for running  any company in profit.  HCL management should
further  rationalise manpower to the extent possible  in all of its units so that cost -component  of manpower in all HCL
units should conform to  the overall cost  benefit analysis.   Government  may review the  VRS  requirement and  fulfill 
it as early as possible.
Action Taken
During last three, the Government has provided a non plan loan of Rs.440 Crore for VRS. 8373 employees have been
separated by VRS. VRS requirement has been further reviewed and it is planned to separate 3000 employees on VRS
for which the Government proposes to make the funds available as  a grant and a restructuring proposal to that effect has
been submitted and considered by CCEA.
Recommendations        (Para 15.3)
MALANJKHAND COPPER PROJECT
Production performance
The Sub-Committee has been  given to  understand  that MCP is a  prospective  plant of HCL  and hopes that  MCP
would achieve the target of production  of copper metal in concentrate  (MIC)  during the year 2001-2002 .
Action Taken
The production of metal in concentrate in MCP during 2001-02 was 24,085 tonnes. Hence, the target was achieved.
Recommendations (Para : 16.3)
Production Cost
The  Committee notes that the progressive increase in the  production cost of   metal in concentrate  is mainly due to
increase in interest burden and administrative expenditure  on Head Quarter.  The  Committee  strongly recommends
that HCL should   take   steps in right earnest for rationalisation /reduction in administrative expenditure so that  MCP 
would be able to run without  much losses.
Action Taken
The company has taken various steps to reduce its interest burden and administrative expenditure on Head Quarter.
High cost term loan of Rs.150 crore taken from IDBI, bearing interest rate of 16% ,has been with issue of bonds with
interest 10.65% per annum. This has resulted in savings of Rs. 8 crores per annum.
Recommendations        (Para 18.3)
MANPOWER  OF MCP
The Committee appreciates the efforts taken by MCP management  towards rationalisation of manpower because 
optimum manpower is a pre-requisite condition for  reducing the cost of production.  The Sub-Committee notes the 
strategic  restructuring of manpower in MCP off-loading  of ancillary services and re-deployment  of existing manpower
in production sector.  This is a  step  in right direction.  With this the Committee hopes MCP would be able to improve
its condition considerably.
Action Taken
The Committee's appreciation for rationalisation of manpower and off loading of ancillary services at MCP is noted.
Recommendations        (Para 22.4)
SUPPORT NEEDED FROM THE GOVERNMENT
The Committee understands that the  basic  transportation  and  communication facilities are   essential for    running
any plant in profits.  The Committee feels that the Department of Mines should have  acted as facilitator   to improve 
basic  infrastructure.  The role of the Department of Mines is found wanting in this regard.  However, the Committee
recommends that the   Department of Mines should now take up the matter with State Government for improving the
road condition linking MCP ensuring conducive procurement of essential inputs and for transportation of   its finished

79th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/79threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:42]
products. 
Action Taken
 
The performance of HCL has been reviewed frequently and problems expressed by the Management have been attended
to. Funds for (Renewal and Replacement), VRS and  working capital have been provided as per the detail given below:-
(Rs. in crore )
Year Funds for VRS Funds for R/R Working
Capital
Guarantee for raising funds for
working capital
1999-00 200*
   12 75
2000-01 100 28 -- 175
2001-02 140 25 95 __
 
*This includes figures of 1998-99 (Rs. 60 crores)
A proposal for restructuring of the company has been submitted to CCEA.
Secretary (Mines) Addl. Secretary held meetings with Chief Secretary, Government of Rajasthan to sort out problems of
water and electricity at KCC. Department of Mines had written to other Government Ministries & Departments for
placing orders for supply of cathode. The State Government of Jharkhand is being persuaded for taking over of
Mosabani township at ICC, Ghatshila. Department of Mines has requested the State Government of Madhya Pradesh for
improving the road conditions linking MCP .
Recommendations        (Para 22.5)
Telecommunication facilities at MCP
The Committee further recommends that the Department of Mines may   take up with the Ministry of Communication
for providing regular and continuous telecommunication   facilities at MCP.  The Ministry of   Telecommunication
should explore the possibility of  laying of  optic  fibre cable between  Balaghat and Malanjkhand.
Action Taken
 
The Department of Telecommunication has laid optic fibre cable between Balaghat and Malanjkhand.
(Chapter - II)
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the government’s replies:
Recommendations        (Para 5.2)
Physical Performance
The  Committee is of the view that  HCL management should  make efforts for producing metal  in concentrates ,
refined copper ( Cathode) and wire rod to the extent of installed capacity of plant in cost  effective manner.  Efforts
should be made for making each and every unit of  HCL a  centre of profit making  so that the HCL would come out of 
red.  HCL can survive   in this competitive  era only  when  all units of HCL  are  made  economically viable.
Action Taken 
 
Metal in Concentrate production from the most economic mine i.e. .Malanjkhand Copper Project has been increased and
production of MIC during the last year i.e. 2001-02 was 24,000 tonne against three  years average production prior to
capital restructuring ( 1996-97 to 1998-99) of 19,700 tonne .
 
The production of cathode during 2000-01 and 2001-02 was 42,245 tonne and 40,215 tonne respectively against the
average of three  years prior to capital restructuring (1996-97 to 1997-98) of 38,900 tonne. Production of CC Rod at
Taloja matches with cathode production and commercially it is not a good proposition to produce wire rod to the extent
of installed capacity as it would increase the loss.
Recommendations        (Para 6.3) and  (Para 6.4)
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF HCL
The steps taken  still do not  appear to be  sufficient to  make the  company   come upto expectations.
(Para 6.3)
The Committee understands that HCL, whose income  generated is less than its operating  cost,   a total   turn around 
strategy is required  for survival.  HCL management should chalk out effective measures for cost reduction and also

79th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/79threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:42]
chalk out unit-wise strategy to make them viable.
(Para 6.4)
Action Taken
Benefits of steps taken during the last four years to improve the financial performance of the company had been negated
substantially by corresponding increase in price of inputs, lower customs duty, downturn of LME price of copper and
higher interest burden. Cash loss vis-a-vis LME price of copper during the last six years are given below:-
                                                            (Rs.. in crore )
Year LME price(US $)   Cash loss
1996-97 2257 103.09
1997-98     2097 129.03
1998-99 1581 203.84
1999-2000     1670 121.18
2000-01 1806 76.77
2001-02 1527 151.09
 
 
Efforts to reduce loss in each unit have been initiated. It is planned to close two uneconomic underground mines
namely,  Surda and Khetri,  and separate 3000 employees. With increased productivity and various cost reduction
measures, it is projected that the cash loss for the year 2002-03 would be around Rs. 70 crore. In business terms, it is
most appropriate that the company is disinvested at the earliest as has been decided by the Cabinet Committee on
Disinvestment on 26.12.200 I.
Recommendations        (Para 9.2)
SWOT ANALYSIS OF HINDUSTAN COPPER LTD. (HCL)
The Committee is of the opinion that HCL should capitalise on its strength and explore  ways and means for making
benefits of opportunities.  The Sub-Committee further recommends that HCL should  undertake research  projects for
cost effective processing of low copper content in  Ore, determine path breaking approaches  for  achieving economy of
scales.
Action Taken
The committee's opinion on the subject is noted. However, at present the company is incurring cash losses and is not in
a position to spend any amount for undertaking research projects.
Recommendations        (Para 11.2)
KHETRI COPPER COMPLEX          (KCC)
SWOT analysis of KCC
The weaknesses seem to  be the major issues that led to the present state of the company.  New ore reserves should be
explored.  The Mine needs to be modernised.  The Committee  is of the opinion that, once the strategic  partner in HCL
comes forward and strategic  investment is made to upgrade technology and equipment to achieve better performance,
things would  automatically improve with Khetri  Copper Complex.  HCL  management should undertake   steps to
rationalise  its manpower  making use of by product  recovery  facilities.
Action Taken
The proposed future expansion/modemisation of KCC is best left to the decision of the successful bidder of HCL if he
decides to run the project after taking over ownership of the company. The manpower is being rationalised by closing
Khetri mine.
(Chapter - III).
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies of the Ministry of Mines of
further recommendation of the Committee is required :.
 
Recommendations
 
CAPITAL RESTRUCTURING (Para : 3.7)
The Committee is constrained  to express  its concern over the adverse business prospects of Hindustan copper Ltd due
to weak financial base of the company which   continued to work long   on  unviable mines .  The Company is  in deep   
troubles  and is  heading towards a  point of no return.  Its  operation might come to a standstill if  concrete steps  are not

79th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/79threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:42]
taken in right direction.    The Committee hears the  rings of  the alarming bell .  Its really a time to  work  now or never
.
Action Taken
 
The objectives of the first Capital Restructuring sanctioned in 1999 were to save the company from being referred to
Board for Industrial and Financial Restructuring (BIFR) and improvement in its overall operational performance. The
first objective of saving the company from BIFR was achieved while the other objective of improvement in financial
performance could not be achieved.
 
2.         Efforts to reduce cost of production and expenses have been narrated in the report. However, more steps have
been taken which are given below:-
Production of Metal in Concentrate from most economic mine i.e. Malanjkhand Copper Project(MCP) and loss of
production due to closure of uneconomic mines had been partly offset by increase in production from Malanjkhand
Copper Project.
Improvement in productivity i.e. Refined Copper production per man.
Despite steep increase in price of petroleum products, power tariff and substantial reduction in customs duty on the
finished copper products, the average cash loss has been continued.
Further Recommendation 
 
The Committee is constrained to express its concerns over the fact  that HCL management  could not inject a new  lease 
of life by  implementing  successfully the  First capital restructurings  sanctioned  in 1999. The cherished objective of
the first restructuring programme was to improve the company's overall operational performance.  However, the
management just managed the company form falling in the net of Board for Industrial and Financial Restructuring
(BIFR).  Efforts to reduce the cost of production    was not fruitful   due to steep increase in price of petroleum product,
power tariff  and  substantial  reduction in custom duty on the finished copper products, as a result of which, the
company continues to run in loss.
 
            The Committee is of the opinion that HCL requires a total  overhauling, which  is possible only when
management with a new  vision and structuring strategy is put in place.
 
Recommendation  (Para 3.8)
CAPITAL RESTRUCTURING
The Committee is  constrained  to note  that  efforts made for capital  restructuring could not   prove beneficial  to the
company.  Net worth of the company is dwindling and the company is almost knocking the door of BIFR.  The
Committee feels that concrete steps  towards capital restructuring must be taken for  ameliorating  the company at the
earliest not with standing the process of disinvestment. 
Action Taken :
 
In order to keep the net worth of the company positive, another restructuring proposal is under active consideration of
the Government.
Further Recommendation
 
 The Committee observes that it is due to failure in achieving  the objectives of first capital restructuring  programme 
that HCL's net worth started  to dwindle  and the financial  base of the company  continued to suffer further.  However,
the Government has  given  due hearing to the warning bell sounded by the Committee and sanctioned intermediate 
package in order to keep company operational.
            The Committee desires that the Department of Mines would furnish the details of financial assistance as
extended by the Government  along with the outcome of the package on the financial  performance of the company.
Recommendation  (Para 3.9)
CAPITAL RESTRUCTURING
The Committee feels that    factor like fluctuating  LME price    is perhaps beyond  reach  and controlling limit of HCL
management and the Department of Mines.  However, the Department of Mines  in general and HCL management   in
particular  should take steps for  harnessing  the further business prospects of HCL by working on  those  factors  viz 
identification  of viable mines/deposits , reduction in  cost  of production  , interacting  with State Governments for 

79th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/79threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:42]
providing power to the units of HCL at the viable rate, approaching Ministry of Finance  for rationalisation of  tax
structure. 
Action Taken
 
Process to close further two uneconomic mines namely Surda and Khetri has been initiated.
Increase in the recovery rate of power being supplied to the employees in residential colony of the different projects has
been implemented.
The State Governments of Jharkhand and Rajasthan have been requested to take over part of the residential colonies at
Indian Copper Complex(ICC) and Khetri Copper Complex (KCC) to reduce substantial expense being incurred by the
company on maintaining water and power supply etc. The matter is being followed  up regularly.
Higher targets for improvement in recovery and reduction in power and fuel cost have been set.
Geological Survey of India(GSI) is doing exploration work near Malanjkhand Copper Project to locate better reserves
which can be exploited more economically. However, in view of proposed disinvestment further expansion would be
unjustified.
In line with the suggestions made, Department of Mines has already taken up the matter of rationalisation of tax
structure with the Ministry of Finance on the basis of the recommendations made by a Multy- Disciplinary Committee
on Taxation Regime for the Mineral Sector in the country .
 Further Recommendation
 
While the Committee  welcomes the closure of two  uneconomic mines namely  Suda and Khetri, the
Committee,however, desires that the interest  of workers should be kept in  mind   while giving VRS to workers
working  in these two mines.
 
            The Committee desires that the Department of Mines would furnish  the details of  Jharkhand  and Rajasthan
Government’s response to the  request of Department of Mines for taking over  part of the  residential  colonies at
Indian Copper Complex (ICC) and Khetri   copper Mines (KCC) for maintaining waste and power supply etc in order to
reduce expenditure presently incurred by the company.
 
            As regards the issues of identification of viable mines /deposits the committee is of the considered opinion that 
Geological   survey of India (GSI)  should continue with its exploration work in Malanjkhand  and other areas of the 
country to locate better reserves  for their commercial   exploitation irrespective  of the proposed disinvestment of the
company.
 
            The Committee is pleased to note that the Department  of Mines  has taken up the matter of rationalisation of tax
structure with the Ministry of Finance.  The Committee desires that the Department of Mines should   apprise the
Committee of the outcome of efforts made by   it.  The Department of Mines may  also furnish  the details of the
recommendation made by a Multi-Disciplinary  Committee  for the mineral sector in the country in regard to
rationalisation of  tax structure.
 
Recommendations          (Para 4.2)
PRODUCTION CAPACITY OF  HCL MINES
The Committee,  while taking note of the Ore capacity  of  KCC, ICC and MCP  mines  of HCL,  hopes that all the units
would make full capacity utilisation  in a cost effective manner.   The Committee also recommends that  all units of 
HCL  smelter plant  would make optimum capacity  utilisation for the production of  metal.  The Sub-Committee also
hopes that Tajola copper plant would also produce   CC  Rod to the maximum capacity .
Action Taken :
 
Four underground unviable mines have been closed and it is proposed to close two more mines while augmenting the
production from open cast mine at Malanjkhand.
 
The optimum capacity utilisation for Smelter Plants located at KCC and ICC is difficult in view of the lower availability
of MIC from economic captive mines. The benefit from processing of imported concentrate has dwindled substantially
because of steep reduction in customs duty from 35% to 25% in the year 2002-03.
 Further Recommendations

79th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/79threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:42]
 
The Committee has been given an   understanding that  due to lower availability  of MIC ( Metal- in- concentrate)   in
captive mines at KCC and ICC it is difficult to make full capacity utilisation.  The  steep reduction  in custom duty from
35%  to 25% in the   financial year 2002-03 had added to the woes of the company,
 
            While the committee welcomes the closure of  unviable  mines and continuation of  operation at the
economically viable mines, the committee would like to know the impact of closure of unviable  mines on the physical
and financial performance  of the company.
 
Recommendations  (Para 8.5)
STATUS OF   AMR SCHEMES IN HCL
The Committee recommends that workers interest should  be protected  when the company  is disinvested.  In case the
disinvestment does not take  place  within six months the Government should  come forward to  implement its 
revival/expansion plans.
Action Taken
 
The Government would try to include suitable clauses in the share Purchase Agreement to be signed with the
prospective buyer(s) of HCL to protect the interest of the workers to the best possible extent i.e. no retrenchment would
be made in the first year after taking over the charge of HCL by the buyer; and in case someone is given VRS, it should
not be less than what the Government is already giving.
 
The exercise for disinvestment, which is on, would take about three to four months for completion. In case no suitable
buyer is found, then the company would be closed, as has also been observed by the Ministry of Finance in their
comments to draft CCEA note for restructuring of HCL.
Further Recommendations
 
The Committee is pleased to note the government assurance  for incorporation of suitable clause to protect the interest
of  workers  in the share purchase agreement of be signed with the prospective buyer(s)  of HCL in the case of
protection of  disinvestment of the company.  The committee is of the considered opinion that revival/expansion
programmes of HCL   shouldn't be delayed beyond a fixed time in view of   proposed disinvestment.  As far as the
observation of the Ministry of Finance made in the  draft CCEA note far restructuring of HCL regarding the closure of
company, in case no suitable buyer is found, is  concerned, the committee  opines that government  should  reconsider
its decision.  That is so because closure of company would make even the Malanjkhand copper project defunct.  In any
case profit making operational plant should not be affected with the closure of the company, the  Committee   maintains.
PROBLEMS BEING FACED BY KHETRI UNIT OF HCL   (Para : 12.6)
The Committee is of the opinion that the problems of KCC are deep-rooted   therefore, immediate panacea   might not
be  possible.   Since  total  turn around  of  KCC involves huge investment  it may not be  possible before the
restructuring takes place.  However, the Committee is of the view that  the process of restructuring   should not be
procrastinated.  In case it is going to be  delayed for more than six months Government should come to the rescue  of  
KCC with necessary fund   for an early  solution to  its problems.
 
Action Taken
As stated earlier, a restructuring proposal for HCL which includes KCC has been submitted to CCEA to improve
chances of disinvestment.
Further Recommendations :
 
The Committee hopes that any decision in this regard  to Khetri unit of HCL should not  be delay beyond a period of
time as the same would  erode the financial base of the company further.
 
Recommendations
FUTURE  BUSINESS  PROSPECTS OF KCC         (Para 13.3)
 The Committee is of the opinion     that HCL management should  take up  the case of  Banwas Deposits of KCC  on
priority basis so that  the financial position of  HCL in general  and KCC in particular would  improve  to  some extent. 
Development  of Banwas  deposits should not be linked to the disinvestment.  Government should also  give necessary

79th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/79threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:42]
assistance for  modernisation of the  Kolihan mine and increasing smelter capacity.
Action Taken
 
It may not be prudent to invest funds for development of mine and increasing smelter capacity when the process for sale
of Government of India's entire equity to a buyer is on.
Further Recommendations :
 
The Committee was apprised of the potential of  Banwas deposits that is why the committee had recommended for 
commercial expectation of Banwas deposits on a priority basis.  This Committee recommends that development of
Banwas  deposits should not be  linked to the issue of disinvestment as linking of each and every  schemes/projects
with  disinvestment would not only have  adverse financial effect  on company but also detract prospective buyers.
 
Recommendations        (Para 17.2) and (Para 17.3)
COST COMPONENTS OF MCP
The Committee, while  noting the cost components of  MCP, feels that MCP management should take  steps towards
rationalisation of  expenditure on stores  and  spares fronts.
(Para 17.2)
Since State Government is getting a fairly good amount by way of royalty, the Committee recommends that also  the
Department of Mines also may  take up the matter  with the state Government for providing  power to MCP at
economically  viable rate.
(Para 17.3)
Action Taken
 
As per the Committee's recommendation, several steps for rationalisation of expenditure on stores and spares front have
been initiated like verification of inventory, maintaining minimum stock avoiding dependence on single supplier etc.
 
The Department of Mines has already taken up the matter with the State Government of Madhya Pradesh for providing
subsidised power to MCP.
 
Further Recommendations
 
The Committee would like know the  savings made by MCP management   due to steps taken towards rationalisation of
expenditure   on stores   and spares parts   like verification  of inventory  maintaining minimum   stock and availing 
dependence  on single supplier etc.
 
            The Committee would like also to know the  response of state government of Madhya Pradesh  to the  request of
department of    Mines for providing subsidized  power to MCP.
 
Recommendations        (Para 19.6) , (Para 19.7) ,(Para 19.8) ,(Para 19.9) and (Para 20)
 
FUTURE BUSINESS  PLANS OF MCP
The Committee appreciates the efforts of MCP management  for chalking out feasible  and profitable future business
plan of MCP.  The Committee notes the possible operational  efficiency desired to be achieved    due to  improvement 
of modified ultimate pit of MCP over ultimate  pit of MCP as designed by  RTZC.  The Committee hopes that the
Department of Mines  would  facilitate MCP management to take advantage of modified ultimate pit so  MCP would be
able to save Rs.300.00 as targeted.                                                                         
(Para 19.6)
The Committee further recommends that MCP management should take steps towards developing South part of  the 
mine for  in-pit dumping.
(Para 19.7)
The Committee notes that MCP management is exploring the possibility of opening up  an economically viable
underground mine as a replacement for the  open pit mine.  This is a futuristic  step.  The Sub-Committee hopes that 
MCP  management would come out   with pre-feasibility report on  development of  underground mine within the  set
time limit.  Government  should come forward to give necessary assistance.                                           

79th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/79threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:42]
(Para 19.8)
           
The Committee  hopes that MCP management would continue to make efforts for identifying  potential  copper 
bearing  deposits for further  commercial production of metal.  The Department of  Mines should  facilitate MCP
management for  procuring PL/ML, whenever  MCP management so requires.
(Para : 19.9)
The Committee  is of the view that the Department of Mines should examine the possibility of installation of  double
stage cycloning  facilities  for extending downstream facilities and if   found feasible the Department of Mines  should
make efforts for providing  adequate investment.
(Para:  20)
Action Taken  
The Department of Mines have facilitated the efforts of HCL to procure/renewal lease in Godori area in Madhya
Pradesh. The decision on the development of the south part of open cast mine and  developing another underground
mine and installing double stage cyclone facilities should best be left to the buyer who purchase the equity of
Government of India in HCL. However, HCL has been asked to submit details of installation of double stage cyclone
facilities.
Further Recommendations
The Committee is constrained to opine that the replies furnished  by the department of Mines  is incomplete and  
incomprehensive which serves no  purpose.  The Department of Mines maintained conspicuous  silence over
committee's  recommendation pertaining to possible operations efficiency expected to be achieved in the case modified  
ultimate  pit of MCP is used and  thus proposed saving of Rs.300.00
 
            The Committee is of the  firm view  that since MCP    is a prospective plant of    HCL  and every decision should
be linked with the issue  of disinvestment.  Therefore, the committee reiterates its recommendations that  MCP
management   and the Department of Mines should make    efforts/explore and  examine  the following  issues:-
 
Towards developing   South part of  the mine  far in-pit
Opening up of  economically viable  underground mine as a replacement of open pit mine.
Identifying potential copper  bearing deposits for  further commercial product of   metal
Possibility of installation of double stage cycloning facilities for indenting downstream facilities.
Committee strongly recommends that  either  the process of disinvestment should  be accelerated or the  above
recommendation  be implemented for proper and timely  availing of  opportunities  before the MCP.
 
Recommendations        (Para 21.2)
SWOT ANALYSIS OF  MCP
The Committee understands that  MCP due to its  open pit mines and experience manpower, has a trend of increasing  
operational performance.  If  investment  made in time  on equipment   and infrastructure,  MCP  would further increase
the  operational efficiency.    The Committee  recommends that   the Department of Mines would give due consideration
to the strategic expansion and modernisation programmes of MCP at the time of capital restructuring of HCL  as a
whole.  In sufficient infrastructure  are the basic weaknesses   and need to be addressed.
 
Action Taken : 
 
In view of the disinvestment of HCL which is at  an advanced stage, it will not be prudent to invest in expansion and
modernisation programmes  of MCP .
 
Further Recommendations :
 
The Committee is of the opinion that development of basic infrastructure would be required irrespective of the fact that
MCP either remains as a plant under PSU, or in joint venture   or a private sector enterprise.  Government should
continue its efforts for providing improved infrastructure as even the plant goes for disinvestment it would fetch
strategic price.  Therefore, the issue of development of   infrastructure should not be undermined.  The Committee is of
the opinion that the Department of Mines should guide MCP management for assessing examine SWOT analysis of
MCP   and make this best efforts for overcoming its  weaknesses and threats while taking advantage of strengths and

79th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/79threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:42]
opportunities.
 
 New Recommendation
 
Capital restructuring of   Hindustan Copper Ltd  (HCL)
 
The Department of Mines  in its communication  vide O.M. No. 20(20)/-97-Cdn.  dated  15
th July, 2002 informed the
Committee that cabinet has approved, on  11th June, 2002 the Capital restructuring of Hindustan Copper Ltd. which
inter-alia include :-
 
conversion of Rs.440 crore to  grant-in-aid from non-plan ;
Rs.71.50 crore  plant loan  into equity;
waiver of outstanding interest on loan of Rs.25.72 crore;
extension of period of Government  for working capital;
waiver of outstanding guarantee fee i.e. Rs.6.75  crore  for extending  Government of India guarantee for raising
working capital;
grant of Rs.130 crore for VRS for 3,000 employees for closing Surda and Khetri Mines.
 
The Committee notes the elements of capital restructuring package for HCL and  hopes that HCL management would
make an all out effort for implementing the capital restructuring package  a success . The Committee hopes further that
the physical and financial performance of the company would improve once capital restructuring package is
implemented.
 
(Chapter – IV)
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the  Ministry of Mines   have not been received.
NIL
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS  AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF  THE
COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE
 
 
The Committee is constrained to express its concerns  over the facts that HCL management  couldn't inject a new   lease 
of life by  implementing  successfully the  First capital restructurings  sanctioned  in 1999 which was  to improve the 
company's overall operational performance.  However, the management just managed to  save the company from falling
in the net of Board for Industrial and Financial Restructuring (BIFR).  Efforts to reduce the cost of production get
integrated due to steep increase in price of petroleum product power tariff and substantial reduction in custom duty on
the finished copper products, as a result of which, the company continues to run in loss.
 
            The Committee is of the opinion that HCL requires a total  overhauling, which  is possible only when
management with a new vision and structuring strategy is put in place .
 
(Para : 3.6)
 
            The Committee observes that it is due to failure in achieving  the objectives of first capital restructuring 
programme that HCL's net worth started    to dwindle  and the financial  base of the company  continued to suffer
further.  However, the Government has  given  due hearing to the warning  bell  sounded  by the Committee and
sanctioned intermediate  package in order to keep company operational.
            The Committee desires that the Department   of Mines would  furnish the details of financial assistance as 
extended by the  government  alongwith the outcome of the package on the financial  performance of the company.
(Para : 3.7)
 
            While the Committee  welcomes the closure of two  uneconomic mines namely  Suda and Khetri the Committee

79th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/79threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:42]
, however,   desires that the interest  of workers should be kept in  mind   while giving VRS to workers working in these
two mines.
 
            The Committee desires that the Department of Mines would furnish  the details of  Jharkhand  and Rajasthan
Government is response to the  request of Department of Mines for taking over  part of the  residential  colonies  at
Indian Copper Complex (ICC)  and Khetri   copper Mines (KCC)   for maintaining waste  and power supply    etc  in
order to reduce expenditure presently incurred by the company.
 
            As regards the issues of identification of viable mines /deposits the committee is of the considered opinion that 
Geological   survey of India (GSI)  should continue with its exploration work in Malankhand  and other areas of the 
country to locate better reserves  for their commercial   exploitation irrespective  of the proposed disinvestment of the
company.
 
            The Committee is pleased to note that the Department  of Mines  has taken up the matter of rationalisation of tax
structure with the Ministry of Finance.  The Committee desires that the Department of Mines should   apprise the
Committee of the outcome of efforts it.  The Department of Mines may  also furnish  the details of the recommendation
made by a Multi-Disciplinary  Committee as  for the mineral sector in the country in regard to rationalisation of  tax
structure.
 
(Para : 3.8)
 
            The Committee has been given an understanding that  due to lower availability    of MIC ( Metal- in-
concentrate)   in captive mines at KCC and ICC it is difficult to make full capacity utilisation.  The  steep reduction  in
custom duty from 35%  to 25% in the   financial year 2002-03 had added to the woes of the company.
 
            While  the committee welcomes the closure of  unviable  mines and continuation of  operation at the
economically viable  mines, the committee would like to know the impact of closure of unviable  mines on the physical
and financial performance  of the company.
 
(Para : 4.2)
 
            The Committee is pleased to note the government   assurance   for incorporation of suitable clause to protect the
interest of  workers  in the share purchase agreement of be signed with the prospective buyer(s)  of HCL in the case of
protection of  disinvestment of the company.  The committee is of the considered opinion that revival/expansion
programmes of HCL   shouldn't be delayed beyond a fixed time in view of  the proposed  disinvestment .  As   far as the
observation of the Ministry of Finance  made in the  draft CCEA note far restructuring of HCL regarding   the closure of
company, in case no suitable buyer is found, is  concerned, the committee  opines that government  should  reconsider
its decision.  That is so because  closure of company would  make even the Malanjkhand copper  project defunct.  In any
case profit  making operational plant  should not be affected with the closure of the  company the  Committee  
maintains.
 
(Para : 8.5)
 
            The Committee hopes that any decision in this regard  to Khetri unit of HCL should not  delay beyond a period
of time as the same would  erode the financial base of the company further.
(Para : 12.6)
 
            The Committee  was apprised of the potential of  Banwas deposits that's why the committee had recommended
for  commercial expectation of Banwas deposits on a priority basis.  This committee  recommends that development of
Banwas  deposits should not  be linked to the issue of disinvestment as linking of each and every   schemes/projects
with   disinvestment would not only that to further adverse financial situation of company but also detract  prospective
buyers.
(Para : 13.3)
 

79th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/79threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:42]
            The Committee would like know the  savings made by MCP management   due to steps taken towards
rationalisation of expenditure   on stores and spares parts    like verification  of inventory , maintaining minimum   stock
and availing  dependence  on single supplier etc.
 
            The Committee would like also to know the  response of state government of Madhya Pradesh  to the  request of
department of   Mines for providing subsidized  power to MCP.
 
(Para : 17.2 +17.3)
 
            The Committee is constrained to opine that the replies furnished  by the Department of Mines  is incomplete
and   incomprehensive which serves no  purpose.  The Department of Mines maintained conspicuous  silence over
committee's  recommendation pertaining to possible operations efficiency expected to be achieved in  case the 
modified   ultimate  pit of MCP is used and  thus proposed saving of Rs.300.00
 
            The Committee is of the  firm view  that since MCP    is a prospective plant of    HCL  and every decision should
be linked with the issue  of disinvestment.  Therefore, the committee reiterates its recommendations that  MCP
management   and the Department of Mines should make    efforts/explore and  examine  the following  issues:-
 
Towards developing   South part of  the mine  far in-pit
Opening up of  economically viable  underground mine as a replacement of open pit mine.
Identifying potential copper  bearing deposits for  further commercial product of   metal
Possibility  of installation of double stage  cycloning   facilities for  indenting downstream facilities.
Committee   strongly  recommends that  either  the process of disinvestment should  be accelerated or the  above
recommendation  be implemented   for proper and timely  availing of  opportunities  before the MCP.
 
(Para : 19.6,19.7, 19.8, 19.9, 20)
 
            The Committee is of the opines that development of basis  infrastructure  would be required  irrespective    of the
fact that MCP either remains as a plant under PSU,  or in joint venture   or a private sector  enterprise.  Government
should continue  its efforts for providing improved infrastructure as even the  plant goes for  disinvestment it would
fetch  strategic price.  Therefore, the issue of development of   infrastructure should not   be undermined.  The
Committee is of the  opinion  that the Department of Mines  should guide MCP management for keeping  examine
SWOT analysis of MCP   and make this best efforts for overcoming its    weaknesses  and threats while taking
advantage of strengths and opportunities.
(Para : 21.2)
 
 New Recommendation
 
Capital restructuring of   Hindustan Copper Ltd  (HCL)
 
 The Committee notes the elements of capital restructuring package for  HCL  and  hopes that HCL management would
make an all out effort for implementing the capital restructuring package  a success . The Committee   hopes further that
the physical and financial   performance of the Company would improve once capital restructuring  package is 
implemented.
MINUTES
XI
 
ELEVENTH MEETING
 
                        The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday the 9
th August, 2002 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
           
PRESENT

79th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/79threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:42]
 
Shri T.N. Chaturvedi - Chairman         
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Dr. Abrar Ahmad        
3.         Shri Prasanta Chatterjee          
4          Smt. Saroj Dubey                    
5          Dr.  Faguni Ram                                  
6          Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
7          Sh. P.K. Maheshwari              
8          Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
9          Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
                                   
LOK SABHA
 
10        Smt. Jayashree Banerjee          
11        Shri Nepal Chandra Das          
12        Shri A.C. Jose
13        Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
14        Shri Sunil Khan
15        Dr. K.Malaisamy
16        Shri A. Narendra 
17        Shri P. Rajendran
18        Dr. B.B. Ramaiah
18        Chowdhary Talib Hussain
19        Shri Chunnilal Bhau Thakur
20        Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri  Tapas Das Gupta, Director
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
 
2.         Shri A.C. Jose, Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi and Dr. B.B. Ramaiah and other members of the Committee 
felicitated the Chairman of the Committee who had since been designated as the Governor of Karnataka.  In the
felicitation address, all the three Convenors and other members of the Committee appreciated the work done by the
Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri T.N. Chaturvedi.  They all were of the view that Shri Chaturvedi gave a new
thrust and orientation to the working of the Committee and gave inspiration to the Committee with his valuable
contribution and personal interest in the day-to-day working of the Committee and in a short span of four months, the
Committee could present a record number of ‘23’ reports.
            The Chairman, in response, observed that due to the hard work put in by the Sub-Committees it had been
possible to prepare such a large number of reports.  He thanked the Convenors of all the Sub-Committees, Members of
the Committee and the Secretariat for extending cooperation to him to discharge his duties as the Chairman of the
Committee.
3.         The Committee then took up consideration of the following draft reports:-
76
th Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee’s 53rd Report on Modernization, Restructuring
and Expansion Programmes of NALCO.
77
th  Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee’s 67th Report on Organization, Structure and
Performance Review of Indian Bureau of Mines.
 78
th  Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee’s 68th Report on Working and Performance

79th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/79threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:42]
Review of Mineral Exploration Corporation Ltd. (MECL).
79th  Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee’s   65th Report on Modernisation,
Restructuring and Expansion Programmes of Hindustan Copper Ltd. (HCL).
80th  Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee’s 66th Report on Performance Review of
Jawahar Lal Nehru Aluminum Research Development and Design Centre.
81
st   Report  on Sickness in SSI Sector of Cement Industry in Uttar Pradesh.
82nd   Report on  MoU system in the Strategic Sector PSEs
83rd Report on  MoU system in the Allied Sector PSEs.
84th Report on Implementation of Prime Minister’s Rozgar Yojana (PMRY) in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Kerala.
85th Report on Implementation Status of Financial Assistance-cum-Restructuring Package and Revival of Hindustan
Steel Works Construction Ltd. (HSCL).
86
th Report on Performance Review of Metal Scrap Trade Corporation Ltd. (MSTC).
87th Report on Implementation status of Financial Assistance-cum-Restructuring Package and Revival of Bharat
Refractories Ltd. (BRL).
88
th Report on  Performance review of Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL).
89th Report on Modernisation, Restructuring and Expansion Programmes of Durgapur Steel Plant (DSP).
90th Report on Sickness in SSI Sector in the City of Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh.
91st   Report on Coir Board – A performance Review.
 
4.         The Committee adopted all the above stated reports and authorized its Chairman  to make corrections, if any, in
the reports.  The Committee decided to present/lay the above mentioned reports on the 13th August, 2002.  The
Committee for this purpose authorized its Chairman to present the reports  in the Rajya Sabha and in his absence Shri
Khan Ghufran Zahidi and Prof. M.M. Agarwal to present the reports.  The Committee also authorized Dr. B.B. Ramaiah
to lay the reports in the Lok Sabha and in his absence authorized Shri A.C. Jose and Shri A. Narendra to lay the reports.
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 P.M.
 
 