Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON INDUSTRY
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on th December , )28 2018
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on th December , )28 2018
Action taken on the 286th Report of the Committee on Demands
for Grants (2018-19) Pertaining to the Ministry of
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises
(Department of Heavy Industry)
TWO HUNDRED NINETY SECOND REPORT
December, 2018/Pausa, 1940 (Saka)


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON INDUSTRY
TWO HUNDRED NINETY SECOND REPORT
Action taken on the 286th Report of the Committee on Demands
for Grants (2018-19) Pertaining to the Ministry of
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises
(Department of Heavy Industry)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 28th December , 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 28th December , 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2018/Pausa, 1940 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-19
Chapter I : Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Ministry.................................................................................... 2-5
Chapter II : Recommendations/Observations which the committee does not
desire to pursue further in view of the Government’s replies................ 6-7
Chapter III : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the
Committee has not accepted the replies of the Ministry and
desires the Ministry to review their replies......................................... 8-14
Chapter IV : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the
Committee desire further comments of the Ministr y ........................... 15-19
4. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 21-24

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 1st September, 2018)
1. Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh  —    Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri G. C. Chandrashekhar
3. Shri Ram Narain Dudi
4. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque
5. Shri Shwait Malik
6. Shri Sanjay Seth
7. Shri Amar Singh
8. Shri Tiruchi Siva
9. Shri T. G. Venkatesh
10. Dr. Amee Yajnik
LOK  SABHA
11. Shrimati Ranjanben Dhananjay Bhatt
12. Shri Birendra Kumar Choudhary
13. Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi
14. Shri S. P. Muddahanume Gowda
15. Shri G. Hari
16. Shrimati Darshana Vikram Jardosh
17. Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena
18. Shrimati Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam
19. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato
20. Shri Mutthamsetti Srinivasa Rao (Avanthi)
21. Shri Ramsinh Pataliyabhai Rathwa
22. Shri Konda Vishweshwar Reddy
23. Shri Raj Kumar Saini
24. Shri Rajveer (Raju Bhaiya) Singh
25. Shri Rameswar Teli
26. Shrimati Savitri Thakur
27. Shrimati Dev (Moon Moon Sen) Varma
28. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare
*29. Vacant
30. Vacant
31. V acant
(i)
*Vacancy due to demise of Shri Asrarul Haque Mohammad on 7th December, 2018.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Director
Shri J.K. Mallick, Additional Director
Shrimati Sreeja V ., Deputy Secretary
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Deputy Secretary
Shri Ajin. J. R., Under Secretary
Shrimati Renu Sreekanth, Committee Officer
Shri Divender Singh Bisht, Committee Officer

INTRODUCTION
I. the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having
been authorised by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred Ninety-Second Report on Action
Taken Notes furnished by the Department of Heavy Industry (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises) on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred and Eighty-Sixth Report
on the Demands For Grants (2018-19) pertaining to Department of Heavy Industry.
2. I, thank the Department of Heavy Industry (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises) for
furnishing the Action Taken Notes on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred
Eighty- Sixth Report.
3. The Committee in its meeting held on the 21st December, 2018 considered and adopted the report.
RAM CHANDRA PRASAD SINGH
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
21st December , 2018 Department-related Parliamentary
Agrahayana  30, 1940 ( Saka) Standing Committee on Industry,
Rajya Sabha.
(iii)

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of Heavy Industry) on the recommendations contained in the
Committee’s Two Hundred and Eighty-Sixth Report on the Demands for Grants (2018-19) pertaining to
Department of Heavy Industry.
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry or Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises
(Department of Heavy Industry) in respect of the recommendations contained in the 286 th Report. These
have been categorized as follows:
Chapter I : The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry.
The Committee notes that the Ministry has accepted its recommendations as mentioned in the
Chapter -I of the Report.
Chapter II : The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue further in
view of the Government’s replies.
In respect of these recommendations, the Committee is convinced with the logic and explanation
advanced by the Ministry and therefore does not want to pursue them further for the present.
Chapter III : The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted
replies of the Ministry and desires the Ministry to review their replies.
The Committee is not convinced with the replies of the Ministry in respect of recommendations
contained in Chapter - III and desires that the Ministry may in the light of further
recommendations/observations of the Committee furnish comments/explanations thereof.
Chapter IV : The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee desire further comments
of the Ministry.
In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV, the Ministry has either furnished the
interim replies, therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry may furnish Action Taken
Notes in respect of recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to the point, as
per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee.
3. The details of the Action Taken Replies of the Ministry and further recommendation/observations of
the Committee thereon wherever found necessary are given in the succeeding pages.

CHAPTER-I
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS, WHICH HAVE
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY
Recommendation/ Observation
In this regard, the Committee would like to suggest that such a wide gap between Revenue and Capital
Expenditure under Revised Estimates (FE) in the Budget allocations of DHI does not paint an ideal financial
picture and needed to be looked at with a holistic/balanced approach. From the submission of the Department,
the Committee infers that huge fluctuation in the Budget Estimates (BE) and Revised Estimates (RE) in
terms of Capital Expenditure figures is broadly due to delays in approval for the anticipated closure/restructuring
packages of CPSEs. Such unforeseen delays in approval take out large amount of funds at Revised Estimates
(RE) stage. This, combined with the Revised Estimates ceiling prescribed by Ministry of finance based on
pace of expenditure, which is applicable to the entire Budget allocations, affects the key projects like NA
TRiP , FAME-India, AUSC, etc. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that Dl--li should initiate appropriate
action and avoid such vast fluctuations between BF and RE allocations in future in consultation with the
Ministry of Finance (MoF). (Para 13)
Action Taken
The points have been noted for future compliance.
Recommendation/ Observation
The Committee notes that during 2017-18, the FAME-India scheme got a hiked RE of ` 235 crore
compared to the BE of ` 175 crore. Regarding the utilization of this enhanced funds; DHI has informed that
the funds would be utilized for the committed liabilities as well as for funding the Pilot Project of Public &
Shared Transportation involving 11 cities. However , the Committee finds that till January, 2018, the expenditure
under the scheme along with said liabilities, amount to ` 144.66 crore. That is, the utilisation during 2017-
18 till date is only around 60% and has not even reached the mark of ` 175 crore (BE). This leaves the
Department with only two months in the current FY to utilize the rest of the allocation of ` 89.34 crore. The
Committee expects that maximum funds would be efficiently utilized within the time left and in consonance
with the Expenditure Management Rules stipulated by the Ministry of Finance. The Committee also desires
that for the future, adequate care should be taken while conceptualising a scheme initially instead of
resorting to mid-course re-conceptualising. (Para 33)
Action Taken
An amount of `235 crore was sought for the FAME India Scheme in RF 2017-18 considering the then
existing liabilities and estimated requirement of’ funds towards release of part grant in the FY 2017-18 to the
cities selected for public & shared electric mobility through Expression of Interest (EoI) issued by the
Department of Heavy Industry on 31st October 20J7.
Though the Department was ready with the release of eligible amount of grant to the selected cities,
but all the pre-conditions for release of grant as per terms & condition of the Expression of Interest/Letter
of Intent were not fulfilled/completed by 31st March 2018. As such, the estimated amount (About `65-70
Crore) could not be utilised from the RE 2017-18 for FAME Scheme.
2

3
However, the then existing committed liability were honoured by 31st March 2018, resulting into
utilization of budget @ ` 165 Crore under the Scheme in the FY 2017-18.
The advice of the Hon’ble Committee has, however, been noted for strict compliance in future.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee understands that the gradual transition to pure EVs is an inevitability considering
the limited fossil fuel reserves and heightened environmental concerns. However, it has felt that the
path of transformation needs a lot of coordinated and well thought out planning from the part of the
Government, with the partnership of the Auto Industry. A synchronized platform involving the relevant
Ministries and other stakeholders need to be set up for policy formulation and implementation. Further ,
the Committee perceives that EV penetration in the Country would critically depend on the development
of indigenous battery technology and the creation/setting up of charging infrastructure dovetailed by
appropriate charging technology. Also, the Committee is of the considered opinion that the economic
ramification of transformation to pure EV technology has to be given priority by the Government,
taking into account the fact that any laxity in proper planning and implementation could affect millions
of jobs in the auto sector . Such an impact on jobs would be unaffordable to the economy of a developing
country like India. The Department should make concerted efforts in planning a roadmap to re-deploy
the employees in the conventional Auto Sector, who would be displaced with the change over to electric
mobility.
Taking all of the above into account, the Committee recommends that the Government should come up
with a well spelt out road map based on empirical studies before pushing hard for change over to pure BY
technology. In the opinion or the Committee, gradual shift, taking the route of promoting appropriate hybrid
technology, could be one of the adoptable methods in this direction. The F AME- India scheme under DHI is
an ideal vehicle which could be widened in scope and magnitude to accommodate the challenging needs of
the Country’s gradual shift to the Electric Mobility. The Committee is well aware that the stakes are high for
the Country in terms of the environmental benefit the changeover can offer and also in terms of the weaning
away from import dependence on fossil fuels. (Para 36 & 37)
Action Taken
National Council for Electric Mobility (NCEM) and National Board of Electric Mobility (NBEM),
which are chaired by Hon’ble Minister for Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises and by Secretary (Heavy
Industry) respectively, and are having members from various stakeholders including Government Departments/
Ministries, Industry Associations and various Original Equipments Manufacturers (OEMs), are already in
place to propagate electric mobility and manufacture of electric vehicles (including hybrid vehicles) and
their components.
In addition, the Department has already included the Industry Representatives from Society of Indian
Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM), Automotive Component Manufacturers Association (ACMA) and Society
of Manufacturing of Electric Vehicles (SMEV) in the Committees of the Department concerning Auto Sector.
Further, there are representatives from various stakeholder Ministries and Automotive Industries in the
Development Council of Automobile & Allied Industries (DCAAI) of the Department. Hence, it is evident
that the Department of Heavy Industry is taking care of Private Sector involvement in the Policy Formulations/
Implementation etc.

4
As far as synchronised platform involving the relevant Ministries and other stakeholders for policy
formulation and implementation is concerned, in addition to the DCAAI mentioned above, NITI Aayog
has recently been designated as the nodal agency for promotion of Electric Vehicles/clean mobility solution.
Accordingly, the NITI Aayog, in consultation with all stakeholders, is already in the process of formulating
a strategy to scale up transformative mobility for uptake of Zero Emission Vehicles and ancillary
technologies.
Regarding development of indigenous battery technology and the creation/setting up of charging
infrastructure, the Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology (MEJTY), under their M-SIPS program,
is already extending capital subsidy for setting up of units for electronic/ telecommunication components
which may be utilised for battery technology. Through the scheme component or Pilot Project, some charging
infrastructure projects have already been approved by DHI.
It may be mentioned here that at present there is no proposal under consideration of Department of
Heavy Industry for targeted complete transformation or vehicles technology from ICE based technology to
Electric Powertrain based technology for vehicles. DHI notes the views of the Committee in the matter and
agrees that changeover to electric mobility must not disrupt the existing Auto Industry. In fact, DHI proposes
an incremental switchover of technology gradually and the Committee may, therefore, have no apprehension
of job loss in auto sector.
However, the valuable suggestions of the Hon’ble Committee for gradual shift from ICE to Electric
Mobility under FAME-India Scheme have been noted for compliance.
Recommendation/ Observation
In reply, the Department assured the Committee on the progress of the projects under the scheme and
stated that projects worth 
` 246.64 crore have been approved by the Competent Authority for the year 2017 -18.
But, the Committee notices that even though project proposals worth of ` 246.64 crore was approved, the
allocated fund at Budget Estimates stage for the year was only ` 150.00 crore, which was again curtailed to
` 110 crore at Revised Estimates stage. Though the Department has submitted that the progress of the
projects under the scheme is satisfactory, the Committee does not find that entirely convincing based on the
figures shown above. Curtailment at RE stage usually happens when the utilization of funds is not up to the
expected level. Hence, it would not be out of the place to suspect that the progress of projects under the
scheme were not up to the mark. Taking into consideration the number of approved proposals, the Committee
observes that there is no dearth of projects under the scheme, while the problem seems to be with the pace of
implementation and the fund availability. Therefore, taking into consideration the benefits that proper
implementation of the scheme can bring to the nation; the Committee recommends that the DHI should work
on both, implementation of its ongoing projects as well as to secure required funds from the Ministry of
Finance (MoF). Here, the Committee would like to mention that the Department while answering to the
queries of the Committee chose to remain silent on the reasons behind delayed receipts of pro-rata industry
contributions. (Para 56)
Action Taken
Under the Scheme on ‘Enhancement of Competitiveness in the Indian Capital Goods Sector’, the
following year-wise approvals were given:
2014-15 : `42.27 Crore

5
2015-16 : `223.1119 Crore
2016-17 : `60.22388 Crore
2017-18 : `246.64 Crore
The projects approved during the year 2017-18 are new projects and the completion period or the
projects varies between 2-3 years from the dates of approval. The grant-in-aid of every project is earmarked
for two to three installments depending upon the activities / work to be undertaken according to milestones
in the given completion period subject to receipt of industry contribution of 20%. Year 2018-19 eventually
be the second year of the projects approved in 2017 and the projects are progressing well and are being
regularly reviewed/ monitored by this Department. First installments, in most of the projects approved in the
Financial Year 2017-18, have already been released by this Department after confirmation of the receipt of
matching industry contribution by project implementing authorities.
It is mentioned that the. scheme was introduced on pilot basis in 2014-15 and MSMEs are the major
beneficiaries/ industry partners of the scheme. Release of funds by this Department is sometimes delayed
due to non-receipt of matching contribution from MSMEs as per the scheme guidelines which was the
major factor in reduction of the allocation at RE stage in 2017-18. However, after the approval of the
projects worth `246.64 crore in 2017-18, the Department is hopeful of utilizing the entire amount al located
in 2018-19.

CHAPTER-II
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE
TO PURSUE FURTHER IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee notices that DCCAI has been entrusted with the function of hand holding R&D
proposals in the Automobile Sector. The source of funds for the Council till now was the Auto Cess collected
during the sale of automobiles. Going through the utilization of funds by the Council in the recent past, the
Committee finds that the utilization of funds has been below par. The same fact was pointed out by the
Committee during the last year as well. The noncommittal reply of the Department regarding the specific
action taken/proposed by them to increase the fund utilization under DCAAI for R&D gives the Committee
an indication that little has been done in this regard. (Para 43)
Action Taken
Presently under DCCAI only Government as well as private institutions are eligible to submit their
R&D proposals for funding. These institutions include Testing Agencies like ARAI, Academic institutions
like IITs, R&D Institutions like Applied Materials, NFTDC etc; Business Organizations like SIAM, ACMA,
CII etc. and International organizations like UNIDO. During the last FY 2017-18, fund amounting to ` 24.25
Crore [ie. 24.18 Grant-in-Aid General and ` 0.07 Crore Contributions] was allotted in RE 2017-18 and this
amount has been utilized/released totally to various institutions for R&D Projects. Therefore, sanctioned
funds stand fully initiated.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee finds that the funds for AUSC project during the first year i.e. 2017-18, of 
` 121.00
crore (Budget Estimates) as approved by Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) was curtailed to
` 90 crore at the Revised Estimates stage. The initial query of the Committee regarding the reasons for this
yielded an answer that the reduction in funds “vas due to a Revised Estimates ceiling imposed by MoF .
However, on further enquiry it was revealed that the Revised Estimates (RE) ceiling had been prescribed
purely based on the pace of expenditure which has been really slack in the case of AUSC as well as other
projects/schemes under DHI. So, it turns out that lack of proper progress in AUSC project execution had
resulted in funds being taken away at Revised Estimates stage during 2017-18. (Para 67)
Action Taken
Budget Estimate (BE) of ` 120 Crore for 2017-18 allocated for the ‘R&D project for Development of
Advanced Ultra Super Critical (AUSC) Technology for Thermal Power Plants’ [as per Demands for Grants
(2017-18) pertaining to DHI] was released by DHI and the AUSC Mission Directorate has utilised the same
during 2017-18 itself This has helped the R&D project to progress as per schedule.
Recommendation/Observation
Regarding the approval of the modernization plan of HSL, the Committee finds that certain details of
the approval of the modernization plan has not been shared by the Department, for instance, the date of
approval, etc. Further, the Committee observes that the HSL was allocated Rs 24.81 crore during 2017-18.
However, only Rs 10 crore was retained at RE stage. Balance fund of Rs 14.50 crore has been kept in BE
6

7
2018-19 for completion of various ongoing projects of up-gradation in HSL. Here, the Committee finds it
ironical that an allocation of an amount of ` 14.50 crore which was curtailed owing to the company showing
negative net worth and decline in sales/turnover, despite past investment, was reallocated in the very next
year to the company as BE. Also, the Committee notes that the NITI Aayog has recommended to hand over
SSL, a subsidiary of HSL to the Government of Rajasthan. Despite this recommendation of the NITI Aayog,
the Committee finds that the Government has gone ahead with providing budgetary support for the
modernization of HSL, including upgradation projects in SSL. It is observed that this move of DHI is at
variance with their usual stand taken in case of such CPSEs. The Committee, therefore, seeks to know the
reasons behind these actions taken by DHI. (Para 93)
Action Taken
For the modernization of HSL/SSL ` 55.35 crore was approved and ` 45.56 was allocated during five
year plan for the modernization of the following projects:-
Hindustan Salts Ltd.
1. Refinery at Kharaghoda.
Sambhar Salts Ltd.
1. Development of infrastructure for enhancement of common salt production phase II.
2. Refinery at Nawa.
3. Expansion of capacity of Gudha Salt.
4. Refinery from 1 Lakh MT to 2 Lakh MT and Process Sail Plant from 60000 MT to 200000 MT.
The grant out of ` 45.56 crore was allocated to HSL/SSL from time to time on the progress of the
projects. There was no curtailment, but funds were given to the company as per the progress of the
projects.
The schemes of HSL and SSL are combined and upto 2016-17 an amount ` 17.75 crore was spent and
` 3 crore has been given as loan for Mandi project. There is balance of ` 24.81 crore and thereafter
` 10 crore was allotted out of ` 24.81 on the basis of progress of its projects and still an amount of
` 14.81 crore is the balance left in 2018-19. And not 14.50 crore.
As stated by the company, the balance funds are required in the year 2018-19 as work order/tender
finalized it is committed liability and provided in BE 2018-19. The project/plan schemes related to Sambhar
Salts Ltd are under process hence the provision for SSL are also provided in BE 2018-19 and in case of hand
over of SSL to Govt of Rajasthan the expenditure incurred on the projects will be considered in the total
assets of the SSL.

CHAPTER-III
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE HAS
NOT ACCEPTED THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY AND DESIRES
THE MINISTRY TO REVIEW THEIR REPLIES
Recommendation/Observation
Regarding the operating CPSEs, under the administrative control of Department of Heavy Industry,
the Committee notices that their number has begun to dwindle since 2016-17. From a total of 31 in 2016-17,
they have come down to 24 in 2017-18 and curr ently, the number of operating CPSEs under DBI has been
reduced to 22. According to the data submitted by OPE before the Committee, amongst the Ministries/
Departments of Government of India it is DHI that has seen the largest attrition rate of CPSEs - 10 that
have been approved for closure and 6 that have been approved for strategic disinvestment.
In this regard, the Committee takes into cognisance the fact that depending on the NITI Aayog’ s
classification of ‘High Priority’ areas for Government Ownership, CPSEs which are in profit or those that
can very well be revived/restructured can also be strategically disinvested/closed, if they do not fall under
the priority areas. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that DHI should start classifying CPSEs under
it, in tune with the ‘High Priority’ areas identified for Government ownership. Such classification would
help the Department focus its attention and funds on CPSEs that would be identified for retention under
Government ownership as per extant policy. In the opinion of the Committee, this would in turn give more
meaning to the Department’s Mission and Vision statements. (Para 6&7)
Action Taken
DHI undertakes appraisals of each loss-making CPSEs wherein appropriate response to the performance
of individual CPSEs is determined in consultation with stakeholders after periodic appraisal. NITI Aayog has
scanned almost all the companies under DHI and based on the criteria/parameters of high priority/low
priority areas have recommended some CPSEs for disinvestment or closure. CPSEs found chronically sick
are disinvested or closed down after payment of attractive V oluntary Retirement Scheme (VRS)/V oluntary
Separation Scheme (VSS) compensation to employees. As per this practice, the Government has already
decided to close some of the CPSEs under this Department namely, Tungabhadra Steel Products Ltd.,
Hindustan Cables Ltd., HMT Watches Ltd .. I-IMT Chinar Watches Ltd., HMT Bearings Ltd., Kota Unit of
Instrumentation Ltd. and Tractor Division of HMT Ltd. These CPSEs suffered sickness due to a number of
factors including poor order booking, shortage of working capital. surplus manpower. obsolete plant and
machinery, stiff competition from private sector, cheaper imports and difficulty to adjust to changing market
conditions. In addition, the Government has also decided for 100% disinvestment of Bridge & Roof Co.
Ltd., Scooters India Ltd. and Bharat Pumps & Compressors Ltd., Disinvestment of 100% shareholding of
the concerned CPSE in Hindustan Ncwsprints Ltd. (a subsidiary of Hindustan Paper Co Ltd.) to strategic
buyer through two stage auction process, Units of Cement Corporation of India Ltd. to be disinvested
where it is legally permissible to strategic buyer through two stage auction process and Merger of Engineering
Projects (India) Ltd. with similar by placed CPSEs. Subsequently, on the suggestion of NITI Aayog and
upon approval of Cabinet /CCEA, DHI is pursuing the laid down course of action. As such the attrition rate
is higher.
Further Recommendations/Observations
The Committee observes that the reply of the Government does not address the crux of its
8

9
recommendation. DHI has furnished the details of the CPSEs recommended/identified by the NITI
Aayog for disinvestment/closure as well as the reasons behind their poor performance and the
methodology adopted for executing the disinvestment/closure. However, the Committee has
recommended that the CPSEs under the fold of DHI, which fall under the ‘High Priority’ category
as identified by the Government, shall be concentrated upon by DHI for their better performance so
as to enable their continued retention under Government ownership as per extant policy. Besides,
in the absence of such categorisation of CPSEs as those falling under ‘High Priority’ business area
and those falling under ‘Low Priority’ business area, an apprehension is felt that the Department
may utilise its funds on CPSEs catering to the ‘Low Priority’ business areas too, unwittingly. Such
utilisation of funds would be meaningless as ultimately the CPSEs of ‘Low Priority’ business areas
would meet a fate of closure/disinvestment, without getting a chance of revival. The Committee is
of the opinion that this would help the Department to concentrate precious resources on ‘High
Priority’ CPSEs and also to arrest the high attrition rate of CPSEs under them, which the Department
have conceded as a fact. Further, such a move would also lend more meaning to DHI’s Mission and
Vision statement. Hence, the Committee wishes to reiterate its recommendation.
Recommendation/Observation
Also, the Committee is of the opinion that it would be prudent for DHI to study the goods/services
offered by the CPSEs intended/identified for closure or strategic disinvestment and understand the manner
in which the void likely to be created in the market due to the absence of Government ownership of these
CPSEs is going to get filled. If such demands are proposed to be met by imports, including cheap second-
hand machinery/goods, rather than by domestic production, then it must be assumed that the closure/strategic
disinvestment would be antithetical to national priority of promoting domestic production and ‘Make in
India’ initiative and would be a matter of great worry. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the
Department should commission a research study to find reasons as to why they are losing CPSEs dealing
with goods/services under the Heavy Industries Sector. The study should also focus on the market demand
currently being met by these CPSEs and how the said demand would be met in case of their closure/strategic
disinvestment. (Para 8)
Action Taken
Those Companies which have been recommended for closure/disinvestment were sick/loss making/
unviable for past many years because a lot of private players began manufacturing these products at more
efficient and competitive prices. The gaps in manufacturing of products (like watches, tractors, cables, etc.)
/demand created by the closure of these companies are already filled up by the private manufacturers. Hence
it is unlikely that the import of these products will increase.
Further Recommendations/Observations
The Committee finds that the reply of the Government is in contradiction to their own answer
to the recommendation of the Committee as contained in paragraphs 6 and 7 wherein the Government
has cited import of cheap products as one of the reasons contributing to CPSEs turning to loss
incurring. But in the instant reply, the Government claims that it is unlikely for such imports to
increase.
Here, the Committee would like to clarify the reason for suggesting a research study, is to
find out the alternative sources for the products in the market which have hitherto been catered to

10
by the disinvested/proposed to be disinvested/closed CPSEs under DHI. But, the Government’s
reply concentrates only on CPSEs that have been identified for closure till now. However, the
Committee would like to stress that the study proposed above should cover all CPSEs under DHI. In
the opinion of the Committee, if the products of such CPSEs are expected to be replaced in the
market by imported goods, especially to the detriment of domestic producers, then the Government
would have enough reasons to revisit their decision of disinvestment. The Committee feels that
import of goods from China is adversely affecting the economy of the country as well as the industrial
sector. The Government should, therefore take a cautious move on it.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee also discerns the fact that Auto Cess has been subsumed after the coming into effect of
GST. That puts a stop to the hitherto available source of funds to the Council. In this regard, the Committee
takes note of the Department’ s decision to seek the continuance of the support to the ongoing projects
through DCAAI by way of Budgetary Support. Pertinently, the Committee is also aware of the need ofassistance
to R&D initiatives in the auto sector which is slated for huge transformation in the wake of changing mode
or mobility. Therefore. the Committee recommends that the functions of R&D support extended by DCAAI
should be continued, despite the end of Auto Cess, as the same is one of the better avenues for R&D
initiatives. alongwith other proposed funding like Venture Capital Funding. (Para 44)
Action Taken
During the current FY 2018-19 funds amounting to ` 30.00 crore [Grant in - Aid General ` 27.50
crore and Contribution ` 2.50 crore] has been allotted to Development Council of Automobile and Allied
Industries.
Further Recommendations/Observations
The Committee finds that the reply of the Government mentions only about funding for
Development Council of Automobile and Allied Industries (DCAAI) for the year 2018-19, but it
does not mention anything about continuance of funding for DCAAI beyond 2018-19 as recommended
by the Committee. Accordingly, the Committee reiterates its recommendation that funding for
DCAAI shall be continued notwithstanding the cessation of Auto Cess.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee has an unequivocal and firm opinion about the cardinal role the Capital Goods Sector
of the country can play in improving the economy of India. The opinion is same about the prospects of the
Scheme for Enhancement of Competitiveness’ s contributions to the Government’ s ‘Make in India’ initiatives.
While analysing the progress of the scheme, the Committee finds that the money allocated for the scheme
saw a reduction for first time, since its inception, at Revised Estimates stage in 2017-18. The reasons quoted
by the Department for this curtailment was the delay in receipt of pro-rata industry contribution for the
project in few cases and slow pace of progress of the project. The Committee sought further clarification on
the above reasons and their impact on the effectiveness of the scheme. (Para 55)
Action Taken
A Scheme for Enhancement of Competitiveness in Indian Capital Goods Sector was launched in the
financial year 2014-15 with a financial allocation of `581.22 crore over a period of five years. At present, the

11
projects worth `572.22 crore have been approved by the competent authority under the various components
of the Scheme such as Centres of Excellence. Common Engineering Facility Centres. Technology Acquisition
Fund Programme and Integrated Industrial Infrastructural Facility. Further, projects worth ` 10.69 crore
under UAY and IMPRINT Schemes or the Ministry or Human Resource Development have also been approved
for funding under the Capital Goods Scheme.
Although the allocation for the scheme was reduced at RE stage in 2017-18 for the reasons as mentioned
in Para No.55, however, the effectiveness of the scheme can be seen from the number of project proposals
received by this Department and were considered first by the Screening Committee and thereafter by Apex
Committee in the months of July/August, 2017. Thereafter projects worth ` 246.64 crore were approved by
the Apex Committee in the financial year, 2017- J 8. Further, most of the projects awarded by this Department
under the scheme are progressing well. Hence, it may be seen that the Scheme is very much effective both
in financial and physical terms.
Further Recommendations/Observations
As part of its recommendation, the Committee sought further clarification on the two reasons
quoted by DRI for the curtailment of funds for the Scheme for Enhancement of Competitiveness in
Indian Capital Goods Sector during 2017-18. However, the reply of the Government addresses only
one of the issues, i.e., of slow progress of the project while being silent on the other which is delay
in receipt of pro-rata industry contribution for the project. Accordingly, the Committee reiterates
its recommendation to provide clarification for the reasons which contributed to the delay in receipt
of pro-rata industry contribution for certain projects under the scheme.
Recommendation/Observation
Regarding the setting up of Test and Certification Centre, the Committee observes that despite being
in the fourth year of the implementation of the scheme, the Department is yet to finalize the DPIR of its first
Certification Centre which is expected to cost 
` 100 crore. Considering the fact that the total financial
allocation of the scheme for five years is ` 581.22 crore and projects worth ` 572.22 crore have already been
approved, the Committee hopes that the Department would be able to secure the required fund for the setting
up of the proposed Test Centre. Based on the submissions made before the Committee that, Common Testing
Centres/Certification Centres are the need of the hour, the Committee recommends that the Department
should work more on setting up such centres and should try and seek more fund from M/o Finance to rectify
this lacuna ‘which otherwise can hinder the growth of India’s Capital Goods Sector. (Para 57)
Action Taken
Under the Scheme for Enhancement of Competitiveness in Indian Capital Goods Sector, a Test and
Certification Centre of Earth Moving Machinery has been proposed to be set lip through a Special Purpose
Vehicle (SPV) with a cost or `100.00 crore to be funded by the Department of Heavy Industry. Such Test
and Certification Centre is under active consideration or the Department and the Automotive Research
Association of India (ARAI) has been requested to work in collaboration with Indian Construction Equipment
Manufacturers Association (ICEMA) in preparing the proposal for setting up of the Construction, Earthmoving,
Material Handling and Mining Machinery (CEMM) Equipment Test Centre. Detailed Project Implementation
Report (DPIR) is being prepared by ARAI.
With regard to the funding of Test and Certification Centre, it is mentioned that under the present

12
Capital Goods Scheme, the projects worth ` 572.22 crore have already been approved and thereby the said
Centre can be set up after the availability of additional funds under the present scheme or after the approval
of the new scheme.
Further Recommendations/Observations
The Committee finds that the reply of the Government does not address the issue flagged by
the Committee in its recommendation regarding the delay in setting up of Test and Certification
Centre under the Scheme for Enhancement of Competitiveness in Indian Capital Goods Sector.
The reply mentions that such Test and Certification Centres is under active consideration and the
Detailed Project Implementation Report (DPIR) is being prepared by Automotive Research Association
of India (ARAI). Details regarding the funding of the Test and Certification Centre have also not
been specified in the reply. Keeping this in view the Committee reiterates its recommendation to
expedite the implementation of the Test and Certification Centre and to secure the requisite fund
for the same without any further delay and furnish the status to the Committee.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee notes that for the first year, within the fold of DHI, CMTI had been earmarked with
` 10 crore as BE for part payment of salary of the employees of the institute. The Committee also takes note
of the submission of DBI that the Institute has the potential to spearhead R&D efforts in the field of
Machine Tools and also help bridge the technology gap affecting the players of Capital Goods Sector in
India. It is felt that such an institute should be accorded special status under the ‘Make in India” programme.
The Committee recommends that DHI should pursue this matter on priority and endeavour to setup more
such institutes at different Capital Goods Sector hub of the country as it was observed that only a meagre 0.5
per cent of entire turnover is being increased in R&D. vis-a vis all average of 2 per cent investment ill
developing countries and 5-6 % investment in the developed nations. Further, the Committee also recommends
that the institute should be allocated budgetary support to strengthen its core R&D activities that could
enhance manufacturing competitiveness in the country. (Para 73)
Action Taken
CMTI, a unique; premier Applied R&D institute is offering technology solutions to the manufacturing
Sector for more than five decades. In line with its mandate, the Institute has always tried hard to bring in
new technologies, assimilate and disseminate them for the benefit of the Indian manufacturing sector.
Leveraging its strength in manufacturing technology, CMTI has also developed competencies and capabilities
in Complex and Special purpose machine building involving design, manufacturing, assembly & testing and
is a one-stop shop for ideation to realization. Realizing fully functional first time manifestations, specifically
denied technologies, is the primary strength of CMTI.
Further Recommendations/Observations
The Committee had recommended the Central Manufacturing Technology Institute (CMTI)
shall be accorded special status under the ‘Make in India’ programme which should be pursued by
DHI on priority. It was also recommended that the institute should be allocated Budgetary Support
to strengthen its core R&D activities. In their reply, DHI has stated that CMTI has submitted
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) for the consideration of DHI which will be considered based on
availability of funds and that several projects of CMTI are funded under the Scheme are for

13
Enhancement of Competitiveness in Indian Capital Goods Sector. However, the Committee finds
that the DHI has maintained silence on its recommendation regarding according of special status
for CMTI under the ‘Make in India’ programme in their reply. Accordingly, the Committee reiterates
its recommendation to pursue on priority the accordance of special status to CMTI and continue
budgetary support to the institute to strengthen its core R&D activities. Further, it is also the
considered opinion of the Committee that allocation of funds to CMTI may be given priority based
on the merit of the proposals and taking into consideration the fact that India lags behind in core
R&D activities and the Government is planning to invest heavily on expansion of R&D in near
future and develop the country into a Global Innovation hub by 2020.
Recommendation/Observation
As part of the oral evidence before the Committee in connection with the examination of Demands
2018-19 or DHI, Secretary, DBI interalia opined that “........... sometimes Government’ s neglect may be
good for the CPSEs. Maybe they will be healthier on their ows.” Further, it is in the knowledge of the
Committee that the Government has decided to engage in business only in a few selected areas of operation
like in the spheres of national security, sovereign functions at arms length like the exploration of natural
resources, etc and market imperfections and Public Purpose. Notwithstanding this, the Committee feels that
the Government should take a judicious view of the track record of the CPSEs concerned before applying
the “high priority” principle devised by them to close down/disinvest CPSEs. Also, in support to CPSEs, the
Committee takes into account the deposition of Department of’ Public Enterprises as part of their Demands
for Grants before the Committee that CPSIs have proved their relevance with their ability to plough in
CAPEX (investment) in recent times, while the private sector held itself back, which had helped the Government
keep its infrastructure investment targets active. Therefore, the Committee is of the opinion that while
precious public money should not be wasted on CPSEs that turn redundant, those public enterprises which
have stood the test of time can and should have some hand holding in the form of budgetary support from
the part of the Government. Besides, by their own Mission statement, the Department has a mandate to
provide necessary support to CPSEs in order to improve their overall performance and in the opinion of the
Committee, DHI should leave no stone unturned to fulfil this responsibility vested on them. (Para 80)
Action Taken
All CPSEs of DHI have been screened by NITI Aayog in terms of extant laid down parameters of
‘high priority’/ ‘low priority’ areas. Based on this some of the CPSEs are being closed down and some are
under disinvestment process.
Further Recommendations/Observations
The Committee takes note of the reply of the Department, but is of the opinion that its
recommendation shall be reiterated since it feels the CPSEs have to be given credit to the contributions
they have made towards nation building. The Committee feels that the Government has to take
into account the track record of a CPSE before applying the ‘High Priority’ and ‘Low Priority’
principle devised by them for disinvestment/closure of CPSEs. Accordingly, it is again recommended
that those CPSEs which have stood the test of time should be handheld by the Government, to the
extent possible, in the form of budgetary support. The Committee feels that DHI will be well
within its rights to suggest a review of the extant policy especially taking into consideration the
relevance of CAPEX cushion the CPSEs have been providing to the Government to sail through

14
some tough economic situations. Even under the present scenario, when the Government is fixing
targets for CAPEX for CPSEs to enhance the growth of the economy, its relevance should be
reviewed positively.

CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DESIRE FURTHER COMMENTS OF THE MINISTRY
Recommendation/Observation
Regarding the report of the C&AG on the performance audit of NATRiP, the Committee desires that
it be furnished with the findings thereof as and when the Report is available. (Para 24)
Action Taken
When Final Audit Report is received from CAG, it will be furnished to the Committee.
Recommendation/Observation
Further, while analysing the fund allocation and utilization under NATRiP in 2016-17 and 2017-18,
the Committee noted that in 2016-17 the fund has been completely utilized and for the current financial
year, the utilization is 89% of RE by the end of January, 2018, Likewise, the Committee hopes that for the
year, 2018-19, the Department would take appropriate measures to utilize the fund allocated effectively as
per their submission made before the Committee. Here, the Committee also takes into account the submission
of the Department that during 2017-18 they faced certain legal road blocks mainly due to delinquent
contractors. It was also seen that the slow take off at certain facilities is due to hitches in the bidding
process. However, since most of the facilities have now surpassed the legal problems and troubled bidding
process, the Committee expects that there shall not be any further delays in the future and the scheduled
completion time of July, 2019 would be adhered to. It is for DHI to ensure this, by providing timely interventions
to avoid such roadblocks in future. (Para 25)
Action Taken
Under RE 2017-18, funds to the tune of ` 307.00 crore were allocated to NATRIP for completion of
various project activities.
Up to 31
st March, 2018 expenditure to the tune of ` 345.46 crore has been made by NATRIP which is
112.53% (approx) of RE and same has been met out from Grants as well as refund of Land Cost by
UPSIDC amounting ` 36.52 crore.
NATRIP has been allocated for FY 2018-19 funds to the tune of ` 378.88 crore, of which ` 178.88
crore is against Grant-in-Aid and ` 200.00 crore is loan. It is worth mentioning that progress of various
facilities of NATRIP is being monitored regularly at the highest levels in order to ensure completion of the
project by June, 2019 as per CCEA approved timeline
Recommendation/Observation
For the year 2018-19, the allocation for AUSC is only 
` 100 crorc whereas the CCEA approved fund
for the year is ` 608 crore. Such humongous difference in the planned expenditure and the Actual allocation
compels the Committee to presume that there are enough reasons to be apprehensive about the progress of
the Mission Mode project as pace of the project execution decides the fund allocation. Going as per the
figures approved by the CCEA, till now, the fund allocation of the project should have been 
` 729.00 crore
whereas the actual allocation is ` 90 crore (Revised Estimates, 2017-18) and ` 100 crore (Budget Estimates,
15

16
2018-19) totalling to only ` 190 crore. The Committee also takes note of the fact that the Department is
confident of meeting the timeline of the project as submitted by them.
Taking the above situation into account, the Committee cannot but express its displeasure at this
juncture about the way the Mission Mode AUSC supervised by the Principal Scientific Advisor to the
Government of India is progressing. The Committee accordingly recommends that DHI, as-the primary
contributor to the project, should take appropriate measures to improve the pace of the implementation of
the project in coordination with other stakeholders. (Para 68 & 69)
Action Taken
Apart from ` 90 crore released as observed by the Committee, ` 30 crore have also been released by
DHI in March, 2018 itself. Hence the whole amount i.e. ` 1 20 crore allocated for 2017-18 has been released
by DHI and the same has been utilized by AUSC Project Mission Directorate.
For the year 2018-19, CCEA had approved ` 608 Crore for the AUSC R&D Project. The allocation of
` 100 crore (BE) for the year 2018-19 for the A USC R&D Project is less than the projected requirement.
The fund allocation to various schemes including AUSC project has been made by the Department keeping
in view the total allocation ( ` 1125.73 crore) intimated by Ministry of Finance to the Department.
Fund requirement of at least ` 425 crore for the year 2018-19 has been envisaged by the BHEL- AUSC
Project Mission Directorate for the Financial Year 2018-19, against the anticipated requirement of ` 608
crore, as per CCEA approval.
Additional fund will be sought by Department through Supplementary Demands for Grants to ensure
timely execution of this R&D project.
It may be worth mentioning that the progress so far is as per schedule and the work plan for 2018-19
is also expected to be achieved.
Recommendation/ Observation
The Committee notes that HPC has been in trouble since the year 2009-10 which began with the
shortage of bamboo, its primary raw material. Further, many other external factors added to the woes of the
company over the succeeding years. Alongwith such reasons the necessity for the upgradation of plant and
machinery also weighed down the performance of HPC. A revival/restructuring plan or the company has
been pending approval of the Government since 2016-17. During 2017-18, Rs 95 crore was allocated as BE
in anticipation of approval for the revival, but the Committee finds that this money had to be withdrawn at
RE stage because the revival was yet to be approved by the competent authority. Funds have again been
provisioned for 2018-19 hoping for the approval. Further, the Committee understands that there has been a
new development in the matter which is the move to engage an Operations & Maintenance (O&M) partner
to run HPC. Regarding approval to the revival/restructuring of HPC, the Committee apprehends that further
delay in the matter can seriously jeopardise the viability of revival of HPC. The Committee expects that the
Government will show the requisite urgency in approving the revival/restructuring plan of the company and
hopes that the engagement of O&M partner does not herald the privatisation of HPC. With respect to the
impetus given to National Bamboo Mission, the Committees wants DHI to coordinate with the Ministry of
Agriculture/ National Bamboo Mission/ Ministry of DoNER to ensure ample raw material supply to HPC by
way of methods like captive farming promoted amongst small and marginal local bamboo farmers as per the
provisions of the Mission. (Para 88)

17
Action Taken
A draft CCEA note for revival of HPC through engagement of O&M partner has been circulated for
inter-ministerial consultations. Once the approval of Cabinet is obtained, further action towards floating of
tender and finalisation of O&M partner would be taken. Thereafter necessary action to consult stakeholders
for ensuring ample raw material shall be taken.
Recommendation/ Observation
The Committee’s summarisation of the approach of the Government towards the modernization of
HEC is that the Company is to be strategically disinvested; a private partner is to be brought in to run the
company on JV basis and also to hive off non-core assets like surplus land of HEC to a separate SPV and
be monetized. In this connection, the Committee notes that apart from the idea of monetization of its land,
the other two are new to Committee. Said this, the Committee is yet not aware whether these proposals of
DHI are in conformity with the recommendations of Dr. Saraswat Committee which have been pending with
the Government, for final approval, for more than a year- now. Further, the Committee notes that the
Department holds a view that the present financial condition of the Company and the repealed failures of
the past revival packages have prompted them to mull the new ideas. Here, the Committee is not convinced
of the reasons ascribed by DHI, keeping in view the fact that the alter the revival packages of 2005 to 2008,
HEC had shown profit till 2012-13. Gut it remains a fact that the said revival packages had not focussed on
modernization of plant and machinery of HEC but were mainly debt waivers and financial restructuring.
The Committee believes that the present financial condition of HEC is the result of the lack of foresight in
not supplementing the waivers of debts with modernization plans, which ultimately caused the Company to
slip back to losses again. The Committee opines that as the administrative Department of HEC, DHI cannot
absolve itself the responsibility for the current situation at HEC. Keeping in view the above, the Committee
recommends that DHI should give full weightage to the recommendation of Dr. Saraswat Committee which
had favoured the revival of HEC by approving the revival plan proposed by the Company, before contemplating
measures like strategic disinvestment. Besides, the Committee is highly critical of the delay on the part of
the Government in arriving at a decision regarding the revival of HEC. Administrative delay of this kind
adds to the misery of CPSEs awaiting revival. It is surprising that revival/restructuring of CPSEs remains
long drawn despite the efforts of the Government claim of hastening them up. (Para 99)
Action Taken
The recommendation/observation of the Committee in respect of HEC has been noted by the Department.
The recommendations of Saraswat Committee are still under consideration of the Government and no
finality has been achieved as yet.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee wants to cite the case of NEP A as an extreme case of administrative apathy and
indifference towards the revival of a CPSE with an unignorable developmental legacy. The Committee finds
that BIFR, for a company referred to them in 1998, approved a Rehabilitation Scheme for revival of NEPA
in 2014, based on cost estimation as a part of its original Techno-Economic Feasibility Report (TEFR),
formulated in 2010. It will be anybody’ s guess that approval of a cost estimation made in 2010, as such in
2014, plagued by further implementation delay, would only result in further conundrum for the Company.
This is exactly where NEP A finds itself today. On the Government’s part, they have released their part of

18
funds as included in the total cost of RMDP of NEPA. However , it was obvious from the submission of DHI
that without the loan portion materializing from the banks, far which the banks were insisting on ‘Government
guarantee, the execution of RMDP would remain incomplete. Now, the revised cost estimate is Rs 434 crore
and the process for securing an approval for this amount from the competent authority is underway. The
progress made towards securing loan with or without Government guarantee, has not been furnished to the
Committee. Further. the Committee is aware of the recommendation of NITI Aayog with respect to NLPA
which is that the revival process of NEP A may be permitted to complete and then the Company may be
reviewed for strategic disinvestment. The Committee is of the view that if’ the current state of affairs is
allowed to prevail, the revival of EPA might remain a mirage. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that
DHI should come up with proactive and fast-tracked measures, with accelerated inter-departmental
coordination, if deemed required, to revive/restructure NEP A, taking every care to avoid any further delay.
It is further recommended that the decision whether or not to provide Government guarantee for obtaining
the bank loan portion of the funds for executing the RMDP should also not be procrastinated any further
because clarity in this regard will give a better assessment of the availability and sources of funds for the
revival of NEP A. (Para 102)
Action Taken
DHI has already prepared a draft Cabinet Note containing proposal for budgetary support for revised
cost estimates of the RMDP, payment of pending salary/wages and statutory dues and for funding VRS for
employees of Nepa Limited after due and in depth deliberations and had circulated the same for inter-
ministerial consultation on 11.12.2017. To reach a consensus on the course of direction to be taken meetings
are being taken with the stakeholders to discuss the comments received on the Cabinet note and finalize the
same for consideration of the Cabinet.
Recommendation/Observation
During the presentation in connection with examination of the DFG-2018-19, the Secretary, DHI has
stated that land assets of HCL at Hyderabad and Asansol are slated to be disposed off as per guidelines
framed by DPE. The Secretary also informed the first round of bidding process had been completed recently,
in which few Government Department had taken part. A final decision is yet to be taken as to whom the
landed assets of HCL is to be disposed off. The Committee had time and again observed that land assets of
CPSEs decided for closure should be given to Government Department for better utility of the same. The
Committee accordingly desires that DHI may in collaboration with the authorities concerned ensure that
land assets of HCL may go to proper hands so that the larger interests of society is served. (Para 104)
Action Taken
The above recommendation has been noted. The present status of land assets of HCL is as under:-
(i) LMA has received bids for
(a) 2 Acres of land (Narendrapur, Kolkata)
(b) 2 Nos of guest houses (Gariahat Road/Rasnbehari Avenue, Kolkata)
(c) 2 Nos of flats (Agnipath Colony, Allahabad)
(d) 115 acres land (92 acres land parcel at Mallapur village and 23 acres land parcel at Cherlapally
village, Hyderabad)

19
(ii) LMA has called for a joint negotiation meeting on 27.03.2018 with bidders, HCL and Department
of Heavy Industry (OHI).
(iii) LMA did not get bid for
(a) land at Rupnarainpur (947.23 acres)
(b) remaining land at Hyderabad (209.56 acres)
(c) Flats at Allahabad (5 Nos at Juhi Colony of which 2 Nos of flats under for office/record
office, one flat under unauthorised occupation and rest two are vacant) and flats at Kolkata
(4Nos)
(iv) Matter for Sale of HCL immovable asset at Narenderapur, Rashbehari Avenue, guest house at
Gariahat Road, Kolkata, two flats in Agnipath Colonoy Al1ahabad and Asian Games village Delhi
is under process.

MINUTES

23
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Friday, the 21st December, 2018 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh  —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Sanjay Seth
3. Shri Tiruchi Siva
4. Shri T. G. Venkatesh
5. Dr. Amee Yajnik
LOK  SABHA
6. Shri Birendra Kumar Choudhary
7. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato
8. Shri Ramsinh Pataliyabhai Rathwa
9. Shri Raj Kumar Saini
10. Shri Rameswar Teli
11. Shrimati Savitri Thakur
12. Shrimati Dev (Moon Moon Sen) V arma
13. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare
SECRETARIAT
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Director
Shri J. K. Mallick, Additional Director
Shrimati Sreeja V ., Deputy Secretary
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Deputy Secretary
Shri Ajin. J. R., Under Secretary
Shrimati Renu Sreekanth, Committee Officer
Shri Divender Singh Bisht, Committee Officer
At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting.
The Committee, then, took up for consideration and adoption the draft 291st, 292nd, and 293rd Action
Taken Reports of the Committee based on the replies provided by the Ministry/Department to the
recommendations of the Committee as contained in its 287th, 286th and 288th Reports on Demand for
Grants (2018-19) pertaining to Department of Public Enterprises, Department of Heavy Industry and Ministry
of MSME, respectively. After a brief discussion, the Committee adopted the draft 291st, 292nd, and 293rd
Reports without any change.

24
2. The Committee decided to present the Reports in both the Houses of Parliament on the 28th December,
2018 and accordingly, authorised the Chairman of the Committee to decide the names of the Members who
would present the Reports in both the Houses of  Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned at 10.25 A.M.