98+9 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON INDUSTRY 
  
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
July, 2022 / Shravana, 1944 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 THREE HUNDRED AND SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in 
the 309th Report of the Committee on Electric & Hybrid Mobility – Prospects And 
Challenges in Automobile Industry pertaining to the Ministry of Heavy Industries 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 28th July, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 29th July,2022) 
 
  
  REPORT NO. 
317 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
July, 2022 / Shravana, 1944 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 THREE HUNDRED AND SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in 
the 309th Report of the Committee on  on Electric & Hybrid Mobility – Prospects And 
Challenges in Automobile Industry pertaining to the Ministry of Heavy Industries 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 28th July, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 29th July,2022) 
 

 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGES 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………………………………     (i) 
 
2.  INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………………….    (ii) 
 
3.  ACRONYMS………………………………………………………………………..   (iii) – (iv) 
 
4.  REPORT…………………………………………………………………………………    1-24 
 
     
       CHAPTER – I Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Ministry………………………............................. 
 
2-10 
       CHAPTER–II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does 
not desire to pursue fur ther in view of the  replies of the 
Ministry……………………………….............................. 
 
 
 11-  12          
      CHAPTER–III Recommendations/Observations in res pect of which the 
Committee has not accepted  the replies of the 
Ministry……………………….............................................. 
 
13-21          
 
      CHAPTER – IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of wh ich the 
final replies of the Ministry are still awaited......................... 
22-24          
 
    
4.    * Minutes…………………………………………………………………………….          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* To be appended later. 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2021-22) 
 
(Constituted  w.e.f. 13th September, 2021) 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
 1. Dr. K. Keshava Rao         -       Chairman 
  2.  Shri Hardwar Dubey    
 3. Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
 4.  Dr. Amee Yajnik 
 5. *Shri Luizinho Joaquim Faleiro 
 6.   #Shri Jose K. Mani 
 7. %Vacant 
 8. @Vacant 
 9.   $Vacant 
 10. &Vacant 
     LOK SABHA 
 11.   Shri Hanuman Beniwal 
 12.   Ms. Mimi Chakraborty 
 13.   Shri Bharatsinghji Shankarji Dabhi 
 14.   Shri Hemant Godse  
 15.   Dr. S. T. Hasan 
 16.   Shri Ravi Kishan 
 17.   Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanjibhai Kundariya 
 18.   Shri Ravinder Kushawaha 
 19.   Shrimati Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
 20.   Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
 21.   Shri Ramprit Mandal 
 22.   Shri Vincent H. Pala 
 23.   Shri Chirag Kumar Paswan 
 24.   Shri T. R. V. S. Ramesh 
 25.   Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy  
 26.   Ms. Jothimani S.  
 27.   Shrimati Gomti Sai 
 28.   Shri Sunil Soren 
 29.   Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare 
 30.   Shri Thirunavukkarasar S.U. 
 31.   Shri Vijay Kumar (alias) Vijay Vasanth 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri Jagdish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
2.  Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Secretary 
3.  Shri Narendra Kumar, Additional Director 
4.  Smt. Sreeja. V., Deputy Secretary 
5.  Shri Pratap Shenoy, Under Secretary 
6.  Miss Deepti Rana, Assistant Committee Officer 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
*Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 24.01.2022 
#Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 11.03.2022 
%Retirement w.e.f. 2nd  April, 2022 
@Retirement w.e.f. 9th  April, 2022   
$Resignation w.e.f. 2nd May, 2022 
&Retirement w.e.f. 4th July, 2022   
(i) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of  the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on  
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this  317th Report on 
Action Taken by the Ministry of Heavy Industries on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the Committ ee’s 309th Report on Electric & Hybrid Mobility – Prospects 
And Challenges in Automobile Industry pertaining to Ministry of Heavy Industries. 
 
2.  The 309th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 6 th December, 2021 and laid on the Table 
of the Lok Sabha on 6th December, 2021. 
 
3.  The Ministry of Heavy Industries  furnished the Action Taken Replie s on the 
309th Report of the Committee on the 28th March, 2022. 
 
4. The Committee conside red the draft -Report and adopted the same at  its meeting 
held on 21st July, 2022. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
21st July, 2022 
Ashadha 30, 1944 (Saka) 
 
Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (ii) 

ACRONYMS 
CSR - Corporate Social Responsibility 
EV - Electric Vehicle 
GHG - Green House Gas 
PLI - Production Linked Incentive 
HEV - Hybrid Electric Vehicles 
BEV - Battery Electric Vehicles 
ICE - Internal Combustion Engine 
4W - Four Wheeler 
RFP - Request for Proposal 
GSR - General Statutory Rules 
RVSF - Registered Vehicles Scrapping Facility 
PPP - Public Private Partnership 
OMC - Oil Marketing Companies 
BEE - Bureau of Energy Efficiency 
AC - Alternate Current 
LEV - Light Electric Vehicle 
DISCOM - Distribution Company 
RoI - Return on Investment 
GARC - Global Automotive Research Centre 
NATRAX - National Automotive Test Tracks 
VRDE - Vehicles Research and Development Establishment 
NIAIMT - National Institute for Automotive Inspection Maintenance and Training 
PHEV - Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicles 
FCEV - Fuel Cell Electric Vehicles  
PCS - Public Charging Station 
MoP - Ministry of Power 
EESL - Energy Efficiency Services Limited 
CC - Cubic Centimetre 
MoF - Ministry of Finance 
DST - Department of Science and Technology 
BIS - Bureau of Indian Standards 
MoEFCC - Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change  
DoR - Department of Revenue 
IIT - Indian Institute of Technology 
MHI - Ministry of Heavy Industries 
2W - Two Wheeler 
3W - Three Wheeler 
ACC  - Advanced Chemistry Cell 
ARAI - Automotive Research Association of India 
BE - Budget Estimates 
(iii)

 
BS - Bharat Stage 
CO2 - Carbon Dioxide 
FAME - Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid &) Electric Vehicles 
FY - Financial Year  
GST - Goods and Services Tax 
GWH - Giga Watt Hour 
iCAT - International Centre for Automotive Technology 
KWh - Kilo Watt Hour 
MoRTH - Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways 
NATRiP - National Automotive Testing and R & D Infrastructure Project 
OEM - Original Equipment Manufacturer 
R&D - Research and Development 
UT - Union Territory 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

 1 
REPORT 
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the  Action Taken by the  
Ministry of Heavy Industries on the recommendations co ntained in the Committee’s 
Three Hundred and Ninth Report on Electric & Hybrid Mobility – Prospects and 
Challenges in Automobile Industry pertaining to Ministry of Heavy Industries. 
 
2.  Action Taken Replies have been received from the Ministry of Heavy Industries in 
respect of the recommenda tions contained in the 309 th Report. These have been 
categorized as follows: 
 
Chapter-I-     The recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the  
  Ministry. 
 Para:  22(iii), 22(iv), 27, 42, 49, 52,  66,71(i), 71(ii), 71(iv), 71(v), 82,  90, 
91, 92, 97, 102, 109(i), 109(ii) and 109(iii)  (Total: 20 ) 
 
Chapter-II-  The recommendations/ observations which the Committee does not desire 
to   pursue further in view of the Ministry’s replies. 
Para: 16 (i), 16(ii) and 22(i) (Total: 03) 
 
Chapter-III-  The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has 
not accepted replies of the Ministry.  
  Para: 11, 22(ii), 33, 87, 37, 40, 47, 58, 60, 89, 94 and 100 (Total: 12) 
 
Chapter-IV- The recommendations/observations in respect of which the  final replies of 
the Ministry are still awaited.  
 Para: 44, 71(iii), 71(vi) , 78, 81, 83, 85 and 96 (Total: 08) 
 
 
3. The details of the Action Taken Replies of the Ministry and further 
recommendations/observations of the Committee thereon wherever found necessary are 
given in the succeeding pages. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 2 
CHAPTER – I 
 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY 
   
 Recommendation/ Observation 
1. The Committee further notes that currently the FAME scheme is limited to 
subsidising xEV purchase & charging infrastructure. The Committee is of the view 
that its scope should be broadened to include funding/grants for xEV components 
development and R&D, Development of components for charging infrastructure & 
capital subsidy/incentive for manufacturing xEV components. 
(Para 22 (iii)) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
Advance Automotive components including xEV components and Electric vehicle 
are covered under PLI Scheme for Automobile and Auto Components. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
2. The Committee notes that the 2 nd Phase of FAME Scheme was launched on 
1st April, 2019 with an  outlay of 10,000/ - crores for a period of 3 years and the 
scheme tenure has been extended for further two years.  However, the expenditure 
outlay has not been enhanced.  The Committee feels that with the extension of the 
period, there is likelihood for the requirement of more funds for incentivizing more 
number of vehicles in the new segments like e3W & e4W for boosting the EV sale 
in the immediate future.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that fund 
assessment may be carried out by the Ministry of Heav y Industries to ensure 
successful implementation of the Scheme and if required, outlay may be enhanced 
and sufficient funds may be demanded in the coming years.  
(Para 22 (iv)) 
Action Taken Replies 
As per fund assessment carried out by the Ministry of Heav y Industries BE 
2021-22 for Rs 756.67 have been revised to Rs 800 crore under RE 2021 -22 and 
BE allocation for 2022-23 has been steeply enhanced to Rs 2908.28 crore. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
3. The Committee has been informed that to qualify for the PL I Scheme for 
Advanced Chemistry Cells (ACCs), a high threshold has been set by the 
Government as manufacturers have to set up production units with a capacity of at 
least 5 GWh.  Similarly, to become eligible for the Automotive Champion Scheme, 
a company should earn revenue of Rs.1000 crore from overseas operations. Most 
of the existing Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) in the EV industry are 
nascent and don‟t have such international operations .  The Committee, therefore, 
is of the view that the speci fication and criteria prescribed in PLI Scheme should 
be revisited to enable the Indian OEMs to be eligible for the Scheme. 
(Para 27) 

 3 
Action Taken Replies 
 Under ACC PLI, MHI issued RFP on 22 nd Oct, 21 inviting proposals from 
domestic/international manufac tures for setting up ACC manufacturing plants in 
India. As per technical bids opened on 15 th Jan, 2022 proposals from 10 
domestic/international manufacturers, for 128 GWh ACC has been received.    
Similarly overwhelming response have been received under Au to PLI. The 
Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Automobile and Auto Component 
Industry in India has been successful in attracting proposed investment of ₹ 74,850 
crore against the target estimate of investment ₹ 42,500 croreover a period of five 
years. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
4. The Committee recommends that the Government should regularly monitor 
and ensure implementation of the measures issued throu gh M/o Road Transport 
and Highways advisory dated 17.07.2019 by all State Governments to expedite 
transition to EVs. 
(Para 42) 
Action Taken Replies 
MORTH has informed that the same is noted for compliance. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
5. The Committee is d eeply concerned to note the poor uptake in the sales of 
EV i.e., less than 1% sale compared to that of the Internal Combustion Engine 
(ICE) vehicle since the launch of FAME-I Scheme in the year 2015 by the Ministry 
of Heavy Industries, which was primarily targeted to promote Electric Mobility in 
India.  For proliferation of a robust EV transition, it is imperative to layout a 
clear and planned strategy for introduction of new technology or investments.  The 
Committee feels that the Ministry could not antici pate the evolution and adoption 
of the Electric Mobility, which at this point of time demands urgent mid -term 
course correction to see the desired off-take in mass adoption of EVs. 
(Para 49) 
Action Taken Replies 
i) In order to increase the sale of xEVs sub sidy/incentive has been increased 
from Rs. 10,000/ - per Kwh to Rs. 15000/ - per Kwh and increase in the cap on 
incentive for e2W from 20% to 40% of the cost of vehicles. It resulted in sharp 
increase in sale of e -2W which is evident from the fact that as on  18th Feb 21 in 
FY 2021-22, total 1.7 lakh EV were sold which is over 4 times than the total EV 
sold during entire FY 2020 -21 as per vahan portal.  Further, there is significant 
growth of EV sector in India during FY 2021 -22. As on 18 th Feb 22 in FY 2021 -
22, total 3.3 lakh EV were sold which is over 2.5 times than the total EV sold 
during entire FY 2020-21 as per vahan portal. 
(ii) The Government on 12th May, 2021 approved a Production Linked 
Incentive (PLI) scheme for manufacturing of Advanced Chemistry Cel l (ACC) in 
the country in order to bring down prices of battery in the country. Drop in battery 
price will result in cost reduction of electric vehicles. 

 4 
(iii) Electric Vehicles are covered under Production Linked Incentive (PLI) 
scheme for Automobile and Auto Components, which was approved on 15th 
September 2021 with a  budgetary outlay of Rs. 25,938 crore for a period of five 
years. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
6. The demand for Electric vehicles in India have surged in the last five years, 
but there is st ill a long way to go for the industry to reach a parity point with 
Internal Combustion Engine (ICE) vehicles. The Committee recommends that 
Government should endeavour to make India a global manufacturing hub of 
electric vehicles through various measures l ike policy support and creating a 
conducive and comprehensive EV ecosystem to bring a parity with ICE vehicles so 
that consumers are encouraged to buy Electric Vehicles without any concern. 
(Para 52) 
Action Taken Replies 
Adoption of EVs is being promoted t hrough three major policy interventions as 
per below:  
(i) In order to make India a global manufacturing hub of Automobile & Auto 
Components a Production Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme for Automobile and 
Auto Components was approved on 15th September 2021 w ith a  
budgetary outlay of Rs. 25,938 crore for a period of five years. Electric Vehicles 
are covered under Production Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme for Automobile and 
Auto Components. 
(ii) The Government on 12th May, 2021 approved a Production Linked 
Incentive (PLI) scheme for manufacturing of Advanced Chemistry Cell (ACC) in 
the country in order to bring down prices of battery in the country. Drop in battery 
price will result in cost reduction of electric vehicles. 
(iii) FAME-II, which is being implemented  for a period of 5 years w.e.f. 01st  
April, 2019 with a total budgetary support of Rs. 10,000 crores, focusses on  
supporting electrification of public & shared transportation and aims to support, 
through subsidies, 7090 e -Buses, 5 lakh e -3 Wheelers, 55000 e-4 Whe eler 
Passenger Cars and 10 lakh e-2Wheelers.   
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
7. The Committee notes that the EV industry is initially facing many 
challenges for take-off due to poor demand from consumers owing to high upfront 
cost of EVs in compariso n to Internal Combustion Engine (ICE) vehicles, 
inadequate charging infrastructure etc. The Committee urges the Government to 
play an important role as a catalyst for enabling faster adoption of Electric 
Mobility through subsidies, incentives and long -term sustainable policies for 
demand creation. Further, States which have not fully waived off road 
tax/registration fee on EVs should be directed to do so in order to attract 
consumers to go for EVs. Lowering the price of EVs and additional incentives on 
scrapping ICE vehicles for EVs can also fast-track transition to Electric Mobility. 
(Para 66) 

 5 
Action Taken Replies 
The Ministry of Heavy Industries formulated a Scheme namely Faster  
Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid &) Electric Vehicles in India (FAME 
India) Scheme in 2015 to promote adoption of electric/ hybrid vehicles (xEVs) in 
the country. At present,Phase -II of FAME India Scheme is being implemented for 
a period of 5 years w.e.f. 01st April, 2019 with a total budgetary support of Rs. 
10,000 crores. This phase focusses on supporting electrification of public & shared 
transportation and aims to support, through subsidies, 7090 e -Buses, 5 lakh e -3 
Wheelers, 55000 e -4 Wheeler Passenger Cars and 10 lakh e -2Wheelers. In 
addition, creation of charging infrastr ucture is also supported to address range 
anxiety among users of electric vehicles. 
Further, following steps have been taken by the Government for adoption of 
electric vehicles in the country: 
 
i. The demand incentive for electric two wheelers has been inc reased to Rs. 
15,000/KWh from Rs. 10,000/KWh with an increase in cap from 20% to 40% of 
the cost of vehicle from 11th June, 2021, thus enabling cost of Electric two 
wheelers at par with that o f ICE two wheeler vehicles.  
ii. The Government on 12th May, 2021  approved a Production Linked 
Incentive (PLI) scheme for manufacturing of Advanced Chemistry Cell (ACC) in 
the country in order to bring down prices of battery in the country. Drop in battery 
price will result in cost reduc tion of electric vehicles.  
iii. Electric Vehicles are covered under Production Linked Incentive (PLI) 
scheme for Automobile and Auto Components, which was approved on 15th 
September 2021 with a budgetary outlay of Rs. 25,938 crore for a period of five 
years. 
iv. GST on electric vehicles h as been reduced from 12% to 5%; GST on 
chargers/ charging stations for electric vehicles has been reduced from 18% to 5%.  
v. Ministry of Road Transport & Highways (MoRTH) announced that battery -
operated vehicles will be given green license plates and be ex empted from permit 
requirements.  
vi. MoRTH issued a notification advising states to waive road tax on EVs, 
which in turn will help reduce the initial cost of EVs. 
viii. Further, As on 18 th Feb, 2022 Eighteen states (Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, 
Karnataka, Keral a, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh, 
Madhya Pradesh, Meghalaya, Gujarat, Assam, Goa, Meghalaya, West Bengal and 
Uttarakhand) have approved/notified dedicated EV policies providing fiscal and 
nonfiscal incentives for Electric vehicles. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
8. The Committee observes that the number of existing charging stations is 
very negligible and is concentrated only in Metros and select cities. For a vast 
country like India with huge population of vehicles, the existing c harging facility 
is too inadequate. Lack of visible number of charging stations have been the major 
reason for strong hesitancy in consumers to accept Electric Mobility. Unless and 

 6 
until the issue of inadequate charging facility is addressed, the adoption of 
Electric Mobility is hardly going to take -off. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Government should emphasize on establishing dense, robust 
and fast charging infrastructure across the country over and above the FAME 
(India)-II Scheme and if n eed be with Public Private Partnership (PPP), to allay 
the fears of range anxiety of customers and instill confidence in them for opting to 
EV. 
(Para 71 (i)) 
Action Taken Replies 
 
The Ministry of Heavy Industries had also sanctioned 520 Charging Stations/ for 
developing charging Infrastructure under Phase-I of FAME-India Scheme. 
 This Ministry has sanctioned 2,877 Electric Vehicle Charging Stations in 68 cities 
across 25 States/UTs. Further, 1576 charging stations across 9 Expressways and 
16 Highways under Phase II of FAME India Scheme has also been sanctioned. 
Further, as per information received from Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, 
1536 electric vehicle charging stations have been installed at Oil Marketing 
Companies (OMCs) retail outlets in the country as on 01.01.2022. 
Further, Oil marketing companies are being expedited to install charging stations 
across their ~22000 retail outlets.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
9. The Committee desires that all the EV manufacturers should make 
provisions for EV Ch arging facility in their showrooms & service stations, which 
will add up to the charging infrastructure to alleviate consumer‟s range anxiety. 
(Para 71 (ii)) 
Action Taken Replies 
Noted for compliance.Some OEMs are installing charging stations.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
10. To improve the mobility services, it is advisable to have a live database of 
active charging stations installed all over the country and the locations readily 
available for the consumers for their reference enabling them to easily trac k the 
nearest charging station at times of need while on the move.  The Committee, 
therefore, urges that the MHI in coordination with the Ministries/Agencies 
concerned, may put in place such a facility for enhancing the e-Mobility services.  
 (Para 71 (iv)) 
Action Taken Replies 
As per clause 6.1 of the "Charging Infrastructure for Electric Vehicles  (EV) - the 
Revised Guidelines and Standards" issued by MoP on 14.01.2022, Bureau of 
Energy Efficiency (BEE) as the Central Nodal Agency has been tasked with 
developing this live database. As per BEE, the work of developing a mobile app 
and web portal is currently under progress. 
 
 

 7 
Recommendation/ Observation 
11. The Committee desires that for increasing numbers of charging stations, 
the Government may explore inst alling Smart Meters on electric Poles at 
dedicated locations and make small charging stations across the 
city/villages/highways and issue smart cards to the EV owners, who can charge 
their batteries anywhere which can be a good booster for faster adoption of EVs. 
(Para 71 (v)) 
Action Taken Replies 
As per "Charging Infrastructure for Electric Vehicles (EV) — the Revised 
Guidelines and Standards" issued by MoP on 14.01.2022, the consolidated 
Guidelines include Indian standards for AC chargers for charging lig ht Light 
Electric vehicles (LEV) like 2 - wheelers and 3 -wheelers. As per BEE, these 
chargers will have built in provision to measure and register electric energy 
delivered and a provision for EV charging upon user authentication using mobile 
App. Such chargers may be mounted on poles in public parking by DISCOMs. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
12. The Committee further recommends that Government should endeavour to 
achieve self -dependency in manufacturing Lithium -ion batteries to reduce 
dependency on other co untries, especially China for unhindered availability of 
raw materials used in batteries. 
(Para 82) 
Action Taken Replies 
PLI scheme Advance Chemistry Cells envisages to achieve self -dependency in 
manufacturing Lithium-ion batteries. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
13. During the course of discussion it was suggested that Ministry of Heavy 
Industries and EV Manufacturers should jointly work together to undertake R&D 
for furthering the cause of 'Make-In-India' so that in the coming years country can 
become self-reliant in manufacturing EV batteries and components indigenously. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that MHI and EV manufacturers should 
make concerted efforts for setting up of a robust R&D infrastructure to promote 
indigenous manufacturing to reduce imports and achieving self -reliance through 
technology improvements and advancements (R&D). 
(Para 90) 
Action Taken Replies 
PLI Scheme for Automobile & Auto Components and PLI Scheme for Advance 
Chemistry Cells promote domestic manufacturing and decreases i mports of 
Electric Vehicles/Components which will encourage  buyers to purchase xEVs. 
 
 
 
 
 

 8 
Recommendation/ Observation 
14. The Committee further recommends that the Government should focus on 
creating local manufacturing ecosystem at global scale in order to lower the price 
of EV batteries, which will ultimately help to create EV demand. The Government 
should also focus on global competitiveness of indigenous EV industry. However, 
the most important element is to develop local EV parts manufacturing eco -system 
that is at global scale & quality. 
(Para 91) 
Action Taken Replies 
PLI Scheme for Automobile & Auto Components and PLI Scheme for Advance 
Chemistry Cells promotes domestic manufacturing and decreases imports of 
Electric Vehicles/Components which will encourage buyers to purchase xEVs. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
15. At present, there is no Government Scheme for incentivizing the local 
manufacturing of EV components other than battery cells. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that Government may mull over bringing a scheme focused 
on localization of other critical EV components as that would give a good boost to 
Electric Mobility in India. 
(Para 92) 
Action Taken Replies 
PLI Scheme for Automobile & Auto Components and PLI Scheme for Advance 
Chemistry Cel ls promotes domestic manufacturing and decreases imports of 
Electric Vehicles/Components which will encourage buyers to purchase xEVs. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
16. The Committee further recommends that skill and capability building 
measures and skills improvement of manpower in handling fire safety hazards in 
case of EVs should be ensured. Up -skilling of workshop manpower to handle 
servicing and repair of electric powertrain, connected features, vehicle analytics 
etc. should be done expeditiously. 
(Para 97) 
Action Taken Replies 
Noted for compliance. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
17. The Committee observes that the intervention by the Government for 
promoting EV adoption by way of subsidies, financial support, R&D etc. in India 
is very minimal compared to other countries, which is the reason why the offtake 
of EV adoption in India has been very low.  The Committee desires that the 
Government should have focused strategy for enhancing its involvement for 
supporting the EV transition. 
(Para 102) 
 
 

 9 
Action Taken Replies 
Adoption of EVs is being promoted through three major policy interventions as 
per below:  
(i) In order to make India a global manufacturing hub of Automobile & Auto 
Components a Production Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme for Automobile and 
Auto Com ponents was approved on 15th September 2021 with a  
budgetary outlay of Rs. 25,938 crore for a period of five years. Electric Vehicles 
are covered under Production Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme for Automobile and 
Auto Components. 
(ii) The Government on 12th  May, 2021 approved a Production Linked 
Incentive (PLI) scheme for manufacturing of Advanced Chemistry Cell (ACC) in 
the country in order to bring down prices of battery in the country. Drop in battery 
price will result in cost reduction of electric vehicles. 
(iii) FAME-II, which is being implemented for a period of 5 years w.e.f. 01st  
April, 2019 with a total budgetary support of Rs. 10,000 crores, focusses on  
supporting electrification of public & shared transportation and aims to support, 
through subsidies, 7090 e -Buses, 5 lakh e -3 Wheelers, 55000 e -4 Wheeler 
Passenger Cars and 10 lakh e-2Wheelers.   
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
18. The objective of the Government for adoption of Electric & Hybrid 
Mobility is to achieve reduction in fossil fuel consumptio n, pollution and Carbon 
Emission, reducing net imports, realizing energy security, enhancing local 
manufacturing, creation of jobs etc. The Automobile Industry as a whole, even 
before the onset of Covid -19 Pandemic was going through slowdown due to poor 
demand because of non -availability of finance to consumers. Moreover, the 
automobile and auto components manufacturers had made huge investments for 
the transition from BS -IV to BS -VI emission norms w.e.f. 1st April, 2020. The 
Covid-19 Pandemic has further s talled the Auto Industry. Hence, given the 
prevailing precarious situation in the automobile sector, the Committee feels that 
to achieve the end objective, a technology neutral approach to the EV Mobility 
would be prudent to ensure de-risking from the rapid technology transformations. 
(Para 109 (i)) 
Action Taken Replies 
Noted for compliance. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
19. The Committee has also been informed that technology innovations are 
occurring rapidly and other options i.e. Hydrogen and alternate fu els such as 
Ethanol are a lso coming up.  Therefore, the C ommittee is of the view that 
widening the technology options would be a better approach in the journey ahead.  
Further, Government policy support may be provided to all electrified 
technologies (BEV,  HEV, PHEV & FCEV), which will ensure a disruption free 
and faster transition from ICE vehicles. 
(Para 109 (ii)) 

 10 
Action Taken Replies 
Electric Vehicles and hydrogen fuel cell vehicles are covered under Production 
Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme for  Automobile and Auto Components. Further, 
Advance automotive components used in EV,  Hydrogen and alternate fuels such 
as Ethanol are covered under Auto PLI. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
20. The Committee is hopeful that with the trend of fall in battery prices and 
indigenous production of batteries and EV Components, the gap between the price 
of EV in comparison with similar Internal Combustion Engine (ICE) 
model/category will be bridged soon and the consumers will shift to e -mobility 
given its low total cost of own ership.  The Committee further hopes that measures 
such as creation of demand for local manufacturing, reduction in GST rate for 
Hybrid EVs, announcements of long-term policy measures for Electric and Hybrid 
Vehicles, provision of subsidy for EVs, revisiti ng PLI Scheme, incentive for 
scrapping of ICE vehicles while purchasing EVs, availability of easy and 
affordable financing options for EV components, inclusion  of EVs in Priority 
Sector Lending, extension of subsidy under FAME -II scheme to e3Ws and privat e 
e4Ws, enhancing awareness among people about EV adoption, extension of 
Government support for Research & Development in the field of EV manufacture, 
robust EV charging infrastructure etc. would accelerate the EV penetration in 
transport sector, as per the targets set by the Government. 
(Para 109 (iii)) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
PLI Scheme for Automobile & Auto Components and PLI Scheme for Advance 
Chemistry Cells promotes domestic manufacturing and decreases imports of 
Electric Vehicles/Components which will encourage Electric Vehicles buyers to 
purchase xEVs. 
 
 
 
 
 

 11 
CHAPTER–II 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE FURTHER IN 
VIEW OF THE MINISTRY'S REPLIES 
 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
21. The Committee notes that Hybrid  Electric Vehicles (HEVs) complement 
Battery Electric Vehicles (BEVs) by not only contributing to meet key national 
objectives of reducing fossil fuel consumption and carbon emissions by replacing 
Internal Combustion Engine (ICE) vehicles but also in speed ing up BEV adoption 
as both these technologies have common EV parts. The Committee further notes 
that since the Hybrid vehicles use dual power train the gross weight is higher 
resulting in relatively lower efficiency, in comparison to EVs.  
(Para 16 (i)) 
Action Taken Replies 
Noted 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
22. The Committee further notes that BEV enjoys some distinct advantages.  
Firstly, the electricity cost associated with operating a BEV over one mile is 
significantly lower than the gasoline cost requ ired for operating a comparable 
ICE Vehicle over the same distance.  Secondly, BEV costs less to maintain, owing 
to the relative elegance and simplicity of a battery -electric motor system 
compared with the frequent maintenance required for operation of an ICE.  
Further, given the high tank-to-wheel efficiency of EVs, overall CO 2 emissions per 
vehicle will remain lower than ICEs.  The trend towards a higher share of 
renewable energy in energy generation will further make EVs even more CO 2 
efficient. The Committee, therefore, hopes that the EV Sector in India will witness 
growth in the coming years, with more consumers opting to adopt EVs. 
 
(Para 16 (ii)) 
Action Taken Replies 
 EV Sector witnessed significant growth during FY 2021 -22 as registered 
EVs sold (~3. 3 lakh as on 18 th Feb 22) in FY 2021 -22 is over 2.5 times than the 
total registered EV sold during entire FY 2020 -21 (~1.34 lakh EV) as per vahan 
portal. 
 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
23. The Committee appreciates the amendments made by Ministry of Heavy 
Industries in Phase -II of the Scheme, in order to accelerate the transition to 
Electric Mobility. India primarily being a Two -Wheeler (2W) driven market with 
almost 22 million sales per year, the Committee welcomes the recent decision 
under FAME -II scheme t o increase the subsidy/incentive from Rs. 10,000/ - per 

 12 
Kwh to Rs. 15000/ - per Kwh and increase in the cap on incentive for e2W from 
20% to 40% of the cost of vehicles. The Committee hopes that the increase in 
subsidy and the ceiling limit would help in demand creation in e2w segment. 
(Para 22 (i)) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 It resulted in sharp increase in sale of e -2W which is evident from the fact 
that as on 18th Feb 22 in FY 2021-22, total 1.7 lakh registered EV were sold which 
is over 4 times than the total  registered EV sold during entire FY 2020 -21 as per 
vahan portal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 13 
CHAPTER–III 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
THE COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED THE REPLIES OF THE 
MINISTRY 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
24.  The Committee notes that India being the fifth largest automobile market in 
the world, imports crude oil from outside to cover 80% of its transport fossil fuel, 
thereby draining public exchequer and also increasing pollution from traditional 
Internal Combustion Engine Vehicles is at alarming levels. The Committee further 
notes that India‟s EV Ecosystem is still at a nascent stage, as compared to several 
other countries in the world. Therefore, the need of the hour is to scale up the 
transition process to electric mobility. The Committee welcomes the decision taken 
by the Govt. of India to switch over to Hybrid & Electric Vehicles to tackle the 
GHG (CO2) emissions from transport sector, helping to reduce crude oil import 
and also be in line with the latest global technology. 
(Para 11) 
Action Taken Replies 
 Adoption of EVs is being promoted through three major policy 
interventions as below:  
(i) In order to make India a global manufacturing hub of Automobile & Auto 
Components a Production Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme for Aut omobile and 
Auto Components was approved on 15th September 2021 with a budgetary outlay 
of Rs. 25,938 crore for a period of five years. Electric Vehicles are covered under 
Production Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme for Automobile and Auto Components. 
(ii) The Government on 12th May, 2021 approved a Production Linked 
Incentive (PLI) scheme for manufacturing of Advanced Chemistry Cell (ACC) in 
the country in order to bring down prices of battery in the country. Drop in battery 
price will result in cost reduction of electric vehicles. 
(iii) FAME-II, which is being implemented for a period of 5 years w.e.f. 01st 
April, 2019 with a total budgetary support of Rs. 10,000 crores, focusses on 
supporting electrification of public & shared transportation and aims to support, 
through subsidies, 7090 e-Buses, 5 lakh e-3 Wheelers, 55000 e-4 Wheeler 
Passenger Cars and 10 lakhs e-2wheelers.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee notes that the Government on 12th May, 2021  has 
approved a Production Linked Incenti ve (PLI) scheme for manufacturing of 
Advanced Chemistry Cell (ACC) in the country to bring down prices of 
battery in the country.  The Committee desires to be apprised of the Status 
Report regarding the progress  made as on date in this direction. 
 
 
 

 14 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
25. The Committee further suggests that similar measures to promote EV 
adoption also be taken in respect of other segments such as e3w & e4w (private 
vehicles). Further all the States should be made aware of the benefits of the FAME 
scheme to encourage consumers to opt for EVs. 
 
(Para 22 (ii)) 
Action Taken Replies 
In e3W and e4W segment, only public transport/commercial vehicles are 
incentivized in order to spread allocated fund to maximum beneficiaries as no of 
user of public transpo rt/commercial vehicle is much more than private people. 
Further, vehicle used for commercial purpose/ public transport are having greater 
visibility. Further, fuel saving and reduction in emission is more in vehicles used 
for commercial/public transport pu rpose as compared to private vehicles.  All 
States/UT have been informed about benefits of the FAME scheme. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry that all the states have 
been informed about the FAME scheme.  The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry should organise regular meetings with the States to promote 
manufacturing of EVs, EV components and EV infrastructure. The 
Committee is of the opinion that even though only public 
transport/commercial vehicles in e -3W and e -4 W are being incentivized, 
there was an impending need to promote e -4W (private vehicles) as the basic 
purpose is to reduce dependence on ICE vehicles which are one of the major 
source of pollution. The Committee desires to be apprised of the meas ures 
taken as on date in this direction. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
26. The Committee notes that Ministry of Power had launched a nationwide 
campaign “Go Electric” on 19.02.2021 to educate the general public on the 
benefits of e -mobility and Govt. incent ives etc. However, in order to increase the 
awareness about the campaign, the Committee is of the view that advertisements 
should be given in print as well as electronic media in co -ordination with all State 
Governments. Further, efforts should be made to conduct seminars, workshops 
etc. to increase the awareness about the campaign  so that consumers can be 
encouraged to go for EVs, removing apprehensions in their minds about range 
anxiety, charging infrastructure etc. 
(Para 33) 
Action Taken Replies 
Noted. Further, MHI Organized a conference on e -mobility on 4th Dec, 2021 in 
Goa under Chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister of Ministry of Heavy industries 
which was attended by Chief Minister/Goa, Hon’ble MoS/MHI, CEO/NITI 

 15 
Aayog, Secretary Heavy Industries, Transpor t Ministers of States, senior officials 
from States/UTs, senior officials from Central Govt. and CEO/Senior officials 
from Auto Industry. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
27. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government and all other 
stakeholders (espe cially manufacturers) should make use of every feasible 
promotional and advertising platform to highlight the benefits of Electric Vehicles 
and EV technology. Informational campaigns across print and electronic media 
can make a huge impact. In addition to the obvious benefits such as anti -pollution 
and cost -efficiency, busting myths such as battery longevity that surround EV 
usage may also be highlighted. Return on Investment (RoI) and cost of ownership 
benefits of EVs vis a vis conventional Internal Combus tion Engines (ICE) can be 
demonstrated. Customers may also be educated about the various benefits, 
incentives and subsidies offered by the Government such as exemptions of EVs 
from road tax during vehicle registration, discounts offered on purchase of EVs 
etc. 
(Para 87) 
Action Taken Replies 
Noted. MHI Organized a conference on e -mobility on 4th Dec, 2021 in Goa under 
Chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister of Ministry of Heavy industries which was 
joined by Chief Minister/Goa, Hon’ble MoS/MHI, CEO/NITI Aayog, Secr etary 
Heavy Industries, Transport Ministers of States, senior officials from States/UTs, 
senior officials from Central Govt. and CEO/Senior officials from Auto Industry. 
  
Ministry of Power had launched a nationwide campaign "Go Electric" on 
19.02.2021 to educate the general public on the benefits of e -mobility and Govt. 
incentives etc. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation (for Para 33 and Para 87) 
  
The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Ministry  of Heavy 
Industries and Ministry of Power  to promo te e -mobility in the country . 
However, in order to fast track the transition to e -mobility, the Committee is 
of the opinion that more initiatives should be taken to spread awareness , 
especially amongst the  owners of those vehicles  with less than  1 year  life, 
about the incentives, subsidie s, benefits of Electric Vehicles  vis-a-vis ICE 
vehicles and remove the apprehensions regarding charging, durability and 
safety of the EVs through SMS/ emails, advertising platforms such as audio, 
visual, print and social me dia. The Committee may be apprised of the 
awareness campaigns organised to educate the consumers about the benefits 
of e-mobility. 
 
 
 

 16 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
28. The Committee notes that the tariff applicable for domestic consumption 
shall be made app licable for domestic charging, whereas for Public Charging 
Station (PCS) provision a separate metering arrangement shall be made for 
subsidized tariff.  The tariff on domestic consumption is charged on slab basis and 
the consumption of units over and above the fixed quota used for EV charging, are 
charged at a high rate resulting in high electricity bill which is likely to 
discourage consumers for opting EVs. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
as in the case of Public Charging Station, a sub -meter or  separate meter 
arrangements may be installed for billing the charging point used exclusively for 
EV charging by domestic consumers to keep the electricity bill affordable to 
encourage potential buyers to go for EVs. 
(Para 37) 
Action Taken Replies 
Ministry of Power (MoP) has issued "Charging Infrastructure for Electric Vehicles 
(EV) — the Revised Guidelines and Standards" on 14.01.2022.  
  
As per clause 7.2 of the guidelines "The tariff applicable for domestic 
consumption shall be applicable for domestic charging." 
  
As per clause 7.3 of the revised guidelines:  
"The separate metering arrangement shall be made for PCS so that consumption 
may be recorded and billed as per applicable tariff for EV charging stations." 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
The Co mmittee reiterates  that subsidized tariff  for consumption of 
electricity units for EV charging could play a significant role in incentivising 
the consumers to opt for EVs over ICE vehicles. The Committee recommends  
that necessary guidelines should be issue d by MHI to Ministry of Power so as 
to ensure that similar to Public Charging System  (PCS), a separate metering 
arrangement with subsidized tariff shall be made for domestic charging of 
EVs.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
29. The Committee notes that curren tly, Scrapping industry in India is 
unorganized and not environment -friendly. Further, the existing scrapping cycle 
has a low recovery percentage in India, which is about 70 -75%, while global 
benchmarks for recovery from scrapped vehicle are in the range o f      85 -95%. 
This not only leads to inefficient resource management, but also         non -
realization of the full value of high -strength steel alloys and recovery of valuable 
rare-earth metals. Enabling vehicle scrapping in a scientific manner by using 
modern technology can enhance value recovery from scrapped vehicles. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the following measures:- 
 Setting up of Registered Vehicle Scrapping Centres across the country. 

 17 
 Incentivising consumers who opt for EVs and scrap their  old ICE vehicles 
from such registered vehicle scrapping centres. 
(Para 40) 
Action Taken Replies 
The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has formulated the Vehicle 
Scrapping Policy that includes a system of incentives/dis -incentives for creation of 
an ecosystem to phase out older, unfit polluting vehicles. GSR Notification 653 
(E) dated 23.09.2021 provides the Motor Vehicles (Registration and Functions of 
Vehicle Scrapping Facility) Rules, 2021 for establishment of Registered Vehicles 
Scrapping Facility (RVSF). The notification has come into force with effect from 
25th September, 2021. It is also submitted that incentives have been included in 
the policy for purchase of new vehicles against scrapped vehicles: 
• Waiver of registration fee for a new vehicl e purchased against the 
certificate of deposit issued by an RVSF on submission of vehicle for scrapping as 
per GSR 714 (E) dated 4th October 2021. The notification shall come into force 
with effect from 1st April, 2022. 
• Concession in motor vehicle tax upto 25% for non -transport vehicles and 
upto 15% for transport vehicles, for first 15 and 8 years, respectively, for vehicles 
purchased against certificate of deposit as per GSR 720 (E) dated 5th October 
2021. The notification shall come into force with effect from 1st April, 2022. 
• Advisory to vehicle manufacturers for providing a discount of 5% on 
purchase of new vehicle against Certificate of Deposit. 
• Provisions for scientific scrapping to increase recovery rate upto 95% from 
scrapped vehicles. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee may be apprised of the details of Registered Vehicle 
Scrapping Facility (RVSF) centres setup/likely to be setup in the country and 
the procedure involved in issuing the ‘Certificate of Deposit’ on submission of 
a vehicle for scrapping. Further, safeguards adopted to prevent 
environmental pollution while scrapping old vehicles as well as the steps 
taken to recover valuable rare -earth metals from the scrap ped vehicles may 
also be intimated to the Committee for perusal. Further, the timeline fixed for 
setting up of scrap yards throughout the country to carry out the gargantuan 
task of scrapping all old vehicles may also be intimated to the Committee. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
30. The Committee is of the opinion tha t there is a strong need to align policies 
across the Center and the State Governments as the difference in the structure and 
quantum of incentives across the Central and State policies, sales of Electric 
Vehicles are not picking up pace across the nation uniformly.  The Committee 
recommends that Government should align the Central and State policies across 
the nation and calibrate them to create a „One India One Policy‟ for early 

 18 
adoption of Electric Mobility in India.  Further, this would give EV manufact urers 
a clear direction to invest and create demand and facilitate mass adoption to EVs 
along the length and breadth of the country. 
(Para 47) 
Action Taken Replies  
As on 18 th Feb, 2022 Eighteen states (Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, Karnataka, Kerala, 
Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, 
Meghalaya, Gujarat, Assam, Goa, Meghalaya, West Bengal and Uttarakhand) 
have approved/notified dedicated EV policies which is aligned with FAME -II and 
EV policies as issued by different Ministries of Central Govt. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee notes that as on 18th February, 2022 only 18 states have 
approved/ notified dedicated EV policies which are aligned with FAME -II 
and EV policies issued by different Ministries of Cent ral Government. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry , in order to give further impetus 
to electric mobility, should take up the matter with the remaining States and 
UTs and make efforts so as to avoid any further delay in the approval of EV 
policy.The Committee desires that a status report regarding the same may 
also be furnished. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
31. The e3W segment is depressed in demand generation mainly due to 
challenges on affordability. The Committee, recommends that the demand 
incentive slab for e3W from Rs. 10,000/KWh to Rs. 15,000/KWh as done in the 
case of e2W, which will generate demand for e3w and help in creating self -
employment and reduce pollution. 
(Para 58) 
Action Taken Replies  
For increase in sale of e3W, following amendm ents have been brought in the 
FAME notification w.e.from 11th June, 2021: 
  
Aggregation will be the key method for bringing the upfront cost of 3W EV at an 
affordable level and at par with ICE 3 -Wheelers. EESL will aggregate demand for 
3 lakh Electric 3 Wh eelers for multiple user segments. Details will be worked out 
by EESL for implementation. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee appreciates the aggregation strategy adopted by MHI to 
increase the sales of e3W. The Committee further desires  t hat MHI should 
not leave any stone unturned to seize this opportune time to intervene in the 
e3W segment and enhance the demand incentive slab for e3W from Rs. 

 19 
10,000/KWh to Rs. 15,000/ KWh  along with increasing the cap on incentive 
on the cost of e3W vehicle. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
32. With the growing per capita income of the country, the purchase of Private 
e4W was expected to go up rapidly since this category has high scope because 
electric car Models available in India are predominantly low cost segment. 
However, lack of incentives to individuals for purchase of e4W has been a big 
roadblock in the consumer‟s mind before opting for purchase of e4W. The 
Committee, therefore, urges that the Government should extend incentives to 
purchase e4W by indiv iduals to boost sales in this category and Fame -II Scheme 
should be modified to this extent, as it is already providing subsidy for commercial 
e4Ws. 
(Para 60) 
Action Taken Replies 
In order to spread allocated fund to maximum beneficiaries as no of user of 
e4W public transport/commercial vehicle is much more than private people. 
Further, e4W vehicle used for commercial purpose/ public transport are having 
greater visibility. Further, fuel saving and reduction in emission is more in 
vehicles used for commerci al/public transport purpose as compared to private 
vehicles. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee desires that along with e4W public 
transport/commercial vehicles, there is an urgent need to incentivize e4W 
private vehicles as public transport fails to provide last mile connectivity and 
consumers are more inclined towards purchasing private vehicle than using 
public vehicles especially in the post pandemic scenerio . The Committee also 
recommends that the MHI should apprise the Committee about  the measures 
taken in this regard. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
33. The Committee observes that there is no sufficient R&D Support by the 
Ministry for technological advancement. The spending in India on R&D is point 
less than 1 percent whereas the major e conomies spend around 5 to 6 percent.  
Because of poor funding, India is lagging behind in R&D.  Without sufficient 
R&D, technological improvements/advancement is not possible.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that R&D facilities should be improved an d its funding 
should also be enhanced. The Ministry of Heavy Industries has 
centers/autonomous bodies like Automotive Research Association of India (ARAI) 
and National Automotive Testing and R&D Infrastructure Project (NATRIP) for 
R&D of Internal Combustio n Engine (ICE) Vehicles. The Committee recommends 
that MHI should set -up R&D Centers for supporting EVs also for technological 
advancement.                                                                                               (Para 89) 

 20 
 
Action Taken Replies 
Noted. NATRIP is one of the most significant initiatives of the Govt. of India for 
the growth of Automobile sector in India and includes setting up of "State of the 
Art" automotive Homogenization, Testing, Certification and R&D infrastructure at 
three new centers at GARC, Chennai, NATRAX Indore, NIAIMT Silchar and 
upgradation of three existing centers at ARAI Pune, VRDE Ahmadnagar and 
ICAT Manesar (Gurugram).  
These centers supports EV for technical advancement. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee is not satisfied with the response of the Ministry and 
reiterates its recommendation that budgetary allocation towards R&D should 
be significantly enhanced. The Committee desires that the Ministry should 
formulate policy for development of  Industrial parks for manufacturing EV 
components and their repairs, promote setting up of state -of-the-art R&D 
facilities for technological advancement of Electric Vehicles  and organising 
training of Automobile engineers in the field of EVs . The Committee should 
also be apprised of the steps taken to increase the funding for R&D. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
34. Some of the Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) informed the 
Committee that they made a great progress in localizing major components. 
However, few child parts are still imported from other countries like China. The 
import duties have been increased from 5% to 15% to encourage local 
manufactures. But due to non -production of some of the child -parts/components, 
the cost of Production has increase d due to hike in import duties. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that Import duty may be raised only in a phased manner 
till such components are manufactured locally. 
(Para 94) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
The rate changes for the various parts of EVs were made in accordance with the 
Phased Manufacturing Programme notified by the Ministry of Heavy Industries 
vide notification No. 12(31)/2017-AEI dated 06.03.2019. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee notes that even though the Ministry has fixed the 
import rate changes for the  various parts of EVs in accordance with the 
Phased Manufacturing Programme notified vide notification No. 12(31)/2017-
AEI dated 06.03.2019, the increase in import duty on certain child -
parts/components adversely affects the l ocal production cost. The Committee 
recommends that appropriate measures/ efforts should be made to keep the 

 21 
imported child-parts/components affordable along with providing impetus to 
local manufacturing.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
35. The Committee has been informed that at present EV Cars are taxed at 5%, 
and big Hybrid Electric Vehicles (HEVs) are taxed at 43% (28% GST plus 15% 
Cess). EVs reduce energy consumption by 75% over Internal Combustion Engine 
(ICE) while HEVs reduce energy consumption by 30 -45% over ICE without any 
external charger. Hence, HEVs are also entitled for discount on GST rate as in the 
case of EVs. GST support of HEV would help the whole eco -systems and provide 
impetus to EVs. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the GST rates on 
HEV may also be at a lower rate to create a lucrative EV ecosystem. 
(Para 100) 
 
Action Taken Replies  
The GST Council, at the time of initial fixation of GST rates, had discussed the 
issue of Compensation cess on hybrid vehicles in detail and recommende d that 
there may be no Compensation cess on small hybrid petrol cars (of engine 
capacity upto 1200 CC) and small hybrid diesel cars (of engine capacity upto 1500 
CC), and to impose 15% Compensation cess on other hybrid cars (big hybrid 
electric vehicles). Further, it is also to mention that subsequent to roll out of GST, 
compensation cess has been increased on large Internal Combustion Engine(ICE) 
cars consequent to the recommendation of the GST Council in its meeting held on 
09.09.2017. However, the Counci l recommended that status -quo be maintained in 
GST/ cess rates on Hybrid vehicles. Hybrid cars enjoy an advantage of 2% to 7% 
compensation cess as compared to normal ICE cars. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee finds the reply of  MHI  to be unsatisfactory as there is 
no mention of any measures  to reduce the GST and Cess on Hybrid Electric 
Vehicles ( HEVs). The Co mmittee fails to understand the  rationale behind 
levying the highest GST  rate of 28 % on HEV s which is equivalent to ICE 
vehicles. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that since  Hybrid 
Electric Vehicles (HEVs) help in reducing fossil fuel consumption and carbon 
emissions, the GST rates on HEV should be lowered so as to incentivise their 
adoption. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 22 
CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
36.  The Committee recommends that the Government should ensure strict 
adherence of “Battery Waste Management Rules, 2020” by all stake holders, for 
management of various types of waste batteries including lithium -ion batteries. 
The Committee hopes that with the imposition of „Extended Producer 
Responsibility‟, producers of batteries would collect waste batteries, ensure its 
recycling and recovery of rare earth -metals and re -use recycled elements thereby 
promoting circular economy & minimizing the adverse impact on environment. 
(Para 44) 
Action Taken Replies 
The recommendation has been forwarded to MoEFCC. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
37. The Committee was informed that for a universal and uniform charging 
provisions at charging stations, the Bureau of Indian Standards along with the 
Department of Science and Technology, the Principal Scientific Adviser and NITI 
Aayog are on the role to stan dardize the adapters so that transferability and inter -
operability is possible. The Committee desires that it be apprised of the outcome of 
such strategies developed by BIS and other stakeholders. 
(Para 71 (iii)) 
Action Taken Replies 
The recommendation has been forwarded to NITI Aayog, DST and BIS. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
38. The Committee further recommends that expenditure incurred on setting up 
of charging stations may be brought under the ambit of CSR for a limited period 
of 2 -3 years.  Further, re newal energy may be used for powering the Public 
Charging Stations. 
(Para 71 (vi)) 
Action Taken Replies 
The recommendation has been sent to MoF for further necessary action as 
the subject matter i.e. expenditure incurred on setting up of charging stations may 
be brought under the ambit of CSR for a limited period of 2 -3 years pertains to 
MoF. Regard to CSR for charging stations, the corporate entities may plan  
expenditure as per the provisions of Companies (CSR Policy) Rules, 2014.  The 
recommendation regard ing renewal energy for powering the Public Charging 
Stations has been forwarded to MoP 
 
 
 
 

 23 
Recommendation/ Observation 
39. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the Government needs to 
forge international partnerships to secure access to key minerals.   The 
Government may form consortium for joint research, investment pooling and 
development of battery technology and battery recycling.  Since India is already a 
global powerhouse in information technology, communication, digital 
technologies, an excellen t foundation may be set up for the development of 
cutting-edge battery management systems.   
(Para 78) 
Action Taken Replies 
The recommendation has been forwarded to Ministry of Mines. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
40. Home to some of the most polluted citie s on the earth, India is pivoting 
towards new -energy electric vehicles to clean up its toxic air. But with meager 
resources of lithium, the mineral essential to make batteries for electric vehicles, it 
is having to scout for resources overseas. India‟s EV production will rely heavily 
on imports from China of lithium chemicals used to make cathodes and b attery 
cells as China has a thriving lithium chemical, battery cathode, battery cell and 
EV supply chain. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government should 
explore other sources of battery raw material like Lithium etc. rather than solely 
relying on China for its import needs to ensure unhampered supply of raw 
materials. 
(Para 81) 
Action Taken Replies 
The recommendation has been forwarded to DST. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
41. The Committee also recommends that Government should ensure 
strengthening supply chain network, easy availability and accessibility to raw 
material and components for batteries, to promote EV adoption. 
(Para 83) 
Action Taken Replies 
The recommendation has been forwarded to Ministry of Mines. 
  
Recommendation/ Observation 
42. The Committee notes that currently, loans for Internal Combustion Engine 
(ICE) vehicles are relatively easy to get with lower interest rates as the vehicle‟s 
value is well -understood, making loans secure for the bank. However, this is not 
the case with E Vs, as their residual value is not clear. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that Government should designate EV as a priority lending sector, 
especially financing for commercial fleets, as they are critical to the transition 
towards cleaner mobility. Availability of easy loans with lower interest and longer 
tenures will make it easier for the consumer to go for EVs, which ultimately lead 
to faster adoption of electric mobility across the country.                          (Para 85)  

 24 
 
Action Taken Replies 
The recommendation has been forwarded to DoR. Further, the matter   
forwarded to MoF as DoR informed that it does not pertains to DoR.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
43. The aggressive push by the Government and EV manufacturers will 
certainly see a massive EV Industry setup in the coming years, including battery 
production, EV specific assembly lines as well as the charging infrastructure.  
This would naturally lead to a huge demand of technically skilled workforce in the 
area, as several auto makers have al ready announced their upcoming EV plans in 
the country. Meeting this demand will not be possible without the cooperation of 
the training institutes in the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
EV-specific trainings/courses should be included i nto the curriculum of premier 
institutes like IITs, Engineering Colleges etc. to ensure that there is no scarcity of 
skilled manpower for Indian EV Industry. 
(Para 96) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
The recommendation has been forwarded to NITI Aayog. 
 
 
 