 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
November, 2016/ Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
 TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-NINTH REPORT 
ON 
 
 ACTION TAKEN ON THE 272 nd  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
           ON   
REVIEW OF PROVISIONS OF CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBI LITY UNDER THE 
COMPANIES ACT, 2013 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES  
(DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES) 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22 nd  November, 2016) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  22 nd  November, 2016 ) 
 REPORT NO.  
252 
 
 REPORT NO.  
252 
 
 REPORT NO.  
279 
 

RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
November, 2016/ Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-NINTH REPORT 
ON 
 
 ACTION TAKEN ON THE 272 nd  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
        ON   
REVIEW OF PROVISIONS OF CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBI LITY UNDER THE 
COMPANIES ACT, 2013 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES  
(DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES) 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22 nd  November, 2016) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 22 nd  November, 2016 ) 
 

C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ……………………………………………….. (i) 
 
2. INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………………………    (ii) 
 
3. REPORT ………………………………………………………………………………….. (iii) 
 
(i)  CHAPTER – I 
 Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the              
Ministry ………………………………………………………………………… ……. 
1 
 
(ii)  CHAPTER–II 
  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
  view of the Government's replies……………………………………………………….2 
 
(iii)  CHAPTER–III 
   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has either not                        
accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its                
replies…………………………………………………… …………………………3-4 
 
(iv)  CHAPTER – IV 
  Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry 
  have not been  received……………………………………………………………..5-11 
 
4. *Minutes……………………………………………………………………………..     ……   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
* to be appended at printing stage. 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Date of Constitution 1 st  September, 2016)  
 
RAJYA SABHA  
     
1.   Shri Sharad Yadav  _  Chairman  
2. Shri Narendra Budania  
3. Shri Ram Narain Dudi 
4. Shri Vivek Gupta  
5. Shri Shwait Malik   
6. Shri K. K. Ragesh 
7. Shri Vivek K. Tankha  
8. Shri Pramod Tiwari    
9.   Shri T. G. Venkatesh  
10. Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav 
 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
11. Smt. Ranjanben Bhatt 
12. Shri Birendra Kumar Choudhary 
13. Shri S. P. Muddahanume Gowda    
14. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque 
15. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
16. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
17. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
18. Dr. (Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
19. Shri. Tapas Paul 
20. Shri Mutthamsetti Srinivasa Rao 
21. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
22. Shri Konda Vishweshwar Reddy 
23. Shri Raj Kumar Saini 
24. Shri B. Senguttuvan  
25. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
26. Shri Y. V. Subbareddy 
27. Shri Rameshwar Teli 
28. Smt. Savitri Thakur 
29. Smt. Dev Varma (Moon Moon Sen) 
30. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
31. Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena 
 
Secretariat  
1.      Shri A.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
2.      Smt. Sasilekha Nair, Director 
3.      Shri J.K. Mallick, Joint Director 
4.      Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Deputy Director 
5.      Smt. Renu Sreekanth, Committee Officer 
6.      Shri Divender Singh Bisht, Committee Officer 
 (i) 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamen tary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred 
and Seventy- Ninth  Report on Action Taken Notes furnished by the Department of Public 
Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Publi c Enterprises) on the 
recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hu ndred and Seventy- Second 
Report on the Review of the Provisions of Corporate  Social Responsibility under the 
Companies Act, 2013 pertaining to Department of Public Enterprises. 
 
 
2.  I, thank the Department of Public Enterprises ( Ministry of Heavy Industries and 
Public Enterprises) for furnishing the Action Taken  Notes on the recommendations 
contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred and Seventy- Second Report. 
 
3.  The Committee in its meeting held on the 24 
th  October, 2016 considered and 
adopted the report. 
 
 
 
 
 
Sharad Yadav 
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
New Delhi 
October, 2016  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REPORT 
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with  the Action Taken by the 
Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises  (Department of Public Enterprises) 
on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s  Two Hundred and Seventy- 
Second Report on the Review of the Provisions of Co rporate Social Responsibility under 
the Companies Act, 2013 pertaining to Department of Public Enterprises. 
 
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Heavy Industries 
and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterp rises) in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the 272 nd  Report. These have been categorized as follows: 
 
Chapter I -  The recommendations/observations, which have bee n accepted by the 
Ministry. 
 
 The Committee is pleased to observe that the Minis try has accepted its 
recommendations as mentioned in the Chapter – I of the Report. 
 
Chapter -II -  The recommendations/observations which the Commi ttee does not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government's replies. 
 
 In respect of these recommendations the Committee is convinced with the logic 
and explanations advanced by the Ministry and there fore, do not want to pursue them for 
the present. 
 
Chapter -III -  The recommendations/observations in respect of w hich the Committee has 
not accepted replies of the Ministry and has asked the Ministry to review its reply. 
 
 The Committee expresses its concern over the non-i mplementation of 
recommendations contained in Chapter – III and desi res that the Ministry should furnish 
logical explanations thereof. 
 
Chapter -IV - The recommendations/observations in respect of wh ich final replies of the 
Ministry have not been received. 
 
 In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either 
furnished the interim replies or couched its langua ge in vague terms therefore; the 
Committee desires that the Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in respects of 
recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention 
and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee. 
 
3. The details of the ATR are being discussed in the succeeding pages. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(iii) 
CHAPTER – I 
 
The Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee recognizes that the Act gives rule ma king powers to Central 
Government. Considering that the DPE is the nodal D epartment to provide non-financial 
guidelines to PSEs, the Committee acknowledges that  DPE guidelines have given greater 
force to the CSR related provisions of the Act by i ntroducing negative marking in MoU 
for non-CSR compiled CPSEs. The DPE may assess the performance of a PSE, against 
each of its CSR guidelines before rating the PSE. 
Para No 10 
Action Taken Replies 
 Under the MoU guidelines for 2016-17, DPE has incl uded compliance of CSR by 
CPSEs as provided under the Companies Act, 2013 and  Rules for obtaining higher MoU 
ratings. 
 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The  Committee is of the opinion that such success stori es should be published on 
the website of DPE and other visual and print media  and also be included in the 
documents like Public Enterprises Survey and Annual  Report of DPE as a token of 
appreciation to these earnest efforts. The Committe e recognizes the efforts made by 
Standing Committee of Public Enterprises (SCOPE) by  compiling such success stories. 
This needs to be updated and be given wide publicity. 
Para No 41 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
 The recommendation is noted for compliance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 

CHAPTER–II 
The Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government's replies 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 The Committee acknowledges that subsequent to thei r taking up the matter 
regarding the need for the inclusion of health care  in Schedule VII of the Act, in the 
above meeting, the Ministry came out with its first  amendment to the Schedule VII on 
31 
st  March, 2014. Vide  this amendment “promoting health care including pre ventive 
health care” was added in the Schedule VII (i) of t he Act in the place of 
“……………..promoting preventive health care.” 
Para No.13 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 The observation by the Committee is noted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 

CHAPTER–III 
The Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted 
the replies of the Ministry and has asked the Ministry to review its replies 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 As per the UNIDO definition CSR should be an integr al part of a Company’s 
business operation. This approach makes CSR more su stainable instead of the approach 
taken by Companies (CSR Policy) Rules, 2014 that ex clude activities undertaken in 
presence of normal course of business. This approac h will help companies to align their 
operations with sustainable development objectives,  instead of taking up unsustainable 
one off projects and tendency to make financial con tribution for CSR. The DPE 
guidelines too require the PSUs to exploit their co re competence and mobilize their 
resource capacities in implementation of CSR. PSUs have been advised to align their 
CSR with their business policies and strategies. Th is position is concurrent with the 
UNIDO but contrary to Rule 4(2) of Companies (CSR P olicy) Rules, 2014. The 
Committee finds this approach to be more effective and practicable.  
Para No. 17 
Action Taken Replies 
 Companies (CSR Policy) Rules, 2014 have been notifi ed by M/o Corporate 
Affairs under the provisions of Companies Act, 2013 on CSR contained in Section 135 of 
the Act. CSR provisions of the Act and the CSR Rule s are uniformly applicable to all 
CSR eligible companies, including CPSEs. Any change / modification to CSR Rules can 
only be considered by Ministry of Corporate Affairs.  
  
Further Recommendations 
 
 
 From the reply of the Department, it is not clear w hether the 
recommendation of the Committee has been brought to  the notice of the M/o 
Corporate Affairs for their consideration. Further,  the reply is also silent on the 
opinion of DPE on the recommendation of the Committ ee. Merely passing it to the 
M/o Corporate Affairs will not suffice.  
 
 Accordingly, it is recommended that the views of D PE with regard to the 
above recommendation and whether the recommendation  has been brought to the 
notice of M/o Corporate Affairs and if so, their op inion on the same may be 
submitted to the Committee. DPE may also inform if it stands by its own Guidelines 
that require PSUs to export their core competence a nd mobilize their resources/                           
capacities in implementation of CSR. In case it doe s not, then the rational behind 
not adopting its own guidelines may be given by DPE  despite international practices 
to this effect as reflected in UNIDO definition. 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee, while analyzing the provision that allows companies to engage 
trust/society/NGO with ‘established track record’ t o execute their CSR activities, feels 
that the term as mentioned in the Rules, ‘established track record’ needs further  
3 

specifications to avoid any possible abuse. The Com mittee also feels that it is required to 
exclude those trusts/societies/NGOs wherein relativ es of Board members of the CPSEs, 
State/Central Ministries or local administration ar e involved in undertaking CSR 
activities. DPE should issue general guidelines in this regard and not leave it to the Board 
alone. DPE should also advise CPSEs to blacklist de viant trust/society/NGO to prevent 
them from engaging in such activities in future. Th e Committee also recognized that the 
Rules have been amended to provide only 5% of the C SR budget for such overhead 
expenditure towards salary, etc. to NGOs. Also, rul es must specify that such trusts/ 
NGOs must utilize the funds in time and give Utiliz ation Certificate to the Company for 
inclusion in the annual account. 
Para No. 24 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 CPSEs while making selection of implementing agenc ies/ NGOs are required to 
apply due diligence and to look into the experience  and track record of these agencies. 
They are supposed to follow provisions of Companies  (CSR Policy) Rules, 2014. As the 
Companies Act, 2013 and the Rules apply to all corp orates, including CPSEs, it is for the 
MCA to consider the suggestions made by the Committ ee for prescribing safeguards etc. 
in the Act and Rules to be followed by all companies including CPSEs. 
 
Further Recommendations 
 
 
 The Committee is fully aware that any change in the  provisions of the 
Companies (CSR Policy) Rules, 2014 ought to be brou ght forth by M/o Corporate 
Affairs. Not withstanding  this fact, the Committee  feels that DPE, in its capacity as 
the nodal body of all CPSEs in India, can include i n its guidelines to CPSEs certain 
precautionary measures regarding the selection of i mplementing agencies/ NGOs as 
suggested by the Committee in its recommendations. Such guidelines can be 
complementary and facilitative of the CSR Rules, no t necessarily conflictive as DPE 
seems to portray in their reply. For example:-  suc h agency /trust, etc should be 
verified by company’s CVO  and its accounts should be verified by company’s 
Auditor.  
 
 Accordingly, the Committee is reiterating it’s abo ve recommendation and 
wants DPE to get back to the Committee regarding th e opinion of M/o Corporate 
Affairs on the recommendation of the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER – IV 
 
Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry 
have not been  received 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 DPE should issue directions or guidelines, as to h ow can the CPSEs extend their 
CSR oversight to entire supply chain network to ens ure vendors comply with principles 
of CSR as per DPE guidelines. The DPE should also a llow the CPSEs to join in the 
Central and State Government’s Schemes like Mid-day  meal, Sarva Siksha Abhiyan as 
per Schedule VII. For this DPE should evolve a mode l arrangements framework between 
the CPSEs and the nodal Government Agency which sho uld ensure timely release of 
Utilization Certificate to the CPSEs so that it can  reflect the CSR expenditure in its 
annual accounts. Similarly, the Company or NGO, thr ough which CSR projects are to be 
implemented, too should furnish the Utilization Cer tificates in time. It must be ensured 
that such NGOs and Companies should actually use the funds in time. 
Para No. 9 
Action Taken Replies 
 As per Section 135 of Companies Act, 2013, the CSR Committee of the 
Company’s Board are guided by the provisions under Schedule VII of the Act and have 
functions of deciding the CSR policy including the activities and expenditure to be 
incurred thereon besides monitoring the implementat ion of CSR policy. Convergence of 
CSR activities with Central and State Government’s Schemes is to be decided by the 
Board of Directors keeping in view the permissible activities under Schedule VII of the 
Act. DPE on its part regarding implementation of CS R, has been advising CPSEs during 
the workshops organized for senior executives of CP SEs to practice due diligence in the 
implementation of CSR activities. 
 
Further Recommendations 
 
 
 The Committee recommends that in these initial yea rs, DPE must monitor 
the implementation of CSR related provisions by CPS Es to overcome the             
teething difficulties and prepare regulatory framework for the CPSEs.  
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 During its interaction with the CPSEs, the Committ ee drew the following 
inferences which needed greater clarity. DPE may include these issues in the guidelines: 
(i) Lack of provisioning for cost of maintaining a dura ble social asset created under 
CSR. 
(ii) Clarifications regarding CSR obligations of Holding  companies, like Coal India 
Ltd. considering that earning in form of dividend w ere not to be included while 
computing Net income.  
(iii) There is confusion whether PSUs can set up professi onal/ skill development 
institutions as per Schedule VII in their respectiv e area of usual business and core 
competence.  
(iv) Exclusion of para military veterans and widows from  the definition of armed 
forces. 
Para No. 12 
5 

Action Taken Replies 
 Observations made by Department Related Parliamenta ry Standing Committee 
(DRPSC) on Industry vide Point No. (i) to (iv)  fal l within the purview of M/o Corporate 
Affairs as amendments in the provisions of Companie s Act, 2013 on CSR or the 
Schedule VII of the Act has to be considered by Min istry of Corporate Affairs. These 
recommendations have been conveyed to Ministry of Corporate Affairs.  
 
Further Recommendations 
 
 
 DPE has merely submitted to the Committee as part of their action taken 
that they have conveyed the recommendation of the C ommittee to M/o Corporate 
Affairs. In this scenario, the Committee would like  to point out that it is also the 
responsibility of DPE to pursue the consideration o f the recommendation of the 
Committee with  M/o Corporate Affairs and update th e Committee on its outcome, 
alongwith the opinions/views of DPE as well as on the same. 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee is of the considered opinion that as  provided by the Companies 
Act, 2013 it is an obligation of a Company to be co ncerned with the well being of its 
local populace and environment, the resources of wh ich are being directly utilized by 
them. However, the Committee also holds the view th at CPSEs should take into account 
the development of remote backward areas of the country. These are areas where the pace 
of industrial development has been slow due to thei r geographic isolation. While 
neighbourhood community and local area with referen ce to company’s works have first 
claim over CSR projects, Schedule VII should also p rovide for development by 
individual company or jointly with other companies,  in backward areas like North East, 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep, which do not have much of 
industrialization and are in need of development. T he Committee therefore, recommends 
that some percentage of CSR be allowed to spend in such backward areas other than local 
area. Similarly, the Committee is of the opinion th at in case company contributes its CSR 
fund to the corpus for National Schemes like Swachh  Bharat Mission, a certain 
percentage of CSR fund must mandatorily be assigned  to local area around Company’s 
works/projects so that the basic ideology to start CSR policy for local area population is 
not defeated and local population do not suffer bec ause they are the first people who are 
socially and environmentally affected whenever any plant of PSUs is established. 
Para No 15 
Action Taken Replies 
 The first Proviso to Section 135 (5) of the Compan ies Act, 2013 reads: 
 
 “Provided that the company shall give preference t o the local area and areas 
around it where it operates, for spending the amoun t earmarked for Corporate Social 
Responsibility activities” 
 
 The proviso provides for preference to be given to  local area. Companies have 
enough flexibility to allot CSR funds for activities to be undertaken beyond local area,  
 
 
6 

including remote and backward areas. Any initiative  to be redefine local area besides the 
provisions contained in the first proviso of Sectio n 135 of the Companies Act, 2013 or 
any amendment / modification in Schedule VII to pro vide for development by companies 
in backward areas like North East, Andaman Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep has to be 
considered by M/o Corporate Affairs. In the worksho ps conducted by DPE, the senior 
executives of CPSEs who are involved in the impleme ntation of CSR provisions have 
been advised besides contribution to Swachh Bharat Kosh, they should also undertake 
CSR activities in local and outside local areas also. 
 
Further Recommendations 
 
 
 DPE should pursue Committee’s recommendation regard ing CSR in remote 
backward region that lack industries with M/o Corpo rate Affairs and apprise the 
Committee of their response.  
 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee feels such initiatives should become  a model for CPSEs and 
companies in other Sectors as well to come together  to set up industry specific 
technology institutes to cater to the demand of ski lled manpower for the sectors like 
defence, petroleum, etc. In this regard, the Commit tee also acknowledged the 
pronouncement made in Budget Speech (2016-17) regar ding setting up of Higher 
Education Financing Agency (HEFA)- ‘We have decided  to set up a Higher Education 
Financing Agency (HEFA) with an initial capital base of Rs. 1,000 crore. The HEFA will 
be a not-for-profit organization that will leverage  funds from the market and supplement 
them with donations and CSR funds. These funds will  be used to finance improvement in 
infrastructure in our top institutions and will be serviced through internal accruals.’  
Para No. 18 
Action Taken Replies 
 A number of major CPSEs operating in different sec tors have their own 
Management Training Institutes to cater to the skil l development needs of their own 
employees and the employees from other CPSEs. Managements of CPSEs individually or 
jointly may decide to set up industry specific tech nology institutes to cater to the 
demands of skilled manpower. Implementation modalities of setting up Higher Education 
Financing Agency (HEFA) as pronounced in Budget Speech (2016-17) are yet to be fully 
operationalized by Govt. However, observation of th e Committee has been conveyed to 
MCA.  
  
Further Recommendations 
 
 
 In its recommendations the Committee had envisaged  institutions/sector 
specific professional institutions beyond in-
house training                               
institutions for higher education/professional training. 
 
 DPE has merely submitted to the Committee as part of their action taken 
that they have conveyed the recommendation of the Committee to M/o Corporate  
 
7 

Affairs. In this scenario, the Committee would like  to point out that it is also the 
responsibility of DPE to pursue the consideration o f the recommendation of the 
Committee with  M/o  Corporate Affairs and update t he Committee on its outcome 
alongwith the opinions/views of DPE as well on the same. 
 
 The Committee feels that DPE on its part can issue  supplementary guidelines 
for CPSEs in addition to those of M/o Corporate Affairs. 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee while keeping in mind and considerin g the essence of CSR, 
observes that setting up of training institutions i n specialized areas by companies can be 
allowed regardless of its relations to its core bus iness. This is even more imperative 
considering that our country is facing an acute pro blem of skill deficit in specialized 
fields like defence, power, petroleum, mining techn ologies, etc. Such training institutions 
would be social assets whose pass-outs may or may n ot join the Company. These 
institutions may be run on the terms of financial s ustainability. The senior management 
and engineers may join the faculty or take up resea rch assignments thereby evolving into 
scholars and professionals . 
Para No. 19 
Action Taken Replies 
 A number of major CPSEs are already having their M anagement Training 
Institutes for in-house/ on the job training of the ir employees to overcome the problem of 
skill deficit. MCA has also been conveyed the recommendation of DRPSC on Industry. 
 
Further Recommendations  
 
 In its recommendations the Committee had envisaged institutions/sector 
specific professional institution beyond in-house t raining          
                     
institutions for higher education/professional training. 
 
 DPE has merely submitted to the Committee as part of their action taken 
that they have conveyed the recommendation of the C ommittee to M/o Corporate 
Affairs. In this scenario, the Committee would like  to point out that it is also the 
responsibility of DPE to pursue the consideration o f the recommendation of the 
Committee with  M/o  Corporate Affairs and update t he Committee on its outcome 
alongwith the opinions/views of DPE as well on the same. 
 
 The Committee feels that DPE on its part can issue  supplementary guidelines 
for CPSEs in addition to those of M/o Corporate Affairs. 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 To discount such trend, the Committee recommends t hat a certain percentage of 
CSR budget must be assigned to CSR projects in the neighbouring community around the 
Company’s project. The Committee also emphasis that  Board of Directors of all PSUs 
while framing their CSR Policy should define the lo cal areas as mentioned in DPE 
Guidelines (point xii).  
Para No. 25 
8 

Action Taken Replies 
 As mentioned in the Act, CPSEs should give preferen ce to ‘Local area’ in 
selecting the location of their CSR activities. It is for the Board of Directors of CPSEs to 
define the scope of ‘Local area’ of their commercia l units/plants/projects, keeping in 
view the nature of their commercial operations. MCA  is the custodian of the Companies 
Act and Rules and it is for them to consider the recommendation. The recommendation of 
the Committee has been conveyed to MCA.  
Further Recommendations 
 
 
 For the purposes of PSUs, DPE should define ‘local  area’ with reference to 
the location of works of CPSEs and not the corporat e or regional                          
offices located in metros. 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee believes that the concept of CSR woul d be defeated in case 
CPSEs resort to mere transfer of CSR money to any f und created by Central Government 
for social-economic development. Instead they shoul d directly involve in building 
community assets and maintaining them in partnershi p with community. However, in 
cases where CPSEs contribute CSR money to Central G overnment sponsored 
funds/schemes/programmes mentioned under Schedule V II of the Companies Act, 2013, 
the Committee recommends that such contributions sh ould be limited to a specified 
percentage of the entire CSR fund of the CPSE and c ertain percentage of CSR must be 
mandatorily assigned to neighbouring communities wo rk. Such a specification will 
ensure that the CPSEs would imbibe the essence of C SR by directly engaging themselves 
in such activities.  
Para No. 29 
Action Taken Replies 
 The recommendation would involve amendment of Compa nies Act, 2013 and 
Rules. These are matters to be considered by MCA. T he recommendation of the 
Committee has been conveyed to MCA.  
 
Further Recommendations 
 
 
 DPE must indicate if it agrees with Committee’s as sertion                
/recommendation and issue supplementary guidelines for PSEs in addition to the 
extant Rules/ regulations framed under the Act. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 The Committee recommends that the Companies should be allowed to identify the 
technologies developed by research institutions lik e CSIR, Universities or start ups, 
incubate and commercially develop them for some yea rs as part of CSR and then may be 
allowed to market it under mutually agreed terms be tween Company and the research 
institution. 
Para No.30 
9 

Action Taken Replies 
 As per the clarificatory OM dated 18.6.2014 issued by MCA, CPSEs can 
undertake research and studies under the respective  areas of items covered in Schedule-
VII or otherwise under ‘Promoting Education’ for the benefit of society.  
 
Further Recommendations  
 
 The Committee recognizes that innovation and incub ating start-ups is                
Government’s policy. Government has launched severa l schemes in this respect 
across the ministries. The Committee encourages DPE  and CPSEs to join these 
schemes as per amended Schedule VII of the Act.  
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee takes note of the responses of MCA an d appreciates the fact that 
sustainability is expected to be factored into the design of CSR projects at its beginning. 
However, the Committee also takes cognizance of the  fact that a good share  of CSR 
activities are purely welfare oriented and may not strictly fit into a project/ programme 
mode where sustainability can be built in. This asp ect of sustainability of CSR initiatives 
will be even more accentuated in the case of CPSEs who are prone to fluctuating 
earnings/profits. Further, the CSR, Rules, 2014 inc lude ‘ongoing’ activities under CSR 
activities. While emphasis  is on the self sustaini ng CSR projects, the activities listed in 
Schedule VII are one off activities that do not  ge nerate revenue even to maintain these 
assets and are therefore non-self sustaining. Provi sions should be made for maintenance 
of CSR assets in successive years. Therefore, the C ommittee is of the considered opinion 
that DPE should mention in their guidelines for mai ntenance of CSR assets created under 
CSR budget. So that the assets are maintained otherwise the whole funds would go waste.  
Para No. 34 
Action Taken Replies 
 Maintenance of assets created under CSR and handing  over maintenance 
responsibility to local bodies/users and creation o f a project specific sustainability fund 
with contribution from users are issues related to the Companies Act, 2013 and Rules and 
these are to be considered by MCA. Once amendments are carried out, DPE will act on 
them. 
 
Further Recommendations 
 
 
 As expressed earlier, the Committee is aware that the M/o Corporate Affairs 
is the Ministry in charge of the operation of the C ompanies Act, 2013 and 
Companies (CSR Policy) Rules, 2014. However, it is of the considered opinion that 
DPE has the requisite operative space within the am bit of the Act and the Rule to 
issue guidelines to the CPSEs on implementation of issues like the steps to be taken 
to ensure the sustainability of initiatives carried  out under CSR. DPE can take 
proactive measures of advisory nature in this regar d. This may even set an example 
to companies other than CPSEs. Further, the Committ ee wants DPE to obtain the 
opinion of M/o Corporate Affairs also in this regar d and convey the same to the 
Committee. 
10 

Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee is of the firm opinion that since it will be the first audit of CSR 
activities after CSR has been made legally mandator y, auditing of expenditure made 
under these activities, along a guided path, would be important for streamlining of 
expenditure and ensuring transparency. The Guidance  Note of ICAI is expected to be the 
tool for the purpose. In view of this, the Committe e wants to be apprised of the details 
relating to the salient features of the Guidance Note and compliance by CPSEs in the first 
audit since the coming into force the Companies (CSR Policy) Rules, 2014. 
 
Para No. 40 
Action Taken Replies 
 The MCA has responded in writing that Section 143 o f the Companies Act, 2013 
prescribes Auditing Standards for auditing the Annu al Financial Statements of the 
companies. This would also include auditing of expe nditure incurred on CSR by eligible 
companies. As desired by the Committee, MCA have be en requested to furnish salient 
features of Guidance Note on auditing of CSR expenditure by companies, if available. 
 
Further Recommendations 
 
 
 DPE may ensure that M/o Corporate Affairs furnishes  a copy of the salient 
features of Guidance Note on auditing of CSR expend iture by companies to the 
Committee. 
 
 
 
 
************** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 