Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
REPORT NO.
296
November, 2019/Kartika, 1941 (Saka)
ON INDUSTRY
TWO HUNDRED AND NINETY SIXTH REPORT
Action Taken  on  the  290th  Report  of  the  Committee  on
Professionalisation of Boards of CPSEs Pertaining to the
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on th November, )25 2019
(Department of Public Enterprises)
Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Entedrprises
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on th November, )25 2019

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON INDUSTRY
TWO HUNDRED AND NINETY SIXTH REPORT
Action  taken  on  the  290th  Report  of  the  Committee  on
Professionalisation of Boards of CPSEs Pertaining to the
Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Entedrprises
(Department of Public Enterprises)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 25th November, 2019)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 25th November, 2019)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
November, 2019/Kartika, 1941 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-19
Chapter I : Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Ministry.................................................................................... 2-6
Chapter II : Recommendations/Observations which the committee does not
desire to pursue further in view of the Government’s replies................ 7-10
Chapter III : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the
Committee has not accepted the replies of the Ministry and
desires the Ministry to review their replies......................................... 11-15
Chapter IV : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the
Committee desire further comments of the Ministr y ........................... 16-19
4. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 21-24

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 13th September , 2019)
1. Dr. K. Keshava Rao  —    Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
3. Shri Subhasish Chakraborty
4. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
5. Shri Shwait Malik
6. Shri Jose K. Mani
7. Shrimati Ranee Narah
8. Dr. Amee Yajnik
#9. Vacant
*10. V acant
LOK SABHA
11. Kunwar Danish Ali
12. Ms. Mimi Chakraborty
13. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi
14. Shrimati Annpurna Devi
15. Dr. S. T. Hasan
16. Ms. S. Jothimani
17. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanjibhai Kundariya
18. Shri Ravindra Kushawaha
19. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam
20. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato
21. Shri Rampreet Mandal
22. Shri Vincent H. Pala
23. Shri T. R.V .S. Ramesh
24. Shri Y . S. Avinash Reddy
25. Shrimati Gomati Sai
26. Shri Ganesan Selvam
27. Shri Chandan Singh
28. Shri Sunil Soren
29. Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare
30. Shri Su Thirunavukkarasar
31. Vacant
(i)
#Vacancy caused due to resignation by Shri Ram Kumar Kashyap on 04 th November, 2019
*Vacancy caused due to resignation by Shri Vijay Goel on 21 st November, 2019

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Director
Shri Jayanta Kumar Mallick, Additional Director
Shrimati Sreeja V ., Deputy Secretary
Shri Ajin J.R., Under Secretary
Shrimati Renu Sreekanth, Committee Officer

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having
been authorized by the Committee, hereby to present this Two Hundred and Ninety-Sixth Report on Action
Taken Notes furnished by the Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises) on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred and Ninety Report on the
Professionalization of Boards of CPSEs pertaining to the Department of Public Enterprises.
2. I, thank the Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises)
for furnishing the Action Taken Notes on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred
and Ninety Report.
3. The Committee in its meeting held on 21
st November, 2019 considered and adopted the report.
Dr. K. KESHA V A RAO
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
21st November , 2019 Department-related Parliamentary
Kartika 30, 1941 ( Saka) Standing Committee on Industry,
Rajya Sabha.
(iii)

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises) on the recommendations contained in
the Committee’s Two Hundred and Ninety Report on the Professionalization of Boards of CPSEs pertaining
to the Department of Public Enterprises.
2. Action Taken Notes received from the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (Department
of Public Enterprises) in respect of the recommendations contained in the 290th Report have been categorized
as follows:
Chapter I : The Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry.
The Committee notes that the Ministry has accepted its recommendations as mentioned in
the Chapter – I of the Report.
Chapter II : The Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to
pursue further in view of the Government’s replies.
In respect of these recommendations, the Committee is convinced with the logic and explanation
advanced by the Ministry and therefore does not want to pursue them further for the present.
Chapter III : The Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not
accepted replies of the Ministry and desires the Ministry to review their replies.
The Committee is not convinced with the replies of the Ministry in respect of the
recommendations contained in Chapter – III and desires that the Ministry may in the light of
further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee furnish comments/explanations
thereof.
Chapter IV : The Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee desires further
comments of the Ministry.
In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV, the Ministry has either furnished the
interim replies, therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry may furnish Action Taken
Notes in respect of the said recommendations in detail and to the point, as per the intention
and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee.
3. The details of the Action Taken Replies of the Ministry and further Recommendations/Observations of
the Committee thereon, wherever found necessary, are given in the succeeding pages.

CHAPTER – I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS,  WHICH  HA VE  BEEN
ACCEPTED  BY  THE  MINISTRY
Recommendation/Observation
1. The Committee observes that CPSEs benefit from the push by the Government for enhancing the
‘Ease of Doing Business’ in the country. It is further noted that conducive environment with ease of entry,
operation and exit would ensure better compliance with good Corporate Governance principles. Accordingly,
the Committee is of the opinion that DPE should keep watch for the initiatives of the Government for the
Ease of Doing Business, collate them in a manner which is of functional/operative utility to CPSEs and
appropriately communicate the same to the administrative ministries of the CPSEs directly.
     (Para 4.5)
Action Taken Replies
The Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion is the nodal agency of the Government for
coordinating initiatives aimed at promoting ‘Ease of doing business’ in the country.  DPE had requested the
Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion to furnish the details of initiatives being taken by the Government
in this regard so that the same could be examined for their functional utility with respect to CPSEs and
forwarded to administrative Ministries/Departments and CPSEs for their information.
The Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion has forwarded a brief note on ‘Ease of doing
business’ covering details of initiatives/steps being taken by it to promote Ease of Doing Business in the
country. This Note has been circulated to all administrative Ministries/Departments and CPSEs for their
information.
Recommendation/Observation
2. The Committee notes that exemptions from certain provision of the Companies Act, 2013 have been
granted to the CPSEs to smoothen their functioning. DPE informs the Committee that exemptions cannot be
considered as antithetical to the concept of Professionalization of Boards of CPSEs. Further, it has been
placed before the Committee that all exemptions have been notified with the approval of the Parliament.
Ministry of Corporate Affairs has informed the Committee that the exemptions have been provided based on
the reference received from DPE which inter-alia stated that the provision relating to Schedule IV of the Act
was not relevant to CPSEs as Government would lay down guidelines for appointment/selection,
reappointment, resignation/removal and evaluation of performance of Independent Directors.
(Para 5.8)
Action Taken Replies
The observation of the Committee has been noted.
Recommendation/Observation
3. The Committee perceives that Audit Committee of a company has inalienable importance in ensuring
economic efficiency, prudence, transparency and vigilance. In case of CPSEs, the Audit Committee has a
reduced role limited to recommending remuneration of auditors, reviewing the annual financial statements,
performance of internal auditors, functioning of the whistleblowers mechanism and similar review functions
2

3
related to financial operations of CPSEs. However, in the Committee’s opinion, the credibility of the Audit
Committee of a company may have a linkage to the fiduciary responsibility of the Board and its members
and hence can be perceived to have an impact on investor confidence in the Company. The truncation of
role of the Audit Committee of a CPSE, in comparison to the roles laid down in CA- 2013, is due to the
involvement of the Controller and Auditor General of India in auditing of CPSEs. However, the Committee
finds that the role of the Audit Committee in CPSEs is currently governed by the provisions of CA-2013 and
DPE guidelines on Corporate Governance 2010, which covers for the exemptions granted from certain
provisions of CA-2013, to CPSEs. In the opinion of the Committee taking into account the essence and sprit
of the said Act, it will be prudent to have a review of the provisions related to Audit Committee as contained
in the guidelines of Corporate Governance 2010. It is felt that such a review shall concentrate on lending the
Audit Committee a more effective profile akin to the provisions of CA-2013 applicable to companies, in
general. The Department shall also refer the matter for the expert advice of Controller and Auditor General
of India. Further, the Government shall ensure that the Audit Committees are constituted and functioning in
all CPSEs and they are adequately populated with Independent Directors as per extant provisions/guidelines.
(Para 6.7)
Action Taken Replies
The Department shares the concern expressed by the Committee with regard to proper constitution
and functioning of Audit Committee in all CPSEs as per extant provisions/guidelines. Accordingly, all
administrative Ministries/Departments have been requested to ensure proper constitution and functioning of
Audit Committee as per extant provisions/guidelines in all CPSEs under their respective administrative
jurisdiction, as recommended by the Committee.
The Committee of Company Secretaries of select CPSEs has been asked to examine the issue of role
and functions of Audit Committee in the context of need for aligning DPE guidelines on Corporate Governance
with provisions of the Companies Act, 2013. Further, the, advice of Comptroller and Auditor General of
India has also been sought in this matter.
Recommendation/Observation
3. The skilling of the members of the Audit Committee to equip them to effectively essay their roles shall
also be of primary importance. Accordingly, the Committee recommends  that DPE may requisition the
expertise of domain specialist institutions like Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) and
Institute of Company Secretaries of India (ICSI) in this endeavour. (Para 6.8)
Action Taken Replies
The Department is in agreement with the recommendation made by the Committee. Accordingly, DPE
proposes to organize capacity building programmes (twice in a year) for members of Audit Committee of
CPSEs in collaboration with domain specialist agencies, viz. The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
and The Institute of Company Secretaries of India.
Recommendation/Observation
4. The Committee finds that it remains a fact to be dwelt upon that vacancies of Independent Directors
remain in the Boards of almost all CPSEs and the total vacancies as on 2017 stand at 380. It is noted that
when Maharatna, Navratna and Miniratna companies are compared the vacancies of Independent Directors
are the least in Maharatnas and they increase when it comes to Navaratnas and Miniratnas. The primary

4
reason for this situation has been brought before the Committee, time and again, as the delay on the part of
administrative Ministries concerned in taking necessary actions. As the Committee perceives, consequent to
the coming into force of Companies Act, 2013, great emphasis has been placed on the role of Independent
Directors on the Boards of companies in general. The role played by Independent Directors is central to
many aspects relating to efficient Corporate Governance. CPSEs have entered a phase wherein they are not
anymore immune to the latest corporate practices and also find themselves in a situation that can be described
as ‘perform or perish’. Here, the Committee observes that the vacancies of Independent Directors on the
Boards of CPSEs are a serious threat to the efforts to professionalize their Boards which in turn is required
to shore up their performances. Major international organizations like Organization of Economic Cooperation
and Development (OECD) who specialize in the field of Corporate Governance have highlighted the need
for establishing well-structured, merit-based and transparent board nomination processes which the Committee
endorses. (Para 8.15)
Action Taken Replies
The Department shares the concern expressed by the Committee with regard to the need for filling up
of vacant positions of non-official (Independent) Directors on the Boards of CPSEs. It is informed that due
to sustained efforts made during the year, the number of vacant positions of non-official (Independent)
Directors on the Boards of CPSEs has been brought down from 380 to around 215 as on date. This is an
ongoing process and all efforts would continue to be made to fill the vacant positions of non-official Directors
of CPSEs in a timely manner.
Recommendation/Observation
5. Another recommendation in this regard is that the process of filling up the regular Board   level
vacancies  should  be  initiated  by  the  CPSE  at  least  one year before the vacancy actually occurs so that
there is no gap between the anticipated vacancy and the recruitment. In case of unforeseen vacancies like
resignation or death, the time period as prescribed in the Companies Act, 2013 should be scrupulously
followed. DPE can ensure this by adequately making it a part of the evaluation of performance of a CPSE.
(Para 8.17)
Action Taken Replies
The selection to full time Board level posts in CPSEs is undertaken by the Public Enterprises Selection
Board (PESB) in consultation with the concerned administrative Ministry. As per extant guidelines, PESB
initiates the selection process for filling up Board level posts in CPSEs one year in advance of occurrence of
anticipated vacancies. The above recommendation of the Committee has been forwarded to PESB for their
further necessary action. As suggested by the Committee, the panel of names for Independent Directors can
be processed by the administrative Ministry one year before the occurrence of vacancy.
Recommendation/Observation
6. The Committee takes into cognizance the submission of Ministry of Corporate Affairs about a proposal
to make IICA the nodal institution to create and maintain a data bank of Independent Directors for companies
in general. While welcoming and endorsing this proposal of MCA, the Committee recommends that DPE
should update and maintain their own data bank of Independent Directors for the Boards of CPSEs in
consultation with IICA. (Para 8.20)

5
Action Taken Replies
The Ministry of Corporate Affairs has so far not issued the notification making Indian Institute of
Corporate Affairs (IICA) as the nodal institution to create and maintain a databank of Independent Directors
of companies. DPE will take action in this regard as and when such a notification is issued. In the meanwhile,
DPE is continuously updating its databank of persons desirous of being appointed as non-official Directors
on the Boards of CPSEs.
Recommendation/Observation
7. In the Committee’s opinion, training and orientation programmes which help to enhance the skills of
the Members of Boards of Directors will be a decisive factor in the endeavour towards the Professionalization
of Boards. This belief stems from the fact that the Directors, individually and as part of the Board, will be
heavily dependent on their already acquired abilities and the specific knowledge and skills imparted to them
about their respective CPSEs as part of their training. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that training
should be a continuous process for the Directors of the Boards of CPSEs, especially for the Independent
Directors. Capacity building and skill enhancement sessions should be made mandatory in a periodic fashion
and fulfilling of mandatory training  hours  shall  be  ensured  in  an appropriate manner. Further, the
Committee also recommends that an evaluation of the up-scaling of skills attained through such training
programmes and sessions shall be included within the framework of a structured programme. For formulating
effective capacity building programmes for Directors, talent pools available with the leading management
institutions like IIM, domain specialist institutions like ICSI, ICAI and Government Institutions like IICA
may be utilized. The Committee also favours exposure of Independent Directors to the best international
Corporate Governance practices as devised and followed by institutions like Organization for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD) and the World Bank. (Para 9.7)
Action Taken Replies
The Department has already been organizing training/orientation programmes for Directors including
non-official Directors as well as Government nominee Directors with the objective of capacity building
of such functionaries. During the year 2018, six such training/orientation programmes have been
organized by the Department wherein domain experts from various fields are called to give specialized
inputs. DPE regularly pursues with the administrative Ministries/CPSEs to ensure that all non-official
and Government Directors get covered under these programmes. The Department would also like to
inform that the process of capacity building of CPSEs is being institutionalized through Indian Institute
of Corporate Affairs (IICA) which will partner with DPE to conduct these training programmes which
will upgrade their skills and enable them to discharge their assigned responsibilities on the Boards of
CPSEs in a better manner. A post training evaluation module has also been suggested for these training
programmes to IICA.
Recommendation/Observation
8. The Committee observes that realm of Corporate Governance always remains in a flux owing to
dynamic generation of ideas and concepts. Cutting edge developments are continuously followed by
international organization like OECD, World Bank, etc. Accordingly, the Committee suggests that DPE
should endeavour to continuously analyse the latest trends that are in place in the international arena and
look for their adoptability in Indian context. (Para 12.2)

6
Action Taken Replies
The Department is in agreement with the recommendation of the Committee and would like to inform
that DPE has been maintaining working relationship with OECD in the area of Corporate Governance.
Wherever possible, DPE officials have in the past participated in the meetings organized by OECD on the
issue of Corporate Governance. The Department will continue to collaborate with international organizations/
framework such as OECD, BRICS and other similar forum/agencies in the area of Corporate Governance
and other issues of importance to State-Owned Enterprises so as to keep itself abreast of latest developments
and international best practices which could be considered for adoption in the Indian context.

CHAPTER–II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS  WHICH  THE  COMMITTEE
DOES  NOT  DESIRE  TO  PURSUE  FURTHER  IN  VIEW  OF  THE
GOVERNMENT’S  REPLIES
Recommendation/Observation
9. Regarding the performance evaluation of Directors of the Boards of CPSEs the Committee finds that
performance evaluation of Functional Directors has been hinged on the MoU system. Here, the Committee
is of the considered opinion that a broad based evaluation mechanism dependent on the MoU performance
of a CPSE will only provide a macro level assessment of the performance of a Functional Director. It is the
view of the Committee that this mechanism has to be appropriately reviewed in a time bound manner and a
more micro level evaluation of the performance of the Functional Directors which would bring out their
individual contributions towards the actual performance of the Company has to be put in place. The Committee
recommends accordingly, taking into consideration the fast changing and complex requirements of the economy
the CPSEs cater to. (Para 5.9)
Action Taken Replies
The Department of Public Enterprises has laid down the guidelines for writing Annual Performance
Appraisal Reports (APARs) of Board level incumbents of CPSEs. These guidelines, inter-alia, provide that
in the case of APAR of full time Directors of CPSEs, 40% weight would be given to the MoU rating of the
concerned CPSE, 35% to the individual targets flowing from MoU targets and remaining 25% to personal
attributes and functional competencies. In the case of CMD/MD, 75% weight has been assigned to MoU
rating of the concerned CPSEs and remaining 25% to personal attributes and functional competencies.
Thus, the recommendation of the Committee for a more micro-level evaluation of the performance of
functional directors has already been addressed in the existing guidelines.
Recommendation/Observation
10. Coming to Independent Directors, the Committee finds that nothing has been brought before it which
suggests that the Government has laid down a well designed evaluation mechanism for the Independent
Directors. Therefore, the Committee suggests that any mechanism, currently in place, to evaluate the
performance of the Independent Directors should be submitted to the Committee in detail. In case such a
mechanism is not in vogue, the Committee considers this as a serious lapse from the side of the Government
and a lukewarm response to the need for professionalizing the Boards of CPSEs. Under such circumstance,
the Committee recommends that a scrupulous mechanism for performance evaluation of Independent Directors
has to be brought in with urgent priority. Further, the Independent Directors may be accorded an increased
role in the overall evaluation of the management of a CPSE by amending the extant DPE Guidelines to
make their yearly meeting, apart from the rest of Board Members of the Company to evaluate the performance
of the CPSE concerned, mandatory. (Para 5.11)
Action Taken Replies
The Companies Act, 2013 and SEBI (LODR) Regulations, 2015 envisage that all eligible companies
including CPSEs will put in place a system of assessment/evaluation of performance of their non-official
(Independent) Directors. The Government has recently initiated the process of performance evaluation of
7

8
non-official Directors of CPSEs who were due to complete their three year tenure in 2018 or by early 2019.
A copy of the assessment format is enclosed for ready reference.
Regarding the recommendation for evaluation of the performance of management and CPSE concerned
by non-official (Independent) Directors, it is submitted that the Government has already laid down
comprehensive guidelines and procedure for evaluating the performance of CPSEs in an objective manner
on annual basis by putting in place the system of Memorandum of Understanding (MoU). The Annual
Performance Appraisal of Chief Executives, functional Directors and senior management of CPSEs is linked
to MoU rating of the concerned CPSE. This Department is of the view that adding one more layer of
evaluation of CPSEs and performance of management of CPSEs by independent directors could be counter-
productive as it may lead to complexity and delays in the process of finalizing the evaluation. It is also
pertinent to mention that Independent Directors, being members of the Board, are also responsible for the
performance of the company.
Recommendation/Observation
11. From the oral and written submission made before the Committee as part of the examination of the
subject, the Committee comprehends that the maximum limit of 15 Directors on the Board of a Company,
applicable for a private Company, is not applicable to Government Companies. This is one of the exemptions
granted to CPSEs w.e.f. from 5.06.2015, the date on which it has been notified by Ministry of Corporate
Affairs. However, it has been brought to the knowledge of the Committee that the Government is considering
the feasibility of bringing down the number of Government nominee Directors on the Boards of CPSEs to
one. In this exercise, number of other Directors are also supposed to be rationalized to achieve optimum
sized CPSE Boards of Directors. The Committee holds the view that larger Boards may be unwieldy and
consensus building may be difficult to attain which in turn could impinge timely decision making. Therefore,
the Committee recommends that this exercise should be pursued in all earnestness and can be perceived as a
definite step towards the professionalization of the Boards of CPSEs. The Committee notes that an inter-
ministerial discussion on a proposal to restrict the number of Government Directors on the Board of CPSEs
is on going. The Committee desires that as and when the proposal is finalised the Committee may be apprised.
(Para 5.14)
Action Taken Replies
DPE had initiated the process of inter-ministerial consultations on the proposal to reduce the number
of Government Directors on the Boards of CPSEs to 1(one). However, a number of administrative ministries
did not agree with the proposal stating that this proposal could lead to losing the services of Financial
Advisor (FA) as a Board member whose presence is particularly required for examining the financial issues
of CPSEs. It had also been conveyed that the oversight function of the Board over management could also
be compromised if there are not enough voices, who are somewhat removed from day-to-day management
of CPSE. In view of the above position, it has been decided to continue with the existing system which
provides for appointment of upto two Government Directors on the Boards of CPSEs.
Recommendation/Observation
12.  The Committee finds that the extant provisions regarding eligibility criteria of Independent Directors
on the Boards of CPSEs are largely broad based and can be more condensed and streamlined in tune with the
best corporate practices. It should be kept in mind that in the current competitive market economy, the
Government has decided to support only the best performing CPSEs. Under these circumstances, there

9
cannot be any compromise on the quality of Independent Directors picked up to perform active Board room
roles. The Committee accordingly recommends that DPE shall initiate an exercise to contemporarily recast
the eligibility conditions for Independent Directors. (Para 7.4)
Action Taken Replies
In terms of the present eligibility criteria, persons from diverse backgrounds such as former Government
servants, former CMD/Directors of CPSEs, Academicians/Professors of educational institutes, Professionals
and eminent persons from Industry, Business and Agriculture, etc. are eligible to be considered for appointment
as non-official Directors on the Boards of CPSEs. It has also been provided that persons with minimum
graduate degree who are in the age band of 45-65 years (relaxable upto 70 years in specific cases) would be
eligible for such appointment. The above criteria have been laid down with the approval of ACC in 2010 and
facilitate availability of experienced individuals from different spheres of activities to the Boards of CPSEs.
It is also pertinent to mention that CPSEs operate in a wide sphere of activities and it is essential that persons
from different backgrounds and experience are appointed as non-official Directors on their Boards to render
advice. This Department is, therefore, of the view that the existing eligibility criteria for persons to be
considered for appointment as non-official Directors on the Boards of CPSEs does not warrant any change
at this stage.
Recommendation/Observation
13. While analyzing the various aspects of Professionalization of Boards of CPSEs as part of its examination
of the subject, the Committee has been exposed to the idea of Ownership  Neutrality.  The  Committee  feels
that  this  is an idea worth pondering over. Many issues like delay in appointment of Board Members, non-
compliance with Corporate Governance practices/regulations, rationalization of exemptions, etc., that have
a direct bearing on the Professionalization of Boards, may be areas that could benefit from the separation of
regulatory powers from the administrative Ministry i.e. the owner. To the Committee’s understanding, while
the administrative Ministry pursues the interest of shareholders and fulfill other statutory as well as social
obligations of the CPSE, the regulatory/co-coordinating agency could play its role independently.
(Para 11.5)
Action Taken Replies
The concept of ‘ownership neutrality’ implies that the regulator should be empowered to enforce
same set of rules for public as well as private sector. It also implies that both public and private sector
entities would have to follow same set of rules. In the context of corporate entities in the country, the
concept of ‘ownership neutrality’ is being espoused to imply that public sector entities should follow
same set of rules/provisions as being followed by private sector entities in respect of SEBI (LODR)
Regulations, 2015 or Companies Act, 2013. However, the concept of ‘ownership neutrality’ should also
imply that private sector entities too follow same set of rules/provisions as being followed by public
sector entities in respect of regulations such as RTI Act, Procurement, Oversight mechanism of C&AG ,
CVC, CBI, etc. It is also worth mentioning that as Government is the majority owner of CPSEs, the
ownership functions such as appointment/removal of Directors, strategic initiatives, etc. will have to be
taken by the Government itself. Therefore, there is a logical case for exemptions to Government companies
from such provisions which impede Government from discharging its ownership functions. However,
despite such constraints, the Government has already taken steps in this direction which are evident in the

10
setting up of independent regulators in important sectors such as telecommunications, electricity, petroleum,
airports, warehousing, etc.
Recommendation/Observation
14. Further, in this regard the Committee would like to recommend that since the country already has a
nodal Department for all CPSEs, which is Department of Public Enterprises, they should be entrusted with
the responsibility for playing the role of the regulatory agency to all CPSEs. The Committee has no doubt
about the competency of DPE in this area, with their vast repertoire of domain experience. Moreover, DPE
is already into regulatory functions through issue of various guidelines on a variety of aspects governing the
CPSEs. But, the Committee reckons that the current role of DPE is restricted to being advisory in nature. To
implement the recommendation of the Committee on ownership neutrality, DPE has to be endowed with
executive functions related to regulations and should be able to enforce the regulations, which may extend to
new areas like Board level oversight. (Para 11.7)
Action Taken Replies
All Ministries/Departments work in terms of Allocation of Business (AoB) framed by the Government.
As per its AoB, DPE has been, inter-alia, assigned the mandate of (i) coordination of matters of general
policy affecting all PSEs. (ii) evaluation & monitoring the performance of PSEs (MoU), (iii) survey of
Public Enterprises, (iv) categorization of CPSEs including conferring ‘Ratna’ status, (v) render advise for
Revival/restructuring/closure of PSEs, (vi) permanent machinery of arbitration for the PSEs, (vii) Counselling,
Retraining and Rehabilitation of employees in CPSEs under V oluntary Retirement Scheme, (viiii) Measures
aimed at improving performance of CPSEs and other capacity building initiatives of PSEs, (Ix) Review of
capital projects and expenditure in CPSEs and (x) International Center for Public Enterprises (ICPE), SCOPE.
It is pertinent to mention that different Ministries too have been allocated specific mandate as per AoB rules
and these Ministries perform functions as per their mandate. For example, issues related to Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises are dealt by the Ministry of MSME, procurement by Department of Expenditure and
appointment to Board level posts by Department of Personnel & Training. In addition, sectoral line Ministries
such as Steel, Coal, Power, Petroleum & Natural Gas, etc. deal with policies related to their assigned
sectors. Therefore, as per the present governance set up and mandate of DPE, it may not be possible for it
to assume the role of regulator for CPSEs on all issues.

CHAPTER–III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS  IN  RESPECT  OF  WHICH
THE  COMMITTEE  HAS  NOT  ACCEPTED  THE  REPLIES  OF  THE  MINISTRY
AND  DESIRES  THE  MINISTRY  TO  REVIEW  THEIR  REPLIES
Recommendation/Observation
15. The performance evaluation of the Government Directors, who are serving officers of the Government,
is based on their annual performance appraisal, regarding which the Committee recommends that their
annual performance appraisal should be adequately modified to reflect their execution of their designated
roles on the Board of a CPSE. In the opinion of the Committee this step is essential as the Government
Nominee Directors are the guardians of the majority Stakeholder’ s (Government) interest which could translate
into protecting public interest. (Para 5.10)
Action Taken Replies
Most of the officers nominated as Government Directors on the Boards of CPSEs are serving
Government officers at the level of DS/Director, Joint Secretary and Additional Secretary and are appointed
in the administrative Ministries/Departments mainly through the Central Staffing Scheme (CSS). Accordingly,
Department of Personnel & Training had been requested to examine the matter regarding incorporation of
suitable entry in the Annual Performance Appraisal Reports (APARs) of the Government nominee Directors
by their Reporting Officer/authority pertaining to their contribution on the Board of CPSEs. The Department
of Personnel & Training has intimated that it is not practical to expect the Secretary of the Ministry/
Department or the Reporting Officer who writes the APAR of such officers to know about their performance
as the Government Director and if the Reporting Officer is to get the feedback from the Chairman of Board,
it would compromise the freedom of the Government Director on the Board. Therefore, due to above
practical problems as intimated by the Department of Personnel & Training, it may not be desirable to
modify the existing system of writing Annual Performance Appraisal System in respect of the officers of
Government of India functioning as Government Directors on the Boards of CPSEs.
Further Recommendations/ Observations
The Committee takes into cognizance, the reply of the Government that puts forward ‘practical
problems’ in assessing the performance of Government Directors on the Boards of CPSEs.   The
Committee feels that the Department should think out of the box and consider concepts like peer
assessment or self assessment with respect to the assessment of performance of Government
Directors.  Such assessment reports can be further reviewed by the competent authority in the
Department/Ministry. Accordingly, the Committee desires the Department to take up the
recommendation again for implementation by evolving suitable/appropriate performance assessment
methods.
Recommendation/Observation
16. It is further recommended that the criteria of educational qualification has to be enhanced from the
current ‘minimum graduation degree’ to atleast a professional degree in the domain concerned keeping in
mind the high expectations from a Board member in the current corporate world. (Para 7.5)
11

12
Action Taken Replies
In terms of the present eligibility criteria, former Government servants, former CMD/Directors of
CPSEs, Academicians/Professors of educational institutes, Professionals and eminent persons from Industry,
Business and Agriculture, etc. are eligible to be considered for appointment as non-official Directors on the
Boards of CPSEs. It has also been provided that persons with minimum graduate degree who are in the age
band of 45-65 years (relaxable upto 70 years in specific cases) would be eligible for such appointment. In
case the recommendation of the Committee is implemented, it could lead to a situation where senior Government
servants, CMD/Directors of CPSEs, Academicians/Professors and eminent persons from public life will be
rendered ineligible to be considered for appointment as non-official Directors on the Boards of CPSEs as
there is no such requirement of having a ‘professional’ degree for appointment as Government servant or
CMD of a CPSE. This Department is, therefore, of the view that the present eligibility condition which
prescribes educational qualification of ‘minimum graduation degree’ is inclusive and amending the same to
‘professional degree’ would be restrictive in the context of CPSEs.
Further Recommendations/ Observations
The Committee does not agree with the reply of the Government that the education qualification
of ‘Minimum Graduation Degree’ is to be retained for accommodating senior Government servants,
CMD/Directors of CPSEs, Academicians/Professors and eminent persons from public life  on the
Board of a CPSE.  The Committee is of the opinion that ‘minimum graduation’ is a benchmark that
has been set long back.  In the current scenario, there would not be any dearth of professionals/
higher qualified persons in the categories of officials mentioned by the Department who can be
considered as potential candidates for appointment as Independent Directors. Such an eligibility
condition for selection for appointment of non-official directors on the Boards of CPSEs will also be
in the interest of the CPSE concerned rather than being in the interest of the individual. Accordingly,
the Committee reiterates its recommendation.
Recommendation/Observation
17. Further, the Committee feels that it is time to take some decisive steps with regard to the timely
appointment of Independent Directors. As a preliminary step, the Committee welcomes the penal initiative
that has come from the side of SEBI. But as one goes further into the matter, it remains a fact that placing
the onus of initiating the selection  on  the  administrative  Ministry  has  proved  to  be  a  failure.
Accordingly, an alternative has to be sought urgently. In this regard, the Committee feels that the levels
involved in the selection of Independent Directors can be brought down. Currently, it is initiated by the
administrative Ministries concerned. Thereafter, DPE processes these proposals for obtaining the
recommendations of the Search Committee. The recommendations of Search Committee are conveyed by
DPE to the administrative Ministry concerned. The administrative Ministry then makes the appointment of
non-official Directors after obtaining the approval of Appointments Committee of Cabinet (ACC). This
involves six different steps. The Committee recommends that the process should be initiated by the CPSE
concerned, who should make the recommendation directly to the Search Committee under intimation to
Administrative Ministry and DPE. Thereafter, the Search Committee should convey their decision to the
DPE who should place it before ACC, in a time bound manner, under intimation to Administrative Ministry
and convey the final appointment to CPSE directly. (Para 8.16)

13
Action Taken Replies
As per extant guidelines, the proposals for appointment of non-official (Independent) are initiated by
the concerned administrative Ministry and submitted to DPE. DPE places these proposals for the consideration
of the Search Committee and conveys the recommendations of Search Committee to the concerned
administrative Ministry which makes the appointment after completing due formalities and obtaining the
approval of the competent authority.
As per extant procedure, the proposals for appointment of Independent Directors are submitted for
the approval of ACC after the approval of Minister-in-charge of the concerned administrative Ministry.
Further, the concerned administrative Ministry not only discharges ownership functions but is also accountable
to Parliament in respect of CPSEs under its administrative control. The concerned administrative Ministry is
responsible for ensuring implementation of applicable laws, regulations, guidelines, etc. in respect of CPSEs
and also oversees their performance. Therefore, it may not be procedurally appropriate to remove administrative
Ministry from the process of selection and appointment non-official (Independent) Directors on the Boards
of CPSEs.
Recommendation/Observation
18. The Committee has been made aware of the recommendations by the Kotak Committee set up by SEBI
on review of Corporate Governance norms of the country. One of the important recommendations of Kotak
Committee is that:-‘The government should aim at ensuring independence of the PSEs from the administrative
ministry to ensure speedy decision making, functional and operational autonomy in pursuit of their stated
objectives, for better commercial goals and to attract talent in a competitive market place.’ The Committee
finds that this recommendation is of cardinal importance in the efforts to professionalize the Boards of
CPSEs. As discussed above, the administrative Ministry has failed in making timely decisions thus impinging
the Corporate Governance aspects of CPSEs and thereby affecting their functional autonomy. Accordingly,
the Government  should  endeavour to  make  CPSEs  independent  from  the  administrative Ministry as
recommended by the Kotak Committee. The first step in this direction could be that of disassociating the
administrative Ministry in matters regarding the filling up of vacancies of Independent Directors in the
Boards of CPSEs as recommended earlier . (Para 8.18)
Action Taken Replies
The CPSEs are covered under the ambit of definition of ‘State’ mentioned in Article 12 of the Constitution
and the concerned administrative Ministry discharges ownership functions as well as Parliamentary
accountability in respect of CPSEs under its administrative control. The concerned administrative Ministry
is also responsible for ensuring implementation of laws, regulations, guidelines, etc. applicable to ‘State’
entities in respect of CPSEs and also overseeing their performance. Therefore, it may not be procedurally
appropriate to disassociate administrative Ministry from the process of selection and appointment non-
official (Independent) Directors on the Boards of CPSEs. Further, the selection of non-official Directors on
the Boards of CPSEs is done by a Search Committee comprising of Secretary of concerned administrative
Ministry, Secretary, DPE and Secretary, Department of Personnel & Training and two non-official members.
Hence, the selection of non-official Directors is not restricted to the administrative Ministry alone. There are
laid down guidelines which are followed for the process of selection of non-official Directors on the Boards
of CPSEs.

14
Further Recommendations/ Observations
The Committees aim in recommending the independence of the CPSEs from their respective
Administrative Ministries was to ensure more speedy action in required spheres and effective decision
making, especially in the selection and appointment of Independent Directors. The Committee has
observed that despite the efforts put forth recently to fill up a number of vacant posts of independent
directors on the Board of various CPSEs, more rigorous efforts need to be put in as timely filling of
vacant posts, in several cases, is still not found to have been done.
If the professionalization of Boards of CPSEs is to be achieved in its true sense of letter and
spirits, then it is imperative that adequate steps are to be taken in right earnest to fill up all vacant
posts of Independent Directors. Besides, necessary action should be taken, well in advance to fill up
the anticipated vacancies likely to arise in the posts of Independent Director. The primary aim of
the Committee in suggesting disassociation of the administrative Ministry from the process of
selection and appointment of non official Directors on the Board of CPSEs was to stem the delay in
the process as it was found that the administrative Ministries fell short of their duties in initiating
timely action to fill up the vacant post of Independent Directors and not to violate laid down procedures
and guidelines. The Committee accordingly states that earnest efforts be made to fill up all existing
vacant post and ensure that necessary steps are taken well in advance to fill up anticipated vacancies
of the post of Independent Directors.
Recommendation/Observation
19. The Committee finds that Section 150 of CA-2013, interalia, provides that an Independent Director
may be selected from a data bank, maintained by any body, institute or association, as may by notified by
the Central Government   The Committee is also aware that DPE maintains a Data Bank of persons desirous
of being appointed as Independent Directors in Board of CPSEs. However, as informed to the Committee,
currently the administrative Ministries may or may not include the name from the DPE data bank in the
panel for prospective candidates for the post of Independent Directors furnished to DPE. To the Committee’s
reading, this situation has to change. The CPSEs should directly be able to recommend names solely from
the data bank of DPE. In this scenario, the role of DPE will be amplified in terms of the authenticity and
dependability of the data bank of potential Independent Directors which they maintain. Giving such a
responsibility to CPSEs will be in tune with the current international practices of Corporate Governance
intended to safeguard the independence of Independent Directors. It would also be in consonance with the
recommendations of the Kotak Committee which has suggested that the Government should aim at ensuring
independence of CPSEs from their Administrative Ministry. (Para 8.19)
Action Taken Replies
The databank being maintained by DPE is a repository of biodata of persons desirous of being appointed
as non-official Directors on the Boards of CPSEs. The databank is based on the applications of prospective
applicants for the position of non-official Director in CPSEs received in DPE directly from the concerned
individuals or from Ministries/Departments. Suitable candidates are also available for consideration as non-
official Director apart from the databank being maintained by DPE. The CPSEs can always suggest suitable
names for inclusion in the DPE databank through the concerned administrative Ministry. Completely
dissociating the administrative Ministries from the selection of non-official Directors on the Boards of

15
CPSEs is not feasible as the former exercise ownership functions in respect of CPSEs which are ‘State’
entities.
Further Recommendations/ Observations
The recommendation of the Committee that CPSEs shall directly be able to recommend names
solely from the Databank of DPE has been made under the premise that DPE would also be able to
complete the preliminary selection of the persons from the Databank after conducting the required
formalities.  For this pre-appointment selection process, DPE could bank upon the professional
competence of institutions like Indian Institute of Corporate Affairs (IICA) etc..  The Committee
has also harped on the recommendation of the Kotak Committee in this regard.  The DPE should
accordingly take measures to get this proposed new and added responsibility incorporated to their
Allocation of Business as per the laid down procedure.

CHAPTER – IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS  IN  RESPECT  OF  WHICH  THE  COMMITTEE
DESIRE  FURTHER  COMMENTS  OF  THE  MINISTRY
Recommendation/Observation
20. The Committee notes that one of the important features of the Company Act, 2013 is Schedule IV to
the Act which contains the Code of Conduct of Independent Directors. There, it finds that on the reference
received from DPE, MCA has given exemptions to CPSEs from various provisions as contained in the Code.
The Committee also finds that these exemptions are subject to the condition that the requirement in respect of
matters specified in these exemptions are specified by the Ministries or Departments of the Central Government
or as the case may be, the State Governments concerned and such requirements are complied with by the
Government companies. The Committee is in agreement with the fact that certain exemptions are undoubtedly
needed to be given to CPSEs owing to the peculiarities of their structure, functioning and objectives for
which they have been set up. However , the Committee is surprised to note that DPE has termed these
exemptions be on “miscellaneous matters”. The Committee cannot but take exception to this stand of DPE
and does not agree in toto. Accordingly, it is of the strong opinion that the areas in which the exemptions
have been granted have to be invariably addressed appropriately by DPE, either through their guidelines or
through other definite measures and it needs periodical reviewing so that it is in sync with related SEBI
Regulations and other similar statutory stipulations applicable. (Para 5.18)
Action Taken Replies
The Committee of Company Secretaries of select CPSEs set up by DPE has been asked to review the
exemptions granted to Government companies to ensure that the same are in sync with extant SEBI regulations
and other applicable similar statutory provisions.
Recommendation/Observation
21. The Committee finds that the exemptions granted to CPSEs from certain provisions of the Companies
Act, 2013 have been based on the reference from DPE. It has also been given to understand that some of
these exemptions have been continued as they were in force as part of Companies Act, 1956. Regarding
having a review or relook at the exemptions, both MCA and DPE have submitted that no demand to that
effect have been received from any stakeholders. In this direction, the Committee is of the opinion that the
Government, especially DPE, does not need any proposal from the administrative Ministries of CPSEs or
any other quarter to initiate a review of these exemptions. As already expressed by the Committee earlier, it
is very much in favour of providing appropriate exemptions to CPSEs. However, too many exemptions to
CPSEs, vis-a-vis, their private counterparts would not augur well for the Professionalization of the Boards
of CPSEs. Hence, care should be taken to keep such exemptions in alignment with the SEBI (LODR)
Regulations and other statutory requirements that the CPSEs has to comply with, so as not to hinder them
from taking full advantage attached to such compliance. Furthermore, the exemptions should also be in the
light of the current international practices, the Indian context and also keeping in view the Government’s
push to recast CPSEs as independent, competitive, self reliant corporate entities who can be at par with the
private companies to the extent possible. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that DPE should undertake
a comprehensive review of the exemptions granted to CPSEs under the Section 462 of the CA-2013 and
weed out redundant ones. Further, the Committee also recommends an overhaul review of the entire Guidelines
16

17
on Corporate Governance for the CPSEs, 2010 of DPE which predates the CA-2013 and covers for the
exemptions granted to CPSEs. (Para 5.21)
Action Taken Replies
The Committee of Company Secretaries of select CPSEs set up by DPE has been tasked to undertake
a comprehensive review of the exemptions granted to Government companies under the Section 462 of the
Companies Act, 2013. This Committee had earlier been asked to suggest changes/modifications in the DPE
guidelines on Corporate Governance for CPSEs in the light of provisions of Companies Act, 2013. The
Committee has already presented its first report but it has been asked to re-examine the same in the light of
exemptions granted to Government companies and suggest a complete overhaul of the existing DPE guidelines
on Corporate Governance.
Recommendation/Observation
22. On exemptions to CPSEs, the Committee also wishes to bring on record the feasibility of the
recommendation of the Kotak Committee set up by SEBI to review the Corporate Governance norms in the
country wherein it has been preferred that the differentiating factors between CPSEs and the private companies
shall be based on the objective for which a CPSE has been set up. This means the exemptions shall not be
by virtue of the fact that one is a Government company and the other, a private entity but based on factors
like the social objective, balanced regional development and similar goals proposed to be addressed and
other factors peculiar to Government being in business. The Committee observes that the Government shall
take appropriate action on the above mentioned aspect. (Para 5.22)
Action Taken Replies
The exemptions to Government companies are notified by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. The
observation made by the Committee had been forwarded to the Ministry of Corporate Affairs for further
necessary action.
The Ministry of Corporate Affairs has informed that ‘Keeping in view the need for examination of all
related aspects involved in implementation of the recommendations made by Kotak Committee on the
Governance aspects of CPSEs and since MCA had processed the case for according various exemptions at
the behest of and as solicited by DPE, this Ministry feels that DPE may consider review of relevant norms
at appropriate time. MCA can provide relevant inputs on the matter’.
DPE has already referred the matter of review of exemption to Government companies to the Committee
of Company Secretaries of select CPSEs.
Recommendation/Observation
23. To gauge the understanding of the Independent Directors about their duties and liabilities in relation
with the CPSE to which they belong, the Committee is in favour of introducing an aptitude test as one of the
mandatory selection criteria. This idea gains importance especially in the light of recent scams that have
taken place in reputed companies. In this regard the Committee takes into cognizance the suggestion of
MCA to entrust Indian Institute of Corporate Affairs (IICA) to conduct such a passing/qualifying test and
accordingly recommends that the Government shall take into account the feasibility of such a move. The
Committee accordingly would also like to know the status of the proposed move to notify IICA as nodal
institution to create and maintain to database of Independent Directors and also the fall out of the consultation

18
process initiated with DPE, SEBI, CII, FICCI, Assocham, etc. The Committee also wishes to recognize the
initiatives from the part of ICSI on the issue, as brought before the Committee, and hopes that they can also
be roped in to contribute in formulating such an aptitude test. (Para 7.6)
Action Taken Replies
As this matter is being dealt by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, the above recommendation had been
forwarded to the Ministry of Corporate Affairs for their comments and further necessary action.
The Ministry of Corporate Affairs has informed that “the matter relating to notifying Indian Institute
of Corporate Affairs (IICA) as the nodal agency/institute for the creation and maintenance of data bank of
Independent Directors under Section 150 of the Companies Act, 2013 alongwith relevant rules is under
consideration of the Ministry in consultation with IICA and other stakeholders”.
Recommendation/Observation
24. The Committee notes that the greatest threat to Professionalization of Boards of CPSEs lie in the
rampant non-compliance by CPSEs with provisions aimed at good Corporate Governance practices as
enshrined in the CA-2013, and other such regulations. It is disturbing to find that not even 50% of listed
CPSEs are compliant with provisions of Independent Directors on the Board of CPSEs. Here, since the
appointment of Independent Directors is the responsibility of the administrative Ministries and other
Government entities involved, individual CPSEs are by and large helpless spectators. Less than adequate
number of Independent Directors can lead to situations where Audit Committee and other Committees of the
Board are not able to meet. Even CPSEs which have been granted ‘Maharatna’ status are not in a position to
exercise their enhanced delegated powers. The Committee infers that the situation reached this magnitude
due the lack of effective penal provisions and no penal action being effected. In this regard, the Committee
is aware of the latest step taken by SEBI to introduce a fine of INR 5000 per day for continued non-
compliance on the listed entities not complying with provisions pertaining to composition of the Board.
However, the Committee feels that since CPSE has no role in filling up the vacancies of Independent Directors,
it will be unjustified to impose the penal provision and fine on them. Or else the onus of filling up the post of
Independent Directors should rest with the CPSEs concerned, as already recommended by the Committee
and in that scenario the penal provision being applicable to CPSEs is justified. Further, the Committee wishes
that MCA and DPE may bring in more suitable penal provisions for non compliance of other provisions
under CA-2013 and other Corporate Governance regulations/guidelines. (Para 10.5)
Action Taken Replies
As regards the filling up of positions of non-official Directors on the Boards of listed CPSEs is
concerned, it is informed that of the existing 59 listed CPSEs, there are no vacant positions of non-official
Directors in 29 listed CPSEs and there is only one vacant position of non-official Director in 13 listed
CPSEs. As far as DPE is concerned, it is mentioned that DPE grades CPSEs on the basis of their compliance
with guidelines on Corporate Governance for CPSEs. The Department would also like to inform the Committee
that under the MoU system ‘compliance with provisions of Companies Act, 2013’ is one of the criteria and
MoU score of a CPSE is reduced by one mark in case of non-compliance with this criteria. MoU rating of
CPSE has been linked to annual performance appraisal of top management of CPSEs and performance
related pay of CPSEs. Thus, the recommendation of the Committee for penal provision for non-compliance
with provisions of Companies Act, 2013 has been addressed by DPE.

19
The above recommendation was also conveyed to Ministry of Corporate Affairs for their information
and necessary action. The Ministry of Corporate Affairs has informed that “the provision of Companies Act,
2013 provide for clear provision w.r.t. appointment of directors and Independent Directors by all Companies.
In case of CPSE, the exemption under Section 462 of the Companies Act, 2013 have been provided as
requested for by and in consultation with Department of Public Enterprises and CPSEs keeping in view the
position under the Companies Act, 1956 and the practice/administrative instructions issued by Department
of Public Enterprises. Any modification in the requirement under the Companies Act, 2013/rules made
thereunder can be considered by MCA as per the suggestion of Department of Public Enterprises. Comments
of SEBI may also be sought w.r.t action being taken by against listed CPSEs”.
The Ministry of Corporate Affairs has been again requested to re-examine this matter and furnish their
comments on the recommendation of the Committee for penal provisions for non-compliance of such
Sections of Companies Act, 2013 which relate to Corporate Governance and are not related to the issue of
appointment of Directors.
As suggested by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, comments of SEBI have been sought regarding
action being taken against listed CPSEs for non-compliance of Corporate Governance norms prescribed by
SEBI.
Recommendation/Observation
25.  The Committee observes that countries like Singapore which have a successful eco-system of PSEs
with proven track record follows the system of Ownership Neutrality in Corporate Governance. The Kotak
Committee set up by SEBI to review the Corporate Governance norms of the country has analyzed and
recommended the idea that the Government should aim at ensuring independence of the PSEs from the
administrative ministry to ensure speedy decision making, functional and operational autonomy in pursuit
of their stated objectives. The Committee is given to understand that this recommendation of the Kotak
Committee has been forwarded to Ministry of Finance and DPE for consideration. The Committee also
finds that international organizations in the realm of Corporate Governance like Organization of Economic
Cooperation and Development (OECD) has been in favour of clear cut identification of ownership rights of
State Administration, which can be inferred as separation of ownership rights and regulatory powers.
Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the Government shall initiate expedient action on the said
recommendation of the Kotak Committee. (Para 11.6)
Action Taken Replies
The recommendations of Kotak Committee are being processed by SEBI and Department of Economic
Affairs. DPE has already furnished its comments to Department of Economic Affairs on this specific issue
raised by Kotak Committee. The above recommendation of the Committee has been forwarded to Department
of Economic Affairs for their comments and further necessary action.

MINUTES

23
IV
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 21st November, 2019 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. K. Keshava Rao  —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shwait Malik
3. Dr. Amee Yajnik
LOK  SABHA
4. Dr. S. T. Hasan
5. Shrimati Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam
6. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato
7. Shri Rampreet Mandal
8. Shri Vincent H. Pala
9. Shri T. R. V . S. Ramesh
10. Shri Ganesan Selvam
11. Shri Sunil Soren
12. Shri Su Thirunavukkarasar
SECRETARIAT
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati. Sasilekha Nair, Director
Shri J.K. Mallick, Additional Director
Shrimati Sreeja .V , Deputy Secretary
Shri Ajin. J. R, Under Secretary
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting. The Committee then took up for
consideration and adoption of the draft 295
th and 296th Action Taken Reports of the Committee, which have
been prepared based on the replies provided by the Ministry/Department on the recommendations of the
Committee as contained in its 289 th and 290 th Reports on Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme and
Professionalization of Boards of CPSEs pertaining to the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
and Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises respectively. After a brief discussion, the Committee
adopted the draft 295
th and 296th Action Taken Reports without any change.
2. The Committee decided to present/lay the above Reports in both the Houses of Parliament on the 25 th
November, 2019.  It authorised the Chairman of the Committee and in his absence, Dr. Amee Yajnik, MP and
in the absence of both, Shri Shwait Malik, MP to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha.  Similarly, the
Committee authorised Shri Su Thirunavukkarasar, MP and in his absence Shri Rampreet Mandal to lay the
Reports in the Lok Sabha.

24
** *
3. The Committee also discussed its future programme.  After some discussion, decided to undertake a
Study Visit to Kolkata, Hyderabad and Mumbai in the first week of January 2020.  The Committee authorised
the Chairman to obtain the approval of the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha to undertake a Study Visit to the
above places.
The Committee then adjourned at 3.35 P.M.
*Relates to other matter.