NINETY - FIFTH  REPORT COMMITTEE  ON  INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/95threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:51]
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE  ON  INDUSTRY
 
NINETY - FIFTH  REPORT
ON
 
INTER-PSU COOPERATION IN ENGINEERING
& CONSTRUCTION SECTORS
THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES, (MINISTRY OF
HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES)
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2002)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF  LOK SABHA ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2002)
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
DECEMBER, 2002/AGRAHAYANA, 1924 (SAKA)
E-mail:rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in
Website:http//parliamentofindia.nic.in
____________________________________________________________________________
 
CONTENTS
1                     
1.
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2. INTRODUCTION
3. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
 CHAPTER --- I
 CHAPTER --- II
 CHAPTER --- III
 CHAPTER --- IV
4. OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE
5. MINUTES
 
COMPOSITION OF  THE COMMITTEE
(Date of Constitution - 1st January, 2002)
    *1   Dr. P.C. Alexander        -----     Chairman
           RAJYA  SABHA
     2.   Prof. M.M. Agarwal
     3.   Dr. Abrar Ahmed

NINETY - FIFTH  REPORT COMMITTEE  ON  INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/95threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:51]
     4.   Shri Jayantilal Barot
     5.   Dr. Prasanta Chatterjee
     6.   Shrimati Saroj Dubey
     7.   Dr. Faguni Ram
     8.   Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
     9.   Shri P.K. Maheshwari
   10.   Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
   11.   Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
   12.   Shri S. Sivasubramanian
   13.   Shrimati Sushree Devi
   14.   Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
   15.   Vacant
           LOK  SABHA
   16.   Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
   17.   Kumari Mamata Banerjee
   18.   Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
   19.   Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
   20.   Shri Nepal Chandra Das
   21.   Shri Deepak Kumar
   22.   Shri Thomas Hansda
   23.   Dr. S. Jagathrakshakan
   24.   Shri A. C. Jose
   25.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
   26.   Shri Brijlal Khabri
   27.   Shri Sunil Khan
   28.   Shri Manjay Lal
   29.   Dr. K. Malaisamy
   30.   Shri A. Narendra
   31.   Shri Ananta Nayak
   32.   Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
   33.   Shri Dharam Raj Singh Patel
   34.   Shri Uttamrao Patil
   35.   Shri Malyala Rajaiah
   36.   Shri P. Rajendran
   37.   Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
   38.   Shri Tarachand Sahu
   39.   Shri Ramanand Singh
   40.   Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
   41.   Chowdhary Talib Hussain
   42.   Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
   43.   Shrimati D.M. Vijaya Kumari
   44.   Shri Beni Prasad Verma
   45.   Vacant
           SECRETARIAT
           Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
           Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
           Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
           Shri D. P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
           Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
 
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having been authorised by
the Committee, hereby present this Ninety-fifth Report on the Inter-PSU Cooperation in Engineering and Construction
Sectors of Department of Public Enterprises.
2.      The Committee, in this context, heard the oral evidence of CMDs of Engineering and Construction Sectors at
Hyderabad on 14th October, 2001.

NINETY - FIFTH  REPORT COMMITTEE  ON  INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/95threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:51]
3.      The Committee at its meeting held on 17th December, 2002 considered and adopted the report.
NEW DELHI ;
 17 December, 2002
DR.  P.C. ALEXANDER
 Chairman,
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry.
 
REPORT                                       
CHAPTER-I
INTRODUCTION
1.1   At the time of India’s Independence in 1947, the country had been facing a plethora of problems, which needed to be
tackled in a planned and methodical manner. Primarily, our country being an agrarian economy had negligible industrial
base, low level of savings, inadequate investment with virtually no infrastructural facilities. A large population was below
poverty line and inequalities prevailed in income, levels of employment coupled with lack of trained manpower, which led to
regional imbalances.
1.2   In order to attain the industrial growth, a big initiative was needed from the Government as the private sector had neither
the necessary resources in terms of funds, managerial and scientific skills nor the will to undertake risks involved in large
long gestation investment. In view of the wide range of problems faced by the country on its economic, social and strategic
fronts, it became a necessity to deploy the public sector as an instrument for self-reliant economic growth to overcome the
industrial backwardness. In addition, the adoption of Indian constitution also identified two major National missions, namely
needing self reliance and social justice in the chapter IVof the Constitution.
1.3   Hence, Industrial Policy Resolution of 1956 was amended in time with a emphasis on   strategic role in the economy.
Massive investments have been made in last five decades to build a public sector. Many of public sector enterprises
successfully expanded production, opened up new areas of technology and built up a resource of technical competence in a
number of areas.
1.4   Some of the major objectives of setting up public enterprises had been as under:
l     To ensure rapid economic growth and industrialisation of the country and create necessary infrastructure for
economic development;
l     To earn return on investment and thus generate resources for development;
l     To promote redistribution of income and wealth;
l     To create employment opportunities;
l     To promote balanced regional development;
l     To assist the development of small-scale and ancillary industries;
l     To promote import substitutions, save and earn foreign exchange for the economy; and
l     To create national wealth for larger public good.
1.5   In order to improve the portfolio and performance of public enterprises in a liberalised economy, and also involve
private sector participation be nation building the Government of India announced on  24
th July 1991, as a part of the
Statement on Industrial Policy a Statement on Public Sector  Policy also. The Statement contains the following decisions:-
(i)    Portfolio of public sector investments will be reviewed with a view to focus the public sector on strategic, high-tech
and essential infrastructure. Whereas some reservation for the public sector is being retained, there would be no bar
for area of exclusivity to be opened up to the private sector selectively. Similarly, the public sector will also be
allowed entry in areas not reserved for it.
(ii)    Public entreprises which are chronically sick and which are unlikely to be turned around will, for the formulation
of revival/rehabilitation schemes, be referred to the Board for industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) or
other similar high level institutions created for the purpose. A  social security mechanism will be created to protect
the interests of workers likely to be affected by such rehabilitation packages.
(iii)   In order to raise resources and encourage wide public participation, part of the government’s share-holding in the
public sector would be offered to mutual funds, financial institutions, general public and workers.
(iv)   Boards of public sector companies would be made more professional and given greater powers.
(v)   There will be a greater thrust on performance improvement through the Memoranda of Understanding (MoU)
system by which managements would be granted greater autonomy and will be held accountable. Technical
expertise on the part of the Government would be upgraded to make the MoU negotiations and implementation
more effective.

NINETY - FIFTH  REPORT COMMITTEE  ON  INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/95threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:51]
(vi)   To facilitate discussion on performance, the MoU signed between Government and the public enterprises would be
placed in Parliament. While focusing on major management issues, this would also help place matters on the day-
to-day operations of public enterprises in their correct perspective.
1.6   As per the announcement in the Industrial Policy Statement and also in the Budget Speech of  July  1991 in order to
raise resources. Encourage wide public participation and promote greater accountability, the government equity in selected
public enterprises was to be offered to Mutual Funds, Financial Institutions , workers and general public.
1.7   The main elements of the present government policy towards public sector enterprises are:
l     Bring down government equity in all non-strategic  PSEs to 26 percent or lower, if necessary;
l     Restructure and review potentially viable PSEs;
l     Close down PSEs which can not be revived; and  
l     Fully protect the interests of workers.
1.8   A development of this nature had an immediate impact on the prospects of several public  sector units. Overnight, the
“Sellers’  Market’’ was converted into “ Buyers’ Market’’. The industrial units, where investments ran into hundred of
thousands of crores of rupees were allowed to go to the wall to lay waste investments sunk in the past. The impact can further
be gauzed from the fact that 66 industrial PSEs whose net worth had become negative and had become sick were registered
with BIFR  as  on 31.6.01 and a number of PSUs were closed. In the circumstances the endeavour ought to be to extract
whatever output is extractable from installed industrial capacity if these products have a ready market within the country and
that should be the justification enough for the process of production in these units not being permitted to come to halt.
1.9   The Committee in its 17
th report on “Industrialisation of Backward  Areas and the State of the Capital Goods Sector’’
while dealing with the impact to liberalisation on the Indian industry observed as follows:
        “ This state of ambivalence will perhaps contiune for some while. In the meantime, it will be instructive if limited
experiments could be tried out pursuant to various suggestions offered to the committee. One such suggestion is for common
productions planning by a group of sick public sector units located in reasonable proximity to one another and specialising in
a similar range of products by interacting closely with one another and ensuring that the output of one units is accepted as
input in a neighbouring units and vice versa, both units , it is claimed could significantly improve the prospects of their
survival. Should that be the case, even banks and financial institutions might decide to change their general approach.’’
1.10However, neither the government  nor the PSEs took any initiaive to make a serious effort to translate the suggestion into
reality. Sub-committee-III  for Ministry of Heavy  Industry and Public  Enterprises of Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry under the convenorship of Dr. B. B.Ramaiah, while doing an exercise on the study of the
instrument of MoU signed by the Central PSUswith their administrative Ministries, also observed that no weightage had been
given to inter-PSUcooperation in the MoUs. The Committee felt that in the new economic scenario the collaborative
approach amongst the PSUs under various Ministries should be evolved without compromising the competitive spirit and
quality.
1.11The committee further observed that liberalisation and globalisation has had an impact on the overall industrial scenario.
Transition form a closed economy to a free market economy has meant opening of floodgates of unforeseen troubles for
some of these PSUs. These PSUs should be given enough elbow room to adapt themselves in accordance with the new
realities. They  need an impetus for sustaining mutual cooperations in respect of their works order position,  R&Dand
technological development , etc. This could be addressed through inter-PSUcollaborative approach.
1.12This shall not only ensure a better-coordinated and healthy relationship between these PSUs but also address issues of
better responsiveness, better quality of product, better degree of adherence to delivery schedules and cost effectiveness.
This will also in a way encourage R&Defforts of the supplier PSUs enabling them to upgrade and update their products,
services and technologies to the needs of the client  PSUs and departments as well as foster other synergetic endeavour
like concurrent engineering drawing to Delivery collaboration etc.
CHAPTER-II
 INTERACTION WITH THE PSUs
2.     A meeting was covered on the 14 th October 2001   at  Hyderabad   to interact with the CMDs of Engineering and
Construction schemes.    On  the issue of inter-PSU, cooperation most of the CMDs present in that meeting stated that the
member PSUs should cooperate and coordinate with each other so as to explore the possibilities of permanent mechanism for
cooperation in respect of work orders, export orientation, sharing of R&D experiences, forming of Joint venture, etc.
        The viewpoints expressed by the representatives of PSUs are given below:
3.     BHEL
3.1   BHEL has been following a policy of procuring materials/items from PSEs who are technically qualified and meet

NINETY - FIFTH  REPORT COMMITTEE  ON  INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/95threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:51]
delivery and quality requirements as this is essential to make the competitive intensity in the opened –up market. Regarding
implementation of the purchase preference policy, BHEL includes purchase preference clause in its NIT (Notice Inviting 
Tender). The PSEs , which meet the required techincal conditions and specifications of quality, deliveries etc. are further
considered for order placement. BHEL also procures material on the basis of long-term  Memorandum of
Understsnding/public/rate contracts negotiated with PSEs such as SAIL, Hindustan  Zinc, Indian Oil  Corporation etc.
Similarly in the area of machine tool services, HMT and HEC have been given preference by BHEL for condescending and
modernisation contracts. Wherever possible, construction services have also been taken from PSEs like Bridge and Roof,
NPC, NIDC   etc. Last two PSEs are currently involved in a Rs 6 crore civil works contract for blade shop at BHEL,
Haridwar.
3.2   During the last year (2000-2001), around  Rs 410 crores of contracts were awarded by the BHEL to PSEs including Rs.
54 crores to central PSEs under the engineering and construction sectors. During the last three years, orders placed on central
PSEs under the engineering and construction sectors were Rs. 152 crores.
3.3   BHEL is continuing to pursue Inter-PSU cooperation as outlined above. Whereas the orders placed on BHEL by other
PSEs in the last three years on the basis of purchase preference has been only to the extent of Rs. 328 crores for non-power
sector areas, BHEL has awarded contracts worth Rs. 600 crores to other PSEs on purchase preference basis. Majority of
tenders placed by various petrochemicals etc are on competitive basis. There are many possibilities of business operation
which can be exploited provided such an opportunity is given  e. g. partnership in manufacturing defence equipment with
Ordnance Factory Board, with RITES  and other railways organisations for railways equipment, locomotive, etc.
3.4   On its part, BHELhas taken steps to enhance cooperation with other  PSEs by entering into MoUs and organising
customer focus groups. It has entered into MoU with Bhakra Beas Management for renovation, modernization and
upgradation of hydro sets. Recently in September 2001, an MoU has been entered into with EIL with the objective of jointly
addressing certain identified areas of business. Utilising the complementary strengths of the two organisations, BHEL has
also organised a marketing and project management group at Mumbai to service certain segments of ONGC’s requirements
for modernisation and renovation of off  -shore and on-shore  drilling equiment and platforms.
4.     HEAVY  ENGINEERING  CORPORATION
4.1   Heavy Engineering Corporation was set up as a temple of modern India in accordance with the Nehruvian dream to
provide strong industrial bases for the country. In the manufacturing facilities of casting, forging navigation and machining
has been created all under one umbrella and it became the biggest integrated engineering complex of South Asia and it is one
of the very few such set-ups all over the world. There are only a few countries over the globe that have facilities comparable
to Heavy Engineering Corporation. They treat this type of industry as a crown jewel among their heavy industries in respect
of the engineering capability and self-reliance to the nation. In spite of many odds and world wars they were safeguarded
against devastation
4.2   Heavy Engineering Corporation’s facilites were cerated basically to cater to the needs of core sector steel industry. 
Nation’s planners envisaged that by the turn of the last century India would acquire the capability to produce 100 million ton
steel to meet its projected demand and to establish such complexes this company was created not only to arrest the drain of
foreign exchange but simultaneously to establish world-class manufacturing setup specifically to cater to this objective. The
company supplied more than 5.50  lakh  tonnes of equipments for steel plants.
4.3     Apart from steel sector, this company also caters to the need of other sectors namely mining,  coal,  aluminium,  power,
railways,  defence and other areas like nuclear, atomic and space research.  
4.4   It has supplied mining shovels, which constitute backbone and are the most commonly used prime mining equipment in
open cast mining of various subsidiaries of coal India Ltd. spread over the coal-mining belt of the nation. It is among the very
few companies in the world that manufacture heavy duty crushers used for ore- processing . More than 60 percent of this
company’s products are of import substitution in nature and it supplies to many PSUs and other government organisations.
4.5   It has contributed in products of strategic importance in the areas of defence, nuclear and space. These are fields which
are either difficult to get or the country would have paid exorbitant price for such items. This has become more significant
when the country has to face the embargo on high technology components items from USA and other developed world after
Pokhran experiments.
4.6   It has entered into technical collaboration agreements with leading manufacturers in the world,  observed, assimilated 
and  Indianised the same to widen technical Knowledge base of India. Thereby it also created technically competent pool of
manpower in other organisations both private as well as public sector all over the country. As the talent in this company went
out over the years, in search of better prospects in their careers.
4.7   Quality  remained the hallmark of this company’s  products and received commendations from foreign experts. In 
2000-2001  it produced ultra clean steel for some strategic defence need and properties achieved were much superior to the
foreign specifications.
4.8   As the priorities  changed, the nation’s plans didn’t materialise and economy did not pick up to the desired level. It too

NINETY - FIFTH  REPORT COMMITTEE  ON  INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/95threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:51]
had to pay heavy price in the form of un-utilised capacity right from its inception. Commercial viability became significant
after the initiation of economic reforms since 1991. Added to this, recession in the capital goods sector caused further harm in
procuring orders for its survival.
        Some problems specific to this company, which need redress, are:
l     Huge infrastructure has been created and the same remains under-utilised.
l     It is being denied orders by other PSUs on the ground of its negative net worth.
l     Tailor-made stringent and unreasonable specifications are framed by PSUs to deny orders to this company in
preference to MNCs.
l     Some PSEs even do not open the bids of others without proper justifications. It is forced to submit EMD and
securities prior to bid opening on par with others in spite of credentials of being established supplier of many of the
tender equipments.
l     It is denied its due payments and the payment issues are put into complex disputes and delays by other PSUs.
l     Instead of mutual cooperation through synergising their capabilities and abilities, PSUs are engaging in working
against each other.
l     Foreign collaborations for technology by more than one  PSU for the same product leads to additional drainage of
foreign exchange through licence fee, royalty and higher import.
5.     NATIONAL  INSTRUMENTS  LTD.
5.1   The Company is engaged in design, development, manufacturing and marketing of opto-mechanical and opto-electronic
instruments, both for civil as well as defence use. The company in India is good brand equity and is also an accredited and
registered supplier of equipments and instruments to defence establishments.
5.2   
Present Purchase Preference 
        The present purchase preference is applicable for PSUs purchase in case of value of Rs. One crore or more. Under
existing policy, there is no purchase preference to PSUs as such, excepting that in case of any  PSU/  government
organisations quoted price is higher by  10  percent with reference to the lowest bidder, the tender  PSU/ government bodies
are called for price negotiation and given an opportunity to lower their price at the level of the lowest bidder.  Therefore the
PSU/ government organisations, unless they actually became the lowest bidder are not entitled to get on a contract and hence
not entail any preference.
5.3   In case of National  Instruments Ltd. the tender that generally comes out and the  company responds to at all is less than
Rs 1 crore.   So the company is not able to derive any benefit because of the value ceiling, i.e. Rs.1crore. In case a purchase
made by this company, the procurement quantum/value of each tender is much lower than  Rs1 crore and as such, the
company is not in a position to extend its benefits to any  PSU/ Government departments.
5.4   Necessity of Purchase Preference
        The company earnestly feels that there is a distinctive necessity of purchase preference applicable to  PSUs/
government  departments.
5.5   The purchase preference if it has to be beneficial to this company the value limit of tender and that is purchase should be
Rs 10 lakhs and above. Since the cost structure of PSUs/ Government organisations are to absorb some social costs/
overheads, apart from the laid down wage structure required to be followed, as compared to the private sector, threrfore to
stand in the competitive market it is necessary that the price preference should be allowed to all PSUs in their bids to other
PSUs and that should at least be 9-10 percent.
5.6   It is also felt that it should be mandatory to all  PSU/  government bodies that certain part of the total annual purchase is
to be purchased /Procured directly from other PSUs eligible to supply.
6.     IRCON
6.1   Lease Export of Machinery and Equipment
        The Indian projects exporters temporarily  export some construction equipment from India for a particular project
abroad and on its completion, may have to shift the same to another project, either in the same or another country and it may
finally be more than five years before such equipment  is imported back into India. As part of the current rules, such re-
import attracts customs duty even though no export benefit may have been availed at the time of export. Levy of customs
duty on import of such machinery and equipment on which exports benefits had been availed is understandable and is
appreciated  but levying import duty on equipment and machinery which was temporarily exported without having exports
benefits, defies common sense. This needs to be quickly rectified.
6.2   Similarly, certain equipment/machinery may be exported from India for overseas leasing purpose without any export
benefits and may have to be re-imported and after particular leasing business is over. For example, IRCON had

NINETY - FIFTH  REPORT COMMITTEE  ON  INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/95threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:51]
imported/exported some metre-gauge diesel locomotives on lease from Indian Railways for further sub-leasing to the
Malaysia Railways. However, all along , the locomotive remained on the books of Indian Railways. No export benefits,
whatsoever, had been availed. Surprisingly, customs authorities are levying 40% customs duty on locomotives in all such
cases where re-import is done after five years. Such leavy of customs duty will seriously jeopardise import and leading from
India. It is understood that this problem has arisen due to an amendment to section 25 clause (2) through the Finance Act
1999as a result of which the Central Government’s power to allow exemption of import duty under the Act, is restricted to
goods of strategy or secret nature or for charitable purpose. Hence, it is requested that this clause be suitably amended as to
restore the power of the government for exemption of customs duty on import of such machinery and equipment on which no
export benefits has been availed at the time of temporary export.
6.3   Providing a Freedom and Flexibility to the PSUs to form and offer attractive Voluntary Retirement Schemes
        IRCON is a consistently profit-making company under the Ministry of Railways. However, due to heavy recruitment in
the early stages, the company is burdened with more than 700 surplus staff in various categories. AVRSwas framed in
accordance with income tax rules and also the Government guidelines and offered to the employees from time to time. The
response has not been very encouraging.
6.4   Based on our experience it is felt that there is need to make the scheme more attractive. For this purpose, some
amendments may be required in tax rules and also the Government guidelines.
6.5   As section 10 (10C) of the Income Tax Act  1961 read with rule  2EA  of the Income Tax Rules 1962,  the amount
receivable on account of retirement should not exceed the amount equivalent to three months salary for each completed year
of service or three months per year of remaining service for superannuation. A further ceiling upto Rs. 5 lakhs has been
placed by the Finance Act 2000.
6.6   These limits are too law. After implementation of revised scales of pay both in the CDA as well as IDA scales of pay,
the limits mentioned above operate in such a manner that even for a 20-22 years of service, employees only in a very low
scale of pay fall within the eligible range. This restricts the scope of the scheme very much.
6.7   Even in the case of those who were eligible, the amounts are too meagre to act as an inducement. An amount equivalent
to five to six months pay per years of completed service or balance service subject to a ceiling of Rs.10  lakhs may be
considered reasonable. If judiciously invested, this amount of VRS package may provide them months return of 70-75% of
the normal monthly wages. With this they may feel reasonably secure to opt forVRSand look for alternative avenues of
income to make up for the monthly shortfalls.
6.8   Due to existing scheme being an unattractive one, the surplus employees have to be continued in employment. As a
consequence, the organisation continues to bear not only the cost of the  monthly wages but also an avoidable attendant cost
on housing , office, transport , electricity, LTC, statutory bonus,  contribution to P.F., medical expenses, etc. The total cost to
the organisation thus comes out to be much more than the bare cost of employee alone. It would be more economical to offer
VRS terms and reduce surplus staff than to continue to bear the avoidable cost perpetually. In fact, indirect benefits would
also accrue by way of increased efficiency with lesser number of staff.
6.9   Needless to say, the separation package should be such as can reasonably be expected to enable an employee to make a
new beginning in life. Also, the separation package should have a more humane face.
6.10Further, the Income Tex rules and government  guidelines on VRSshould be such that they promote VRSscheme. At
present, the rather lukewarm response to the scheme suggest that there is need for serious reconsideration.
6.11It is appreciated that some PSUs may not be able to afford more liberal voluntary retirement schemes. However, PSUs
which can afford to pay more attractive separation package, should be allowed to frame more liberal schemes so as to right
size the manpower establishment in order  to face the increasing competition.
6.12It is, therefore, necessary that current provisions of Income Tax Rules including the Upper ceiling of 5 lakh are
considered for modifications as suggested above.
7.     Instrumentation Ltd.
        Instrumentation Ltd. with registered headquarters at Kota, Rajasthan, was set up in 1964 by Government of India, to
make the requirement of control and instrumentation of core sector process industries like power, steel, refineries,
petrochemicals, paper and pulp etc. The Company functioned reasonably well for over two decades, and having foreseen
severe competition in C&I area, prepared itself for manufacturing telecom exchanges based on C-DOT technology, which
eventually became a thrust area for the company in the last decade of the preceding century. This diversification. In addition
to manufacturing of certain products for defence services, helped the company to sustain for some time. The company
additionally developed and supplied a few critical instrumentation items for nuclear power plants. The thrust area gradually
shifted from C&I  to telecom over a period of 35 year since there was a situation of oversupply against  demand in the C&I
field, thereby  causing severe unhealthy competition from private as well as PSUs with consequent erosion of margin.
Incidentally in C&I the company has executed turnkey jobs at over 250 per plants, to almost all steel plants of SAIL, all
refineries, and other sectors of process industries. The telecom exchanges manufactured by the company are installed in
about 300  locations all about the nation. All three units at Kota, Pallakad and Jabalpur, manufacturing different types of C&I

NINETY - FIFTH  REPORT COMMITTEE  ON  INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/95threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:51]
products and telecom exchanges are accredited with ISO 9000.
7.1   In the year 1992, the Company incurred Loss and in October 93  was registered with BIFR as a sick company. After five
years or so a revival plan was eventually approved and submitted in March 1999 by BIFR.  In the intervening period the
company has been facing continuously increasing working capital problem on the face of ever mounting competition due to
relatively less industrial demands. The position got aggravated since pressure kept mounting on the company due to
avoidable expenses on account of inflexible position of sister PSUs in their asking for several bank guarantees towards
advance payment, performance of contract, detention of money etc. though it is very clear that the company would never go
back on its contractual obligations or other liabilities towords  PSU customers, all being members of the same bank. The
labour factors have been putting avoidable financial pressure on them, beneficiaries being neither the company nor its PSU
customers, but banks alone, charging hefty commission towards gurantees.
7.2   The above combined and forced obligations on working capital problem did not allow the Company to perform timely
and effectively, with the result that liquidated damages was being applied by customers on various orders, notwithstanding
without correct interpretation of the terms and proper analysis and identification of the agencies of the delay in the execution
of projects, by the Company participated in a much smaller way. Request for waiver of liquidated damages was not met with
success since intention for correct impartial approach has been missing most of the times. This not only eroded the small
margins in the orders the Company has been executing. But also rendering cash loss at times.
7.3   The situation aggravated further since for the Company there are two major products, i.e., C&I and telecom exchanges.
Notwithstanding granting licences to many private companies, multinationals, licences for identical product range have been
granted to certain PSUs whose current thrust areas of the operation are elsewhere. For  instance, Bharat Heavy Electricals
Ltd   is a giant PSU with the main product areas of boiler, turbine, and various other main plant items, but they are dominant
competitor in our small product areas of C&I and the telecom exchanges as well. There are other examples of similar nature
including Bharat Electronics Ltd., ECIL,   etc. in the field of telecom. Thus if we lose an order in either area stated above, we
remain severely handicapped, whereas companies like BHEL and other can survive pretty well on the strength of their high-
value products and their performance is not significantly affected even if they lose orders in the above areas. 
7.4   As a consequence of bad financial health of the Company many good collaborations like Hartmann and Braun,
Germany, Fiji Electrical Company , Japan, have left, Further, no partner of repute is coming to form joint ventures, which the
revival plan emphatically stipulates. A Company called NCS though initially entered into marketing tie up with the
Company, and the Company generated reasonable business for them, NCS and BHEL   collaborated to manufacture control
system at BHEL works and ILS investments and efforts become futile because of weak financial position of the Company.
7.5   In the above context it is recommended that an analysis of synergies amongst PSUs be carried out from the angle of
consolidation of operations based on best availability of resources, optimum utilisation of infrastructure and
manpower/expertise and with a view to avoiding undesirable competition amongst PSUs themselves for same product range.
The approved revival plan of the Company is in the initial stage of implementation and receiving due attention of the
government though because of procedural delays and non-availability of working capital in time, have been making the
operation of the Company uncomfortable despite sacrifice by all sections of the employees, for months together. Threrefore,
at this juncture, consolidation of synergy activities amongst PSUs like that of IL and BHEL shall ensure revival of the
Company.
8.     BHARAT  BHARI  UDYOG  NIGAM  LTD.
Utilisation of capacities in the PSUs to the maximum by way of collaborations between the PSUs.
        Indian Railways in need of about 14000 vehicular units of wagons every year on replacement account only, unless they
want to compromise with the safety in the freight movement. In addition, Railways also require around 8000 vehicular units
of wagons per year as fresh input to meet the projected annual freight demand of the country. BBUNL group being a major
wagon manufacturer of the country, gets about 60 percent of the orders from the Railways annual off take based on the
lowest prices against open tender. The requirements of next financial year are generally ordered during March every year but
sometimes, Railways will make inordinate delay in the order with unpredictable low order quantity. In this regard and in
view of the Inter-PSU cooperation, Ministry of Railways can have an MoU with BBUNL for yearly off take of wagons from
the wagon building PSUs under BBUNL for a period of five years on competitive terms. This will enable us to plan on yearly
production programme and cash flow management to yield better performance of the PSUs. The following points may also
be considered:-
l     Extension of purchase preference policy for maximum utilisation of created capacities in the PSUs and strict
adherence to this policy by including the purchase preference clause in every NIT from PSUs
l     Creation  of a monitoring cell under the Ministry of Heavy Industry & Public Enterprises to review and establish
proper education of collaborative approach between the PSUs and the implementation of purchase preference policy
of Government of India.

NINETY - FIFTH  REPORT COMMITTEE  ON  INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/95threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:51]
l     PSUs to work in synergy of the growth in the performance level of public sector.
l     While there are PSUs which follow an executive purchase preference policy, we have noticed and faced indifferent
approach for the purchase preference to PSUs by the PSUs in the buyer sector through the following actions:-
l     Denial of purchase preference as per purchase preference policy of Government of India DPE’s OM dated 14
February 2000.
l     Denial of reservation in the issue of tender/bid documents on the ground of negative net worth of the PSU on the
PSU on its efforts to BIFR.
l     Insistence on submission of bank guarantee by purchasing PSUs. Even fresh DPE guidelines state that indemnity
bonds between the PSUs should suffice.
9.     BHARAT  EARTH  MOVERS  LTD.
        It is observed that Central Government departments are not strictly adhering to purchase preference policy and State
Government departments are not giving cognisance to this. Even in some of the tenders issued by central PSUs, it was not
specific that the purchase preference will be given to central PSUs, in accordance with the Government policy and this will
be incorporated only after insistence by the supplying PSUs. In some cases. Tender conditions on purchase preference is at
variance to government policy and in the recent tenders issued by Coal India, the tender stipulates that CI Ltd. reserve the
right to:
(i)    Follow the guidelines issued by the Government of India from time to time for giving purchase preference for
production and services to PSUs;
(ii)    Distribute the order amongst two or more suppliers from PSUs or non-PSU sector.
        Notwithstanding anything said above, CI Ltd. reserve the right to follow any guideline or instruction received from the
Government on any statutory bodies from time to time.
9.1   Some of the major PSEs on the reason of their own purchase policy and also giving the reason that they should have
alternate source of supply which otherwise affects performance of the equipment already supplied from non-PSU sector, have
been adopting the policy of sharing the orders even where the evaluated bid price of central PSUs is within 10% of the lowest
evaluated bid price of valid offers from non-PSU sector, other things being equal.
10.   METALLURGICAL  ENGINEERING  CONSULTANTS  (INDIA)  LTD.
        Some Government organisations follow 80-20 policy for order placement i.e. 80  per cent weightage to technical
parameters and 20 per cent for price. There is excessive subjectivity in award of marks. Instead, parties should be qualified
technically first. Out of the technically acceptable parties, jobs should be awarded on the basis of purchase preference policy.
10.1Sometimes tender called is global and purchase preference is not given. In all cases purchase preference should be
allowed.
11.   ENGINEERS  INDIA  LTD.
        Keeping in view the changed business scenario, which is increasingly becoming highly competitive in the day-to-day
business, both within the country and outside, it is very prudent that PSUs reorient their operations and evolve suitable
strategies. In this respect DP networking should be a good concept. At our end and their end they have initiated actions
towards introducing cooperation through signing up memorandum of understanding with M/s National Building Construction
Corporation, Bridge and Roof Company Ltd. and Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd. to work together with these companies in
areas and projects of mutual interests. They are actively involved whenever working with these companies whatever
opportunities come their way.
11.1PSUs individually or in consortium could implement various infrastructure projects. However, the bid qualification with
respect to past track record many times does not permit the PSUs of even to pre-qualify. Accordingly, for the PSU the
qualification criterion should be relaxed to facilitate their participation.
11.2Purchase preference for Engineers India Ltd. is now also undertaking implementation of projects on Lump Sum Turnkey
basis. It is seen that clients now prefer to adapt this mode of project implementation. The purchase preference policy of
Government, if  uniformly   implemented,   will   help   Engineers   India   Ltd. in its diversification  effort. Purchase 
Preference  should be continued and made  available without any exception. Provision of this clause may be considered in all
the tenders and at enquiry stage itself.   This would help all the PSUs to effectively enhance their participation.
12.   CONTAINER  CORPORATION  OF  INDIA  LTD.
12.1There were detailed discussions regarding extension of purchase preference in respect of products manufactured by PSUs
and supply to PSUs and central government While it was explained that Container Corporation of India is in favour of
extensions of the policy of purchase preference it is also explained that this company is mainly purchasing wagons financed

NINETY - FIFTH  REPORT COMMITTEE  ON  INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/95threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:51]
by loans sanctioned by World  Bank. The procurement of these wagons has therefore to be done within the procurement
guidelines issued by the World Bank and in these guidlines there is no provision for purchase preference for the products
manufactured by the PSUs.   Hence, this Company has not been able to give purchase preference to PSUs in respect of the
purchase of high-speed wagons.
13.   BHARAT  YANTRA  NIGAM
13.1The PSUs in engineering and construction sectors are primarily supplying goods and services,  undertaking projects for
service and infrastructure sectors. In engineering and construction sectors the size and capabilities of the companies vary.
Some are quite big like BHEL  and others are small PSUs. For inter-PSU cooperation, it is necessary that concerned PSUs
join hands in undertaking big packages by joint bidding and consortium.
Placement of orders on this company
13.2This group of companies have predominant presence in oil and petroleum sectors but cater to virtually all sectors of
economy including engineering and construction, thermal, hydel and nuclear power, map transportation including railways,
defence etc. At present almost all companies in the BYN Group of companies are short of orders due to slump in the market.
Pre-qualification criterion and its impact on BYN
13.3In view of the size of the work getting bigger due to customers tendency to award total contract on LSTK  basis and also
stipulating requirement of financing the project in select cases, the BYN group companies are finding it increasingly difficult
to directly participate in the bid. The customers are also stipulating stiff  PQ criteria, which disqualify the BYN group of
companies. PQ criteria should be relaxed to the extent possible and also the size of the packages should be reduced so that the
BYN group of companies can participate.
Joint Bidding
13.4BYN group of companies are also willing to bid jointly with BHEL and other PSUs for projects either in India or abroad.
Timely Release of Payments
13.5BYN group of companies is also facing financial crises. It is, therefore, necessary that customer PSUs should release the
payment in time.
Release of Liquidated Damages
13.6In the past the customer PSUs due has imposed certain Liquidated Damages due to delay in supplies. However, this
needs to be reviewed and release of LDs be considered sympathetically, particularly where the delay and supply of the BYN
group of companies has not affected the overall completion schedule of the project.
Indemnity Bond
13.7Between two  PSUs the requirement of bank guarantees may be waived and indemnity bond in lieu there of may be
accepted. This will result in considerable saving in the bank charges as also help the companies ease the bank limit problems.
14.   ORDINANCE  FACTORY  BOARD
14.1       Guidelines have been issued by the Government of India for allowing purchase preference to PSUs.       In
accordance with the above orders. PSUs are eligible for price preference of 10 percent provided the value purchase is in
excess of Rs one crore. In respect of armoured fighting vehicles being procured at  H.V.F. Avadi   and OF Project, Medak are
quite a number of systems , which are procured from PSUs on single known source basis.  These PSUs have been identified
based on the capacity is available with them and designated as nodal agencies for supply of the systems. Examples are as
under:-
(i)    For the manufacture of T72 tanks, the Turret Customs weighing approximately six tonnes each are procured from
Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, annual off take is around 80 nos. from this company.
(ii)    13.10 Some of priced components of T72 tanks are procured from Bharat Heavy  Electricals Limited,  Trichi. Nine
types of thermo-pressed components at 80 sets premium valued at Rs 5.60  crores are being obtained from Trichi
Unit.
(iii)   For the manufacture of Main Battle   Tank,   Arjuna, Bharat   Heavy Electricals Limited, Bhopal has been
identified as the nodal agency for supply of Gum Control System. Order for 124  sets have been placed on BHEL,
Bhopal, for a total value of Rs 220  crore. Special armour steel plates for production of T72 tanks at HVF and  BMP
to OT Medak are procured from Rourkela Steel plant. Besides the armoured plates, about 50-60  per cent of the total
steel being purchased by the Ordnance Factories are sourced from SAIL. The annul quantities from SAIL are
around 18000 tonnes. In respect of plant and machinery requried by Ordnance Factory, a very large percentage of
various types of machine tools have been procured and that being procured from various units of HMT   Ltd., 
Bangalore.

NINETY - FIFTH  REPORT COMMITTEE  ON  INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/95threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:51]
15.   NATIONAL  PROJECTS  CONSTRUCTION  CORPORATION
        NPCC was benefited in bagging works from PSUs like NTPC through purchase preference. There is good inter-PSU 
corporation especially with the NTPC.     That corporation has entrusted  work of a total amount of Rs. 776 lakhs. The tie-up
with NHPC  for hydroelectric development in Northeast is also under consideration. PSUs   like NTPC  had been extending
the facility of exemption of EMD  in their tenders. Similarly the facility in payment of advances and delays of retention of
money against indemnity bond in place of bank guarantee will provide a great fillip to the cash-strapped organisations in
construction industry like NPCC, which may be extended by the .other PSUs also in order to promote inter-PSU cooperation.
16.   HINDUSTAN  MACHINE  TOOLS  LIMITED
16.1The purchase preference policy, which was extended upto 31 st March 2000, has been a necessary help. The extended
policy amended to include the minimum value of purchase to be one crore against earlier Rs. 5 crore.
16.2But PSUs  are not allowing this price preference citing CVC guidelines in vogue. This issue should be addressed.
16.3Interventions required to obtain advance against orders from defence, railways and other government  safety institutions
and staggered payment for orders valued over Rs.50 lakhs to ease pressure on working capital requirement . If client PSUs do
not release advances and other payments even after release of order  supplies, which put HMT into severe financial strain.
16.4Corporate guarantee should suffice instead of bank guarantee in these cases. In case of inter-PSU supplies payment
should be ensured without delay of the delivery. Assistance is also sought for sales of NPA.
17.   BHARAT  ELECTRONICS  LTD.
        The most compelling factors for inter-PSU cooperation are:
(a)   End-customer preference/public loyalty built up over the years.
(b)   Ability/readiness of the PSUs to meet the requirements of specifications, quality and delivery schedules of the
costomer PSUs.
17.1With these in mind, the following suggestions are submitted for improving effectiveness of cooperation between PSUs:-
        PSUs have to continuously improve their technology and quality levels and ensure that their price and delivery
schedules of the products are acceptable to the customers.
17.2Government to consider extending purchase preference to PSUs, which will mean purchase preference between PSUs as
well.
17.3PSU - PSU cooperation to cover both ways i.e. buying from one PSU and selling to other PSUs.
18.   BHARAT  DYNAMICS  LTD.
18.1Many public sector units are involved as co-production partners to Bharat Dynamics Ltd for production of missile
weapons systems. Bharat Dynamics Ltd has been patronising public sector not only in the production technologies but also
for civil engineering works and consultancy services.
18.2Bharat Dynamics invariably procures the production requirement of various subsystems from other public sector
undertakings depending on the core strength of the organisation.
19.   GUARDENREACH  SHIPBUILDERS  AND  ENGINEERS  LTD.
19.1As regards purchase preference question is concerned, it is given to Public Sector Undertakings such as Bharat Heavy
Electricals Ltd, Bharat Electronics Ltd, HAL, ECIL, ETC, who are the main suppliers of weapons, electronics and
communication equipment.
19.2Amendment to Contract Labour Act 1970 will help in a big way to resolve the shipbuilding activities which are totally
labour oriented. This would give more flexibility for the Organisation to engage subcontractors without any moral obligation
towards permanent absorption. The cost of labour in public sector undertakings is very high and outsourcing of work will
certainly help in bringing down the cost of production.
20.   HINDUSTAN  SHIPYARD  LTD.
20.1Weightage in MOU for cooperation between PSUs is to be considerd, since PSUs are not implementing the purchase
preference to other PSUs from whom the products and services can be procured. It would become obligatory for the public
sector to extend such purchase preference.
20.2Shipbuilding orders are not coming to Hindustan Shipyard Ltd in the absence of paru pasu clause. Presently the shipping
companies are procuring almost all the requirements from abroad. It must be made mandatory on the shipping companies to
place orders on Indian shipbuilding yards, which are primarily created to serve the needs of shipping companies. Hence the
regularisation of Paru Pasu would help the Indian public sector shipyards to build ships at least one for every three vessels
being procured from abroad.

NINETY - FIFTH  REPORT COMMITTEE  ON  INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/95threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:51]
20.3Public sector shipyards are geared up to take all types of ship repairs but unfortunately most of the shipping companies
are opting for repairs at China or Singapore leaving Indian shipyards, especially Hindustan Shipyard Ltd, due to its
geographical location. Directives to shipping companies are required to engage Hindustan Shipyard Ltd for ship repairs.
20.4A dedicated yard was exclusively created for ONGC in 1982 and ONGC placed orders on nomination basis for 11
platforms on cost plus basis. Due to liberalisation since 1991, Hindustan Shipyard Ltd. could not bag any order on global
tender. ONGC is having a massive expansion programme in the redevelopment of Bombay, South and North oil fields and
augmentation and refurbishment of many existing platforms and should be as lead to consider placing orders on Hindustan
Shipyard Ltd on nomination basis of staff. Therefore inter-PSU cooperation in the form of weightage for MOU entering
companies is felt highly essential since order from public sector to other public sector is not encouraging due to global
competition, excepting a few companies like Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, CIL, etc. As far as Hindustan Shipyard Ltd is
concerned it is to compete with other competitors both nationally and internationally and if both purchase and price
preferences are not extended, it would be very difficult to secure orders. In case of shipbuilding, government's policy for
extending 30 percent subsidy over the international L1 price is not helping since Indian shipping companies are accruing
second-hand vessels or floating for vessels or floating  for vessels beyond the capacity of Hindustan Shipyard LTd. Therefore
Hindustan Shipyard Ltd has no fresh orders excepting a few small crafts and 700 passenger vessels.
20.5Hence considering the present scenario on shipbuilding, Hindustan Shipyard Ltd is concentrating mainly on ship repairs
and intending to improve its inner performance and turnover by planning a floating dock.
21.   NATIONAL  BUILDING  CONSTRUCTION  CORPORATION  LTD.
21.1It is necessary that the following points be kept in mind ---
1.     Create level playing field for PSUs.
2.     Sick and financially unviable PSUs should be merged with rich and financially healthy PSUs to the extent
considered viable and balance PSUs should be closed by giving adequate attractive compensation.
3.     Government should pass strictures on defaulters for not following its orders on purchase preference and a
grievance cell can be created.
4.     The PQ criteria should be made stringent to enable level playing ground for PSUs. This purchase preference
facility should be extended to state government projects also since substantial plan outlay is allocated by the
centre for spending by the state governments.
5.     As a matter of fact, the existing purchase preference policy, which is at present valid upto March 2002, should
be extended for another five years on the simple reason that PSUs availing price preference are required to
execute the projects at the lowest prices quoted by an other private sector bidder implying the government PSU
who is getting the project executed does not have to pay higher price to the contractor/PSU. It therefore does not
increase the project cost and also helps to sustain the surplus labour employed by the government over the
period.
6.     In most of the projects, scope and limits of contracts changed substantially where contractor continues to
discharge his responsibility and does not abandon the work at the slightest pretext.
7.     The grievance committee can also look into the grievance of client PSUs in case of delay etc.
8.     By awarding the projects to PSUs in such cases it provides an opportunity to improve their physical and
financial performance and at times reduces overheads, which are higher due to various factors including
expenditure on social commitments.
22.   BIECCO  LAWRIE  LTD.
22.1EIL has a policy for deposit of Rs. 5 lakhs for registration of products. It is suggested that this provision be waived.
Instead it may allow registration of products/services of other PSUs without any deposit, since registration alone does not
guarantee any business in favour of PSUs seeking registration. BLL's switchgear division's major business being with State
Electricity Boards and various utilities run by State Governments, purchase preference is not allowed. It may be explored
whether purchase preference to PSUs can be extended by SEBs to state government utility organisations. Certain SEBs
follow the policy of preference to state based units ignoring preference to PSUs of other states. It may also be explored
whether such scenarios can be changed through the policy of purchase preference.
22.2Repair of Rotating Machines
        BHEL also undertakes similar repair work but does not have any workshop at the Eastern region. Since to and from
movements of such machines between user's locations and the repair workshop entail time and cost. It may be explored
whether BHEL can sub-contract their business from Eastern region to BLL, Calcutta.

NINETY - FIFTH  REPORT COMMITTEE  ON  INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/95threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:51]
22.3Electrical Projects
        BLL's prospectiv PSU customers normally do not allow purchase preference to BLL, even after accepting BLL's offer
technically and commercially and on opening up price bid in two-part tender.
23.   PARAGA  TOOLS  LTD.
23.1In the present scenario of market globalisation, a recession in the automobile industry and technology revolution, the
Government support by way of implementation of purchase preference has helped the company in securing 10-15% orders
from railway organisations. Further continuation of this policy will strengthen the public sector enterprise in increasing their
production capacity and sustaining the industry.
23.2BHEL has given purchase preference and extended associate for job work on our spare capacity of general purpose
precision machine tools.
24.   ANDREW  YULE  &  CO.  LTD.
        This company has common synergy with the BHEL. Its Engineering and Electrical Divisions are producing similar
products, which BHEL is producing. Since BHEL has no unit in the Eastern region, they can form Joint venture with AYCL
for combining synergies of both the companies.
 
CHAPTER-III
CONTENTIOUS  ISSUES  CONCERNING  THE  PSUs
25.   Implementation Issues and Suggestions
25.1Any attempt for Inter-PSU cooperation should take into account the interests and meet the requirements of ultimate
consumer in the opened up economy, for example PSEs in the infrastructure sector should be able to join hands and deliver a
project to the satisfaction of customers within reasonably qualifying conditions. The implementation of such a policy requires
orchestrated efforts and to be successful requires policy directives from the owner, the Government of India, to the concerned
ministries and PSEs under them.
25.2Many of the users sector PSEs such as those in power sector and also SEBs specify their own venders for procurement of
certain equipments and also prescribe approval of sub-vendors. This condition often works to the detriment of the PSEs.
25.3Within the PSEs themselves, both the suppliers and end-users, there is need for increased cooperation and understanding
in terms of provisions such as suitable risk sharing in respect of penalty clauses as well as field trials  of new products
developed etc.
25.4It has been observed in certain instances that PSEs, which developed products linked to a single dominant customer
which is another PSU and make long-term fixed investment in equipment technology, manpower, etc, do not get to realize
adequate returns due to sudden drop in order inflow (In case of BHEL are Turret casting, SRGM Locos etc.).
26.   Purchase Preference for Central PSEs
26.1The genesis of purchase preference to PSEs lies basically in better utilisation of assets and facilities created at great cost
to the economy to enable the country improve its GDP growth. At present the role of private sector especially in the
infrastructure, basic goods and other core sectors of the economy, is limited. The public sector investment still far outweighs
the private sector investment and as such, better utilization of the public sector assets will have beneficial impact on the
overall economic growth, which has been assisted by continuation of purchase preference policy.
26.2The premise that private sectors and MNCs could be constrained from bidding with the continuation of purchase
preference is not factual. There is also no linkage between purchase preference scheme and quality of products, as any
company including PSEs bidding for purchase under ICB has to first meet the qualifying technical and quality requirements.
Also, there is no impact on the project cost as PSEs have to match the lowest bidding price (L1) and provided thier own
prices within 10% of L1.
26.3In the context that PSEs are not truly Board managed as in the case of private sector, the policy of purchase preference
has served the purpose of neutralising some of the disadvantages faced by them. However, in the present business
environment, there is need to expedite the process of transformation of PSEs to autonomous Board managed companies so
that the need of such preferences can be obviated. This premise is evident from the fact that as PSEs gain competitive
strength, when purchase preference is not being used.
27.   Policy Issues
27.1In this background, the inter-PSE cooperation could fit in only if such cooperation is based on factors such as

NINETY - FIFTH  REPORT COMMITTEE  ON  INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/95threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:51]
competitiveness, meeting technical requirements, adherence to reasonable qualification criteria etc., especially in case of
International Competitive Bidding (ICB) tenders. These are hallmarks of today's business environment in the opened up
economy where public sectors not covered under administered price regime have to compete with Indian private sector and
multinational companies at times even on unequal footing. Therefore, as a pre-requisite, any inter-PSE cooperation has to
have a directive from the centre and a mandate for being operational and successful.
27.2Most of the public sector enterprises in the industrial field were created for catering to the infrastructure  needs of the
country where investment from private sector was not forthcoming. As such, if at all there is going to be any structured inter-
PSE cooperation, it should cover all the areas of infrastructure etc. by utilizing their synergies rather than catering to only the
inter-PSE needs in the engineering and construction sectors.
27.3With the opening up of the Indian economy, sectoral policies are no more seamlessly linked and every company has to
compete with every other company for getting business in India as well as abroad. In this scenario inter-PSE cooperation
should be directed by a Government policy framework on the subject which should ensure that policy pronouncements and
their implementation are beyond the purview of WTO provisions but also competition law, which is equally applicable to
PSEs, may also come in the way of mutual cooperation unless validated by a national policy framework.
27.4However, inter PSE cooperation for maximizing the business among public sector units and utilizing the assets created at
great cost to the country is a desirable objective at the national level, which will have positive impact on the economy. While
ensuring that this objective is realised, it is also necessary that the PSEs be enabled to become competitive, for which a policy
framework should be in place to ensure availability of critical inputs such as technology flows, which are particularly
necessary for PSEs in the engineering and construction sectors.
27.5Suggestions to improve the viability of PSUs
l     PSUs should form a consortium or enter into a joint venture partnerships to exploit their potential strength in the
best manner so that they can compete with MNCs.
l     There should be central coordination committee to guide and encourage PSUs to pull up their resources and form
consortium.
l     There should be a central coordination committee to bring together buyer as well as seller PSUs across the table to
sort out their issues/disputes.
l     There should be an overseeing mechanism and laid down policy to stop duplication of foreign collaborations for
similar products by different PSUs.
l     Since the large infrastructure is not fully utilized, purchase preference should continue.
l     Dealings amongst the PSUs Should be more transparent and documents resulting to decision by one accessible to
the other.
27.6Authorising MDs of MoU signing PSUs to approve overseas tour programmes of the functional Directors
27.7Based on Cabinet approval, DPE had agreed to authorise MDs of MoU-signing-PSUs to approve overseas tour
programme of the functional Directors. Subsequently, on the instructions from the Ministry of Heavy Industry, the DPE had
withdrawn these powers with the result that proposals for overseas visits of even functional directors of all PSUs have to be
sent for minister's approval.
27.8More than 50 per cent of IRCON's annual business comes from overseas operations. It is to be appreciated that IRCON
basically contracts the company and clients are required to discuss urgent contract projects related issues with the top
management of the contract or company at a very short notice of 2-3 days. The normal procedure of obtaining approval from
the concerned Minister takes anything from two to three weeks, with the result that it becomes embarrassing to explain to the
client about delay in coming for meeting/discussion.
27.9It is therefore suggested that while tour programmes of MDs of MoU signing companies may still be approved by the
concern Minister, authority of MDs in MoU signing PSUs to approve overseas program of the functional directors should be
restored at the earliest so as to remove this handicap.
Observation on Purchase Preference
27.10 From the above background it is absolutely clear that the very aim of the Government to implement the philosophy of
purchase preference in the true spirit is defeated when more than one PSU bidders participate for a job, since the situation
leads to competition amongst the bidding PSUs undercutting each other and possibly submitting cost ineffective proposals.
Even if there is one PSU bidder for a particular job, and PSU customers prepared to give a purchase preference to the bidding
PSUs, in absence of the proper level playing field, it sometimes becomes impossible for the bidding PUSs to match the price
of L1 bidders in the private sector. In fact, in tender enquiries of PSU customers, more often do not mention purchase
preference clause. Not only this, bid qualify and consequent requirements framed in such a way e.g. minimum turnover
figures and profitability for three consequent financial years prior to bid submission date etc. match, i.e., some PSU bidders

NINETY - FIFTH  REPORT COMMITTEE  ON  INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/95threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:51]
may quote at all let aside a purchase preference.
27.11 To the entire background and philosophy of setting up of various PSUs several years back as compared to many private
sector companies and multinationals, who had very definite advantages of entering the field later need to be pragmatically
understood to ensure proper level playing field to PSUs.
Global Tenders
27.12 Many of the major PSUs particularly in coal and power sector had been issuing global tenders even for range of the
equipments that are available indigenously with established manufacturing and product support/service facilities and the
products are already established with purchaser PSU for a long time. Even though such global tenders may provide for
purchase preference to central PSUs, the following anomalies still exist which require to be addressed to for providing level
playing field and implementing the govt. policy in letter and spirit.
(a)   Price preference of 15%: against all global tenders, MNCs are eligible to participate and this amounts to
international competitive bidding. In such ICB where purchases financed by multilateral agencies like IBRD, ADB
etc. bids offering the goods manufactured in the purchaser's country with minimum 30% value addition on ex-works
price quoted and that production facility has been extended at least since the date of bid submission and considered
under group 'A' category. The fully imported offers are considered under group 'C' category. For the bids under 'A'
category, there are domestic price preferences of 15% on CIF value of imported goods (amount of customs duty and
other import tax that a non-exempt importer would have to pay for importation of goods offered under 'C' category or
15% of CIF value of goods offered, whichever is low) in evaluation. If group 'A' of domestic bidder thus becomes L1
in evaluation, after considering 15% price preference, group 'A' domestic bidder will not get contract at the bid price
quoted. This facility of 15% price preference to indigenous goods evaluation is not available in respect of global
tenders, where competition will be from international bidders, same in line with World Bank tenders. This facility of
15% price preference is to be extended by Government of India to all global tenders.
28.   Bid Currencies
28.1In IBRD and ADB tenders, indigenous bidders are allowed to quote in foreign currency also and are paid in currency
quoted. This is not being allowed in domestic and global bids and indigenous manufacturers are asked to quote price in
rupees only, whereas in case of imported offer evaluation is done by converting the foreign currency bids into Indian Rupees
at the exchange rate, as applicable on the date of bid opening; the actual outgo will be at the rate as applicable on the date of
payment against shipments though L/C.
28.2Hence domestic bidders particularly where import content is substantial (meeting the minimum value addition of 30 pc)
should be allowed to quote in foreign currency also for import content and subject to same type of evaluation as applied in
fully imported equipment. Payment should also be made to domestic bidders for the foreign currency portion in equivalent
rupees, at the exchange rate applicable on the date of supply, without asking for further confirmation on documents.
29.   Special Additional Duty
29.1As per policy, SAD is applied at 4% on all imports and the same is non-MOD vatable. In the case of indigenous offer,
particularly where the value of import content is high, SAD is paid on import content and in addition, CST is also charged at
4% on the ex-factory price plus FD. Thus, indigenous offers will be in a disadvantageous position when compared to the
imported offer in total evaluation to the extent of CST.
        The following points need consideration
(a)     Purchase preference to be given for domestic offers onIy between established non-PSE sector and established
PSE sector including joint ventures in the later case, subject to value addition being minimum 30%.
(b)   In case of global tenders, domestic bidders should be given 15% preference as allowed in the case of
international competitive bidding, in addition to purchase preference.
(c)   Domestic bidders to be allowed to quote in foreign currency plus Indian Rupees when import content is of a
high value and payments to be made by purchasing PSE to selling PSE in equivalent Indian Rupees, for
corresponding foreign exchange value at the exchange rate as applicable on the date of supplies.
(d)   Purchase policy is to be extended for another three years that is up to 31st March 2005.
(e)   All tenders issued by the central PSUs and Government departments (central and state) for goods and services
of more than one crore value should incorporate purchase preference clause strictly in line with the government
guidelines and extend the same to a bids offered by selling PSUs as mandatory.
(f)    In case of global tenders, the tender document should contain 15% price preference in evaluation and if
domestic central PSE offer becomes L1 with this price preference, the order should be placed on the central
PSE at the quoted price.
29.2Exemption to PSUs should be given from submission of Earnest Money deposit. In lieu of draft/cash/B.G., PSUs should
be allowed to submit indemnity bond.

NINETY - FIFTH  REPORT COMMITTEE  ON  INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/95threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:51]
26.17 Pre-qualification criterion is being unnecessarily made too stringent to minimise competition and favour some parties
e.g. too much turnover sought, consortium not allowed.
 
CHAPTER-IV
OBSERVATIONS/FINDINGS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
30.1The Committee, while having interaction with the PSUs, considered it proper to take a view on the following points
offered by various PSUs:
(i)    Cooperation in defence and railway sectors
        The possibility of partnership in manufacturing defence equipment with Ordnance Factory Board and with RITES
and other railway  organisations for railways equipment, locomotive should be explored.          
(ii)    Cooperation in infrastructure sector
        PSUs in the infrastructure sector should join hands and deliver a project to the satisfaction of the customer within
reasonable qualifying conditions. The provision of joint bidding may be explored.
(iii)   Approval of sub-vendor
        Many client PSUs  including  SEBs   specify their own vendors for procurement of certain equipment and also
prescribe approval of sub-vendors. This condition often works to the detriment of the PSUs. The job of appointment
of sub-vendors should be left with the main supplier PSU.           
(iv)   Cooperation in risk sharing
        There is a need for increased cooperation among the client and supplier  PSUs in terms of provisions such as
suitable risk sharing in respect of penalty clauses as well as field trial of new products developed etc.                
(v)   Development of products linked to a single dominant customer
        PSUs which developed products linked to a single dominant PSU and made long term fixed investment in
equipment technology, manpower etc. do not get to realise adequate returns due to sudden drop in order inflow.
This is the area where a study is required for the survival of supplier PSUs.  DPE should find out which are the
PSUs that are affected by such sudden drop of  orders.
(vi)   Making PSUs truly board-managed companies
        PSUs are not truly Board-managed as in the private sector. In the present business scenario, there is a need to
expedite the process of transformation of PSUs to autonomous  Board-managed companies so that the need of
purchase preference can be obviated.    
(vii)  Central coordination committee and buyers’ and sellers’ meet
        There should be a central coordination committee to guide and encourage PSUs to form a consortium or join
venture to exploit their potential strength in the best manner so that they can compete with the MNCs.  This
committee should also bring together buyer as well as seller PSUs across the table to sort out their issues/disputes
for settlement outside the arbitration. The committee would also review and establish proper education of
collaborative approach between and among PSUs and arrange Buyers and sellers meet.
(viii)Preventing duplication of foreign collaboration for similar products
        There have been cases where foreign collaboration was sought by the PSUs for similar products. There should be a
mechanism for information dissemination so that duplication of such activities can be avoided.
(ix)   Unutilised infrastructure
        Huge infrastructure created in pre-liberalised era is lying unutilised or partially utilised due to lack of orders. In
cases where the PUSs have been closed due to various reasons, their assets are also lying unutilised. Government
should come forward with a proposal for best utilisation of unutilised/partially utilised/under-utilised infrastructure
to prevent unauthorised encroachment by the antisocial elements.
(x)   Customs duty on re-import of machinery
        
The Indian projects exporters temporarily export some construction equipment from India for a particular project
abroad and on its completion, may shift the same to another project, either in the same or another country and
finally it is brought back to India after project is implemented. Such re-import attracts customs duty even though no

NINETY - FIFTH  REPORT COMMITTEE  ON  INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/95threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:51]
export benefit may have been availed at the time of export. This needs to be addressed.
(xi)   Attractive Voluntary Retirement Scheme
        Voluntary Retirement Scheme should be such as can reasonably be expected to enable an employee to make a new
beginning in life. But the Income Tax Rules and Government guidelines have failed to draw response to the scheme.
The PSUs should be allowed to frame more liberalised VRS to make it attractive. For this purpose, provision of
Income Tax Rules including upper ceiling of Rs.5 lakhs should be suitably modified. Budgetary support should also
be provided for the purpose.
(xii)  Foreign Tour
        DPE has withdrawn the power of MDs of MoU signing PSUs to approve the overseas tour of functional Directors.
This has created Difficulty when the PSU has to discuss contract project related issues with the  management of a
foreign company at a very short notice of 2-3  days as the approval of the concerned Minister comes after 2-3 weeks
and it becomes embarrassing to explain to the foreign client about the delay in coming for the meeting. DPE should
address the issue and sort out the problem.
(xiii)Combining of Synergies
        Some of the big PSUs and small PSUs are manufacturing similar products. In the post-liberalised era, existing
synergies of big and small PSUs should be combined to bring a better result. For example, Engineering & Electrical
Divisions of AYCL and BHEL have can non synergies and their synergies can be combined to achieve a fruitful
result. DPE should make a study of the matter and submit a status note to the Committee.
(xiv)Coordination with the Ministry of Railways
        Ministry of railways can play a vital role in implementing the concept of inter-PSU  cooperation. DPE should
initiate a dialogue with the Ministry of railways for allotment of railway equipments to PSUs under the control of
various administrative ministries. A   step in this regard would definitely usher in a new era in revitalising the PSUs.
(xv)  15%Price Preference
        In case of global tenders, domestic bidders should be given 15% price preference as allowed in the case of
international Competitive Bidding.  The Sub-Committee is separately examining this matter for the Capital Goods
Industry. DPE  may examine its application to other sectors of the industry.
1.     Bid in foreign currency
        Domestic bidders to be allowed to quote in foreign currency plus Indian Rupee when import content is of high
value and payments to be made by purchasing PSU to selling PSU in equivalent rupees, for corresponding
foreign exchange value at the exchange rate as applicable on the date of supplies. DPE should sort out the
matter in consultation with the concerned authority.
2.     Reasonable pre-qualification criteria
        Sometimes PSUs stipulate pre-qualification criteria, which Indian bidders then with good capability can not
match. DPE should  find out, which PSUs are stipulating unreasonable PQ criteria so that greater outflow to
foreign contractor is stopped. This is especially relevant in LSTK  projects.
3.     Past track record- negative net worth
        PSUs  individually or in consortium can   implement various infrastructure projects. But the bid qualification
with respect to past record (negative net worth) many times does not permit the PSUs even to pre-qualify. The
pre-qualification criterion should be relaxed to facilitate their  participation. DPE  should examine the matter in
consultation with the concerned PSUs under the control of various ministries.
4.     World Bank guideline in respect of wagon procurement
        Container  Corporation of India is mainly  purchasing  wagons financed by loans sanctioned by the World
Bank. The procurement of wagons has therefore to be done within the procurement guidelines issued by the
World Bank and in these guidelines there is no provision for purchase preference for products and
manufactures by the PSUs. DPE should examine whether the above procurement comes under the 15%  price 
preference to domestic companies under the World Bank guidelines. In case it is covered by the World Bank
guidelines, the PSEs may jointly or in consortium of private domestic sector bid for supply of wagons.
5.     Release of Liquidated Damages
        Sometimes client PSUs impose liquidated damages on supplier PSU due to delay in supply of products. This
results in stoppage of flow of much  needed cash to the supplier PSUs. Liquidated Damages should be released

NINETY - FIFTH  REPORT COMMITTEE  ON  INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/95threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:51]
where delay has not affected the overall completion schedule of the project.
        DPE should make an exercise in this regard in coordination with the Department of Programme 
Implementation.                
6.     Indemnity Bond
        Between two PSUs the requirement of bank  guarantees may be waived and Indemnity Bond may be accepted
for saving in the bank charges as also help the PSUs in case of  bank limit problems. DPE should explore the
possibilities of introducing such a system.
7.     Research and Development Unit in the PSUs
        The PSUs have to continuously improve their technology and quality levels for making their products
acceptable to the customers. For this purpose R&D units should be set up in each and every PSU and
weightage on R&D facilities should be given in MoUs signed by the PSUs with their administrative ministries.
8.     Amendment of Contract Labour Law
        Amendment of Contract Labour Law, 1970 would help in a big way to resolve the corporate activities, which
are totally labour-oriented. DPE should take up the matter with the Ministry of Labour.
9.     Purchase from PSUs
        Out side the Purchse Preference Policy, all the PSUs autonomous bodies should purchase certain part of total
annual purchase from the PSUs eligible to supply.
25.   Emphasis on Quality
        The Committee  observes that utmost emphasis should be given on the quality of product. The PSUs should
help each other without compromising the quality and competitive spirit. The Department of Public Enterprise
should play a pro-active role in the matter for helping the PSUs. Hitherto. DPE’s role has not been that pro-
active as it should have been. Detractors of PSUs in government circle may come forward with the reasoning
that inter-PSU cooperation is not necessary as PSUs are likely to be disinvested. In defence of mutual
cooperation among PSUs it may be said that by such cooperation the PSUs will be strengthened, and it will
fetch better price in the eventually of their privatisation.
26.   Impetus to Shipping Industry
1.     Indian  shipping  companies  should  place  orders  on  Hindustan  Shipyard Ltd. to utilise the shipbuilding
facilities;
2.     ONGC should place orders for construction of offshore platforms,  since an exclusive platform fabrication
yard  was created for ONGC;
3.     Shipping companies should send their vessels for repair at Hindustan Shipyard Dry Dock to utilise the
infrastructure optimally.
27.   Unreasonable Prequalification stipulated by PSUs
        The Committee recommends that there should be a mechanism in DPE through which it should be possible to
refer such unreasonable pre-qualifications stipulated by certain PSUs. In many cases  Indian bidders with good
capability cannot be even with suitable foreign break-up.  Such restrictions stifle growth opportunities for
Indian firms, curb their initiative and lead to greater outflow to foreign contractors.
28.
  The Committee therefore recommends that Department of Public Enterprises should initiate action in respect of
all the above points of this report and appoint a Task Force to implement these points in the best possible
manner. The Committee also observed that presently there is existence of permanent Machinery of Arbitration
for reassertion of differences in the Department of Public Enterprises. However, no positive progress in this
direction exists. The Committee recommends setting up a Take Force for a positive thrust towards PSU
coordination having representative sample of client and service PSUs/Departments with the position of the
chairman being tenure based, by rotation to be filled by election. The task force shall submit periodic reports to
this Committee/parliament in significant initiations and important achievements on a periodic  basis. The
Committee understands that the task entrusted to DPE is not a small one and requires monumental effort but the
committee hopes that the Department will leave no stone unturned to  bring the PSUs out of woods.   
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE
        The Committee, while having interaction with the PSUs  considered it proper to take the following views on the
following points offered by various PSUs:

NINETY - FIFTH  REPORT COMMITTEE  ON  INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/95threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:51]
1.     Cooperation in defence and railway sectors
        The possibility of partnership in manufacturing defence equipment with Ordnance Factor Board and with RITES
and other railway  organisations for railways equipment, locomotive should be explore.          
2.     Cooperation in infrastructure sector
        PSUs in the infrastructure sector should join hands and deliver a project to the satisfaction of the customer within
reasonable qualifying conditions. The provision of joint bidding may be explored.
3.     Approval of sub-vendor
        Many client PSUs  including  SEBs   specify their own vendors for procurement of certain equipment and also
prescribe approval of sub-vendors. This condition often works to the detriment of the PSUs. The job of appointment
of sub-vendors should be left with the main supplier PSU.           
4.     Cooperation in risk sharing
        There is a need for increased cooperation among the client and supplier  PSUs in terms of provisions such as
suitable risk sharing in respect of penalty clauses as well as field trial of new products developed etc.                
5.     Development of products linked to a single dominant customer
        PSUs which developed products linked to a single dominant PSU and made long term fixed investment in
equipment technology, manpower etc. do not get to realise adequate returns due to sudden drop in order inflow.
This is the area where a study is required for the survival of supplier PSUs.  DPE should find which are the PSUs
that are affected by such sudden drop of  orders.
6.     Making PSUs truly board-managed companies
        PSUs are not truly Board-managed as in the private sector. In the present business scenario, there is a need to
expedite the process of transformation of PSUs to autonomous  Board-managed companies so that the need of
purchase preference can be obviated.    
7.     Central coordination committee and buyers’ and sellers’ meet
        There should be a central coordination committee to guide and encourage PSUs to form a consortium or join
venture to exploit their potential strength in the best manner so that they can compete with the MNCs.  This
committee should also bring together buyer as well as seller PSUs across the table to sort out their issues/disputes
for settlement outside the arbitration. The committee would also review and establish proper education of
collaborative approach between and among PSUs and arrange Buyers and sellers meet.
8.     Preventing duplication of foreign collaboration for similar products
        There have been cases where foreign collaboration was sought by the PSUs for similar products. There should be a
mechanism for information dissemination so that duplication of such activities can be avoided.
9.     Unutilised infrastruture
        
Huge infrastructure created in pre-liberalised era is lying unutilised or partially utilised due to lack of orders. In
cases where the PUSs have been closed due to various reasons, their assets are also lying unutilised. Government
should come forward with a proposal for best utilisation of unutilised/partially utilised/under-utilised infrastructure
to prevent unauthorised encroachment by the antisocial elements.
10.   Customs duty on re-import of machinery
        
The Indian projects exporters temporarily export some construction equipment from India for a particular project
abroad and on its completion, may shift the same to another project, either in the same or another country and
finally it is brought back to India after project is implemented. Such re-import attracts customs duty even though no
export benefit may have been availed at the time of export. This needs to be addressed.
11.   Attractive Voluntary Retirement Scheme
        Voluntary Retirement Scheme should be such as can reasonably be expected to enable an employee to make a new
beginning in life. But the Income Tax Rules and Government guidelines have failed to draw response to the scheme.
The PSUs should be allowed to frame more liberalised VRS to make it attractive. For this purpose, provision of
Income Tax Rules including upper ceiling of Rs.5 lakhs should be suitably modified. Budgetary support should also
be provided for the purpose.
12.   Foreign Tour
        DPE has withdrawn the power of MDs of MoU signing PSUs to approve the overseas tour of functional Directors.
This has created Difficulty when the PSU has to discuss urgent contract project related issues with the  management
of a foreign company at a very short notice of 2-3  days as the approval of the concerned Minister comes after 2-3
weeks and it becomes embarrassing to explain to the foreign client about the delay in coming for the meeting. DPE

NINETY - FIFTH  REPORT COMMITTEE  ON  INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/95threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:51]
should address the issue and sort out the problem.
13.   Combining of Synergies
        Some of the big PSUs and small PSUs are manufacturing similar products. In the post-liberalised era, existing
synergies of big and small PSUs should be combined to bring a better result. DPE should make a study of the matter
and submit a status note to the Committee.
14.   Coordination with the Ministry of Railways
        Ministry of railways can play a vital role in implementing the concept of inter-PSU  cooperation. DPE should
initiate a dialogue with the Ministry of railways for allotment of railway equipments to PSUs under the control of
various administrative ministries. A   step in this regard would definitely usher in a new era in revitalising the PSUs.
15.   15%Price Preference
        In case of global tenders, domestic bidders should be given 15% price preference as allowed in the case of
international Competitive Bidding.  The Sub-Committee is separately examining this matter for the Capital Goods
Industry. DPE  may examine its application to other sectors of the industry.
16.   Bid in foreign currency
        Domestic bidders to be allowed to quote in foreign currency plus Indian Rupee when import content is of high
value and payments to be made by purchasing PSU to selling PSU in equivalent rupees, for corresponding foreign
exchange value at the exchange rate as applicable on the date of supplies. DPE should sort out the matter in
consultation with the concerned authority.
17.   Reasonable pre-qualification criteria
        Sometimes PSUs stipulate pre-qualification criteria, which Indian bidders then with good capability can not match.
DPE should  find out, which PSUs are stipulating unreasonable PQ criteria so that greater outflow to foreign
contractor is stopped. This is especially relevant in LSTK  projects.
18.   Past track record- negative net worth
        PSUs  individually or in consortium can   implement various infrastructure projects . But the bid qualification with
respect to past record (negative net worth) many times does not permit the PSUs even to pre-quality. The pre-
qualification criterion should be relaxed to facilitate their  participation. DPE  should examine the matter in
consultation with the concerned PSUs under the control of various ministries.
19.   World Bank guideline in respect of wagon procurement
        Container  Corporation of India is mainly  purchasing  wagons financed by loans sanctioned by the World Bank.
The procurement of wagons has therefore to be done within the procurement guidelines issued by the World Bank
and in these guidelines there is no provision for purchase preference for products and manufactures by the PSUs.
DPE should examine whether the above procurement comes under the 15%  price  preference to domestic
companies under the World Bank guidelines. In case it is covered  by  the World Bank guidelines, the PSEs may
jointly or in consortium of private domestic sector bid for supply of wagons.
20.   Release of Liquidated Damages
        Sometimes client PSUs impose liquidated damages on supplier PSU due to delay in supply of products. This results
in stoppage of flow of much  needed cash to the supplier PSUs. Liquidated Damages should be released where
delay has not affected the overall completion schedule of the project.
        DPE should make an exercise in this regard in coordination with the Department of Programme 
Implementation.                
21.   Indemnity Bond
        Between two PSUs the requirement of bank  guarantees may be waived and Indemnity Bond may be accepted for
saving in the bank charges as also help the PSUs in case of  bank limit problems. DPE should explore the
possibilities of introducing such a system.
22.   Research and Development Units in the PSUs
        The PSUs have to continuously improve their technology and quality levels for making their products acceptable to
the customers. For this purpose R&D units should be set up in each and every PSU and weightage on R&D
facilities should be given in MoUs signed by the PSUs with their administrative ministries.
23.   Amendment of Contract Labour Law
        Amendment of Contract Labour Law, 1970 would help in a big way to resolve the corporate activities, which are
totally labour-oriented. DPE should take up the matter with the Ministry of Labour.

NINETY - FIFTH  REPORT COMMITTEE  ON  INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/95threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:51]
24.   Purchase from PSUs
        Out side the Purchse Preference Policy, all the PSUs autonomous bodies should purchase certain part of total
annual purchase from the PSUs eligible to supply.
25.   Emphasis on Quality
        The Committee  observes that utmost emphasis should be given on the quality of product. The PSUs should help
each other without compromising the quality and competitive spirit. The Department of Public Enterprise should
play a pro-active role in the matter for helping the PSUs. Hitherto. DPE’s role has not been that pro-active as it
should have been. Detractors of PSUs in government circle may come forward with the reasoning that inter-PSU
cooperation is not necessary as PSUs are likely to be disinvested. In defence of mutual cooperation among PSUs it
may be said that by such cooperation the PSUs will be strengthened, and it will fetch better price in the eventually
of their privatisation.
26.   Impetus to Shipping Industry
1.     Indian  shipping  companies  should  place  orders  on  Hindustan  Shipyard Ltd. to utilise the shipbuilding
facilities;
2.     ONGC should place orders for construction of offshore platforms,  since an exclusive platform fabrication
yard  was created for ONGC;
3.     Shipping companies should send their vessels for repair at Hindustan Shipyard Dry Dock to utilise the
infrastructure optimally.
27.   Unreasonable Prequalification stipulated by PSUs
        The Committee recommends that there should be a mechanism in DPE through which it should be possible to refer
such unreasonable pre-qualifications stipulated by certain PSUs. In many cases  Indian bidders with good capability
cannot be even with suitable foreign break-up.  Such restrictions stifle growth opportunities for Indian firms, curb
their initiative and lead to greater outflow to foreign contractors.
28.  The Committee therefore recommends that Department of Public Enterprises should initiate action in respect of all
the above points of this report and appoint a Task Force to implement these points in the best possible manner. The
Committee also observed that presently there is existence of permanent Machinery of Arbitration for reassertion of
differences in the Department of Public Enterprises. However, no positive progress in this direction exists. The
Committee recommends setting up a Take Force for a positive thrust towards PSU coordination having
representative sample of client and service PSUs/Departments with the position of the chairman being tenure based,
by rotation to be filled by election. The task force shall submit periodic reports to this Committee/parliament in
significant initiations and important achievements on a periodic  basis. The Committee understands that the task
entrusted to DPE is not a small one and requires monumental effort but the committee hopes that the Department
will leave no stone unturned to  bring the PSUs out of woods.       Para (27.1)
 
MINUTES
XIV
FOURTEENTH  MEETING
        The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 17th December, 2002 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
     1.   Dr. P.C. Alexander    -----    Chairman
           RAJYA  SABHA
     2.   Prof. M.M. Agarwal
     3.   Shrimati Saroj Dubey
     4.   Dr. Faguni Ram
     5.   Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
     6.   Shri P.K. Maheshwari
     7.   Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
     8.   Shri S. Sivasubramanian
     9.   Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
           LOK  SABHA
   10.   Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
   11.   Shri Nepal Chandra Das
   12.   Shri Thomas Hansda

NINETY - FIFTH  REPORT COMMITTEE  ON  INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/95threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:51]
   13.   Shri A. C. Jose
   14.   Shri Sunil Khan
   15.   Shri Manjay Lal
   16.   Shri A. Narendra
   17.   Shri Ananta Nayak
   18.   Shri P. Rajendran
   19.   Dr. B.B. Ramaiah
   20.   Chowdhary Talib Hussain
   21.   Shrimati D.M. Vijaya Kumari
           SECRETARIAT
           Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
           Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
           Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
           Shri D. P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
2.     At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them of agenda for the meeting of
the day.
3.    *                                                   *                                                        *
3.1  *                                                   *                                                        *
3.2  *                                                   *                                                        *
3.3  *                                                   *                                                        *
3.4  *                                                   *                                                        *
3.5  *                                                   *                                                        *
4.     The Committee, thereafter, took up Auto Policy for discussion. The Chairman suggested, after its reconstitution on 1st
January, 2003, could have a meeting in Chennai with all Tyre Manufacturers. Threreafter, the Chairman discussed with the
Members the scope of Auto Policy which aimed at to promote integrated, phased, enduring and self-sustained growth of the
Indian Automobile Industry. Some suggestions like use of dippers at night, higher ground clearance for car, investment of
R&D, excise duty on vehicles at the reasonable level, concessions to manufacturer of multy utility vehicles were discussed
for incorporation in the report.
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 5.45 p.m.