126th Report on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/126threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:42:01]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
HUNDRED TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT
ON
 
REVIVAL OF NAGALAN PULP AND PAPER COMPANY
 
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 8TH May, 2003)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 8TH May, 2003)
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
MAY, 2003/ VAISAKHA, 1925  (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                
REPORT                                                                                                                              
CHAPTER – I Introduction                       
CHAPTER–II Discussion with various Central Ministries, State Government And PSUs
CHAPTER–III Observations/Recommendations
MINUTES                                                                        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
              Dr. P.C. Alexander       —   Chairman
                       
                        RAJYA SABHA
 
2.
      Prof. M.M. Agarwal
3.      Shri  Jayantilal Barot
4.      Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5.      Dr. M.N. Das
6.      Shrimati Saroj Dubey
7.      Shri Faguni Ram
8.      Shri Lajpat Rai
9.      Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

126th Report on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/126threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:42:01]
10.  Shri P.K. Maheshwari
11.  Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
12.  Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
13.  Shri S. Sivasubramanian
14.  Shrimati Sushree Devi
15.  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
 
LOK SABHA
 
16.  Shrimati  Jayashree Banerjee
17.  Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
18.  Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
19.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das
20.  Shri K Francis George
21.  Shri Thomas Hansda
22.  Md. Anwarul Haque
23.  Shri  A.C. Jose
24.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
25.  Shri Mansoor Ali Khan
26.  Shri Sunil Khan
27.  Shri Deepak Kumar
28.  Shri Manjay Lal
29.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
30.  Shri A. Narendra
31.  Shri Ananta Nayak
32.  Shri  Dayabhai V. Patel
33.  Shri Uttamrao Patil
34.  Shri Malyala Rajaiah
35.  Shri P. Rajendran
36.  Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
37.  Shri Tarachand Sahu
 
(i)
38.  Shri Ramanand Singh
39.  Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
40.  Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
41.  Shri V. Vertiselvan
42.  Shrimati  D.M. Vijaya Kumari
43.  Shri Ram Prasad Singh
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri  K.P. Singh,  Under  Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
I N T R O D U C T I ON
 
 
I,  the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry,  having   been authorised  by the
Committee, hereby present this  126th  Report on the Revival of Nagaland Pulp and Paper Mills( Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises).
 
2.         The Sub-Committee III for Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises held a series of meetings with  the

126th Report on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/126threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:42:01]
representatives  of Ministry of Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises,  Department of Development of North East Region and Nagaland
Pulp and Paper Mills, Hindustan Paper Corporation.The Committee also examined the relevant documents papers furnished by the
Ministry. The Committee wishes especially to thank  the  Shri C. Apok Jamir and Shri K.Asungba Sangtam, Member of Parliament from
Nagaland for their valuable contribution . 
 
            The Committee at its meeting held on  6
th  May,  2003 considered and adopted the Report.
 
NEW DELHI;     
May 6, 2003
DR. P.C. ALEXANDER
Chairman
Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry
 
        CHAPTER I
Introduction
1.         When ceasefire was declared with the Naga insurgents in 1964, the Government of India made a commitment to ensure rapid
industrial development to wean people of Nagaland away from violence. The Paper Mill Project was conceived in Nagaland in the late
60s. Nagaland Pulp and Paper Company Limited was incorporated in 1971. This was first and only large & medium unit in the State of
Nagaland and the first paper mill in the central public sector in the North Eastern region. It generated great hope and enthusiasm among
the people of Nagaland. This project was conceived with the following technical specifications:
(i)
                  Capacity : 100 Tons per day i.e. 33000 tons per annum
(ii)                Product : Writing and printing paper
(iii)               Basic Raw Material : 60% Bamboo, 40% Reed
(iv)              Power Requirement : 13 MW
(v)                8 MW to be generated internally from waste head of boilers, 5 MW to be supplied from State Grid
(vi)              Hindustan Paper Corporation, A Central PSU executed the project.
(vii)             Entire responsibility of management rested with HPC.
1.1       The local people donated 700 acres of land for the mill and housing colonies in Tuli area of Nagaland. 126 sq. kilometers of
bamboo forest land was purchased for captive plantation and was leased to NPCC. Water from river Melak was harnessed for water
supply to the Mill. In anticipation of demand from the mill, large scale bamboo plantation took place in private lands.
 
1.2       The project took 10 years to complete. Paper machines for both lines of production were imported from Sweden. Boilers were
supplied by Walchand Nagar Industries. The mill started making commercial production in 1982 with defective boilers. One of the
boilers failed in the trial test and insufficient heat from the remaining boilers kept the Turbine Generator (TG) set idle. The Mill
primarily depended on power supply from the State which accessed power from Assam grid. Thus, the power supply was unstable
besides being costlier.
 
1.3       The defective boilers crippled performance of the mill. The envisaged 60% captive power from Turbine Generator set was not
available and hence the capacity utilization was poor, ranging between 3% to 19%. One of the two production lines i.e. Reed Line was
never utilized. Peak capacity utilization reached 60% on some days whenever power supply was stable. The mill continued to make
losses due to under capacity utilization. The production was abruptly suspended in 1992 as the net worth of the company was eroded and
it was declared sick. Subsequently, it was referred to BIFR in 1992.
 
1.4       The operating agency i.e. IDBI framed a revival proposal and recommended – (1) Capital restructuring; (2) Operation at 60 TPD;
and (3) Fresh investment of Rs. 16.5 crore. Government of India accepted the proposal as approved by the BIFR and it was taken out of
purview of BIFR in 1996. Government of India carried out capital restructuring but did not infuse fresh funds except for VRS, hence

126th Report on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/126threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:42:01]
production could not be resumed and it was again referred to BIFR in 1998 for the second time. IDBI was again appointed operating
agency and a Draft Rehabilitation Scheme (DRS) was submitted by them which recommended revival at 60 TPD, fresh investment of 55
cores, other reliefs and concessions applicable to new industrial units in the North Eastern region  and a marginal viability was
envisaged. Nagaland Government agreed to support DRS for its share of reliefs and concessions and fresh investment. However,
Government of India declined to support this Scheme. The decision of Government of India was conveyed to BIFR who in turn asked
the IDBI to advertise for change of management. Although IDBI advertised for change of management, no expression of interest was
received. This position was conveyed to BIFR and thereafter the matter was taken up by Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) who decided
to take a fresh view.
1.5       An Expert team consisting of Hindustan Paper Corporation, Central Pulp and Paper Research Institute and State Government
officers was sent to determine the technical viability of the Scheme. The team recommended revival at 120 TPD of value added paper for
technical and economic viability and an approximate investment to the tune of 150 crores. The MHA directed to carry out the Scheme by
outside consultants. Outside consultants were identified. The cost of detailed project report was to the tune of 30-35 lakhs. The
Department for Development of North Eastern Region agreed to meet the cost of project. However, BIFR refused to grant any further
time and issued orders of winding up.
 
1.6       However, it is worth mentioning that infrastructure development over the years in Nagaland was favourable for revival of the
company. The details of the development are as under:
·
                    Railway line extended to Tuli
·                    Upgraded to broad gauge
·                    Kohima-Mokokchung-Tuli-Amguri road upgraded to National Highway
·                    66/33 HT transmission lines extended to TULI
·                    TULI transformer upgraded from 1.6 to 7.5 MVA
·                    Power availability improved by commissioning 75 MW Doyang and 24 MW Likhimro hydel projects
·                    Substantial investment for road connectivity of Tuli with rest of the State.
 
·                    Coal and Limestone available within a radius of 250 kilometers
·                    Communication and transport facilities many times better than 30 years back.
 
1.7       In the circumstances stated above, the following options are there:
·
                    Wind up and spend Rs.107 crore for closure.
·                    Revive and let HPC manage with the existing arrangement
·                    Revive and privatize as a going concern
 
            Revival is the most feasible and desirable option also compatible with Central Government policy on sick PSUs.
1.8       The matter relating to NPPC was raised by the Members almost in every meeting of the Department related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry when Demands for Grants came up for discussion.  The management of HPC constantly informed the
committee that the company has become non-operational due to insurgency problem in Nagaland.  The Ministry of Heavy Industry also
in their annual reports routinely stated that the company, which came out of the purview of BIFR due to financial restructuring again
became sick as the revival scheme could not be put into operation due to law and order problem, lack of infrastructure and absence of
banking facilities.
1.9       The Committee has been noting over the past years the stereotype statement of the HPC as well as the Ministry of Heavy
Industry.  Law and Order situation has been cited as a major cause for the non-revival of the company.  In this context, the committee
noted that the President of India in his address to Parliament on 25
th February 2002 had said “ The peace process in Nagaland has been
strengthened with satisfactory progress of talks with various militant groups.  What is specially heartening n the last one year is that
people of Nagaland have come out strongly in favour of peace, dialogue  and development, often by staging spontaneous mass

126th Report on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/126threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:42:01]
activities”.  Since law and order situation appears to have improved in Nagaland, the committee felt that a beginning may be made
towards reviving NPPCL for the benefit of the people of Nagaland.
CHAPTER II
Discussion with various Central Ministries, State Government and PSUs
2.         The sub-Committee-II for Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises had meetings with the Department of Heavy Industry,
Department for Development of North Eastern Region, Railway Board, Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion, Chief Secretary,
State of Nagaland, representatives of Hindustan Paper Corporation, Nagaland Pulp and Paper Corporation, Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd.
and Gas Authority of India Ltd. to explore the possibility of reviving the Nagaland Pulp and Paper Company.  Members of Parliament of
the State of Nagaland also attended the meetings as special invitees.  The date-wise details of the meeting are given below.
 
Meeting held on 15th April 2002
2.1       At the outset, the Sub-Committee-III heard the Secretaries, Department of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises, Department
for Development of North Eastern Region, Chief Secretary, Nagaland, and CMD, Hindustan Paper Corporation, regarding revival of
Nagaland Pulp and Paper Company Ltd.
 
2.2       After hearing the Secretaries of the concerned departments and the Chief Secretary Government of Nagaland, the Committee
recommended that the State Government and employees of the Nagaland Pulp and Paper co. Ltd. should make an appeal to AAIFR
before whom the case was pending for grant of stay.  The committee further recommended that simultaneously, the HPC would call for
bids from the reputed consultants and place an order for preparation of a Detailed Project Report.  The Secretary, Department for
Development of North Eastern Region, assured the committee that his Department would bear 50% of the cost of preparing the Detailed
Project Report.  Secretary, Department of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises, also agreed to meet the balance 50% of the cost.  The
sub-committee observed that after preparation of the Report, the sub-committee would examine the viability of reviving the said
company and thereafter it would request the Government of India and Government of Nagaland to help the company.  The sub-
committee also decided that there was still need for participation of MPs representing the State of Nagaland and Chief Secretary and
other concerned officers of the Government of Nagaland in the ensuing meetings of the sub-committee in regard to revival of NPPC
Ltd. 
 
Meeting held on 24
th June 2002
2.3       At the outset, the Convenor wanted to know the status of the revival scheme of the Nagaland Pulp and Paper Company Ltd.
(NPPC).  Secretary, Department of Heavy Industries, informed the Committee that in pursuance of the directions given by the
Committee at its meeting held on 15 th April 2002, an appeal against BIFR’s decision on closure of NPCC was filed by the Government
of Nagaland and NPPC with AAIFR and also M/s Development Consultants Pvt. LTd., Kolkata, a consultant in the pulp and paper
industry were appointed on April 22, 2002 for preparation of a Detailed Project Report.  The consultant was to give a Preliminary
Viability Report (PVR) on August 22, 2002 and a final draft report on November 22, 2002.  AAIFR, after hearing the parties concerned,
had agreed to an extension and fixed the next date of hearing for 10 th September 2002 and had directed that copies of the PVR may be
given to them as soon as it is available.  The Covenor thereupon asked the consultant about the status of the PVR.  The consultant
informed that the PVR would be submitted by 22 th August 2002.  The Convenor directed that efforts may be made to expedite the
finalisation of the report before 22th August 2002.  Convenor also directed the Department of Heavy Industry to extend all possible help
to the consultants so as to enable them to prepare their report quickly. 
Meeting held on 12th December 2002
2.4       At the outset, the Convenor recalled that revival of Nagaland Pulp and paper Corporation was important because Government of
India was very particular that the area should be developed, there should be employment potentiality and insurgency reduced.  The

126th Report on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/126threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:42:01]
projection as given was likely to be production of 45000 tonnes of paper.  It would get the original benefits of concession and the
consultants had taken that into consideration and prepared a detailed report on that basis.  Estimates came to Rs.250 crores.  The
feasibility report had two factors where the company may raise 250 crores or raise 50% and borrow 50%.  Borrowing 50% would not be
very difficult.  The company was presently under reference to BIFR.  They had given some more time to revive this plant.  The matter
now rested with the Ministry of Heavy Industry and Nagaland Government.  The Convenor wanted to know from the Ministry of Heavy
Industry about the present position.
 
2.5       Secretary, Heavy Industry informed that they had received the comments of the holding company.  Although nothing had been
said about the avenues from where the finance had to be raised while the liabilities had not been taken into account which were to the
tune of 130-140 crores.  However, the Ministry would look into it.
 
2.6       CMD, Hindustan Paper Corporation, informed that on certain technical issues the company agreed with the consultants. They
were taking availability projection as if it was a green field project.  At the same time, the company would be using existing assets
without considering the liabilities.  It did not indicate what treatment would be given to equity, loan and accumulated losses of Rs.197
crores as on 31.3.02. Even with the projections based on the premise that the company would get the excise exemption and 100%
capacity utilisation, their estimated earnings would be only Rs.138 crores.  So even after 10 years accumulated losses would not get
wiped out.  This issue needed to be considered.  He further informed that the company had only touched about 20% utilisation. 
Estimating 100% utilisation in three years was being over-optimistic.  Next point was that the project completion period was taken as 24
months.  Unless and until the critical equipment supplied and erection took place in at least 15-18 months, 24 months would not be a
realistic schedule.  There were logistic inadequacies.  Next factor was that working capital was slightly on the lower side.  The
company’s requirements would be higher.  Then there was the issue of requirement of gas.  Gas availability assurance was not there. 
Besides, HPC was in 1987 pay structure.  To attract good personnel this needed revision. 
 
2.7       HPC further agreed with certain technical analysis except for one issue.  This was related to the capacity utilisation issue.  When
the plant was installed, it undertook production of 100 tonnes per day for 330 operating days.  The normative level for Indian processing
industry was 333.33 days.  Consultants had taken 345 operating days and had assumed production level of 140 tonnes per day.  Then it
was assumed that within three years of operation it would go to 100 percent.  These were optimistic estimates but it was better to have a
realistic view.
 
2.8       The Convenor observed that boilers, turbines and erection plant had to be changed.  Infrastructure also needed improvement. The
land was available.  He enquired whether it could be done with Rs.240-250 crores.  HPC informed that the new green field plan would
cost 530 crores.  Due technical justifications had been given and some contingencies had been kept and so they had arrived at a figure of
Rs.250-260 crores.
 
2.9       Shri K. Sangatham, Member Lok Sabha, informed that the boilers bought earlier were second hand.  It was the mismanagement
of the company, which was responsible for this kind of sorry state of affairs.  The resources were mismanaged.  When the company was
started, the State of Nagaland was not properly equipped.  Civil Servants did not know what was happening.  But now there were people
who were ready to work there.  The state had officers who were experienced and willing to work.  Raw materials could also be supplied
in required quantity.  The industry could be revived with the help of various departments of Government of India.
 
2.10     Thereafter, the Convenor raised two points regarding gas and railways.  Representative of GAIL informed that the job of original
allocation of gas was made in 1986 and ONGC was to supply the gas.  The route was to be provided by HP, which failed to do so and so
ONGC could not lay the pipeline.  In 1991-92 this allocation was transferred to GAIL and the ministry told them that agreement should
be signed between ONGC and GAIL.  It could not take place.  From 1986 the gas was coming from Assam to the paper plant.  Since
then the availability of gas had gone down.  If gas was available, GAIL would lay the pipeline and supply it.  Representative of Railways
informed that broad gauge line was ready between Anomi and Tuli and they could carry any traffic on this route.  

126th Report on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/126threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:42:01]
 
2.11     Representative of Nagaland Government informed that the viability of the company had been established.  So the first task would
be to review the decision of Government of India.  Then funding had to be found.  As far as the State Government was concerned, it was
going to get this mill revived because this mill was the only source which could lead to economic regeneration of the state.  So from the
state government it would get whatever assistance was required.  The State Government would be very happy if the decision on the
revival of the mill was taken as early as possible.
 
2.12     As far as communication was concerned, he informed that the road passing through Tuli had been upgraded to national highway. 
The work on the road was on.  The railway line had also come.  The communication had improved ten times to what it was 30 years
ago.  Telephone communication had also improved.  As far as law and order situation was concerned, there was a ceasefire going on
between the factions and negotiations were at a very advanced stage.  So, insurgency related law and order situation had improved quite
a lot in the last five years.
 
2.13     The representative of Nagaland further informed that Nagaland had recently commissioned two projects.  The entire state had
been covered under 66 KV grid which had been extended to Tuli also.  Electrical sub-stations had also been upgraded.  Transmission line
passed through very tough terrain, so even if the availability of power was there, it would not be a very good idea to make a mill
dependent on state power.  So the mill should have a standalone arrangement.  About gas, a pipeline passed through Assam but it may be
not a very good idea to make the operation of the mill dependant on the pipeline. 
 
2.14     The representative of Department of Development of North East Region informed that there were certain things which should be
looked into like gas availability and other things.  As far as money part was concerned, their department had no budget proposals for
such schemes.  It was basically the project of Heavy Industry. 
 
2.15     After hearing all the Ministries/Departments/State Government of Nagaland/HPC/GAIL/HUDCO, the Committee directed that
Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises should look into the matter and come back with a suitable proposal for reviving the
NPPCL.
 
Meeting held on 23.04.03
2.16     At the outset, the Convenor observed that as per consultants’ report, fresh investment to revive the NPPC would require Rs.250
crores.  However, it came to the notice of the Committee that the cost of the revival scheme had gone up.  He wanted to know the details
in this regard.
 
2.17     The representative of NPPC informed that earlier in the PVR they had indicated Rs.246 crores.  In the last meeting, the consultant
was asked to increase the plant capacity for making it more viable.  So they made it 50000 tonne capacity from earlier 45000 tonnes. 
Secondly, earlier they had not taken the liabilities.  So that also has been included.  This had caused the increase in the fresh investment. 
Past liabilities came to about 200 crores.  However, only pressing liabilities, some government loans and equity portion had been taken
into account.
 
2.18     He further informed that there was capital expenditure of 301 crores for payment to pressing creditors, which was to the tune of
Rs.13.92 crores, cash loans was 10.38 crores, margin money was 10.22 crores, and 3.50 crores for fresh VRS.  Total came to 339.43
crores.
 
2.19     The Convenor observed that it should be taken as a fresh project.  Only when government gave a clear indication that it would be
a fresh project, it would be possible to work on its viability.
 
2.20     Chief Secretary, Government of Nagaland informed that the State Government were prepared to make contribution in terms of

126th Report on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/126threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:42:01]
their equity share.  Their equity holding was 1:18 and to that extent they were prepared to invest funds.  They were also prepared to write
off whatever was payable to them by the NPPC on account of electricity and other payments. This came to about Rs.6 crores. 
 
2.21     Joint Secretary, Department of Heavy Industry, informed that as the situation stood, the cost of revival cost of the project was
Rs.340 crores.  Then Rs.30 crores of loan needed to be written off.  Also there would be waiver of interest of GOI loan to the extent of
Rs.21 crores and a write off of dues of HPC of Rs.32.78 crores.  Total came to Rs.422 crores.  Against this, the cost of closure would be
Rs.107 crores.
 
2.22     When the Convenor waned to know the DHI’s plans in this regard, DHI informed that they sought the views of HPC, Central
Pulp and Paper Institute and Economic Advisor to the Ministry of Industry.  HPC had concluded that in the long run when the excise
exemption would come to cease, NPPC would incur net losses.  Even with 100% exemption, reserves would be Rs.139.17 crores at the
end of 10 years and this would be insufficient to wipe out the present accumulated losses of Rs.197.38 crores.  Central Pulp and Paper
Research Institute agreed that the project was viable technically but economic feasibility would have to be separately examined. 
According to the Economic Advisor, price sensitivity was an issue that needed to be addressed.  Even if there was a variation of 5-10%
in the sale price, it would severely impact the projections, which had been made in the report.  This sort of variation could happen with
changes in the customs duty.  Another problem was the question of availability and the cost of raw material.  NPPC were largely
dependent on the availability of bamboo in that area.  The volumes and the price at which they were available, was vital.  The draft
report took into consideration only fixed rate.
 
2.23     He further stated that excise duty exemption should be made available for 25 years.  Transport subsidy must also be available. 
Writing off of 6 crores by Govt of Nagaland and 100% cess exemption from payment of cess was a negligible amount.  NPPC would
require assurance on the volume of bamboo required over a period of 15 years.  Besides, HPC was being disinvested.  In that case, new
owners of the company would play a role in the decision making process of the company.  Also, DHI did not have a provision, as
envisaged herewith of Rs.339.43 crores, in its budget.
 
2.24     The Convenor observed that that difficulties were there but if the concerned departments also put all the initiative, then it should
be done.  This concerned the integrity of the country.  The amount consideration should be discouraging.
The Convenor further observed that the whole attitude of the committee was that the unit should be revived, whatever the cost.  Today
the cost might have gone up but those were old liabilities in the total package for going into production.  If the mill was to be disinvested
along with HPC, then the holding company would be changing.  The new partner would have its own priorities.  So this had to be
considered separately from HPC.  If HPC was disinvested then NPPC had to be given separate revival package.
 
2.25     When Members wanted to know what happened to the 10% of budget money from each ministry which would be put in the
central pool for North East development, Secretary, Department for Development of North Eastern Region, informed that the idea was
not that each department would give its gross budgetary support.  10% of the GBS is to be used in the NE and whatever amount was not
used, only that portion would get into the pool.  Of this, a certain amount was made available to DONER to be spent on the new
projects.  The Department’s mandate was a total amount of Rs.550 crores.  This was insufficient to cater to all the on going projects. 
Besides, the Department’s guidelines did not permit anything except infrastructure.  Therefore, it would not be in a position to meet this
requirement.
 
2.26     When the Convenor asked what were the consequences if State Government went to BIFR and they asked the Government to
wind this up, DHI informed that Cabinet would support the views of BIFR and the effect would be closure.  Rs.107 crores was the
liability amount, which would be paid by DHI.
 
2.27     The Convenor then observed that DHI should think how to get Rs.250 crores.  There was tremendous  employment potential.  Lot
of raw material was available.  If NPPC could be made operational with a reasonable output of 50000 tonnes, then it would be very

126th Report on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/126threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:42:01]
economical.  The product it produced was very good.  There machines were also good.  BHEL wanted to give some excellent equipment
at nominal cost. 
 
2.28     Joint Secretary, DHI, informed the committee that DHI was yet to take a final view in this matter.  Since the project has large
financial implication, the matter required clearance from the Union Cabinet.  Presently, the DHI was in the process of reconciliation of
the views expressed by various agencies.
CHAPTER III
Observations/Recommendations
3.         After hearing the Department of heavy Industry, Department for Development of North Eastern Region (DONER) and Hindustan
Paper Corporation, the committee understands that the main question relates to funding the project and this aspect is to be made clear
before the AAIFR in its next hearing to be held on 1 st July 2003.  It is clear that the NPPC is to be wound up if funding of the project
does not take place.  The committee, however, understands that the Government did not take the revival of NPPC seriously.  This is
corroborated by the fact that on NPPC’s first reference to BIFR, Government of India carried out capital restructuring without infusing
fresh funds except for VRS.  Moreover, the Ministry of Home Affairs appointed a team of experts for the revival of the company.  That
team recommended revival at 12 TPD of value added paper for technical and economic viability with an investment of Rs.150 crores. 
The Ministry of Home Affairs decided to carry our detailed project report and DONER agreed to meet the cost of DPR, which was to the
tune of Rs.30-35 lakhs.  In spite of this, BIFR refused to grant any further time and issued orders for winding up.
3.1       This shows that the case was not properly presented before the BIFR.  When the Ministry of Home Affairs decided to appoint a
consultant to explore the viability of the project, what prompted BIFR to issue orders to wind up the company without going into the
merit of the case, is not understood.
3.2       The DONER has been created for the development of North Eastern Region but it cannot contribute funds for NPPC from non-
lapsable pool as their mandate is to aid only new projects.  In fact, DONER should be made a model agency for the development of the
North Eastern Region, which should encompass not only new projects but also the existing units if any meaningful role is to be played
by the newly created department. DONER should play a leading role for the development of the North East in coordination with
concerned central ministries to usher in real development of the North East.  The Committee notes that out of Rs.1600 crores non-
lapsable pool for North East, Rs.550 crores goes to the budget of DONER for creation/completion of last mile projects in social
infrastructure.  The committee feels that the balance fund may be tapped for funding revival of the company.
 
3.3       The Committee notes that the cost of closure is Rs.107 crores.  In addition Rs.112 crores worth of investment is sunk.
3.4       It has been the committee’s stand that the greenfield fresh project emphasis is from the point of view of Government’s writing off
the loans.
 
3.5       In the light of the views expressed by the HPC, Central Pulp and Paper Research Institute and Economic Advisor to DHI on how
to make the company viable, excise duty exemption for 25 years coupled with transport subsidy should be made available to the
company.  NPPC should also have assured supply of bamboo for a period of 15 years.
3.6       The committee took up the case of NPCC as the peace process in Nagaland is going on and industrial development of Nagaland
should go hand in hand with the peace process.
In case NPPC is wound up the immediate impact would be –
-
                     Colossal waste of all investment made in infrastructure
-                     Serious erosion of credibility of Central Government in sensitive border area.
-                     Wrong signals to ongoing peace process
-                     accentuate already alarming unemployment situation
-                     Nagaland would be wiped of the map of large industries of India.
 

126th Report on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/126threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:42:01]
3.7       The Committee therefore recommends that –
-                     DHI and Government of Nagaland should properly place the matter before the AAIFR, specially with reference to the
funding position.  Since Rs.250 crores is not required at one go, this can be arranged in a phased manner.
-                     Excise exemption for 25 years coupled with transport subsidy be provided to NPPC as a special dispensation.
-                     Assured supply of bamboo be made available for a period of 15 years.
-                     Since the proposal involves financial implications, the clearance of Union Cabinet be obtained at the earliest.
 
3.8       The committee notes that a number of sick PSUs have been given more than one revival schemes and feels that no discrimination
should be made in the case of NPPC in view of its location.  The Committee hopes that Government of India, in view of the sensitivity of
the matter, would not belie the hopes of Nagaland  people.
MINUTES
X
 
TENTH MEETING
 
          The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday the 6 th May, 2003 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
 
                  PRESENT
 
1.
                  Dr. P.C. Alexander  --  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.                  Prof. M.M. Aggarwal
3.                  Dr. M.N. Das
4.                  Shri Faguni Ram
5.                  Shri Lajpat Rai
6.                  Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
7.                  Shri P.K. Maheshwari
8.                  Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
9.                  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
10.              Shri K. Chandran Pillai
 
LOK SABHA
 
11.              Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
12.              Shri Francis George
13.              Shri A.C. Jose
14.              Shri Manjay Lal
15.              Shri A Narendra
16.              Shri Ananta Nayak
17.              Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
18.              Shri V. Vertiselvan
19.              Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari
 
SECRETARIAT
           
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
            Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
            Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
            Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
 

126th Report on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/126threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:42:01]
2.                  At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee.
...2/-
-3-
 
3.                  The Committee then took up the following draft Report for its consideration:-
 
126th Report on  Revival of  Nagaland  Pulp and Paper Company (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises).
 
4.                  The Chairman requested the Members to give any suggestion or change in the Report, if required.  After a brief discussion
the Reports were adopted.
 
5.                  The Chairman nominated Prof. M.M. Aggarwal and in his absence Shri Khan Gufran Zahidi, Members Rajya Sabha to
present these reports to the Rajya Sabha.  He also nominated Dr. B.B. Ramaiah and in his absence Shri A.C. Jose, Members
Lok Sabha to present these reports in the Lok Sabha on 8th May, 2003.
 
6.                 The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 