 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2022 / Magha, 1943 (Saka) 
 
REPORT NO. 
314 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND FOURTEENTH REPORT 
ON 
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the 307th Report of the Committee on 
Impact of Covid-19 on PSUs and the initiatives taken by PSUs under 
Atamnirbhar Bharat Abhiyaan 
pertaining to 
the Ministry of Heavy Industries 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th February, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th February, 2022) 

 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2022 / Magha, 1943 (Saka) 
 
 
 
  
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY FIRST REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON  247TH  REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
ON 
 IMPLEMENTATION OF  INTEREST SUBSIDY 
ELEGIBILITY CERTIFICATE (ISEC) SCHEME  
 
PERTAINING TO 
THREE HUNDRED AND FOURTEENTH REPORT 
ON 
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the 307th Report of the Committee on 
Impact of Covid-19 on PSUs and the initiatives taken by PSUs under 
Atamnirbhar Bharat Abhiyaan 
pertaining to 
the Ministry of Heavy Industries 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th February, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th February, 2022) 

 
CONTENTS 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE................................................. (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION............................................................................................ (ii) 
3. ACRONYMS..................................................................................................... (iii)-(iv) 
4. REPORT................................................................................................... 1-28 
   
 Chapter I      
 
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted  by 
the Ministry 
 
        2-11 
 Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not 
desire to pursue further in view of the Ministry’s replies 
 
  12-22 
 Chapter III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the 
Committee has not accepted the replies of the Ministry 
 
 23 – 26 
 Chapter IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Ministry are still awaited 
 
 27-28 
5. MINUTES ........................................................................................... 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 To be appended later 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2021-22) 
(Constituted  w.e.f. 13th September, 2021) 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 1. Dr. K. Keshava Rao         -       Chairman 
 2.  Shri Hardwar Dubey    
 3. Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
 4. Shri Shwait Malik 
 5. Shrimati Ranee Narah  
 6. Shri Sanjay Seth 
 7. Shri Abdul Wahab 
 8.  Dr. Amee Yajnik 
 9.   *Shri Luizinho Joaquim Faleiro 
 10.  &Vacant  
    LOK SABHA 
 11.   Shri Hanuman Beniwal 
 12.   Ms. Mimi Chakraborty 
 13.   Shri Bharatsinghji Shankarji Dabhi 
 14.   Shri Hemant Godse  
 15.     Dr. S. T. Hasan 
 16.   Shri Ravi Kishan 
 17.   Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanjibhai Kundariya 
 18.      Shri Ravinder Kushawaha 
 19.   Shrimati Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
 20.     Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
 21.   Shri Ramprit Mandal 
 22.      Shri Vincent H. Pala 
 23.   Shri Chirag Kumar Paswan 
 24.   Shri T. R. V. S. Ramesh 
 25.   Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy  
 26.   Ms. Jothimani S.  
 27.   Shrimati Gomti Sai 
 28.   Shri Sunil Soren 
 29.   Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare 
 30.   Shri Thirunavukkarasar S.U. 
 31.   Shri Vijay Kumar (alias) Vijay Vasanth 
    SECRETARIAT 
1.           Shri Jagdish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
2.      Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Secretary 
3.     Shri Narendra Kumar, Additional Director 
4.     Smt. Sreeja. V., Deputy Secretary 
5.      Shri Pratap Shenoy, Under Secretary 
6.      Shri Anil Kumar, Assistant Committee Officer 
________________________________________________________________________ 
*Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 24.01.2022 
&Vacancy caused due to demise of Dr. Mahendra Prasad on 27.12.2021.  
 (i) 
 

 
  INTRODUCTION 
  
  I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this 314th Report on 
the Action Taken by the Ministry of Heavy Industries  on the 
recommendations/observations of the Committee on Industry contained in the 
Committee’s 307th Report on “Impact of Covid-19 on PSUs and the initiatives taken by 
the PSUs under Atmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyaan”. 
 
2. The 307 th Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Industry was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 17 th March, 2021 and laid on the 
Table of the Lok Sabha on 17th March, 2021. 
 
3. The Ministry of Heavy Industries  furnished the Action Taken Notes on the 
recommendations contained in the Committee’s 307thReport, of the Committee on 
Industry on 25th November, 2021. 
  
4. The Committee in its meeting held on 3rd February, 2022 considered and adopted 
the Report. 
 
  
 
 
New Delhi 
3rd  February, 2022 
Magha 14, 1943 (Saka) 
 
Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

 
ACRONYMS 
 
 
ACR - Annual Compliance Report 
ACC - Advance Chemistry Cell 
ARAI - Automotive Research  Association of India 
AUSC  - Advanced Ultra Supercritical 
B&R - Bridge & Roof Co. (I) Ltd. 
B2B - Business to Business 
BEL - Bharat Electricals Ltd. 
BHEL - Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited 
BPCL - Bharat Pumps & Compressors Ltd. 
BS-IV - Bharat Stage IV 
CAPEX - Capital Expenditure 
CCEA - Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
CEFCs - Common Engineering Facility Centres 
CII - Confederation of Indian Industry 
CMTI  - Central Manufacturing Technology Institute 
CNC - Computerised Numerical Control 
COC - Cost Optimization Cell 
COEs - Centres of Excellence 
COVID - Corona Virus Disease 
CPSE  - Central Public Sector Enterprises 
CSR - Corporate Social Responsibility 
DHI  - Department of Heavy Industry 
DICGC   - Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation 
DoPT - Department of Personnel and Training 
DPE - Department of Public Enterprise 
DPIIT  - Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade 
EDP - Electronic Data Processing 
EV - Electric Vehicle 
FDI  - Foreign Direct Investment 
FICCI   - Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry   
FY - Financial year 
GDP - Gross Domestic Product 
GoI - Government of India 
HSL - Hindustan Salts Ltd. 
ICAT  - International Centre for Automotive Technology 
IEEMA - Indian Electrical and Electronics Manufacturers  Association 
IGCAR - Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research 
IISc - Indian Institute of Science 
IIT - Indian Institute of Technology 
IMC   - Institute Management Committee 
LLP - Limited Liability Partnership 
 
 
 
(iii) 
  

 
 
 
MHI - Ministry of Heavy Industries 
MOU  - Memorandum of Understanding 
MSE  - Micro and Small Enterprises 
MSME - Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise 
NATS - National Apprenticeship Training Scheme 
NBFC - Non-Banking Financial Company 
NBT  - Net Before Taxes 
NIP - National Infrastructure Pipeline 
NRF - National Research Foundation 
NSTI - National Skill Training Institutes 
NTPC - National Thermal Power Corporation 
OEM - Original Equipment Manufacturers 
PDC  - Project Development Cell 
PHDCCI      - PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry 
PLI   - Production-Linked Incentive 
PPP - Public Procurement Policy 
PSU  - Public Sector Undertaking 
R&D - Research and Development 
REIL  - Rajasthan Electronics & Instruments Ltd. 
RMDP - Revival & Mill Development Plan 
SC/ST - Schedule Caste/Schedule Tribe 
SIL - Scooters India Ltd 
TDP   - Technology Demonstration Plant 
VDP  - Vendor Development Programmes 
YoY - Year on Year 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

 1 
REPORT 
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the 
Ministry of Heavy Industries on the recommendations contained in the Committee‟s 
Three Hundred and Seventh  Report on Impact of Covid -19 on PSUs and the 
initiatives taken by  the PSUs under Atmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyaan  pertaining to 
Ministry of Heavy Industries. 
 
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Heavy Industries in 
respect of the recommendations /observations contained in the 307th Report. These hav e 
been categorized as follows: 
 
Chapter-I    The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the                     
Ministry. 
   
Para: 10, 35.14, 41.10, 43.10, 56, 58.1.2, 58.2.2, 58.4.2, 58.4.3, 61, 62  
and 63 (Total 12) 
 
Chapter-II-  The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire 
to  pursue further in view of the Ministry‟s replies. 
   
Para: 12, 29, 35.13, 41.11, 42.8, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 58.5.2 and 64 
 (Total 12)  
 
Chapter-III-    The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has  
  not accepted the replies of  the Ministry.  
 
Para: 32, 33, 37.9, 37.10, 37.11, 37.12 and 57    (Total 07) 
 
Chapter-IV-  The  recommendations/observations  in respect  of   which   the   final 
replies of the Ministry are still awaited.  
  
Para:  44.6, 46.8,  58.3.2 and 65  (Total 04) 
 
3. The details of the Action Taken Replies of the Ministry and further 
recommendations/observations of the Committee thereon wherever found necessary are 
given in the succeeding pages.  
 
 

 2 
CHAPTER – I 
 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.  The Committee takes note of the data furnished by DPE regarding production by 
CPSEs and recognizes the severity of operational disruptions i n CPSEs due to complete 
lockdown. The Committee, therefore, is of the opinion that a detailed study needs to be 
conducted to comprehend at micro -level; the actual impact of COVID -19 Pandemic and 
consequent lockdowns on the performance of the CPSEs so that necessary timely 
intervention by the Government can be made to mitigate the economic fallout.  
(Para 10) 
 Action Taken Replies 
 The Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) has informed that they collect 
information on performance  relating to all the CPSEs a nnually and brings out  a 
comprehensive Public Enterprises Survey which is laid on the table of  both the House of 
the Parliament. The recommendation of the Hon‟ble Committee would be duly 
considered while preparing the Public Enterprises Survey for the year  2020-21 to include 
a chapter on impact of COVID -19 pandemic and consequent lockdowns on the 
performance of CPSEs. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.  The Committee notes that BHEL in collaboration with NTPC & IGCAR, with 
funding support from DHI is developing  Advanced Ultra Super Critical Technology for 
thermal power generation, which is an indigenous technology being developed for the 
first time in India. Since the R&D phase of the said project is in the final stages, as 
informed by DHI, the Committee is of t he view that initiatives may be taken for exploring 
the domestic power market using the new technology to supplement the Make in India 
initiative. 
(Para 35.14) 
Action Taken Replies 
All the envisaged seven (07) major technical milestones pertaining to the “ R&D 
Project for Development of Advanced Ultra Super -critical (AUSC) Technology for 
Thermal Power Plants” (Phase-1) were completed / achieved by December 2020, and the 
financial closure of R&D Phase-1 was accomplished in March 2021. 
  The next intended footstep, i.e. Phase-2, involves setting up of a 1x800 MW coal -
fired AUSC technology demonstration plant (TDP) under the aegis of Ministry of Power 
(MoP). In this regard, NTPC Ltd. and BHEL have signed a MoU (Memorandum of 
Understanding) in July 2019 for forma tion of Joint Venture (JV) company for setting up 

 3 
of 1x800 MW AUSC TDP at Sipat site of NTPC Ltd. The approval for Phase -2, which 
encompasses financial support from Government of India, is under purview of NTPC 
Ltd. and Ministry of Power. The technical spe cifications of the TDP are under process of 
finalisation. Further steps shall be taken after the successful implementation of the AUSC 
technology in the TDP. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.  The Committee notes that 40% of the component required for HMT Machines viz. 
CNC Controllers & Drivers, Spindle Bearings, Linear Motion Guides etc were imported. 
However, disruptions in import due to lockdowns and closure of ports have 
adversely affected the productions. Efforts have been made by HMT to provide technical  
support to Domestic Manufactures and utilize its infrastructure facilities for production 
of import substitutions. The Committee observes that the turnover and profit/loss for the 
2nd quarter have been poorer than that of 1st quarter of the current FY 202 0-21. The 
Committee recommends that new avenues may be explored for alternate manufacturing 
hubs for import substitution and technology transfer from other countries to meet the 
requirements of HMT so that the production process is back on track. 
(Para 41.10) 
Action Taken Replies 
HMT Limited has been looking for alternate sources and is encouraging domestic 
manufactures to take up manufacturing of the items which were hitherto imported. With 
the easing of disruptions due to lockdown and opening of ports, th e production process 
has been on track in the third and fourth quarters of financial year 2020-21. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.         The Committee recommends that DHI should make concerted efforts to uplift the 
company from its dependency on Chinese r aw materials and co -ordinate with concerned 
Indian stakeholders, who would be able to provide the Company with the requisite raw -
materials, so as to facilitate the Company to realise the vision of an ‘Atmanirbhar 
Bharat’. 
     (Para 43.10) 
Action Taken Replies 
REIL has partially arranged few items such as solar cell from other sources which 
were procured from China. However, continuous efforts are being made for procurement 
of other components/items such as semiconductors, thermal printer, LCD etc.  from 
indigenous sources /  other countries, which may result into positive output in terms of 
having independency from Chinese market and the initiatives taken by the Company will 
provide impetus in achieving its goal of „Atmanibhar Bharat‟. 
 

 4 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee observes that under the Public Procurement Policy (PPP), the 
MSEs are promoted to improve their market accessibility and competitiveness through 
increased participation in Government procurements and encouraging development of 
linkages between MSEs and PSEs. As per the mandate of the Public Procurement Policy 
for Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs) Order 2012, every Central Ministries/PSEs 
should set an annual target of minimum 25% procurement of goods & services from MSE 
Sector. Out of 25% annual procurement, a sub -target of 4% & 3% should be from MSEs 
owned by SC/ST and Women entrepreneurs, respectively. Keeping in view the 
extraordinary situation, the Committee is of the view that the Central Ministries and 
PSUs may procure more than  the prescribed limits laid down under the PPP for MSES 
Order 2012, so as to give further boost to the localized production. 
 (Para 56)   
Action Taken Replies 
Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises has informed that they have 
taken various initiativ es to improve the market accessibility and competitiveness of 
MSEs through increased participation in Government procurement and encouraging 
development of linkages between MSEs and CPSEs. In FY 2020 -21, 141 CPSEs had 
procured Rs.39,557.34 crore (31.69%) o f goods and services from MSEs (including 
SCs/STs), which is more than the mandated target 25%. Furthermore, the 
recommendation of the Committee has been forwarded to all the Ministries/Departments 
and also to CPSEs by DPE to take note of it for consideration and compliance. 
Recommendations rece ived from the Committee has been conveyed to CPSEs for 
compliance.  
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee takes note of the new initiative taken by DHI for constitution of 
Project Development Cell (PDC) for attracting investments and development of investible 
projects in India in coordination with various other Ministries/Departments and State 
Governments. The Committee desires that the details of the roadmap formulated by PDC 
for providing support to investors for investing in India in the automobile and auto 
components sector, capital goods sector etc. may be furnished for information of the 
Committee.  
(Para 58.1.2) 
Action Taken Replies 
Project Development Cell (PDC) was constituted and operationalized in  June 
2020 in this Ministry . Strategy to attract investments fall under the following 4 
categories: 
 

 5 
 One-to-one investor engagement: 
  MHI has been interacting with multiple individual investors in the automotive, 
auto components, electric mobility and capital  goods sectors. The purpose of these calls 
is to understand and facilitate the India investment plans of companies, through extension 
of support at the Central and State Government level. 
 Investment focused webinars: 
  In the post -COVID19 era, virtual inv estment-focused webinars are the primary 
means of reaching a wider investor audience. MHI has been participating in various 
industry consultations and investment promotion webinars, coordinated with the support 
of other entities including industry association. 
 Production Linked Incentive schemes: 
With an aim to Enhance India‟s Manufacturing Capabilities and Enhancing 
Exports – in automobile and automobile components sector, PLI Scheme for the 
automobile and automobile components sector has been notified in  September 2021.  
 
To enhance India‟s Manufacturing Capabilities and Enhancing Exports – for 
manufacture of Advance Chemistry Cell (ACC) in India, a Production -Linked Incentive 
(PLI) scheme for manufacture of Advance Chemistry Cell (ACC) in India is approve d by 
the Union Cabinet on  12th May, 2021  under Aatmanirbhar Bharat with a total outlay of 
Rs. 18,100 crores over a period of 5 years.  The Scheme has been notified on  9th June, 
2021. The PLI scheme for ACC battery envisages to incentivize large domestic and  
international players in establishing a competitive ACC battery set -up in the country. It 
represents one of the largest economic opportunities of the twenty -first century for 
several global growth sectors, such as consumer electronics, electric vehicles, and 
renewable energy. 
Regional Investment Dialogues: 
  MHI PDC has participated in multiple Regional Investment Dialogues, 
coordinated by DPIIT. These dialogues establish synergies and facilitate information 
exchange between internal stakeholders for investor promotion. 
An Empowered Group of Secretaries has been Constituted by DPIIT to provide 
support and facilitation to investors for investing in India and to boost growth in the key 
sectors of the economy. Project Development Cells (PDCs) within relevant 
Ministries/Departments of GoI have also been envisioned to ensure a faster mechanism to 
facilitate investments through integrated efforts by Central ministries and the State. In 
furtherance of above, MHI has constituted a PDC  with the  Joint Secretary (Auto)  as 
Nodal Officer with following focus areas of PDC has been mentioned:         
 

 6 
       (i) Automobile and Auto Components         
      (ii) Electric Mobility         
      (iii) Capital goods      
Accordingly, major State Governments have been requested to provide the details 
of Industrial Ecosystems in general and particularly the Auto and Capital Goods Sector 
ecosystem in their respective States.  
To seek and promote investments in this sector, information relating to the following was 
requested: 
i. the State's Industrial policy. 
ii. details of the promotional package, if any, for the Capital Goods sector. 
iii. details of specialized industrial parks, if any, for this sector in the State. 
iv. details of existing CG Industrial clusters with examples of the specialty 
machines/parts produced. 
v. details of R&D centres, if any, in the State dedicated to Capital Goods. 
vi. information about major companies located in these clusters that have 
contribution to the global supply chain in the CG sector. 
vii. unique investment friendly initiatives launched by State Govt. 
viii. designate a nodal officer as a single point of contact for the PDC to interact 
with in respect of the Capital Goods Sector. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
7.  The Committee notes that the Capital Goods Sector is the backbone of the 
manufacturing sector as it produces machines required for industrial production. Due to 
technology gaps in Capital Goods being manufactured in India, this sector is importing 
high-end machines required for manufacturing. The Committee is of the view that there is 
an urgent need to address the gaps in technology needs, skill and infrastructure 
development for Capital Goods Sector. The Committee recommends that more webinars 
with prospective/potential investors be organized in collaboration with Indian Mi ssions 
abroad to promote industrial investments for the development of high -end technology, 
skill and infrastructure. The Committee is hopeful that DHI would work to make India 
investment-ready and investor friendly. The Committee also suggests that DHI ma y 
prepare a list of potential clusters, potential sectors and potential investments with 
several state governments, so as to facilitate the grounding of investments and creation of 
investible projects. 
(Para 58.2.2) 
Action Taken Replies 
In order to address  the skill  gaps and  infrastructure development and 
technology needs for the Capital Goods Sector, Phase I of the Capital Goods scheme was 
rolled out by the Department in 2014. Phase I of the scheme fostered partnerships 

 7 
between Academia and Industry for en gendering technology development with 
Government support. The outcomes of the Scheme have proved the efficacy of the 
strategies deployed for technology and industrial infrastructure 
development.  Nine Common Engineering Facility Centres (CEFCs) including fo ur 
Industry 4.0 SAMARTH centres, Eight Centres of Excellence (COEs) for Technology 
Development, A 500 acres world class Machine Tool Park in Tumakuru, Karnataka in 
partnership with the Government of Karnataka have been established under the scheme. 
25 new technologies in the field of machine tools, textile machinery, earth moving 
machinery, nano and sensor technologies, are being developed at national research 
institutes of eminence such as IITs, IISc, CMTI, etc. and are undergoing 
commercialization. 
Further, six Web -based open manufacturing technology innovation platforms 
have been  developed by IIT Madras,  Central Manufacturing Technology Institute 
(CMTI), International Centre for Automotive Technology (iCAT), Automotive Research   
 Association of India(ARAI ), BHEL and HMT  under the phase I of the Capital Goods 
scheme. These Platforms will bring all India‟s technical resources and the concerned 
Industry on to one network to kick start and facilitate identification of technology 
problems faced by Industry and crowd source solutions for the same in a systematic 
manner. These platforms will identify technological solutions to the problems and 
challenges posed by the Industry. The identified technologies shall subsequently be 
developed with the help of the industr y and premier academic institutions in the existing 
Centres of Excellence (CoEs) established under Phase I and new  CoEs to be developed 
by the Department under Phase II of the Capital Goods scheme. 
The Ministry is also planning to promote skilling in Capit al Goods Sector 
by creation of skilling packages for skill levels 6 and above, in association with Skill 
Councils and imparting of skill training in the Samarth Udyog and Skill Centres 
developed under Phase -I of the Capital Goods Scheme and other identifie d institutions. 
The same would also be done for the technologies identified through the Technology and 
Innovation platforms in association with Skill Councils, CPSEs, Autonomous bodies. 
Embassy of India, Tokyo, the Ministry and the Government of Japan orga nized a 
webinar on Investment Opportunities in India in Capital Goods sector with 150 
prospective companies from India and Japan on June 24 2020.   The Secretary (Heavy 
Industry) and Hon‟ble Ambassador, Embassy of India, Tokyo co -chaired the said 
webinar. At the end of the webinar, one to one contacts session was held between Indian 
and Japanese participants.  State Governments also participated. B2B followed. Now 
individual one to one meetings are being held by the Department and the Mission with 
investors.  
This webinar generated a large number of leads besides awareness in the 
catchment area about opportunities in India. Positive long terms impact is expected.  The 
Ministry also plans to organize participate in similar webinars  in  collaboration  
with Indian Missions abroad to promote industrial investments  for the development of 
high-end technology skill and infrastructure.  
 

 8 
Recommendation/Observation 
8.  The Committee appreciates the efforts undertaken by the DHI regarding 
promotion of technological development and innovation and suggests that a master list of 
all the imported items used by CPSEs in assembly of their products should be prepared 
and shared with all the national research centres and educational institutions indulged in 
R&D activities, design  and scientific innovations. Further the Committee desires that 
such research institutions should be provided financial assistance to support R&D 
activities for creation of a healthy manufacturing ecosystem. India is importing high -end 
technology machines since the domestic industry does not presently have the 
technological capabilities to manufacture the same. The Committee is of the view that 
concerted efforts involving technology driven innovations have to be made to create an 
environment congenial for R&D and innovation for achieving the goal of self-reliance. 
(Para 58.4.2) 
 
Action Taken Replies  
As advised by the Committee, a master  list of all the imported 
items used by CPSEs in assembly of their products will be prepared. In order to address 
the technology needs for the Capital Goods Sector, Phase I of the Capital Goods scheme 
was rolled out by the Department in 2014. Phase I of the scheme, fostered partnerships 
between Academia and Industry for engendering technology development with 
Government suppor t. The outcomes of the Scheme have proved the efficacy of the 
strategies deployed for technology and industrial infrastructure 
development.  Nine Common Engineering Facility Centres (CEFCs) including four 
Industry 4.0 SAMARTH centres, Eight Centres of Excel lence (COEs) for Technology 
Development, a 500 acres world class Machine Tool Park in Tumakuru, Karnataka in 
partnership with the Government of Karnataka have been established under the scheme. 
25 new technologies in the field of machine tools, textile mac hinery, earth moving 
machinery, nano and sensor technologies, are being developed at national research 
institutes of eminence such as IITs, IISc, CMTI, etc. and are undergoing 
commercialization.  Alongside, six Web -based open manufacturing technology 
innovation platforms have been  developed by IIT Madras,  Central Manufacturing 
Technology Institute (CMTI), International Centre for Automotive Technology (iCAT), 
Automotive Research   Association of India(ARAI), BHEL and HMT  under the phase I 
of the Capital Goods scheme.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
9.  The Committee has been told that DHI is developing web -based open 
manufacturing Technology Innovation Platforms under the ongoing Capital Goods 
Scheme for enhancing India’s technological capabilities. The Committ ee hopes that this 
initiative would facilitate more start -ups and angel funding of innovations in India as 
well as development of mother manufacturing technologies indigenously through Grand 
Challengers on the Platform. The Committee recommends that the si x Technology 
Platforms which are presently under trial runs may be formally launched on priority to 

 9 
promote industrial investments. Further, the Committee recommends that DHI should 
take all out efforts to promote the development of Technical Platforms und er the Capital 
Goods Scheme in order to ensure their optimum utilization by experts including 
academia, technology students, manufacturing experts, etc.  
(Para 58.4.3) 
Action Taken Replies 
 
 Ministry has embarked on innovative path to engender R&D in manuf acturing by 
developing six Technology Innovation Platforms which shall be  accelerators for making 
India self -reliant in various fields of the Capital Goods Sector with focus on bridging 
technology gap. The Ministry has developed web based open manufacturin g technology 
innovation platforms under the ongoing Capital Goods Scheme. These platforms will 
help in bringing all India‟s technical resources and the concerned Industry on to one 
platform to kick start and facilitate identification of technology problems  faced by Indian 
Industry and crowd source solutions for the same in a systematic manner so as to 
facilitate start-ups and angel funding of India innovations. This includes the development 
of the key „mother‟ manufacturing technologies' indigenously throug h „Grand 
Challenges‟ on the Platforms to help achieve the vision of an  Aatmanirbhar Bharat and a 
globally competitive manufacturing sector in India. 
Six Technology Platforms have been developed by IIT Madras,  Central 
Manufacturing Technology Institute (CMT I), International Centre for Automotive 
Technology (iCAT), Automotive Research    Association of India (ARAI), BHEL and 
HMT. These platforms will focus on development of technologies for the globally 
competitive manufacturing in India.  
So far, the technolo gy and innovation platforms have developed a strong user 
base of about 40,000 users from industry, academia, R&D institutes, and retired industry 
experts. Around 23 grand challenges have been posted on these portals for seeking 
technological solutions. 58 webinars have been conducted in order to enhance the 
outreach of the initiative. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
10.  The Committee is of the view that CPSEs have a very pivotal role in giving a 
push to the growth of Indian economy and are regarded as one of the key generators of 
remunerative employment in the formal sector. Further, the Capital Expenditure has a 
high multiplier effect to increase the country’s GDP. The Committee recommends that 
the CPSEs should take extraordinary efforts at extraordinary time s to achieve targets of 
Capital Expenditure and to ensure that the capital outlay provided to them for the FY 
2020-21 is utilized properly within the targeted period. 
  (Para 61) 
 
 

 10 
Action Taken Replies 
As recommended by the Hon‟ble committee, DPE has been continuously 
monitoring and reviewing the Capital expenditure activities of the select CPSEs (having 
annual CAPEX target of more than Rs. 500 crore) during the FY 2020-21.  
For FY 2020-21, CPSEs under the CAPEX review have been able to achieve Rs. 
2,04,243 crores of CAPEX i.e. 92.73% of the planned targets. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee observes that from a measly Rs.24,738 crore in June 2020, the 
CAPEX achievement of CPSEs have risen to a whopping Rs.84,824 crore by September, 
2020. This is  a promising scenario. However, the Committee is of the opinion that it 
should be ensured that CPSEs are encouraged to maintain the pace of escalation in 
CAPEX. Any help/intervention needed by CPSEs on this front should be extended to 
them. DHI may strive to make concerted efforts on this front and impress upon the 
respective Administrative Ministries of other CPSEs, through DPE, to provide necessary 
hand-holding to any CPSE, who is in need of it, to keep up the achieved momentum of 
CAPEX. 
(Para 62) 
Action Taken Replies 
DPE has informed that they will continue to review the CAPEX performance of 
CPSEs on regular basis to escalate the CAPEX by CPSEs to achieve their planned 
targets. Further, the CAPEX has been prescribed as Parameter for CPSEs in the revised 
MoU Guidelines for the year 2021-22 and onwards. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
12.  The Committee notes the efforts being made by DHI as well as CPSEs under its 
administrative control to achieve the goal of Atmanirbhar Bharat in manufacturing 
sector by adopti ng various innovative measures for indigenous production/manufacture 
of items, including items which were imported earlier. However, the Committee is of the 
view that a lot more needs to be done to make India actually self reliant. Besides, 
indigenous capa bilities available for R&D, design, prototyping, manufacturing and 
testing in many of the CPSEs may be made available to all stakeholders for seamless co -
operation between the public and private sectors. In this direction, the Committee hopes 
that with the  public-private partnership and development of Technology Platforms, the 
vision of Atmanirbhar Bharat can become a reality. 
 (Para 63) 
 
 
 

 11 
Action Taken Replies 
Apart from the initiatives taken by this Ministry under the Phase -I of the Capital 
Goods Scheme including the development of the technology and innovation platforms as 
explained to the ATR of the Recommendation No. 29, MHI is preparing the proposal for 
the Phase -II of the Capital Goods Scheme which will, to a great extant, enhance the 
indigenous capabilities for R & D, design, prototyping and testing through cooperation 
with Public / private sector as well as the Industry - academic linkages. The Technology 
and Innovation Platforms will identify technological solutions to the problems and 
challenges pos ed by the Industry. The identified technologies shall subsequently be 
developed with the help of existing CoEs developed under Phase I and new CoEs to be 
set up by the Ministry under Phase II of the scheme, industry and premier academic 
institutions, CPSEs under MHI.  This will enable seamless co - operation between public 
and private sectors to fulfill vision of ATAMNIRBHAR BHARAT. 
The NATRIP centers are giving preference to the Indian vendors/ manufacturers 
and promoting the Make in India initiative. Moreo ver, centers facilities are supporting 
Automobile OEM‟s and suppliers to develop their product indigenously and trying to 
achieving the goal of Atmanirbhar Bharat. 

 12 
CHAPTER–II 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE FURTHER IN VIEW OF 
THE MINISTRY’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
13.  However, the Committee is of the concerted view that besides extending the 
instructions, the DPE, given its role as a policy maker for the CPSEs, should develop a 
mechanism for close  monitoring of the fact as to whether the instructions/guidelines are 
being followed in letter and spirit by the concerned CPSEs. This could be achieved by 
close co-ordination and working in tandem with respective Administrative Ministries of 
the CPSEs. 
                      (Para 12) 
Action Taken Replies 
DPE has informed that general policy guidelines applicable to CPSEs are being 
issued by them. However, the implementation of these guidelines lies with the concerned 
administrative Ministry/ Department and CPSE.  
In accordance with the recommendation of the 216 th report of the DRPSC, DPE 
since 2010 has been asking for Annual Compliance Report (ACR) from CPSEs about 
implementation of DPE policies and guidelines issued from time to time. Under this 
mechanism CPSEs submit annual compliance report within 30 days from the end of the 
preceding financial year to the concerned administrative Ministry. The administrative 
ministry/department then consolidate the ACR for all CPSEs under its administrative 
control and forward it to DPE by 30th June every year. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
14.  The Committee appreciates the stimulus package announced by the Central 
Government for the economic revival of the country during the Covid -19 Pandemic. 
However, it is observed that  the package is not enough to boost the economy when it is 
set for double digit contraction in the FY 2020 -21. Even the economists have projected 
that the economy will contract by 9.5% during the said period. Also the first stimulus 
package has been parsimonious as can be seen that even after lifting of lockdown across 
the country, demand continues to be elusive. It is high time for the Government to come 
out with a new stimulus package to strengthen the business needs of the economy. The 
Committee, therefore, is of the view that the Government should come out with a larger 
stimulus package to tide over the economic fallout of Covid-19 Pandemic. 
(Para 29) 
 
 

 13 
Action Taken Replies 
Department of Economic Affairs has informed that: 
1. In FY 2020 -21, Government of In dia announced Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan 
Yojana, valued at Rs. 2.76 lakh crores to save lives and livelihoods. The stimulus 
measures included, among others, in -kind (food; cooking gas) and cash transfers 
to vulnerable sections; insurance coverage for workers in the healthcare sector; in-
kind and cash transfer relief measures for households and employment provision 
measures for migrant workers under Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Rojgar 
Abhiyaan, increased allocation under MGNREGS, credit guarantee and equity 
infusion-based relief measures for MSMEs and NBFCs and regulatory and 
compliance measures, amongst others.  
2. Government in May 2020 announced AtmaNirbhar Bharat Packages (ANB) 1.0, 
followed by ANB 2.0 in October and ANB 3.0 in November 2020 to combat the 
impact of the COVID -19 pandemic and to revive economic growth. Total 
financial impact of all AtmaNirbhar Bharat packages (ANB 1.0, 2.0 and 3.0) 
including measures taken by RBI was estimated to about Rs. 27.1 lakh crores 
which amounts to more than 13 percent of GDP. Structural reforms were also 
announced as part of the AatmaNirbhar Bharat Package which, inter alia, included 
deregulation of the agricultural sector, change in definition of MSMEs, new PSU 
policy, commercialization of coal mining, higher FDI limit s in defence and space 
sector, development of Industrial Land/ Land Bank and Industrial Information 
System, revamp of Viability Gap Funding scheme for social infrastructure, new 
power tariff policy and incentivizing States to undertake sector reforms. The 
implementation of the package is reviewed and monitored regularly. 
3. The Union Budget 2021 -22 has also announced a number of measures to support 
broad-based and inclusive economic development under six pillars listed as under: 
i. Health and Wellbeing 
Key measur es include a holistic approach to strengthen healthcare with focus on three 
areas- Preventive, Curative, and Wellbeing, Rs. 35,000 crore for COVID -19 vaccine, roll 
out of Made -in-India Pneumococcal Vaccine across the country, launching of a new 
centrally s ponsored scheme PM AtmaNirbhar Swasth Bharat Yojana in addition to 
National Health Mission, Mission Poshan 2.0, Universal Coverage of Water Supply, 
Urban Swachh Bharat Mission 2.0, Clean Air, Scrapping policy, etc. 
ii. Physical & Financial Capital, and Infrastructure 
Key measures include Production Linked Incentive scheme (PLI) in 13 Sectors, Mega 
Investment Textiles Parks (MITRA), 7 Textile Parks, expansion of National 
Infrastructure Pipeline (NIP) to 7,400 projects, creation of   institutional structures for 
Infrastructure Financing, National Monetization Pipeline, sharp increase in Capital 
Budget, economic corridors, flagship corridors/expressways, National Rail Plan for India 

 14 
(2030), future Dedicated Freight Corridor projects, strengthening of urban infrastru cture, 
launching of National Hydrogen Energy Mission 2021 -22, extension of Ujjwala Scheme 
to cover 1 crore more beneficiaries, development of a  world class Fin -Tech hub, 
increasing FDI limit in insurance sector from 49 percent to 74 percent, setting up of Asset 
Reconstruction Company Limited and Asset Management Company, recapitalization of 
PSBs easing compliance requirement of small companies, amendments to the Deposit 
Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation (DICGC) Act, 1961, decriminalization of 
the Limited Liability Partnership (LLP) Act, 2008, promoting start -ups and innovators by 
incentivizing the incorporation of one person companies, strengthening NCLT 
framework, new policy for Strategic Disinvestment, Government Financial Reforms such 
as universa l application of Treasury Single Account (TSA) System, rationalization of 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes, development of Multi-State Cooperatives, etc. 
iii. Inclusive Development for Aspirational India 
Key measures include ensuring MSP at minimum 1.5 times the cos t of production across 
all commodities, extension of SWAMITVA Scheme to all States/UTs, enhancing 
agricultural credit and infrastructure funds, investments to develop modern fishing 
harbours and fish landing centres, One Nation One Ration Card, Rs. 15,700 crore budget 
allocation to MSME Sector, etc. 
iv. Reinvigorating Human Capital 
Key measures include qualitative strengthening of 15000 schools under National 
Education Policy, setting up of 100 new Sainik Schools, Higher Education Commission 
of India, Central University in Leh, 750 Eklavya model residential schools in tribal areas, 
revamped Post Matric Scholarship Scheme for welfare of SCs, measures to enhance 
skilling like realignment of existing National Apprenticeship Training Scheme (NATS), 
etc. 
v. Innovation and R&D 
Key measures include Rs. 50,000 crore outlay under National Research Foundation 
(NRF), Rs. 1,500 crore for financial incentives to promote digital modes of payment, 
PSLV-CS51 launch, Gaganyaan mission activities, launching of Deep Ocean Mission, 
etc. 
vi. Minimum Government and Maximum Governance 
Key measures include reforms to rationalize the functioning of Tribunals, National 
Commission for Allied Healthcare Professionals Bill in Parliament to ensure transparent 
and efficient regulation of the 56 all ied healthcare professions, National Nursing and 
Midwifery Commission Bill to bring transparency, efficiency and governance reforms in 
the nursing profession, setting up of a Conciliation Mechanism for quick resolution of 
contractual disputes, Rs. 3768 cro res for India‟s first digital census, Rs.1000 crores for 
the welfare of tea workers especially women and their children in Assam and West 
Bengal, etc.  

 15 
4. Economic Recovery 
a. More than 6.5 crore first doses (4.8 per cent of current population), and 1 crore 
second doses (0.7 per cent of current population) have been administered – third 
highest after US and China. Comparing vaccinations with new cases, India 
vaccinated 41 persons for every 1 person getting infected in March. With 
vaccination opened for all indivi duals above 45 years, India achieved a milestone 
in its vaccination drive with the highest ever single day figure of more than 36.7 
lakh vaccination coverage recorded in 24 hours on 1st April 2021. 
b. Despite the surge in cases, the recovery in economy is res ilient with sustained 
improvement in majority of high frequency indicators. The agricultural sector 
remains the bright spot of Indian economy with foodgrains production touching 
303.3 million tonnes in 2020 -21 beating record production levels for the fifth  
consecutive year in a row. MGNREGS has acted as a strong pillar to insulate the 
rural economy by generating all time high employment of 383.8 crore person days 
during 2020-21, 44.7 per cent higher compared to previous year. 
c. Central Government‟s capital ex penditure sharply turned around to grow at 104.4 
per cent during October 2020 to February 2021 (YoY), recovering from a decline 
of 11.6 per cent (YoY). As per information available with Comptroller and 
Auditor General (CAG), total capital expenditure of 25  States increased by 7.29 
per cent in Q3:2020-21 over the corresponding period of last year. Growth in real 
gross fixed capital formation of overall economy increased from a contraction of 
46.4 per cent in Q1:2020 -21 to growth of 2.6 per cent in Q3:2020 -21. The effect 
on overall economy of the country is reflected in increase in real GDP growth 
from a contraction of 24.4 per cent in Q1:2020 -21 to growth of 0.4 per cent in 
Q3:2020-21. 
d. Looking at sectoral developments, real estate sector signalled revival wit h growth 
in construction activity witnessing a healthy rebound to 6.2 per cent in Q3:2020 -
21 from the sharpest contraction of 49.4 per cent in Q1:2020 -21 and contraction 
of 7.2 per cent in Q2:2020 - 21. This is also manifested in steel consumption 
which clocked growth of 13.7 per cent in Q3 compared to ( -)51.3 per cent in Q1 
and ( -)7.3 per cent in Q2. Growth in production of infrastructure/construction 
goods increased to 5.0 per cent in Q3 compared to ( -)46.8 per cent in Q1 and       
(-)1.6 per cent in Q2. C ontraction in production of capital goods significantly 
eased to ( -)9.1 per cent in Q3 compared to ( -)64.8 per cent in Q1 and ( -)12.8 in 
Q2. Similarly, contraction in imports of engineering goods also eased to ( -)11.9 
per cent in Q3 compared to (-) 46.3 per cent in Q1 and (-) 32.7 per cent in Q2. 
e. India‟s PMI Manufacturing Index of 55.4 in March indicated some loss of 
momentum compared to February. However, manufacturing sector conditions 
continue to improve sharply, outpacing the long -run series average wit h firms 
scaling up production and witnessing upturn in sales.  
f. Further strengthening in demand conditions could be clearly seen in auto sales 
and power consumption. Monthly GST collections attained all -time record levels 
since its inception during March 20 21. The growth momentum in rail freight 

 16 
traffic remains upbeat, port cargo traffic grows YoY, and domestic aviation picks 
up further. The digital payment upsurge too continues unabatedly, powered by 
resumption of economic activity, financial inclusion thro ugh Aadhar enabled 
Payment Systems, and behavioural shift to digital payments.  
g. Preliminary estimates of trade data for March propagates the strong recovery in 
demand despite several challenges. Exports climbed up to highest ever monthly 
level at USD 34 bi llion by registering a growth of 58.2 per cent and imports also 
expanded by 52.9 per cent. FY 2020 -21 witnessed a record FPI inflow of USD 
36.2 billion, the highest in a decade after 2014-15. 
h. Systemic liquidity continued to remain accommodative with daily net liquidity 
absorption under the liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) averaging ₹6.4 lakh crore 
in February and ₹5.5 lakh crore in March 2021. Money supply (M3) growth 
remained steady at 12.6 per cent as on March 19, 2021. Sectoral credit growth 
showed encouraging signs in both December 2020 and January 2021. 
i. The fiscal positi on of the Central Government has witnessed improvement in the 
recent months due to a revival in the economic activities. During April 2020 to 
February 2021, the Centre‟s fiscal deficit stood at ₹14.05 lakh crore, which is 76 
per cent of RE 2020 -21. Net Tax  Revenue of the Central Government for FY 
2020-21 is set to overshoot the RE despite 41 per cent higher income tax refunds 
this year. To share the revenue buoyancy seen in Q4 2020-21 and in the true spirit 
of fiscal federalism, an amount of ₹45,000 crore h as been released as additional 
devolution to States in FY 2020 -21, an increase of 8.2 per cent over RE. Central 
Government has raised ₹13.7 lakh crore as gross market borrowings during FY 
2020-21 at a weighted average borrowing cost of 5.79 per cent - the lowest in 17 
years. Central Government‟s capital expenditure sharply turned around to grow at 
104.4 per cent during October 2020 to February 2021 (YoY), recovering from a 
decline of 11.6 per cent in the first half of 2020-21(YoY). 
Recommendation/Observation 
15.  The Committee notes that BHEL has taken innovative measures to combat Covid-
19 and developed/manufactured products such as (i) BHEL  Mister (equipment for mass 
sanitization), (ii) Electrostatic Disinfection Machine for disinfection/sanitization of 
offices, hospitals etc., (iii) Full Body Sanitization Chamber etc. The Committee is of the 
view that BHEL should also take initiatives to cut its fixed costs and diversify beyond 
power into areas like defence, transportation, aerospace, e -mobility batteries, oil & gas 
etc. for revenue generation post-Covid-19 Pandemic to achieve the vision of Atmanirbhar 
Bharat and become a Global engineering organisation. 
(Para 35.13) 
Action Taken Replies 
Optimization of costs in an ongoing and continuous process in BHEL. Va rious 
efforts undertaken towards optimization / rationalization of fixed costs in the recent past 
include in the areas of: 

 17 
 Contracting of outsourced services, payment to agencies providing security 
services. 
 Repairs and maintenance. 
 Office expenses. 
 Rent payment. 
 Insurance coverage, bank charges. 
 Equipment / machinery hire charges, electronic data processing (EDP), software 
and lease line services. 
 Power & fuel. 
In addition, Cost Optimization Cell (COC) has been formed at Corporate level to 
inter-alia drive cost reduction initiatives in the company. 
BHEL is actively pursuing for diversification of its revenue, and in this direction 
has formed focused business groups to strengthen diversification efforts and harness 
related opportunities viz. „Hydro Business Group‟, Nuclear Business Group‟, 
Transportation Business & Systems Group‟, „Defence & Aerospace Business Group‟, 
„Energy Storage Solutions Group‟ including e -Mobility, „Make in India Business 
Development Group‟, „NTPC Business Group‟, and „Solar Business D ivision‟. 
Furthermore, addressing of market opportunities in the Oil & gas segment and new 
business areas covering Rail track electrification, Water business, Medical Oxygen Plant 
etc. is being handled under the Industry Sector of the company. In 2020 -21, BHEL has 
forayed into Downstream Oil & Gas business as part of diversification initiatives. In 
addition, the company is making endeavors in expanding its offerings in the power sector 
business as well. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
16.  However, the Committ ee is given to understand that the impact of the Covid -19 
was evidentially felt by the HMT Machines Tools Limited as it could not find domestic 
manufacturers for 40% imported content in HMT machines, viz. CNC Controllers and 
Drives, Spindle Bearings, Linea r Motion Guides etc. The Committee hopes that with the 
easing of lockdowns in a graded manner, the Company is able to locate domestic 
manufacturers for its contents and accordingly desires that DHI may extend a helping 
hand in facilitating the Company to achieve this goal. 
(Para 41.11) 
Action Taken Replies 
This Ministry is taking several steps to reduce import content in the machine tool 
sector including identifying technology gaps, encouraging and facilitating domestic 
sector to acquire / develop requisite  technologies, and setting up technology and 
innovation platforms. 
 
 

 18 
Recommendation/Observation  
17.  The Committee notes that BPCL has imposed a ban on Capital Expenditure to 
manage its cash crunch caused due to the Covid -19 Pandemic lockdowns. However, with 
the opening of lockdown, economic activities have resumed in a large scale improving 
the earnings. The Committee is of the view that as the Capital Expenditure is a critical 
driver for economic growth and employment generation; BPCL should strive to me et its 
targeted Capital Expenditure set for the FY 2020-21. 
(Para 42.8) 
 Action Taken Replies 
The Union Cabinet has approved the closure of BPCL on 09.12.2020. 
Accordingly, the operations of the company have been closed and all the employees have 
been given VRS. The other formalities like settlement of other dues, delisting of shares, 
transfer of land, etc. is under progress. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
18.  The Committee notes the adverse impact of Covid -19 Pandemic on CPSEs and 
the huge losses suffered by almost all the aforesaid CPSEs in the 1st and 2nd quarter of 
the FY 2020 -2021 vis-a-vis FY 2019 -20. The Committee hopes that the CPSEs would be 
able to overcome the Pandemic situation through various initiatives proposed to be 
undertaken by the Governme nt to mitigate the adverse impact and improve their 
profitability in the remaining quarters of FY 2020-21. 
(Para 51) 
Action Taken Replies 
Financial Year 2020 -21 was a difficult year marred by the outbreak of Covid -19 
pandemic in the country, which also sev erely impacted the overall operation of the 
CPSEs under this Ministry. These CPSEs made all efforts in the 3 rd and 4th quarter of FY 
2020-21 to overcome associated disruptions due to Covid 19 pandemic. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
19.  Despite the protective measures taken, the Covid -19 pandemic wrought negative 
impact on the functioning of the Company like slowing down of production and delaying 
of execution of projects in hand. In fact the Committee notes with concern that 
underground mining in the HSL -Mandi Region has come to a grinding halt and has not 
commenced so far. The Committee, therefore, desires that DHI should look into this 
matter in right earnest and take all measures to hand hold the company, which is already 
a loss making CPSE, so that it is enabled to start operations imminently. 
 
(Para 52) 

 19 
Action Taken Replies 
The mining operations at Mandi, Himachal Pradesh have started and efforts are 
being made to achieve optimum productivity in the year 2021-22. 
Recommendation/Observation  
20.  Under Section 135 of the Companies Act, 2013, Corporate Social Responsibility 
(CSR) activities have been made mandatory for all profit making CPSEs to allocate 2% 
of their average net profits (NBT) of the three preceding years. Further as per the 
guidelines issued by the DPE vide their OM dated 10th December, 2018, the CPSEs are 
to utilise their CSR Funds in a focused manner towards national priorities by adopting a 
theme based approach each year. The Committee notes that most of the contributions to 
the PM CARES F und by the CPSEs have been made from their CSR Funds diverting a 
large share that would have otherwise been utilized towards theme based CSR activities 
in their local areas. The Committee recommends that efforts should be made to ensure 
that the CPSEs util ize their CSR Funds particularly during the Covid -19 Pandemic fully 
to meet the targets set for the theme based activities in their respective areas. 
(Para 53) 
Action Taken Replies 
DPE has already issued the instruction that for the financial year 2021 -22 the 
common theme is “Health & Nutrition, with special focus on COVID related measures 
including setting up makeshift hospitals and temporary COVID Care Facilities”.   During 
the year DPE will continue to sensitize and follow up with the CPSEs for undertakin g 
CSR activities in accordance with the above mentioned theme. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
21.  The Committee is of the view that the CPSEs may establish specialized training 
institutes of their own or as a group, catering to their needs and requirements,  so as to 
pull in and retain the technologically skilled brains churned out by the national as well 
as global educational institutions. Further, multi -skilling and cross -training of selective 
employees across multiple machineries would mitigate risks and h elp in managing 
quality control. Creating conducive environment and providing opportunities would 
surely help reverse brain drain. 
(Para 54) 
Action Taken Replies 
  Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship has informed that while 
bringing out the specialized training institute framework dedicated to the  needs and 
requirement of Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs), the necessary convergence 
with the existing Skill Training institutions such as National Skill Training Institutes 
(NSTI) & Indust rial Training Institutes (ITIs) may be explored. Already many CPSEs 

 20 
have adopted many ITIs  through Institute Management Committee (IMC) & CSR 
activities. The same may be taken up by more CPSEs., who may adopt NSTI/ ITIs and 
have students trained as per the ir requirement.  This will bring a two -fold benefit of 
upgrading the existing ecosystem with relevant CPSEs connect and meeting the 
requirement of CPSEs for selective employees across multiple machineries. This will 
create employment opportunities, fill the  skill gap and savings on account of the Capital 
infrastructure for new institutions. 
Further, CPSEs may be encouraged to take up more Apprentices (to the upper 
limit permitted under Apprenticeship norms) to build a pool of practically trained 
technical workforce. 
Instructions have been isued to all CPSE's under the ministry, accordingly and 
give an Action taken report thereon. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
22.  It is observed that the strength of CPSEs is their manpower and the main asset of 
the private sector is their investment capability in R&D. The Committee, therefore, is of 
the view that initiatives may be taken so that the public and private sectors come together 
in a bid to complement each other in the national project of building a sustainably self -
reliant India. 
(Para 55) 
Action Taken Replies 
Both the government and private sector companies have generally been 
contributing to the cause of building a self -reliant India, and as such supplement and 
complement efforts of each other through transactions pertaining to projects, systems, 
goods and services. 
In pursuance of the vision of making India self -reliant besides for giving further 
thrust to the “Make -in-India” initiative, BHEL had floated an open ended Expression of 
Interest (EOI) dated 13.11.2020, which was also given wide publicity, for sourcing of 
materials / items / components for which local suppliers are needed by the Company.  
In addition, BHEL conducted more than ten online workshops – BHEL 
SAMVAAD – during December 2020 to February 2021, wit h the support of Ministry of 
Heavy Industries (M/o HI), Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade 
(DPIIT) and Ministry of MSME. These workshops with the domestic industry included 
the MSE divisions of various trade associations like CII, FICC I, IEEMA, PHDCCI, and 
the MSME Technology Institutes etc. Deliberations were done with the domestic industry 
by the technical teams of various Units of BHEL, soliciting participation from MSME 
vendors. 
 
 

 21 
Recommendation/Observation 
23. The Committee is of t he opinion that the proposal of DHI to grant Production 
Linked Incentives (PLI) to the automotive and automotive components sectors is a 
welcome step in order to boost investment, production, sales and export of automobiles 
and its components making Indian automotive industry more competitive and self-reliant. 
The Committee may be updated about the progress made in this regard. 
(Para 58.5.2) 
Action Taken Replies 
 The Production Linked Incentives (PLI) Scheme i n automotive and automotive 
components sectors has been notified in September, 2021. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
24. Further, the Committee desires that DHI may devise suitable policy interventions 
in collaboration with other concerned Ministries to proactively render a stiff competition 
by the indigeno us manufacturers, to lowly priced items such as glossy paper that are 
being imported from abroad to carry forward the vision of ‘Atmanirbhar Bharat.’ 
(Para 64) 
Action Taken Replies 
To strengthen the  indigenous manufacturers of the Capital  Goods Sector by 
addressing the skill gaps, infrastructure development and technology needs, Phase I of the 
Capital Goods scheme was rolled out by the Ministry in 2014. Phase I of the scheme 
fostered partnerships between Academia and Industry for engendering technology 
development with Government support. The outcomes of the Scheme have proved the 
efficacy of the strategies deployed for technology and industrial infrastructure 
development.  Nine Common Engineering Facility Centres  (CEFCs) including four 
Industry 4.0 SAMARTH centres, Eight Centres of Excellence (COEs) for Technology 
Development, a 500 acres world class Machine Tool Park in Tumakuru, Karnataka in 
partnership with the Government of Karnataka have been established under the scheme. 
25 new technologies in the fiel d of machine tools, textile machinery, earth moving 
machinery, nano and sensor technologies, are being developed at national research 
institutes of eminence such as IITs, IISc, CMTI, etc. and are undergoing 
commercialization.     
In addition, six Web-based open manufacturing technology innovation platforms 
have also been  developed by IIT Madras,  Central Manufacturing Technology Institute 
(CMTI), International Centre for Automotive Technology (iCAT), Automotive Research   
 Association of India(ARAI), BHEL and HMT to bring all India‟s technical resources and 
the concerned Industry on to one  network to kick start and facilitate identification of 
technology problems faced by Industry and crowd source solutions for the same in a 
systematic manner. These platforms will identify technological solutions to the problems 
and challenges posed by the Industry. 

 22 
To further strengthen indigenous manufacturers of the Capital  Goods Sectors, the 
scheme for Enhancement of competitiveness in the Indian Capital Goods Sector phase -II 
is being framed by this Ministry and after the in principle approval of the scheme, EFC 
note has been prepared and approved by Hon‟ble Minister (HI).   The draft EFC note has 
been circulated for seeking comments on Ministry of Finance, NITI Aayog and o ther 
concerned Ministries/Departments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 23 
CHAPTER–III 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED THE  REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
25. The Committee recommends tha t the matter may be taken up with the concerned 
Ministries in right earnest and see to it that the pending dues to the MSMEs are released 
expeditiously. The Committee also desires to be updated of the action taken in this 
regard. 
 (Para 32) 
Action Taken Replies 
 Status of outstanding dues related to Bridge & Roof Co. Ltd. (I) Ltd., as reported, 
towards MSMEs as on 21.09.2021 as per MSME Samadhaan Portal Portal is hereunder: 
S. No. Items Rs. (Cr.) Nos. 
I Total Pending (Application+Cases) 35.99 56 
II Details of (I)     
a) Payment made but yet to be 
acknowledged by vendor on portal 
6.91 19 
b) Disputed claims 29.08 37 
c) Total (II) 35.99 56 
III Undisputed Outstanding dues to 
MSMEs as on 21.09.2021 
NIL NIL 
D/o Telecommunications has informed the following: 
S.No.              Name of CPSE Reply 
1 Telecommunications Consultants 
India Ltd. (TCIL) No pending payments. Payments are 
being released as per the terms of P.O. 
/ agreement. 2 TCIL Bina Toll Road Ltd. 
3 TCIL Lakhnadone Toll Road Ltd. 
4 ITI Ltd. 
As against of MSME vendors due 
amount of Rs.116.48 cr., ITI has 
released the payment of Rs.82.41 cr. to 
various MSME vendors during the 
year 2020 -21. Balance amount to be 
paid is Rs.34.07 cr. Out of this amount, 
Rs.19.19 cr. is due for payment and 
this is being looked into. 
Rs.14.88 cr. is not due for payment to 
the vendors, as the payment term with 
the vendors is on back to back basis. 
This amount will be paid to the 
vendors on receipt of the same from 
the customers. 

 24 
 The status in respect of 3 CPSE's Viz. BSNL, BBNL and MTNL will be informed in due 
course.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
The Committee recommends that MHI should play an active role in sett ling 
the disputed claims between the PSUs and MSME s with regard to outstanding dues 
so that the paym ent can be released to MSMEs for the goods and services received 
from them , without any further delay.  The Committee  also recommends that the  
MHI should  apprise the Committee about the status of CPSEs Viz. BSNL, BBNL 
and MTNL. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
26. The Committee also recommends that the DHI should monitor the CPSEs under 
its administrative control to ensure timely payment to MSMEs i.e., within 45 days from 
the date of acceptance of goods and services from them. 
 (Para 33) 
Action Taken Replies 
The matter related to timely payment to MSMEs is given utmost priority and necessary 
instructions are issued time to time by this Ministry to all its CPSEs / ABs in this regard. 
Furthermore, it is also reviewed in  weekly staff meeting of this Ministry. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
The Committee reiterate its recommendation that necessary 
guidelines/direction should be issued by Ministry to CPSEs to ensure timely 
payment to MSMEs . The Committee further recommends that details of delayed 
payments (bey ond 45 days) by CPSEs under MHI  may be shared with the 
Committee and should also be uploaded on the respective CPSE’s portals/websites 
with regular updation of the same. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
27. The Committee notes that due to sudden imposition of nationwide lockdown 
before the end of March, 2020, nearly 200 BS -IV variant vehicles with SIL could not be 
sold out resulting in blockage of inventory worth Rs.6.0 crores. The Committee 
recommends that, keeping in view the Pandemic induced unexpected lockd owns, DHI in 
coordination with the Ministry concerned, may work out legally tenable suitable 
measures to sell the buffer stock of unsold 200 BS-IV vehicles left with SIL. 
 
 (Para 37.9) 

 25 
Action Taken Replies 
The Union Cabinet has approved the closure of SIL on 20.01.2021. Accordingly, 
the operations of the company have been closed and all the employees have been given 
VRS. The other formalities like settlement of other dues, delisting of shares, disposal of 
assets, transfer of land, etc. is under progress. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
28. The Committee notes that only 75% salary has been paid by SIL to its employees 
since April, 2020. The Committee hopes that after the lifting of the lockdown, the 
payment of full salary to its employees would have been restored . The Committee 
recommends that as the lockdown has been eased almost completely throughout the 
country, DHI should ensure payment of full salary to the employees of CPSEs and 
apprise the Committee. 
(Para 37.10) 
Action Taken Replies 
The Union Cabinet has a pproved the closure of SIL on 20.01.2021. Accordingly, 
the operations of the company have been closed and all the employees have been given 
VRS. The other formalities like settlement of other dues, delisting of shares, disposal of 
assets, transfer of land, etc. is under progress. Salaries are paid by CPSEs from their own 
resources as per their earnings. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
29. The Committee would like to be apprised of the status of ‘Type Approval’ of the 
new model of Electric Vehicle from ICAT and also as to whether the E -Rickshaw variant 
has been submitted to ICAT for obtaining ‘Type Approval’. 
 (Para 37.11) 
Action Taken Replies 
The Union Cabinet has approved the closure of SIL on 20.01.2021. Accordingly, 
the operations of the company have been clo sed and all the employees have been given 
VRS. The other formalities like settlement of other dues, delisting of shares, disposal of 
assets, transfer of land, etc. is under progress. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
30. The Committee notes the efforts being mad e by SIL to promote e -mobility mission 
of Government of India with all components sourced from Indian suppliers thereby 
fulfilling the vision of Atmanirbhar Bharat. Since BEL, with which SIL has tied up, is in 
advanced stage of developing/manufacturing all  critical equipments/components, 
including Lithium Ion battery packs required for electrical vehicles and supplying the 

 26 
same to SIL shortly, the Committee may be apprised about the progress made in this 
regard. 
 (Para 37.12) 
Action Taken Replies 
The Union Cabinet has approved the closure of SIL on 20.01.2021. Accordingly, 
the operations of the company have been closed and all the employees have been given 
VRS. The other formalities like settlement of other dues, delisting of shares, disposal of 
assets, transfer of land, etc. is under progress. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation (Para 37.9, 37.10, 37.11 and 37.12) 
 
 The Committee expresses concern over the closure of one more CPSE  i.e. 
SIL under MHI .  The Committee desires that MHI periodically review the 
performance of CPSEs under their administrative control and take all preventive 
measures to arrest the early signs of weakness in CPSEs and improve their financial 
performance. The Committee  also impresses upon the Ministry to expedite 
settlement of dues of employees at the earliest.  The Committee would also like to be 
apprised of the fate of : (i) ‘Type Approval’ of new model of Electric Vehicl e from 
ICAT and also whether the E-Rickshaw variant has been submitted to ICAT for 
obtaining ‘Type Approval’  and (i i) ti e up of SIL with BEL for 
developing/manufacturing all critical equipments/components etc. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
31. The Committee recommends that regular Vendor Development Programmes 
should be conducted by the CPSEs to give wide publicity on th e Public Procurement 
Policy so that MSEs are provided with business opportunities to expand their market 
base. The Committee desires that DHI may ensure conduct of such VDP regularly by the 
CPSEs under their administrative control. 
(Para 57) 
Action Taken Replies 
Vendor Development Programmes (VDP) are being organized regularly by the 
CPSEs in their premises which serves as a platform for identification of needs and for 
mutual benefits. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
The Committee appreciates the efforts  made by MHI to organise regular 
Vendor Development Programme (VDP) for MSEs. The Committee desires that the 
list of all such VDP organised by MHI in the last two years may be furnished to the 
Committee. The Committee would also like to know the outcome of  these VDPs on 
increasing the publicity of Public Procurement Policy and enhancing the business 
opportunities  for the MSEs. 

 27 
CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE  
FINAL REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
32. The Committee notes that in October, 2018 the Government had approved the 
Revival and Mill Development Plan (RMDP) of NEPA Ltd. which was slated to be 
completed in December, 2019 with a total financial package of Rs.469.41 crores. 
However, the RMDP missed its first deadline and, as intimated by DHI, was likely to be 
completed in September, 2020 as it has been designed to boost production and 
support/generate local employment. On completion of RMDP, NEPA is expected to 
produce 1,00,000 MT p. a. of Writing & Printing Paper and Newsprint paper which will 
help minimize imports and increase exports. Since the lockdown has been eased almost 
completely, the manpower and other facilities are available for carrying out RMDP 
works in full swing. DHI had apprised the Committee that a Monitoring Committee under 
the Chairmanship of AS&FA, DHI has been constituted to regularly review the progress 
of the implementation of the RMDP. The Committee, therefore, recommends that efforts 
should be made on a priorit y basis to complete the RMDP of NEPA expeditiously. A 
compliance report on this aspect may be furnished to the Committee. 
(Para 44.6) 
Action Taken Replies 
  The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA), on 3.10.2018, approved 
the proposal for providing  additional budgetary support of Rs.469.41 crores to NEPA 
Ltd. to meet the revised cost estimates of the RMDP, payment of pending salary/wage 
and statutory dues and for funding VRS of about 400 employees of NEPA Ltd. 
As directed by CCEA, a monitoring commi ttee under the chairmanship of 
AS&FA of this Ministry was constituted to periodically review the progress of the 
implementation of RMDP of NEPA Ltd. A technical committee comprising of the field 
experts from other CPSEs and CPPRI under this Ministry was al so constituted to assist 
the monitoring Committee. 
Till date, 21 meetings of the monitoring committee have been held and efforts are 
being made to complete the RMDP at the earliest despite impediments like delayed / 
insufficient supplies of the paper machi nes and rewinders etc. by foreign supplier who 
had gone into insolvency proceedings and countrywide lockdown due to Covid – 19 
pandemic which resulted into unavailability of sufficient skilled manpower and NEPA 
site to execute the project activities. 
 

 28 
Recommendation/Observation  
33.  The Committee notes the efforts taken by B&R to secure its employees by 
providing them with health insurance coverage and desires that the DHI may take 
necessary initiatives in this direction so that other CPSEs follow the sam e to cover major 
unexpected health care costs thereby protecting their staff against unforeseen health 
issues. 
(Para 46.8) 
Action Taken Replies  
The recommendation made by the Committee have been well taken. The 
feasibility of making other CPSEs to adopt s uch or similar health coverage scheme, will 
be explored. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
34. The Committee notes that the Phase -II proposal of the Scheme Enhancing the 
Global Competitiveness of Capital Goods Sector for development of advanced 
manufacturing tec hnologies is pending with the Ministry of Finance for approval. The 
Committee recommends that DHI may pursue the matter vigorously with the Ministry of 
Finance for approval of Phase -II proposal and apprise the Committee of the 
status/outcome. 
(Para 58.3.2) 
Action Taken Replies 
Ministry of Finance has granted the in principle approval to the concept note 
prepared of the Phase -II of the Scheme  for Enhancement of the  Competitiveness in the 
Indian Capital  Goods  Sector. Further, the proposal for the seeking t he approval of 
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) chaired by Secretary, Expenditure, is being 
prepared in consultation with the concerned stakeholders.  After obtaining the approval of 
the EFC, the approval of the Competent Authority would be solicited. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
35. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the status of the policy 
formulation by DPE with regard to the use of land of loss making CPSEs for other 
purposes such as setting up of units by other public/private entities, so as to 
retain/generate employment.                 (Para 65) 
Action Taken Replies 
DPE has informed that the Committee will be apprised once the revised guidelines 
on time bound closure of sick/loss making CPSEs and disposal of movable and 
immovable assets are finalized and approved by the competent authority. 
***** 