PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
                                                                                                                                      
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE 215 TH  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON  
DEMAND FOR GRANTS (2010-2011) 
 
PERTAINING TO 
 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
(DEPARTMENT OF HEAVY INDUSTRY)  
____________________________________________________________________________  
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 8th  MARCH, 2011) 
   (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 7 th  MARCH, 2011) 
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
MARCH, 2011 PHALGHUN, 1932 SAKA) 
 220  

 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA                       
 
                                                                                                                                      
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE 215 TH  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON  
DEMAND FOR GRANTS (2010-2011) 
 
PERTAINING TO 
 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
(DEPARTMENT OF HEAVY INDUSTRY)  
____________________________________________________________________________  
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 8th  MARCH, 2011) 
   (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 7 th  MARCH, 2011) 
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
MARCH, 2011 PHALGHUN, 1932 (SAKA) 
220 

 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………………………………..  ( i ) 
 
2. INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………………………     (ii) 
 
3. REPORT …………………………………………………………………………………    (iii) 
 
(i)  CHAPTER – I 
 Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the              
Ministry …………………………………………………………………………      1-8 
 
(ii)  CHAPTER–II 
  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
  view of the Government's replies………………………………………………… 9-10 
 
(iii)  CHAPTER–III 
   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has either not                        
accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its                
replies…………………………………………………… …………………... …11-13                                   
 
 
(iv)  CHAPTER – IV 
  Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry 
  have not been  received……………………………………………………………14-21 
 
4. Minutes…………………………………………………………………………………   …….  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Date of Constitution 31 st  August , 2010)  
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
   1.   Shri Tiruchi Siva                —                Chairman  
2.  Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy 
3.  Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4.  Shri Ashk Ali tak 
5.  Shri K.B. Shanappa 
6. Shri Natuji H. Thakor 
7.  Shri S.P. Singh Baghel 
8.  Shri K.V. Ramalingam 
9.  Shri  Nandamuri Harikrishna 
       10. Dr. Vijay Mallya  
 
LOK SABHA 
11.   Shri Suvendu Adhikari 
12.   Shri Badruddin Ajmal 
13.   Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
14.    Shri Bansagopal Chowdhury 
15.    Shri Sabbam Hari 
16.    Smt. Poonam Veljibhai Jat 
17.    Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
18.    Shri M. Krishnaswamy 
19.    Shri Pakauri Lal 
20.    Smt. Ingrid Mcleod 
21.    Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal 
22.    Shri Devendra Nagpal 
23.    Shri Gorakhnath Pandey 
24.   Shri Kishanbhai V. Patel 
25.   Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
26   Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
27   Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
28   Shri Raju Shetti  
29   Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware 
30   Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
31   Smt Putul Kumari 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary 
Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Director 
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Assistant Director 
 
 (i) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred 
and Twentieth Report on Action taken Notes furnishe d by the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of He avy Industry) on the 
recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hu ndred and Fifteenth Report on 
the Demands For Grants (2010-11) pertaining to Department of Heavy Industry. 
 
2.  I thank the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Pu blic Enterprises (Department of 
Heavy Industry) for furnishing the Action Taken Not es on the recommendations 
contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred and Fifteenth Report. 
 
3.  The Committee in its meeting held on the 3
rd  March, 2011 considered and adopted 
the report. 
 
 
 
 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA        
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
New Delhi 
3
rd  March, 2011  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 

REPORT 
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with  the Action Taken by the 
Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises  (Department of Heavy Industry) on 
the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Tw o hundred and Fifteenth Report 
on the Demands For Grants (2010-11)  pertaining to Department of Heavy Industry. 
 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Heavy Industries and 
Public Enterprises (Department of Heavy Industry) in respect of the recommendations 
contained in the Report. These have been categorized as follows: 
 
Chapter -I-  The recommendations/observations, which have bee n accepted by the 
Ministry. 
 
 The Committee is pleased to observe that the Minis try has accepted its 
recommendations as mentioned in the Chapter – I of the Report. 
 
Chapter -II -  The recommendation/observations which the Commit tee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies. 
 
 In respect of these recommendations the Committee is convinced with the logic 
and explanations advanced by the Ministry and there fore does not want to pursue them 
for the present. 
 
Chapter -III -  The recommendations/observations in respect of w hich the Committee has 
either not accepted replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its reply. 
 
 The Committee expresses its concern over the non-i mplementation of 
recommendations contained in Chapter – III and desi res that the Ministry should furnish 
logical explanations therefor. 
 
Chapter -IV - The recommendations/observations in respect of wh ich final replies of the 
Ministry have not been received. 
 
 In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either 
furnished the interim replies or couched its langua ge in vague terms like noted for 
compliance/guidance, therefore, the Committee desir es that the Ministry should furnish 
Action Taken Notes in respects of recommendations c ategorized in Chapter-IV in detail 
and to the point, as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee. 
 
3.  The details of the ATR is being discussed in the succeeding pages. 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

CHAPTER – I 
 
The Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry 
 
 
Impact of Budget proposal on Auto Sector  
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
1. The Committee appreciates that such an initiative o f the Department of Heavy 
Industry with the Ministry of Urban Development wil l not only boost the demand in the 
Auto sector but will also develop the public transp ort in the remote areas of the country.  
The Committee, therefore, desires that the scheme o f funding the purchase of buses for 
public transport by the States under JNNURM may con tinue for some more time in 
public interest.  The Committee at the same time st resses upon the Department of Heavy 
Industry to monitor the progress of this scheme wit h the Ministry of Urban Development 
and concerned State Governments. 
Para 7 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
 As regards monitoring of JNNURM Scheme, it may be stated that whenever 
meetings are held in Ministry of Urban Development for monitoring the progress of the 
scheme, DHI is being invited and the meeting is bei ng attended regularly by a senior 
representative from DHI.  In addition, meetings are  also held in DHI with bus 
manufacturers to ascertain the supply order positio n, difficulties, if any, in timely supply 
of buses and decisions communicated to Ministry of Urban Development for necessary 
action.  Moreover, recently Ministry of Urban Devel opment has moved a Note for 
Cabinet committee on Infrastructure for review of t he JNNURM scheme wherein, 
Secretary, DHI or his nominee has been proposed to be included as a member in the 
Central Sanctioning & Monitoring Scheme (CSMC) for the subject relating to 
procurement and supply of buses under this scheme. . 
 
 
Scooter India Limited 
 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
2. The Committee is surprised to know that despite of its serious concern for the 
revival of Scooters India Ltd., the Department has made the provision of Budgetary 
support to this company to the tune of only Rs.4 cr ore which Committee feels is very 
meagre amount for its revival.  Committee,  therefo re, recommends that the Department 
of Heavy Industry should make adequate Budgetary su pport for this company at the time 
of RE stage and at the same time,  should  seriously    pursue its 70  crore rupee project  
 
 
 

2 
proposal for revival through joint venture.  In fac t, this important PSE has to diversify its 
activities because it is manufacturing three wheele rs which are being phased out in 
various parts of the Country. Mini four wheelers fo r transporting goods have fairly good 
market and with the help of Government this PSE may  examine the diversification issue 
in right earnest. 
Para-18 
Action Taken Note 
 
            Scooters India Limited (SIL) engaged in  manufacturing 3-wheelers is not 
performing well for over a period of time and is incurring losses.  As a result, the net worth 
of the company has completely eroded.  The company,  at present, has been registered as a 
sick company with BIFR and is under reference to BR PSE.  As regards, the provision of 
Rs. 4 crore, the same had been budgeted for SIL, on  account of Renewals & Replacements 
(R&R), as part of the exercise for repairing and up-grading the old and obsolete machinery.  
The Business Plan of SIL for revival of the company , has been prepared by the consultant 
engaged by the company, in consultation with the ma nagement of SIL and has also been 
presented to BRPSE on 28.07.2010.  The recommendati ons of the BRPSE will be taken up 
for consideration and approval of the Government. 
 
 
Capital Good sector 
 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
3. The Committee feels that such imported machines/plants although imported at the 
lower cost but importers have to pay high prices fo r their maintenance contracts and 
spares.  The Committee notes that the DHI has raise d such issue in the Development 
Council of Automotive and Allied Industries (DCAAD)  meeting. The Committee 
recommends that suitable remedial measures be taken by imposing high import duty   and 
anti dumping duty on second hand machinery in consultation with Ministry of Commerce 
to grow our capital goods Industry.  The Committee impresses upon the Government to 
allocate sufficient fund for the engineering indust ry and R & D activities to sustain the 
Industrial growth in coming years.  
Para-20 
Action Taken Note 
 
 Textile Machinery Sector: 
  It is observed that textile machinery sector is p resently 
importing the machinery both new as well as second hand to the extent of Rs.4411 crore 
during the year 2008-09.  The Textile Machinery Man ufacturers Association (TMMA) 
has already raised the issue of huge import of seco nd hand textile machinery in the 
Development Council meeting held on 24.2.2010 which  was considered to be major 
detrimental factors preventing the development of t he local machinery with various 
factors such as the imported machinery about one-fo urth or one-fifth price of the new 
equipment in addition to coupled with old generatio n of technology that consumes more 
electricity per unit production.   The textile indu stry is being supported by the scheme 
under Ministry of Textiles viz. Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS) in which  

3 
import of second hand textile machinery such as air  jet, projectile, rapier and water jet 
shuttleless looms up to 10 years old with expected residual life of 10 year are funded 
under the scheme.  During the year 2008-09, the new  looms imported to the extent of 
Rs.238 crores (1645 nos.) whereas second hand looms  valued Rs.90 crores (1354 nos.) 
had been imported.  It is also learnt that the seco nd hand looms of more than 10 years old 
had also been imported.   For the development of lo cally manufactured looms, the 
Department is taking up with Ministry of Textile wi th a suggestion not to fund the 
imported second hand looms through TUFS.  Moreover,  it is also being recommended 
that the second hand textile machinery not more tha n five years old with a minimum 
residual life of five years with the applicability of actual user condition only be allowed. 
The enhancement in customs duty rate is also recommended. 
 
 Machine Tools Sector: 
  The machine tools industry presently needs Govern ment 
support. It is noted that no big industrial house i s coming forward in the machine tools 
manufacturing activity.  During the year 2008-09, o f machine tools worth Rs.1424 crore 
had been manufactured where as machine tools valued  Rs.6271 crore was imported.  The 
issues have been discussed in the Development Council meeting held on 9.3.2010 to form 
Sub- Committee to look into all concerned issues. T he suitable action plan to restructure 
PSUs viz. HMT & HEC has also been proposed.   Like textile machinery, the 
development of machine tools industry is also affec ted by large scale import of second 
hand machine tools.  The appropriate policy such as  permitting import of machine tools 
with not more than five years old with expected res idual life of five years with the 
applicability of actual users condition are being proposed in the policy.  
 
 
HMT 
 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
4. The Committee expresses its serious concern over the state of affairs of HMT Ltd. 
Despite Governments grant of two revival packages i n the recent past and part of the 
revival package is still under implementation. Desp ite these revival packages there is no 
turn around of the units. Department of Heavy Indus try is contemplating for a Joint 
Venture and the Committee is of the opinion that se rious attempts should be made for the 
revival of HMT Ltd. through the Joint Venture route  as a last resort otherwise how long 
the public money can be pumped and drained in keepi ng the PSE alive. In that 
eventuality some other options including closure ha ve to be given a serious thought.  The 
Committee, therefore, is of the view that necessary budgetary support should be given for 
the upgradation of technology to HMT Ltd. during su pplementary demands 2010-2011.  
The Government should at the same time also impress  upon bulk buyers in the 
Government Sector, such as Railways, Indian Airline s, Commonwealth Games 
Organization Committee etc.  to opt, wherever  feas ible, for HMT products so that this 
once much achieved and prestigious unit would come out of the red.  
Para- 25 
 
 

4 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
 As regards the issue of technology upgradation and  upgradation of machinery and 
equipments it may be stated that Revival packages w ere sanctioned to HMT Bearings 
Ltd., HMT Machine Tools Ltd. and Praga Tools Ltd [Praga Tools Ltd now stands merged 
with HMT Machine Tools Ltd w.e.f 1.4.2007].  
 
 The revival package sanctioned to HMT Bearings Ltd  in 2005-06 turned out to be 
failure as necessary funds for working capital and CAPEX were not available in the form 
of loan from Bank against Govt. Guarantee. The Bank  was not willing to extend loan at 
the interest rate prescribed by Ministry of Finance .  After long persuasion with the bank 
and consultation with Ministry of Finance the Gover nment Guarantee could be issued in 
August, 2008.  By this time, the financial health o f the company eroded and it was 
referred to Board for Industrial and Financial Reco nstruction (BIFR) during November, 
2008 because of its negative networth.  As directed  by BIFR the draft Rehabilitation 
Scheme for this company is under consideration.  As  per the direction of CCEA action 
has been initiated to find a strategic partner for the company and for the purpose for 
obtaining parliamentary approval, a Resolution has been introduced in the both Houses of 
Parliament. 
 
 In the revival package of Rs.880.80 crore sanction ed to HMT Machine Tools 
Limited in February, 2007 an amount of Rs.90 crore was allocated for CAPEX and Rs.80 
crore for technological acquisition / upgradation a nd Rs.10 crore for training & 
retraining.  Inspite of this revival package the co mpany could not turnaround towards the 
path of profit making.  As per the direction of CCE A action was initiated for the 
formation of a joint venture for this company.  In the meantime, a proposal for merger of 
HMT Machine Tools Limited with Heavy Engineering Co rporation, Ranchi is being 
explored and a Task Force has been constituted to look into this matter. 
 
 The revival package for HMT Ltd. has been under co nsideration of the 
Government.  In that revival package, inter-alia, a  provision of Rs.50 crore has been 
proposed for CAPEX, an amount of Rs.30 crore for te chnology upgradation.  Once the 
approval of CCEA is obtained on this revival packag e necessary provision will be made 
in the supplementary demand for grants for DHI for 2010-11. 
 
 The revival package for HMT Watches Ltd. is also u nder consideration of the 
Government.  Looking to the prospects of the watch business and the existing facilities 
available with the company the turnaround of the co mpany seems to be difficult and a 
new road map for revival is being thought of.  
 
BHEL 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
5. The Committee is of the view that fierce competitio n to BHEL from these 
companies is healthy kind of thing which improves the performance of BHEL day by  

5 
 
day. The Committee at the same time feels that Capi tal Goods Industry faces dearth of 
skilled and trained manpower both at shop floor lev el, as well as managerial level. With 
growing demand and growth of Capital Goods Industry  it needs to be provided with 
adequate skilled manpower. The Committee, therefore , recommends that DHI should 
consider providing the Industry with assistance for  development of skills to employees of 
PSUs through approved training institutes.  For this purpose exclusive Industrial Training 
Institutes may be established for BHEL or arrangeme nts may be made with various ITIs 
to train batches of students in these vocations for  BHEL. The Committee finds that no 
budgetary support has been provided to engineering sector and there is huge demand of 
secondary level engineers in the Capital Goods Sect or. The Committee therefore 
recommends that BHEL themselves, meet various engin eering clusters and support it 
through various up gradation schemes. The Committee at the same time also recommends 
to Government of India that a separate fund may be earmarked for Ministry of HRD for 
opening of more ITIs throughout the country for pro ducing secondary level engineers 
which are in great demand in the Capital Goods Industry.   
Para-26 
Action Taken Note 
 
 BHEL: 
 During the 3 year period 2007-10, BHEL has inducte d around 11,950 persons in 
the Executive, Executive/Engineer Trainee, Supervis or/ Supervisor Trainee and Artisan 
categories. Though BHEL has been ramping up its man power strength in a timely and 
commensurate manner so as to address the increasing  business requirements and 
retirements in the company, availability of skilled  manpower especially with various 
contractors engaged in power plant installation at sites is an issue.  
 
 BHEL on its part has set up Training Centers in al l its Units catering to Training 
& Development needs of the employees. The company is also associated with specialized 
training institutes of repute viz. WRI (Welding Res earch Institute) at Trichy to cater to 
the need of Indian welding industry & growth of wel ding & allied technologies; ATI 
(Advanced Technical Institute) at Hyderabad to cate r to the training requirements of 
Industries / Organizations / Industrial Training In stitutes (ITI) / Private Industrial 
Training Centres.  
 
 Further, with respect to ITIs, BHEL has under the PPP (Public Private 
Partnership) Scheme enunciated by the Govt. of Indi a (DGET, Ministry of Labour & 
Employment) adopted one ITI at Latur in Maharashtra ; and sent a proposal to adopt two 
more ITI’s in Madhya Pradesh (one in Khandwa and other in Burhanpur). In addition, the 
company is exploring possibility of adoption of mor e ITI’s in the vicinity of its existing 
manufacturing plant location like viz. Trichy, Hari dwar etc.  BHEL is also participating 
in the setting up of a new ITI at Bolpur in West Bengal. 
 
 
 

6 
 
Capital Goods Sector (HE&MT Section) 
 
 It has been deliberated at length in the Developme nt Council meetings about non- 
availability of skilled man power both at shop floo r level and managerial level which 
capital goods industry is facing presently. The pre paration of skill gap analysis for textile 
machinery sector and machine tools sector have been  requested to the respective 
associations. The suitable action plan will be made  after analyzing the data so received.  
As a matter of fact, skill development support has been included in the proposed capital 
goods scheme. 
 
 
 
The Problems of PSUs of the Department of Heavy Industry 
 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
6. The Committee is of the view that there must be som e practical difficulties in the 
revival packages of loss making PSUs, Committee fin ds that DHI proposes the revival 
plan, starts preparing project reports, finalize these reports which consume lot of time and 
therefore before its execution, due to fast changin g latest technology and global 
modernization, the whole revival package suggested by the DHI becomes outdated. 
Hence, the revival packages have to be prepared and  implemented in a time bound 
manner by removing the red tape and other bottlenec ks.  The Committee feels that there 
is a great deal of uncertainty in regard to the pub lic sector enterprises such as Scooters 
India Ltd., HMT etc. The Committee impress upon the Government that where budgetary 
support becomes too difficult, the Ministry of Fina nce should be approached to arrange 
for adequate funds from banks and other financial institution under stipulated conditions.  
 
Para-30 
Action Taken Note 
 The suggestions of the Committee towards timely fi nalization of revival plan of 
CPSEs have been noted for future compliance. 
 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
7. The Committee desires that apart from the sickne ss of the PSUs under the 
Department of Heavy Industry, DHI should focus its concern on the modernization of all 
the PSUs so that they may face the competition in t he market. The Committee, 
recommends, that the revival of PSUs too should be in real terms and simply writing off 
the interest and part of Government loan will not s erve the purpose. The obsolete 
machines and technology needs to be replaced, work culture has to be enforced. The 
Committee hopes that DHI will do its best in this regard. 
 
Para-31 
 

7 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
 In the case of Sick PSEs, while preparing its revi val plan proper thrust is given for 
Capital infusion for modernization and technologica l upgradation including renewal/ 
replacement of old Plant & Machinery. However, the suggestion of the Committee 
regarding revival of PSUs in real terms,  and not s imply writing off the interest and part 
of Govt. loan, particularly, modernization & upgrad ation of technology have been noted 
for future compliance also while finalizing the rev ival/restructuring package for the 
concerned PSEs. 
 
 
Waiving off the Loans 
 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
8. The Committee notes with concern that major part of the financial packages are in 
the form of writing off the interest and loans and funds are not provided for 
modernisation, technology upgradation etc.  The Com mittee hopes that the Department 
will focus on the modernisation of the PSUs instead  of simply waiving off the loans, 
interests etc.  
Para-32 
Action Taken Note 
 
 While granting a revival packages efforts are made  to provide help to the 
company on all other fronts wherever the help is re quired. In case of BPCL, ILK, CCI, 
AYCL etc. besides waiver of loans/write offs etc .f inancial support has been provided for 
technology upgradation also. In the case of NPPC wh ile preparing its revival plan proper 
thrust has been given for modernization and technol ogical upgradation. Further, the 
suggestion of the Committee to focus on the modernisation of the PSUs instead of simply 
waiving off the loans, interests etc . have been noted for future compliance also while 
finalizing the revival/restructuring package.   
 
 
Status of Employment of SCs/STs/ OBCs/ Minority in CPSEs 
 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
9. The Committee finds that the progress made by vario us CPSE in respect of 
recruitment of SCs/STs/OBCs/Minorities is not very encouraging.  The Committee feels 
that HR Department of these PSUs should be very par ticular at the time of recruitment of 
manpower in their PSUs in respect of SCs/STs/OBCs/M iniority etc candidates.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that particular ca re be taken so that the reserved 
quotas are filled and a periodical assessment on a continuous basis is undertaken for this 
purpose. 
Para-35 

8 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
 The Committees recommendations have been circulate d to all 32 operating PSEs 
under DHI to take particular care on recruitment of  SC/ST/OBC/Minority etc. candidate 
so that reserved quota vacancies are filled and a p eriodical assessment on a continuous 
basis is undertaken for this purpose. 
 
 
Recommendations/observations 
10. The Committee hopes that its recommendations wi ll be taken in the right earnest 
to promote the heavy industrial sector and more so the auto sector, capital goods sector 
etc. and the revival of ailing PSUs in real terms. 
Para-36 
Action Taken Note 
 
 As desired by the Committee, DHI will take all eff orts to promote the heavy 
industry sector including the auto sector, capital goods sector etc. and the revival of ailing 
PSUs in real terms 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9 
 
CHAPTER–II 
 
The Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government's replies  
 
 
 
BHEL  
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
1. The Committee has made its serious concern on its l ong waiting list for 
establishment of power plants in the country. Commi ttee finds that it has a pending list 
for customers who are waiting for 2-3 years. 
Para-26 
Action Taken Note 
 
 The setting up of power plant is a complex process  and is dependent on the 
performance of several players. The developer has t o provide several inputs starting from 
making available encumbrance free land, civil work including foundations, raw water, 
construction power etc. using which the equipment s upplied by BHEL is to be erected 
and commissioned. Several other Balance of Plant (B OP) vendors have to supply 
equipment like coal and ash handling systems, water systems, cooling towers etc. 
 
 The scope of work of BHEL for major portion of pre sent orders on hand for 
power projects in the country is limited to design,  engineering, manufacture, supply, 
erection & commissioning of Boiler, Turbine Generat or & Auxiliaries packages (BTG) 
only. The remaining portion including all Civil wor ks & several sub-systems of Balance 
of Plants (BoPs) like Coal handling plant (CHP), As h handling plant (AHP), De-
Mineralisation (DM) Plant and Pre-treatment (PT) Pl ant, Switchyard etc. are under 
project developer scope.  
 
 Most products of BHEL are custom designed and only  after receipt of an order is 
the design/manufacture undertaken. These can be bro adly classified for 2 types of 
customer segments viz. power and industry. For the industrial segment products, the 
period of delivery is relatively shorter and orders  are generally executed within a year 
after an order is received. On the other hand the m ain power plant generating 
equipment/products catering to the requirements of power utilities, are generally long 
cycle items. In this context, the execution period of power sector orders on hand varies 
between 36-48 months for 500/660/800 MW projects (2 8-33 months for 250MW 
projects), and for some hydro projects, the execution period could be even longer. Hence, 
at any given point of time, different customer orde rs with BHEL are at different stages of 
implementation. 
 
  

10 
 There have been some rescheduling in supplies from  BHEL mainly due to non 
availability of critical castings and forgings of a lloy steels, pipes and fittings and CRGO 
sourced from limited number of foreign vendors. Inf rastructure inadequacies with respect 
to roads, ports, rail links coupled with limited in digenous capacity & capability for 
Balance of Plant (BoP) equipment ; limited number and capacity of qualified construction 
contractors and erection agencies in the country for taking up construction of large power 
plants in civil, mechanical, electrical works ; ava ilability of skilled manpower with the 
contractors for specialized jobs like high pressure  welders, fitters etc. also contribute to 
the timely implementation of project.  
 
 BHEL has also embarked on a plan for enhancing its  manufacturing capacity & 
capability for preparing itself to meet the country ’s power demand and providing “Power 
to all by 2012”. Towards this end BHEL has augmented to annual capacity and capability 
to manufacture power generating equipment from 6000  MW in 1999-2000 to 10000 MW 
in 2008 and 15000 MW in 2010. This is expected to go up to 20000 MW by 2012. 
 
 Inspite of various factors beyond the control of B HEL, the company puts in extra 
efforts to minimize the slippages in commissioning of the projects. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

11 
 
 CHAPTER–III 
 
The Recommendations/Observations in respect of whic h the Committee has either not      
accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its replies  
 
Impact of Budget proposal on Auto Sector  
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
1. The Committee feels that this policy will boost the  auto sector during the coming 
years.  The Committee desires that Government shoul d create a National Technology 
Development Fund for the development of auto and au to component industry.  This fund 
will not only provide impetus for modernisation of auto sector but will also create huge 
employment opportunities in the country.  Further, this fund would provide financial 
support to companies by financing 50% of the projec t cost by way of a loan with 
minimum interest of 4 to 6%.  The Committee feels t hat such a fund will truly support 
auto companies to modernise and upgrade their techn ology in the globally competitive 
environment. 
Para-10 
Action Taken Note 
 
 The Department had recommended, in the pre-budget recommendations for 2009-
10 and 2010-11 also, for setting up of an Auto Comp onent Technology Development 
Fund with a corpus of Rs. 1000 crore to provide fin ancial support to companies by 
financing 50% of the project cost by way of a soft loan with an interest rate of 6-7%.  
This will be used to finance and support companies as they modernize/upgrade 
technology and thereby allow them to become more co mpetitive in meeting requirements 
of both domestic and overseas customers. The focus of this fund would be for 
modernization and improving manufacturing technolog y which would allow companies 
to upgrade the existing facilities as well as devel opment of new manufacturing processes, 
use of new and composite materials, automation of p rocesses, acquiring of intellectual 
properties etc. This was not accepted in the Budget -2010-11. No provision was made in 
the budget 2009-10 and 2010-11. The Department is of the view that this fund would go a 
long way in encouraging the auto component sector t o obtain new technology and 
becoming more competitive in meeting requirements o f both domestic and overseas 
customers.  
 
Further Recommendation 
  
 
 The Committee is of the firm opinion that our auto component industry can 
be even more competitive if infused with cutting ed ge technology. Support of the 
Government to the R&D initiatives can lessen the bu rden on individual players and 
produce greater impetus in this direction. This asp ect has also been emphasised in 
the Eleventh Plan. In the plan document it has been  pointed out that short term 
relief in corporate tax doled out by the Government  to encourage R & D activates 
by auto and auto component companies is not enough.  For sustained and effective R 
&D initiatives, the plan document has envisaged the Government assistance in  

12 
 
setting up of world-class automotive testing and R& D infrastructure. In this 
background, the Committee fails to decipher the rea son behind the Government’s 
recalcitrant attitude to institute a National Technology Development Fund. With the 
automotive industry growing at a very fast pace, an y lag in the auto component 
manufacturing would result in serious impediments t o the growth in automotive 
sector. Accordingly, the Committee reiterates its r ecommendation to create a 
National Technology Development Fund. The Department of Heavy Industry should 
take up the matter again with the Planning Commissi on and the Ministry of 
Finance.  
 
Coal Gasification Projects 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
2. Since this very important project has got lot of po tentiality in future in terms of 
generating power at lesser cost with more eco-frien dly power generation using less fuel 
with latest technology, the Committee recommends th at in the national interest, 
protecting the ecology and generation cheaper power, the Government should provide the 
budgetary support of Rs. 350 crores for this all im portant project of BHEL at the RE 
stage so that the project is not got stalled for wa nt of funds because Government of India 
on the one hand is promoting/developing environment  friendly projects and 
discouraging/shutting down polluting industries but  on the other hand does not take 
serious interest on environment friendly power proj ects. The country is facing acute 
power shortage and the capacity of this project is 182 MW . 
Para- 33 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
 As the initial capital cost of an IGCC power plant  is generally higher world-wide 
compared to a conventional thermal power plant, funding support for such futuristic clean 
coal technology projects have been extended by vari ous Governments internationally. 
BHEL has also sought a grant of Rs. 350 Crore from the Government of India to partially 
cover the cost of the 182 MW IGCC Project. The tota l cost of the IGCC project was 
estimated to be Rs. 1665.36 crores out of which Rs.  812.45 crores would be met by 
APGENCO and Rs. 502.91 Crore would be met by BHEL. DHI had placed a proposal 
before the Planning Commission during the discussio ns on the Annual Plan of the DHI 
for allocation of Rs. 350 crores as Govt. of India funding for this project of BHEL. No 
amount has been allocated for this project. 
 
Further Recommendation 
  
 
 Coal gasification has gained a lot of ground of lat e as a relatively green 
technology at considerably lesser cost. The nation is in dire need of such technology 
that has least carbon foot prints, at the same time  adds to power production 
capacity.  In this light, the Committee had recomme nded a budgetary support to 
BHEL of Rs. 350 crore for their coal gasification p roject.  The Committee is 
unhappy to note that though this amount was only about one fourth of the total  

13 
 
project costs, the Government could not allocate it  to BHEL.  The Committee 
desires to know the rationale quoted by the Plannin g Commission or the Ministry of 
Finance for not providing funds to the project.  It also reiterates its recommendation 
for adequate budgetary support to the coal gasifica tion project of BHEL. The 
Committee strongly recommends that the Department o f Heavy Industry sensitise 
the Planning Commission to allocate enough resources for this purpose. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

14 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry 
have not been  received  
 
 
Industrial Growth  
 
Recommendations/observations  
 
1. The Committee is of the firm opinion that despite s igns of a recovery of industrial 
growth during the period from October 2009 onwards,  the performance of the industrial 
sector is cause of concern as the growth is directl y proportional to stimulus packages 
announced by the Government.  The Committee also ex presses its concern on the 
sustainable growth of automobile sector in view of this years' budgetary proposals and 
hike in the excise duty of petroleum products. The Committee feels that the need of the 
hour is not merely in keeping on the stimulus packages but also to restructure the bases of 
taxes and import and export duties in such a manner  that without affecting public 
expenditure, the industrial growth can sustain.  The Committee desires that this issue may 
be taken up with the Ministry of Finance and pursued seriously . 
Para- 5 
Action Taken Note 
 
Auto Sector 
 
 The automobile sector was earlier badly hit due to  global economic slowdown. In 
order to tide over the situation GoI took immediate  remedial measures and announced 
three stimulus packages [1 st  on 07.12.2008, 2 nd  on 02.01.2009 and 3 rd  on 24.2.2009] 
which included; reduction of excise duty from 12% t o 8% for smaller cars and from 24% 
to 20% for others, increasing liquidity and credit flow in the market, procurement of 
buses through JNNURM scheme, enhanced depreciation for commercial vehicles. The 
GoI in the budget 2010-11 has only partially rolled back the excise duty cuts by 2%.  
 
 The Department has already taken up the matter wit h Ministry of Finance in the 
past at various stages recommending measures for au tomobile sector. The matter has also 
been taken up during the pre-budget recommendations  of the year 2009-10 as well as 
2010-11. Some of the measures recommended by the Department includes: 
   
• Bringing down the excise duty on MUVs by 4-5% (from existing 20%)  
• Withdrawal of additional excise duty of Rs. 15000 imposed as a temporary measure 
on all cars (other than small cars). 
• Increasing the depreciation rates of vehicle from 15% to 25% 
• Setting up of an Auto Component Technology Development Fund with a corpus  of 
Rs. 1000 crore to provide financial support to comp anies by financing 50% of the 
project cost by way of a soft loan.  

15 
 
• Measures to encourage new technology vehicle, vehic les with alternate fuels and 
drives such as: 
(a)  Duty drawback equivalent to 50% of the customs duty  applicable on the 
 import of hybrid 4 wheelers and plug-in hybrid 4 w heelers and also 
making countervailing duty at 0% from present 4%. 
(b)  Excise duty exemption at par with electric vehicles  and their parts for 
 Hydrogen/Fuel Cell/Hybrid/ CNG/Hy-thane vehicles a nd other alternate 
fuel vehicles and parts. 
(c)  No levy of NCCD on hybrids vehicles including hybri d/plug in hybrid 4 
wheelers imported to India. 
(d)  Extending the benefit of custom duty exemption avai lable to parts of 
electric cars to parts of all electric vehicles inc luding parts for CVs, 2/3 
wheelers. Similar benefit may be extended to parts of CNG, LPG, 
Hydrogen, Hybrid, Hy-thane vehicles etc. 
(e)  Income tax relief on purchase of Electric/Hydrogen/ Fuel Cell and Hybrid 
Vehicles. 
(f)  Allowing weighted deduction of 200% under income ta x act for R&D 
expenditure for hybrid/hydrogen/electric vehicles i ncluding battery 
technology. 
(g)  Weighted deduction under section 35(2AB). 
 
Effect of budget 2010-11 on auto sector:  
 
(a)  Partial roll back of Excise duty: In the first stimulus package a general 
reduction of Cenvat by 4% was announced. As a resul t excise duty on small cars, 
auto components came down to 8%. Despite good perfo rmance of the auto sector 
in 2009-10, the, Government in the Budget 2010-11ha s decided not to fully roll 
back the excise duty cuts and has increased the exc ise duty by 2% and therefore 
only partially rolled back the stimulus measures announced earlier.   
(b)  The excise duty on electric cars has now been aligned with excise duty on parts of 
electric vehicles, the excised duty of which  has b een reduced from 8% to 4%, so 
as to allow the manufacturers to avail the cenvat credit on the parts.  
 
 The first quarter performance (April-June 2010) of  auto sector has continued to 
show a considerable growth of 33.27% in production,  29% in sale and 59% in export. 
This shows that the growth in the auto sector is su stainable despite partial roll back of 
stimulus measures.  
 
 As per the recommendations of the Department relat ed Parliamentary Standing 
Committee, the matter has been further taken up wit h Ministry of Finance  in respect of 
some of the issues which are still to be resolved such as; 
• Bringing down the excise duty on MUVs by 4-5% (from existing 20%)  
• Withdrawal of additional excise duty of Rs. 15000 i mposed on all cars (other than 
small cars) 

16 
 
• Increasing the depreciation rates of vehicle from 15% to 25% 
• Setting up of an Auto Component Technology Development Fund with a corpus  of 
Rs. 1000 crore to provide financial support to comp anies by financing 50% of the 
project cost by way of a soft loan.  
• Certain measures to encourage new technology vehicl e, vehicles with alternate 
fuels and drives such as; 
(a)  Duty drawback equivalent to 50% of the customs duty applicable on the import 
of hybrid 4 wheelers and plug-in hybrid 4 wheelers and also making 
countervailing duty at 0% from present 4%. 
(b)  Excise duty exemption at par with electric vehicles  and their parts for 
Hydrogen/Fuel Cell/Hybrid/ CNG/Hy-thane vehicles an d other alternate fuel 
vehicles and parts. 
(c)  No levy of NCCD on hybrids vehicles including hybri d/plug in hybrid 4 
wheelers imported to India. 
(d)  Extending the benefit of custom duty exemption avai lable to parts of electric 
cars to parts of all electric vehicles including pa rts for CVs, 2/3 wheelers. 
Similar benefit may be extended to parts of CNG, LP G, Hydrogen, Hybrid, 
Hy-thane vehicles etc. 
(e)  Income tax relief on purchase of Electric/Hydrogen/ Fuel Cell and Hybrid 
Vehicles. 
(f)  Allowing weighted deduction of 200% under income ta x act for R&D 
expenditure for hybrid/hydrogen/electric vehicles including battery technology. 
(g)  Weighted deduction under section 35(2AB). 
 
 
Capital Goods Sector  
 Based on the request for amendments in the budget proposals for the capital 
goods industry, which have been received from the c oncerned industry associations, the 
suitable recommendations from the Department are se nt regularly to Ministry of Finance. 
As regards the Pre-Budget Proposals 2010-11 in resp ect of Capital Goods Sector, DHI 
had asked  concerned Industry Associations viz. Ind ian Machine Tools Manufacturers’ 
Association (IMTMA), Textile Machinery Manufacturer s’ Association (TMMA), 
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), Indian Prin ting Packaging & Allied Machinery 
Mfr. Association (IPP&AMMA), Indian Earthmoving Con struction Industry Association 
Ltd.(IECIAL), Process Plant & Machinery Association  Of India (PPMAI) and Indian 
Textile Accessories & Machinery Manufacturers’  Ass ociation (ITA&MMA) for their 
comments/ views/ suggestions vide this Department’s  letter No.8/2/2009-HE&MT dated 
02-12-2009 and 08-12-2009 well in advance before th e Budget 2010-11 Presentation in 
Parliament. In response, TMMA, ITAMMA, PPMAI and IM TMA submitted their 
views/suggestions before the presentation of Budget  2010-11 in Parliament and after 
examining their views /suggestions in this Departme nt as well our views/suggestions, 
D.O. letters No.8 (2)2009-HE&MT dated 24 th  Dec.2009 and  5 th  Feb 2010 along with 
enclosures (copies enclosed for reference) from SHI were sent to Secretary, Department  
 

17 
 
of Revenue requesting to kindly look into the matte r and consider the recommendations 
of this department for appropriate remedial measures.  
 
 DHI has also received Post Budget Memorandum for 2 010-11 form TMMA for 
making a strong recommendation to M/o Finance for n ecessary changes to redress the 
difficulties facing the Textile Manufacturers’ Industry. However, for further processing in 
this concern, TMMA was requested to furnish complete details along with justification of 
each issue and calculation regarding its effect on Exchequer and in this concern DHI has 
not received any response so far.  
 
  Further follow up with the Ministry of Finance wi ll be taken up in future.   
 
 
Impact of Budget proposal on Auto Sector 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
2. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Depar tment of Heavy Industry 
should take up the issue with the Ministry of Finan ce to ensure concessional excise duty 
structure for utility vehicles.   
Para 8 
Action Taken Note 
 All cars other than small cars attract high rate o f excise duty at 20% plus Rs. 
15000 additional levy. The matter was taken up duri ng pre-budget recommendations for 
the year 2009-10 and 2010-11 for withdrawal of the additional excise duty of Rs. 
15,000/-, as this was levied as an interim measure.  In addition to the matter being taken 
up in pre-budget recommendations, this issue has al so been taken by the then Hon’ble 
Minister(HI&PE) with Hon’ble Prime Minister as well  as  Hon’ble Finance Minister  
vide d.o letter dated 13 
th  December, 2008 and 26 th  Feb., 2009 respectively.  
 
 As per the recommendations of the Department relat ed Parliamentary Standing 
Committee, this issue has again been further taken up with Ministry of Finance.  
 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
3. The Committee, therefore, recommends that in order to promote use of 
Hydrogen/Fuel cell/Hybrid vehicles, CNG vehicles an d other alternative fuel vehicles, in 
the interest of protecting environment, such vehicl es and its parts/components thereof 
may be exempted from excise duty at par with electric vehicles.   
Para- 9 
Action Taken Note 
 The Department in the pre-budget recommendations f or 2010-11  had 
recommended the following measures in respect of Hy drogen/Fuel cell/Hybrid vehicles, 
CNG vehicles and other alternative fuel vehicles, including miro-hybrids and hybrids.  

18 
 
• Duty drawback equivalent to 50% of the customs duty applicable on the import of 
hybrid 4 wheelers and plug-in hybrid 4 wheelers and  also making countervailing duty at 
0% from present 4%. 
• Excise duty exemption at par with electric vehicles  and their parts for 
Hydrogen/Fuel Cell/Hybrid/ CNG/Hy-thane vehicles and other alternate fuel vehicles and 
parts. 
• No levy of NCCD on hybrids vehicles including hybri d/plug in hybrid 4 wheelers 
imported to India. 
• Extending the benefit of custom duty exemption avai lable to parts of electric cars 
to parts of all electric vehicles including parts f or CVs, 2/3 wheelers. Similar benefit may 
be extended to parts of CNG, LPG, Hydrogen, Hybrid, Hy-thane vehicles etc. 
• Income tax relief on purchase of Electric/Hydrogen/ Fuel Cell and Hybrid 
Vehicles. 
• Allowing weighted deduction of 200% under income tax act for R&D expenditure 
for hybrid/hydrogen/electric vehicles including battery technology. 
• Weighted deduction under section 35(2AB). 
 
These issues were again taken up by Hon’ble Ministe r (HI&PE) with Hon’ble Finance 
Minister vide d.o letter dated 9.4.2010.  
 As per the recommendations of the Department relat ed Parliamentary Standing 
Committee, this issue has again been further taken up with Ministry of Finance. 
 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
4. The Committee, therefore, desires that Department o f Heavy Industry should 
propose an amendment with Ministry of Finance (Depa rtment of Revenue) in Section 11 
AB of the Central Excise Act, 1944 so that such anomalies may be sorted out. 
Para-11 
Action Taken Note 
 This issue was also taken up during the pre-budget  recommendations [2010-11] 
requesting amendment in the Central Excise Act by inserting a clause as under: 
 “No interest is however payable on account of diff erential duty paid payable 
because of any revision of prices subsequent to the  removal of goods”. This issue is still 
to be resolved.  
 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
5. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Departmen t of Heavy Industry 
should create a separate fund for the upgradation o f Auto Expo Centres like Pragati 
Maidan, Delhi etc. in consultation with ITPO and Mi nistry of Commerce & Industry.  
The Committee further suggests the Department of He avy Industry to also arrange such 
Auto Expos in other suitable places in the country such as Greater Noida (U.P),  

19 
 
Hyderabad (A.P.) and some other cities of the count ry where required infrastructure and 
facilities are available.  
Para-12 
Action Taken Note 
 In the first instance views of the industry associ ation (SIAM) have been sought on 
the issue as auto expos are organised by the indust ry associations. Based on their views, 
suitable recommendations will be made to Ministry o f Commerce and Industry, as the 
subject matter is under the purview of that Ministry. Response from SIAM is awaited.  
 
 
NATRIP 
 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
6. The Committee wonders how the DHI will be able to c omplete the project with a 
meager Budgetary Support of Rs. 232.10 crore under BE 2010-11.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the funds to the tune of  Rs.654.90 crores should be allocated 
to NATRIP which will be required for timely complet ion of this important national 
project which may be asked for during supplementary  Demands for the year 2010-2011 
so that funds asked for NATRIP are made available t o complete the projects which are in 
pipeline.  
Para-17 
Action Taken Note 
 
 A LOAN head against NATRIP is required to be appro ved through Ministry of 
Finance. The proposal to get a new loan head for NA TRIP has been initiated by the 
Department. As per B&A division, DHI, the request f or opening of a loan account head 
for NATRIP can be done at the time of supplementary  demands for grants only when 
there are funds allotted in the loan portion for pa rking in the loan heads. It has been 
decided to initiate this process during August - Se ptember 2010 so as to get the loan 
account head for NATRIP in time for the supplementary demands for grants for 2010-11.  
 
 (ii). Processing of the proposal of NATRIP for add itional funds at the time of 
supplementary demands for grants will be initiated by the end of August, 2010. In this 
regard, Secy HI has already written to Finance Secretary in Feb, 2010 to consider making 
allocation of funds in 2009-10 from automotive cess  funds as envisaged for NATRIP in 
the cabinet approval. Earlier, Secy HI also wrote t o Member, Planning Commission in 
December, 2009 on this issue.   
 
 
 
 
 
 

20 
 
Capital Good sector 
 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
7. The Committee feels that the Department of Heavy In dustry needs to provide a 
road map to establish these clusters and provide ad equate funds to create facilities for 
these clusters.  
Para-21 
Action Taken Note 
 
 For creating good infrastructure for capital goods  sector, the Department has 
initiated capital goods scheme targeting the enhanc ement of competitiveness in the 
capital goods sectors which includes textile machin ery, machine tools, heavy electrical 
equipment, process plant equipment and mining and c onstruction machinery. Planning 
Commission had already given its ‘in principle’ approval. 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
8. The Committee feels that the DHI should facilitate such common facility centers 
in Public Private Participation (PPP) mode.  Some o f the Common facilities that can be 
provided are: -  
Common Foundry (for Machine Tool Industry); 
Common Heat Treatment facility (for Machine Tool Industry); 
Accredited Testing Laboratories;  
Design Centre; and Centers of Excellence 
 The Committee suggests that PPP based approach cou ld be adopted for this 
purpose, under which group of entrepreneurs or indu stry associations would be 
encouraged. 
Para-22 
Action Taken Note 
 The proposed capital goods scheme mainly covers th e Government support of six 
types of components i.e. (i) setting up of common f acility centres, (ii) setting up of sector 
specific industrial cluster parks, (iii) business d evelopment support, (iv) market 
development support, (v) skill development support and (vi) support for research and 
development projects.  The proposal has already bee n sent to various Departments / 
Ministries as directed by Deptt. of Expenditure Min istry of Finance and the comments 
received therefrom, are once again being examined i n consultation with stake holders.  
The revised note is under preparation and the same will be sent to Department of 
Expenditure for consideration. 
 
 
Recommendations/observations 
9. The Committee suggests that DHI should initiate act ion in this regard in 
coordination with Ministry of Railways, Road Transp ort & Highways and Ministry of 
Power etc.  
Para-23 

21 
 
 
Action Taken Note 
 View has been noted. Information in the matter is being collected and 
Government will take appropriate action in the matt er, as recommended by the  
Committee. 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
10. The Committee is of the view that the issue regardi ng   import duty should be 
discussed in details with the Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Ministry of Finance 
and Information and Broadcasting before a decision is taken.  The Committee at the same 
time recommends that some measures need to be taken  to protect the paper industry in 
the country.  The Committee also recommends that the issue regarding supply of Railway 
rakes on the M.G. Section linking Cachar Paper Mill s to B.G. Section may be taken up 
with the Ministry of Railways so that speedy comple tion of conversion of meter gauge  
can be made to help the paper industry in the North-Eastern region.  
Para-24 
Action Taken Note 
 
 The approved allocation of outlay during FY-2010-1 1 is as under: 
(Figs. in Rs. crore) 
 BS IR EBR Total Outlay 
For existing 
units of HPC 
0.00 136.45 0.00 136.45 
JPML(UP 
Paper Mill) 
0.01 0.00 0.00 0.01 
NPPC(Revival) 0.01 0.000 227.86 227.87 
Total : 0.02 136.45 227.86 364.33 
 
 It may be observed from the above  that out of the  total outlay of Rs. 364.33 crore, a sum 
of Rs. 227.86 crore is the outlay in respect of rev ival of NPPC which was contemplated to be 
made from commercial borrowings i.e. EBR. With rega rd to outlay in respect of HPC’s existing 
units, a sum of Rs. 136.45 crore was proposed to be made out of carry over surplus and hence put 
under internal resources (IR). Thus, the total I & EBR works out to Rs. 364.31 crore. The token 
provision of Rs. 0.01 crore towards budgetary support is in respect of Jagdispur Paper Mill which 
is yet to be started because of non-availability of  land and Rs. 0.01 crore also has been kept for 
NPPC revival. 
[ 
  As recommended by the Sub Committee, DHI is consi dering to take up the issue 
regarding imposition of minimum import duty of 5% o n imported newsprint with M/o Finance 
and M/o Commerce &Industry. In order to offset loca tional disadvantages and consequent cost 
increase, conversion of MG to BG section is absolut ely essential for the Paper Industry in the 
North Eastern Region.  Therefore, it has been proposed to request M/o Railways to take necessary 
action so that the conversion of railway track is completed at the earliest.  
 
*********** 
 