PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYASABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
FIFTY-SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
RECOMMENDATIONSCONTAINED IN ITS34TH REPORTON 
PROBLEMS BEING FACED BY STEEL INDUSTRY (BOTH IN 
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SECTORS) MINISTRY OF STEEL 
(PRESENTED TO RAJY A SABHA ON 21st NOVEMBER, 2001) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 218T NOVEMBER, 2001) 
RAJYA SABHASECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
NOVEMBER, 2001/KARTIKA, 1923 (SAKA) 

CONTENTS 
PAGES 
l. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i)-{ii) 
2. INTRODUCTION (iii) 
3. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 1-67 
4. OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND 6q -7: 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF niE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE 
5. MINUTES 73-76 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
1. Shri Ramdas Agarwal - Chairman 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
3. Dr. FaguniRam 
4. Shri P.K. Maheshwari 
5. Dr. Manesh Chandra Sharma 
6. Shri Jibon Roy 
7. Shri Somappa R. Bommai 
8. Smt. Saroj Dubey 
9. Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhundar 
I 0. Shri S. Sivasubramanian 
I 1. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha 
12. Prof. M.M. Aggarwal 
13. Shri Bangaru Laxman 
LOKSABHA 
14. Shri Chunnilal Thakur 
15. Shri Ramanand Singh 
16. Shri R. Basanagouda Patil 
17. Shri G. Mallikarjunappa 
18. Shri Tarachand Sahu 
19. Shri Anant Nayak 
20. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
21 . Shri A. Narendra 
22. Shri A.C. Jose 
23. Shri Uttamarao Deorao PatH 
24. Shri K.P. Singh Deo 
25. Shri Thomas Hansda 
26. Shri Nepal Chandra Das 
27. Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary 
28. Shr~ Sunil Khan 
29. Shri P. Rajendran 
30. Dr. B.B. Ramaiah 
31. Shri M. Rajaiah 
32. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh 
33. Shri Deepak Kumar 

34. Shri Manjay Lal 
3 5. Shri An ant Mahadeoappa Gudhe 
36. Shri Ram Sajivan 
3 7. Shri K. Malaisamy 
38. Shri Nagmani 
39. Shri Ramdas Athawale 
40. Shri Rizwan Zaheer 
41. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
42. Shri G.J. Javiya, 
43. Smt. Renu Kumari 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director 
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer 

INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chainnan of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, 
having been authorised by the Committee, hereby present this Fifty-sixth Report on the Action 
Taken by the Ministry of Steel on observations/conclusions and recommendations contained in its 
34th Report on Problems being faced by Steel Industry (both in Public and Private Sectors). 
2. The Committee examiped and considered the Action Taken Note of the Ministry of 
Steel on the Committee's 34th Report on Problems being faced by Steel Industry (both Public 
and Private Sectors). Based on the Action Taken Note a detailed questionnaire was prepared and 
the Ministry of Steel was asked to comments thereon. The Comments of the Ministry of Steel 
have been incorporated as further replies of the Government. 
3. The Committee at its meeting held on 9t11 November, 2001 considered and adopted the 
Report. 
NEW DELHI; 
November 9, 2001 
RAMDAS AGARWAL 
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Commillee on Industry 

REPORT 
I. The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Steel on 
the Recommendations contained in its 34th Report of the Department Related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry on the "Problems being faced by Steel Industry ( both in Public 
and Private Sector ) " which was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
the 2"d May, 2000. 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Steel in respect ofthe 
recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorized as follows: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Government: 
(Chapter .- I). 
General recommendations:- 1,5,7,8,9,13,16, 17 
Specific recommendations:-! (i) ,1(ii), 2 (iii), 2(v), 2(vi),3(ii), 5(iii), 13,14,16,18,20,21, 
23 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the government's replies : (Chapter- II) 
General recommendations:- 2, 6,11, 14, 18, 
Specific recommendations:- 2,(i),2(ii), 2(iv), 3,4,5(i), 5(ii), 10, 11, 12, 17, 19,22 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in resped of which the Committee bas not aeeeptecl 
replies of the Government:. (Chapter - Ill). 
General recommendations:- 10, 12, 15, · 
Specific recommendations:- 1(iii), 3(iii), 6, 7, 8, 9, 15, 
(iv) RecommendationS/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been received. (Chapter -IV). 

• 
• 
CHAPTER- I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
GENERAL RECOMMENDATION 
l. 
RECOMMENDATION 
Steps to Increase Demand 
Government may take following steps in order to increase the consumption of steel which 
will automatically increase the demands of steel in various sectors of economy:-
(i) Envisaging Mega- infrastructural projects like roatl. Power ports, dams, water 
pipelines, Airports etc and speedy implementation of these projects say in 3 to 5 
years; 
(ii) Reduction in safe life of LPG cylinders from existing 20 years to 15 years; 
(iii) Promotion of made in India Steel for infrastructure projects, especially those 
projects which are financed 100% by Indian Companies . Made in India steel 
must be used for construction of bridges and roads. 
(iv) .Encouraging the use of steel wheelbarrows instead of allowing to carry material 
on head; 
(v) Replacement of the use of bamboo scaffolding by steel pipe structure; 
(vi) Banning usage of health hazardous asbestos corrugated sheet both for domestic 
and industrial cladding purpose; 
(vii) Promotion of steel usage in making of truck body; and 
(viii) Encouraging usage of steel houses in earthquake prone zone. 
The measures above will result into multifold growth in areas like housing construction 
etc. And ultimately gross domestic product with go up, besides improving the health of India 
Steel Industry. 
REPLY 
Government has taken several policy measures for the growth and development of steel 
industry which inter alia, will increase the demand of steel. These include :-
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
Enhanced allocation for infrastructure development, housing, power and high 
ways in the last 2 budgets; 
Launching of a National Campaign to increase the consumption of steel 
particularly in rural and agro based industrial sector; 
Setting up of an Institute for Steel Development and growth for promotion of 
usage of steel in construction sector; 
Setting up of an empowered committee for assisting research and development 
activity in steel sector; and 

(v) Launching of a Research Project on " Development of Teaching Package on 
Steel Structural design" for Departments of Civil/Structural Engipeering by 
Ministry of Steel. The Project is being carried out by Indian Institute of 
Technology, Chennai, Annamalai University, Structural and Engineering 
Research Centre, Chennai and is being carried out by INSDAG. This project is 
likely to increase the demand of steel by improving the knowledge and 
competence of fresh Civil /Structural Engineers passing out from Educational 
Institutions. 
As far as the replacement of the use of bamboo scaffolding by steel pipe structt;tre and 
promotion of steel usage in making of truck body are concerned, the necessary action in this 
regard has already been initiated by the Development Commissioner for Iron and Steel . As far 
as other points are concerned, that office is being advised to take necessary action as suggested 
by the Standing Committee on Industry. 
FURTHER REPLY 
Housing, power and highway including bridges segments account for approximately 
50%--55% of the steel produced and consumed in the country. The authentic figures on sector 
wise sales are not available as the construction sector materials are mainly supplied by the 
secondary sector. However, estimates point out that during 1998-99 and 1999-2000 the 
consumption of steel by construction sector including infrastructure, housing, power, high way 
etc. was 12 million tonnes and 13.5-14 million tonnes respectively. 
(i) The National Campaign launched by the DCI&S has been aiming to promote the 
consumption of steel in general and rural areas in particular. The scientific grain 
storage through usage of steel is one of the main activities of this campaign. 
With the help of different state governments and union ministry of food and 
consumer affairs, the National Campaign Committee has been marketing storage 
bins made of steel at a subsidized rate to the farmers and households in the rural 
areas. The Campaign Committee has also taken up cudgels for banning of 
asbestos sheets in construction, compulsory usage of steel scaffolding in place of 
bamboo scaffolding, development of welding centres in rural areas, developmertt 
of truck bodies made of steel and to encourage building houses without timber 
with th~ help of Indira A was Y ojana Scheme. The objective of this campaign is 
to popularise the use of steel in non .. traditional sectors. However, the actual 
impact of such campaign may be felt only after a couple of years. 
(ii) The Institute primarily works towards the steel market development, 
development of technology in steel usage and addressing the needs of the steel 
supply chain. Some of its roles are: 
a. Creating awareness amongst potential users about affordability and benefits 
of Steel; 
b. Providing prompt advisory service on materials, construction practices, 
interpretation of codes, etc. and creating an environment for better usage of 
steel by acquiring and disseminating knowledge about the best practices; 
c. Upgrading the skills of the work force by organizing refresher 
courses/training programmes and offering better technical know-how, design 
aids and teaching aids; 
d. Communicating the benefits of steel vis-a-vis other competitive materials, 
·through life cycle cost studies, where required; 

e. Providing requisite thrust to increase steel consumption in rural areas; and 
I 
f. Assisting in the development of ancillary industries, which boost the usage of 
steel. 
The initial focus of the Institute's activities is the construction sector. 
INSDAG has made a significant impact on the technical awareness all across the supply 
chain. Though it is difficult to measure the direct impact of these activities, favourable 
environment appears to have been created for the preference of steel in place of conventional 
mode of construction (RCC/PSC) in the country. 
(iii) The Offices of the DCI&S/JPC have initiated many development jobs as 
facilitator to the steel industry. Some of these are 
a. Launching of a National CaQlpaign to promote consumption for steel in 
general and rural sector in particular. 
b. Playing a major role in the formation of the Institute for Steel Development 
and Growth (INSDAG) to work for the construction sector. 
c. Motivating the steel sector to maximise IT application - introducing e­
commerce in steel marketing and global steel trading, automation process , 
etc. 
d. Promoting new application of steel; viz. Steel water system, s teel furniture , 
etc. 
e. Promoting new clean technology of iron and steel making like Romelt , 
Corex, etc. 
f. Dissemination of information on prices, technology advancement, new steel 
application , markets , etc. through regular periodical publication s. 
(iv) The domestic industry has been representing to the Minist ry df Steel for 
introduction of "Buy Indian Act" on the lines of the "Buy Ameri can Act" of 
USA. The objective of this act is to encourage growth and development of 
indigenous industry by giving theJ!l constructive preference in Govemmen~ 
procurement. The Ministry of Steel is consulting the Ministry of Finance , 
Commerce and Law regarding the compatibility of the legislation with reference 
to our commitment in the WTO . 
INTEGRATED NATIONAL STEEL POLICY 
5. 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-Committee reiterates the recommendation made in 30th Report ( of Department 
Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry) to have an "Integrated National Steel 
Policy" comprising of all the segments of the Steel Industry and a policy statement which can 
land the Steel Industry to a place where it can open the account in the new millennium with 
cherished vision and rosy hopes and aspirations. Such National Steel Policy, embedded within 
overall national ,policy and priority, should be formulated while keeping in mind the SWOT 
analysis (strength, weaknesses, opportunitie s and threats) of Indian Steel Industry vis-a-vis world 

Steel Industry.. National Steel Policy should incorporate mutual coherence and cp-existence of 
Public and Private sector and reveal the policy with regard to investment-decision, humM 
resource management, pricing-policy in a liberalized and globalised economy, export import 
policy, structural co-ordination between various organizations dealing steel units etc. 
REPLY 
The Ministry of Steel has decided to formulate a National Steel Policy to have ;a national 
perspective and vision for the steel sector in the context of the second generation reforms, 
restructuring and globalisation. Ministry of Steel has already set up a drafting. Committee to draft 
a vision statement. The Committee is expected to submit its report within three months. The 
National Steel Policy will be finalised in consultation with major steel producers and consumers, 
their associations, suppliers of raw materials, financial institutions, Ministry of Coal, Commerce, 
Railways and Finance. 
FURTHER REPLY 
In pursuance of the directions of the Parliamentary Standing Committee On Industry, 
Ministry of Steel initiated action to formulate a National Steel Policy. A meeting was held under 
the chairmanship of Secretary (Steel) on 11.10.2000 which was attended by SAIL, TISCO, 
representatives of Planning Commission, Steel Furnace Association of India, CORSMA, CIT, All 
India Induction Furnace Association etc. A small drafting committee was set up to prepare the 
draft. The drafting committee is yet to submit the draft. The draft prepared by the drafting 
committee will be examined within the Ministry of Steel in consultation with Ministry of 
Finance, Commerce, Surface Transport, Railways and Coal. Thereafter, Ministry of Steel would 
go for wider consultation with all the major producers as well as Associations of steel producers 
and producers of raw materials for steel industry. In order to prepare the draft, DCI&S convened 
a meeting to discuss the blue prints of the draft policy and assign the work relating to various 
chapters to the experts in the fields. In an era of globalisation any national policy has to take into 
account not only the developments within the country but also developments in other countries & 
especially in view of the integration of the Indian steel industry with the global markets. 
NATIONAL POWER GRID SYSTEM 
7 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-Committee, therefore, is of the view that the Ministry of Steel may take up the 
issue with the Ministry of Power for exploring the possibility and commercial viability for setting 
up of National Power Grid System for Central distribution of power which will ensure not only 
the uniform tariff rate but also the continued supply of power to steel plants because a system 
may be developed where power, from the state of producing surplus may be channelised to the 
states having shortage of power. 
The Sub-Committee hopes that the Ministry of Steel will act in right earnest. 

REPLY 
The Ministry of Steel has taken up the above recommendation with the M inistry of 
Power. It has been infonned by the Ministry of Power that the thrust of the observation made by 
the Standing Committee on Industry is regarding setting up of a National Power Grid System. 
POWERGRID has already chalked out its plan to integrate all the regions through HVDC 
stations/ hi-poles and 765 KV AC rings to facilitate the transfer of power between the regions 
without any constraint. In fact, the HVDC inter regional links between Western and Northern, 
Western and Southern and Eastern and Southern regions are already existing and HVDC links 
between Eastern and Northern region is under construction. The other strong inter-regional links 
between various regions have been planned under mega generation projects which will be 
commissioned matching with the commissioning of generation projects. For further strengthening 
of National Grid, high capacity link HVDC/AC links viz. Talcher (ER)- Kolar (SR) (2000 MW), 
Ib (ER) - Jaipur (NR) (3000 MW) and Tata Transmission System have been approved/planned. 
A status note on the development of National Power Grid is enclosed as. 
DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL GRID 
Details of the Proposal 
The country is demarcated into five electrical regions namely Western, Southern, 
Northern, Eastern and North-eastern Region. Schemes planned to interconnect all these five 
regions so as to develop a National Grid, are under various stages of implementation by 
POWERGRID; status of various schemes is as given below: 
(i) Between Northern Region (NR) and Western Region (WR) 
500 MW HVDC back to back at Vindhyachal connecting Vindhyachal (WR) and 
Singrauli (NR) : Existing and under operation. 
(ii) Between Western Region (WR) and Southern Region (SR) 
1 000 MW HVDC back to back link at Chandrapur connecting Chandraqpur (WR) 
and Ramagundam (SR) : Existing and under operation 
(iii) Between Southern Region (SR) and Eastern Region (ER) 
500 MW HVDC back to back at Vizag connecting Jeypore (ER) and Vizag (SR) 
:Existing and under operation 
(iv) Between Eastern Region (ER) and Northern Region (NR) 
500MW HVDC back to back at Sasaram (NR) connecting Biharsharif (ER) and 
Rihind in (NR) : Expected to be commissioned by 2002 
(v) Between Eastern Region (ER) and Western Region (WR) 
Raipur (WR) - Rourkela (ER) 400 KV 0 /c line : Under planning a nd is 
expected for commissioning by 2002. 
(vi) Between Eastern Region (ER) and North- east ern Region (NER) 
Salakati (NER) - Birpara (ER) 220 KV 0 /c LINE : Existing and making Eastern 
and North-Ea stern Region to operate in synchronou s mode. Bongaigaon (NER) -
Maida (ER) 400 DV 0 /s line is completed and expected to be commissioned by 
Dec . 1999. With the commissioning of all the above links, concept of fonna tion 
ofNational Grid would be completed. 

For further strengthening of the National Grid, high capacity long HVJ)C links as well as 
AC links have been planned and to be commissioned along with Mega Projects. They are 
expected to be completed by 2004 and are as under: 
(i) Talcher (ER) - Kolar (SR) 2000 MW HVDC bipole along with Talcher II 
generation ofNTPC. 
(ii) lb (ER)- Jaipur (NR) 3000 MW HVDC bipole along with Ib Valley Stage I of 
CEPA (IPP). 
(iii) Tala Transmission system to evacuate power from Tala Hydro Project in 
Bhutan will connect Eastern Region with Northern Region where this power 
will be consumed. This scheme will also carry power from other new 
generation projects in Eastern Region. It wtll be commissioned by 2004. 
FURTHER REPLY 
The power Grid system has been basically conceived to integrator different regions of 
the country so as to facilitate the transfer of power between different regions without any 
constraint. For this purpose the whole country is demarcated into five electrical regions namely 
Western, Southern, Northern, Eastern and North-Eastern Region. Steel Plants of SAIL located in 
the Eastern Region had been suffering on account of 'High Frequency' of the power supply. 
Following are the adverse effects on the operation of steel plants: 
(i) Equipment damage. 
(ii) Erosion in the life of rotating equipment. 
(iii) Unwarranted increase in power consumption of the steel plant and thus loss of 
profitability and 
(iv) Loss of captive power generation since captive power plants of steel plants ha~ 
to isolate from grid when frequency is very high. 
Creation of a national grid by integrating the regional grids would definitely be a positive 
step for solving the problem. Schemes planned to interconnect all these five regions are under 
various stages of implementation by POWERGRID and when completed will be very useful for 
the steel sector. 
IMPLEMENTATION OF VOLUNTARY RETIREMENT SCHEME 
8 
RECOMMENDATION 
" The Sub-Committee is constrained to express its displeasure over the low productivity 
of labour in Indian Steel Industry which pushes the Industry to a disadvantageous point. In this 
regard, the respective plant management may be directed to resume that adequate training is 
imparted to the workers & various motivational scheme may be adopted to improve the labour 
productivity. 
The Committee, further, desires that the endeavour of rationalisation of manpower should 
continue with massive inputs on Scientific Human Resources management in order to achieve a 
'rational labour order' where high labour productivity may be obtained by employing efficient 
and effective labour force". 

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
In SAIL, labour productivity is calculated as "Production of Crude Steel including 
equivalent of Saleable Pig Iron assuming one tonne of Saleable Pig Iron equal to 0.25 tonnes of 
Crude' Steel divided by total number of Works Personnel in position excluding trainees of the 
plants". 
Labour productivity is usually expressed in terms of tonnes of Crude Steel produced per 
man year. The trend of Labour Productivity over the last few years has been as follows:-
Year BSP DSP RSP BSL 4 Plants 
Average 
1990-91 98 45 56 87 77 
1991-92 108 45 56 103 85 
1992-93 115 34 57 106 86 
1993-94 122 31 54 109 88 
1994-95 121 49 53 108 90 
1995-96 123 52 54 108 92 
1996-97 126 65 52 109 94 
1997-98 131 71 49 109 96 
1998-99 132 78 53 97 95 
1999-2000 121 88 55 105 96 
The need for manpower rationalisation has been recognised within the company, and 
manpower has been reduced through natural separations, and operation of Voluntary Retirement 
Schemes in phases. 
A Financial and Business restructuring plan for SAIL has recently been approved by the 
Government of India and some of the non-core units will be divested. Right-sizing of manpower 
is one of the important areas of the plan. SAiL has prepared a plan to reduce its work force to 
• about one lakh by 2005 as against present strength of approximately 1.5 lakhs. 
The competency .and motivational levels of employees also contribute to the attainment 
of higher productivity levels .. SAIL has been impaqing training through its training institutes to 
enhance manpower utilisation. The system of unit training helps in defining standard operating 
practices to stream-line work flow and methods. Through multi-skilling, employees are 
encouraged to acquire additional allied skills to ensure complementarity and optimum utilisation 
between operations and maintenance functions. 
The incentive and reward schemes that are in vogue for all levels of executives and non­
executives have a component on producuon performance, in addition to cost and quality 
parameters. Capacity utilisatjon and fulfillnumt of Annual Performance Plan (APP) target on 
production are important parameters on which payments to employees are based. 
In the fiercely competitive steel market, enhancing productivity of work-force is an important tool 
for achieving higher profitability. Accordingly, all systems and schemes are being reviewed 
towards attainment of this goal. 

FURTHER REPLY 
(i) So far as SAIL is concerned the exercise to have rational labour is expected to be 
achieved in the next five years through Voluntary Retirement and other 
separations. This is as per MoU signed between SAIL and Government of India 
in terms of financial and business restructuring plan. 
(ii) Labour productivity depends on various factors like capacity of the plant, 
operating rate, employee's strength etc. Labour productivity varies widely not 
only between India and other Developed countries but also \\-ithin India between 
different steel producing units as measurement procedures and variables for 
calculation of labour productivity vary from unit to unit. 
So far as SAIL is concerned, the total ingot steel production in a year plus 25% of the pig 
iron production is divided by the manpower engaged in production process to arrive at the labour 
productivity. The labour productivity is around 95 tonnes/man year in SAIL. 
CONTINUATION OF MODERNISATION OF PLANTS 
9. 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-Committee observes that Steel Industry is a heavy industry where high level of 
technology is in rolled in the process of production and it has been felt that the state of technology 
keeps on changing in each three to five years. Therefore, the Sub-Committee is of the considered 
view that the Ministry of Steel should remain in touch with the development of state of 
technology and employ the latest technology available. 
REPLY 
(i) Ministry of Steel is in touch with the development of state of technology and 
employing the latest technology as per requirement, like NMDC and SAIL has 
adopted Romelt Technology, in public sector. NSL has adopted Corex 
Technology and Ispat Industries Ltd. has adopted thin slab casting compact strip 
production for fast production of quality HR Coils. 
(ii) The plants under Steel Authority of India Ltd. while modernising, have been 
gradually adopting advance technology like Continuous Casting of Slabs/Billets, 
Secondary Steel Metallurgy of improvement of steel quality etc. Similarly, Plants 
like Tata Iron and Steel Company Ltd. have also been modernised to adopt latest 
technologies including stamp charging in Coke Oven. 
FURTHER REPLY 
Technology upgradation and modernization is a continuous process. To achieve 
,international standards, steel PSU (SAIL) has undertaken major modernisation programme at 
Durgapur, Rourkela and Bokaro Steel plants. The technology introduced in the modernization 
were of international standards. The new technologies introduced under the Modernization plan, 
l'lantwise are as under: 

(a) Modernisation ofDurgapur Steel Plant 
(i) Raw Material Handlin g Complex 
(ii) Selective crushing of Coal 
(iii) Lump Ore Screening in Raw Material Handling Plant ( RMHP) 
(iv) Base Blending of Raw Sinter Mix 
(b) Coke Oven & By Product Plant 
Plough Extractor System of feeding coke from Wharf to conveyor 
(c) New Sinter Plant 
(i) Waste Heat Recovery from Sinter Coolers 
(ii) PI.-C & DOC level process automation 
(d) Blast Furnace 
(i) Stave cooling and under hearth cooling 
(ii) Sinter Screening at Skip 
(iii) Conveyorisation of Stock House 
(iv) Cast House Slag Granulation in Blast Furnace-4 (BF-4) 
(v) Twin Tap Hole 
(vi) Rocking Runners 
(vii) High Hot Blast Temperature including Hoogoven's Technology in BF-4 
(viii) Complete automation and control of stoves 
(e) Basic Oxygen Furnace 
(i) BOF Process of Steel Making 
(ii) Continuous Casting of Billets 
(f) Rolling Mill - I 
Oil Hydraulics in Wheel Forge presses 
(g) Rolling Mill-ll 
Thennex cooling of Ribbed Bars in Merchant Mill 
(h) . Wheel & Axle Plant 
(i) CNC Machines for Wheel Machining 
(ii) Process Control Computerization and High Degree of automation in all 
modernized Units. 
Modernization of Rourkela Steel Plant 
a. Base blending facilities for preparation of Sinter Mix 
b. Cbnveyorisation of stock houses and sinter screening at Blast Furnaces 
c. Controlled crushing and blending of coking coal by modernising existing Coal 
Handling Plant 

d. Partial Briquetting of Coking Coal Charges 
e. Cast House Slag Granulation facilities in Blast Furnace No. 4 
f. Inert gas purging facility for LD Converters 
g. Suppressed combustion facilities for recovery of converter gases 
h. Continuous casting of liquid steel into slabs 
t. Pitch bonding and tempering facilities for converter bricks 
j. Coil Box facilities in Hot Strip Mill 
k. Quick roll changing facilities at Hot Strip Mill 
I. Walking beam reheating furnaces in Plate Mill and Hot Strip Mill 
Modernization of Bokaro Steel Plant 
a. Continuous Casting Technique 
u. Walking Beam Type Reheating Furnaces 
c. Laminar Strip Cooling 
d. Hydraulic Automatic Gauge Control 
e. Work Roll Bending 
f. Mill Automation 
After Modernisation of Durgapur Steel Plant, Rourkela Steel Plant and Bokaro Steel 
Plant, techno-economic parameters have shown significant improvement. The energy 
consumption per tonne of crude steel in the Bbilai Steel Plant is the lowest among the similar 
integrated plants in public and private sectpr. 
Visakhapatnam Steel Plant (VSP) is a modem steel plant and has been set up with several 
latest technologies for the first time in the country such as 100% continuous casting of liquid 
steel, dry quenching of coke with auxiliary power generation facilities, 100% Cast House Slag 
Granulation in Blast furnace and Torpedo Ladle fo~ transporting liquid hot metal. But VSP is 
behind in terms of level of technology, scale of operation and the value addition to the product­
mix as compared to the world standards. 
In the private sector, the Tata Iron and Steel Company Limited is said to have achieved 
its vision of becoming the world's lowest cost producer of steel after modernization of their 
production technologies and innovations on various technological parameters. The new steel 
plants in the private sector are being set up with modem technologies. lspat Industries Limited 
has set up Electric Arc Furnace based on CONARC technology and is producing steel using 
sometimes as high as 100% solid Direct Reduced Iron (DRI) charge. The metallic charge, in 
Electric Arc Furnace (EAF) is being supplemented with Hot Metal produced from Blast Furnace. 
The steel is being rolled in Compact Strip Mill. Essar Steel Limited is producing steel with 
Electric Arc Furnace using gas based Hot Briquetted Iron (HBI) in Electric Arc Furnace. They 
have innovated their production technologies to charge Direct Reduced Iron (DRI) in hot 
condition also. Jindal Vijaynagar Steel Limited (NSL) are using COREX technology to produce 
Hot Metal using non-coking coal. This is stated to be environment friendly iron and steel 
production technology. 

COST REDUCTION MEASURES 
13. 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-Committee observes that almost all steel plant is facing the mind boggling 
problem of high cost of production due to one and other reasons which inter-alia include low 
labour productivity, high power tariff, obsolete tools and technology, high payment for 
procurement of raw material etc. which directly affects the pricing policy of the product and 
ultimately makes the product less competitive in domestic and international market. 
In this regard, the Sub-Committee hopes that the workers and management should 
undertake conscious efforts for reducing the cost of production. The Sub-committee is of the 
view that efforts may be made towards generat~on of high work culture, developmental 
supervision and progressive management, which backed by employment of latest technology for 
economisation of energy consumptions, would lead to reduction in the cost of production. 
REPLY 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
SAIL has adopted the following measures for cost reduction/cost control : 
Improvement in yield and productivity. 
Reduction in the consumption of coking coal and other raw materials. 
Reduction in the consumption of power and fuel and stores & spares. 
Reductio n in the administrative and other expenses. 
Implementation of Voluntary Retirement Scheme(VRS) for right sizing 
manpower. 
(vii) Reduction in inventory by Rs. 768 Crores during 1998-99 and by Rs.2172 crores 
during 1999-2000. 
As a result of intensive cost control drive, SAIL has achieved a saving of Rs.713 crores 
during 1999-2000. 
REPLY 
RINL has informed that the following cost reduction measures were undertaken:-
(i) Productive Work Culture : 
RJNL(VSP) has given special emphasis on promoting and sustaining 
productive work culture which inter-alia includes (a) developing Organization 
Mission & Vision, Core values to operate at high levels of efficiency, (b) 
working with compact manpower, (c) Optimum utilization of available 
manpower, (d) introducing productive work practices like multi-skilling, . 
reduction of shift-change delays. job rotation, team working etc., (e) training, re­
training and changing the mind set, (f) inculcating achievement orientation 
amongst managers & employees etc. All these have helped to step up the labour 
productivity from 110 to 192 T per man per month in 1999-2000 .. 

(ii) Developmental supervision & Progressive management: 
In RINL (VSP), focus has been given through various tailor-made HRD 
programmes, to ta·ansfonn the role of Supervisors and develop their role more as 
'Facilitators & Developers' rather than mere "Controllers". Besides this, in order 
to build up a strong frontline supervisory cadre, non-executive employees with 
required qualification, adequate experience of men & equipment on the shopfloor 
are being inducted as Non-Unionised Supervisors. This has greatly helped in 
improving quality of supervision on the shop floor. Apart from this, there is 
constant endeavour on the part of top management to achieve administrative 
excellence by adopting progressive techniques of management like simplification 
and rationalization of existing procedures, clear-cut delegation of powers, 
Standard Operating Practices, Standard Maintenance Practices, role in clarity, 
intensive & extensive communication through various mechanisms like 'Open­
house', 'Samalochana', 'Access', Bipartite forums, informal meeting etc., 
deploying company policies & strategies through a frrupework of key processes, 
competence building, involvement and empowerment, rewarding, recognizing 
and caring for the employees etc. 
(iii) Employment of latest technology: VSP is pioneer in adopting latest 
technologies combined with higher scale of operation. Some of these 
measures are mentioned below:-
(a) 7 M tall coke oven batteries. 
(b) Dry quenching of coke 
(c) Use of more than 80% sinter 
(d) Bell-less top charging in Blast Furnaces 
(e) BF slag generation at the cost house of Blast Furnaces. 
(f) Generation of power from the waste heat available from dry quenching 
of coke and from the high top pressure to Blast Furnaces. 
(g) 1 00% continuous casting of steel 
(h) High Speed automatic rolling mills. 
(i) Installation of "Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCAD A) for 
proper monitoring and control of power, fuel and utilities. 
(j) Computerization of processes and controls. 
(iv) Cost reduction measures: 
Concerted efforts were made to reduce the cost of production by cost reduction 
measures. Meticulous planning was made and the execution was vigorously monitored 
which has yielded substantial savings. These efforts resulted in saving of Rs.44 crores 
during 1998-99 and Rs.118 crores during 1999-2000. A plan has been drawn and is being 
executed during 2000-2001 aiming at a savings of Rs.75 crores. All these efforts would 
reflect in reduction in cost of production. Some of the major areas of cost reduction 
measures are:-
(a) Reduction of refractory consumption. 
(b) Maximisation of power generation:irom waste heat. 

(c) Maximisation of use of metallurgical wastes. 
(d) Reduction in overall energy consumption. 
(e) Optimum use ofBF gas, LD gas and coke oven gas. 
(f) Budgetary control on expenditure. 
Apart from these, several other austerity measures have been taken to reduce the 
administrative cost. 
FURTHER REPLY 
The cost of production is a classified information. However, the trend of cost of 
production of saleable steel of SAIL is as under: 
(Rs.nonne) 
1996-97 1999-00 2000-01 (April-Dec.) 
Variable Cost 7315 6829 6935 
Total Cost 12007 12796 12697 
SAIL has taken number of initiatives in the area of cost control : 
(i) The intensive cost control drive envisages improvement of yield, redt1ction in 
consumption of coking coal & other raw material, power & fuel, 6tores & spares, 
improvement in other key techno-economic parameter~ .-uction in 
administrative expenditure, etc. 
(ii) Manpower cost in SAIL is about 18% of the cost of p roduction against 4-5% of 
the competitors. For right sizing the manpower, SAIL h ~ s launched various VR 
Schemes. 
(iii) In the year 1998 and 1999, VR Schemes were launched based on the deferred 
pa:yment . basis. Implementation of Voluntary Retirement Scheme (VRS) 
resulted in separation of 5975 employees in 1998 and 13617 employees in 1999. 
(iv) Another VR Scheme has been introduced based on OPE pattern in February, 
2001 which will remain open till mid-April. 
(v) Fresh investment proposals are virtually on hold except ongoing scheme and 
schemes relating to statutory requirement viz. safety, environment, etc. The 
expenditure during last two years was restricted to Rs. 777 crores ( 1999-00) and 
Rs.l246 crores (1998-99) as against about Rs.2000 crores/year in earlier years. 
For 2000-01, capital outlay is for Rs.500 crores only. 
(vi) By strict working capital management, the borrowing level has been reduced by 
Rs.450 crores in the nine months' of 2000-01. 

AGGRESSIVE MARKETING STRATEGY AND ENHANCEMENT OF MARKET 
SHARE 
16. 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-Committee is of the optmon that in a globalised and liberalized scenario 
formulation of marketing strategy has the telling impact on the profitability of corporate business . 
Henceforth, the Sub-Committee is of the considered view that the Ministry of Steel should 
formulate proper 'marketing policy' on the basis of which Central Marketing Organisation should 
chalk out effective marketing programmes which should be delivered to the marketing wing of 
the plant management and plant management should be given sufficient autonomy to act 
prudently keeping in mind the prevailing market scenario . Plant Management must strive at 
product promotion & product diversification & development in order to seize larger international 
market share. A proper market segmentation and brand endowment is the need of hour, besides 
stressing on consumer satisfaction . 
The Sub-Committee views that steel plants should adopt aggressive marketing strategy 
which will not only lead to disposal of inventories but also attainment of larger market share. 
REPLY 
With a view to evolve a Sales Plan attuned to the market conditions , a detailed exercise is 
undertaken before commencement of each financial year which, interalia, included the product­
wise, segment-wise demand vis-a-vis availability in the country as well as the production 
capabilities/constraints of each of the plant. 
The demand forecast based on the above exercise is projected by the Market Research 
Group (MRG) Group of CMO of SAIL in consultation with the field marketing set up which is 
then deliberated extensively with the plant representatives for finalising the Sales Plan for the 
year. 
After the finalisation of the Annual Sales Plan, demand assessment as well as order 
booking are undertaken during the year as an on-going process and, in case any modification is 
warranted in the plan during the course of the year, depending on the prevailing market 
conditions, the same is carried out. 
On the basis of Annual Sales Plan, orders are booked on annual/quarterly/monthly basis 
and efforts are made to execute the orders in terms of the customer's requirements. In order to 
compete in the highly competitive market, SAIL is reorienting its strategies/marketing initiatives 
based on the prevailing market conditions. 
Some of the initiatives taken by SAIL towards aggressive marketing are as under : 
(i) To help increase market share and customer focus, CMO has undertaken 
organisational restructuring consisting of Flat Product Group and Long Product 
Group. 
(ii) Introduction of Key Account Management process to attract new/lost customers 
and provide total service to major/strategic accounts in order to increase market 
share. 

(iii) Special emphasis on developing value added products through the efforts of R. & 
D wing of the Organisation. 
(iv) Developing and nurturing long term relationship with customers by entering into 
MOU/Annual tie-ups with them. 
(v) Emphasis on increasing sales through the network of authorised dealers. 
(vi) Offering full package of steel materials to projects. 
(vii) Sale of materials through conversion arrangements. 
(viii) Exploring ways to tap the potential Rural Demand. 
FURTHER REPLY 
The market research group of CMO is primarily entrusted with market research work 
related to the domestic market. Market research function for international market is carried out 
by International Trade Division of SAIL. Following are the salient achievements :-
(i) Export of Rails to Bangladesh: SAIL has re-entered the Rail Export market after 
a gap of about 25 years. 
(ii) Export of HR Slit Coils to Bangladesh: SAIL has been able to' export Slit Coils 
for the first time. 
(iii) Export of Semi-Rolled Slabs to Myanmar: This product was e-· · ~- \~d for the 
first time. 
(lv) Strengthening of Nepal market: Nepal has been a natural market for SAIL 
e:~ports. During the current year, exports to Nepal are exp;.;cted to touch I 00,000 
tonnes. 
As result of the initiatives taken, SAIL has been able to sustain its presence in the 
competitive market and improve average per tonne realisation as compared to the corresponding 
period last year. Tl1~re has· been' an improvement in customer focus leading to higher customer 
satisfaction levels. 
As regards marketing strategy policy etc. of SAIL Plants, it may be stated that the Prime 
quality Iron and Steel materials produced by SAIL Plants are sold through Central Marketing 
Organisation (CMO). With a view to evolve a Sales Plan attuned to the market conditions, a 
detailed exercise is undertaken before comme11cement of each tinancial year which inter-alia 
include the Plant-wise, prod~ct-wise, segment-wise Sales Plan keeping in view the demand and 
supply scenario in the country as well as production capabilities/c0nstraints of each of the Plants 
of SAIL. 
This Plan is developed after extensive deliberations among the plant and CMO 
representatives. Simultaneously, the annuai strategy for order booking and servicing are finalized 
after extensive deliberations at various levels. 
The actual order booking and servicing are done on annual/quarterly/monthly basis after 
taking care of the customers requiremer1ts and expectations. Mid course corrections in the plans 
and strategies are made as required based on the market conditions prevailing. The pricing 
strategy is decided on a monthly basis in close coordination among CMO, the Plants and the 
Corporate Finance Group. 

Attainment of competitive edge 
17. 
RECOMMENDATION 
The sub-committee has dealt in detail strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats of 
each plant (SWOT analysis) and hopes that steel plants wilt make use of the same for 
comparative analysis and would learn the better part of other in order to achieve competitive edge 
in domestic as welt as international markets. Such exercise would foster fair competition among 
domestic market. 
The sub-committee recommends that the Ministry of Steel will take account of the 
SWOT analysis of each plant done by the sub-committee and make use of the same while taking 
any policy decision with regard to any specific plant. 
The sub-committee hopes that steel plant may prosper by overcoming weaknesses, 
combating threats, utilising opportunities banking on its inherent strength. 
REPLY 
The benefit of the SWOT analysis made by the sub-committee of the various steel plants 
will be availed by Government while deciding policy and/the plants themselves with a view to 
furnishing a competitive edge to their performance. 
FURTHER REPLY 
The SWOT analysis made by the sub-committee will be considered by the Government 
while giving the final shape to the National Steel Policy. 
SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATION 
jt(i) Bhilai Steel Planu (BSP) 
(i) Export surplus plates 
RECOMMENDATION 
The sub-committee feels that BSP management may be given autonomy in deciding the 
pricing of arising which accumulates during the process of production and BSP . ~hile disposing 
of the arising through disposal stores should take into account the interest of local customer, as 
this measure will promote the regional industrial development. 
REPLY 
The Steel Plants have full autonomy in deciding the pricing of the arising during the 
process of production. The marketing policies of SAIL as a responsible corporate entity in the 
public sector, are oriented towards attainment of development of local areas to the extent these 
are consistent with the interests of SAIL. As a Navratna Company, SAIL is well aware of its 
responsibilities towards the development of the ancillary units near the plants including Bhilai 
Steel Plant. The recommendation of the Committee to keep in view the interest of the local 

customers to promote regional industrial development has been noted for guidance and 
compliance to the extent possible. 
FURTHER REPLY 
The arisings which get produced alongwith main products are sold partly by open tender 
and partly on fixed price sale every month arisings are put on sale through open tender to the 
hiShest bidder. If the price quoted is found reasonable by the tender committee based on the 
market trend received in the tender. Prices of re-rotlable items are fixed by the pricing 
committee and price list is published and notified based on the ~vailability. The material is sold 
on first-come-first-serve basis. 
Most of such arisings are purchased by local customers only and has resulted in setting of 
large number of industries in and around Bhilai. 
AUGMENTATION OF RAIPUR-VIZAG ROUTE 
l(ii) 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Steel should take up the issue of 
doubling of Raipur-Vizag railway line with the Ministr) of Railway to enable the plant for 
smooth course of finished products for exports. 
REPLY 
The views of Sub-Committee have been acted upon and the matter taken up with the 
Ministry of Railways. The job of laying of double line on the route from Vizag to Raipur has 
already been taken up by the Railways and completed upto Lanzigarh Road. The current status 
and plan for doubling of remaining part of the route from Raipur to Lanzigarh Road (about 251 
krns) is being.obtained from Ministry of Railways. 
FURTHER REPLY 
The position is being ascertained from the Ministry of Railways and will be informed to 
Rajya Sabha Sectt. in due course. 
(iii)_Entering into Private Sector for Scrap Recovery and Processing Job 
RECOMMENDATION 
-The Sub-Committee believes that FSNL management should intensify ·the follow-up 
action for entering into an agreement with M/s. Neelachal Ispat Nigam Ltd., M/s. Essar Steel Ltd. 
and Is pat Metallic India Ltd., for taking up scrap recovery operation. 

REPLY 
The latest position with regard to FSNL's efforts for taking up the scrap recovery and 
processing job at Private Sector/Joint Sector Steel Plants is as under:-
(i) Ispat Metallic India Ltd. - FSNL has already started the work of recovery and 
processing of iron scrap on 12.7.2000. 
(ii) Ispat Industries Ltd.(IIL) - Preliminary discussion was held in May 2000 for 
handling of SMS Slag and Scrap. IlL wanted FSNL to study the problem of 
. liquid slag being faced by them and to submit a suitable scheme for the same. 
Accordingly, FSNL alongwith their consultant M/s. MECON has studied the 
problem i.n detail and is expected to send the proposal soon. 
(iii) Neelachal Ispat Nigam Ltd.(NINL)- Discussion for the techno-commercial 
terms and conditions of the Agreement for handling BF and BOF slag are going 
on with NINL and the agreement is expected to be fmalised shortly. 
(iv) Essar Steel Ltd.(ESL)- In response to the proposal submitted by FSNL for 
handlirrg of liquid slag, ESL has asked for certain clarifications which were 
furnished on 5.7.2000. 
FURTHER REPLIES 
(i) FSNL has given its offer to M/s. Ispat Industries Limited on 4.10.2000 for 
handling of liquid slag. This offer is under consideration of M/s. lspat Industries 
Ltd. 
(ii) The scope of work, equipment and manpower requireml nt at M/s. Neelachal 
Ispat Nigam Ltd. have been discussed with M/s. NINL and finalised for handling 
Blast Furnace Slag and recovering metallic from this slag.. Negotiation on 
service charge rate and CQmmercial terms & conditions is in progress. 
(iii) Discussion on the project of BOF Slag handling Utd processing has not been 
concluded as the Steel Melting Shop construction work at M/s. NINL is not 
expected to bo oompleted during 20~1-02. 
l l(v) Scrap Recovery Operatiou over to FSNL 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-Committee, in view of the decision taken vide minvtes~ormance Review 
meeting held at Ministry of Steel on 21
11 
December, 1990 that "all scra)r"rf!lv ery operations in 
the integrated steel plants should be handed over to FSNL", and recommends that the Ministry of 
Steel may look into the matter and FSNL should have a priority in settiDa orders and professional 
for scrap recovery operation . As regards the recovery of steel from slq from dump yards of 
BSP, Durgapur, BSL & RINL steel plants the Sub-Committee reiterates the Committee's 
recommendation made in this regard in its 30• Report of Demands for Onnta ( 1999-200,0). . 
REPLY • • 
Some steel plants have engag~ private cont:ractors for recowry of scrap from curreut 
ariJinp as well Is from dump yards. As realls reoovery of steel from slq from dump yards, as 
already replied, the matter was taken up with SAIL who reported that there is no scientific 

method available to assess the quantity of scrap buried underground and the figure of Rs.20 lakh 
tonnes and Rs.600 crore stated to be locked up in dumps is a subjective assessment of the private 
party. 
However, the availability of scrap in the SMS slag dumps of all the six integrated steel 
plants under SAIL and RINL has been assessed by FSNL on the basis of following three factors:-
a. The report of Centre for Engineering and Technology (CET) who was appointed as 
Consultant by FSNL for this purpose in the year 1985 in respect of Rourkela, Bhilai 
& Durgapur. 
b. The quantity of scrap generated as percentage of liquid steel production based on our 
experience. 
c. The actual quantities of scrap recovered from the SMS slag dumps by FSNL and 
other agencies. 
Based on above, FSNL has since made the assessment of scrap in the SMS slag dumps 
and action plan has been prepared for retrieval of this scrap in respect of the Steel Plants at 
Rourkela, Bhilai, Durgapur and RINL, which is as follows: -
SCRAP BALANCE IN THE DUMPS 
STEEL PLANTS RSP BSP DSP VIZAG 
QTY. IN MT 0.96 0.88 2.28 0.43 
ACTION PLAN .FOR RECOVERY (IN M.T.) 
1999-00 (Actual) 0.24 0.25 0.53 0.07 
2000-01 0.36 0.32 0.70 0.18 
2001-02 0.36 0.31 0.70 0.18 
2002-03 - - 0.35 -
The entire quantity of scrap in the dump at Bumpur Plant of liSCO has been recovered 
and there is no backlog. 
At Bokaro Steel Plant the SMS slag is thrown in the dump outside the boundary walt of 
the Plant after recovery of scrap by sweeping by magnetic cranes at the slag yards. There is 
hardly any scrap available in this slag for recovery. Economic recovery any further from this 
dump is therefore not feasible. 
12(vi) Solid-waste M,anagement 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-Committee is of the view that FSNL should shine its best to engage itself in 
solid-waste management and improve in financial performance. 

REPLY 
The Gross Margin of the Company increased to Rs.25.71 crores in 1999-2000 from 
Rs.24.01 crores in 1998-99, which reflects improvement in its financial performance. 
FURTHER REPLY 
Proportion of income accruing on account of solid waste management as percentage of 
total service charge income for last 4 years is given below: 
Year Proportion of income on account of solid waste Management 
1996-97 98.86% 
1997-98 96.99% 
1998-99 96.99% 
1999-00 1999-2000 97.42% 
FINANCIAL RESTRUCTURING 
3 (ii) 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-Committee is of the considered view that RSP management and the Mi~istry of 
Steel should carve out areas of organisational intervention and undertake appropriate 
modernisation process so that the cost of production is reduced. 
REPLY 
SAIL has spent Rs. 4468 crores on modernisation of RSP upto 31.3.2000. Benefit of 
modernization would come in phases. As part of corporate strategy for improvement of 
performance, number of other measures have been taken for RSP viz. 
(i) Intensive cost control drive resulting in saving of Rs. 238 crores in 1998-99 and 
Rs. 229 crores in 1999-2000 . The variable cost of production has come down by 
5.6% in 1999-2000 over 1998-99. 
(ii) Introduction of voluntary retirement scheme for employees in 1998 and 1999 
resulting in separation of 3820 employees. 
(iii) Market oriented production and product-mix. 
(iv) Improvement in techno-economic parameters. 
(v) Inventory reduction by Rs. 73 crores in 1998-99 and Rs. 466 crores in 1999-
2000. 
FURTHER REPLY 
Modernisation of RSP was completed in phases by November 1999. Apart from 
modernisation, SAIL has taken number of cost control measures to reduce the cost and improve 
profitability in the plant viz., improvement in yield, reduction in consumption of coking coal and 
~ 

other raw material, power, fuel, stores/spares etc. Cost of production per tonne in the plant has 
come down from Rs.l8983 in 1999-2000 to Rs.l8322 in 2000-01 (April-December). 
MODERNISATION OF CRM-2 
I S(iii) 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-Committee recommends that BSL management and the Ministry of Steel may 
look into the issue of modernization of CRM-2 and prepare the feasibility report, thereon, and if 
necessary • should undertake modernization project at the earliest . 
REPLY 
SAIL has appointed an international consultant, M/s Hoogovan Technical Services (HfS) 
of Netherlands for study of the total cold rolling mill complex of BSL. The report of HTS has 
been received. Schemes are being formulated as per the recommendations of HTS. 
Implementation of these schemes, however, will depend upon availability of funds with SAIL. 
FURTHER REPLY 
The major recommendations ofM/s. Hoogovan Technical Services, ~s~cially with 
regard to investment, are as follows: 
1 . The layout and facilities are good but poorly maintained and investment should be 
made to bring the equipment to the original condition. Stress is on hydraulic 
equipment. 
2. Quality has been analyzed and various aspects like Shape, Surface and Gauge have 
been prioritized as under: 
Priority-1 has bc;en given to shape correction. The following suggestions have been made 
for priority action (Investment: Rs.30 crore) 
1. Positive & negative bending facilities in all four stands of Tandem Mill- I (TM-1) 
2. Differential cooling system in stand-IV ofTM-1 
3. Revamping of emul~ion system of TM-1 
4. Revamping of hydraulic system ofTM-1 
S. Installation of tension leveler 
Priority-II has been given to surface. Here more changes in maintenance and operating 
practices are involved than investment. Some funds will, however, be required to put the 
equipment in proper order. Electro Discharge Texturing (EDT) is suggested but this could be on 
Build-Own-Operate (BOO) basis as planned by BSL. 
Priority-ill has been given to pup ::ontrol for which the following are suggested 
(Investment Rs. 30 crore) 
l. Electrical revamp in TM 
2. Tension reel change 
3. Inteistand guide revamping. in TM 

3. Hydraulic Automatic Gauge Control (AGC) is not a priority for TM-1. Electrical revamp with 
electro-mechanical AGC is adequate to give the required thickness tolerance. 
4. Stress meter and automatic shape control are not a priority for good shape. Roll bending in 
Tendem Mill (TM) & Skin Pass Mill (SPM) and differential roll cooling with proper 
operating practice can give good shape. 
5. The report has identified points of weakness and given suggestions for improvement in 
different units of CRM. It has also covered aspects of material handling and packing. 
6. It has been decided by SAIL to take up the various investment proposals of Cold Rolling 
Mills on scheme to scheme basis in such a wtty that the benefits froin individual schemes 
could be obtained. 
METAL SCRAP TRADE CORPORATION LTD. (MSTC) 
13 
RECOMMENDATION 
1. The Sub-Committee feels that once the depression in the Steel market is over and the most of 
EAF unit back on the track the demand of Steel melting scrap will surge up and MSTC would 
be in a position to import the scrap in buck quality to fulfill the domestic demands of the 
Secondary Steel. At the same time, MSTC should adopt the "Aggressive Marketing 
Strategy" to import slab end cuttings and petroleum products to maintain a stay in foreign 
trades giving further imputes to diversification on the foreign trade front. 
2. Adequate guidelines should be given to Railways, SAIL and other Governmental department 
to dispose of scrap through MSTC. 
3. MSTC should widen the basket of items of trade and should adopt massive marketing 
strategy of Sponge Iron and finished steel etc. 
4. To continue the direct trading i.e. purchase and sell and to cut the intermediaries in order to 
enhance profit. 
5. MSTC should find the pros & cons of joint-venture, before entering into an agreement and 
correct estimation of viable projects should be worked out in advance showing managerial 
skill and corporate bargaining. 
6. The Sub-Committee hopes that MSTC would run in profit once the cloud of recession in 
Steel Industry descends and would play pivotal role in its traditional as well as newly adopted 
roles. 
REPLY 
The depression in the steel market is not yet over, particularly in the case of long 
pr~ucts which predominantly comprise the product mix of the secondary sector of steel. Inspite 
of that, MSTC imported approx. 80,000 tonnes of melting scrap during 1999-2000 against 'Nil' 
import of this item in 1998-99 and 1997-98. 
The Steel Ministers have written to the Minister of Railways in this regard on 30.7.99 and 
12.11.1999. MSTC is now pursuing the matter with the Railways. 

MSTC has already widened its basket of imports and in the year 1999-2000, it imported 
eight items namely ferrous melting scrap, pellets, petroleum products, slab end cuttings, ferro 
alloys, sintered ore, coke. As regards marketing of sponge iron and steel, there does not appear to 
exist any possibility of trading in sponge iron, MSTC is trying to trade directly in domestically 
produced steel but have not been successful so far. 
Direct trading will involve higher risks and physical handling of the merchandise which 
would call for investment in land, machinery and possibly increase in the manpower, which is not 
considered desirable specially in view of the Government's decision to divest l 00% Government 
equity in MSTC. 
This has been noted. During the year 1999-2000, MSTC was able to earn a profit before 
taxofRs. 5.70 croresagainstaprofitofRs. 3.06 croresduring 1998-99 
FURTHER REPLY 
(i) As a sequel to MSTC's proposal, there have been a number of meetings and also 
exchange of correspondence at various levels. At the request of the Railways 
MSTC's officers have visited North Eastern Railway, North Frontier Railway. 
They have informed the Railway Board that after having studied these railways 
they feel that separate proposals cannot be worked out for separate railways. The 
last correspondence rests with MSTC's reply dated 7.3.200 1. 
(ii) The Cabinet Committee on Disinvestment in its meeting held on 19.7.2000 
approved the proposal of the Department of Disinvestment to d~invest the entire 
shareholding of Government in MSTC through strategic sale to a strategic buyer. 
The disinvestment process is to be undertaken by the Department of 
Disinvestment during January 2001-2002 and implemented by 31.3 .2002. 
HINDUSTAN STEEL CONSTRUcrJON LIMITED (HSCL) 
14 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-Committee undertook a very extensi~e study of facts and figures of HSCL and· 
came to the conclusion that HSCL should continue in the public sector and its fate can be 
transformed by taking following measures:-
• (i) Rigorous implementation of Financial Restructuring cum Financial Assistance 
Package; 
(ii) Striving hard to obtain maximum work order for the company; 
(iii) Gainful rationalization of manpower; 
(iv) Managerial revolution and management overhauling; 
(v) Doing away with the prevailing practice of Sub-Contracting the works 
undertaken; and 
(vi) Shifting of HSCL headquarters from Calcutta to Bokaro or any other suitable 
location. 
The SuD-Committee was surprised to observe that BSP owes to HSCL an outstanding 
claims of approx. 45 crore for the last I 0 years and even after the opinion given by the then 

Attorney General of India for settlement, the issue is still pending. How can HSCL survive if the 
amount to such a tune may remain outstanding to a span of ten years? The Sub-Corqmittee feels 
that the BSP management should look into all the aspects of the issues and settle the issue in the 
best possible manner. 
REPLY 
Rigorous implementation of Financial Restructuring-cum-Financial Assistance Package 
is being done. SBI has disbursed a loan of Rs.209.82 crores (approx.) for separatiqg 4000 
employees during the current financial year. At present 4004 employees as on 31.7.2000 have 
already been separated under VRS. Further loan of Rs.l 08 crores is under process and may be 
disbursed by the Commercial Banks soon, to effect the VRS for separation of 2000 employees 
by March, 200 I. 
HSCL is striving hard to obtain maximum work for the company. In 1999-2000, HSCL 
has bagged orders amounting to Rs.361.16 crore which is an all time high achievement since 
inception. 
Rationalisation of manpower is under process through VR Scheme and it is aimed to 
separate 6000 employees by 2001-2002. 
Managerial restructuring is continuously on and for the last 4 years, there many changes 
had been brought about at the Unit Head level, and other levels. Also major resetting will be 
done after 6000 employees are separated, in the year 200 1. 
Since total availability of manpower in respective disciplines, expertise etc. will be well 
established after separation of 6000 employees, the mis-match of resources can be ascertained 
thereafter and maximum departmentalisation can be done subsequently. 
HSCL headquarters should not .be changed from Calcutta because it will lead to 
avoidable expenditure and would not be in ihe interest ofthe company at this juncture. 
Huge outstanding dues of HSCL are pending with BSP. In this regard, Secretary (Steel) had 
taken a meeting recently and it was decided that the matter will be examined by the Board of 
HSCL and, if necessary, the same will be referred to the Administrative Ministry for further 
course of action. 
FURTHER REPLY 
(i) Commercial Banks have sanctioned loans amounting to Rs. 318.36 crores 
(including Rs. 209.82 crores from State Bank of India and Rs. 52.16 crore from 
Indian Overseas Bank and Rs. 56.38 from Indian Bank) during 2000-2001. Out 
of this Rs. 209.82 crores have been disbursed by State Bank of India and Rs. 
5.50 crores have been disbursed by Indian Overseas Bank. 6137 employees have 
been separated during 2000-2001 at an expenditure of Rs. 211.25 crores. 
(ii) Separation of 6137 employees has already taken place during 2000-2001 as per 
the approved Scheme. 
(iii) HSCL had submitted its Claim on Bokaro Steel Limited amounting toRs. 25.70 
crores. The settlement is under negotiation between the two companies. 

RASBTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LIMITED (RINL) 
16 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that inadequate fund flow led to time & cost 
overrun in the commencement of operation of the plant. Inadequate and procrastinated provision 
of financial supply during project implementation period followed by long gestation penod 
resulted into high capital cost of Rs.8594 crores (originally conceived at a cost of Rs.2256 
crores). 
However, the Sub-Committee is happy to note that the Government has approved second 
capital restructuring by converting Rs.l33.47 crore of Government loans into preferential share as 
an interim measure and hopes that RINL management through effective managerial skill will 
ensure better physical and financial performance of the plant. 
The Sub-Committee strongly believes that the Government would take kind consideration 
of"Comprehensive Turnaround Strategy", presently under inter-ministerial consideration. 
The Sub-Committee recommends that the ministry of Steel would resolve the outstanding 
issues between NMDC and RINL regarding the problems faced by RINL in procuring Iron-Ore in 
sufficient quantity from NMDC. 
REPLY 
The Ministry of Steel noted the recommendations of the Sub-Committee with reference 
to the resolution of the outstanding issues between NMOC and RINL (VSP) concerning the 
problems faced by RINL (VSP) in the matter of procurement of iron ore in sufficient quantities 
from NMDC. Occasionally, problems did arise, in the past, with reference to the supply of iron 
ore from iron ore mmes ofNMDC during monsoons in view of difficult mining operations at the 
relevant period. Moreover, the railway track from Kiruburu (Bailadila mines) to Kothavalsa for 
VSP passes through difficult hilly terrain . The goods traffic on this line was affected due to the 
landslides in the monsoon months, which resulted in delays in the dispatch of iron ore to RINL 
(VSP). However , later, this problem was appreciated by RINL (VSP) and RINL took care of this 
problem by keeping sufficient stock of iron ore fines prior to the onset of monsoon. 
At the moment, no problems are being faced by RINL (VSP) in the matter of 
procurement of iron ore in sufficient quantities from NMDC. 
FURTHER REPLY 
Revival plan of RINL is pending with Department of Disinvestment since 1 0
1
h February 
2000. The loss incurred by RINL for the year 1999-2000 was Rs.561 crores and for the period 
from April 2000 to December, 2000 is Rs. 254.87 crores. This loss incurred by RINL has not 
been separately conveyed to Department of Disinvestment. 
However, a meeting was held under the chairmanship of Union Finance Minister on 19th 
May 2000 which was attended by Steel Minister, Disinvestment Minister and Chief Minister of 
Andhra Pradesh to discuss the revival plan for RINL (VSP). The information I clarifications 
asked for by the Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh were furnished to the State Government 'by 
Ministry of Steel and the Department of Disinvestment. It was decided to hold a subsequent 
meeti~g to discus s/ finalise the revival plan for RINL (VSP). The subsequent meeting, which was 
scheduled to be held on 22/23rd January , 2001 could not be held due to the inability of Chief 

Minister of Andhra Pradesh to attend the meeting. No date for this subsequent meeting 
convenient to all the concerned Ministers has yet been fixed. 
MANGANESE ORE INDIA LTD. (MOD..) 
18 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-Committee is happy to note that MOIL is a profit making company and 
recommends that MOIL management would make concerted efforts for maintaining its track 
record of making profit. 
The Sub-Committee further recommends that Ministry of Steel should take adequate 
steps to remove the general problems of MOIL enabling the company for better physical and 
financial performance. 
REPLY 
MOIL management and Ministry of Steel have taken following steps for improving upon 
the physical and financial performance of MOIL: 
I. Various technology upgradation schemes are being introduced in a phased manner. 
2. In view of general slow down in the Steel Industry, sale of manganese ore is 
adversely affected. In order to maintain the existing level of productivity the 
company has introduced dynamic marketing strategies such as 
modification/optimisation of product mix suiting the requirements of the buyers, sale 
of individual ores etc. This strategy has enabled MOIL to achieve good performance 
during 1999-2000 and earn a net profit of about Rs. 11.73 crores. 
3. To obtain power at a cheaper rate for its Ferro Manganese Plant at Balaghat, the 
following steps are under consideration: 
(i) To purchase power from outside parties at cheaper rates. 
(ii) To set up captive power plant by outside parties and obtain power on "Build­
Own-Operate" (BOO) basis. 
4. The company has sought exemption from Forest Conservation Act, 1980 in respect of 
its various mining lease of Kandri Mine, for diversion of forest land for mining 
subject to certain conditions. MOIL is pursuing the matter with Ministry of 
Environment and Forests for expediting the decision in other cases. 
5. A team led by Joint Secretary, Ministry of Steel including CMD, MOIL and 
Executive Director (Commercial) had visited China during June, 2000 to promote 
export of Manganese Ore to China and Hong Kong. The response to the team was 
very positive and encouraging. 
6. As a consequence of declaring MOIL as 'MINI RATNA' enterprise, four experts in 
the field of Steel Industry, Management of PSUs, Banking and Finance and State 
Administration have been appointed on the Board of MOIL as part-time non-<>fficial 
Directors to render their services to improve the working of the company. 
7. MOIL has been allowed by the Government to export its manganese ore directly to 
foreign parties. 

FURTHER REPLY 
I. MOIL is purchasing its requirements of power for its 6 mines in Maharashtra and 4 
mines in Madhya Pradesh from respective State Electricity Boards i.e. MSEB and 
MPEB. The average power purchase rate from these two Boards are Rs. 4.50 and 
Rs. 5.30 per unit respectively. MOIL produces 7 lakhs tonnes of cleaned ore per 
annum for which approximate one million units are being consumed annually. The 
cost of electricity for production of one tonne of manganese ore works out to about 
Rs. I 00 which is viable. 
2. For its Ferro Manganese Plant at Balaghat Mine, MOIL requires 2.5 million units 
per month and the Company is purchasing power from MPEB at a concessional rate 
of Rs. 3.60per unit being T.O.D.(Time Off Day) tariff. Ferro Manganese Plant is 
producing l 0,000 tonnes ferro alloys annually for which the cost of electricity is Rs. 
10,000/- (approx.) per tonne i.e. 60% input cost of ferro alloys production. Thus, the 
rate ofRs. 3.60 per unit is not viable for the operation of the Ferro Manganese Plant. 
3. Government of Madhya Pradesh has not permitted setting up of the Captive Power 
Plant by outside parties on Build-Own-Operate (BOO) basis so far. Hence, the 
proposal for setting up of Captive Power Plant on BOO basis by MOIL has been 
kept pending. · 
USHA ISPAT LTD. 
20 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-Committee feels that Usha Ispat Limited is a promising Pig Iron Plant and once 
the cloud of recession is off there would be a new morning for the Pig -Iron Industry. The Sub­
Committee is happy to note that UIL is the first Pig Iron Plant in India to get ISO certification. 
The Government 'should endeavor to encourage all such Pig Iron plant in private sector 
through tax & financial reforms which will not only lead to the prosperity of Steel industry but 
also lessen the dependence on import having its lasting impact on India's balance of payment. . \ 
REPLY 
'Iron and Steel'. including pig iron has been de-reserved and also de-licensed and the 
industry has been thrown open to the private sector for its development. In the post­
liberalisation era, the pig iron industry in India in the private sector has grown many fold. As a 
res.ult of various policy initiatives taken by the Government, the capacity of pig iron in the private 
sector has increased from merely one lakh tpa in l991-92lo over 3.53 million tpa in 1999-2000. 
The contribution of private/secondary sector units in the overall productions of pig iron in the 
country continued to increase. By 1999-2000, their contribution to the total production of 
approx. 3.2 million tonnes was about 60%. Today, India has emerged from a net importer of pig 
iron to a net exporter. 
FURTHER REPLY 
India's export of pig iron during 1997-98, 1998-99 and 1999-2000 were 0.79 million 
tonnes, 0.28 million tonnes and 0.29 million tonnes respectively. The above corresponds to 
about 5% of the global trade during 1997-1998 and around 2-2.5% during 98-99 and 99-2000. 

The Indian Pig Iron Industry, particularly those in the private sector are striving hard to 
reduce their costs of production and be competitive in the market. One of the deterrents is the 
higher cost of imported metallurgical coke which is mainly due to high rate of basic customs 
duty @ 15%. Ministry of Steel has been requesting repeatedly the M/o Finance to reduce the 
customs duty from 15% to 5% which has not been agreed to so far. Further, consumption of pig 
iron is directly dependent on the investment in the infrastructure. construction and engineering 
sectors. It is felt that general improvement of Indian economy and consequent higher domestic 
consumption of pig iron, resulting in higher sales realisation, will improve the performance of 
this sector. 
MANDOVI PELLET LTD. (MPL) 
21 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-Committee feels that MPL, being in moribund stage, requires generation of 
new life with enthusiastic management. A policy is required to be taken up. A policy in regard 
to what to do with such moribund plant. The Sub-Committee otherwise strongly feels that MPL 
should be allowed to enliven as there is geographical advantages due to its location. Besides 
workers are willing to work with the management and to undertake all kinds of measures for the 
emancipation of the plant. 
REPLY 
Mandovi Pellets Ltd.(MPL) is a company promoted by Chowgule group of Compames 
and the Government of India. The shares representing Government of India were held through 
SAIL. The shares held by SAIL to the extent of Rs. 2.55 crores were transferred to NMDC and 
subsequently, NMDC made further investment in MPL. The total investment ofNMDC in MPL 
is now stands at Rs. 6 crores. 
MPL has not been doing well and more particularly for the last three years due to 
recession in Steel Industry. The total carried forward loss as of March, 1999 was Rs. 64 crores 
and total liabilities of the company were around Rs. 61 crores. The net worth of the company 
was negative throughout its operating years. MPL have made a critical analysis of the working 
of the company and identified that further investments are required towards captive power plant 
and working capital amounting to Rs. 50 crores. MPL Board debated on the affa1rs of the 
company and discussed the desirability of the pellet plant being synergisttcally attached either to 
a raw material producer or a end user of the pellets who is able to make the required investment 
or arrange for the same. 
As suggested by MPL Board, the possibility of NMDC, as raw material producer, taking 
over the plant has been analysed and discussed in NMDC Board on 9th July,l999 when it was 
decided tha~ NMDC may withdraw from the equity. However, CCL. as the original promoters, 
were prepared to take further risk by making MPL a division of CCL which will enable MPL 
to raise resources based on the overall strength of CCL. The MPL Plant could be revived by 
CCL after it becomes its full fledged division and suitable investment is made for reviving the 
operations. 
In accordance with NMDC Board resolution, Ministry of Steel has conveyed 'in 
principle' approval to withdraw NMDC's entire shareholding from Mandovi Pellets Ltd. to get 
the shares duly evaluated by an autj10rised evaluating company and then come to the Government 
with the final concrete proposal. 

REPLY 
l. Having suffered in the past for many years, on account of non-availabilit)' of required 
electric power, resulting in restricted operations, below 25% of the installed capacity of 
the plant, the MPL has formulated a revival plan which consists of setting up a Captive 
Power Plant of the capacity of l2MW, change in process from Dry Grinding to Wet 
Grinding and refurbishment of the Pelletisation Plant. 
2. 
(i) · With the Captive Power Plant and steady availability of power, 1t is hoped 
that, capacity utilisation of the Plant will at least be increased to the level of 
80%. With this, accumulated liabilities and the carry-forward losses are expected 
to be mitigated from the revenues to be generated from the future operations. 
(ii) The main Promoters, Chowgule & Co. Limited (CCL), have secured finances 
from overseas lenders, amounting to US$ 16.45 million (about Rs. 76.50 crores) 
required for implementation of the revival plan ofthe Company. 
(iii) The strategy for revival of MPL is formulated by the Company in consultation 
with the Promoters, CCL No new Partner is envisaged in the revival plan. 
(iv) Government of India has in principal, approved Disinvestment of NMDC's 
holding of Rs. 6 crores in MPL's Equity, in favour of the main· partner viz. 
CCL. However, the modalities in this respect are being worked out. 
KUDREMUKH IRON ORE COMPANY LTD. (KIOCL) 
23 
RECOMMENDATION 
The 
KIOCL: 
(i) 
(ii) 
REPLY 
Sub-Committee recommends that following steps may be taken with regard to 
Interest of workers and employees should be protected in the event of carrying 
out of strategic sale of-KIOCL. 
The Ministry of Steel should take up the issue of grant of mining lease i.e. 
Nellibeedu iron Ore Deposits without any further delay. 
The recommendation made regarding production of interest of workers and employees of 
KIOCL in the event of canying out strategic sale of KIOCL has been noted by the Government. 
The Ministry of Steel has already taken up the issue of grant of mining lease in the 
adjoinin g areas i.e. Nellibeedu iron ore deposits with the State Government of Karnataka. 

CHAPTER-0 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT" REPLIES 
GENERAL RECOMMENDATION 
Provision for sufficient fund-Row at sustainable rate of interest 
2 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-Committee regards continuation of required fund flow as the life blood for steel 
industry which is capital intensive so development and growth of steel industry depends largely, 
on the degree of support from Government banks & other financial institution. Lack of sufficient 
working capitals funds for further modernization projects, high rate interest causing, increasing in 
cost of production due to debt burden & interest multiplication and hesitation on the part of 
Financial Institution in advancing further finance, to several units of steel industry etc. are the 
issues which require immediate reconsideration and evaluation. By the way, the Sub-Committee, 
considering the fact that steel industry, a sunrise industry, is passing through a cyclical recession, 
the financial institution should take a sympathetic view of steel industry & provide: -
(i) find for completion of on-going projects on priority basis; 
(ii) working capital facilities should also be made available at lower rates, because 
the Sub-Committee feels that primary producers find it difficult to extend the 
credit limit to their customers, so banks should be more forthcoming in extending 
working capital; 
(iii) Long term funding should be made available at the rate of 10 to 12% and the 
maternity of such debts may be 8 to 12 years; and 
(iv) As the steel plants has to spend about 15 to 20% of its project cost in developing 
infrastructure such as ports, roads, power distribution, fun"ds used for the 
development of such infrastructure projects may be considered at on interest rate 
of 10%. 
The Su~-Committee believes that the above support to steel industry from financial 
institutions will generate employment & enhance GOP growth. 
REPLY 
Government is aware of the issues which have been taken up in several forums and 
occasions. The issues were raised in the Round Table on Steel organised by the Ministry of Steel. 
As a follow-up of the Round Table, Ministry of Steel has constituted a Project Co-ordination 
Group (PCG) under the Chairmanship of the Steel Minister and Members consisting of 
Secretaries in the Ministries of Finance, Commerce, Power, CEOs of Financial Institutions 
(lOBI, IFCI & ICICI) ,State Bank of India .and President, Institute for Steel Development and 
Growth. The terms of reference of the PCG are as under:-

1. To find ways & means and suggest measures for early completion of the on-going iron and 
steel projects. 
2. To address the problems of existing I newly commissioned iron and steel plants with regard 
to the following : 
a. Demand generation; 
b. Customs and Excise Duty rationalization, 
c. Availability of power at reasonable prices, 
d. Measures to boost export , and 
e. Measures to restrict import of Steel . 
Subsequent to the constitution of the Project Co-ordination Group (PCG), two meetings 
of the Group were held on t 3.3.2000 and 1 I .9.2000 under the chainnanship of Minister of State 
for Steel. Various inputs were received on problems & issues related to the units. Specific issues 
like fund for completion of the on-going projects including their Working Capital requirements, 
lowering of interest rate etc. were also taken up for discussion during the meeting. The 
representatives of the Financial Institutions have generally agreed to provide need based support 
subject to observance of financial discipline by the promoters and also bringing in their equity as 
well as bringing back the diverted funds. The request on lowering of interest rate, however, did 
not find support by the Financial Institutions in view of the fact that this is a larger issue and 
concerns the economy as a whole. 
FURTHER REPLY 
(i) In the two meetings of the Project Co-ordination Group held so far, while no 
categorical assurance has been given to the new/upcoming steel units for 
supplying working capital, State Bank of India had shown its willingness to 
consider financing their share of working capital in respect of some units on 
merits subject to fulfillment of certain conditions. 
The Project Co-ordination Group was mainly constituted to find ways and means 
and suggest measures for early completion of the on-going projetts. As a 
facilitator,' the PCG has succeeded in creating an interface between the steel units 
and the financial institutions/commercial banks to address the problems of the 
industry. The PCG had discussed the problems relating to tenn loan as well as 
working capital requirements of different units with the financial institutions and 
SBI. The financial institutions/SBI have taken follow-up action on the decisions 
arrived at in the meetings ofthe PCG in respect of various units. 
(ii) The Union Budget for 2001-02 has reduced the interest rate on small savings by 
15 percentage points. RBI has also reduced the bank rate to 7%. This has 
resulted in reduction of PLR by most of the commercial banks and financial 
institutions by 0.25 to 0.5%. This reduction in PLR is accordingly, expected to 
reduce the interest rate in the procurement of working capital by the steel plants. 
Interest rates to steel plants vary from country to country and also unit to unit 
depending upon the PLR in the country and agreements with the lending bank. 
These in tum are governed by bank rate and many other factors including 
Government Policy, Reserve Bank Policy, rate of inflation etc. While there is no 
specific information on interest rates being availed by various steel producing 

units in the world, it is a fact that in most of the major steel producing countries, 
the interest rates are much lower than in India. 
(iii) Ministry of Steel at present has no proposal for setting up of Technology 
Development Upgradation Bank to meet the requirement of funds for 
modernisation of steel plants. The integrated steel plants viz. SAIL and TISCO 
are eligible to get concessional loan from Steel Development Fund. In so far as 
newly commissioned steel plants and plants in the pipe-line are concerned, it 
would be premature for them to consider any modernisation at this stage. The 
funds for modernisation of other plants, as and when required, can, be met by the 
existing financial institutions and commercial banks. 
DC (I&S) 
6 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-committee feels that there is an imperative need to entrust Development 
Commissioner for Iron and Steel be with the task of exploring ways and means of developing 
steel industry, acting as a co-coordinating authority among the various sectors of steel industry 
including Main Steel Plant, secondary producers, re-rolling mills, induction furnaces, ship 
breaking industry etc. Arrangement may be made to integrate the role of Regional Development 
Commissioner for Iron and Steel, which may collect and maintain statistics of demand, 
production, consumption , import, export etc., in respect of various sectors of steel industry. 
REPLY 
As far as the Task of exploring ways and means of developing industry, acting as 
coordinating authority among the various sectors of steel industry including main steel plants , 
producers , re-rolling mills etc. are concerned, DCI&S is already performing these functions . 
However, his office is again being asked to take action vigorously on the above points. As far as 
the collection and maintenance of statistics of demand /production, consumption import export 
etc., in respect of various sectors of steel industry are concerned, they are already forwarding the 
following reports to the Ministry of Steel. While finalising these reports, the inputs provided by 
the RDCI&S are compiled by the DCI&S and thereafter the reports are submitted to the Ministry 
of Steel. 
I. Figures for production of pig iron and finished steel along with the data on 
consumption import and export (being utilised for Secretary's d.o. to Cabinet 
Secretary) 
2. A Quick Monthly report on iron and steel every month. 
3. Monthly Bulletin on iron and steel. 
4. Market analysis on iron and steel along with their production availability and 
apparent consumption . 
FURTHER REPLY 
The major activities being undertaken by the Office of the Development Commissioner 
for Iron & Steel at present are as follows: 

(i) Distribution of iron and steel to five primary sector viz. States Small Industries 
Corporations, defence, railways, North-Eastern States and Engineering Exports 
Promotion Councils. 
(ii) Collection and maintenance of data of imports/exports of steel and providing 
back up assistance to Ministry of Steel on issues relating to imports and exports; 
(iii) Recommendations for allocation of raw materials, railway wagons for new 
projects and coordination of raw materials for existing projects; 
(iv) Recommendations on Tariff structure in steel sector; 
(v) Statistics of iron and steel covering producers of primary sector as well as 
secondary sectors which are large in number totaling more than 2000 units; 
(vi) Survey of industries mostly in the secondary sector spread all over the country: 
(vii) Monitor activities of ship breaking industries; 
(viii) Promotional activities for increase of use of steel i.e. 1\iational Campaign for 
increased usage of steel and promotion of Institute of Steel Development and 
Growth 
(ix) Organising seminars on various aspects of Indian steel industry; 
(x) Carry on activities of Steel Consumer Council and ')teel Exporters Forum 
constituted by the Ministry of Steel 
(xi) Publish reports on various aspects of Indian iron and steel sector 
(xii) Residual work including court case relating to the period prior to liberalisation; 
For carrying out this work, the Development Commissioner for Iron & Steel has besides 
its headquarters, four regional offices as the producers in the steel sector are distributed all over 
the country. 
Research and Technology Mission 
II 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-Committee view that Steel Industry being technology intensive Industry, the 
Ministry of Steel should make conscious effort towards technology generation and development. 
The Sub-Committee hopes that R&T Mission backed by purposive service of the 
Empowered Committee, involving intellectual honesty will not only lead to reduction in the cost 
of production but also requisition of indigenous technology, skinned of continuous & rigorous in 
home experiment and research. 
If the fund for R&T Mission, appropriated from Steel Development Fund, is not 
sufficient a result-oriented effort may be made by the Ministry of Steel for getting the budgetary 
support. As a member from Planning Commission is the member of Empowered Committee, the 
Sub-Committee hopes that there should not be too over hitch & hassle for budgetary support. 
The Sub-Committee further views that the Ministry of Steel should make efforts so that 
the benefits of the R&T Mission is available to each and every plant/unit engaged in Steel 
Industry. · 

REPLY 
R&T Mission is primarily to function as the Secretariat of the Empowered Committee 
and wilt do the evaluation of schemes submitted as well as monitoring and assessing of the 
schemes approved. 
2. Normally, the R&D activities in steel sector in the country is carried out by the individual 
steel plants, academic institutes and Research laboratories. In order to supplement research and 
technology development in iron and steel sector in India Government have decided on 19.7.1997 
to spend upto Rs. 150 crore annually from interest proceeds of Steel Development Fund (SDF). 
This money is being utililsed to finance supplementary R&D activities in iron and steel sector, 
both in public and in private sectors, research laboratories and technological universities and 
institutes. 
3. The R&T Mission is giving priority for use of fund for such research projects, which 
address industrial problems, development of indigenous technology, utilization of the indigenous 
raw materials, development of new and value added products, reduce cost of production, energy 
conservation and pollution control etc. 
4. The Empowered Committee has met four times till date and approved 21 research 
projects (II in the Government, 5 public sector, 3 joint (public sector private sector) and 2 in the 
private sector). The total cost o(these 21 projects is Rs.l66.52 crore. Out ofthis, Rs.85.52 crore 
is to be met from Steel Development Fund (SDF). As on 21.9.2000, Rs.50.5815 crore (Rs.0.04 
crore in 97-98, Rs. 1.3798 crore in 98-99. Rs.24.5167 crore in 99-00 and Rs. 24.645 crore in 
2000-01) has been disbursed. No major difficulty is being experienced to obtain fund from Steel 
Development Fund (SDF) for such R&D projects and so obtaining fund from budgetary support 
is not required at the moment. If and when such fund is required, this option will be considered. 
FURTHER REPLY 
(i) The technologies initially selected for the public sector steel plants had become obsolete 
and so gradually, modernisation programme for these plants had been taken up and most 
of them have been completed. The private sector steel plant had also modernised their 
technologies and the new private sector steel plants are installing modem technologies. 
The main thrust of the research and technology development undertaken by the steel 
plants themselves relate to innovation in these basic technologies to improve their techno­
economic parameters of operations including reduction in energy consumption, cost of 
production, utilisation of waste materials and control of pollution and also deyelopment 
of new value added products. These are being adopted gradually and the main thrust of 
activities is being carried out by the plants themselves out of their own funds. The 
research and technology projects approved for funding from the Steel Development Fund 
is only supplementing the activities of the steel plants in this direction. It may be 
mentioned here that many of these projects are being undertaken by some research and 
academic Institutions and their results, if and when implemented may benefit some of the 
steel plants. 
(ii) 21 research projects which have been approved by the Empowered Committee for ;>artial 
funding from Steel Development Fund cover the areas like mining and beneficiation of 
minerals, improvement of properties of coal, reduction in energy consumption, reduction 
of refractory consumption, improvement in productivity, utilisation and treatment of 
wastes, containment of pollution, development of human resources etc. Out of these, 2 
projects covering reduction of energy consumption and improvement of quality of coal 
has been complete and one project has been stopped. The other 18 projects are at various 

stages of implementation. The status of the 21 Research Projects approved by the 
Empowered Committee is annexed. 
LIST OF THE 21 RESEARCH PROJECTS APPROVED THE EMPOWERED 
COMMITTEE 
Sl. No. 
1. 
Name of the Project 
Energy Efficiency 
Improvement m Secondary 
Steel Sector in India: by 
MECON Ltd., Ranchi. 
2. Chemical modification of 
lignite based additives and its 
application in beneficiation of 
iron ore fines and slimes: by 
RRL, Jorhat 
3. To improve coking 
characteristics of non coking 
Chandrapura Coal of Western 
Coal Field Ltd.: by llT, Delhi 
4. Introduction of new mining 
methods and techniques. for 
ground control to enable mining 
of rich Manganese ore under 
very poor to fair ground 
conditions: by National Institute 
of Rock Mechanics, Bangalore 
5. Development of on line expert 
system for continuous cast 
Status 
The energy conservation opportunities suggested by I 
MECON in the final report of the project have been 
circulated to the selected model plants. They have 
adopted some of the suggestions given by MECON 
Ltd. However, in some areas they are not able to 
comply the recommendations due to some financial 
constraints. 
The final report has been received in the Ministry in 
Sept. 2000. RRL, Jorhat has developed additives. 
However, the same could not reduce undesirable 
impurities to the extent required in the process. 
Therefore further experiments have been stopped and 
RRL, Jorhat has been asked to return balance amount. 
The coke button has been produced at lab scale. 2-3 
experiments were conducted in prototype reactor 
where they got little success for manufacture of coke. 
However the work could not be completed due to 
failure in the last experiment. Possibilities are being 
explored to conduct further experiments with other 
coke producers of the country. 
The experiments at Kandri mines have been stopped 
due to safety problems. However, the work is in 
progress at Chikla mines on the expected lines. 
The expert system has been developed and in 
operating on off-line basis. However, due to un­
willingness to spend for required commercial products 
(Billets/Blooms/Slabs): by instruments, the same is not implemented at the 
MECON Ltd, Ranchi. Modem Steel Ltd., Mandi Gobindgarh on on-line 
basis. Possibilities are being explored to implement 
the system in other steel plants who may be willing to 
bear the cost of the instrumentation. 
6. To achieve refractory The required equipments have been procured. 
consumption of international Software for neural Network and sensitivity analysis 
bench mark level in integrated has been developed. Work for data collection and 
steel plants: by ROCIS, SAIL, reliability check for expert system is going on. 
Ran chi 

Sl. No. Name of the Project 
7 Simulation of Thenno-
mechanical Processing of steels 
and Hot Workability studies of 
High strength steels: by RDCIS, 
SAIL, Ranchi 
8. Development of welding 
consumables and assessment of 
weld ability index for micro 
alloyed steels: by Jadavpur 
University, Calcutta 
9. Development of Cast & forged 
microalloyed steel: by liT, 
Kharagpur 
1 0. Documentation and 
development of iron making 
process used by Tribals of 
India: by National Metallurgical 
Laboratory, Jamshedpur 
11. To study various tolerable 
Indian non-coking coal sources 
with the aim of maximizing the 
usage of domestic non-coking 
coat in the COREX process: by 
Jindal Vijayanagar Steel Ltd., 
Vijayanagar 
12. Production of CC Billet/Bloom 
of quality suitable for single­
stage conversion into special 
Bars: by Tata Iron & Steel Co. 
Ltd. and RDCIS, SAIL, Ranchi 
13. Desulp hurisation of Assam 
Coal Centre for Energy Studies, 
liT, Delhi. 
I Status 
Some equipment has been imported and all functional 
aspects have been checked. Analysis of data and 
fonnulation of Thenno Mechanical Control 
Processing experiments are being completed. 
Bead on test of Micro alloyed steel for optimisation of 
welding parameters has been completed. Details ofthe 
base plate and filler wire have been received from 
Hindustan Motors. Preparation of base plate is under 
progress. 
The project proposer has revised the objectives of the 
original proposal. The results obtained so far from the 
research work are in the line with the stated · 
objectives. The project has been selected for the A.K. 
Bose memorial award of liM 2000, as the best M­
Tech. Thesis. Further work is in progress. 
After getting the first progress report of research work 
and a copy of the report on similar study, submitted to 
DST by RRL, Bhopal, it is felt that even if the 
project is successful, there will be hardly any 
difference in the practice by the Tribal. Therefore, the 
project has been stopped. However, NML may 
submit a fresh proposal to R&T Mission for further 
research required on the basis of the results. 
The facilities required for the research work have been 
installed at liSe, Bangalore. The physical model for 
the study of the lower part of me Iter gasifier has been 
designed. The model to study the mixing in the hearth 
of metter gasifier has been fabricated. The result is 
being used in other mOdels of melter gasifier . JVSL 
have entered into an agreement with CFRI, Dhanbad 
for coal characterisation, washabilities on laboratory 
scale and evaluation of washed coal and char. 
The revised cost of the project proposa l was examined 
and approved in September 2000. Fresh tenders for 
the equipments have been floated. The work ts m 
progress. T he duration of the project has been 
enhanced to March 2003. 
Though research work has shown that it is possible to 
bring down sulphur fonn 3.5% to 1.8% by vapour 
extraction method. They have developed a new 
technology by introducing sulphur type catalyst (l!'on 
pyrite). They are expecting very high percentag'.! of 
sulphur removal if the catalyst is introduced over the 
coal bed dunng solvent vapour extraction. The work is 
.__ __ ___._ ____ ____ ___ __._i_n_.p_lro_,>g.:..•r~es~ __ I 

L~No. [_ Name of the Project I Status 
~~eaching Package on Structural All the 45 chapters have been completed and 
Steel Design for Department of incorporation of suggestions/corrections is near 
Civil/Structural Engineering: by completion. The final report is awaited. 
Institute for Steel Development 
and Growth (INSDAG), 
Calcutta 
15. Maximisation of blast furnace The activities in II areas have been finned up. 
I 
productivity with Indian tron Suppliers for equipments have been identified. 
ore: by National Metallurgical Equipments are expected to arrive shortly. NML have 
I Laboratol), Jamshedpur, Tata interacted with number of organisations and have 
~ 
Iron & Steel Co. Ltd and assigned some activities to them. 
ROClS. Steel Authonty of 
India Ltd. 
16 Utilisation of solid waste The required samples have been received from RSP 
I materials generated at Steel and TISCO. The study on BF flue dust has been 
i Plants by physical beneficiation completed. Further work on characterisation studies 
techniques: by RRL. is under progres s in consultation with TISCO and 
Bhubanes\\ar RDCIS. SAIL, Ranchi. 
I 
17. Macromodelling of heat The work on setting up of Horizontal gradient 
transfer and inclusion machine to get well-focused images is in progress . 
management in continuous and Further work on characterisation studies is under 
ingot c·asting of steel: by Indian progress in consultation with Mukand Ltd., Mumbai. 
Institute of Technology, 
Kharagpur 
18. Improved leak proof design of Technical specification to procure new items needed 
door in coke oven battery at for modification of existing door bodies and brick 
Rashtriya I spat Nigam Ltd., holder have been sent to VSP by MECON. VSP is in 
Visakhapatnam: by MECON the process of floating of tender enquiries and 
Ltd finalisation of placement of orders. 
19. Design and development of They have completed literature survey. They have 
TRIP aided ferrite-bainite steel prepared two alloys with composition equivalent to 
for structural application: by the composition of TRIP induced dual phase steels. 
B.E. College, Shibpur The results obtained so far are on expected lines. 
20. Cold Briquetting of Iron Oxide: Cold Briquetting press has been installed at their site. 
by Ispat Metallics India Ltd. They have released money to RRL, Bhubaneshwar 
and RDCIS, SAIL, Ranchi for development of binders 
and their analysis. 
21. Development of ultra high They have prepared samples for testing of the 
strength steel in as rolled properties. The results are awaited. 
condition through thermo 
mechanical controlled 
processing: by B.E. College, 
Howrah 

SELECT ION OF KEY AREAS FOR INTENSIVE ACTION AND ORGANISATIONAL 
DEVELOPMENT 
1114 
~. -------------------------------------------------------
RECOM MENDATION 
J 
The Sub-Committee hopes that the Ministry of steel , in coordination with the 
management of respective plants will select the key areas wh1ch need immediate actions for better 
physical and financia l performance. The Ministry of Steel should remain in constant touch with 
the management to know the problems being faced by large and small plant/units and after 
comprehensive assessment, a proper guideline may be issued to the management for carving out 
''programme of action" for immediate intervention which will not only lead to streamlining and 
better co-ordination between the plant management and Ministry of Steel, but also translate the 
organization development and growth. 
REPLY 
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL), being a 'Navratna' Company, its Board has full 
autonomy in respect of financial and administrative matters for the operation and management of 
its plants/units. SAIL's performance is reviewed by the Government at the highest level and 
corrective measures are taken for the improvement in performance. Ministry of Steel is in touch 
with the management and intervenes as and when required. 
Detailed guidelines have been drawn up for the restructuring of the company with a view 
to increasing its competitiveness and profitability. 
FURTHER REPLY 
With reference to the recommendation of the Committee it was inter-alia stated in the 
Action Taken Note that the Government reviews the performance of SAIL in the Performance 
Review Meetings taken at the highest level i.e. Steel Minister. Directives/instructions are issued 
to SAIL for improving the performance in the spheres, which needs special attention. In 
addition, it may be stated that every year Ministry of Steel signs Memorandum of Understanding 
with SAIL for achieving the targeted production levels, improving techno-economic parameter s 
to ensure cost competitiveness, setting up targets of sales and exports and attaining lower energy 
consumption. Achievement of targets stated in MoU are monitored in the Ministry and corrective 
steps taken wherever necessary. 
APPEAL TO PRIVATE SECTOR STEEL PLANTS 
118. 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-Committee while appreciating the contribution of private sector steel plants in 
the strengthening of steel industry in the country and making it internationally competiti ve hope<> 
that steel plants in private sector would promote balanced national economic development and 
growth by promoting development of backward regions of India and supporting India's large 
population by taking positive steps towards employment generation and poverty alleviation. 

REPLY 
The above observations of the Standing Committee have been communicated to all 
leading Industry Associations for the information and necessary action. It is sincerely hoped that 
the private sector steel plants will take into consideration the appreciation of the Sub-Committee 
with regard to their contribution for the strengthening of steel industry and at the same time 
contribute their mite in the untiring efforts of Government towards employment generation and 
poverty alleviation, by taking suitable steps, positively. 
SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATION 
Ferro Scrap Nigam Limited {FSNL) 
2(i) 
RECOMMENDATION 
(i) Modernisation of Scrap Recovery Technology 
The Sub-Committee was made to understand that FSNL adopted Heckett's world class 
and world wide technology for carrying out the scrap recovery and processing operation. As the 
technology and equipments in FSNL became obsolete and old so it is pertinent that the plant 
should undergo modernisation process at the earliest in order to improve the physical and 
financial performance, henceforth FSNL management should work in the right earnest. 
REPLY 
There is no technology for scrap recovery other than magnetic separation. At FSNL 
magnetic separation is being carried out in mobile separation plants since inception. A feeding 
equipment i.e., Excavator is used for feeding this type of plant. However, FSNL is now setting up 
Modern Stationary Scrap Separation Plants at Durgapur & Vizag. These plants will have 
automatic vibrating grizzly feeder and will dispense with the feeding equipment. Crushing of 
slag and screening to various fractions will also be done after modernisation. 
FURTHER REPLY 
(i) Present status of Modern Stationary Scrap Separation Plant at DURGAPUR is given as 
under:-
All civil and structural drawings and detailed engineering have been completed. Tenders 
for civil construction and structural fabrication and erection jobs have been issued and work 
orders are expected to be released by end of March 200 I. 
All the equipment such as vibrating grizzly feeder, vibrating pan feeder, vibrating screen, 
belt conveyor components, rotary drum magnet, motors, control panels etc. are indigenously 
available and these have already been ordered and are expected to be received by August 200 I. 
Project cost of Plant is expected to be Rs.4.00 crores. 
VIZAG: 
Stationary plant is not proposed to be set up at present at Vizag Steel Plant because it has 
not been found to be economically viable due to very low scrap content in the L.D. Slag. 

Existing 3 Nos. mobile magnetic separators are adequate for fulfilliDJ the requirement of 
Visakhapetnam Steel Plant. 
TECHNOLOGY 
The technology involves automatic feeding of slag mixed with scrap by grizzly feeder 
into the feed hopper, separating metallics from slag by rotary magnetic drum separator and 
screening of the separated scrap into different sized fractions for reuse in Steel Melting Ship, 
Blast Furnace and Sintering Plant or for marketing. This is a proven technology established 
world over by M/s. Heckett Multiserv, who are the world leader in the area of scrap recovery and 
processing in steel plants. Same technology as used by M/s. Hec:kett Multiserv has been adopted 
and therefore there is no doubt about the usefulness of this proven technology in carrying out 
scrap recovery and processing to the full satisfaction of the Steel Plants. 
ENFORCEMENT OF CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATION 
2(ii) 
RECOMMENDATION 
M/s. HARSCO Corporation, who holds 4oelt equity share· in FSNL, was bound by the 
contractual obligation to provide the latest technology to FSNL free of COlt but u M/s. HARSCO 
declined to meet the legal obligation despite repeated requests, the iaue may be taken by the 
Ministry at the appropriate level. 
REPLY 
Harsco Corporation has indicated . that the technologies for scrap recovery have not 
changed over decades except one technology, which was acquired by them only in 1993. The 
specific technology has been demanded by FSNL in 1999 only IDc:l HARSCO have agreed to 
provide technology free of cost subject to a satisfactory resolution of other issues namely 
liquidating their holding in FSNL. The matter is. under consideration of the Government. 
FURTHER REPLY 
MSTC is negotiating with Harsco for free transfer of technology required by FSNL. 
Recovery of Dues of FSNL from BSP, RINL 
12(IV) 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-Committee came to know that SAIL and RINL owes to FSNL huge outstanding 
to the tune of Rs.6050 lakh and Bhilai Steel Plant, alone has to pay FSNL Rs.22 crore. liSCO 
also failed to pay FSNL Rs.7 crore, as a result of which, FSNL is not in a position to undertake its 
capital restructuring and modernisation project, henceforth, the Sub-Committee is of the 
considered view that the Ministry of Steel may urgently look into the matter and resolve the issue 
without any further delay. 

REPLY 
At present, there are no dues outstanding against Bhilai, Rourkela, Durgapur and Bokaro 
Steel Plants. The dues outstanding against liSCO and RINL as on 30.6.2000 are Rs.S92 lakhs 
and Rs.939 lakhs respectively. Efforts are being made to liquidate the same expeditiously. 
FURTHER REPLY 
Mls. liSCO & Mls. RINL have not paid the outstanding dues and as on 28.2.2001 the 
dues outstanding from these two Plants are to the tune of Rs.6.74 crores and Rs.9.26 crores 
respectively. 
Financial Restructuring 
3(ii) 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-Committee is of the considered view that RSP management and the Ministry of 
Steel should carve out areas of organisational intervention and undertake appropriate 
modernisation process so that the cost of production is reduced. 
REPLY 
SAIL has spent Rs. 4468 crores on modernisation of RSP upto 31.3.2000. Benefit of 
modernization would come in phases. As part of corporate strategy for improvement of 
performance, number of other measures have been taken for RSP viz. 
(i) Intensive cost control drive resulting in saving ofRs. 238 crores in 1998-99 and 
Rs. 229 crores in 1999-2000 . The variable cost of production has come down by 
5.6% in 1999-2000 over 1998-99. 
(ii) Introduction of voluntary retirement scheme for employees in 1998 and 1999 
resulting in separation of 3820 employees. 
(iii) Market oriented production and product-mix. 
(iv) Improvement in techno-economic parameters. 
(v) Inventory red'uction by Rs. 73 crores in 1998-99 and Rs. 466 crores in 1999-
2000. 
FURmER REPLY 
Modernisation of RSP was completed in phases by November 1999. Apart from 
modernisation, SAIL has taken number of cost control measures to reduce the cost and improve 
prof1tability in the plant viz., improvement in yield, reduction in consumption of coking coal and 
other raw material, power, fuel, stores/spares etc. Cost of production per tonne in the plant has 
come down from Rs.1 ~983 in 1999-2000 to Rs.18322 in 2000-01 (April-December). 

TATA IRON AND STEEL COMPANY LTD. 
4 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-Committee is happy to note that TISCO is the only company where Social 
auditing has been put into practice. TISCO's contribution to national economic growth and 
development is also on undeniable fact. But, at the same time the Sub-Committee expects that 
TISCO management will consider workers demand which inter-alia include 16% of bonus; 
division of money. Table of bonus; incentive & capacity bonus and affordable price of item in 
the canteen. The Sub-Committee hopes that TISCO, management will take the liberal '& 
sympathetic view of workers demand. 
REPLY 
The Recommendations of the Sub-committee have been taken up with TISCO Ltd. for 
appropriate action at their end. It is sincerely hoped that the management ofTISCO will give due 
consideration with sympathy as per the suggestion of the Sub-Committee. 
FURTHER REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
According to information received from TISCO, the relevant details are given below: 
1. Bonus : This is as per annual agreement with their recognised Union, wherein factors such as 
production, productivity, labour utilisation, techno- economics and profits of the Company are 
taken into account for deciding the percentage of the bonus to be given. The last bonus was given 
@ 18%. 
2. Incentive/Production Bonus: Different production units have different criterion to decide the 
monthly incentive bonus to be given to the employees. This is done in consultation and 
agreement with the recognised Union. Company wide bonus is given on criterion fixed for non­
prOduction departments. 
3. Affordable price of items in the Canteen : The Canteen .facilities are run by the Central 
Canteen Management Committee which is a joint body of the Union and the Management. All 
the fixed costs are borne by the Company and a percentage of the variable cost is charged to the 
employees for facilities. 
BOKARO STEEL PLANT (BSL) 
S(i) 
RECOMMENDATION 
(i) Equal treatment to all workers Union 
The Sub-Committee came to know that only those workers Union, which have the 
political back-up have been allotted space for accommodation which Bokaro Steel Rashtriya 
Mazdoor Sangh's demand for office space have been ignored. As the "Workers are the real 
producers", the Sub-Committee hopes that BSL management will meet the demand of workers on 
equal footing. 

REPLY 
Allotment of office accommodation to workers' union is done by the Bokaro Steel' Plant 
on the basis of prescribed guidelines and not guided by political factors. 
The Akhil Bhartiya lspat Mazdoor Sangh (ABIMS) which is an affiliate body of the 
Bharat Mazdoor Sangh (BMS) had been allotted office space by the Bokaro Steel Plant. 
Subsequently, the Bokaro Steel Rashtriya Mazdoor Sangh (BSRMS) which is also an affiliate of 
BMS, made a request in January, 1998 to shift the office of ABIMS to a more centrally located 
place so that they and the ABIMS could function in a coordinated manner from the same place. 
Accordingly, a suitable alternative accommodation was allotted to them on 22.12.1998 . 
IRREGULARITIES IN THE PLANT. 
S(ii) 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-Committee recommends that the Ministry of Steel will make an impartial 
inquiry against the alleged irregularities prevailing in BSL like use of low quality spare parts, 
plundering of plant's property and partial appointment & promotion at the top slot. 
The Sub-Committee also feels it an urgent need for the Ministry of Steel to take adequate 
steps for streamlining the purchase and accounts depart of BSL to eliminate the alleged 
corruption charges leveled against the purchue officers of the plant. 
REPLY 
Reports of irregularities in BSL whether in regard to the poor quality of spare parts or 
promotion at top levels are immediately looked into with a view to taking remedial action so that 
the errant officials could be punished and malpractices prevented from recurrence. 
Additionally, periodic surprise checks are made by the officers of the Vigilance Deptt. 
with a view to detecting malpractices, if any. Systemic procedures are revieWed from time to 
time and where necessary modifications are incorporated with a view to checking undesirable 
activities in the plant. Rotation of etbployees is another instrumentality through which 
irregularities are sought to be prevented. 
Appointments whether by promotion or otherwise in BSL are made strictly in accordance 
with relevant recruitment rules and are need based. 
FURTHER REPLY 
'The effort of SAIL has always been to ensure that irregularities do not take place in any 
of their plants and when they do take place no action is spared to identify the guilty and punish 
them with a view to avoiding their recurrence. 

DURGAPUR STEEL PLANT 
10 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-Committee observes that a huge amount of Rs.4870.73 crore has been spent on 
modernisation of plant. there remains no excuse left for not improving the physical and financial 
perfonnance of the plant. Now, onus lies with the DSP management to harvest the fruits of 
modernisation . 
, DSP management should undertake necessary measures for the fullest capacity utilisation 
of the plant; explore measures for reduction of cost and innovate areas. for organisational 
development and managerial intervention so that there.• may be considerable increase in market 
share. and net sales realization. 
\ 
REPLY 
Plans have been drawn up by Durgapur Steel Plant(DSP) for achieving a capacity 
utilisation of 98% in 2000-0 I and 200 1..02. In view of capital repairs _to certain Blast Furnaces, 
full capacity utilisation could not be projected for these years. It is however, hoped that the plant 
will start producing at 100% capacity utilisation from 2002-03 onwards. With the projected 
improvement in hot metal production materialising the Steel Melting Shop is expected to work to 
its rated capacity. Units like the Continuous Casting Plant. Merchant Mill and Skelp Mill in the 
Plant are already working to full capacity and even more. The Wheel & Axle Plant is also 
showing signs of improvement in its working thanks to managerial intervention. 
Cost reduction in·the DSP is expected to be achieved during 2000-01 by economisin&,in 
the use of raw materials and in power consumption, by improving the coke rate, metallic inputs 
and yields, by reducing inventory levels etc. An awareness campaign has been launched to 
infuse motivation at the grassroots. 
FURTHERUPLY 
' 
(i) SAIL have, apart from the modernisation of the plant, taken the following 
measures in order to effect reduction in the coSt of production at their steel plant 
at Durgapur:-
lmprovement of yield, reduction in the consumption of various raw materials, 
energy, stores and spares, efficient management of other techno-economic 
parameters , downsizing of manpower resultina in reduction of administrative 
expcnediture, etc. These measures have resulted in the reduction of cost of 
production at Durgapur from Rs.l3,304/- per tonne in 1996-97 toRs. 12,685/­
during 2000..0 1. 
(ii) In the year 2000-01, Blast Furnace No.2 was scheduled for capital repairs. 
However, seeing the overall furnace conditions, the capital repair for Blast 
Furnace No.I was undertaken and that of No.2 commissioned. Blast Furnace 
No.3 is under reconstruction. 

esides-above, capital repairs of Bllst Furnace No.4 has been planned for 10 days during 
the year 2001-02. In addition, two small shut downs of 3 days each have also been planned· in 
Blast Furnace No.I in order to maintain the health of this old Blast Furnace till No.3 furnace joins 
the production stream. 
The capital project upgradation of Blast Furnace No.3 has been taken up in January, 
2001. The project is presently under exec~ and the construction activities are in progress as 
per schedule. The completion and commiaioning ef the Furnace has been scheduled for 
March'2002. 
CENTRAL MARKETING ORGANISAUON (CMO) 
11 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-Committee understands tlie pivotal role of Central Marketing Organisation in 
marketing the products of four major steel plants. viz. BSP, DSP, BSL & RSP on direct dispatch 
basis and through stockyards and henceforth views that CMO should take stock of the inventories 
at each plant and stockyard and explore ways·and means for disposing of the same at strategic 
price so that the financial performance of.S.All.'s plant may swing upward. 
The Sub-Committee recommends that Market Research Group of CMO should project 
the demand forecast after taking stock of/objective assessment of empirical facts and figures of 
domestic and international market. Moreover, the Market Research Group of CMO should 
explore the new vintage for marketing SAIL's produc~. 
The Sub-Committee felt during the course of interaction with workers and management 
of various plant that delay in decision-making by .CMO has affected the marketing strategy and 
prospects of selling SAIL's p(oduct is being marred due to strategic decision taken by the 
competitors. Henceforth, CMO and Ministry of Steel should work out sufficient flexibility in the 
marketing strategy of SAIL so that units of SAn. may take on the spot decision quickly which is 
possible only when SAIL's Unit are given ceJ\ain degree of autonomy for taking independent and 
quick decision with regard to strategic sale of the products. 
REPLY 
The Plant-wise, Category-wise stock of products are being analysed regularly and 
production/dispatches are regulated accordingly. 
An annual exercise is being undertaken by Market Research Group of SAIL in 
consultation with field officers to assess the likely demand for the next year. 
New areas of steel consumption are being explored. A Cell dedicated to rural marketing 
has been set-up to tap potential demand in the rural/backward areas so as to enable SAIL to 
increase volume and market share. 
Special emphasis is also being laid on developing value added products through the 
efforts of R&D Wing. 
Keeping in view the dynamic market situation, a very close interface with plant is 
maintained so as to take timely and corrective action. Also for evolving as a market driven 

I 
Company, the pricing strategies of the Company are decided on a monthly basis by the Revenue 
Maximizing Team comprising of Director (Commercial), Director (Finance) and the MDs of the 
four Integrated Steel Plants based on the feed-back received from the various 'wings of the 
marketing organisation. The Plant Management is, therefore, suitably involved in formulating the 
marketing strategy of the Company. Suitable delegation at field level exists for carrying out day 
to day marketing functions expeditiously.-
FURTHER REPLY 
Under the existing centralized marketing structure, CMO is responsible for sale.s of prime 
steel products of the four Integrated Steel Plants. 
While pricing strategies of the Company are decided by the revenue maximizing team 
comprising of Director (Commercial), Director (Finance) and the Managing Directors of the four 
Integrated Steel Plants, day to day marketing activities are carried out by CMO, in order to 
facilitate quicker marketing decisions, suitable delegation exists for the field level executives of 
CMO. 
DEVELOPMENT COMMISSIONER FOR IRON AND STEEL, CALCU'IT A (DCI&S): 
12 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-Committee views that if the existence of the office <>f the Development 
Commissioner for Iron and Steel, Calcutta, has any justification for its continuation, especially in 
view of the Govem~ent's general policy of downsizing its departments, the office has really to 
play pivotal role for development and growth of steel industry in general. 
DCI&S should make result, oriented efforts to seek work-orders for the products of PSUs 
of Ministry of Steel from priority sectorS like Defence and Railway etc. 
In order to have integrated growth of steel industry DCI&S should actively assist to EAF 
units and small steel units in Steel Sector. DCI&S, with the help of Regional Development 
Commissioner for Iron and Steel, should overview, periodically the problems being faced by 
secondary sectors and propose measures to remove them at the earliest. 
At the same time the Sub-Committee would like to recommend that the office of DCI&S 
should intensify National campaign for increase of steel consumption which will naturally 
increase this demands of steel products. 
REPLY 
The Office of the Iron and Steel Controller underwent considerable change in nature and 
content of its work after liberalisation. The Iron and Steel sector includes all major producers and 
also nearly two thousand secondary producers spread all over the country. Producers of raw 
materials for iron and steel industry like iron ore, limestone , refractories and their raw materials, 
Ferro alloys, sponge iron etc., also form part of this sector. The major activities being undertaken 
by the office of the Development Commissioner for Iron and Steel at present are as follows: 
(i) Distribution of iron and steel to five primary sector viz. States Small Industries 
Corporations, Defence, railways, North Eastern States and EEPC; 

(ii) 1 ·· Collection and mainteMnce of data of imports/exports of steel and providing 
bllck up assistance to Ministry of Steel.on issues relating to imports and exports. 
(iii) Recommendations for allocation of raw materials, railway waaons for new 
projects aad coordination of raw materials for existing projects. 
(iv) Recommendation on Tariff structure in steel sector. 
( v) Statistics of iron and steel covering producers of primary sector as well as 
secondary sectors which are large in number totaling more than 2000 units. • 
(vi) Survey of industries mostly in the secondary sector spread all over the country. 
(vii) Monitor activities of ship breaking industries 
(viii) Promotional activities for increase of use of steel i.e. National Campaign for 
increased usage of steel and promotion of Institute of Steel Development and 
Growth. 
(ix) Organising seminars on various aspects of Indian Steel Industry. 
(x) Carry on activities of Steel Consumers Council and Steel Exporters Forum 
constituted by the Ministry of Steel. 
(xi) Publish reports on various aspects of Indian iron and steelle\.~or. 
(xii) Residual work including court case relating to the period prior to liberalisation; 
Iron and Steel sector is a core sector basic to the development of a courwy like India, 
which needs considerable improvement in its infrastructure. India has abundant raw materials 
necessary for iron and steel making and it is a ~tor in which India can have a competitive edge 
in the world. The sector still needs Government support and assistance to achieve global 
competitiveness. The office of the Development Commissioner is fulfilling the tuk of· providing 
assistance to the Steel Industry· in India by working a.S an agency to take up promotion 
programmes , coordinate activities of the producers and as a resource centre for various data. 
FURTHER REPLY 
Allocations for finished steel and pig iron are made by DCI&S to five priority sectors i.e. 
Defence, Railways, SSICs, engincerina exporters and North Eastern States. These allocations are 
made on the basis of denwtd placed by priority sectors and availability indicated by main 
producers. Rebates are allowed on lifting of the materials against allocation to SSICs for the 
benefit of the SSI units. Supply pian is also made for nodal authorities of North Eastern States 
for fulfilling the requirements of various government departments of the region. 
·' SPONGE IRON INDIA LTD. (SilL) 
17 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-Committee observes that SilL has to anchor high expends as the maintenance of 
CSF, henceforth, recommends that the Ministry of Steel should look into the matter at the earliest 
and rationalize the number ofCISF at the required level. 

The Sub-Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Steel should examine the 
feasibility of shifting of Headquarters of SilL from Hyderabad to Kothagudam in order to remove 
the communication gap between SilL management and core operating group and to enable the 
SilL management to take quick and on the spot decision for better marketing strategy. 
Ultimately, the Sub-Committee views that SilL management and the Ministry of Steel 
should take measures to reduce the cost of production at the earliest for better financial position 
of SilL. 
REPLY 
CISF has since been withdrawn from the Company w.e.f. 111 August, 1999. The security 
requirements in the plant are now being looked after by the home guards and persons on contract 
basis who are ex-servicemen. 
While there is a likelihood of a marginal financial benefit for shifting the registered 
office to the plant site and rehabilitation of employees, there would be many fall out effects which 
are as follows: 
The Coordination work with the suppliers of iron ore ~d coal (whose offices are located 
at Hyderabad), and all other coordination work with Government agencies being carried out at the 
highest level would be adversely affected, if the registered office is shifted to plant site. 
The smooth communication with purchasers of sponge iron located in various parts of the 
country including Tamilnadu, Kamataka, Kerala, Goa and Maharashtra presently being carried 
out very effectively from registered office, would get severely restricted and badly affected if 
registered office is shifted to plant site. 
The cost of production of sponge iron under SilL's conditions is mainly influenced by (a) 
Raw material cost, (b) cost of manpower and (c) Administrative costs. 
Already actions have been taken to reduce costs on all the above and other areas. There 
has been a substantial improvement. The specific consumption of raw materials mainly iron ore 
and coal have been reduced. The landed cost of coal could be reduced by changing the source of 
coal from the earlier area (Manuguru) to a nearer source (Kothagudem). The landed cost of iron 
ore has also been reduced down by use of ore from other sources along with Bailadila ore. 
FURTHER REPLY 
(i) The cost of production could be substantially reduced by SilL through various actions 
taken and improvements made in the overall techno-economic performance areas. 
a. The capacity utilisation has been increased from 66% during 1999-2000 to a level of 
92.5% in the current year which has reduced fixed cost by Rs. 593/- per tonne of sponge 
iron. 
b. The cost of raw materials i.e., iron ore and coal taken together has been reduced from Rs. 
3561/- per tonne in 1999-2000 to Rs. 3416/- per tonne in the current year i.e., a reduction 
by Rs. 145/- per tonne of sponge iron inspite of escalation in the base price of raw 
materials. 
c. The cost of manpower has been reduced from Rs. 1592/- per tonne in 1999-2000to Rs. 
953/- per tonne in the current year. 

d. Administrative and other cost has been reduced from Rs. 313/- per tonne in 1999-2000 to 
Rs. 182/- per tonne in 2000-0 l. 
With improved marketing strategy and restoration of MODV AT facility in Budget-2000, 
the price realisation has drastically been improved from Rs. 4169/- per tonne of sponge iron in 
1999-2000 to an average of Rs. 5239/- per tonne during the current year. 
(ii) The process of disinvestment of SilL has started and it is at an advanced stage of 
implementation. At this stage the major thrust of the company is to reduce manpower to 
the extent possible through VRS by using whatever internal fund it is generating. The 
next priority is to maintain the working capital required to ensure smooth and improved 
operations of the plant. The relocation of the registered office from Hyderabad to 
Paloncha involving transfer of manpower and assets etc., will require substantial sum of 
money initially. At present the company is not in a position to bear this additional 
expenditure. In fact from the level of 60, the staff strength at registered office has now 
been reduced to 26. Thus SilL is maintaining the registered office at Hyderabad wath 
skeleton strength only. 
MAHARASHTRA ELECTROSMELT LTD. (MEL) 
19 
RECOMMENDATION ·. 
The Sub-Committee views that Ministry of Steel would take adequate steps towards 
installation of 30 MW captive power plant at MEL plant. 
MEL is a power-consuming unit where approx. 50-55% cost of production is the cost of 
power. State Electricity Board is increasing the power tariff on quick interval which in turn 
affects the profitability of MEL. Henceforth own captive power generation by immediate 
installation of 30 MW power plant at MEL is the need of hour for the survival of MEL. 
REPLY 
Maharashtra Elektrosmelt Ltd. (MEL) a subsidiary of SAIL has been incurring losses 
continuously since 1998-99. The accumulated losses of .MEL were Rs.6.88 crore in FX 99. The 
FY.2000 losses were about Rs.l6.10 crore. Meanwhile, SAIL had converted its existing loan of 
Rs.l4 .crore granted to MEL .into equity capital of MEL in FY 2000 in order to avoid MEL being 
referred to BIFR. 
The key success factors for the ferro-alloy industry are availability of good quality raw 
material and cheap power. The power cost for MEL, on account ofMSEB, at present is Rs.3.44 
per unit. Majority of the ferro-alloys manufacturers without their own captive power capacities 
have located themselves in West Bengal and have a major cost advantage affecting MEL's 
profitability. 
Therefore, availability of cheap power is critical for long term viability of MEL. The 
total power requirement of MEL is about 30 MW. A Greenfield 3.0 MW power plant would 
require an investment .of about 120 cr. MEL will with its current financials will not be able to 
make such huge investments. Given current and projected financial position. SAIL is in no 
position to fund the large investment requirements of a power plant for MEL. 

Discussions have been held with officials of Maharashtra Government and MSEB for 
reducing the power tariff for MEL. Meanwhile, the following short term measures have been 
initiated to reduce the overall power cost. 
(i) Early commissioning and stabilisation of 4.2 MW power plant. 
(ii) Regulation of Furnaces to avail the maximum benefit of the concessional night 
tariff from MSEB. 
FURTHER REPLY 
(i) Erection job of 4.2 MW Power Plant has been completed. Commissioning and Hot Trials 
are in progress. 
(ii) It is projected that commissioning & stabilization of 4.2 MW Power Plant will reduce 
power cost. Furnace load is being regulate~ based on production plan to avail 
concessional night tariff. 
(iii) Series of discussions took place with Government of Maharashtra and MSEB in 
connection with reduction of power tariff for MEL. However, no reduction in power 
tariff has been granted to MEL so far. The power tariff is controlled by Maharashtra 
Electricity Regulatory .Commission (MERC). After taking up the matter with MERC, 
bulk discount and power factor incentive have been granted to MEL thereby reducing 
average power tariff to Rs.3.36 per unit as against Rs.3.44 per unit. 
(iv) It is proposed to install30 MW Power Plant on "Built own and Operate" basis by Third 
party at MEL. 
VISVESWARA IRON AND STEEL LTD. (VISL) 
22 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-Committee views that Ministry of Steel in gel}eral and SAIL in particular should 
examine the prospect of installation of sinter plant, captive power plant and cement plant. The 
Sub-Committee views that it is through planned modernisation of VISL, its lot can be improved. 
The management of VISL should make conscious efforts for placement of work order 
from Defence, Railway and other Government agencies. 
The Sub-Committee further recommends that Karnataka Electricity Board be directed to 
provide wheeling facilities to VISL for power generation. 
FURTHER REPLY 
Installation of Sinter Plant at VISL was included in the plan of SAIL for the 9th Five Year 
Plan period. However, due to fund constraints, it could not be considered for implementation. 
Installation of 7.5 MW Captive Power Plant has been taken up and the projects is in progress. 
There is no plan, however, for installation of a Cement Plant. 

Following table shows the orders serviced against Defence; Railways and other 
Government Agencies : 
(in tonnes) 
1997-98 1998-99 1999-2000 
Defence 7489 7848 11850 
Railways 1287 1518 2007 
Government Agencies 5197 7380 9028 
Total Sales Qtty. 49076 62468 75620 
On close monitoring, follow up, product innovation, quality product and import 
substitution, VISL is able to bag more and more orders from the above units. VISL is making 
continuous efforts to serve the Defence, Railways and other Government Agencies in future also. 
On the modernisation of Ferro Silicon Furnaces, it was the intent of VISL to get power 
from NTPC wheeled through Karnataka Electricity Board (KEB) and produce Ferro silicon for 
export. Presently, these Ferro silicon furnaces are being shifted to Bokaro Steel Plant for 
production at Bokaro. Hence wheeling of power may not be required. However, KEB wheels the 
power from their Kadra Hydel Project as per the needs of VISL. 

CHAPTER-m 
RECOMMENDATIONS/O BSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
HAS NOT ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
GENERAL RECOMMENDATION 
Rationalisation of Freight 
10 
RECOMMENDATION 
During the course of interaction with workers and management the Sub-Committee came 
to know that freight charges are increased almost every year and as a result the steel industry has 
to face the consequences of high transportation cost. It is a matter to understand that steel industry 
being a heavy industry cost of transportation is itself high and if the freight is increased year after 
year it would be disastrous for steel industry. 
Moreover Sub-Committee has been apprised that in many a cases Railways charges the 
freight for the distance covered plus 30% which is illogical and unscientific. A case in this regard 
may be referred to the K.K. line ofVizag steel plant where RINL has to pay high charges to the 
Railway despite the fact that the cost of laying the rail platform has been realized much earlier. 
The Sub-Committee recommends that the Ministry of Steel should take up the issue of 
rationalization of freight charges in general and the case of K.K. route in particular, ~ith the 
Ministry of Railway at the earliest and resolve the issue without much delay. 
REPLY 
The Railway have been charging freight on Kimadul-Kottavalasa line (SE Railway) by 
inflating the distance by 30% NMDC has been representing for tbe removal of the same in view 
of the increased traffic handled on the line. 
The inflation in distance on K-K line had been continuing since 1967. Initially it was 
65.2%, but with the traffic volume increasing, this was reduced to ·30% in 1981.This percentage 
of inflation has been continuing since then. In the last eighteen years there has been significant 
increase in the traffic handled on K-K Line - originating iron ore movement has gone up from 
56.361akh tonnes in 1987-88 to 117lakh tonnes in 1997-98 and 124lakh tonnes in 1999-2000. In 
addition, the line has been handling other traffic particularly on account of the NALCO's alumina 
plant near Koraput. 
In addition to the budgetary increase in the freight charges over the years since 1981, 
Railways had been revising the classification of iron ore upwards resulting in further increasing in 
the freight charges. The classification of iron ore which was 110 in 1989-90 had increased to 120 
in 1994-95 and 125 in 1999-2000. For the FY 2000-2001, the Railway freight has been increased . 
by about 5% with downward revision in the classification from 125 to 120. The net result will be 
an increase of about 1% in the railway freight for the year 2000-2001 over the 1~99-2000 rate. 
The above two factors have greatly added to the freight burden on the pricing of iron ore 
from Bailadila Sector. 

The Ministry of Steel has taken up with Railways to withdraw the inflated mileage of 
30% on K-K line and freight charged on the basis of actual distance. However, Ministry of 
Railways informed that the concessional rates were granted by the S.E. Railway in 1999-2000 to 
increase the loading from KK line and the results of granting the concessiQn will be reviewed by 
Ministry of Railways at the end of 1999-2000 to appreciate the possible effect of reduction in 
distance inflation. 
Since NMDC have now poised to achieve the loading of iron ore from Bailadila Sector to 
be level of 13.2 M.T. during the current year, Ministry of Railways have again been requested to 
withdraw the 30% inflation in distance on KK line. 
Even, the Ministry of Steel had recommended to the Ministry of Railways to consider 
NMDC's proposal to take over the operations of K.K. line. But Ministry of Railways have not 
agreed to this proposal since the function of rail transportation has been assigned to Railways 
only and moreover NMDC has no expertise to operate any Railway system. The issue will be 
pursued with Ministry of Railways further. 
FURTHER REPLY 
The matter was again taken up with Ministry of Railway. In response, Ministry of 
Railways had intimated about their resource. crunch and advised this Ministry to make use of 
transport capacity available with railways for transportation of their raw material etc. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS 
The Committee feels that Steel being a heavy item even a slight increase in freight will 
definitely lead tQ higher transportation cost and in the ultimate analysis will affect the Steel 
Industry as a whole. That is why the Committee had recommended for rationalisation of 
freight charges. However, it is being felt that further that the Ministry of Steel will continue to 
persuade to the Ministry of Railway for rationalisation of freight charges or to provide 
concessional charges for transportation.of steel products. · 
The Committee notes· the service sector is becoming more and more competitive and 
many steel players have started steel transportation through roadways and if the trend gather 
the momentum there is a possibility that Railways may incur loss. Henceforth, it is in the 
mutual interest of the Railway and Steel lftdustry due consideration is paid by the Ministry of 
Railways towards rationalisation of freight charges, that so, also to attract potential consumer 
to continue Railway mode of transportation and not to let them switch over to Road ways. It is 
also in the. better interest of railway that large volume of heavy/bulky product is continued to be 
transported through railway instead of roadways. 
As far as the inflation in distance on kinnadua1-kotavasala'( K.K. Line) is concerned 
the Committee reiterates that the Ministry of Railways should reconsider the basic issue. Since 
the cost of laying the rail platfonn has been realised much earlier there remains hardly any 
rational ground to support the view of railways to continue for charging freight on K.K. Line 
by inflating the distance by 30% . A rational approach demands withdrawal of such inflated 
freight charges 

MANAGEMENTBYO~CT~S 
12 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-Committee feels that at times the plant languish in their physical and financial 
performance due to the management found wanting in their role and responstbtlity ;.!though the 
atm of the Sub-Committee is not to find fault, however, 1t is worth mentioning here at that the 
m .. nagement of HSCL, Alloy S teel Plant (ASP), Bokaro S teel Plant n eed overhauling and 
Improvement. The Sub-Committee hopes that the Mimstry of Steel should ensure that the 
mana~ ment of these plants are guided by objectives as it i s o nly through management by 
objective and not mere management by actions, the lot of the plant may be improved. And once 
the objective is set an all out efforts should be made to achieve the objective. 
REPLY 
In SAIL, annual objectives are set, in terms of Budget, P roduction, Operations and 
Techno-econom1c, C ommercial and Financial parameters. Once these parameters are d efined, 
SAIL enters into a M emorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the Government of 
India/Ministry of Steel, setting out the performance parameters for the current year, for all SAIL 
Plants/Units . As a part of the above planning process, for Bokaro Steel Plant also, the parameters 
are defined and targets set. Management of BSL operates on these targets and all thetr actions are 
guided by the above defined objectives. 
The performance of BSL and other SAIL plants/units in terms of achievement of the 
objectives set in the MOU, are reviewed every quarter by the Ministry in the Quarterly 
Performance Review (QPR) Meetings. Based on the observations /suggestions by the Steel 
Minister/Secretary (Steel), action plans are drawn up and implemented. Further Ministry reviews 
the annual performance of BSL and other SAIL plants/units in the Quarterly Review meeting. 
The performance is also reviewed in the Chief Executives Meetings. Highlight of 
performance of BSL in 1999-2000 are:-
• Bokaro Steel Plant achieved best ever prodUction of CCD slabs, Cold Rolled Saleable 
Steel and by-products. 
• Lowest Coke Rate at 548 kg/thm, with an improvement of2.5% over 1998-99. 
• Best ever Energy Consumption of 8.24 GCALITCS with reduction of 3% over 1998-
99. 
• Continuous Casting production (CC) increased by 61% with CC to Crude Steel ratio 
rising from 28% to 45% in 1999-2000. 
ALLOYSTEELPLANT 
Alloy Steels Plant (ASP), has been cOntinuously incurring losses since 1979-80, with the 
exception of small profits during the period 1991-93 & 1995-96. The cumulative losses of ASP 
are substantially at Rs.892 crore. In the last 4 years, the level of losses has increased drastically. 
This is.mainly on account of decreasing sales realisation during sluggish market conditions, over 
supply situation and ~igh cost of production. 

Production at ASP is depen-!ent on the uu:conomtcal low power EAF route and most of 
its equipment is old. The market demand for Alloy and Special Steels in India has stagnated at 
around I 4-1.5 rnt over the last five years and the capacity ut ilization continues to be less than 
500/o. The market is highly fragmented among var1ous small players and ASP's market share is 
o:1ly 6%. ASP has a b usiness dass.dvantage (vts-a-vis 1ts competitors) in its locatioP in the 
eastern region, while nearly 60% of the market demand as from southern and western regio ns 
ASP has a freight cost disadvantage vL-a-vis a sout,,-.Jased supplier. ASP has Lst volumes 
stead ily, as the requ irement of in'.;•·rlant trar.sfers " • come down, on iiCCOunt of econom ic 
considerations . Salaries and wages '!CCOunt for E. bout : ~lo of the turnover of ASP, QS ~mpared 
to an average of about 16% for SAl:. r..s ~ whoie. 
Alloy Steels Plant is fundaiTt·~:ltaHy uncompet!ti.,.e because of its location, low quality o:.' 
assets and outdated technology. lbe;.:fore, considering ASP's financial performam~~ in the past 
and with no strong possibiEty of irqno ·em. nt • divt stmen~ of ASP has been con~ i~red and 
approved, as part ofFinanci;•1 a.nd Business Restructu ring. 
To reduce losses and to revave t.SP :n the interim period, an interim turnaround plan, 
prepared by a cornmitt ... e read~ by U1rector (RDC IS), is being implemented from April­
Decem ber 2000 by ASP. 
A new Management team headed by ED (ASP), GM (Works) and GM (Marketing) of 
ASP are overseeing the achievement of objectives/targets set as part of the Interim Turnaround 
Plan . The progress is reviewed in the Performanc e Rev;ew meeting held periodically . 
FURTHER REPLY 
SAIL has been entering into MoU with the Government of India/ Ministry of Steel since 
1988. The MoU identifies and monitors key Operational, techno-economic, Marketing, Hum~ 
resources, Financial and also assigns weight age to these parameters to evaluate the Company's 
overall performance . 
SAIL has consistently performed with reference to the MoU parameters and the MoU 
rating for the last five years is given below: 
Year MoU ratmg 
1995-96 Excellent 
1996-97 Very Good 
' 1997-98 Fair 
1998-99 Fair 
1999-2000 Good 
The PSUs under Ministry of Steel are engaged in different activities including Steel 
Making, Mining of Iron Ore, Manganese Chromite, Trading , Construction and Consultancy . As 
such performance evaluation parameters vary from company to company and MoUs of each PSU 
is drawn up accordingly . The MoU between SAIL and Ministry of Steel has, therefore , not much 
bearing on performance evaluation of other PSUs. 

FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS 
The Committee hopes that patchy years of SAIL will be over sooner then later if Steel 
PSUs management is honestly guided by the principle of management by objectives then 
management by activities. Memorandum of understanding is a unique tool to evaluate 
perfonnance of a company Target set, prioritization of parameters and objectives envisaged 
in MOtJ should act as the guiding force for actual realisation and implementation of 
programmes and cour'ie of adion Any deviation from the set target or objective or 
implementation gap makes the hole in the management network reflecting adverse credit in the 
MOl: mdex . It is here that the \is ion and managerial skill has its role to play. Awarding of 
Fatr credit to SAIL in the )Car 19CJ7-98 and 1998-99 is testimony to the fact that individual 
PSll management felt to tide over the turbulent water in steel industry, although recession in 
steel industry is a fact. Had the steel PSUs management , under SAIL applied tts best, at least, 
SAIL as a whole \\ould have not done so worse as it did actu!llly However, the Committee 
hope~ that phys1cnl and financial performance of SAIL as a whole wall improve with the time!} 
implementation business-cum-financtal package for SAIL. 
The case of Alloy Steel Plant (ASP) is a pointer to the fact how the plant continues to 
languish m its ph)sical and financial perfonnance due to the management found wanting in 
their role and responsibility. However, the Committee hopes that New Management of ASP 
will show its managerial skill in handling the situation. As Sub-Committee-1 for Ministry of 
Steel visited ASP plant recently the matter will be dealt in a separate Report. 
Similarly, the Committee hopes that financial perfonnance of HSCL will improve under 
new management and with implementation of first phase of financial and business restructuring 
Programmes and sanctioning of second phase of revival plan which is under the 
consideration of Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. 
DISPOSING OF INVENTORIES 
l5 
RECOMMENDATION 
During the course of plant visit and interaction with the management the sub-Committee 
observed the huBC accumulation of inventories, which not only block the scarce resources of the 
plant but also invites apprehension on the financial capability of the plant. High .inventories, 
which remain like 'idle asset' for the plant, lead to high operating cost. 
The Sub-committee is of the view that the Ministry of Steel wiiJ have to periodic 
assessment of the inventories at each plant, and chalk out time bound strategic programme for 
disposal of inventories at eaeh plant. 
REPLY 
SAIL had marketed 8.97 million tonnes of saleable steel and 0.66 million tonnes of pig 
iron in the domestic market and international markets during 1998-99. Consequently, the 
company was successful in depleting around 5 lakh tonnes of saleable steel inventory. 
Highest production of saleable steel was achieved during 1999··2000 which brought down 
in-process and finished inventories by one million tonnes and valued at Rs.200 crores. The 
inventory of pig iron came down by 1,11,000 tonnes during the year. 

FURTHER REPLY 
The current level of inventories of saleable steel and pig iron in terms of volume and 
value as on 31 51 March' 99, 3151 March'2000 and 31.12.00 is as under:-
(Qty in OOO'T/Value Rs/cr) 
As on 31.3.00 As on 31.12.2000 As on 3 I. 12. 1999 
Qty Value Qty Value Qty Value 
Saleable Steel 1252 1829 1795 2691 1691 2525 
Pig Iron 42 24 46 28 97 56 
The Inventory level is expected to come down in the last quarter of 2000-01. 
Action Being Taken To Reduce Stocks. 
Some of the measures taken in this connection, inter alia, include; 
);> Adjusting product mix to suit market requirements. 
);> Monitoring dispatches to stockyards keeping in v1ew existing stocks and potential 
demand at the location. 
');> Intensified customer contact for procuring orders for materials in stock. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS 
While the ,Committee notes the steps taken by the Ministry of Steel to reduce the level of 
inventories in general , however , the Committee is constrained to express its concern over the 
existing level of inventories . The Committee reiterates the recommendation made earlier by 
the Sub-Committee that the Ministry of Steel will continue to have periodic assessment of 
the inventories at each plant and will implement effectively the time bound strategic programme 
for disposal of inventories witqout further delay. 
SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATION 
Inventory of Saleable Steels 
1 (iii) 
RECOMMENDATION 
Although the Sup-committee is happy to note that the total inventory of saleable steel has 
come down from 3,74,600 tonne as on Ist Apri11998 to 3,57800 tonne on 1st August, 1998 but at 
the same time, the sub-committee feels that the volume of inventories are still large, henceforth, 
the BSP Management should take every possible steps to dispose of the same. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
As the result of the measures taken by it the stock of saleable steel at the Bhilai Steel 
Plant has come down from 260,123 tonnes to 179,969 tonnes in the year 1999-2000. 

FURTHER REPLY 
A number of measures have been taken by BSP Management to bring down the inventory 
of saleable steel, which include the following:-
(i) To get orders for sale of inventory of saleable steel 
(ii) To regulate production as per market demand 
(iii) To increase the direct sales/dispatches from the plant 
The stock of saleable steel at the Plant has further reduced during the current year, and is 
given below: 
Stock of Saleable Steel 
Ason 1.4.2000 179,969 tonnes 
As on 31.12.2000 145,473 tonnes 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS 
The Committee believes that Bhilai Steel Plant is a prospective unit of SAIL and 
piling on of saleable steel is a matter of grave concern as the same would adversely effect the 
financial performance of the plant. Therefore, the committee hopes that BSl> management and 
SAIL will keep constant vigil on the level of stock of saleable steel and dispose the same at 
the earliest. The Ministry of Steel should monitor the development in the matter. 
WORKERS UNION MANAGEMENT RELATION 
3(iii) 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-Committee while expressing concern over low productivity of labour, 
recommends that RSP management may prepare m~dalities for improved workers management 
relation which will not only lead to maintenance of Industrial peace but also have bearing on the 
performance of the Plant. 
IU:PLY 
In order to improve Workers-Management Relationship , the following steps have been 
taken: 
1. For improving productivity, the Central Production Committee has given guidelines to 
all Departmental Production Committees/ Departmental Production-cum-Safety Committees 
(DPCs/DP-cum-SCs) to deliberate on the following in each and every meeting: 
(a) Performance Review vis-a-vis Production Plan 
(b) Identification of short falls 
(c) Make up plan for short falls 
(d) Production Plan for the next month 

(e) Review of Quality Parameters 
(f) Review of Cost Control measures 
(g) Review of earlier action points 
(h) Minuting of new action points and fixing responsibility with time-frame 
The above practice is being followed in DPCs/DP-cum-SCs. 
2. A Forum exists for non-Recognised Union(s) at the level ofDGM (PL-Works) and CPM 
Ilc (NW) to discuss matters once every month on issues related to employee grievance and allied 
issues. At present only RMS Union is availing the facilities. 
3. Several commu~ication exercises for improving productivity, controlling wastages, cost 
control measures and on host of other productivity related issues are being conducted at the 
departmental level. 
4. There are sporadic incidents of protests over local issues. Such IR incidents however do 
not effect the production of the Plant. 
5. The labour productivity has been increasing since 97-98. as indicated below: 
-· Year Labour Productivity m Ingot tonnes/man /year I -- --~ 
1997-98 49 
1998-99 53 
--~ 
1999-2000 55 
The Labour Productivity has further increased in theIst Quarter of 2000-2001, the figure 
being 58 (Fifty eight). 
FURTHER REPLY 
Labour productivity in RSP in tenn oftonnes/ingots produced per man year \vas only 55 
Metric Tonnes (MT) in 1999-2000 which is well below the international standards. This 
productivity was even quite loss than the average of SAIL which is 95 MT/ man year. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS 
The Committee hopes that with the implementation of VRS and completion of 
modernisation programmes in RSP labour productivity in RSP should have increased . It is a 
matter of concern that labour productivity in RSP is not or; i] below the international standard 
but the labour productivity is also less than the average of SAIL. The Committee 
recommends that RSP management in general and SAIL in particular should monitor effective 
implementation of guide lines as issued by the Central productivity Committee. The 
Committee believes that labour productivity is the life-line for any industries where large level of 
production is involved. An increased labour productivity will certainly improve financial 
performance of the Company. 

BHARAT REFRACTORIES LTD. (BRL) 
6 l 
RECOMMENDATION 
Implementation of Revival Scheme 
The Sub-Committee is of the view that Bharat Refractories Ltd. required sufficient 
working capital which has been estimated at Rs.21.00 crores as per lOBI Scheme Report whereas 
SBI assessed that the company required working capital to the tune Rs.14 crore but the same is 
yet to be sanctioned and as a result disbursed and the pathetic condition of BRL continuous to 
prevail. Henceforth, the Sub-Committee observes that the required working capital must be 
provided to BRL for its survival and sustenance as on account of paucity of fund and inadequate 
assistance, most of the equipments and machinery outlived their effective life and need immediate 
replacement. 
REPLY 
SBI sanctioned a cash credit limit of R.s: 14 crores only, inspite of the Rs.21 crore as 
approved by BIFR and as per IDBI Scheme Report in the revival plan and it is one of the reasons 
for failure of the revival plan. An effort was made for revival of BRL and accordingly, a non 
plan loan of Rs.20 crore was sanctioned for meeting W..Jrking capital requirements and arrears of 
wage revision of employees of BRL from 1.7.98 m the year 1998-99. In addition Ministry of 
Finance has been requested for sanctioning an amount of Rs.55 crores as interest free loan to 
BRL (Rs. 30 crore for working capital requirements and Rs.25 crore for payment of statutory 
dues) to improve the physical and financial performance on the part ofBRL. 
FURTHER REPLY 
Ministry of Steel had sent a proposal for one time non-plan assistance to the tune of Rs. 
55 crore to the Ministry of Finance for working capital requirement and clearing of outstanding 
wages and statutory dues to the employees of BRL. Subsequently a revised proposal for Rs. 
72.08 has again been sent to Finance Ministry as pending statutory liabilities have increased to 
Rs. 42.08 crore. The proposal i~ awaiting clearance frdm the Ministry of Finance. 
In addition to the above, a proposal received from BRL for enhancement of cash credit 
facility from Rs. 14 crore toRs. 30 crore is under consideration of Government. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS 
The Committee hopes that Government will give green signal to the revival package 
which is under its consideration. It is also hoped that BRL management will take every steps 
to improve the financial performance of the Company. 
INDIAN IRON AND STEEL COMPANY LTD. 
7 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-Committee is constrained to express its concern over the deteriorating physical 
and financial performance of liSCO. While all other steel plants have undergone modernisation 

process, liSCO continues to operate through conventional method with outdated & traditional 
machinery and equipments. Therefore, liSCO requires immediate Government attention for a 
viable and modernisation package. 
The Sub-Committee hopes that Government of India would expedite the process of long 
awaiting signing of the agreement with the Government of Russia for approving SAIL's proposal 
to revive liSCO in a joint venture (N) partnership with Mls. Tyazh Prom export (TPE) of Russia 
by using a part of India-Rupee-Rouble department fund in Escrow Account as a contribution of 
the Russia side to the joint ¥entures company. 
The Sub-Committee further views that in case TPE's offer does not materialize, SAIL 
should take initiative to revive liSCO as sooner the modernisation package starts in the life of 
liSCO the better it would be for its sustainability otherwise, the plant is already heading towards 
a point of no return. 
REPLY 
The revival and long-tenn viability of liSCO would require comprehensive 
modernisation and capacity expansion at a considerable investment. SAIL is unable to fund such 
a modernisation programme, due to it's tight financial position. 
In 1996, in response to the Global Tender floated by SAIL inviting joint venture 
participation, only Mls.TPE of Russia and Mls.Mitsui of Japan responded. However, Mitsui also 
withdrew their offer leaving only the offer ofM/s.TPE. The proposal ofM/s.TPE depended upon 
the concurrence of the Russian Government to the use of Rupee debt funds in the Escrow account 
for the project. Matter pertaining to concurrence of Russian Government for tbe use of Rupee 
debt funds was pursued by Government of India and also discussed during the 61h Session of 
Indo-Russian Inter-Governmental Commission in January' 2000. However, the said concurrence 
did not materialise within stipulated time. 
Meanwhile, the Financial and Business Restructuring proposal of SAIL was approved by 
Government of India, which inter- alia includes, conversion of liSCO into a Joint Venture, with 
SAIL holding minority shareholding. The Joint Venture participation in liSCO is being 
attempted with the idea of facilitating the infusion of fresh capital (by strategic alliance partner), 
for revival/modernisation of liSCO. 
As liSCO is a BIFR case, BIFR was infonned about the Financial and Business 
Restructuring of SAIL/liSCO. BIFR held its hearing on 51h May, 2000 and directed SAIL/MOS 
to submit a final proposal to the Operating Agency (lOBI), for revival of liSCO by March, 200 I. 
SAIL has issued an advertisement inviting "Expression of Interest" (EOI) in Joint 
' Venture participation. The last date for receiving the EOI was upto August 31, 2000. Further 
action as per laid down procedures to conduct due diligence by SAIL/Financial Institutions is 
underway, and short listing of biddies has been completed. 
FURTHER REPLY 
Financial & Business Restructuring proposal of SAIL that has been approved by the 
Government includes inter-alia conversion of liSCO to a joint venture, with SAIL holding 
minority stake. The joint venture participation in liSCO is being attempted with the idea that the 
strategic alliance partner would infuse fresh capital for revival/modernisation of liSCO. 
Expression of interest (Eols) for Joint venture participation process in liSCO were 
received from the following five partie s: 
1. Mitsui & Co. Japan 
2. Mr. M. L. Agarwal - Secunderabad 

3. BHP Minerals Marketing, Australia 
4. TPE- Russia 
5. Sunflag Iron & Steel Co. Ltd 
Out of which three parties namely, M/s. Mitsui & Co., M/s. BHP Minerals Marketing and 
Mls. TPE have been shortlisted for joint venture partnership in liSCO. The divestment process is 
expected to be completed by June 2001, as per schedule. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS 
The Committee is of the opinion that revival and modernisation of liSCO is long 
overdue. As the disinvestment process of liSCO is on the way , the Committee hopefully 
believes that things with liSCO will improve in post divested phase whereby strategic partner 
of joint venture will give kind consideration for comprehensive modernisation and capacity 
utilisation with required investment. The Committee recommends that the disinvestment 
process should be expedited for time bound completion. 
KULTIWORKS 
8 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-Committee feels that a moderate modernisation at Kulti can be a great help to be 
productivity and quality of the plant. Henceforth, sufficient fund may be allocated for Kulti 
works to undertake modernisation programme so that a combination of high work culture 
prevailing at the plant, along with sophisticated technology would yield expected profit. 
REPLY 
Kulti Works is a unit of liSCO. J!SCO is a wholly owned subsidiary of SAIL. The 
revival and long-term viability of liSCO would require comprehensive modernisation and 
capacity expansion at a considerable investment. SAIL is unable to fund such a modernisation 
programme, due to it's tight financial position. 
In 1996, in response to the Global Tender floated by SAIL inviting joint venture 
participation, only Mls. TPE of Russia and Mls. Mitsui of Japan responded. However, Mitsui 
also withdrew their offer leaving only the offer of Mfs. TPE. The proposal of Mls. TPE depended 
upon the concurrence of the Russian Government to the use of Rupee debt funds in the Escrow 
account for the project. Matter pertaining to concurrence of Russian Government for the use of 
Rupee debt funds was pursued by Government of India and also discussed during the 6the 
Session of Indo-Russian Inter-Governmental Commission in January'2000. However, the said 
concurrence did not materialise within stipulated time. 
Meanwhile, the Financial and Business Restructuring proposal of SAIL was approved by 
Government of India, which inter alia includes, conversion of liSCO into a joint venture, with 
SAIL holding minority shareholding. The joint venture participation in liSCO is being attempted 
with the idea of facilitating the infusion of fresh capital (by strategic alliance partner), for 
revival/modernisation of liSCO. 

As liSCO is a BIFR case, BIFR was infonned about the Financial and Business 
Restructuring of SAIL/liSCO. BIFR held its hearing on 5th May, 2000 and directed SAIL/MOS 
to submit a final proposal to the Operating Agency (lOBI), for revival of liSCO by March, 200 I. 
SAIL has issued an advertisement inviting "Expression of Interest" (EOI) in Joint 
Venture participation. The last date for receiving the EOI was upto August 31, 2000. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS 
Since Kulti works is a unit of liSCO it is being believed that wtth the implementation 
of modernisation programmes m liSCO, in post davested phase whereby consaderable amount 
of money will be infused by strategic partners, the fate of Kulti works will improve 
automatically. 
ALLOY STEELS PLANT (ASP) 
[9_. ---------------- -~-=- -~---_-_ l 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-Committee feels that it is an imperative need to arrest the rising cost of inputs 
and negative movement of prices of ASP's product in order to reverse the trend of increasing 
gross loss and net realisation. The said objectives may be achieved by undertaking technological 
innovations and modernisation of manpower through Voluntary Retirement Sch-eme; reduction of 
inventory through strategic marketing and product diversification. 
REPLY OF 11IE GOVERNMENT 
Alloy Steels plnnt js fundamentally uncompetitive because of its location, low quality of 
assets and out.d 1ted technology. Therefore, considering ASP's financial perfonnance in the .past 
and with no str--,:"16 possibility of improvement, divestment of ASP has been considered and 
approved, as pan o1 SAIL's Financial and Business restructuring. 
To reduce losses and to revive ASP in the interim period, an interim turnaround plan, 
prepared by a committee headed by Director (RDCIS), is being implemented from April -
December'2000 by ASP. 
A new Management team beaded by ED (ASP). GM (Works) and OM (Marketing) of 
ASP are overseeing the achievement of objoctivesltargets set as part of the Interim Turnaround 
Plan. The progress is reviewed in the Chief Executives meeting held periodically. 
FURTHER REPLY 
Gives~ the accumulated losses of ASP aad its performance in tbe first half of the current 
fmanciaJ year, it is Wllikety that its divestment will attract any interest from the bidders. With a 
view to rehabilitate ASP, M/s. Dastur & Co. was appointed as technical consultan~ to suggest 
measures to turnaround ASP. The reports ofM/s. M.N. Dastur & Co. is expected to be submitted 
shortly. In the meantime, a taskforce has been constituted to study the approach for scaling down 
production at ASP with corresponding reduction in Manpower and closing down of non·viable 
shops. (Study completed and Report under fmalisation) 

FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS 
The Committee is of the opinion that Alloy Steel Plant requires consid8J'ed and well 
thought planned revival package . An oscillating approach i.e. sometimes thinking 
resurrection of ASP through disinvestment but at the same time believing that due to 
accumulated losses of ASP (stands at Rs.892 crores) it is unlikely that its disinvestment may not 
attract potential partner. However, the Committee believes that implementation of interim 
turnaround plan will arrest the downward financial performance of the Company. However, 
the production level at ASP may be determined at break even points. and ASP management 
may close down non-viable shops. 
SALEM STEEL PLANT (SSP) 
15 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Sub-Committee discussed with workers, officers & management of SSP in detail the 
economic viability and rationale for demand for investment of further Rs. 600 crore for Steel 
melting Shop (SMS) vis-a-vis sluggish demand trend and loan and interest burden to be caused to 
SSP due to proposed installation of SMS and came to the conclusion that installation of -5MS is 
the need of hour. It is noteworthy that out of 48 stainless steel plant all over the world, SSP is the 
only unit without SMS facility. 
The Sub-Committee regards the SSP management's argument convincing which 
underlines the fact that installation of SMS banks on the principles of cost-benefit ratio because 
the existing cost on raw material is 66% of total cost and if SMS facilities are provided, the cost 
on raw material will come down to 45% or so, thus, providing leverage for cOmpetitiveness vis-a­
vis international market. Moreover, the installation of SMS facilities would provide favourable 
Break-Even-Point due to increment in volume of production and reduction in cost. 
Therefore, the Sub-Committee is of the considered view that the Ministry of Steel in 
general and SAD.. in particular should make conscious effort in this regard. 
~ REPLY 
As a step towards backward integration of Salem Steel Plant, steel-melting facilities were 
envisaged to be taken up during the -later part of 9tb Five-Year Plan. Due to fmancial constraints, 
it could not be considered so far. In view of scarcity of resources and high existing level of debts, 
SAIL is unable to provide desired level of funds to various units including that of Salem Steel 
Plant for installation of steel melting facilities, which are essential for technological upgradation 
and long-term viability. Salem Steel Plant is to be hived off inter alia as a part of finaQcial and 
business restructuring proposal. Possibility of forming a Joint Venture Company is being 
explored with two options viz. (i)-steel melting facilities may be set up by the Strategic Alliance 
Partner as a separate Joint Venture Company to supply input materials to SSP or (ii)- a Joint 
Venture Company for entire Salem Steel Plant and the Strategic Alliance Partner will set up steel 
melting facilities in a mutually agreed time schedule. 
FURTHER -REPLY 
After thf Government's approval for conversion of SSP into a joint venture following 
progress has been made so far. · ., 

MIS JM Morgan Stanley has been appointed as Merchant Bankers. MIS Pathak & Co. has 
been appointed as legal advisors to MIS JM Morgan Stanley. Expression of Interest (EOD have 
been received from four parties namely, Mls TISCO, Mls Avesta Sheffield, Mls Shah Alloys & 
Mls Jindal Strips. 
Short listed bidders are Mls Avesta Sheffield, Mls TISCO-Usinor and Mls Jindal Strips 
Ltd (JSL)-ALZ .. The process of divestment has been delayed and is likely to be completed by 
Nov' 2001. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS 
The Committee believes that the installation of Steel Melting Shops ( SMC) for 
echnological upgradation in Salem Steel plant is the need of the hour for long term viability of 
the plant. Therefore, the Committee recommends that every possibility to install the same 
should be explored and decision so arrived at should be implemented without delay. The 
Committee notes that the process of disinvestment will be completed by November, 2001. 

CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
NIL 

OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF J'HE 
COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE 
General Recommendation 
RATIONALISATION OF FREIGHT 
10 
The Committee feels that Steel being a heavy item even a slight increase in freight wilt 
definitely lead to higher transportation cost and in the ultimate analysis will affect the Steel 
Industry as a whole. That is why the Committee had rQCommended for rationalisation of 
freight charges. However, it is being felt that further that ihe Ministry of Steel will continue to 
persuade to the Ministry of Railway for rationalisation of freight charges or to provide 
concessional charges for transportation of steel products. 
The Committee notes the service sector is becoming more and more competitive and 
many steel player~ have started steel transpo11ation through roadways and if the trend gather 
the momentum there is a possibility that Railways may incur loss. Henceforth, it is in ~e 
mutual interest of the Railway and Steel Industry due consideration is paid by the Ministry of 
Railways towards rationalisation of freight charges, that so, also to attract potential consumer 
to continue Railway mode of transportation and not to let them switch over to Road ways . It is 
also in the better interest of railway that large volume of heavy/bulky product is continued to be 
transported through railway instead of roadways. 
As far as the inflation in distance on kirinadual-kotavasala ( K.K. Line) is COf\Cemed 
the Committee reiterates that the Ministry of Railways should reconsider the basic. Since the 
cost of laying the rail platform has been realised much earlier there remains hardly any rational 
ground to support the view of railways to continue for charging freight on K.K. Line by 
inflating the distance by 30% . A rational approach demands withdrawal of such inflated 
freight charges." 
MANAGEMENT BY OBJECI'IVES 
12 
The Cominittee·hopes that patchy years of SAIL will be over sooner then later if Steel PSUs 
management is honestly guided by the principle of management by objectives then 
management by activities. Memorandum of understanding is a unique tool to evaluate 
performance of a company. Target set, prioritization of parameters and objectives envisaged 
in MOU should act as the guiding force for actual realisation and implementation of 
programmes and course of action. Any deviation from the set target or objective or 
implementation gap makes the hole in the management network reflecting adverse credit in the 
MOU index. It is here that the vision and managerial skill has its role to play. Awarding of 
Fair credit to SAIL in the year 1997-98 and 1998-99 is testimony to the fact that individual 
· PSU management felt to tide over the turbulent water in steel industry, although recession in 
steel industry is a fact. Had the steel PSUs management , under SAIL applied its best, at least, 
SAIL as a whole would have not done so worse as it did actually. However, the Committee 

hopes that physical and financial perfonnance of SAIL as a whole will improve with the timely 
implementation business-cum-financial package for SAIL. 
The case of Alloy Steel Plant (ASP) is a pointer to the fact how the plant continues to 
languish in its physical and financial perfonnance due to the management found wanting in 
their role and responsibility. However, the Committee hopes that New Management of ASP 
will show its managerial skill in handling the situation. As Sub-Committee-! for Ministry of 
Steel visited ASP plant recently the matter will be dealt in a separate Report. 
Similarly, the Committee hopes that financial perfonnance of HSCL will improve under 
new management and with implementation of first phase of financial and business restructuring 
Programmes arid sanctioning of second phase of revival plan which is under the 
consideration of Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. 
DISPOSING OF INVENTORIES 
15 
While the Committee notes the steps taken by the Ministry of Steel to reduce the level of 
inventories in general , however , the Committee is constrained to express its concern over the 
existing level of inventories . The Committee reiterates the recommendation made earlier by 
the Sub-Committee that the Ministry of Steel will continue to have periodic assessment of 
the inventories at each plant and will implement effectively the time bound strategic programme 
for disposal of inventories without further delay. 
Spedfic Recommendation 
INVENTORY OF SALEABLE STEELS 
I (iii) 
The Committee believes that Bhilai Steel Plant is a prospective unit of SAIL and 
piling on of saleable steel is a matter of grave concern as the same would adversely effect the 
financial perfonnance of the plant. Theref~re, the Committee hopes that BSP management and 
SAIL will keep constant vigil on the level of stock of saleable steel and dispose the same at 
the earliest. The Ministry of Steel should monitor the development in the matter. 
WORKERS UNION MANAGEMENT RELATION 
3(iii) 
The Committee hopes that with the implementation of VRS and completion of 
modernisation programmes in RSP labour productivity in RSP should have increased . It is a 
matter of concern that labour productivity in RSP is not only below the international standard 
but the labour productivity is also less than the average of SAIL. The Committee 
recommend,s that RSP management in general and SAIL in particular should monitor effective 
implementation of guide lines as issued by the Central productivity Committee. The 
Committee believes that labour productivity is the life-line for any industries where large level 

of production is involved. An increased labour productivity will certainly improve financial 
performance of the Company. 
BHARA T REFRACTORIES LTD. (BRL) 
6 
Implementation of Revival Scheme 
The Committee hopes that Government will give green signal to the revival package 
which is under its consideration. It is also hoped that BRL management will take every steps 
to improve the financial performance of the Company. 
INDIAN IRON AND STEEL COMPANY LTD. 
7 
The Committee is of the opinion that revival and modernisation of liSCO is long ' 
overdue. As the disinvestment process of liSCO is on the way , the Committee hopefully 
believes that things with liSCO will improve in post divested phase whereby strategic partner 
of joint venture will give kind consideration for comprehensive modernisation and capacity 
utilisation with required investment. The Committee recommends that the disinvestment 
process should be expedited for time bound completion. 
KULTIWORKS 
8 
Since Kulti works is a unit of liSCO it is being believed that with the implementation 
of modernisation programmes in liSCO, in ·post divested phase whereby considerable amount 
of money will be infused by strategic partners, the fate of Kulti works will improve 
automatically. 
ALLOY STEELS PLANT (ASP) 
9. 
The Committee is of the opinion that Alloy Steel Plant requires considered and well 
thought planned revival package An oscillating approach i.e. sometimes thinking 
resurrection of ASP through disinvestment but at the same time believing that due to 
accumulated losses of ASP (stands at Rs.892 crores) it is unlikely that its disinvestment may not 
attract potential partner. However, the Committee beli~ves that implementation of interim 
turnaround plan will arrest the downward financial performance of the Company. However , 
the ·production level at ASP may be determined at break even points and ASP management 
may close down non-viable shops. 

-
SALEM STEEL PLANT (SSP) 
IS 
The Committee believes that the installation of Steel Melting Shops ( SMC) for 
Technological upgradation in Salem Steel plant is the need of the hour for long term viability 
of the plant. Therefore, the Committee recommends that every possibility to install the same 
should be explored and decision so arrived at should be implemented without delay. The 
• Committee notes that the process of disinvestment will be completed by November 2001. 

MINUTES 

XIII 
THIRTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 9m November, 2001 in 
Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ramdas Agarwal -Chairman 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Dr. Faguni Ram 
3. Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma 
4. Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhundar 
5. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha 
6. Prof .. M.M. Aggarwal 
7. Shri Bangaru Laxman 
LOKSABHA 
8. Shri Ramdas Athawale 
9. Shri Anant Mahadeoappa Gudhe 
10. Shri Thomas Hansda 
11. Shri G.J. Javiya 
12. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
13. Shri G. Mallikarjunappa 
14. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
1 5. Shri Uttamarao Deorao Patil 
16. Shri M. Rajaiah 
17. Shri Ram Sajivan 
18. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh 
19. Smt. Renu Kumari 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director 
2. 
3. 
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer 
• • 
• • 
• 
• 
4. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration draft Report on the Action Taken 
by the Government on the recommendations contained in its 34th Report on Problems being 
faced by Steel Industry (both in Public and private Sector), Ministry of Steel and draft Report 
on Action Taken by the GQvemment on recommendations contained in its 5151 Report on 
Deman~s for Grants ( 2001-2002) pertaining to Ministry of Steel. The Committee after some 
discussion adopted both the draft reports as circulated. 
•"•Relates to other matter. 

5. The Committee decided that the reports may be presented to both the Houses on the 
21" November, 2001, and that its Chainnan and in his absence, Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha and 
Shri K.H. Muniyappa and in his absenCe Smt. Renu Kumari may present the reports to Rajya 
Sabha and Lok Sabha respectively. 
6. * * * 
A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept. 
7. The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M. 
••Relates to other matter 
~IP(Pw)MRN~1.H3~.e: 2Qd2 . 