PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 231
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 28 MARCH, 2012)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 28 MARCH, 2012)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 28 MARCH, 2012)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 28 MARCH, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2012/CHAITRA, 1934 (SAKA)MARCH, 2012/CHAITRA, 1934 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY 
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON INDUSTR Y
TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTY-FIRST REPORT
ON
RD
ACTION TAKEN NOTE ON THE 223  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
ON
 REVIVAL AND RESTRUCTURING
OF
NORTH EASTERN HANDICRAFTS AND HANDLOOMS
DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION LTD.
PERTAINING TO
THE MINISTRY OF DEVELOPMENT OF NORTH EASTERN REGION

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTY-FIRST REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN NOTE ON THE 223 RD REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
ON
REVIV AL AND RESTRUCTURING
OF
NORTH EASTERN HANDICRAFTS AND HANDLOOMS
DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION LTD.
PERTAINING TO
THE MINISTRY OF DEVELOPMENT OF NORTH EASTERN REGION
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 28 TH MARCH, 2012)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 28 TH MARCH, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2012/CHAITRA, 1934 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—11
(i) Chapter – I
Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the
Ministry.................................................................................................................... 2—4
(ii) Chapter – II
Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to
pursue in view of the Government’s replies... ................................................. 5—6
(iii) Chapter – III
Recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has
either not accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry
to review its replies .............................................................................................. 7—9
(iv) Chapter – IV
Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the
Ministry have not been received ........................................................................ 10—11
4. M
INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 13—15

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted w.e.f. of 31 st August, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Tiruchi Siva — Chairman
2. Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy
3. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
4. Shri Ashk Ali Tak
5. Shri K.B. Shanappa
6. Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor
7. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
8. Shri Srinjoy Bose
9. Shri Nandamuri Harikrishna
10. Dr. Vijay Mallya
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
12. Shri Kamlesh Balmiki
13. Shri Sabbam Hari
14. Shrimati Poonamben Veljibhai Jat
15. Shri Ramsingh Kaswan
16. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar
17. Shrimati Putul Kumari
18. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
19. Shrimati Ingrid Mcleod
20. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal
21. Shri Somen Mitra
22. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey
23. Shri Kishn V . Patel
24. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
25. Shri B.Y . Raghavendra
26. Shri Ramsingbhai Patalbhai Rathwa
27. Shri Ijyaraj Singh
28. Shri E.G . Sugavanam
29. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai
30. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
31. Shri Subhash Bapurao Wankhede
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry,
having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred and Thirty-First Report
on Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region on the
recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred and Twenty Third Report on the
Revival and Restructuring of the North Eastern Handicrafts and Handlooms Development
Corporation Ltd.
2. I thank the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region for furnishing the Action
Taken Note on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred and Twenty Third
Report.
3. The Committee in its meeting held on the 7
th March, 2012 considered and adopted the
report.
TIRUCHI SIV A
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
March, 2012 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of
Development of North Eastern Region on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two
Hundred and Twenty-Third Report on the Revival and Restructuring of North Eastern Handicrafts
and Handlooms Development Corporation Ltd. pertaining to Ministry of Development of North
Eastern Region.
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Development of North Eastern
Region in respect of the recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized
as follows:
Chapter–I The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry.
The Committee is pleased to observe that the Ministry has accepted its recommendations
as mentioned in the Chapter-I of the Report.
Chapter–II The recommendation/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s replies.
In respect of these recommendations the Committee is convinced with the logic and
explanations advanced by the Ministry and therefore do not want to pursue them for the present.
Chapter–III The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has either not
accepted replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its reply.
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of recommendations
contained in Chapter-III and desires that the Ministry should furnish logical explanations therefore.
Chapter–IV The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry
have not been received.
In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either furnished the
interim replies or couched its language in vague terms like noted for compliance/guidance,
therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in respects
of recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention and
spirit of the recommendations of the Committee.
3. The details of the ATR are being discussed in the succeeding pages.

2
2
CHAPTER-I
Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry
Recommendation
1. The Committee while interacting with the officials of the NEHHDC noted that they
were diffident in replying to the queries of the Members of the Committee and even were
not able to satisfactorily provide answers or clarifications on points raised by the Members
of the Committee. The Committee got the impression that the involvement of the officials
in running the affairs of the NEHHDC was not up to mark. It strongly felt that the half-
hearted manner in which they were dealing with the questions of the Committee and quite
often, taking long pauses to say or make remarks on the points raised by the Members,
they were not at all efficiently running the work of the Corporation. The Committee,
therefore, tends to conclude that there is a high degree of mismanagement and lack of
interest in carrying forward the work of the Corporation.
(Para 11)
Action Taken
The observations of the Committee have been noted.
Recommendation
2. The Committee understands that to move from 75:25 ratio to 90:10 ratio necessary changes
have to be affected at the Cabinet level and, therefore, the Ministry of Textiles has to initiate the
process in taking it forward and getting the approval of the Government of India. The Committee
recommends that the 90:10 funding pattern may be seriously considered for the revival of
the NEHHDC.
(Para 22)
Action Taken
Ministry of Textiles have already submitted a proposal before the Planning Commission to
provide grants-in-aid in the ratio of 90:10 for State Corporations of NER including NEHHDC.
Recommendation
3. Secretary, DoNER also put forth the point that the Ministry may also explore the possibility
of utilising the services of the Corporation for implementing its various programmes by providing
it appropriate grant. The Committee feels that the observations of the Secretary, DoNER may
be seriously considered for making the NEHHDC a viable and profitable Corporation.
(Para 24)
Action Taken
The recommendations of the Committee have been kept in view while formulating the
Revival Plan of NEHHDC.

3
Recommendation
4. Net worth of a company is indicative of the health and outlook which drives it and impacts
its activities. It is rather unfortunate to note that the net worth of the company has always been
negative and now stands at (-) Rs 2700.50 lakhs. This issue has been discussed in an earlier para.
The Committee notes that during the preceding three years, i.e., 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10,
the turnover of the Corporation and its gross trading profit has increased. It is a heartening trend.
The Committee also notes that during the year 2008-09 and 2009-10, the Corporation could bring
down, if not completely reverse, its annual loss. The Committee recommends that this new
found strength must be bolstered to restore the economic viability of the Corporation.
(Para 27)
Action Taken
NEHHDC is making all out efforts to bring down its annual losses and trying to reduce it
further as recommended by the Committee. The Revival Plan when implemented is expected to
bolster the economic viability of the Corporation.
Recommendation
5. The Committee was informed by the Corporation that inadequate working capital for
sourcing and procurement of handicrafts and handloom products from various craft clusters in the
region is one of the factors responsible for not achieving the target of sales and profitability. It
was also told to the Committee that logistic and topography of the North-Eastern part of India and
the high cost of transportation, especially of the sofa sets and other household products came on
the way of sourcing such products as per the demand. The Committee strongly recommends
the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region to look into these difficulties and
take measures for addressing the problems faced by the Corporation.
(Para 28)
Action Taken
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. Ministry of Development of North
Eastern Region has been releasing funds to the NEHHDC for meeting its working capital
requirements as loan. The draft Revival Plan of the Corporation has stipulations that address these
aspects also.
Recommendation
6. The Committee understands from the documents supplied to it that there are several factors
which might handicap the Corporation in expanding its activities and reviving its financial
efficiency. One of them is paucity of specific raw materials such as matured cane and wood for
meeting requirements of artisan of the region. The second factor outlined by the Corporation is that
the production, procurement and sourcing of the material suffers due to poor work culture and
attitude of the artisans of the region. The Committee feels that a campaign must be launched to
alter the attitude of the artisans and weavers on a sustained basis. It will take quite long time to
change their outlook. The campaign must be combined with economic incentives which will
certainly motivate them to show interest in the handloom and handicrafts business.
(Para 29)
Action Taken
The Corporation is implementing the recommendations of the Committee to involve larger

4
number of artisans and weavers in its projects and is also giving a platform to young entrepreneurs
and designers for marketing of products meant for the youth and higher-end segment. The
Corporation is also presently working on design improvements and interventions through qualified
designers which will bring Handloom and Handicraft products with contemporary designs to the
market. The recommendations of the Committee have been included in the Revival Plan of the
Corporation.
Recommendation
7. The Committee is of firm opinion that all concerned must summon their energy to stem the
loss suffered by the NEHHDC and slowly but surely make it a profitable company. Even as
budgetary support will go a long way in strengthening the Corporation, attempts must also be made
to create internal resources which would be the source of its sustenance and forward movement.
It is, therefore, appropriate that a road map must be prepared to materialise this vision.
(Para 32)
Action Taken
The Revival Plan being formulated also includes a road map for sustenance of the
Corporation in future and its forward movement.
Recommendation
8. As stated earlier, the officials of the Corporation were evasive in dealing with the questions
and concerns raised by the Members of the Committee in its meeting in Shillong. It is quite clear
that the system of accountability has suffered serious erosion. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommends that every action of the management must be scrutinised and it must
be held accountable for all acts of  omission and commission. By enforcing the principle of
accountability, the Corporation can take a major step forward for using the budgetary
support or other funds that may be infused to revitalise the Corporation.
(Para 33)
Action Taken
As recommended by the Committee, the Ministry is closely scrutinising and monitoring the
managerial activities of the Corporation and taking appropriate measures to revitalise the
Corporation.

5
CHAPTER-II
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies
Recommendation
1. The Corporation through its replies to the questionnaires supplied to the Committee informed
that it is engaged in participating in regional exhibitions, craft fairs and special marketing events.
The Committee notes that its participation is confined to cities like Bangalore, Chennai, Kolkata,
New Delhi, Shillong and Guwahati. The Committee recommends that the Corporation must
explore markets in the eastern region of the country which has potential buyers for
handicrafts and handloom products. These regions would be nearer to the North-Eastern
part and, therefore, the cost of transportation of the goods and finished products would be
relatively less.
(Para 25)
Action Taken
The Committee’s recommendation that the Corporation must explore markets in the Eastern
Region has already been implemented and exhibitions are being held in places like Bhubaneswar,
Asansol, Gangtok besides exhibitions in Kolkata, Shillong, Guwahati and Jorhat in the Eastern Region.
Recommendation
2. The Committee was informed that the activities of the Corporation to develop skills,
particularly the business skills of the artisans, and promoting awareness in the region is based on
organisation of limited number of seminars and workshops. The Committee feels that the
Corporation must intensify its activities to spread awareness among the youth of the region and
associate them in many of its programmes for generating interest among them on the rich heritage
of hand made and hand woven products. As stated earlier, the North Eastern Handicraft and
Handloom Corporation originated in the context of the pitiable condition of the poor craft persons
and weavers most of whom are women. Over a period of time, it is noticed that the middle class
is reviving interest on handloom and handicraft in a big way. The Committee is constrained to
note that the Corporation is quite inert in understanding this trend among the youth,
particularly those belonging to the middle class, and taking advantage of it for taping the
prospective clientele. It, therefore, recommends that both the Corporation and the Ministry
of Development of North-Eastern Region must prepare a strategy to explore new markets.
It is not enough to maintain, as the Corporation did before the Committee, that the private
players have better competitive ability to market handloom and handicrafts products at a
price which is difficult for the Corporation to match. This is the age of innovation and
creativity. The Government of India is observing the decade from 2010 to 2021 as the
decade of innovation. When the term ‘innovation’ is used, its applicability in every sector
including the handloom and handicraft sector assume critical relevance. The Committee
strongly recommends that the officials of the DONER and the NEHHDC must come together
to take appropriate measures so that the Corporation is revived and serves the purpose for
which it was established in 1970s.
(Para 26)
5

6
Action Taken
The Corporation is also implementing the recommendations of the Committee to involve
larger number of artisans and weavers in its projects and is also giving a platform to young
entrepreneurs and designers for marketing of products meant for the youth and higher-end
segment. The Corporation is also presently working on design improvements and interventions
through qualified designers which will bring Handloom and Handicraft products with contemporary
designs to the market.
The activities of the NEHHDC are periodically reviewed to align these with the needs of
bringing innovation in the product mix of the Corporation and to enhance their marketability for
competitive markets and promotion in the national and international markets. The NEHHDC has
undertaken development of engineered bamboo sofa sets in its Common Facility Centre at Garchuk,
Guwahati for meeting demands of the upmarket segment in the country. A range of silk textile
dress material and made ups at Sualkuchi cluster and utility, decorative and gift cane and bamboo
products at Barpeta cluster in Assam, are being developed for meeting national and international
market demands. The Corporation has also recently executed an export order for cane baskets
through value addition by attaching brass metal rim to United Kingdom. The Corporation has also
developed about 900 handicrafts designs in digital formats under its Design Bank Project for
distribution among the artisans and entrepreneurs of the North Eastern Region for development of
samples and depending on the quality of the samples, will arrange for commercial production.

7
CHAPTER-III
 Recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has either not
accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its replies
Recomm endation
1. The Committee expresses its serious concern that the NEHHDC has not been
restructured even after the report given by the BRPSE for making it a  promotional body.
All concerned must pay serious attention to the revival of this important organisation which
was set up to tap the enormous potential in the handloom and handicraft sector of the
region. It proposes a comprehensive revival package which should be implemented in a time
bound manner and not staggered over a long period of time. Till the Corporation is revived
and restructured full budgetary support should be extended by the Ministry for Development
of North-Eastern Region.
(Para 10)
The Committee also impresses upon the Department of Public Enterprises to take up
the matter with concerned Ministries/Departments and apprise the Committee of the
progress made in the action taken notes.
(Para 34)
Action Taken
(M/o DoNER)
A turnaround package in respect of the North Eastern Handicrafts and Handlooms
Development Corporation Ltd. (NEHHDC) was submitted on 12
th October, 2010 by the Ministry of
Development of North Eastern Region to the Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises
(BRPSE). The Board considered the package in its meeting held on 21 st December, 2010 and
recommended that a revival plan for the Corporation, separating its commercial and promotional
activities may be submitted for its consideration. The revival plan is at an advanced stage of
finalisation.
Department of Public Enterprises is to submit ATR in response to a copy of the Report
already sent to them by the Rajya Sabha Secretariat. A copy of ATR of Ministry of Development
of North Eastern Region is also being endorsed to Department of Public Enterprises for taking a
holistic view.
Action Taken
(Department of Public Enterprises)
The view of the Department of Public Enterprises were submitted before the Committee on
18.4.2011 on the revival and restructuring of North Eastern Handicrafts & Handlooms Development
Corporation Ltd. (NEHHDC). DPE on receipt of the complete proposal on revival of NEHHDC from
M/o Development of North Eastern Region (M/o DoNER), which is the administrative Ministry
of NEHHDC will examine and refer it to BRPSE for its consideration and recommendation.
M/o DoNER has also been advised to submit the proposal on NEHHDC at the earliest.
7

8
Further Recommendation
The Committee condemns the delay in submission of the complete revival proposal
of NEHHDC on the part of M/o DoNER which is still awaited in the Department of Public
Enterprises as the DPE in their Action Taken Reply have indicated that on receipt of the
complete proposal on revival from NEHHDC it will examine and refer it to BRPSE for
consideration. The Committee impresses upon the DoNER to expedite the revival proposal
without any further delay. It would also like to have a progress report from the Ministry
of DoNER in this connection alongwith a copy of the revival/restructuring plan of the
NEHHDC for the perusal of the Committee.
Recommendation
2. The Secretary, DoNER also referred to the role played by the NEHHDC for conducting
many training/skill upgradation programmes and implementing projects like Design Bank and
Handicrafts Museums. She maintained that in respect of these programmes/projects, NEHHDC gets
only implementation cost without any services charges. Pleading that component of service charges
may also be included in the project cost of this programmes/projects, she stated that such
measures will help the NEHHDC to revive its financial health. The Committee strongly
recommends the Government to consider the aforementioned points raised by the Secretary,
DoNER and take appropriate steps for their early implementation.
(Para 23)
Action Taken
Undertaking strategic developmental activities, which are in synergy with the commercial
activities of the Corporation and improving the socio-economic conditions of the artisans stand
subsumed in the Revival Plan under finalisation.
Further Recommendation
The Committee further recommends on the suggestion tendered by the Ministry of
DoNER to consider the implementation cost including service charges which may also be
included in the project cost of the programmes/projects viz. training/skill upgradation
programmes and projects like Design Bank and handicrafts museums as such measures will
help the NEHHDC to strengthen its financial health.
Recommendation
3. In the modern period of twenty first century, it is important to integrate business principles
for running any organisation be it the public or private. The Committee understands that one of
the problem areas confronted by the Corporation relates to non-commercial nature of weavers and
artisans of the entire North-Eastern region who pursue the age old habit of weaving and crafting
for meeting specific family requirements on cultural and religious grounds. This is a challenge
which needs to be addressed boldly and creatively. The widespread acceptability of the handloom
and handicraft products and the manner in which these are valued, both in India and abroad, raises
hope that a larger market can be explored and tapped for the benefit of the artisans and weavers.
The Committee feels that apart from budgetary support it requires enormous effort on the
part of the Corporation and those engaged in organising the artisans and weavers for
making their profession commercially attractive and viable.
(Para 31)

9
Action Taken
NEHHDC is taking various initiatives, including plans for cluster development to help the
artisans and weavers of the North Eastern Region make their profession commercially attractive
and viable.
Further Recommendations
The Committee feels that a time bound programme for cluster development be
chalked out a monitoring mechanism should be evolved at the level of DoNER to have a
close look at the cluster development for the benefit of the artisans and weavers of North
Eastern Region.

10
CHAPTER-IV
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of the Ministry have not been received
Recommendation
1. The good and sensible proposal of. the Secretary was welcomed by the Committee.
Besides, the Committee felt that the huge interests on the loan accumulating over the years may
be waived off as an initial measure to help the Corporation to come out of its present pitiable
condition. The Committee also felt that the Corporation can establish its branches in all the States
of the north eastern region and thereby decentralise its activities from its headquarters located
in Shillong. The Committee strongly recommends that a monitoring mechanism may be
placed to have a close look on the funds supplied by the Central Government and
judiciously check the way in which such funds are utilised by the Corporation. The
Committee took note of the statements of the officials of the Corporation and the DoNER
that suitable VRS Scheme should be introduced to rationalise the staff strength in
consonance with its capacity to emerge as a viable, vibrant and profit making body. It is
hoped that the budgetary support to be given by the DoNER would help the Corporation
to revive its financial health.
(Para 19)
Action Taken
The observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. The expenditure being
incurred by NEHHDC is closely monitored through various review meetings taken by the Ministry,
periodical meetings of the Board of Directors of the Corporation and periodical budget review
meetings.
The Revival Plan for NEHHDC, which is at an advance stage of firming up, inter alia ,
includes a proposal for suitable VRS to its employees with a view to rationalise its staff strength
and waiving of interest on the loans.
Recommendation
2. The paramount issue is the livelihood and well being of the poor artisans and weavers who
are mostly women. In fact, the North Eastern Handloom and Handicraft Corporation was
established in 1976 with its foundational objective of safeguarding the poor women engaged in the
handloom and handicraft sector. The central concern of the Committee, therefore, is the protection
of such weavers and artisans. It, therefore, strongly recommends that liquidation of the
Corporation may not be pursued and instead a chance may be given to it with adequate
support from the DoNER to restructure its size and make it competitive and business
oriented. In doing so, it can emerge as a successful public sector enterprise standing on its
own strength and upholding the cause of the artisans and weavers whose interests are of
central concern in any scheme for revival of the Corporation.
(Para 20)
10

11
Action Taken
A Revival Plan is being concretised so as to restructure, revamp and revive the Corporation
to make it competitive and business oriented, as recommended.

MINUTES

IX
NINTH MEETING
The Committee met at 12.00 noon on Wednesday, the 7 th March, 2012 in Committee Room
‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Tiruchi Siva — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
2. Shri Ashk Ali Tak
3. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
LOK SABHA
4. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
5. Shrimati Putul Kumari
6. Shri Kishnaswamy
7. Shrimati Ingrid Mcleod
8. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal
9. Shri Somen Mitra
10. Shri Kishn V . Patel
11. Shri Ramsingbhai Patalbhai Rathwa
12. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and briefed them that the agenda of
the meeting, was to consider and adopt the 227
th and 231 st reports of the Committee on Action
taken Notes on the 218 th report on Revival and Restructuring of Hindustan Paper Corporation Ltd.
and on the 223 rd report on Revival and Restructuring of North Eastern Handicraft and Handloom
Development Corporation Ltd., respectively.
3. Thereafter, the 227 th and 231 st reports were taken up by the Committee for consideration,
separately. After some discussion, Members of the Committee suggested few points to be
incorporated in both the draft Reports. At the end of the discussion, the Committee unanimously
adopted the 227
th and 231 st Draft Reports along with the suggestions.
The meeting adjourned at 01.05 p.m.
15

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.