PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 227
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 27 MARCH, 2012)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 27 MARCH, 2012)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 27 MARCH, 2012)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 27 MARCH, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2012/CHAITRA, 1934 (SAKA)MARCH, 2012/CHAITRA, 1934 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY 
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON INDUSTR Y
TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT
ON
TH
ACTION TAKEN NOTE ON THE 218  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
ON
REVIVAL AND RESTRUCTURING OF 
HINDUSTAN PAPER CORPORATION LTD.
PERTAINING TO
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES
(DEPARTMENT OF HEAVY INDUSTRY)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN NOTE ON THE 218 TH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
ON
REVIVAL AND RESTRUCTURING OF
HINDUSTAN PAPER CORPORATION LTD.
PERTAINING TO
THE MINISTRY OF HEA VY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES
(DEPARTMENT OF HEA VY INDUSTRY)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 27 TH MARCH, 2012)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 27 TH MARCH, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2012/CHAITRA, 1934 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—16
(i) Chapter – I
Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the
Ministry.................................................................................................................... 2—6
(ii) Chapter – II
Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to
pursue in view of the Government’s replies... ................................................. 7—9
(iii) Chapter – III
Recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has
either not accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry
to review its replies .............................................................................................. 10—13
(iv) Chapter – IV
Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the
Ministry have not been received ........................................................................ 14—16
4. M
INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 17—19

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Date of Constitution 31 st August, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Tiruchi Siva — Chairman
2. Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy
3. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
4. Shri Ashk Ali Tak
5. Shri K.B. Shanappa
6. Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor
7. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
8. Shri Srinjoy Bose
9. Shri Nandamuri Harikrishna
10. Dr. Vijay Mallya
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
12. Shri Kamlesh Balmiki
13. Shri Sabbam Hari
14. Shrimati Poonamben Veljibhai Jat
15. Shri Ramsingh Kaswan .
16. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar
17. Shrimati Putul Kumari
18. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
19. Shrimati Ingrid Mcleod
20. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal
21. Shri Somen Mitra
22. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey
23. Shri Kishn V . Patel
24. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
25. Shri B.Y . Raghavendra
26. Shri Ramsingbhai Patalbhai Rathwa
27. Shri Ijyaraj Singh
28. Shri E.G . Sugavanam
29. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai
30. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
31. Shri Subhash Bapurao Wankhede
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry,
having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred and Twenty-Seventh
Report on Action taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises
(Department of Heavy Industry) on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two
Hundred and Eighteenth Report on the Revival and Restructuring of Hindustan Paper Corporation
Ltd. subject pertaining to Department of Heavy Industry.
2. I thank the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of Heavy
Industry) for furnishing the Action Taken Notes on the recommendations contained in the
Committee's Two Hundred and Eighteenth Report.
3. The Committee in its meeting held on the 7
th March, 2012 considered and adopted the
report.
TIRUCHI SIV A
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
7th March, 2012 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of Heavy Industry) on the recommendations
contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred and Eighteenth Report on the Revival and Restructuring
of Hindustan Paper Corporation Ltd. subject pertaining to Department of Heavy Industry.
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises (Department of Heavy Industry) in respect of the recommendations contained in the
Report. These have been categorized as follows:
Chapter –I– The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry.
The Committee is pleased to observe that the Ministry has accepted its recommendations
as mentioned in the Chapter–I of the Report.
Chapter –II– The recommendation/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s replies.
In respect of these recommendations the Committee is convinced with the logic and
explanations advanced by the Ministry and, therefore, do not want to pursue them for the present.
Chapter –III– The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has either not
accepted replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its reply.
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of recommendations
contained in Chapter–III and desires that the Ministry should furnish logical explanations therefore.
Chapter –IV– The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry
have not been received.
In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either furnished the
interim replies or couched its language in vague terms like noted for compliance/guidance,
therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in respects
of recommendations categorized in Chapter–IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention and
spirit of the recommendations of the Committee.
3. The details of the ATR are being discussed in the succeeding pages.

2
2
CHAPTER-I
The Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry
Recommendations/observations
1. One of the noteworthy features of the HPC is that it employees large number of
people and also creates indirect employment opportunities benefiting thousands of the
residents inhabiting the regions where the paper mills of the HPC are located. On the issue
of direct employment opportunities created by the HPC, it has been found that 3852 people
are beneficiaries of such opportunities whereas approximately 30,000 people are indirectly
employed.
(Para 18)
Action Taken Note
Apart from direct employment created by HPC in the region it has created avenues
for generation of employment through development of ancillary industries, farm forestry
initiatives etc. and in the process, well-being of the local residents are being taken care of by
the Company.
Recommendations/observations
2. A fair estimation of the order book position of HPC for the last three years is
available from the documents made available to the Committee. While during 2007--08 the
order booking was to the tune of 210895 MT, the figures available for the year 2008-09 is
192449 MT. It is evident that there is a declining trend in order book position of the
company. If we move to the year 2009-10 we notice that it has come down to 131408 MT.
As far as the order booking for 2010-11 (Upto September 2010) is concerned, it has further
come down to 84227 MT. Thus, it could be concluded with certainty that over the years the
order book of HPC is registering less number of orders which does not augur well for the
public sector enterprise. Even though all the orders are reported to have been executed, the
Committee notes that such declining trend demonstrate the dismal outlook for the future
growth and expansion of the company.
(Para 19)
Action Taken Note
During the current FY till 15-March, 2011 order execution position is around 1.49 lakh MT,
which is 15% higher than last year. Due to severe shortage of bamboo owing to gregarious
flowering of Muli Bamboo in the Barak Valley as well as neighbouring States, during the last 3
years Cachar Paper Mill had to operate at lower capacity. Procurement of bamboo from other areas
proved equally problematic due to frequent landslides leading to blockage/damage to roads and
railway lines which in turn made it very difficult to execute committed orders. The Company was
also unable to accept considerable volumes of orders during these years, and thus the order book
position came down. However, there is a growth of 36% in order booking during April’10 – Feb’l1,
with 165781 MT booking this year against 122171 MT last year.

3
Recommendations/observations
3. Profit before tax is an important indicator of the commercial viability of the
operations and overall functioning of the company. The figures concerning profit before tax
of the HPC as given below testifies to its state-of-affairs.
The Profit Before Tax (PBT) for the last 3 years is as follows:-
Year Target Actual
(Rs. crore) (Rs. crore)
2007-08 69.99 136.74
2008-09 62.38 60.73
2009-10 57.50 (-) 96.56
2010-11 32.22 (-) 62.12
(Upto September 2010)
(Para 20)
4. It is crystal clear that actual profit before tax which was 136.74 crore during
2007-08 drastically declined to 60.73 crore during 2008-09. The figures for 2009-10 which
stood at (-) 96.56 showed that the Miniratna HPC suffered loss. It is continuing to be a loss
making company upto September 2010 for the financial year 2010-11.
(Para 21)
5. There could be several reasons for the loss suffered by the company. But it is a
matter of serious concern that the HPC which was conferred with the Miniratna status has
come to such a pass.
(Para 22)
Action Taken of Para 20, 21 & 22
Due to severe fibre crisis at CPM owing to gregarious flowering of bamboo, a phenomenon
which happens once in 50 years and also on account on non-exploration of the use of
other alternative raw materials, HPC could not achieve capacity utilization resulting in loss during
2009-10 and 2010-11.
It is a fact that the symptom of occurrence of gregarious flowering were known well ahead
of actual period of occurrence i.e. 2002-2003, the management did not do required advance
planning and hence failed to take necessary action which led to certain setbacks. Corrective actions
taken in this regard have shown positive indications since February, 2011 onwards and it is
expected that the Company will come out of difficult situations.
Recommendations/observations
6. However, the  Committee notes with concern that it is incurring loss and could not
pay dividend during 2009-10 due to such loss. A Miniratna Company suffering loss erodes
its credibility. There could be many constraints and difficulties which have contributed to
the decline of the HPC. The Committee recommends that concerted efforts must be made
by the Department of Heavy Industry, the management and employees of the HPC and
other stakeholders such as the State Governments of Assam and Nagaland to address the
problem and revive it and take it to the status of a profit making body.
(Para 26)

4
Action Taken Note
Keeping the recommendation of the committee in view, the management and employees of
HPC under the guidance of Department of Heavy Industry, have been making concerted efforts to
revive the status of HPC as a profit making company. In fact, HPC is pledged to arrest the
declining trend and do all possible for turn around of the company. In fact, in February, 2011 HPC
has made net profit of Rs. 1.24 crore (un Audited) for the first time in Financial Year 2010-11.
Recommendations/observations
7. The Committee noted with concern and anxiety the upward trend of turnover when
the sales figure shows the downward trend. In spite of enjoying the status of A Grade Paper
Mill and a Miniratna Company, the HPC has not executed any export order during last
three years.
(Para 27)
Action Taken Note
Due to rising costs of all inputs and consumables, as well as transportation, prices of paper
had to be revised from time-to-time. Hence, in spite of lower order book position, the turnover had
gone up. Moreover, due to appreciation of Rupee in the International Market, the export price of
paper has become unattractive.
Regarding exports, it is submitted that during 2008-09 HPC had exported 1350 MT directly
to Egypt, and 8725 MT through deemed exports (to Bangladesh: 6000 MT and other countries:
2725 MT). It is expected that during 2011-12, exports will improve, especially with the launch of
copier paper, for which there is good overseas market and efforts are on to tap the market.
Recommendations/observations
8. While, on the one hand, the HPC claims that the aforementioned projects were to
be implemented by generating internal resources, at the same time it notes that owing to
paucity of funds only one scheme, i.e., the Conversion of Mercury Cell to Membrane Cell
at Nagaon Paper Mill could be taken up on a priority basis on the directions of the Central
Pollution Control Board. All other schemes have not been taken forward and kept on hold.
The HPC has been under pressure from the Central Pollution Control Board for measures
to reduce pollution from the paper mills under its jurisdiction and take appropriate
environment related schemes. The Eleventh Five Year Plan document has also stated that
effluent treatment by the paper mills will be a significant step to mitigate environmental
problems.
(Para 32)
Action Taken Note
Due to sub-optimal operation at CPM and consequential funds crunch owing to raw material
crisis arising out of flowering of Muli Bamboo (the basic raw material for  CPM) only Conversion
of Chlor-Alkali Plant (Mercury Cell to Membrane Cell) – a  Corporate Responsibility on
Environmental Protection (CREP) related project, could be  taken up. While CPCB has been
pressurizing for implementation of all CREP related  schemes, HPC has expressed that it is seized
of the necessities of implementing pollution  control measures and installation of the appropriate
environment related schemes. With  this back-drop in view the company had taken up all the
environment related schemes  mentioned under S1. No. 31 of Committee’s report.

5
Recommendations/observations
9. The Eleventh Five Year Plan document under the heading strategies for the paper
industry states that “The foremost problem that needs to be addressed is increasing the raw
material base of the industry. Vast opportunity exist on degraded forest land but the rights
of local communities and the principle of JFM constitute an insurmountable obstacle in
leasing out such land to paper mills. If these lands remain bereft of forests for prolonged
periods, the issue would need to be revisited. In the meantime, wastelands should be
considered for developing forests under appropriate Public Private Partnership
arrangements, with the participation of local communities. The State Government also need
to consider ways of stimulating agro-forestry”. The Committee strongly recommends all the
stakeholders including the Ministry of Environment and Forests to pay serious attention to
the above observation of the Planning Commission for strengthening the raw material base
of the HPC. Besides, due consideration must be given to use non-wood raw material which
includes straw, bagassee, and waste paper for manufacturing paper. So far, the entire paper
production process is dependent on wood, and agri-residue as raw material. However, the
trend has been to use more non-wood raw material. The Third Five Year Plan document
under the chairmanship of Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru had observed that “...the paper
and newsprint industries will have to depend upon new raw materials in place of bamboo
which has so far been their mainstay”. The Committee recommends that this may be
seriously examined to lessen dependence on bamboo for manufacturing of paper. The
Committee has inferred from its discussion that most of the paper industries use pulp
instead of bamboo. However, as mentioned earlier it is understood that this is mostly
imported. Use of such imported raw material might involve additional expenditure on the
part of HPC and make it more dependent on foreign countries. Therefore, cost factor must
be taken into account while opting for such raw material. The HPC units are located in
infrastructure deficient regions. Impediments for transportation of such raw materials may
prove this option unsuccessful. On the whole this will lead to accentuation of loss being
incurred by it. Most of the HPC units were established in the north eastern region due to
abundant availability of bamboo there. Therefore, the Committee is of the opinion that
access of these units to wood pulp through organised and sustainable plantation in the
region itself sounds to be more reasonable, practical and economical and attention be
focused on this aspect.
(Para 38)
Action Taken Note
HPC has been tapping all possible sources for procurement of bamboo and wood even from
far flung areas. Some of the State Governments are being persuaded for procurement of wood for
supplementing the pulp requirement. HPC has also been exploring the possibility of procuring
imported pulp for sustained and un-interrupted production. Lessening dependence on bamboo means
trying other non-conventional materials like baggase, straw, jute, waste paper etc. which can not
meet the requirement of raw material on continuous basis because the plants are not located in
proximity to Sea Ports nor in an area where such non-conventional raw materials are available in
plenty. Allocation of dedicated forest land for development of plantation of wood can be done only
by State Government. Efforts are being made in this direction. Hon’ble Minister of State, during
his meeting with Hon’ble Chief Minister, Goa on 3.6.2011, requested for allocation 10000 acres of
forest land to HPC for bamboo cultivation.
Recommendations/observations
10. The Committee notes that the HPC has a future road map which is given below:–

6
• Enhancement of value added paper with increased production of Copier &
Maplitho Paper.
• 100% capacity utilization at Cachar Paper Mill with improved bamboo
availability expected in the latter part of 2011-12.
• Capacity Expansion at Nagaon Paper Mill to 1,40,000 tpa.
• Imminent Modernization of NPM & CPM.
(Para 44)
Action Taken Note
HPC is committed to follow the road map submitted to the Committee. Once the fund
position improves HPC will take up the capital expenditure schemes on top priority.
Recommendations/observations
11. The detailed interaction the Committee had with officials of the HPC generate hope
that it can achieve goals outlined in the road map. The Committee is mindful of the fact
that the HPC once was a profit making body and its manifold accomplishments brought it
the status of Miniratna. The loss suffered by it can be mitigated by addressing its concerns
and constraints.
(Para 45)
Action Taken Note
HPC is thankful for the confidence reposed by the Committee on its officials. HPC
reaffirms that it will leave no stone unturned in doing justice to the accomplishments conferred on
the company.

7
CHAPTER-II
The Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does
not desire to pursue  in view of the Government’s replies
Recommendations/observations
1. While the Nagaon Paper Mill was commissioned in October 1985, the Cachar  Paper
Mill came into operation on April 1988. These are the only 100% bamboo  based mills in
India. The Committee was informed that fifteen years later i.e. during  2000-01 the Nagaon
Paper Mill achieved 100% capacity utilisation. In case of  Cachar Paper Mill 100% capacity
utilisation was achieved 17 years after it’s  commissioning i.e. during 2005-06 and 2006-07.
(Para 16)
Action Taken Note
Nagaon Paper Mill (NPM) and Cachar Paper Mill (CPM) could achieve 100% capacity
utilization after 15 and 17 years of commissioning respectively, overcoming initial teething trouble.
During the interim period the mills took time for stabilization of production and gradually reached
the peak. While NPM reached its peak in production in 2007-08 (115% capacity utilization), CPM
reached in 2006-07 (103% capacity utilization).
Recommendations/observations
2. The annual turnover of the HPC for the year 2009-10 stands at Rs. 579.40 crore. If
Rs. 284.39, the annual turnover of HNL, is added the total amounts to Rs. 863.79. If this
annual turnover of Rs. 863.79 of the largest public sector paper mill of our country is
juxtaposed with the annual turnover of the paper industry of our country which stands at
Rs.17,000/- crore then one can gauze its contribution to the national exchequer.
(Para 17)
Action Taken Note
The contribution to the National Exchequer during 2009-10 by HPC Group was Rs. 44.42
crore in the form of Excises Duty Sales Tax/V AT, Customs Duty etc.
Recommendations/observations
3. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the HPC as the largest public sector
enterprise in the paper industry has many distinctions to its credit. It has achieved
Excellent MoU ratings for six years in the last ten years since the financial year 1999-2000.
It has been the recipient of the MoU Excellence Award for being one of the top ten central
Public Sector Enterprises for the financial year 2005-06 and 2007-08. It has been paying
dividend since the financial year 2005-06 and the dividend (including tax) paid so far is
Rs.63 crore (Rupees sixty three crore). The redemption of Preference Shares for the HPC
amounts to Rs.38 crore (Rupees thirty eight crore). It has uninterrupted record of making
profit since 1986-87. It is an ISO (International Organisation for Standardization) certified
Public Sector Enterprise which has got ISO 9001:2000 and ISO 14001:2004 certificates. It
7

8
has also been certified by the Occupational Health and Safety Advisory Services (OHSAS)
and received the OHSAS 18001:2007 certificate.
(Para 24)
4. The Committee has great pleasure in noting that the HPC was conferred with
Miniratna status on 9 January, 2009. It is a new feather in its cap and provides ample
leverage to all those who man its affairs to take independent decisions on host of issues.
(Para 25)
Action Taken Note on Para 24 and 25
The achievement of distinction by the company brought it the coveted MoU excellence
award and Miniratna status. The company will put its best efforts to keep it up.
Recommendations/observations
5. The Committee notes that the HPC has taken some measures for the modernisation
and technological upgradation of its paper mills. It was particularly stated that the ambitious
Modernisation and Technological Upgradation Plant (MTUP) has been taken up for augmenting
its competitive ability to improve quality paper and comply with the mandatory environmental
norms. Already, some stand-alone schemes are in operation to achieve the aforementioned
goals. The company has invested Rs.7800 lakh and used the in-house expertise for this
purpose. The following stand-alone projects commissioned by the HPC are given below:–
➢➢➢➢➢ Winder Upgradation at NPM & CPM
➢➢➢➢➢ Two Street SSP Feeding at NPM & CPM
➢➢➢➢➢ QCS for L&T Machine at NPM & CPM
➢➢➢➢➢ Multified AFBC Boiler at NPM
➢➢➢➢➢ Cut Size Sheeter at CPM
(Para 30)
Action Taken Note
HPC, with the help of in-house expertise, took up some stand-alone schemes with an
investment of Rs. 7800 lakh from its own resource generation. The schemes are mostly aimed at
quality improvement of product barring one (Multifuel AFBC Boiler) which has some bearing on
environment.
HPC earlier installed state-of-the-art Falling Film Evaporator aiming both at Energy
Conservation and quality improvement.
Recommendations/observations
6. The HPC was established in the north-eastern region essentially to take advantage
of the plentiful bamboo available there. The success of any enterprise rests critically on the
assured and adequate supply of raw material and access to quality infrastructure. In case
of the Nagaon Paper Mill (NPM) and Cachar Paper Mill (CPM) of the HPC, right since their
inception, there was an implicit assurance from the Government of Assam that bamboo, the
basic raw material for paper industry, would be made available from Dima Hassao Hills
(formerly HC Hills) District and Karbi Anglong Hills District. However, off late that implicit
assurance is not being fulfilled. The Committee was told that there are host of reasons
behind the inadequate supply of bamboo.
(Para 34)

9
Action Taken Note
Two HPC Mills were set up in Assam on the implicit assurance by the State Government
of abundant availability of bamboo. Many a factor contributed to affecting bamboo supply like
gregarious flowering of bamboo, repeated revision of royalty rates defying the tenure of the
agreement, operating agency of the allotted forest area, law and order problem in the Council areas,
poor road and rail infrastructure with NC Hills etc.
Recommendations/observations
7. Access to quality infrastructure is a key to run a commercially viable enterprise. It
has been painfully noted by the Committee that the HPC is facing enormous transportation
bottleneck, particularly the rail transportation. Among the concerns and constraints faced by
the HPC units in the north-eastern region, lack of adequate connectivity through road and
rail limits the procurement of raw material. In the background note supplied to the
Committee, the HPC stated that “Bamboo transportation by rail takes a back seat as limited
railway resource is prioritized for foodgrains and other essential commodities”. Railway rake
for supply of bamboo from Dima Hasao Council to the HPC mills are not adequately available.
Besides, there is a restriction of nine tonne load for movement of raw material on truck.
These have severely limited the capacity utilisation of the HPC paper mills. There has been
a long standing demand from the HPC for conversion of the century old meter gauge railway
line connecting CPM with National Highway 44 to broad gauge for quick and adequate inward
and outward material movement. This demand has the backing of the people of the locality
who stand to benefit from such conversion. The Ministry of Railways has been represented
on number of occasions to meet the demand of the HPC and the local people.
(Para 39)
8. Even the then Minister of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises of the Government
of India, Shri Vilasrao Deshmukh, wrote a letter to the Minister of Railways on 18 June 2009
wherein he stated that the survival of the CPM is dependent upon availability of rail rakes.
He described the issue as a matter of great concern and requested the railways to provide two
empty rakes per day for CPM for transportation of bamboo for inbound journey and also for
transportation of paper for out-bound journey on a regular basis.
(Para 40)
Action Taken Note on Para 39 and 40
HPC Mills, particularly CPM is situated in landlocked hilly terrain with very poor
infrastructure. CPM is dependent on old metre gauge Railways for bamboo transportation from
Dima-Hasao (earlier NC Hills) region to mill and also for paper transportation from mill to
consumers. Since Railways resource is prioritized for foodgrains, limited rack availability affect
Cachar Paper Mill operation adversely. While NPM is connected by broad gauge, CPM is still in
the century old meter gauge era. Transhipment of inbound and outbound traffic is a perennial
problem for CPM. Moreover, CPM has been suffering frequently due to landslides which affect
both road and rail movement. The long standing demand and aspiration of the local people for
conversion of Lumding – Badarpur Hill Section to Broad Gauge still remains a dream. Railway
Ministry was approached by various stakeholders and by Industry Minister himself but no major
breakthrough could be achieved. On top of it, non-acceptance of booking of bulk materials like
soap stone powder, salt cake etc. directly to mill site (Panchgram) causes multiple handling thereby
increasing the cost of transportation and input.

10
CHAPTER-III
The Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has either not
accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its replies
Recommendations/observations
1. The modernisation and technological upgradation of the units under the Hindustan
Paper Mill is of paramount importance. The plants and machinery based on three decade old
technology is unacceptable in the competitive environment of twenty first century. Besides,
in house research and development capability must be developed by using internal
resources. The HPC by virtue of its status as a Miniratna Company enjoys necessary
autonomy to adopt modern technologies. As the HPC was a profit making company
investment of requisite amount for this purpose should have been done as a matter of
routine strategy to augment its competitive ability. Absence of any action in this regard
stands testimony to the failure of the management to take it forward and make it a leading
player in the paper industry. The Department of Heavy Industry must adopt a strategy to
address this problem on an urgent basis. If necessary it must mobilize the Planning
Commission to allocate more resources to modernise such plants.
The Committee feels that a public sector enterprise like that of the HPC which has
been conferred with the status of Miniratna Company must provide leadership to other PSEs
by adopting new technologies. The Committee notes that the Prime Minister of our country
Dr. Manmohan Singh has declared that the Government is committed to improving the
standards of efficiency and competitiveness of public sector enterprises and wanted to see
them as model employers and global players in the years to come. The Committee strongly
feels that modernisation and technological overhauling of the units of the HPC must be
done on a continuous basis by allocating more resources for this purpose. Apart from
enhancing its competitive ability vis-a-vis the private players and improving its functioning
it will contribute in its own way to the development of the north-eastern region which has
been receiving special attention from the Government of India. It will also go a long way
in inspiring the employees of the HPC to scale up their efforts for raising its productivity.
(Para 33)
Action Taken Note
HPC had drawn up an ambitious Modernisation and Technological Upgradation Plan (MTUP)
not only to sustain growth but also to stay ahead of its competitors. HPC had to slow down
investment on the modernization and technological upgradation plan due to insufficient internal
resource generation by which it could only meet working capital requirement. Even some capital
schemes for process improvement of renewal and replacement nature have been shelved due to funds
constraint. HPC management is determined to garner all its resources to improving its performance.
With prosperity of any industry, development of region comes as a corollary so is in the case of
HPC, with prosperity it must contribute to the development of the North Eastern Region.
HPC is also exploring the possibilities of availing financial assistance from North-East
Development Funds to finance some of its ongoing/planned schemes.
10

11
Further recommendation
The Committee would like to get a detailed report about the efforts of the HPC to
get funds from the North East Development Funds to finance some of its ongoing/planned
schemes.
Recommendations/Observations
2. It has been mentioned in the MoU signed by the HPC that land would be allocated
for captive plantation by the Government of Assam to ensure sustained supply of raw
material to the mills and for meeting the demand arising out of their expanded capacity.
However, the Committee notes that Ministry of Environment and Forests continues to
oppose this proposal and, therefore, no allocation of land has been made so far.
(Para 37)
Action Taken Note
HPC’s plea for allocation of dedicated land for raising captive plantation had not met with
success. Even appeal for allocation of degraded forest land did not find favour. However, efforts
are being made in this direction, seeking the allotment of even abandoned tea gardens in Assam.
Further recommendation
As the paper mill of HPC in Assam is totally dependent on bamboo as the raw
material, ensuring its uninterrupted supply is essential to the very existence of this mill.
So, the Committee is alarmed at the continued non-availability of land for bamboo
cultivation even in the face of acute scarcity of raw material for paper mills. The
Committee wants the DHI to take up the issue at the highest level with the Ministry of
Environment and Forests and the Government of Assam and inform the Committee about
the outcome. Further, the Committee also suggest that the Ministry should consider
entering into a permanent lease agreement with the District Council, thereby renewing the
lapsed MoU agreement to use the Government owned bamboo hills to ensure the
uninterrupted supply of raw materials.
Recommendations/Observations
3. The Committee is disappointed to note that no action has been taken in this regard
to address the major infrastructural bottlenecks faced by the HPC. In fact, it has been
found that from October, 2008 onwards the Railways are not booking certain raw materials
for manufacture of paper. As a result, the HPC is compelled to unload such raw material
at Guwahati and re-loading them in trucks for onward journey to CPM. Often such journey
undertaken in the hilly terrain gets disrupted due to land slides. Over and above this, a
load restriction has been imposed on road transport due to the order of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court of India. This restriction has further aggravated the problems faced by the
CPM. It has escalated the transportation cost of raw material and finished products. The
problem has been further compounded by the losses suffered on account of handling of
material at several places. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the
Railway Ministry must act on an urgent basis to pay heed to the request of the Minister
of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises for addressing the transportation problem of the
HPC. The Committee underlines that the inter-ministerial co-ordination must be
augmented for enhancing the efficiency of the public sector enterprises. This should be
vigorously pursued in the context of the north-eastern region where public sector

12
enterprises have to function in difficult terrain combining both the commercial and social
objectives for the benefit of people inhabiting in the region.
(Para 41)
4. The Committee was informed that levy of entry tax by the Assam Government puts
additional burden on the materials taken through the HPC units. This is a valid concern of
the HPC which needs to be addressed. The Committee was given a list of points on which
the HPC sought assistance. All the points enumerated in the lists are given below:–
••••• Financial Assistance for modernization and upgradation of the mills.
••••• Fiscal relief/concession on account of logistical problems and locational
disadvantages to enable HPC to compete with private paper mills on a level
playing field.
••••• Accelerated completion of railway line in Lumding-Badarpur section from MG to BG.
••••• Priority in completion of Lumding-Halflong-Silchar section of East West Corridor
by NHAI.
••••• Assistance from NF Railway for allotment of rakes for inward transportation of
bamboo and outbound transportation of paper.
••••• Removal of Entry Tax on all inputs and imposition of Entry Tax on inflow of
Paper from other State.
••••• 5% custom duty on waste paper to be eliminated as import of Newsprint does
not attract any custom duty.
(Para 42)
5. The Committee strongly feels that the catalogue containing the requirement of the
assistance by the HPC is valid, sound and prudent. This should be seriously taken note of
by the Department of Heavy Industry, the Government of Assam, the Ministry of Railways,
National Highways Authority of India and Planning Commission.
(Para 43)
Action Taken Notes
The problem faced by HPC Mills with regard to infrastructural bottlenecks has been
increasing the cost of production as also other operating expenses. Load restriction imposed on road
transport has also added misery to the problem. Additional financial involvement on account of load
restriction comes to Rs. 2317 lakhs. Completion of Jagiroad–Silchar stretch of Sutarkandi –Surat
Golden Quadrilateral would help lessening the freight burden of the mill.
(Para 41)
Financial assistance enumerated in the Committee’s report would help in addressing HPC’s
long-standing issues and go a long way in alleviating the problems faced by HPC.
(Para 42)
The company expresses its gratitude that the Committee found HPC’s presentation of the
issues logical and reasonable enough to merit their attention and consideration.
(Para 43)
Further recommendation
The Committee had recommended vigorous pursuit of issues involving Ministries of

13
Railways, Finance, NHAI, State Government of Assam and District Councils of Karbi
Anglong and Dima Hassao. This was recommended keeping in view the development of the
NER. However, there is no mention in the reply about the measures taken by DHI to
augment inter-ministerial coordination to improve the infrastructure problems. Accordingly,
the Committee takes a serious view of this causal approach and is of the opinion that the
issue raised in para 41, 42 and 43 are of grave concern, therefore, it reiterates its earlier
recommendations and desires that DHI should come forward with a clear cut reply on the
measures taken by it.

14
CHAPTE-IV
Recommendations/observations in respect of which
final replies of the Ministry have not been received
Recommendations/observations
1. However, the of ficials of the HPC have assured the Committee that manifold
measures have been taken to address the issue. They expressed confidence that the
functioning of the Corporation would improve in future.
(Para 23)
Action Taken Note
The Company is leaving no stone un-turned to bring back its glorious past by dedicated and
concerted efforts at all level. The raw material issue which affected the performance of the
company post 2007-08 is expected to be over by 2011-12.
Recommendations/observations
2. The Eleventh Five Year Plan document outlined the reasons arresting the growth and
expansion of paper industry in our country and its failure to produce quality paper of
international standard. It observed that “... the industry has failed to keep pace with the
technological advances and is beset with major difficulties such as high production cost,
pollution problems and finished paper quality not conforming to international standards”.
(Para 28)
Action Taken Note
Paper Industry is capital intensive in nature with prolonged gestation period and slow Return
on Investment (RoI), as a reason for which it does not allure big industry houses to venture in
this area, leaving apart those set up some 25-30 year ago. To be in the reckoning and to remain
as a major player in the field HPC had taken up an ambitious Modernisation and Technological Plan
(MTUP) for implementation at its mills.
Recommendations/observations
3. The catalogue of documents provided to the Committee by the HPC states that one
of the constraints  faced by the Hindustan Paper Corporation is the state of technology which
was adopted three decades back. It was firmly argued by the officials of the HPC before the
Committee that such technology needs upgradation on a priority basis.
(Para 29)
Action Taken Note
HPC Mills were set up three decades ago with the then available best technology. Over the
years, major players in the field have adopted upgraded technologies to stay ahead in the
competitive environment. The company could embark upon Modernization and Technological
14

15
Upgradation of Plant (MTUP) only in 2007 after the cloud of disinvestments had totally
disappeared.
Recommendations/observations
4. The Committee was informed that M/s Development Consultants Pvt. Ltd., Kolkata
were appointed by the HPC as project management consultant for implementing large and
integrated schemes as given below:-
➢➢➢➢➢ Conversion of Mercury Cell to Membrane Cell
➢➢➢➢➢ New Chlorine Di-oxide Plant
➢➢➢➢➢ Elemental Chlorine Free Bleaching
➢➢➢➢➢ ESP for Coal fired Boiler
➢➢➢➢➢ Modernization of Paper Machine and Capacity Upgrade at NPM
➢➢➢➢➢ New TG for NPM
➢➢➢➢➢ Upgradation of Recovery and Causticizing Plant
(Para 31)
Action Taken Note
After implementation of the stand-alone schemes with internal expertise, it was thought that
for going with large and integrated schemes the services of a Project Management Consultant
would be necessary in view of dearth of in-house professionals related to the field.
M/s Development Consultants Pvt. Ltd. (DCPL) were appointed as Project Management Consultant
vide Work Order dtd. 07.07.2008 for Preparation and Finalization of Process Philosophy and Basic
Engg., Detailed Engg. for Plant and Machinery including preparation of Bid Document and
evaluation of Bid offers, Detailed Engg. for Civil Works including Structural and Miscellaneous
jobs, Construction Management Services. For some of the schemes mentioned in Committee’s
report, Basic and Detailed Engineering as also preparation of Bid Document and evaluation of bids
have been completed.
Recommendations/Observations
6. The Committee wanted to know the steps taken by the HPC for re-plantation of the
bamboos and if it had co-ordinated with the appropriate ministry in anticipation of the
flowering of the bamboo to meet the crisis. The Committee made this observation because
of the alarming decline on the production front. Responding to this observation of the
Committee, the HPC officials stated that they were in touch with the State Forest
Department and the Dima Hasao Autonomous Council and Bamboo Mission on this aspect.
It was also brought to the knowledge of the Committee that Nagaon Paper Mills (NPM) has
established ‘state-of the-art’ Tissue Culture Lab at its unit for developing bamboo plantlets
with the objective of augmenting high yielding, quick growing and disease resistant species
of bamboo for HPC mills. The Committee was informed that the annual capacity of the
tissue culture laboratory is twenty lakh seedlings and the same are distributed to the
farmers as well as NGOs. One of the Members of the Committee wanted to know if the
HPC had tried high yielding Chinese and Malaysian Variety which grows faster than the
local one. He also queried to get the present status of regeneration since flowering took
place in the year 2006. It is heartening to note that the HPC has adopted a future roadmap

16
which includes 100% capacity utilization of Cachar paper Mill with improved bamboo
availability expected in the later part of 2011-12.
(Para 36)
Action Taken Note
As an aftermath of bamboo flowering new shoots have come out which is expected to take
another one and half years from now to grow into matured bamboo. HPC has been keeping track
on regeneration of bamboo and has been in constant touch with Sate Forest Deptt. of Assam.
Government of Assam has been approached for allotment of surplus land in and around Tea
Gardens for raising large scale plantation with high yield and quick growing quality bamboo
plantation from our tissue culture laboratory.
HPC has set up 20,00,000 capacity state-of-the-art bamboo tissue culture laboratory
generating high yielding, quick growing, disease resistant and agro-climatically suitable bamboo
plantlets for distribution to farmers, NGOs/Self-help groups as also different State Forest Deptts.
HPC has not tried high yielding Chinese and Malaysian varieties of bamboo plantlets till now.
On the other hand, the company has been concentrating only on indigenous species in consultation
with National Mission on Bamboo Application (NMBA).
With expected improved availability of bamboo by latter part of 2011-12, CPM would be
able to attain 100% capacity utilization again.

17
MINUTES

IX
NINTH MEETING
The Committee met at 12.00 NOON on Wednesday, the 7 th March, 2012 in Committee Room
‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Tiruchi Siva — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
2. Shri Ashk Ali Tak
3. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
LOK SABHA
4. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
5. Shrimati Putul Kumari
6. Shri Kishnaswamy
7. Shrimati Ingrid Mcleod
8. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal
9. Shri Somen Mitra
10. Shri Kishn V . Patel
11. Shri Ramsingbhai Patalbhai Rathwa
12. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and briefed them that the agenda of
the meeting, was to consider and adopt the 227
th and 231 st reports of the Committee on Revival
and Restructuring of Hindustan Paper Corporation Ltd. and on the 223 rd Report on Revival and
Restructuring of North Eastern Handicraft and Handloom Development Corporation Ltd.,
respectively.
3. Thereafter, the 227
th and 231 st Reports were taken up by the Committee for consideration,
separately. After some discussion, Members of the Committee suggested few points to be
incorporated in both the draft Reports. At the end of the discussion, the Comittee unanimously
adopted the 227
th and 231 st Draft Reports along with the suggestions.
4. The meeting adjourned at 1.05 P.M.
19

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.