Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
REPORT NO.
295
November, 2019/Kartika, 1941 (Saka)
ON INDUSTRY
TWO HUNDRED NINETY FIFTH REPORT
Action Taken  on  the  289th  Report  of  the  Committee  on
Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme Pertaining to the
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on th November, )25 2019
Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on th November, )25 2019

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON INDUSTRY
TWO HUNDRED NINETY FIFTH REPORT
Action  taken  on  the  289th  Report  of  the  Committee  on
Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme Pertaining to the
Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 25th November, 2019)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 25th November, 2019)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
November, 2019/Kartika, 1941 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-10
Chapter I : Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Ministry.................................................................................... 2-3
Chapter II : Recommendations/Observations which the committee does not
desire to pursue further in view of the Government’s replies................ 4-6
Chapter III : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the
Committee has not accepted the replies of the Ministry and
desires the Ministry to review their replies......................................... 7-8
Chapter IV : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the
Committee desire further comments of the Ministr y ........................... 9-10
4. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 11-14

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 13th September , 2019)
1. Dr. K. Keshava Rao  —    Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
3. Shri Subhasish Chakraborty
4. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
5. Shri Shwait Malik
6. Shri Jose K. Mani
7. Shrimati Ranee Narah
8. Dr. Amee Yajnik
*9. Vacant
#10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Kunwar Danish Ali
12. Ms. Mimi Chakraborty
13. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi
14. Shrimati Annpurna Devi
15. Dr. S. T. Hasan
16. Ms. S. Jothimani
17. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanjibhai Kundariya
18. Shri Ravindra Kushawaha
19. Shrimati Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam
20. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato
21. Shri Rampreet Mandal
22. Shri Vincent H. Pala
23. Shri T. R.V .S. Ramesh
24. Shri Y . S. Avinash Reddy
25. Shrimati Gomati Sai
26. Shri Ganesan Selvam
27. Shri Chandan Singh
28. Shri Sunil Soren
29. Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare
30. Shri Su Thirunavukkarasar
31. Vacant
(i)
*Vacancy caused due to resignation by Shri Vijay Goel on 21 st November, 2019
#Vacancy caused due to resignation by Shri Ram Kumar Kashyap on 04 th November, 2019

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Director
Shri Jayanta Kumar Mallick, Additional Director
Shrimati Sreeja V ., Deputy Secretary
Shri Ajin J.R., Under Secretary
Shrimati Renu Sreekanth, Committee Officer
Shri Anuj Verma, Assistant Research Officer

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having
been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred Ninety Fifth Report on Action Taken
Note furnished by the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises on the recommendations contained
in the Committee’s Two Hundred Eighty Ninth Report on Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme.
2. I thank the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises for furnishing the Action Taken Note on
the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred Eighty Ninth Report.
3. The Committee in its meeting held on 21
st November, 2019 considered and adopted the report.
Dr. K. KESHA V A RAO
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
21st November , 2019 Department-related Parliamentary
Kartika 30, 1941 ( Saka) Standing Committee on Industry,
Rajya Sabha.
(iii)

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Micro,
Small and Medium Enterprises on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred Eighty
Ninth Report on Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme pertaining to the Ministry of Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises.
2. Action Taken Notes received from the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises in respect of
the recommendations contained in the 289 th Report have been categorized as follows:-
Chapter I : The Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry.
The Committee is pleased to observe that the Ministry has accepted its recommendations as
mentioned in the Chapter – I of the Report.
Chapter II : The Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue further
in view of the Government’s replies.
In respect of these recommendations, the Committee is convinced with the logic and explanations
advanced by the Ministry and therefore does not want to pursue them further for the present.
Chapter III : The Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted the
replies of the Ministry and desires the Ministry to review their reply.
The Committee is not convinced with the replies of the Ministry in respect of recommendations
contained in Chapter-III and desires that the Ministry, in the light of Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee, furnish explanations thereof.
Chapter IV: The Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee desire further
comments of the Ministry.
In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV, the Ministry has furnished the interim
replies, therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry may furnish Action Taken Notes in
respect of recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to the point, as per the
intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee.
The details of the ATR of the Ministry and Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
thereon are given in the succeeding pages.

CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS,  WHICH  HA VE  BEEN
ACCEPTED  BY  THE  MINISTRY
Recommendation/Observation
1. The Committee is concerned to note that there has been the steep fall in the number of MSEs benefitted
under CLCSS from the Financial Year 2014-15 onwards which is mainly on account of lack of adequate
budgetary resources allocated under the scheme. The Committee accordingly desires that adequate budget
allocations should be made under the Scheme to cover more MSEs under the Scheme. (Para 18)
Action Taken
The Ministry has decided to propose adequate budget provision to cover more MSEs under the Scheme.
Recommendation/Observation
2. The Committee appreciated the efforts/measures being taken by the Ministry of MSME to step up the
penetration of CLCS Scheme to the underprivileged sections (SC, ST and Women), 115 aspirational districts
identified by NITI Ayog, and also the NE Region. (Para 24)
Action Taken
Gratefully noted.
Recommendation/Observation
3. The Committee is of the considered view that taking into account the rate of inflation, the M/o MSME
should gradually consider to enhance the limit of subsidy i.e., from 
` 15 lakh to ` 25 Lakh in prescribed
sectors / sub-sectors which would prove to be more helpful for MSEs to cater to their needs for up-gradation
of machinery and plants. (Para 33)
Action Taken
It may be mentioned that the thrust of the scheme is also for adequate coverage of the number of
beneficiaries along with reasonable subsidy per unit to be given within over all budgetary limits.  However,
the suggestion of the Committee has been noted for future review.
Recommendation/Observation
4. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that serious efforts with practical approach and result-
oriented goals should be made to dispel the confusion and lack of awareness  about  the scheme in  MSE
Sector  as well as  among  the PLIs  and   Financial Institutes. Technology Exhibitions may be one of the
measures to create awareness. However, there must be a unified attempt by the Ministry of MS&ME and
different Industrial Associations to create awareness among the MSEs about the Schemes. The M/o MSME
should make all out efforts for the growth of the MSEs on a uniform pattern across the country for the
overall development resulting in creation of various job opportunities for the masses and dispelling the
geographical imbalance of industrial set up. Therefore, there is a need of continuance of the scheme for a
longer period. (Para 42)
2

3
Action Taken
In addition to awareness programmes, provisions for Regional/ State/ National Workshops have been
proposed in the revised scheme under which the suggested activities shall be undertaken.  The scheme is
being continued.
Recommendation/Observation
5. The Committee observes that to popularize the CLCS Scheme it should be discussed at appropriate
levels i.e. SLBC, Districts Heads, DIC, Industry Associations and grass-root level etc. for better off take
under the scheme. (Para 43)
Action Taken
In addition to awareness programmes, provisions for Regional/ State/ National Workshops have been
proposed in the revised scheme under which the suggested activities shall be undertaken. The scheme is
being continued.
Recommendation/Observation
6.  The Committee desires that M/o MSME may pursue the matter and the Committee may be apprised as
soon as Cabinet approval is accorded. (Para 48)
Action Taken
Noted for compliance. As soon as cabinet approval is obtained, the same will be intimated to the
Committee for kind perusal.
Recommendation/Observation
7.  The Committee desires that it may be apprised of as soon as norms of the Scheme are revised.
(Para 54)
Action Taken
Noted for compliance. As soon as cabinet approval is obtained, the norms will be finalized and informed
to the committee.
Recommendation/Observation
8.  The Committee is of the opinion that to provide smooth corridor for the betterment of MSEs for
having a flourishing business, there is always a need for concerted efforts at every level. On the whole, the
Committee feels that though measures have been taken for overall development of Industrial sector, yet
there is a lot more to be done for making a New India. (Para 62)
Action Taken
Gratefully noted.

CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS  WHICH  THE  COMMITTEE DOES  NOT
DESIRE  TO  PURSUE  IN  VIEW  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT’S  REPLIES
Recommendation/Observation
9. Further , the Committee desires that Ministry of MSME should work in tandem with the State
Governments of the more populous States, where there is less off take of the CLCSS to encourage more and
more promising entrepreneurs to set up industries and also to take part in the Scheme for technical up-
gradation. (Para 23)
Action Taken
The Scheme guidelines have been amended to include awareness programmes across the country
among the prospective and existing entrepreneurs to increase off-take. In organising further awareness
programmes, different stakeholders including the State Governments will also be actively involved particularly
where there is less off-take under the CLCSS.
Recommendation/Observation
10.  The Committee after hearing the Ministry of MSME is of the view that M/o MSME taking the
practical aspect into consideration may ensure or ascertain the genuineness of the claim by MSEs for
subsidy against the purchase of machines or requirement of the machines for technology up-gradation, the
M/o MSME may consider about the possibility of a Third Party Evaluation by some rating agency or NSIC
or SIDBI who can report directly to the M/o MSME in this regard and thereafter the Ministry may take
necessary action without delaying the process. (Para 35)
Action Taken
In the present system, due diligence is done by the bank itself before sanctioning the term loan for
procurement of machines by the unit. Due diligence is also carried out by the bank before approval of the
subsidy at their end. The involvement of third party evaluation is therefore, not likely to add any value in the
process of ensuring or ascertaining the genuineness of the claim by MSE and may in fact, delay the process.
However, the Ministry would get an evaluation of the scheme done by a third party for future improvement
in service delivery.
Recommendation/Observation
11.  The Committee observes that less intake under CLCSS in NER perhaps due to the existence of the
NEIP scheme offering more subsidy vis-a-vis CLCSS. (Para 36)
Action Taken
The North East Industrial Development Scheme (NEIDS), 2017 has a component of Central Capital
Investment Incentive for Access to Credit (CCIIAC) which provides subsidy @ 30% of the investment in
Plant and Machinery with an upper limit of ` 5.00 Cr. on the incentive amount per unit.
Recommendation/Observation
12.  The Committee accordingly desires that Ministry may chalk out measures to make the CLCSS more
attractive by perhaps increasing the subsidy in order to woo the NE entrepreneurs. (Para 37)
4

5
Action Taken
In order to attract the NE entrepreneurs, the Ministry has already incorporated necessary measures in
the revised scheme. The subsidy shall now not be restricted to the identified technologies/sectors in NER
but shall be admissible also for investments for acquisition/replacement of plant and machinery/equipments
and technology up-gradation of any kind, except second hand machinery/equipment for NE entrepreneurs.
Recommendation/Observation
13.  The Committee was of the view that when a woman entrepreneur is eligible in any sector, the benefit
of subsidy should be credited to her individual account or account of the enterprise, as the case may be
without any delay. The subsidy should be extended as margin money rather than granting it at the completion
of 3 years. (Para 45)
Action Taken
The Ministry has provision for women entrepreneurs for extending the benefits of the Scheme.
Further, in order to ensure fair inclusion of women entrepreneurs, the subsidy shall be admissible also
for investment in acquisition/replacement of plant and machinery/equipments and technology up-gradation
of any kind irrespective of the fact whether the sector/technology is listed within the identified sectors/
technologies under the Scheme.
Further, on receipt of the subsidy, the bank reduces the outstanding loan to the unit by the amount of
the subsidy. Consequently, the unit is getting a proportionate benefit throughout debt servicing period, from
inception to the end.
Recommendation/Observation
14. The Committee is of the opinion that if the SMEs are shifted from their present location on the plea of
energy or environmental pollution, adequate infrastructural facility viz. Power, road, easy labour etc. should
be provided to them before shifting them. (Para 47)
Action Taken
Noted. However, the suggestion is beyond the scope of the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme.
Recommendation/Observation
15. The Committee is of the considered opinion that besides Technology up-gradation before granting
subsidy the basic difficulties being faced by the MSEs viz, land, power, water, communication and road
facilities etc. should also be taken care of appropriately to make the MSEs globally competitive and grow in
a hindrance free environment. (Para 50)
Action Taken
MSE Cluster Development Programme of Ministry of MSME is helping MSEs in respect of land,
power, water, communication and road facilities etc.
Recommendation/Observation
16. The Committee is of the view that subsidy should be released to MSEs in such cases where the delay in
submission of cases occurs on the part of PLIs and Nodal Agency. Further, the Ministry should develop an

6
online mechanism to monitor the applications and identify whether delay occurred on the part of MSEs or
banks. (Para 59)
Action Taken
An online monitoring system has already been put in place and will be modified further to keep check
on such cases.
Recommendation/Observation
17. In the opinion of the Committee, the Ministry may consider setting up of a Grievance Committee or an
Ombudsman to oversee all aspects of the Scheme and where an aggrieved entrepreneur could turn too to
make his grievances/problems heard for resolution thereof. Alternatively they may consider setting up of a
web portal to review feedbacks/grievances regarding the scheme and other related problems pertaining to
MSME Sectors. (Para 63)
Action Taken
In addition to the common Central Government Grievance Redressal Mechanism i.e. CPGRAM, the
Ministry has its own Internet Grievance Monitoring System (IGMS) to address and review feedbacks/
grievances regarding the scheme and other related problems pertaining to the MSME Sector.

CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS  IN  RESPECT  OF  WHICH  THE  COMMITTEE
HAS  NOT  ACCEPTED  THE  REPLIES  OF  THE  MINISTRY  AND  DESIRES
THE  MINISTRY  TO  REVIEW  THEIR  REPLIES
Recommendation/Observation
18. The Committee desires that the outcome of such visits may be disclosed to the Committee and whether
the visits have had any lasting impact on percolating the benefits of the Scheme to the grass root levels in
these aspirational Districts or not. (Para 22)
Action Taken
Teams of officers including the officials from our field setup have visited 115 Aspirational districts to
enable the benefit of the Scheme reaching the grass roots. Ministry is working on the recommendations of
these teams.
Further Recommendation/Observation
The Committee may be informed of the outcomes, if any, of these visits to the Aspirational
Districts so far.  The Committee may also be informed whether these visits have been able to create
awareness and increased outreach about the scheme among the entrepreneurs.  Further, the
Committee would like to know the details of recommendations that have been made by these teams
who visited the 115 Aspirational Districts and any noticeable change in the off-take of the Scheme
after these visits.
Recommendation/Observation
19. The Committee recommends that the timeline for application process and disbursement of subsidy
should be reduced by the M/o MSME by co-ordinated effort with the Department of Financial Services.
(Para 49)
Action Taken
In case of availability of sufficient budgetary provision, the timeline for application process and
disbursement of subsidy shall automatically be reduced.
Further Recommendation/Observation
The Committee is of the view that the Ministry should approach the M/o Finance for sufficient
Budgetary allocation under the CLCS Scheme to ensure timely disbursement of subsidy to the
beneficiaries of MSEs.
Recommendation/Observation
20.  The Committee therefore, is of the view that M/o MSME should approach the M/o Finance for
diversion of allocated budget from other schemes and allocate this fund for benefit of Micro and Small
Enterprises under CLCSS at last quarter of the financial year. The Committee also feels that delays in
release of budget under the scheme delay the process of disbursement of subsidy which should be taken up
with M/o Finance for timely allocation. (Para 55)
7

8
Action Taken
Ministry has sought budget under supplementary demand from Ministry of Finance in order to liquidate
pending liabilities under the scheme during the current FY itself.
Further Recommendation/Observation
The Committee notes that delay in disbursement of subsidy discourages the entrepreneurs
and adversely affects the MSEs and ultimately economic growth and employment generation of the
country.  The Committee, therefore, is of the view that the Ministry should pursue the matter with
the M/o Finance for sufficient Budget allocation so that subsidy could be disbursed to SMEs on
time-bound basis avoiding pending liabilities.

CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS  IN  RESPECT  OF  WHICH  THE  COMMITTEE
DESIRE  FURTHER  COMMENTS  OF  THE  MINISTRY
Recommendation/Observation
21. The Committee is of the opinion that the Ministry of MSME has to ensure that in future, appropriate
measures should be taken for induction of more sectors/sub-sector/technologies under the CLCS scheme in
addition to the existing 51 Sectors/sub-sectors/technologies for all categories of entrepreneurs.
(Para 28)
Action Taken
The Scheme Guidelines are being amended to make the list of technologies/machines eligible for
subsidy dynamic with provision for updation and deletion of the technologies/machines based on emerging
requirement of the entrepreneurs.
Recommendation/Observation
22.  The Committee is of the opinion that the CLCS Scheme should be made applicable for all sectors
(including plant and machinery) for subsidy under CLCSS. The Committee, therefore is of the view that the
M/o MS&ME should also ask the Ministry of Finance for more budgetary allocation for betterment of MSE
sector as well as liquidate pending liabilities under the scheme. (Para 29)
Action Taken
Ministry has sought budget in the supplementary demand from Ministry of Finance. The additional
budgetary allocation will liquidate all pending liabilities under the scheme during the current FY itself.
Recommendation/Observation
23.  The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of MSME should regularly monitor the progress in the
matter in co-ordination with State Governments so that the Scheme reaches out to more entrepreneurs. The
Committee also suggests that subsidy for women entrepreneurs of all categories should be raised to 25
percent as is the case of SC/ST entrepreneurs after exploring the feasibility. (Para 38)
Action Taken
To make the CLCSS more attractive for women entrepreneurs, a provision has been proposed under
which the subsidy shall be admissible also for investment in acquisition/replacement of plant and machinery/
equipments and technology up-gradation of any kind, except second hand machinery/equipment. The subsidy
is being retained @15% up to ` 15.00 Lakh in all cases including SC/ST enterprises. However, a Special
CLCSS under National SC/ST Hub Scheme has been launched, which will provide 25% subsidy to SC/ST
entrepreneurs.
Recommendation/Observation
24. The Committee is of the opinion that the Ministry of MSME should conduct a study in all states to
know as to how the awareness could be created to get the optimum out of the Scheme. The Ministry may also
undertake a research study to know the reason as to how five States achieved a stupendous target of 77%
while the rest of India lagged behind. (Para 52)
9

10
Action Taken
In organising the awareness programmes, stakeholders including the State Governments will also be
involved particularly where the off- take under the scheme has lagged behind. Moreover, removal of sectoral
limitations and inclusion of provisions for special categories including SC/ST category, women entrepreneurs
and  entrepreneurs from NER, Hill states (Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand) island
territories (Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep) and the identified Aspirational Districts/ LWE Districts
will help to encourage the more promising entrepreneurs, particularly in the States with low off take. The
reason for better performance five states appears to be their high industrial base and consequent higher
demand.

MINUTES

13
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 21st November, 2019 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. K. Keshava Rao  —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shwait Malik
3. Dr. Amee Yajnik
LOK  SABHA
4. Dr. S. T. Hasan
5. Shrimati Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam
6. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato
7. Shri Rampreet Mandal
8. Shri Vincent H. Pala
9. Shri T. R. V . S. Ramesh
10. Shri Ganesan Selvam
11. Shri Sunil Soren
12. Shri Su Thirunavukkarasar
SECRETARIAT
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Director
Shri J.K. Mallick, Additional Director
Shrimati Sreeja V ., Deputy Secretary
Shri Ajin. J. R, Under Secretary
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting. The Committee then took up for
consideration and adoption of the draft 295
th and 296th Action Taken Reports of the Committee, which have
been prepared based on the replies provided by the Ministry/Department on the recommendations of the
Committee as contained in its 289
th and 290 th Reports on Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme and
Professionalization of Boards of CPSEs pertaining to the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
and Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises respectively. After a brief discussion, the Committee
adopted the draft 295 th and 296th Action Taken Reports without any change.
2. The Committee decided to present/lay the above Reports in both the Houses of Parliament on the 25 th
November, 2019.  It authorised the Chairman of the Committee and in his absence, Dr. Amee Yajnik, MP and
in the absence of both, Shri Shwait Malik, MP to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha.  Similarly, the
Committee authorised Shri Su Thirunavukkarasar, MP and in his absence Shri Rampreet Mandal to lay the
Reports in the Lok Sabha.

14
** *
3. The Committee also discussed its future programme.  After some discussion, decided to undertake a
Study Visit to Kolkata, Hyderabad and Mumbai in the first week of January 2020.  The Committee authorised
the Chairman to obtain the approval of the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha to undertake a Study Visit to the
above places.
The Committee then adjourned at 3.35 P.M.
*Relates to other matter.