 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
April, 2015/ Chaitra, 1937 (Saka) 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2015-16) 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
(DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 27 th  April, 2015 ) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  27 th  April, 2015 ) 
 REPORT NO.  
266  

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
April, 2015/ Chaitra, 1937 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2015-16) 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
(DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 27 th  April, 2015 ) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 27 th  April, 2015 ) 

C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………………… (i) 
 
2. INTRODUCTION…………………………………………………………. (ii) 
 
3. ABBREVIATIONS………………………………………………………….(iii)  
 
4. REPORT……………………………………………………………………. 
 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE –  
    AT A GLANCE…………………………………………………………….  
 
6. *MINUTES………………………………………………………………… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
* to be appended at printing stage.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 (Date of Constitution 1 st  September, 2014)  
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
1. Shri K.C. Tyagi  _   Chairman  
2. Shri M. P. Achuthan 
3. Shri Ramdas Athawale 
4. Shri Vivek Gupta  
5. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
6. Shri T. K. Rangarajan 
7.   Shri Narendra Budania 
8. Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
9.   Shri Pramod Tiwari 
10.  Vacant 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
11. Shri Deepak Adhikari (Dev) 
12. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer 
13. Shri Birendra Kumar Chaudhary 
14. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque 
15. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
16. Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena 
17. Smt. Poonamben Maadam 
18. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
19. Shri S. P. Muddahanumegowda 
20. Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
21. Shri M. Srinivasa Rao 
22. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
23. Shri Konda Veshweshwar Reddy 
24. Shri Y. V. Subba Reddy 
25. Shri Rajkumar Saini 
26. Shri B. Senguttuvan 
27. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
28. Shri Rameshwar Teli 
29. Smt. Savitri Thakur 
30. Smt. Dev Varma (Moon Moon Sen) 
31. Shri Rajan Vichare 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri A.K.Singh, Joint Secretary 
Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
Shri Roshan Lal, Joint Director 
Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
(i) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliame ntary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred 
and Sixty-sixth Report on the Demands for Grants (2015-16) pertaining to the Ministry of 
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises). 
 
2.  This report is based on the material supplied b y the Department of Public 
Enterprises such as the detailed Demands for Grants , Annual Report, Outcome Budget, 
Answers to Questionnaire sent by the Secretariat an d submissions made by the Secretary 
of the Department and its senior officers on 23 
rd  March, 2015. 
 
3.  The Committee considered and adopted the Draft report at its meeting held on             
21 
st  April, 2015. 
 
 
 
 
K.C. TYAGI        
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
New Delhi 
21 
st  APRIL, 2015  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ABBREVIATIONS  
 
 
Actual Expenditure        AE 
Action Taken Note        ATN  
Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises   BRPSE 
Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction    BIFR 
Budget Estimates        BE  
Capital Expenditure        CAPEX 
Central Public Sector Enterprises      CPSEs 
Corporate Social Responsibility       CSR 
Counselling, Retraining & Redeployment     CRR 
 
Demands for Grants        DFG   
Department of Public Enterprises      DPE 
Department of Personal & Training     DoPT  
Government of India       GOI 
International Centre for Promotion of Enterprises    ICPE  
Ministry of Finance        MoF 
National Company Law Tribunal      NCLT  
National Institute of Financial Management     NIFM  
Non official Directors       NOD 
Permanent Machinery of Arbitration      PMA  
Public Sector Enterprises       PSEs 
Revised Estimates        RE 
Research, Development and Consultancy     RDC 
 
Standing Conference of Public Enterprises     SCOPE  
 State Level Public Enterprises      SLPEs 
Skill Development Programmes      SDP 
 
(iii) 
 
 
 
 

Report  
 
 
Introduction 
 
 
 Public sector units are hailed as ‘the temples of modern India.’ Government of 
India has employed the public sector enterprises to  achieve various socio-economic 
objectives. The basic difference between private an d public ownership is the difference 
lies in their objectives, viz welfare maximization by the public sector and profi t 
maximization by the private sector. The Central Pub lic Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) 
comprise enterprises established by the Government of India (GOI) as Government 
companies under Section 617 of the Companies Act, a nd wherein the equity holding of 
the GOI is more than 50 per cent. It also includes statutory corporations constituted under 
specific statutes of the Parliament. The CPSEs do n ot, however, include departmental 
undertakings, banking institutions and enterprises where equity holding of the GOI is 
50% or less.  
 
2. As per the Public Enterprises Survey (2013-14), there were 290 Central Public 
Sector Enterprises consisting of 234 operating CPSE s and 56 CPSEs under construction 
as on 31.3.2014.  The turnover of all 234 operating  CPSEs during 2013-14 stood at Rs. 
20, 61,866 crore as compared to Rs. 19, 45,814 cror e of 230 operating CPSEs in the 
previous year. The list of 64 Schedule ‘A’, 68 Sche dule ‘B’, 46 Schedule ‘C’ and 4 
Schedule ‘D’ CPSEs is placed at Annexure-I.  Also, the list containing names of the  7  
Maharatna, 17 Navratna and 72 Miniratna CPSEs is kept at Annexure-II.  
 
Department of Public Enterprises (DPE)  
Mandate  
 
3. The DPE is the nodal department for all the Cent ral Public Sector Enterprises and 
formulates policy pertaining to CPSEs.  Mandate of DPE as submitted to the Committee, 
lays down policy guidelines on performance improvem ent and evaluation, autonomy and 
financial delegation  and personnel management in CPSEs. Furthermore, it  collects and 
maintains information on several areas in respect of CPSEs.  
 

4.         The Committee was also informed that as per Allocation of Business Rules of the 
Government, the following include the functions all ocated to the Department of Public 
Enterprises:- 
 
i) Bureau of Public Enterprises including Industria l Management Pool. 
 
ii)     Coordination of matters of general policy o f  non-financial  nature       
affecting all public sector industrial and commercial undertakings. 
 
iii)     Matters relating to Memorandum of Understa nding mechanism of 
improving the performance of public sector undertakings. 
 
iv)       Matters relating to Permanent Machinery o f Arbitration for the Public 
Sector Undertakings. 
 
v)        Counselling, Retraining and Rehabilitatio n of employees in Central Public 
Sector Undertakings under Voluntary Retirement Scheme. 
 
 
5. The Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE) was set up in 
December, 2004 to consider inter-alia , Revival/Restructuring proposals of Sick/Loss 
making CPSEs and make suitable recommendations rela ted thereto. The DPE provides 
secretariat support to BRPSE. 
  
6. In fulfilling its role, the Department coordinat es with other Ministries, CPSEs and 
concerned organization.  Some of the important task s of the Department are listed as 
follows: 
 
i)  Co-ordination of matters of general policy of non-financial  nature relating 
to Public Sector Enterprises. 
 
ii)  Issue of Presidential Directives and Guidelines to Public Sector 
Enterprises. 
 
iii)  Publication of the annual survey of CPSEs known as Public Enterprises 
Survey. 
 
iv)  Memorandum of Understanding between the Public Sector Enterprises and 
the Administrative Ministries/Departments. 
 
v)  Formulation of policies pertaining to Public Sector  Enterprises in areas 
like Board Structures, Personnel Management, Performance Improvement, 

Financial Management , Wage Settlement and Vigilance management, 
etc.   
 
vi)  Matters relating to reservation of posts in the Pub lic sector Enterprises for 
certain classes of citizens. 
 
vii)  Policy relating to Voluntary Retirement Scheme in CPSEs. 
 
viii)  Matters relating to Counseling, Retraining and Rede ployment Scheme 
(CRR) for rationalized employees of CPSEs. 
 
ix)  Investiture and review of Maharatana / Navratana / Miniratna status to 
CPSEs. 
 
x)  Policy matters relating to composition of Board of Directors of CPSEs, 
Categorization of top posts Scheduling of CPSEs.  
 
xi)  Notification of Pay Scales of Board level executive s as well as below 
Board level personnel and unionized workers and the  DA admissible 
thereon at periodic intervals. 
 
xii)  Policy relating to deputation of Government officer s to Public Sector 
Enterprises. 
 
xiii)  Matters relating to reservation of posts in the Pub lic sector Enterprises for 
certain classes of citizens. 
 
xiv)  Settlement of disputes through Permanent Machinery of Arbitration 
(PMA) among Public Sector Enterprises and between P ublic Sector 
Enterprises and Government Departments except dispu tes relating to tax 
matters. 
 
xv)  Matters relating to International Centre for Promot ion of Enterprises 
(ICPE).  
 
xvi)  Matters relating to Standing Conference of Public Enterprises (SCOPE). 
 
xvii)  Matters relating to delegation of powers to Board of Directors.  
 
xviii)  Matters relating to Board for Reconstruction of Pub lic Sector Enterprises 
(BRPSE). 
 
7. The Committee notes that as per the Allocation o f Business Rules, the 
functions of DPE includes inter-alia  ` Coordination of matters of general policy of 
non-financial 
 nature affecting all public sector industrial and commercial 

undertakings'.  However, as per the submission made  before the Committee during 
the oral evidence relating to the examination of De mands for Grants (DFG)  (2015-
16), the functions of DPE includes laying down of p olicy guidelines on autonomy 
and financial  delegation.  Similar dichotomous position regarding  the mandate of 
DPE on financial matter is also reflected in the Ou tcome Budget of the Ministry of 
Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises.  This incong ruence was pointed out during 
the oral evidence of DPE and a clarification was so ught.  But DPE did not provide 
the requisite information either at the meeting or in their subsequent written replies 
to the queries raised during the meeting.   
 
8. In this context, the Committee recommends that t he ambiguity regarding the 
functions of DPE relating to whether the Department  is tasked to frame 
policies/guidelines relating to financial matters n eeds to be addressed immediately.  
Accordingly, the action taken in this direction sho uld be intimated to the 
Committee.  
 
Demand for Grants (DFG) 
 
  
9.         The Department as part the examination of its DFG (2015-16) submitted the break 
up of proposed Planned Revenue Expenditure and the Non-Planned Revenue Expenditure 
under major head and sub-head wise in the table below:- 
PLAN  
 (Rs. in Thousand) 
S. 
No. 
HEAD 
 HEAD OF ACCOUNT BE  
2015-16 
1 3451 Information Technology 4000 
2 2552 Lump sum provision fro projects/schemes for the benefit 
of North East Region including Sikkim. 
9000 
3 2852 Counselling, Retraining and Redeployment (CR R) Scheme 
for rationalized employees of Central Public Sector  
Enterprises 
29000 
4 2852  Scheme of Research, Development & Consultan cies on 
Generic Issues of CPSEs. 
35800 
5 2852 Skill Development / Training programmes of E xecutives of 
State Level  Public Sector Enterprises (SLPEs) 
12200 
Total  (Plan) 90000 
 

NON-PLAN  
MAJOR HEAD 3451 – SECTT ECONOMIC SERVICES                                                                                
 (Rupees in thousand)  
S. No. Head of Account BE 2015-16 
1.   Salaries  66590 
2.   Wages 10 
3.   OTA 100 
4.   Medical Treatment 1100 
5.   Domestic TA 4800 
6.   Foreign TA 1400 
7.   Office Expenses 10800 
8.   Publications 2500 
9.   Other Administrative Expenses 500 
10.   Payment for Professional and Special Services 3500 
Total  MH-3451= 91300 
 
MAJOR HEAD 2852 – INDUSTRIES 
(Rs. In thousand) 
S. No. Head of Account BE 2015-16 
1.   Contribution to ICPE 7200 
2.   Awards to CPSEs 1500 
 Total MH 2852  8700 
TOTAL NON PLAN  100000 
Grand Total DPE (Plan and Non-Plan) 190000 
 
 
10. A Statement showing the year wise Budget Estima tes, Revised Estimates and 
Actual Expenditure from 2013 has been submitted as under  
(Rs. in thousand) 
 
Year Budget Estimates Revised Estimates  Actual  Expenditure 
Head Plan  Non-
plan  
Total Plan  Non-
plan  
Total Plan Non-
plan  
Total 
 
2013-14 100000 93900 193900 82500 91000 17350 
0 
64100 89680 153780 
 
2014-15 90000 98200 188200 50000 90000 14000 
0 
42941 
* 
88743* 131684* 
 
2015-16 90000 10000 
0 
190000       
 
* upto 28.2.2015 
 
11. The Committee notes that in the year 2013-14, t he Non Plan Allocation of DPE 
was only slightly lesser than their Plan allocation at the BE stage.  During the revision for 

the period, the Non Plan figures overtook the plan money.  While considering the Actual 
Expenditure for the year, the Committee finds that though Non Plan fund has been 
utilized in its entirety, the Plan fund utilisation  was only Rs. 6.41 crore out of Rs. 8.25 
crore.  Whereas, for the year 2014-15, the Plan and Non Plan Allocations at BE were Rs 9 
crore and Rs. 9.82 crore, which at the RE stage is shown as Rs.5.00 crore and Rs.9.00 
crore, respectively. That is, though the Plan funds  were reduced by almost 40%, the Non 
Plan fund nearly remained the same.  For the curren t financial year, the Non Plan 
allocations have exceeded the Plan allocation, keeping the figures at Rs.10 crore and Rs.9 
crore, respectively. 
 
12. The Committee observes that during 2013-14, the Non  Plan allocation 
exceeded only at the RE stage.  Whereas in 2014-15 and 2015-16, the Non Plan 
allocations can be seen to exceed Plan allocation a t the BE stage, itself.  During 
2014-15, the Plan figures at BE which were already less than Non Plan figures, were 
drastically slashed at RE.  The Committee views thi s trend of Plan allocation being 
kept lower than Non Plan allocation as highly undes irable.  Especially when that 
Non Plan expenses of DPE almost entirely consist of  the expenses to run the 
Department.  Further, it is also not encouraging to  find that the Plan allocations of 
DPE have remained stagnant over the years.  From th is, the Committee infers that 
DPE has not been able to come up with enough new Pl an schemes, which would 
have had a facilitating impact in the realm of CPSEs in India.   
 
13. As part of the examination of DFG (2015-16), DP E submitted the achievements 
of the CPSEs for the year 2012-13 and 2013-14 as under: 
 
(Rs. in crore) 
Items No. of 
CPSEs       
 
Investment  Turnover Total  Net 
Profit 
Foreign 
Exchange 
Earnings 
CPSEs 
Employees 
(No.)   
2012-13 277 845334 1945814 114981   139228 1401519 
2013-14 290 992971 2061866 129109 122719 1351306 
 
 
14. It was noted that though the number of CPSEs ro se from 277 to 290 in 2013-14, 

the number of employees in CPSEs came down from 140 1519 in 2012-13 to 1351306 in 
2013-14. 
 
15. The effective reduction of number of employees was 50,213.  In this regard 
the Committee wants to know how the total number of employees has come down by 
more than 50,000 in just a year.  Also, whether new  recruitments were made to 
replace these employees or were these employee only  VRS optees or retrenched 
employees as part of restructuring/ revival of CPSE s.   The Committee may be 
informed if any Policy has been framed regarding gr ade-wise rationalization of 
employees.  Also provide grade-wise details of abov e 50,000 rationalized employees 
.The Committee also wants to be appraised about how  many of these employees 
have made use of the Counseling, Retraining & Redep loyment  ( CRR) scheme of 
DPE and what was the percentage of employability.  
 
16. It has also been observed from the table at par a 13 that the Total Net Profit 
made by CPSEs and Foreign Exchange Earnings have be en shown separately.  In 
this regard, the Committee needs clarification as t o whether the foreign exchange 
earning of CPSEs is not taken into account for the purpose of calculating the net 
profit. 
 
17. The salient policy initiatives/achievements of DPE during the 12 
th  FYP till now 
have been given below:- 
(i) Corporate Governance & Personnel Management:  DPE a fter consultation 
of stakeholders issued model role & responsibilitie s for non-official Directors of CPSEs. 
The Department has taken the initiative to conduct capacity building programmes for 
non-official and Government Directors of CPSEs in t he context of provisions of newly 
enacted Companies Act, 2013. DPE has also taken act ion to sensitise CPSEs regarding 
professionalization of below Board level management in CPSEs. 
 
(ii) MoU system: The Department after consideration of s uggestions received 
from administrative Ministries/Departments, CPSEs a nd recommendations of external 

studies/evaluation of the MoU system made significant changes in the MoU guidelines in 
2013. These include interalia greater flexibility t o CPSEs to select parameters suitable to 
their nature of operations, common format formulate d for CPSEs (except sick and loss 
making, Section 25 and under construction CPSEs), s ick & loss making CPSEs included 
in their domain syndicate, greater emphasis on CAPEX and project implementation etc.  
 
(iii) Corporate Social Responsibility: Department of Publ ic Enterprises (DPE) 
had issued first guidelines on Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) to the Central Public 
Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) in April, 2010, which were revised as Guidelines on CSR and 
Sustainability and issued to CPSEs in April, 2013. After the enactment of the Companies 
Act, 2013 and the coming into force of the provisio ns of Section 135 of Companies Act, 
2013 on CSR and rules framed there under by the M/o  Corporate Affairs, (MCA) DPE 
has issued Guidelines on Corporate Social Responsib ility (CSR) & Sustainability-2014 
for Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) in Oc tober, 2014. These Guidelines are 
aligned with the provisions of Companies Act, 2013 on CSR, the Companies (CSR 
Policy) Rules 2014 notified by M/o Corporate Affair s under the provisions of the Act, 
and Schedule-VII of the Act, and are intended to re inforce the complementarily of CSR 
and Sustainability and to advise the CPSEs not to o verlook the larger objective of 
sustainable development in the conduct of business and in pursuit of CSR agenda. 
 
iv) Skill Development for executives/ employees of State Level Public 
Enterprises (SLPEs): Keeping in view its multi-dime nsional mandate and the need to 
improve the performance of SLPEs, the new Plan Sche me Skill Development Training 
Programmes (SDP) for Executives of SLPEs was starte d in 2012-13. The objective of the 
scheme is to impart training to the personnel of SL PEs for improving their 
knowledge/skills and thereby bolstering their effic iency, profitability and overall 
performance. 
 
18.         Regarding the schemes operated by the D epartment, the Committee was 
informed by DPE that they are implementing three Pl an Schemes viz. Counseling, 
Retraining & Redeployment (CRR) for the separated e mployees of CPSEs, Scheme of 

Research, Development and Consultancies on Generic issues of CPSE (RDC) and 
Scheme of Skill Development Training Programmes (SD P) for executives/employees of 
SLPEs.  
 
Scheme of Research, Development & Consultancies (RD C) on Generic issues of 
Public Sector Enterprises (PSEs)  
 
19. The Scheme of Research, Development & Consultan cies (RDC) on Generic 
issues of Public Sector Enterprises (PSEs) was intr oduced in the year 2007-08 and is 
being implemented since 2008-09. The activities cov ered under this Scheme include 
organizing conferences, seminars and workshops on g eneric issues of CPSEs, 
undertaking thematic studies, consultancies and oth er activities aimed at strengthening 
the implementation of MoU system of CPSEs, incentiv izing best practices through grant 
of awards/incentives to CPSEs and State Enterprises  and promoting knowledge 
exchange. 
20. Details of allocation and expenditure under the  scheme for the last three years are 
shown as under:                                                                                        (Rs. In crore) 
Year BE RE Utilization  
2012.-13 1.50 0.70 0.35 
2013-14 0.50 0.68 0.67 
2014-15 2.50 0.93 0.43 
Total 4.50 2.31 1.45 
 
It can be noted from the above table that there has  been consistent under 
utilization of funds under the scheme during the 12 th  Five Year Plan till now.  During 
2013-14, the allocation was too meager, but the dow nsized allocation was entirely 
utilized. Out of the total funds allocated over the  span of three years, utilization stands at 
roughly 37% which is not an inspiring figure. The s cheme had a BE of Rs. 2.50 crore for 
2014-15 which got reduced at RE to Rs.0.93 crore, o f which, the utilization was only 
Rs.0.43 crore.  
 
21. Further, for the year 2015-16 the BE for the sc heme has been kept at Rs. 3.58 
crore. When queried to know the reasons for the red uced allocation, meager utilization of 
allocated fund and the proposed plan to efficiently  utilize the allocation of Rs.3.58 crore 

during 2015-16, DPE replied that the RE proposal wa s finalized after taking into 
consideration already committed expenditure under t he RDC Scheme and hence at RE 
stage Rs. 2.50 crore was proposed, i.e, BE was reta ined. But against this, only an amount 
of Rs. 0.93 crore was approved. The expenditure und er RDC is 0.43 crore, as most of the 
activities under RDC scheme are concluded only towa rds end/last month of the financial 
year because of their specific nature e.g. payment for benchmarking studies, expenditure 
incurred on Task Force on MoU etc.  It has been submitted in this regard that  DPE has 
requested Ministry of Finance (MoF) for relaxation of ceiling of 33% in last quarter and 
15% in last month of the financial year explaining this position .The approval of MoF is 
awaited and the entire allocation will be utilized after the relaxation is received. As the 
allocation under RDC has been reduced at RE stage, besides meeting expenses likely to 
be incurred against activities in 2015-16 under the  Scheme, the pending bills of 
committed expenditure during 2014-15 which could no t be paid during this year will be 
met against budget allocated for 2015-16.  
 
22. Under the scheme, for the year 2015-16, DPE is proposed to organize 5 
Workshops and conduct 2 Studies on issues relating to CPSEs/SLPEs. Besides, 200 
MoUs for the year 2015-16 are to be negotiated thro ugh the Task Force and signed. The 
MoUs signed between CPSEs and the administrative Mi nistries/Departments fix the 
targets to be achieved by CPSEs in 2015-16. The 210  MoUs signed for 2014-15 will be 
evaluated after August 2015.  
 
23. The Committee is given to understand that the p eculiarities of the activities 
under the scheme can be concluded only at the end o f a financial year and as such 
the expenditure pattern can not be made to conform with the expediture guidelines 
prescribed by the Ministry of Finance.  The Committ ee notes that DPE has sought 
exemption from Ministry of Finance to iron out this  problem.  The Committee 
observes that utilisation of funds would improve on ce this streamelining of 
expenditure as per the nature of activities underta ken has been carried out.  
However, the Committee is not convinced with the st and of DPE that it has been 
able to utilise only about 37% of funds provided to  the scheme during the first three 

years of the 12th Five Year Plan solely due to the above mentioned discrepency.  
Accordingly, it is recommended that along with secu ring the requisit exemption 
from the Ministry of Finance for the expenditure un der the scheme, it is also 
imperative that the Department takes urgent measure s to improve the utilisation of 
the allocated money.  In this context, the Committe e expects that Rs.3.58 crore 
provided for 2015-16 will be effeciently utilised, and the Department to report to the 
Committee, the specific steps taken in this direction. 
 
Skill Development / Training programmes of Executiv es of State Level  Public 
Sector Enterprises (SLPEs)    
 
24. The Scheme of Skill Development Training Progra mme (SDP) for 
executives/employees of State Level Public Enterpri ses (SLPEs) was operationalised  in 
2012-13. The objective of the scheme is to impart t raining to the personnel of SLPEs for 
improving their knowledge/skills and thereby bolste ring their efficiency, profitability and 
overall performance.  
 
25.  During the year 2014-15, 237 executives from 1 54 State Level Public Enterprises 
(SLPEs) were trained at India’s premier institutes under the scheme. The details of these 
programmes are as under:  
 
i.  Performance Evaluation and Setting Professionally G oal Oriented Targets at 
IIM, Ahmedabad. 
ii.  Strategic Thinking for Growth & Sustenance at IIM, Kolkata 
iii.  Leadership & People Development at IIM, Lucknow 
iv.  Strategic Thinking & Decision Making at IIM, Lucknow. 
v.  Corporate Governance at IIM, Shillong. 
vi.  Project Management at IIM, Khozikode. 
vii.  Dynamic Life Management & Stress free Living at IIPA, New Delhi. 
 
 For the year 2015-16, it is proposed to conduct 5 Training Programmes in 
premium Management Institutes to benefit SLPEs in i mproving productivity in their 
enterprises, promoting best management practices, s trategic thinking, project 
management etc. 
 

26. Details of allocation and expenditure under the  scheme for the last three years are 
shown as under: 
Year BE RE Utilization  
2012-13 1.00 0.50 0.05 
2013-14 0.80 0.80 0.46 
2014-15 0.80 0.75 0.75 
Total 2.60 2.05 1.25 
 
27. The Committee notes that during the first year of i ts operationalisation in 
2012-13, the scheme saw almost ‘Nil’ utilization.  During the next year, the 
utilization was slightly above 50% and in 2014-15, the Committee is happy to note 
the entire RE amount has been fully utilized. The C ommittee, therefore, 
recommends that DPE should continue their good perf ormance under the scheme 
and also ensure further augmentation of the activit ies under it.   The Committee is 
of the view that capacity building of the existing employees of the PSEs under the 
scheme is an important parameter contributing towards the over all performance of 
a company and needs to be given continued impetus t hrough the Scheme. An 
effective feed -back mechanism should be put in pla ce for continuous evolution 
based on beneficiary needs.  
 
Scheme of Counselling, Retraining/Redeployment of separated employees of CPSEs 
 
 
28. Realizing the need to have a safety net for the  separated employees, Government 
had established the National Renewal Fund (NRF) in February, 1992 broadly to cover the 
expenses of VRS and to provide retraining to the wo rkers in the organized sector. The 
retraining activity was administered by the Departm ent of Industrial Policy & Promotion. 
However, due to various reasons NRF was abolished o n 31 
st  March 2001. Since 2001-02, 
the Scheme of Counselling, Retraining & Redeploymen t (CRR) of separated employees 
of CPSEs was implemented by the Department of Public Enterprises.  
 
29. The objective and scope of the CRR scheme is to  provide opportunities of to the 
separated employees who are rendered surplus as a r esult of modernization, technology 
upgradation and manpower restructuring in the PSEs.  The aim of retraining of the 
employees is to reorient them through short duratio n training programmes to enable them 

to adjust to the new environment and adopt new avocations after their separation from the 
PSEs due to VRS/VSS or retrenchment due to closure / restructuring of the enterprise. 
 
30. In order to improve the coverage of the Scheme and make it more effective, CRR 
Scheme was modified in the year 2007. Some of the m ajor modifications included (i) 
Training of one dependent of each VRS optee if the VRS optee himself/herself is not 
interested; (ii) Extended duration of training from  20/30/40 days to 30/45/60 days with 
revised expenditure norms; and (iii) Dedicated amou nt earmarked in the expenditure 
norm for follow-up of trained VRS optees. 
 
31. The Committee noted that during 2014-15, BE was  Rs. 4.40 crore under CRR, 
DPE had proposed Rs.2.75 crore at RE stage against which Rs. 2.42 crore was approved. 
It was informed that in this regard that the reduct ion at RE stage under CRR was sought 
in view of  the reduced physical target  due to dec lining trend of VRS in CPSEs in recent 
years. 
 
32. Since its inception in 2001-02 to 2014-15, abou t 1.86 lakh VRS/VSS 
optees/dependents have been trained under the CRR s cheme. The details of persons 
trained agency wise during the last three years has been submitted as under: 
 
 
No. of persons trained under CRR 
scheme 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Nodal Agency  
2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 
1.   Association of Lady Entrepreneurs  
of Andhra Pradesh(ALEAP), Hyderabad  
 
200 75 -- 
2.   Central Institute of Plastics  
Engineering &Technology, 
Bhubaneswar   
600 355 330 
 
 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Nodal Agency  No. of persons trained under CRR 
Scheme 
2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 
 
3.   Electronics Service & Training Centre, 
Ramnagar 
150 -- -- 
4.   Indian Council of Small Industries,  1351 605 350 

Kolkata   
5.   Institute of Leadership Development 
(ILD), Jaipur   
1400 650 550 
6.   KIIT School of Rural Management 
(KSRM), Bhubaneswar   
600 650 450 
7.   MPCON Ltd., Bhopal  760 350 300 
8.   MITCON Limited -- 355 100 
9.   National School of Computer Education, 
Kolkata 
950 -- -- 
10.   U.P . Industrial Consultants Ltd., Kanpur   550 300 200 
11.   Central Institute of Plastics Engineering 
& 
Technology (CIPET), Amritsar   
300 -- -- 
12.   Hardicon Limited, New Delhi  45 -- -- 
13.   Human Care Foundation (HCF), Delhi    550 -- -- 
14.   Team Lease Services Private Limited, 
Bangalore.  
50 -- -- 
  Total 7506 3340 2280 
 
33. The Committee notes that CRR, launched in 2001,  has seen considerable 
reduction in the physical target during the first t hree years of the 12 
th  Five Year 
Plan.  Consequently, during these three years BE wa s consistently reduced at RE 
and the AE during the first two years of the Plan p eriod has been lesser than the 
RE.  The Committee infers from the above that the s cheme is gradually witnessing 
an evident waning of the effectiveness of original objectives set for it.  Accordingly, 
the Committee recommends that a repositing of the s cheme by the restructuring of 
the core objectives of the scheme is due.  At the s ame time, the Committee is of the 
opinion that the role of the scheme, as a social se curity tool, is commendable and 
should be continued to be offered to the rationaliz ed employees of CPSEs.  While 
observing so, the Committee has in mind the employe es of the five CPSEs of DHI 
which have been decided to be wound up. 
 
34. The Committee notes that only 14 nodal agencies  are imparting training to 
VRS optees under CRR.  The Committee seeks to know whether cost of boarding / 
lodging and other subsistence for the duration of  training is also included in the 
scheme.  The Committee is of the opinion that the p ossibility may be explored to 
impart training near the place of the work of the VRS optees. 

 
Vacancies of Independent Directors in the Board of Various CPSEs 
 
 
35. Regarding the positions of Non official Directo rs (NOD) lying vacant in various 
CPSEs and the details of the specific steps/initiat ives taken by DPE, as the nodal 
department, alongwith their respective administrati ve Ministries/Departments to expedite 
the filling up of vacancies, it was submitted to th e Committee that, as per information 
available, there were around 690 positions of Non-official Directors on the Boards of 182 
scheduled CPSEs of which only around 230 positions are currently filled. Details of the 
vacancies of the posts of CMD/MD and Director in the CPSEs as on 31 
st  March, 2015 are 
being placed at Annexure-III.  
 
36. According to DPE, the proposals for appointment  of Non-official Directors are 
initiated by the administrative Ministries concerne d. DPE regularly requests the 
administrative Ministries to furnish the proposals for filling up vacant positions of Non-
official Directors on the Boards of CPSEs under the ir respective jurisdictions. All 
administrative Ministries have again been requested  to furnish latest information 
regarding vacancies of Non-officials Directors of C PSEs under their respective 
jurisdiction, period of vacancy and steps being tak en to fill these vacancies. During the 
oral evidence it was also by DPE that the Companies  Act, 2013 has made it mandatory to 
have a women director in every company and DPE has issued directions to administrative 
Ministry to comply with this provision of the Act. 
 
37. In the face of the routine reply of DPE, the Co mmittee would like to remind the 
Department that in its Action Taken Note to the Com mittee’s recommendations on the 
issue as contained in its 252 
nd  Report related to DFG 2013-14 of DPE, it had been 
mentioned that it was proposed to make the timely a ction taken by the administrative 
ministry of a CPSE for filling up of Non Official D irectors to be mentioned in the MoU 
of the CPSE. 
 
38. In this regard, the Committee notes with concern th at the persistent problem 
of vacant post of Non-official Directors on the Boa rds of CPSEs continues to exist 

despite the assurance from DPE that laxity in this regard will be suitably reflected 
in the MoU of the CPSEs.  Accordingly, the Committe e reiterates its view that DPE, 
being the nodal Department in charge of all CPSEs in India should have more say in 
enforcing the filling up these vacancies, through i ts policy directives, including a 
penal provision during the assessment of MoU performance of a CPSE.  
DPE should take up this matter at the appropriate forum. 
 
 
International Cooperation 
 for Promotion of Enterprises (ICPE)  
 
39. India is a founder member of ICPE in Ljubljana,  Slovenia. The annual 
contribution of India to ICPE is US$ 1, 50,000.  Th erefore, budgetary provisions have 
been made under this head. DPE informed that the pr ovision of Rs. 0.87 crore in BE 
2014-15 consists of Rs. 0.72 crore for payment of I ndia’s membership contribution to 
ICPE. Hence, the fund allocation is in terms of con tribution as a member and does not 
come under the category of a scheme.  
 
40. As submitted by DPE, ICPE has organized one yea r International MBA 
Programme commencing from 1 
st  October, 2014 at the International Centre for 
Promotion of Enterprises (ICPE), Ljubljana, Sloveni a for session 2014-15. 4 executives 
from Indian CPSEs are attending the programme. The tuition fee for the programme is 
11,500.00 EUR per participant for ICPE member state s. The annual contribution of India 
to ICPE is US$ 1, 50,000.  Therefore, budgetary pro visions have been made under this 
head. 
 
41. The Committee note that as submitted by DPE, In dia's annual contribution 
to ICPE amounts to, approximately, Rs. 93, 34,500 a s per the prevailing exchange 
rate.  Further, the tuition fee for the MBA program me per participant amounting 
to, approximately, Rs.7,73,950, as per the current exchange rate, is either paid by 
the individual CPSE, Department of Personal & Train ing (DoPT) or the Ministry of 
Finance through National Institute of Financial Man agement (NIFM).  The course 
fee is designed mainly according to the duration of  the course and the facilities, 
logistical expenses, etc. 

 
42. The Committee observes that as stated by DPE, t he annual contribution to 
ICPE is Rs.0.72 crore. However, as per the BE for t he last three years from 2012-13 
to 2014-15 and for the current year, the amount all ocated for ICPE was Rs 0.87 
crore.  As such the Committee wants clarification a s to why Rs 0.87 crore is 
allocated year after year, when the annual contribu tion is Rs .0.72 crore.  Further, 
the Committee also observes that the commitment of the Government to continue 
the membership of ICPE and the tangible benefits in  doing so have not been well 
defined.  Accordingly, it is recommended that an objective assessment of the benefits 
accruing to the country through the Membership of I CPE may be undertaken 
expeditiously and a Status Report should be furnished to the Committee. 
 
43. Further, the Committee would also like to be ap prised of the precise details 
of the courses being attended by executives of Indi a CPSEs in ICPE and a 
justification of the amount being spent by the rele vant agency for the training, 
specifying whether such training can be provided at  a lesser cost domestically or in 
some other international institution.  
 
44. Overall the Committee is apprehensive of the im pact of such expensive 
courses at ICPE.  The Committee seeks to know if it  is Department’s considered 
position that such specialised courses are not avai lable in the country at a much 
reasonable cost.  The Committee also notes that whi le States PSU executives are 
being trained at IIM and other national institution s the executives of CPSEs are 
being sent to much costlier ICPE.  The Committee ma y be informed of such 
distinctions in training of executives of CPSEs and  States PSEs is at all desirable.  
The Committee is of the firm view that Department m uch discontinue its 
subscriptions of ICPE unless there is a very pressing necessity.   
  
Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BPRSE) 
 
 
45. The Government constituted BPRSE  vide  Resolution dated 6 th  December, 2004 as 
an advisory body to address the task of strengtheni ng, modernizing, reviving, and 

restructuring of CPSEs and to advise the Government  on strategies, measures and 
schemes related to them. 
 
46. Regarding the process of revival/ restructuring  of sick CPSEs it was earlier 
submitted before the Committee that proposals are f irst sent to BRPSE; they appraise 
them and make appropriate recommendations. The reco mmendation then, through the 
Department, goes to the Cabinet. Cabinet approves a  package to be presented before the 
Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR). It is the BIFR award which has 
statutory force for all sick companies. So, BIFR is  the final body as far as sick companies 
are concerned. On this, the Committee, in its Repor t on Demands for Grants 2012-13, 
brought to the notice of the Department that the fu nctioning of BRPSE is adversely 
impacted by the fact that for every small thing the  sick companies have to approach 
BIFR. Further, recommendations of BIFR were given i mportance over the 
recommendations of BRPSE due to its statutory backi ng. Accordingly, this Committee 
recommended that when National Company Law Tribunal  (NCLT) was put in place of 
BIFR, its mandate should avoid any duplication of work with BRPSE. The Department in 
its Action Taken Note (ATN) assured the Committee t hat its recommendation would be 
represented appropriately at the time of constitution of the new body.  
 
47. During the examination of the DFG for 2015-16 o f DPE it was submitted that the 
NCLT has not been constituted yet as the matter is sub-judice in Supreme Court. Further, 
during the oral evidence of DFG 2015-16, when enqui red about the status of the proposal 
currently under the consideration of the Government  on the replacement of BRPSE with 
a new entity, DPE failed to respond.  
 
48 . The Committee understands that the BIFR and BRPSE, two pivotal 
organizations engaged in the process of revival / restructuring of CPSEs in India are 
reported to be replaced in the near future.  The Co mmittee views these proposed 
changes as a potential watershed in the area of revival /restructuring of CPSEs.  The 
Committee recalls that during their co-existence ti ll now, owing to certain overlaps 
and conflicts in the roles essayed by BIFR and BRPS E in approaching the revival 
/restructuring proposals of CPSEs, the cases of rev ival/restructuring suffered 

avoidable delays. Accordingly, in the backdrop of t he proposed replacement of 
BRPSE and BIFR, the Committee would like to further  reiterate its earlier stand 
and recommend that the every care should be taken t o avoid conflicts and overlaps 
in the role assigned to the new entity of BRPSE and  the NCLT which has been 
conceived to replacing BIFR. Further, the new agenc ies should be conceived in such 
a manner that the revival /restructuring of CPSEs s hall be completed in a 
prescribed timeframe without lingering for years. 
************** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE-AT A 
GLANCE  
 
1. The Committee notes that as per the Allocation o f Business Rules, the 
functions of DPE includes inter-alia  ` Coordination of matters of general policy of 
non-financial  nature affecting all public sector industrial and commercial 
undertakings'.  However, as per the submission made  before the Committee during 
the oral evidence relating to the examination of De mands for Grants (DFG)  (2015-
16), the functions of DPE includes laying down of p olicy guidelines on autonomy 
and financial  delegation.  Similar dichotomous position regarding  the mandate of 
DPE on financial matter is also reflected in the Ou tcome Budget of the Ministry of 
Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises.  This incong ruence was pointed out during 
the oral evidence of DPE and a clarification was so ught.  But DPE did not provide 
the requisite information either at the meeting or in their subsequent written replies 
to the queries raised during the meeting.   
(Para No 7) 
2. In this context, the Committee recommends that t he ambiguity regarding the 
functions of DPE relating to whether the Department  is tasked to frame 
policies/guidelines relating to financial matters n eeds to be addressed immediately.  
Accordingly, the action taken in this direction sho uld be intimated to the 
Committee.  
(Para No 8) 
3. The Committee observes that during 2013-14, the Non  Plan allocation 
exceeded only at the RE stage.  Whereas in 2014-15 and 2015-16, the Non Plan 
allocations can be seen to exceed Plan allocation a t the BE stage, itself.  During 
2014-15, the Plan figures at BE which were already less than Non Plan figures, were 
drastically slashed at RE.  The Committee views thi s trend of Plan allocation being 
kept lower than Non Plan allocation as highly undes irable.  Especially when that 
Non Plan expenses of DPE almost entirely consist of  the expenses to run the 
Department.  Further, it is also not encouraging to  find that the Plan allocations of 
DPE have remained stagnant over the years.  From th is, the Committee infers that 
DPE has not been able to come up with enough new Pl an schemes, which would 

have had a facilitating impact in the realm of CPSEs in India.   
(Para No 12) 
4. The effective reduction of number of employees w as 50,213.  In this regard 
the Committee wants to know how the total number of employees has come down by 
more than 50,000 in just a year.  Also, whether new  recruitments were made to 
replace these employees or were these employee only  VRS optees or retrenched 
employees as part of restructuring/ revival of CPSE s.   The Committee may be 
informed if any Policy has been framed regarding gr ade-wise rationalization of 
employees.  Also provide grade-wise details of abov e 50,000 rationalized employees 
.The Committee also wants to be appraised about how  many of these employees 
have made use of the Counseling, Retraining & Redep loyment  ( CRR) scheme of 
DPE and what was the percentage of employability.  
(Para No 15) 
5. It has also been observed from the table at para  13 that the Total Net Profit 
made by CPSEs and Foreign Exchange Earnings have be en shown separately.  In 
this regard, the Committee needs clarification as t o whether the foreign exchange 
earning of CPSEs is not taken into account for the purpose of calculating the net 
profit. 
(Para No 16) 
6. The Committee is given to understand that the pe culiarities of the activities 
under the scheme can be concluded only at the end o f a financial year and as such 
the expenditure pattern can not be made to conform with the expediture guidelines 
prescribed by the Ministry of Finance.  The Committ ee notes that DPE has sought 
exemption from Ministry of Finance to iron out this  problem.  The Committee 
observes that utilisation of funds would improve on ce this streamelining of 
expenditure as per the nature of activities underta ken has been carried out.  
However, the Committee is not convinced with the st and of DPE that it has been 
able to utilise only about 37% of funds provided to  the scheme during the first three 
years of the 12th Five Year Plan solely due to the above mentioned discrepency.  
Accordingly, it is recommended that along with secu ring the requisit exemption 
from the Ministry of Finance for the expenditure un der the scheme, it is also 

imperative that the Department takes urgent measure s to improve the utilisation of 
the allocated money.  In this context, the Committe e expects that Rs.3.58 crore 
provided for 2015-16 will be effeciently utilised, and the Department to report to the 
Committee, the specific steps taken in this direction.                                 (Para No 23) 
 
7. The Committee notes that during the first year of i ts operationalisation in 
2012-13, the scheme saw almost ‘Nil’ utilization.  During the next year, the 
utilization was slightly above 50% and in 2014-15, the Committee is happy to note 
the entire RE amount has been fully utilized. The C ommittee, therefore, 
recommends that DPE should continue their good perf ormance under the scheme 
and also ensure further augmentation of the activit ies under it.   The Committee is 
of the view that capacity building of the existing employees of the PSEs under the 
scheme is an important parameter contributing towards the over all performance of 
a company and needs to be given continued impetus t hrough the Scheme. An 
effective feed -back mechanism should be put in pla ce for continuous evolution 
based on beneficiary needs.  
(Para No 27) 
 
8. The Committee notes that CRR, launched in 2001, has seen considerable 
reduction in the physical target during the first t hree years of the 12 
th  Five Year 
Plan.  Consequently, during these three years BE wa s consistently reduced at RE 
and the AE during the first two years of the Plan p eriod has been lesser than the 
RE.  The Committee infers from the above that the s cheme is gradually witnessing 
an evident waning of the effectiveness of original objectives set for it.  Accordingly, 
the Committee recommends that a repositing of the s cheme by the restructuring of 
the core objectives of the scheme is due.  At the s ame time, the Committee is of the 
opinion that the role of the scheme, as a social se curity tool, is commendable and 
should be continued to be offered to the rationaliz ed employees of CPSEs.  While 
observing so, the Committee has in mind the employe es of the five CPSEs of DHI 
which have been decided to be wound up. 
(Para No 33) 

9. The Committee notes that only 14 nodal agencies are imparting training to 
VRS optees under CRR.  The Committee seeks to know whether cost of boarding / 
lodging and other subsistence for the duration of  training is also included in the 
scheme.  The Committee is of the opinion that the p ossibility may be explored to 
impart training near the place of the work of the VRS optees. 
(Para No 34) 
 
10. In this regard, the Committee notes with concer n that the persistent problem 
of vacant post of Non-official Directors on the Boa rds of CPSEs continues to exist 
despite the assurance from DPE that laxity in this regard will be suitably reflected 
in the MoU of the CPSEs.  Accordingly, the Committe e reiterates its view that DPE, 
being the nodal Department in charge of all CPSEs in India should have more say in 
enforcing the filling up these vacancies, through i ts policy directives, including a 
penal provision during the assessment of MoU performance of a CPSE.  
DPE should take up this matter at the appropriate forum. 
 
(Para No 38) 
 
11. The Committee note that as submitted by DPE, In dia's annual contribution 
to ICPE amounts to, approximately, Rs. 93, 34,500 a s per the prevailing exchange 
rate.  Further, the tuition fee for the MBA program me per participant amounting 
to, approximately, Rs.7,73,950, as per the current exchange rate, is either paid by 
the individual CPSE, Department of Personal & Train ing (DoPT) or the Ministry of 
Finance through National Institute of Financial Man agement (NIFM).  The course 
fee is designed mainly according to the duration of  the course and the facilities, 
logistical expenses, etc. 
(Para No 41) 
 
12. The Committee observes that as stated by DPE, t he annual contribution to 
ICPE is Rs.0.72 crore. However, as per the BE for t he last three years from 2012-13 
to 2014-15 and for the current year, the amount all ocated for ICPE was Rs 0.87 
crore.  As such the Committee wants clarification a s to why Rs 0.87 crore is 

allocated year after year, when the annual contribu tion is Rs .0.72 crore.  Further, 
the Committee also observes that the commitment of the Government to continue 
the membership of ICPE and the tangible benefits in  doing so have not been well 
defined.  Accordingly, it is recommended that an objective assessment of the benefits 
accruing to the country through the Membership of I CPE may be undertaken 
expeditiously and a Status Report should be furnished to the Committee. 
(Para No 42) 
 
13. Further, the Committee would also like to be ap prised of the precise details 
of the courses being attended by executives of Indi a CPSEs in ICPE and a 
justification of the amount being spent by the rele vant agency for the training, 
specifying whether such training can be provided at  a lesser cost domestically or in 
some other international institution.  
(Para No 43) 
14. Overall the Committee is apprehensive of the im pact of such expensive 
courses at ICPE.  The Committee seeks to know if it  is Department’s considered 
position that such specialised courses are not avai lable in the country at a much 
reasonable cost.  The Committee also notes that whi le States PSU executives are 
being trained at IIM and other national institution s the executives of CPSEs are 
being sent to much costlier ICPE.  The Committee ma y be informed of such 
distinctions in training of executives of CPSEs and  States PSEs is at all desirable.  
The Committee is of the firm view that Department m uch discontinue its 
subscriptions of ICPE unless there is a very pressing necessity.   
 (Para No 44) 
 
15 . The Committee understands that the BIFR and BRPSE, two pivotal 
organizations engaged in the process of revival / restructuring of CPSEs in India are 
reported to be replaced in the near future.  The Co mmittee views these proposed 
changes as a potential watershed in the area of revival /restructuring of CPSEs.  The 
Committee recalls that during their co-existence ti ll now, owing to certain overlaps 
and conflicts in the roles essayed by BIFR and BRPS E in approaching the revival 

/restructuring proposals of CPSEs, the cases of rev ival/restructuring suffered 
avoidable delays. Accordingly, in the backdrop of t he proposed replacement of 
BRPSE and BIFR, the Committee would like to further  reiterate its earlier stand 
and recommend that the every care should be taken t o avoid conflicts and overlaps 
in the role assigned to the new entity of BRPSE and  the NCLT which has been 
conceived to replacing BIFR. Further, the new agenc ies should be conceived in such 
a manner that the revival /restructuring of CPSEs s hall be completed in a 
prescribed timeframe without lingering for years. 
(Para No 48) 
********* 
 