PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
  RAJYA SABHA                                  
  
  
           
           DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
           STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
  
            ONE HUNDRED TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT 
  
                                             ON 
  
MoU PERFORMANCE IN RESPECT OF PSUs OF SHIPPING INDUSTRY  
 (MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES) 
  
  
           
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 19TH AUGUST, 2003) 
         (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON   21ST AUGUST, 2003) 
  
  
              
                 RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
                 NEW DELHI 
  
           AUGUST, 2003/SHRAVANA, 1924 (SAKA) 
C O N T E N T S 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                            
INTRODUCTION                                                                               
REPORT                                                                                                                                                                   
CHAPTER – I                                                                                                              
CHAPTER – II                                                                                                               
            CHAPTER – III                                                                                                              
            CHAPTER – IV                                                                                                            
            CHAPTER – V                                                                                                             
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE                                                          
MINUTES        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
                  Dr. P.C. Alexander       — Chairman 
                       
                  RAJYA SABHA 
  
2.      Prof. M.M. Agarwal 
3.      Shri Jayantilal Barot 
4.      Shri Prasanta Chatterjee 
5.      Dr. M.N. Das 
6.      Smt.  Saroj Dubey 
7.      Shri Faguni Ram 
8.      Shri Lajpat Rai 
9.      Smt. Sumitra Mahajan 
10.  Shri P.K. Maheshwari 
11.  Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil 
12.  Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy 
13.  Shri S. Sivasubramanian 
14.  Smt. Sushree Devi 
15.  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
  
LOK SABHA 
16.  Smt. Jayashree Banerjee 
17.  Shri Ajay Chakraborty 
18.  Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary 
19.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das 
20.  Shri K Francis George  
21.  Shri Thomas Hansda 
22.  Md. Anwarul Haque 
23.  Shri A.C. Jose 
24.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
25.  Shri Mansoor Ali Khan 
26.  Shri Sunil Khan 
27.  Shri Deepak Kumar 
28.  Shri Manjay Lal 
Page 1 of 12127th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/127threport.htm

29.  Dr. K. Malaisamy 
30.  Shri A. Narendra 
31.  Shri Ananta Nayak 
32.  Shri Dayabhai V. Patel 
33.  Shri Uttamrao Patil 
34.  Shri Malyala Rajaiah 
35.  Shri P. Rajendran 
36.  Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
37.  Shri Tarachand Sahu 
  
(i) 
  
38.
  Shri Ramanand Singh 
39.  Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh 
40.  Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur 
41.  Shri V. Vetriselvan 
42.  Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari 
43.  Shri Ram Prasad Singh 
44.  Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
45.  Shri Vijay Sankeshwar 
  
  
SECRETARIAT 
  
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary 
Shri A.K.Singh, Deputy Secretary 
Shri  K.P.Singh ,Under Secretary 
Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer 
INTRODUCTION 
  
  
  
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having   been  authorized  by the Commi ttee, hereby present this  One hund
twenty seventh Report on the  MoU performance in respect of PSUs of Shipping Industry pertaining to the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises.  
  
2.         The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry considered and adopted  the Draft report at its meeting held on the  18th August, 2003. 
  
  
CHAPTER - I 
MOU SYSTEM 
1.         The Memorandum of Undertaking (MOU)  is a negotia ted document between the Government, acting as the owner of Public Sector Enterprise (PSE) and a specific
PSE. It contain the intentions, obligations and mutual responsib ilities of the Government and the PSE. Further, MOU makes an at tempt to move the management of PSEs
from management by controls and procedures to management by results and objectives.  
OBJECTIVES OF THE MOU SYSTEM  
1.1       The objectives of the MOU system are to improve the performance of public enterprises by increasing autonomy and accountability of the management; to remove the
fuzziness in the goals and objectives of the enterprise  to pursue through clearly laid down performance targets   in the  MOU and to enable the evaluation of managerial
performance through objective criteria and provide a mechanism to reward good performance through performance incentives to stimulate improved performance.  
1.2       Under the agreement the enterprises undertake to achieve the targets set in the agreement at the beginning of the yea r. Thus the MOU covers both financial
performance as well as non-financial performance. Under this syst em performance of the company is categorized into five categori es namely: excellent,very good, good, fair,
and poor. 
THE GENESIS OF MOU SYSTEM 
1.3       The genesis of the policy of Memorandum of Understa nding can be traced to the report of the Arjun Sengupta Commitee. One of the recommendations of this
Committee was for the introduction of the system of MOU for measurement of performance of public enterprises. The MOU system wa s introduced on an experimental basis
in 1987-88. It was based on the French system. From 1989-90 the signaling system was adopted and it remains in vogue till now. 
One of the most important difference between the French system and the signaling system is the possibility of making an overall  judgment on the enterprises performance in
the latter system. In the performance contracts belonging to the Fr ench system, one could only point out whether a particular t arget was met or not. This created grea t
difficulty for making an overall judgement regarding enterprises performance. The signalling system overcomes this problem by a dopting the system of "five point scale" and
"criteria weight" which ultimately result in calculation of "composite score" or an index of the performance of the enterprise  
PREPARATION OF MOU 
1.4       Based on the guidelines issued by the DPE in October/November, the draft MOUs are prepared by PSEs and forwarded to t he Administrative Ministry and DPE by
NEW DELHI;     
August 18, 2003 
Dr. P.C.Alexander  
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary  Standing Committee on Industry 
Page 2 of 12127th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/127threport.htm

December. The draft MOUs indicate the performance targets on a fi ve point scale as proposed by the PSE for the ensuing financia l year for all crucial parameters like
production, sales, profits, etc. Additionally, the PSEs are also e xpected to include dynamic parameters of significance for stre ngthing the future potential of the enterprise,
such as project implementation, R&D, Human Resource Development, etc. Appropriate weights are assigned to each of these parameters. The drafts MOUs are discussed with
the PSE Administrative Ministers at the ATF negotiation meetings  arranged in DPE in March/April, soon after the presentation of  the Union Budget. Since the Budget has
implications on performance targets, the timing of the negotiati on meetings is delibrately scheduled after the budget presentat ion. The appropriateness of the parameters an d
weights and the soundness of the targets as also the commitments of the Government are examined in detail at the negotiation me etings. The draft MOUs as finalise d
thereafter are placed before the High Power Committee  (HPC) co mprising the Cabinet Secretary as Chairman, Secretary, Finance, Expenditure, Planning Commission, 
Programme implementation, Chairman Public Enterprises Selection Board, Chief Economic Adviser and Secretary Public Enterprises as Members,   for approval. Afte r
approval, they are signed by Chief Executives and Secretaries.  
EVALUATION 
1.5       The evaluation of the MOU signing enterprises is done at the end of the year by the Ad-hoc Task Force on the basis of  actual achievement vis-a-vis the MOU targets. 
Where the performance exceeds the target by the predetermined sti pulated level the enterprise is ranked as 'excellent' and when  the target is just met, the enterprise is ranke
d
as 'very good'. In other cases, where the targets are not met the enterprise is ranked either 'good' or 'fair' or 'poor'. Ranki ng depends on how the performance has been as
compared to MOU targets. 
1.6     The performance criteria should be assigned appropriate weights corresponding with their stated priorities in the objec tives.  It should be ensured that they also reflec t
the perceived relative importance of the various criteria in th e judgement of the PSE/Ministry.The weight for physical criteria  should be kept as low as possible. Instead,
Efficiency and Dynamic criteria should get higher weights.  The we ight for profit-related financial parameters would be 60% in case of PSEs operating under free marke t
mechanism. The weight of 60% would be dist ributed to,  Gross Margin,  Gross Profit/Capital Employed and   Net Profit/Net Worth,  each having a weight of 20% each. Fo r
PSEs operating under administered prices, PSEs where Government is  sole/almost sole customer & Trading, Consultancy, Engineerin g and Financial PSEs, the weight would
be 40%. The weight of 40% would be distributed to,  Gross Marg in and   Net Profit/Net Worth, each having a weight of 20% each.  The PSEs which have been specially se t 
up for implementing  certain government policy directives will have no pre-determined financial parameters.  
  
  
1.7    The targets set should be realistic and growth oriented. It shoul d be ensured that the MOU targets flow from the Corporate Visi on/Plans formulated by the PSEs an d
there is linkage between them. In case there is any variation, reasons thereof should be clearly specified.        For qualitative indicators, the targets for each of the points on the
5-point scale should be indicated in the performance matrix itself. If these  targets are on a time scale, only such target which fall within the MOU year is  included. 
  
  
1.8       The MOU should contain the past five years' perform ance data on criteria included in the MOU in an appendix. It shoul d also indicate the projections for the next five
years, as far as possible consistent with the corporate plan.  
  
  
1.9       This report on MOU  in shipyard and related industry is an   exercise in the study of memorandum of understanding of  public sector undertakings i.e. Hindustan
Shipyard Limited (HSL), Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL) and Cochin Shipyard Limited (CSL).    The Sub-Committee-III for Ministry of heavy Industries and Public Enterprises 
undertook the study of MOUs  of public sector units in shipyard related industry and visited Goa from 12 th to 15th  January, 2003  in order to have interaction with the 
management of  Hindustan Shipyard Ltd. Vishakhapatnam, Goa Ship yard Ltd.,  Goa and Cochin Shipyard Ltd., Cochin and Mormugao Po rt Trust , Goa.  In this exercise, the
Sub-Committee comprehensively reviewed  the Memorandum of Unders tanding of these Industries and endeavoured to shape its  obser vations/recommendations in the ligh t
of the facts/data presented by these PSEs before the Sub-Committee during the visit.   
  
WORLD DEMAND 
1.10     As per an estimate published in the shipping world and shipbuilder July/August, 2001 the  Global order book for Commer cial new buildings    likely to be sustaine d
over the next 10 years as the world fleet of 90,000  Vessels need replacement,  2200 to 2300  ships per year will be required a s replacement to the old ones and to mee t
additional tonnage requirements.  Ship repairs and conversions are also expanding in terms of  global  demand worth around 8 billion dollars a year. 
1.11     As per the report of the subgroups of the working group on SB& SR industry – 10 th  Five Year  Plan, on the global plane, sea borne trade is expected to grow at a 
steady rate of 2.2%  has been  estimated that between 1998-2008, a total  of 198  million  Gross Registered Tonnage (GRT) is pl anned to be built compared to 125 million
GRT built in the preceding decade.   In the world   shipbuilding capacity is consequently expected to grow from 28   million CG T to 40 million CGT  annually.  Similarly,
ship repair activity will grow from 150  million GRT to  200 million GRT to sustain the aging fleets and to meet the emerging environmental norms. 
1.12     Thus the focus on  shipbuilding and    economic performance has gained importance in the  last few years.  China has started making its presence felt in the market and
shipbuilding achieving   is expected to shift to this country in the  near future.  India is expected  to become the next econo mic giant.  Hence there is an urgent need to reverse
the present situation and a policy  is to be evolved at the apex level to promulgate orders for placement of orders by Indian Ship owners on Indian Shipyards for fuller capacity
utilization for the balanced growth. 
PRESENT SITUATION 
1.13     In the last two decades,  a number of shipyards have co me  up in South Korea which have  displaced shipbuilding activi ties in Europe.  These Yards have large
facilities and are   equipped to build and deliver 40 to 70 ships every year including VLCCs & specialized LNG  ships.  With hu ge manufacturing facilities they are able to se
t
up backward integrated facilities  for manufacturing of Main Engines, Diesel Generator sets & other high value items.  They have also achieved enormous economies on large
purchases of components and materials.  Further, these shipyards have invested  heavily on I.T. so that their operations, from d esign to procurement of materials, cutting o f
steel, fabrication are completely computerized. Whereas in the case of India, although we have very long coastal line and great  opportunity for shipbuilding, it is yet to
Page 3 of 12127th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/127threport.htm

register its presence in the world market.  
CHAPTER – II 
HINDUSTAN SHIPYARD LIMITED, VISAKHAPATNAM 
2.         The main activities of HSL include  Shipbuilding , Ship repair and structural Fabrication. HSL so far built 119 vess els such as Bulk Carriers, passenger Vessels,  Drill
Ships., OPVs, OPSSVs, Tugs, Dredgers etc contributing  to over 1.25 million DWT to the nation’s maritime industry.  The dry doc k with all its infrastructure is one of the 
modernized   repair dock in the East coast of India.  In addi tion to the public and private   shipping  company vessels, a numb er of foreign flag ships are also  undertaken fo r
repair thus earning foreign exchange.     HSL also has a retrof it division to undertake medium  repair of F-Class ( I 641)  sub marines.   HSL is pursuing with Indian Navy to  
undertake retrofitting of  EKM  class submarines and  thereafter graduate construction of submarines at HSL.  HSL set  up an ex clusive offshore platform yard (OPF)  as a
captive yard to construct wellhead platforms for ONGC .  Due to shift   in policy of ONGC, HSL could not secure orders from ONG C since 1990 and the yard is  presently
being utilized for structural fabrication works.Financial restructuring proposal as submitted by HSL, is under active consideration of  the Ministry of Shipping. 
PERFORMANCE RATING   
2.1       Performance rating in terms  of MoU 
  
2.2       A glance at the performance rating of MoU in respect  of HSL reveals that  during the year 1997-2002 it has been rated  from fair to excellent. It was adjudged  
excellent during the year 1999-2000 however, the MOU structure does not reflect the actual performance and the progress of perf ormance in the right spirit.  In the year 1998-
99 when the net MOU rating was very good, the unit had suffered net loss of 29.67 crores as against a targeted loss of 50 crore s, in the year 1999-2000, as against a targete d 
loss of  66 crores, the net loss was 13.61 crores, hence enabling the unit to get excellent rating during this period whereas during the subsequent years, the targeted losses were
18.98 crores and 11.12 crores as against targeted losses of 38.89 cr ores and 26.27 crores respectively.  In this context, durin g the interaction with the management of the
company, it was emphasized that the environment of operation had not  been very congenial and the losses were much less than the  targeted ones during the years, however, it
also came to light that the overall emphasis was on financial para meters in the MOU while other performance parameters like R&D , energy efficiency, safety, industrial
relations were not adequately represented.  It also came to the light of the Committee that as against meeting delivery schedul e, Hindustan Shipyard does not have a very
chequered record.  However, these performance parameters do not get reflected in the MOU signed by the unit with the Government. 
2.3       The Committee, recommends that while importance to financial/param eters is a must in a liberalized economy in the  era of stiff  competition, it should also be seen
that proper weightage is given to parameters linked with R&D,  energy efficiency, safety, industrial relations etc. which form an important constituent in the overall 
performance of a PSE. The Committee therefore, recommends that Mo U should attach due importance to the parameters like R&D,  ene rgy efficiency, safety, industrial
relations for the well being of Public Sector under takings.    
 
1997-98 Fair 
1998-99 Very good 
1999-2000 Excellent 
2000-01 Very good 
2001-02 Very Good 
Page 4 of 12127th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/127threport.htm

CHAPTER – III 
3.         THE MOU OF GOA SHIPYARD LIMITED, GOA 
The Goa Shipyard Limited is located in a very strategic locati on and on the banks of river Zuari,    GSL  has a  10,000  sq. mt s.  completely covered area for building ships,
four  slipways for  launching  and repair of ships, one 180 mete rs  long jetty for fitting out and for harbour trials.  The shi pyard has following other  modern facilities viz
CAD/CAM/CENTRE,  CNC/Automatic Machines for steel preparation, cutting and forming, Electronic workshop and titanium Alloy Work shop.   GSL can design and buil d
ships up to 105  metre  in length, launch weight of 3000 tonnes  displacement and 4.5  metres  draught.  GSL can offer complete  range of Patrol  vessels  covering from 25
metres to 105  meters length 35  Knots Fast Patrol Vessel pres ently under construction for Indian Coast  Guard has been indigen ously designed at GSL.  The Annual  steel
throughput  installed capacity of this shipyard is 5000 Tons. 
  
3.1       PERFORMANCE RATING 
            The MoU ratings  obtained by the  company for the last five years have been as under: 
  
Performance rating in terms  of MoU 
  
3.2       There MOU performance prima facie has been very good for the year 2000-2001 and 2001-2002 whereas prior to these years they were being rated very poor.  This is  
a very encouraging sign, however, in terms of value added per employee, there have been lot of fluctuation and at times underst atement of targets itself in the negotiating
process.  In the year 1998-99, while the target of value added per employee was 4.01 points, the achievements as against was onl y 1.31, but the same target has been
understated as 2.80 in the year 1999-2000 and 2.79 in the year 2000-2001 and 3.10 in the year 2001-2002.  The respective achiev ements in the above years are 2.26, 2.49 an d 
4.36, however, this understatement of target as well as the achieve ments do not seem to be realistic in terms of value added pe r employee.  The Committee recommends tha t
this lacuna should  be addressed and  an appropriate position is required to be reflected in the MOU.  It may be emphasized aga in that the MOU does not adequately  ge t
reflected through the parameters like safety, export orientatio n, R&D, value engineering, inter-PSU cooperation enhancement and  balancing of capacity, etc.  This apart, 
energy efficiency which is a statutory obligation brought in the balance-sheet does not get much weightage  in the MOU. These issues also should be addressed.  
  
3.3       The whole  exercise on MoU  started about  10 years back when the DPE   directed all the PSUs  to determine the   ach ievable target for selected parameters  which
were evaluated   at the  end of the   half year and  full year respectively as  MoU envisions the  PSUs to achieve the best performance. 
  
3.4       The Committee observes that  fixing the targets   in absolute terms in the beginning of year for industries like ship building  is very difficult to achieve especially in the
present scenario  of order books which is uncertain and customer driven. 
  
3.5       The Committee recommends that  the parameters should be more objective in the sense and show how to achieve the busin ess excellence and the management efforts
towards it.  When  the targets are  evaluated the performance ratings can be  established, otherwise, for the   industry like GSL scoring in MoU  rating is difficult. 
 
1997-98 Poor 
1998-99 Poor 
1999-2000 Very poor 
2000-01 Very Good 
2001-02 Very Good  
Page 5 of 12127th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/127threport.htm

CHAPTER - IV 
COCHIN SHIPYARD LIMITED. 
4.         CSL  has  capacity and features distinguishing it fro m other Shipyards of India, it is the   most  modern Shipyard i n India .  It is the only yard in India which can buil d
vessels upto 1,10,000 DWT  and repair vessels upto 1,25,000 DWT.  It is also only Shipyard in India  to have received ISO 9001 certification for shipbuilding, Ship repair and
Marine Engineering Training Cochin Shipyard Limited. The  MOU was examined by the Committee during their visit to Cochin on   14th September, 2001. 
  
PERFORMANCE RATING  
4.1       Performance rating in terms  of MoU 
  
 4.2      The MOU has been performing excellently for the last four years but for the year 2001-2002 where the provisional rati ngs are expected to be very good.  The unit has 
been generally meeting the targets.  At the same time not much understating of the target also seem to be reflected, however, a s in the other shipyard, there is an over-
emphasis on financial performance to the extent of 60% of the total MOU rating , whereas this unit has other achievements in th e area of ship repairs and ship building, etc.
which do not carry appropriate weights that  could have enabled proper reflection of their performance. 
4.3       The Committee observes that Ship repair  has been in  heavy competition in the  prevailing  market. As a result there of, profit margin has reduced. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that CSL should concentrate on larger vessels to sustain itself in the market as it is the only shipyard that  can construct vessels of large carrying
capacity (110000 dwt AND  125000 DWT). CSL therefore should reorient  its marketing strategy from conventional method to gain or ders from foreign countries in  order to
remain in the competition from countries such as Korea, CSL s hould promote intake of  people who can improve the present situat ion. MoU should take care of manpowe r
efficiency for this purpose. High level of technical manpower skil ls are involved in the shipyard industry and retention of man power and upgrading of their skills is a very
vital factor in the industry.   
CHAPTER – V 
  
AREAS OF CONCERN FOR SHIPYARD INDUSTRY 
(I)        Under Utilization of Capacity 
5.         The Hindustan Shipyard (HSL) is  handicapped by the fact that it has got only  one building dock with a capacity to build vessels upto 50,000 DWT.  The level o f
Technology  & Computerization is low and even the design office is yet to be upgraded to international   standards.  HSL mostly  depends for orders from Indian Navy , SCI,
Port Trusts, ONGC, DCI, A&N Administration UTL etc. Lack of   coherent strategy and libealisation in regulatory norm made it ea sier for Indian Ship owners to acquire
vessels from abroad, domestic shipyards industry has lost its clients and does not have requisite  technology, plant & equipment and subsidies at  par with foreign shipyards to
attract new orders. 
5.1       Currently there are three dedicated shipyards, viz. Mazagon Dock Ltd., Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers and Goa Shipyard Ltd.  under  the Ministry o f
Defence  Production who amongst themselves split the requirement of Navy &  Coast Guard leaving    only the spill over, if any,  to non defence shipyards.  The existing
defence shipyards may not be able to cope with  the completion of number of orders of the Defence production programme in the X Five Year Plan.   
5.2       The Committee recommends  that HSL having built &  repaired  various sophisticated vessels including retrofitting/rep air of submarines and having all infrastructure
and human skills/expertise at  par with other Defence yard,   MoU  should be signed  between  I.N.,  Coast Guard & HSL for mutu al benefit and cooperation. Hence
weightage should be introduced in MoU document for cooperation of Indian PSUs for larger benefit of Indian shipyards and HSL in particular. 
5.3       In the  last five  years the Value of Production (VOP) has increased from Rs.111.31 crore in 1997-98 to Rs.220 crores  in the  year  2001-02 .  However it will not be 
possible to sustain this growth if new orders do not materialize in the immediate near future.  The downward trend in the capaci ty utilization has already se t-in.  Situation is 
that, with  the present orders GSL is not in a position to fully  utilize the manpower in the  area of hull construction and outfitting activities.  The overall capacity utilization of
the yard  is about 45.69% in December, 2002.  Since vessels yard 1183 & 1186 will be delivered by March, 2003 , the capacity  u tilization figure will further come down. 
GSL has  expertise and facilities developed  for  medium sized s ophisticated vessels like Missile Crafts and Extra Fast Attack Crafts for  Navy, Fast patrol Vessels an d
Advanced Offshore Patrol Vessels for  Coast Guard/Navy.  If suffici ent orders for  medium sized Naval/Coast  Guard vessels are not received  by   GSL  from esteemed 
customers soon, the manpower & infrastuctural capacity of the yard will remain un-utilised. 
5.4       The Committee observes that under-utilisation of existi ng capacity by GSL  in the absence of work-order is a matter o f grave concern. This negates the prospect o f 
expanding the work sphere of G.S.L. This is also in contravent ion of the performance of the PSU as shown under MoU. The Committ ee therefore recommends that capacity
utilization of a PSU should be reckoned as a vital factor and given due weightage under MoU. 
  
5.5       The Committee was apprised that despite efforts to promote export of Shipyard’s  products and services, it has not be en possible to secure any order because majority
of enquiries require  an integrated institutional   response from the   Indian  side  comprising Shipyards, the Indian navy and  the Government to  ensure  the successful
outcome of promotional efforts besides making funds available for bridging the gap between the order   value and the cost  of  production in the market entry phase.  
  
(II)       Development of in house R&D 
5.6       The Committee recommends that in order to develop in-house  R& D  facilities for design and production of ships an amount of 0.2 5%  of the project cost  may be
approved to the  Shipyards for  enabling such activities to be undertaken on a regular basis.  This will enable self-sufficienc y in production/maintenance of products/ships 
serving the defence/nation.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that a concerted effort should be made by shipyards, Indian N avy and the Govt. to ensure successful
1997-98 Excellent 
1998-99 Excellent 
1999-2000 Excellent 
2000-01 Excellent 
2001-02 Very Good  
Page 6 of 12127th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/127threport.htm

completion of projects undertaken and timely delivery to customers for which synergy of efforts is  required between potent players. 
(III)     Disposal of Scrap 
5.7       Government  of India  have exempted import of ra w materials, bought out components a nd consumables  required for both  shipbuilding/ship repair duty free.  
Considerable difficulties are experienced in disposing of scrap generated during the shipbuilding process.  As per Sec. 65 2(a)  & (b)  of the customs Act, Scrap generate d
during manufacture of goods are to be valued on the basis of  impor ted  scrap or on the basis of value of parent  material depe nding on whether the manufactured   item has
been  exported or cleared for domestic consumption respectively.  In either  case   the value being realized on disposal of scrap from shipbuilding are much less than the value
of imported scrap/parent material.  As a result the yard stands to lose heavily on sale of scrap.  
5.8       The Committee, therefore, recommends that in order to streamline the procedure the scrap generated may be valued  at rate of realizable value.  Necessary 
amendments to the relevant  sections in the Customs Act are called therefor. 
(IV)     Rationalization of Duties 
5.9       The shipyards  have  been facing difficulties on the excise duty also .  The scrap generated form shipbuilding/ship r epair operations are exempted from Excise duty
since the final product viz. ship building and ship repair activities are exempted.  For effective utilization of yard faciliti es the shipyard often   undertakes  other  fabrication
jobs which are   dutiable in nature.  As per Notification  No.89/95 dt. 18.5.95 of Central Excise  and Salt Act 1944 in case dut iable activities are carried out in an organization
where exempted products are manufactured, the entire scrap gene rated by the organization will attract excise duty.  Accordingly ,  the shipyards stands to lose the benefits o f
excise duty exemption when other works are carried out in the in terest of effective utilization of yard facilities and manpower .    Since separate accounts and records are kept 
for  exempted works,  excisable works scrap arising from exempted works may be exempted from the payment of excise duty  even i f excisable goods are also  manufactured
concurrently. 
5.10     The Committee finds that as existing arrangements, capit al  goods imported for ship repair are exempt from levy of  Cu stoms Duty, whereas the same goods fo r
shipbuilding  are not exempted.  The Committee thereforer recomm ends that since shipbuilding is a capital intensive industry an d margins from new building operations are 
negligible,  capital equipments required for shipbuilding for m odernisation, upgradation and expansion of capacities may be exe mpted from levy of Customs duty as in the
case of ship repair. 
  
(V)       Inter  Public Sector Shipyard Corporation 
6.         Out  of the seven public sector shipyards in the country, three are under the Department of Defence production cater ing mainly to the requirements of Indian
Navy/Coast Guard and other four shipyards in terms  of vessels built, technology employed and work culture,   each shipyard is d istinct from  the other.  For instance Cochin
Shipyard with its modern facilities and systems is capable to build and repair vessels upto 110000 dwt and  125000 DWT, respect ively.  Hindustan Shipyard  has the 
capability to handle vessels of smaller capacities   (upto 40000  dwt).  Wherever, joint efforts to securing orders is feasible  to yield desired results,  will be pursued.
Recognising the potential  for securing sizable business  from the offshore repair sector,  a consortium arrangement has been m ade between Goa Shipyard Ltd (GSL),
Hindustan Shipyard Ltd (HSL),  Mazagon dock Ltd (MDL) and cochin Shipyard Ltd. (CSL).   
  
6.1       The main purpose of  Co-operation is to sustain and improve the capacity utilization of the yard by regular patroniza tion by the  other PSUs, exchange and transfe r
valuable technical and managerial know-how for upgrading productivity and quality of product at each centre  to a level which m eets the requirements without    unhealthy  
competition wishing prosperity to one another and to arrive at innovative solutions for the prosperity of Defence, Maritime  and Oil Sectors.  Also in time of tension and crisis
like war, the role to  be played by Indian Shipyard  for building &  repair of ships, such as Survey vessels, OPVs, Submarines etc. can be  discussed and defined by Indian
navy.  The PSUs can  help co-operate each other by maintaining a competitive  edge in a very depressed market. 
6.2       The Committee  recommends that a weightage factor is to be introduced   in MoU document for cooperation of Indian PSUs for  lar ger benefit of  Indian Shipyards
and HSL in particular. 
6.3       The Committee further observes that in the absence  of  any tax  shield, the Shipyard has to pay Corporate  Tax on it s profits.  Presently, no special dispensation is
available to shipbuilding/ship repair  industry under the income tax act, whereas  Shipping Companies enjoy   special concessions under Sec.33 AC  of the income Tax Act.   
6.4       The Committee  recommends that extension of a sim ilar provision to shipbuilding and repair industry will enable them to plough back profit   for acquisition of new
assets for much needed upgradation, modernisation and expansion projects at  low cost. 
6.5       The Committee recommends that  a consensus on product range should  be developed within each shipyard so as to avoid duplicatio n of design and detaile
d
engineering efforts. In the absence of a well developed marine  infrastructure in the country major part of the raw materials and equipment required  for construction /repair of
vessels are being sourced   from abroad.  There are  only very few manufacturers and limited items that can be sourced from ind igenous market. The Committee recommends
that   items being sourced  from abroadshould  be identified  .  A list of such items being procured from abroad should be made   with specifications earmarked and be given to
domestic suppliers for supply.  The domestic s uppliers  can react to it and present to the Government what hurdle/constrains   they are facing in supply of these items. 
Technology wise they can  seek cooperation and collaboration of foreign companies for joint production. This will pave the way for indigenisation of shipping industry from
mere assembling of parts imported from abroad. It is quite   evident  that shipyards  are strategically  necessary to build and  to maintain  Warship and patrol Vessels to secure
extraction of oil & gas offshore from the Exclusive Economic Zone  and keep the sea lanes safe   and secure. 
  
6.6       The Committee further desires that Data exchange betw een the  suppliers should take place from time to time. This wil l enable them to assess possibilities o f
Page 7 of 12127th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/127threport.htm

manufacturing of  such items and stepping up of mutual cooperation between them.  Such proposals can be mooted  by them to Government for help. 
  
6.7The Committee has also come to know that in the wake of development of inland waterways in the country, there is likelihood of demand for barges/smaller vessels. It is 
therefore desirable that the PSUs in shipbuilding should be able to  meet the demand in the future. 
6.7 
 
Page 8 of 12127th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/127threport.htm

6.7 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE 
HINDUSTAN SHIPYARD LIMITED,  VISAKHAPATNAM 
            The Committee, recommends that while importance to financial/param eters is a must in a liberalized economy in the  era of stiff  competition, it should also be seen
that proper weightage is given to parameters linked with R&D,  energy efficiency, safety, industrial relations etc. which form an important constituent in the overall 
performance of a PSE. The Committee therefore, recommends that Mo U should attach due importance to the parameters like R&D energ y efficienty, safety, industrial
relations for the well being of Public Sector under takings.    
(Para  2.3)
THE MOU OF GOA SHIPYARD LIMITED, GOA 
There MOU performance prima facie has been very good for the year 2000-2001 and 2001-2002 whereas prior to these years they wer e being rated very poor.  This is 
a very encouraging sign, however, in terms of value added per employee, there have been lot of fluctuation and at times underst atement of targets itself in the negotiating
process.  In the year 1998-99, while the target of value added per employee was 4.01 points, the achievements as against was onl y 1.31, but the same target has been
understated as 2.80 in the year 1999-2000 and 2.79 in the year 2000-2001 and 3.10 in the year 2001-2002.  The respective achiev ements in the above years are 2.26, 2.49 an d 
4.36, however, this understatement of target has enabled the uni t to reflect their performance as never after the year 1998-99 as value added per employee ever be realistically 
targeted. 
  The Committee recommends that this lacuna should  be addresse d and  an appropriate position is required to be reflected in th e MOU.  It may be emphasized again
that the MOU does not adequately  get reflected through the para meters like safety, export orientation, R&D, value engineering,  inter-PSU cooperation enhancement an d 
balancing of capacity, etc.  This apart, energy efficiency wh ich is a statutory obligation brought in the balance-sheet does no t get much weightage  in the MOU. These issues 
also should be addressed.  
(Para  3.2)
            The Committee observes that  fixing the targets   in absolute terms in the beginning of year for industries like sh ipbuilding  is very difficult to achieve especially in the
present scenarios of order books which is uncertain and customer driven. 
(Para  3.4)
            The Committee recommends that  the parameters should be more subjective in the sense and show how to achieve the bu siness excellence and the management efforts
towards it.  The same when  evaluated the performance ratings can be  established, otherwise, for the   industry like GSL scoring in MoU  rating is difficult. 
(Para  3.5)
COCHIN SHIPYARD LIMITED. 
            The Committee observes that Ship repair  has been in (profitable venture for CSL in their  part  at present) heavy competition in the  prevailing  market. As a resul t
thereof, profit margin has reduced. The Committee, therefore, re commends that CSL should concentrate on larger vessels to susta in itself in the market as it is the only
shipyard that  can construct vessels of large carrying capacity (110000 dwt AND  125000 DWT). CSL therefore should reorient its  marketing strategy from conventional
method to gain orders from foreign countries in  order to remain in the competition from countries such as Korea, CSL should have intake of computer knowledge people who
can improve the present situation. MoU should take care of manpow er efficiency for this purpose. High level of technical manpow er skills are involved in the shipyar d
industry and retention of manpower and upgrading of their skills is a very vital factor in the industry.   
(Para  4.5)
AREAS OF CONCERN 
            The Committee recommends  that HSL having built  &  repair  various sophisticated vessels including retrofitting/rep air of submarines and having all infrastructure
and human skills/expertise at  par with other Defence yard,   MoU  should be signed  between  I.N.,  Coast Guard & HSL for mutu al benefit and cooperation. Hence
weightage should be introduced in MoU document for cooperation of Indian PSUs for larger benefit of Indian shipyards and HSL in particular. 
(Para  5.2)
            The Committee observes that under-utilisation of existing capacity by GSL  in the absence of work-order is a matter  of grave concern. This negates the prospect o f 
expanding the work sphere of G.S.L. This is also in contravent ion of the performance of the PSU as shown under MoU. The Committ ee therefore recommends that capacity
utilization of a PSU should be reckoned as a vital factor and given due weightage under MoU. 
(Para  5.4)
            The Committee recommends that in order to develop in-house  R&D  facilities for design and production of ships an a mount of 0.25%  of the project cost  may be
approved to the  Shipyards for  enabling such activities to be undertaken on a regular basis.  This will enable self-sufficienc y in production/maintenance of products/ships 
serving the defence/nation.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that a concerted effort should be made by shipyards, Indian N avy and the Govt. to ensure successful
completion of projects undertaken and timely delivery to customers for which synergy of efforts is  required between potent players. 
(Para  5.6)
            The Committee, therefore, recommends that in order to streamline the procedure the scrap generated may be valued  a t rate of realizable value.  Necessary 
amendments to the relevant  sections in the Customs Act is called for. 
(Para  5.8)
The Committee finds that as existing arrangements, capital  goods imported for ship repair are exempt from levy of  Customs Duty, whereas the same for shipbuilding 
is not exempted.  The Committee thereforer recommends that si nce shipbuilding is a capital intensive industry and margins from new building operations are  negligible, 
capital equipments required for shipbuilding for modernisation, upgradation and expansion of capacities may be exempted from le vy of Customs duty as in the case of ship
repair. 
(Para  5.10)
THE PURPOSE OF INTER PSUs CO-OPERATION         
Page 9 of 12127th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/127threport.htm

            The committee  recommends that a weightage factor is to be introduced   in MoU document for cooperation of Indian PSUs for  larger benefit of  Indian Shipyards and
HSL in particular. 
(Para  6.2)
            The Committee  recommends that extension of a similar provision to shipbuilding and repair industry will enable the m to plough back profit   for acquisition of new
assets for much needed upgradation, modernisation and expansion projects at  low cost. 
(Para  6.4)
  
            The Committee recommends that  a consensus on product range should  be developed within each shipyard so as to avoid duplicatio n of design and detaile
d
engineering efforts.The Committee recommends that   items being s ourced  from abroad should  be identified  .  A list of such i tems being procured from abroad should be
made  with specifications earmarked and be given to domestic s uppliers for supply.  The domestic suppliers  can react to it and  present to the Government wha t
hurdle/constrains   they are facing in supply of these items.  Technology wise they can  seek cooperation and collaboration of foreign companies for joint production. This will
pave the way for indigenisation of shipping industry from mere asse mbling of parts imported from abroad. It is quite   evident  that shipyards  are strategically  necessary to
build and to maintain  Warship and patrol Vessels to secure extraction of oil & gas offshore from the Exclusive Economic Zone  and keep the sea lanes safe   and secure. 
(Para  6.5)
  
            The Committee further desires that Data exchange  between the  suppliers should take place from time to time. This w ill enable them to assess possibilities o f
manufacturing of  such items and stepping up of mutual cooperation between them.  Such proposals can be mooted  by them to Government for help. 
(Para  6.6)
6.7       The Committee has also come to know that in the wake of development of inland waterways in the country, there is likelihood of demand for barges/smaller vessels. It
is therefore desirable that the PSUs in shipbuilding should be able to  meet the demand in the future.  
  (Para  6.7)
 
Page 10 of 12127th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/127threport.htm

MINUTES 
XIII  
  
THIRTEENTH MEETING 
  
            The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry met at 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday the 19 th August, 2003 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  
                  PRESENT 
  
1.
                  Dr. P.C. Alexander  --  Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
2.                  Prof. M.M. Aggarwal 
3.                  Shri Jayantilal Barot 
4.                  Shri Faguni Ram 
5.                  Shri Lajpat Rai 
6.                  Smt. Sumitra Mahajan 
7.                  Shri P.K. Maheshwari 
8.                  Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil 
9.                  Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy 
  
LOK SABHA 
  
10.              Smt. Jayashree Banerjee 
11.              Shri Nepal Chandra Das 
12.              Shri K. Francis George 
13.              Shri A.C. Jose 
14.              Shri Manjay Lal 
15.              Shri A Narendra 
16.              Shri Ananta Nayak 
17.              Shri Malyala Rajaiah 
18.              Slhri P. Rajendran 
19.              Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
20.              Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari 
  
SECRETARIAT 
             
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
            Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary 
            Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary 
            Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary 
            Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer 
  
2.
                  At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee. 
  
3.                  *                                                    *                                              * 
  
127th Report on `MOU performance in respect of PSUs of Shipping Industry'. 
  
4.                        The Chairman requested the Members to give any suggesti on or modifications if any in the report. After a brief discussion , the reports were adopted. The
Committee authorized the Chairman to incorporate the modifications in the reports.  
  
5.                        The Chairman nominated Dr. B.B. Ramaiah, MP (Lok Sabha) and in his absence Shri A.C. Jose, MP (Lok sabha) to lay the repo rts on the table of the Lo k
Sabha. He said that he himself or in his absence Prof. M.M. Aggarwal, MP (Rajya Sabha) would present the reports in Rajya Sabha.  
  
6.                  The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
______________________________________________________________________________
Page 11 of 12127th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/127threport.htm

*** Relate to other matters.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
                                                                                                 
  
  
  
  
  
  
             
 
 
Page 12 of 12127th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/127threport.htm