PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/112threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:01]
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
ONE HUNDRED - TWELFTH REPORT
 
ON
ACTION TAKEN  BY THE GOVERNMENT ON RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED  IN 
COMMITTEE ' S  89TH   REPORT ON  MODERNISATION, RESTRUCTURING AND EXPANSION
PROGRAMMES OF DURGAPUR STEEL PLANT   MINISTRY OF STEEL)
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON  8TH         MAY, 2003)
(LAID ON THE TABLE  OF THE  LOK SABHA ON 8TH .MAY, 2003)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2003/VAISAKHA, 1925  (SAKA)
 
 
C O N T E N T S
 
                                                                                                                                     
 
1.            COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                             
2.            INTRODUCTION                                                                                                            
3.            REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                        
4.            OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS  AND             RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE  COMMITTEE AT A
GLANCE                               
5.            MINUTES                                                                                                                                       
 
As on 1st  January, 2003
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
            
                  Dr. P.C. Alexander            —Chairman
 
                       RAJYA SABHA
2.      Prof. M.M. Agarwal
3.      Shri  Jayantilal Barot
4.      Dr. M.N. Das
5.      Smt.  Saroj Dubey
6.      Shri Faguni Ram
7.      Shri Lajpat Rai
8.      Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
9.      Shri P.K. Maheshwari
10.  Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
11.  Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/112threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:01]
12.  Shri S. Sivasubramanian
13.  Smt. Sushree Devi
14.  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
15.  Shri K. Chandran Pillai
 
LOK SABHA
16.  Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
17.  Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
18.  Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
19.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das
20.  Shri K Francis George
21.  Shri Thomas Hansda
22.  Md. Anwarul Haque
23.  Shri  A.C. Jose
24.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
25.  Shri Mansoor Ali Khan
26.  Shri Sunil Khan
27.  Shri Deepak Kumar
28.  Shri Manjay Lal
29.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
30.  Shri A. Narendra
31.  Shri Ananta Nayak
32.  Shri  Dayabhai V. Patel
33.  Shri Uttamrao Patil
34.  Shri Malyala Rajaiah
35.  Shri P. Rajendran
36.  Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
37.  Shri Tarachand Sahu
38.  Shri Ramanand Singh
39.  Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
40.  Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
41.  Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari
42.  Shri V. Vertiselvan
43.  Shri Ram Prasad Singh
44.  Shri Mohan Singh
45.  Shri Vijay Sankeshwar
 
                        SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta,  Joint  Secretary
Shri  A.K. Singh,  Deputy  Secretary
Shri  K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
 
 
 
I N T R O D U C T I ON
 
 
I,  the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry,  having   been
authorised  by the Committee, hereby present this One hundred  twelfth    Report on the action taken  by the
Government on recommendations contained  in  Committee ' s  89 th   Report on  Modernisation, Restructuring and

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/112threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:01]
Expansion Programmes of Durgapur Steel Plant  (Ministry of Steel) 
 
2.         The Committee   examined and  considered  the action taken  by the Government on recommendations
contained  in  Committee ' s  89 th   Report on  Modernisation, Restructuring and Expansion Programmes of Durgapur
Steel Plant  (Ministry of Steel)
 
3.         The Committee at its meeting held on  6th January, 2003 considered and adopted the Report.
 
NEW DELHI;
January, 2003
DR.   P.C. ALEXANDER
Chairman
Department -related Parliamentary  Standing Committee
on Industry
 
 
REPORT
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Steel  on the Recommendations
contained in the  89 TH Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry Report on
Modernisation, Restructuring and Expansion Programmes of  Durgazpur Steel Plant   (DSP).
2.         Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Steel   in respect of the   recommendations
contained in the Report.   These have been categorized as follows:
 
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry of Steel  
 
(Chapter - I).
Recommendations:-  4.2, 11.3 12.2, 13..3. 6, 14.3, 14.4, 14.5, 17.4, 17.7 and 20.3
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies  :
(Chapter - II)
Recommendations:- 3.4, 5.1.3, 9.4, 9.5, 10.5, 13.3.5, 17.2, 19.6 and  21.2
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies of the Ministry of Steel    :.
(Chapter - III).
Recommendations:- 2.2, 5.2.3, 6.8, 8.2, 14.2, 16.4 and  17.9,
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  final replies of the  Ministry of Steel   have not been received .
(Chapter - IV).
Recommendations:-  5.3.2, 5.4.2, 7.4,7.5, 14.6, 15.2 and  21.3
3.         The Committee is pleased to observe that  the   Ministry of Steel has accepted its  recommendations  as 
mentioned in Chapter –I of the  Report. 
4.                  In respect of the recommendation contained   in Chapter-II  the Committee is  convinced  with the logic and
explanation  advocated by the Ministry of  Steel  and therefore   does not want to  pursue  further .
5.         The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementations  of recommendations contained in  Chapter-
III  and therefore  the Committee desires that the Ministry of Steel should furnish  logical  explanation  in respect of
these recommendations.
6.         In respect  of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV, the Ministry of Steel has  either   furnished the interim
replies or couched its language in  vague terms like  noted for compliance/guidance therefore, the Committee desires 
that the Ministry of Steel would furnish Action Taken Notes in  respects of recommendation categorized   in Chapter-
IV  in detail and to the point, as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee.
7.            Observations/recommendations of the Committee  are given in Chapter (V)

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/112threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:01]
8.         The Details of the Action Taken Notes is being discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER - I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
 
Recommendations ( Para  4.2  )  
 
Objectives of Modernisation.
                       
   The Committee understands that since DSP was facing problems of poor quality of raw materials, obsolete technology
and inadequate air pollution control measures which necessitated that it undertake the modernisation projects. The
Committee, while noting the objective of modernisation, hopes that DSP Management would make every effort for
achieving the objectives of modernisation during its stabilisation phase.
 
 
Action Taken
            DSP management is making every effort for achieving the objectives of modernisation.  Hot metal  production in
Durgapur Steel Plant has increased from 1138000 Tonne  in 1987-88 (Pre-modernisation) to 881000 Tonne in 2002-
03 (April-September).
                      
Recommendations ( Para 11.3  )
 
Further Modernisation and Restructuring for technology Upgradation
 
   The Committee recommends that the DSP management should push ahead, without delay, the issue of further
upgradation in DSP in regard to Bloom Caster with ladle furnace, New Finishing Mill, Introduction of coal dust
injection and Introduction of SGP for BF-2 for revenue generation and improvement in environment.  The Committee
hopes that SAIL and the Ministry of Steel would extend its helping hand to DSP.
 
Action Taken
            During 10 th Five Year Plan, it has been envisaged that among other schemes for DSP, the proposal for
installation of Wire Rod Mill, Bloom Caster with Ladle furnace and Installation of Slag Granulation Plant in BF-2
would be considered depending upon funds availability and techno-economics. Presently, Installation of Wire Rod Mill
is being considered.
 
Recommendations ( Para  12.2   )
  Conversion of CC Billets into finished products.
 
The Committee understands that almost 55 percent of DSP’s production comprises of semis, which are low contributory
items and fetch lower realization.  The product-mix of DSP is unfavourable and is affecting the profitability of DSP. 
The Committee recommends that DSP Management should chalk out a necessary course of plan for converting CC
Billets into finished products through conversion agents.  The Committee hopes that SAIL should lend its helping hand
to DSP management in chalking out the plan and proposing the same to Ministry of Steel, as the same would help DSP
in improving its physical and financial performance.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/112threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:01]
 
Action Taken
Apart from conversion, DSP has taken up steps for a New Wire Rod Mill for conversion of CC Billets.
Recommendations ( Para13.3.6 ) 
 
 Completion of  AMR scheme without time and cost over-run
 
The Committee further recommends that DSP management should take every effort to complete AMR scheme
without time and cost over-run.
 
Action Taken
            All efforts are being made to reduce the time and cost over-runs in the project.  Some of the measures being
adopted to curtail time and cost over-runs are:
·        Introduction of 2-stage approval (“In-principle” approval and final approval)
·        Preliminary Engineering work being done before tendering to save time
·        Approval of critical/major drawings across the table
·        Computerised PERT Network Project Monitoring.
 
Recommendations ( Para   14.3  ) 
 
  SWOT  ANALYSIS
 
The Committee is of the opinion that since DSP has acquired State of the – Art Technology, including the
benefits of high degree of computerization and automation, it would be able to improve its working and performance,
thereby marching ahead towards achieving the goal of a profit making plant.
 
Action Taken
            Durgapur Steel Plant has started making cash profits since 2000-01.  During April’ 02 to Sep’02  (1 st Half of
2002 – 03),  the plant has made a cash profit of Rs. 10  crore.  Recommendations ( Para    14.4 )  
SWOT  ANALYSIS
The Committee, while appreciating the steps taken by DSP management for reducing the cost of production,
feels that DSP management may capitalise the introduction of CDI in the modernised Blast Furnace for further
reduction in input cost of coal.  The Committee is hopeful that DSP management taking advantage of modernised steel
making route in DSP, would go for product-mix and diversification be its special quality of billets on conversion of CC
billets into finished products through conversion agents. 
 
Action Taken   
            Introduction of CDI in SAIL Blast Furnaces is being looked into by Corporate Management.  As pointed earlier
action is being taken to augment the finishing line for improvement in product-mix.
Recommendations ( Para  14.5   )
  SWOT  ANALYSIS
            The Committee recommends that DSP management in tandem with SAIL and the Ministry of Steel, should chalk
out Areas for further modernisation for improving the performance of the company.  Further DSP management, in its
estimation for examining the need for further modernisation would take care of adequate facility for favourable product
mix and replacement of energy consuming ingot route.
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/112threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:01]
Action Taken
            During 10 th Five Year Plan period, at DSP, Wire Rod Mill has been planned to reduce semis and Bloom Caster
with Ladle Furnace has been planned to replace ingot route.
Recommendations ( Para 17.4    ) 
 DSP’s Marketing Strategy
            The Committee, while noting the elements of DSP’s marketing strategy, recommends that DSP management
should make all-out efforts for actual implementation of the strategy envisaged.  Then and only then, would be DSP able
to enhance its market share.
 
Action Taken
            (a)            Sales Coordination Meeting is held on a monthly basis where the rolling programme is decided based
on the market demands and the orders in hand keeping in view production capabilities of the Plant.
 
(b)
             The direct despatches to customers are being maximized specially where the customers indicate a
preference for the same in April-September’ 2002, 64% of total dispatches have been direct dispatches as
against 60% in the CPLY (Corresponding Period Last Year).
 
(c)
             Road despatches are being made in addition to Rail despatches for augmenting the despatches from the
Plant.
 
(d)             Emphasis is being made on sale of special quality materials.
 
(e)             The synergy of DSP-ASP route is being utilized to meet special steel orders, wherever feasible.
 
(f)               All out efforts are being made to market full volume of Production (Including incremental volume after
Modernisation) with a view to improvement in market share/turnover.
 
Recommendations ( Para  17.7  )  
            While the Committee is pleased to note that DSP management has taken steps for aggressive marketing of DSP’s
products it feels that the steps so taken must have a bearing on the financial performance of the plant, otherwise,
measures so envisaged will remain on paper.
 
Action Taken
i)                      Conversion of Semis into Finished products has been a thrust area.  To further strengthen our efforts to
this end, IISCO’s facilities are being utilized for conversion apart from appointing few more conversion
agents at strategic and important locations.  This effort is yielding improvement in realization.
 
(ii)
          In order to maximize  sales of DSP products in Eastern Region, approx.  55% of the total despatches
during April-September’ 2002 have been effected for Eastern Region from DSP.
 
(iii)        Quarterly/Annual tie-ups are being entered into with the customers to ensure advance order coverage.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/112threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:01]
 
(iv)        In order to widen the reach of SAIL products to a large cross section of customers and to bring SAIL
steel nearer to the doorstep of customers, authorised/rural dealers have already been appointed.
 
(v)         Sales to projects is a thrust area.  Project orders are booked either by participation against
tender/enquiries or are negotiated.  MOU/tie-ups are also entered into with the project customers.
 
(vi)        Emphasis is also being made on sale of value added products.
 
Recommendations ( Para 20.3    )  
Inventories of Saleable Steel Products: (as on 30-06-2001)
 
            The Committee, while taking note of accumulation of saleable steel products to the tune of Rs.13800 tonnes at
stockyards and 27,500 tonnes at plant as on 30 th June, 2001, recommends that DSP management would undertake
adequate measures to dispose of the inventories so that DSP may add to the profit.
 
Action Taken
            Some of the measures taken to reduce stocks, interalia include:
 
1.              Adjusting product-mix to suit market requirements.
 
2.              Monitoring dispatches to stockyards keeping in view existing stocks and potential demand at that
location.
 
3.              Intensified customer contact for procuring orders.
 
CHAPTER –II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE
 
            Recommendations ( Para 3.4    ) 
 
Initial Facilities at DSP
 
The Committee notes the initial facilities available at DSP.  The Committee feels that it is because of unfavourable
break-even point and low economy of scale that the plant incurred loss and therefore, went for an expansion
programmes, initially for 1.6 million tonnes per year and later on 2.8 million tonnes.
 
Action Taken
 
                        No comments.
 
 
Recommendations ( Para  5.1.3   )  
 
Approval & Implementation
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/112threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:01]
The Committee takes note on the new technologies introduced in the primary areas during the modernisation process. 
The Committee is pleased to note that hot metal and crude steel production has been stabilised qualitatively and as well
as quantitatively, which  is giving financial benefit.
 
Action Taken
 
                        No comments.
 
Recommendations ( Para 9.4    ) 
 
Performance of Plant
 
            The Committee notes that the DSP, in the post-modernisation phase, is performing at near rated capacity levels. 
Moreover, production beyond capacity level has been achieved in Blast Furnace No. 4 (102 per cent), Continuous
Casting Plant (108 per cent) and Merchant Mill (101.4 per cent) during 2000-01.
Action Taken
 
                        No comments
 
 
Recommendations ( Para  9.5   )
 
  Objectives of Modernization
 
            From the above it is evident that the basic objectives of modernization are being progressively achieved with
respect to integrated operation.  There has been improvement in product quality with the introduction of continuous 
casting, which is operating above capacity.  In addition, the plant has been able to produce higher quality products like
TMT bars, special quality semis and loco wheels.
 
Action Taken
 
                        No comments.
 
Recommendations ( Para 10.5  )  
 
Financial performance of DSP
 
            The Committee is of the opinion that during the modernization of DSP new technologies were introduced in the
primary areas.  Hot metal and crude steel productions have been stabilized qualitatively as well as quantitatively, which
is giving financial benefits.  The modernization of DSP has been satisfactory.
 
Action Taken
 
            No comments.
 
Recommendations ( Para  13.3.5  )  
 
Requirement of Funds
 
The Committee is of the opinion that modification/replacement of existing machineries and addition of new equipment
is essential to keep the production process going smoothly and effectively.  The committee feels that since DSP is
continuously making losses and is not in a position to generate internal revenue, therefore, it is but natural that
budgetary support from the Government is required  to carry on the AMR schemes.  The committee hopes that once
DSP is put on the revival track and starts making net profit, it would not require budgetary support any longer.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/112threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:01]
 
Action Taken
            No budgetary support is being provided to DSP  by the Government.  DSP has been running AMR schemes from
its own resources for maintenance of plant & equipment.  Since 2000-01 DSP has managed to earn cash profits.  It is
hoped that if this trend continues   DSP will generate net profit very soon..
Recommendations ( Para 17.2    )  
Marketing Strategy of DSP
The Committee is pleased to note that the present demand for DSP’s product is satisfactory.
Action Taken
 
 Noted.
 
Recommendations ( Para  19.6   )
 
            Cost Reduction-measures
The Committee is happy to note that substantial improvement has taken place in almost all the operating parameters. 
These improvements are also reflected in reduction cost of production by more than six percent in last five years in spite
of substantial input cost escalation in almost all the major input like indigenous coal, imported coal, exchange rate,
power rate, salary and wages etc.  The Committee is please to know that DSP has made cash profit of Rs.58 crore during
2000-01 after a gap of six years.  The trend continues during the current year also as it has made a cash profit of Rs.17
crore during April-December, 2001.  There is continuous reduction in the loss incurred by plant after completion of
modernization schemes.  In the current nine months also there is reduction in net loss by about 35 per cent as compared
to corresponding period of last year.
Action Taken
            Noted.
Recommendations ( Para  21.2   )
   DSP management guided by management by objectives
            The Committee is pleased to note that DSP’s
production and other related activities such as R&D projects, capital repairs, raw-material procurement are being carried
out as per internal improvement targets and Annual Performance Plan (APP) as envisaged in the Memorandum of
Understanding signed between DSP and SAIL on the one hand and SAIL and Ministry of Steel on the other.
 
 
Action Taken
            Noted.
 
 
 
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE HAS NOT
ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY OF STEEL
 
Recommendations ( Para   2.2  ) 
 
DSP’s Accumulated losses
 
            The Committee is constrained to express its concern over the DSP’s accumulated loss (to the tune of  Rs.4046.00
crore) but at the same time hopes that since its has started to harness the benefits of modernisation, the company would
be able to come out of the red.  DSP Management may chalk out a special action plan in order to mitigate the
accumulated loss.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/112threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:01]
 
 
Action Taken
            DSP has started earning cash profit since 2000-01 harnessing the benefit of modernisation.  The plant has
projected a net profit in the 2nd half of 2002-03.
Further recommendations
 
            While  the Committee is pleased to note that DSP has projected a net profit in the 2 nd  half of 2002-03,  but the
Committee would have been in a better position to assess the financial performance of DSP, had the Ministry of Steel
furnished in its Action Taken Note  the details of performance  of DSP in the recent month and the basis  of conjectures 
on which DSP has  projected  a  net profit in the  2nd  half of 2002-03.
 
            But  what the Committee exactly wanted was  the  chalking out a special action plan in order to mitigate the
accumulated  loss  which has accounted to the tune of Rs.4046.00 crore .  The Ministry of  Steel  remained short of
furnishing the  detailed replies.
 
 
Recommendations ( Para 5.2.3    )  
 
Major Facilities
 
The Committee, while noting the results of modernisation, recommends  that DSP management would leave no
stones unturned to make optimum utilisation of facilities.
 
Action Taken
   DSP management is making all efforts to make optimum utilisation of facilities.
Further recommendations
 
            The Committee would like to know the details of efforts and the Monitoring  mechanism  ensuring the optimum
utilization of facilities available in DSP in post  modernisation phases .  That is so because  it is only after optimum
utilization  of facilities the plant may improve  upon it physical and financial performance  and   only then the plant
would   be   in a position to mitigate  its  accumulated losses, the Committee believes.
 
Recommendations ( Para 6.8    )  
 
Time Over-run & Reasons
 
The Committee feels that there may be variety of reasons for time over-run in the implementation of
modernisation projects.  Some of the reasons might be  beyond the control of management but the fact remains that lack
of Management by Objective also contributed to time over-run.  The Committee feels that the then management failed
to act promptly in right direction.  There was a definite lacunae in the managerial supervision and direction, the
Committee feels.
 
Action Taken
            DSP modernisation was a mega project with introduction of new technologies.  During its execution, the
packages got delayed due to unexpected/unforeseen site conditions, shut down problems, etc. which had to be tackled
without hindering the production of the plant, planning, close coordination and monitoring of the project at all levels
including DSP, SAIL and Ministry of Steel were done to ensure the slippage is minimum.  However, SAIL has taken
steps to improve its project implementation system to prevent any such recurrence.
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/112threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:01]
Further recommendations
 
            The Committee is not in argeement with the logic of Ministry of Steel these the implementing of  modernisation
procress in DSP got delayed because DSP  modernisation was a major project and because of unexpected/unforeseen
site  condition, shut down problem,  etc.  It  is   an open secret   that all pre-cautionary measures on the part of DSP
management, SAIL and the Ministry  of Steel  to  avoid   the time –over-run failed miserably.  What  the  Committee
wanted to know was the part played by managerial inefficiency  in the  implementation  of modernisation  projects. 
The  more sordid state  of affairs is that the three-tier of  monitoring mechanism   i.e.  DSP  management , SAIL and the
Ministry of Steel failed to ensure the timely implementation of modernisation projects.
 
 
Recommendations ( Para  8.2   )  
 
An Enquiry Committee
 
The Committee feels that the examination of Report ( of the Enquiry Committee headed by Shri J.S. Baijal,
former Secretary, Planning Commission) into the delay aspect of implementation of DSP and RSP modernisation
projects of SAIL has been since long pending with the Ministry of Steel for long.  The report is itself suffering from
time over run.  Therefore, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Steel should expedite the process of
examining the said Report and furnish, in the Action Taken Note of the present report, the details of the Enquiry
Committee and the penal action taken against the authority/officials upon whom responsibility has been fixed.
 
Action Taken
            Ministry of Steel has duly examined the Report of the Enquiry Committee.  After due examination of the Report,
Ministry of Steel has decided to get further investigation of certain identified matters done by various agencies
depending upon the issue involved.  Some of the matters have been referred to Central Bureau of Investigation, some to
Chief Vigilance Officer/SAIL, while C&AG has been requested to conduct  a special audit  of other identified matters.
Further recommendations
 
The Committee  is constrained to express its concern over the delaying  of the Ministry of Steel in examining the
Report ( of the enquiry Committee headed by Shri J.S. Baijal, Former Secretary, Planning Commission) on the delay
aspect of  implementation of DSP and RSP modernisation
Recommendations ( Para 14.2   )  
SWOT Analysis 
            The Committee desired that DSP Management should make all out efforts to capitalize on its strength and should
avail all opportunities knocking at its door at the first instance.  The Committee is of the view that since the
modernisation process has injected sufficient resilience in the working and operation system of DSP, the management
should chalk out concrete steps to combat all weaknesses that come in way of the company’s  better physical and
financial performance.  The Committee further hopes that the DSP management would analyse threats to DSP and take
timely steps to face them.
Action Taken
            Steps have been taken for improving both labour productivity and systems & procedures to augment production
and improve working results.
Further recommendation
 
                        The Committee is pleased to note that the DSP management and  Ministry of Steel has   taken  steps for
improving the    labour productivity and system  and procedures to  augment production and improve working  results,

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/112threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:01]
but the Committee , at the same time , would like to know as to what steps have been taken  and the outcome of the
steps so  taken.
 
Recommendations ( Para  16.4 )  
 
Surplus Manpower
 
            The Committee is of the view that the key element of Human Resources Planning is the determination of right
size of manpower.  Surplus manpower only adds to the cost of production, therefore, optimum manpower strength in a
company is the first and foremost concern of an enterprise.  The Committee is pleased to note that DSP management has
chalked out a proper Human Resource Programme, whereby it has been decided to optimize its manpower from existing
strength of 20, 431 to 14, 456 by 31 st March, 2003.  The Committee recommends that DSP management should carry
out the programme of right sizing of manpower within the stipulated time and approach the Government for financial
assistance for reducing manpower.
 
Action Taken   
 
Manpower of DSP as on 31.3.2002 was 19641 and as on 31.8.2002 is 18731.  The planned ending manpower for
the year 2002-03 is 18399.    
 
DSP has further planned to reduce manpower and has already made plan for 31.3.2004, 31.3.2005 and
31.3.2006.  Plan for 2006-07 and 2007-08 is to be prepared shortly.  The following is the manpower plan for next three
years :-
Year Manpower
31-3-2004 16904
31-3-2005 15394
31-3-2006 14420
 
            Manpower levels planned earlier to be attained by 2002-03 are unlikely to be achieved mainly due to lack of
fund availability for VRS.
 
 
Further Recommendation
 
            While the Committee was pleased to note in the (89
th) Report that the DSP management had chalked  out a 
proper human resource programme ( whereby DSP  had decided to optimize its  manpower from existing strengtj  pf
20,431  to 14,456 by 31st march, 2003 however, the Committee expresses  its anguish  for the   Ministry of Steel for  not
adhering  to attain the manpower levels  by 2002-03 due to    lack of fund availability for  VRS.  The Committee had
desired  that  DSP   management  should have chalked out the programme  of  rightsizing of manpower  within the
stipulated time and  approved the Government for financial assistance  for  reducing  the manpower.  And  it   is  now
that the Ministry of steel is advocating  that the Human Resource Programme  chalked out earlier to be attained by
2002-03 are unlikely to be  achieved  mainly  due to  lack of fund  availability for VRS.  The question   arises  whether
the issue  of lack of availability  of fund for VRS was raised by DSP management at the   SAIL  corporate  level and if
so, whatever SAIL approached the Ministry for the required  amount  and if so, whether  the Ministry of Steel has
approached the Ministry of Finance and if the answer is in negative  at any stage, the Committee  would like to know
the   reasons therefor. 
 
            The Committee recommends  that the Ministry of Steel should not only facilitate   the Steel PSUs but it should
also have overall  supervision in the implementation of programmes/projects, as Human Resource Programmes in the 
present case of DSP.
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/112threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:01]
Recommendations ( Para 17.9    )  
 
            Central Marketing Organisation (CMO)
 
            The Committee understands that CMO, with Head Quarters at Kolkata, has an elaborate structural arrangement
for marketing SAIL’s product but CMO would lose its relevance unless its role is recognised and felt in improving the
marketing share of SAIL’s plant here at DSP.  The Committee feels that, CMO’s Head Quarter being in Kolkata, it can
play pivotal role in promoting DSP’s product.
 
Action Taken
            Noted.
 
Further Recommendations
 
            The Committee wanted to know as  to what extent the  elaborate structural arrangement of `Central Marketing
Organization’ (CMO), with Head Quarters at  Kolkata, for marketing SAIL’s  product, is playing its role in prompting
DSP’s product   and improving  the market share of SAIL.   The mere  expression of `noted’   does not convey the 
extent of seriousness  with which the recommendation of the  Committee has been taken by the Government.
 
 
CHAPTER –( IV)
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
OF STEEL HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED.
 
 
Recommendations ( Para 5.3.2   )
 
Strategy and status of Implementation
 
The Committee is constrained to express its concern that the delay caused in implementation of modernisation package
led to time and cost over run.  Almost all packages suffered time over-run.
 
Action Taken
 
No comments.
 
Recommendations ( Para 5.4.2    )  
 
Steps taken for timely completion
 
            The Committee feels that steps taken for timely completion of modernisation package proved inefficient and
ineffective as the modernisation projects suffered from time and cost over-run.
 
Action Taken
No comments.
 
Recommendations ( Para  7.4   )  
Cost Over-run & Reasons
 
The Committee is constrained to express its anguish over the fact that the modernization of Durgapur Steel Plant
was approved in February 89 by the Government at an estimated cost of Rs. 2668 crore with FE component of Rs. 785
crore (Base date: 3
rd Quarter,1988).  The revised cost estimate of DSP modernization works out to Rs. 5074.71
nd

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/112threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:01]
crore(FE: 1375.42 crore) on base date of 2   Quarter, 1999.  As per Government’s approval, the project was to be
completed by March, 1993.  The modernization has been completed in March 98 with an overall delay of 60 months.
 
Action Taken
            No comments.
 
Recommendations ( Para 7.5    )  
 
Reasons for cost over-run
 
The Committee notes that reasons for cost over-run  are mainly due to increase in volume of work, inclusion of
new items, price escalation, exchange rate variation, increase in duties & taxes and increased in interest payments due
to change in mode of financing.
 
Action Taken
No comments.
 
Recommendations ( Para 14.6    )
 
Recent signs of improvement in the steel market and price
            The Committee hopes that with the recent signs of improvement in the steel market and price hike, DSP would
be in a better position to compete in the market.
 
Action Taken
            Noted.
Recommendations ( Para 15.2    )  
Research And Development Projects                       
            The Committee understands the importance of R&D project in removing technical problems in steel plants.  The
Committee is happy to note that R&D projects in DSP has helped in improving productivity, developing product-mix
and reduction in the cost of production and energy consumption.  The Committee recommends that DSP management
should have appropriate and sufficient fund for R&D projects.
 
Action Taken
            Noted.
Recommendations ( Para 21.3   ) 
 
Objectives as set in MOU
 
            The Committee hopes that DSP management, while striving to achieve the objectives as set in MOU signed
between DSP and SAIL and Ministry of Steel; would ensure that all the targets are set in MOU are being achieved in
time.  The Committee further expects that SAIL and the Ministry of Steel would regularly monitor the management of
DSP’s activities for better performance of the Plant.  MOU system must act as a catalyst to the improved physical and
financial performance of the Company.
 
Action Taken
            Efforts are being made to achieve objectives set in MOU and the performance of the Plant is also being
monitored.       
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/112threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:01]
CHAPTER (V)
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE
 
 
Recommendations ( Para   2.2  )  
 
Financial Performance of DSP
 
            While  the Committee is pleased to note that DSP has projected a net profit in the 2 nd  half of 2002-03,  but the
Committee would have been in a better position to assess the financial performance of DSP, had the Ministry of Steel
furnished in its Action Taken Note  the details of performance  of DSP in the recent month and the basis  of conjectures 
on which DSP has  projected  a  net profit in the  2nd  half of 2002-03.
 
            But  what the Committee  wanted exactly was  the DSP management checking but a special action plan in order
to mitigate the accumulated  loss  which has accounted to the tune of Rs.4046.00 crore .  The Ministry of  Steel 
remained short of furnishing the  detailed replies.
 
 
Recommendations ( Para 5.2.3    )  
 
Major Facilities
 
            The Committee would like to know the details of efforts and the Monitairing  mechanism  ensuring the optimum
utilization of facilities available in DSP in past  modernisation phases .  That is so because  it is only after optimum
utilization  of facilities the plant may improve  upon it physical and financial performance  out  only them the plant
would   be   in a position to mitigate  its  accumulated loss, the committee believes.
 
Recommendations ( Para 6.8    )  
 
Time Over-run & Reasons
 
            The Committee is not in argument  with the  logic  of Ministry of Steel these the implementing of  modernisation
progress in DSP got delayed because DSP  modernisation was a major project and because of unexpected/unforeseen
site,   condition, start down problem,  etc.  In is   an open scret   that all pre-cautionary measures on the past of DSP
management, SAIL and the Ministry    of Steel of avoid   the time –over-run failed miserably.  What  the  Committee
wanted to know was the part played by managerial inefficiency  lack of implementation  of modernisation  projects. 
The  more sordid state  of affairs is that the three-tier of  monitoring mechanism  i.e.  DSP  management , SAIL and the
Ministry of Steel failed to ensure the timely implementation of modernisation projects. This is  pathetic.
 
 
Recommendations ( Para  8.2   )  
 
Further recommendations
                       
                         An Enquiry Committee
                         The Committee  is constrained to express its concern over the delaying  of the Ministry of Steel in
examining the Report ( of the enquiry Committee headed by Shri J.S. Baijal, Former Secretary, Planning
Commission) on the delay aspect of  implementation of DSP and RSP modernisation.
 
Recommendations ( Para 14.2   )  
Improving the   labour productivity and system 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/112threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:01]
 
            The Committee is pleased to note that the DSP management and  Ministry of Steel has   taken  steps for
improving the    labour productivity and system  and procedures to  augment production and improve working  results,
but the Committee , at the same time , would like to know as to what steps have been taken  and the outcome of the
steps so  taken.
 
 
Recommendations ( Para  16.4   )  
Proper Human Resource Programme
 
            While the Committee was pleased to note in the (89
th) Report that the DSP management had chalked  out a 
proper human resource programme ( whereby DSP  had decided to optimize its  manpower from existing strengtj  pf
20,431  to 14,456 by 31st march, 2003 however, the Committee expresses  its anguish  for the   Ministry of Steel for  not
adhering  to attain the manpower levels  by 2002-03 due to    lack of fund availability for  VRS.  The Committee had
desired  that  DSP   management  should have contained out the programme  of  rightsizing of manpower  within the
stipulated time and  approved the Government for financial assistance  for  reducing  the manpower.  And  it   is  now
that the Ministry of steel is advocating  that the Human Resource Programme  chalked out earlier to be attained by
2002-03 are unlikely to be  achieved  mainly  due to  lack of fund  availability for VRS.  The question   arises  whether
the issue  of lack of availability  of fund for VRS was raised by DSP management at the   SAIL  corporate  level and if
so, whatever SAIL approached the Ministry for the required  amount  and if so, whether  the Ministry of Steel has
approached the Ministry of Finance and if the answer is in negative  at any stage, the Committee  would like to know
the   reasons therefore. 
 
            The Committee recommends  that the Ministry of Steel should not only facilitate   the Steel PSUs but it should
also have overall  supervision in the implementation of programmes/projects, as Human Resource Programmes in the 
present case of DSP.
 
Recommendations ( Para 17.9    ) 
 
Central Marketing Organization’ (CMO),
 
            The Committee wanted to know as  to what extent the  elaborate structural arrangement of `Central Marketing
Organization’ (CMO), with Head Quarters at  Kolkata, for marketing SAIL’s  product, is playing its role in prompting
DSP’s product   and improving  the market share of SAIL.   The mere  expression of `noted’   does not convey the 
extent of seriousness  with which the recommendation of the  Committee has been taken by the Government.
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING
TENTH MEETING
X - 115, 117, 118
 
            The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday the 6 th May, 2003 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
1.                  Dr. P.C. Alexander  --  Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.                  Prof. M.M. Aggarwal
3.                  Dr. M.N. Das
4.                  Shri Faguni Ram
5.                  Shri Lajpat Rai

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/112threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:01]
6.                  Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
7.                  Shri P.K. Maheshwari
8.                  Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
9.                  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
10.              Shri K. Chandran Pillai
 
LOK SABHA
 
11.              Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
12.              Shri Francis George
13.              Shri A.C. Jose
14.              Shri Manjay Lal
15.              Shri A Narendra
16.              Shri Ananta Nayak
17.              Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
18.              Shri V. Vertiselvan
19.              Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari
 
SECRETARIAT
           
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
            Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
            Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
            Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
 
2.                  At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee.
 
 
3.                  The Committee then took up the following draft Report for its consideration:-
(i)     111th Report on Operational Efficiency and Survival of Alloy Steel Plant (ASP), Durgapur (Ministry of
Steel)
(ii)    114th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Eighty-
third Reort on MOU system in Allied Sector PSEs Pertaining to the Department of Heavy Industries
and P8ublic Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises)
(iii)  115th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendation Contained in the
Committee’s Eighty-first Report on Sickness in SSI Sector of Cement Industry in Uttar Pradesh
(Ministry of Small Scale Industries)
(iv)  116th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendation Contained in the
Committee’s Eighty-second Report on MOU System in Strategic Sector PSEs Pertaining to the
Department of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises.
(v)   117th Report on Demands for Grants (2003-2004) Pertaining to the Ministry of Small Scale Industries.
(vi)  118th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendation Contained in the Ninetieth
Report on ‘Sickness in SSI Sector in the city of Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh (Ministry of Small Scale
Industries).
(vii)119th Report on Demands for Grants (2003-2004) pertaining to the Department of Public Enterprises
(Ministry of Small Scale Industries).
(viii)           120th Report on Demands for Grants (2003-2004) pertaining to the Department of Heavy Industries
(Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises)
(ix)  121st Report on Action Taken by the Government on Recommendation Contained in the Committee’s
Hundredth Report on Performance Review of National Mineral Development Corporation (Ministry
of Steel).

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/112threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:01]
(x)   122nd Report on Demands for Grants (2003-2004) pertaining to the Ministry of Steel.
(xi)  123rd Report on Demands for Grants (2003-2004) pertaining to the Ministry of Mines.
(xii)124th Report on Demands for Grants (2003-2004) pertaining to the Ministry of Agro and Rural
Industries.
(xiii)           125th Report on Implementation Status of Modernisation Expansion and financial-cum-Business
Restructuring Programmes of SAIL at a Glance (Ministry of  Steel).
(xiv)           126th Report on Revival of nagaland Pulp and paper Company (Ministry of Heavy Industries and
Public Enterprises).
4.                  The Chairman requested the Members to give any suggestion or change in the Report, if required.  After a
brief discussion the Reports were adopted.
5.                  The Chairman nominated Prof. M.M. Aggarwal and in his absence Shri Khan Gufran Zahidi, Members
Rajya Sabha to present these reports to the Rajya Sabha.  He also nominated Dr. B.B. Ramaiah and in his
absence Shri A.C. Jose, Members Lok Sabha to present these reports in the Lok Sabha on 8th May, 2003.
 
The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M.
 