154th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/154threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:23]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY -FOURTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
COMMITTEE'S 129TH REPORT ON CREDIT
FLOW TO SSI SECTOR IN THE REGIONS OF DELHI,
NOIDA AND GHAZIABAD
(MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES)
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 16TH DECEMBER, 2004)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 16TH DECEMBER, 2004)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2004/AGRAHAYANA, 1926 (SAKA)
E-mail : rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------
CONTENTS
            1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
            2. COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE-IV
            3. INTRODUCTION
            4. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
            5. OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE—AT A
GLANCE
            6. MINUTES
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
(Date of Constitution - 1st January 2003)
     1.   Dr. P.C. Alexander----Chairman
           RAJYA SABHA
     2.   Prof. M.M. Agarwal
     3.   Shri Jayantilal Barot
     4.   Dr. M.N. Das
     5.   Shrimati Saroj Dubey
     6.   Dr. Faguni Ram
     7.   Shri Lajpat Rai
     8.   Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
     9.   Shri P.K. Maheshwari
   10.   Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
   11.   Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy

154th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/154threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:23]
   12.   Shri S. Sivasubramanian
   13.   Shrimati Sushree Devi
   14.   Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
   15.   Shri K. Chandran Pillai
           LOK SABHA
   16.   Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
   17.   Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
   18.   Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
   19.   Shri Nepal Chandra Das
   20.   Shri K Francis George
   21.   Shri Thomas Hansda
   22.   Md. Anwarul Haque
   23.   Shri A.C. Jose
   24.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
   25.   Shri Mansoor Ali Khan
   26.   Shri Sunil Khan
   27.   Shri Deepak Kumar
   28.   Shri Manjay Lal
   29.   Dr. K. Malaisamy
   30.   Shri A. Narendra
   31.   Shri Ananta Nayak
   32.   Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
   33.   Shri Uttamrao Patil
   34.   Shri Malyala Rajaiah
   35.   Shri P. Rajendran
   36.   Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
   37.   Shri Tarachand Sahu
   38.   Shri Ramanand Singh
   39.   Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
   40.   Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
   41.   Shri V. Vetriselvan
   42.   Shrimati D.M. Vijaya Kumari
   43.   Shri Radha Mohan Singh
   44.   Shri Vijay Sankeshwar
 
           SECRETARIAT
           Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
           Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
           Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
           Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
           Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Date of Constitution - 5th August, 2004)
     1.   Shri Santosh Bagrodia   ----       Chairman
           RAJYA SABHA
     2.   Prof. M.M. Agarwal
     3.   Shri Surendra Lath
     4.   Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
     5.   Dr. K. Malaisamy
     6.   Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
     7.   Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
     8.   Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
     9.   Dr. Vijay Mallya
   10.   Shrimati Vanga Geetha
           LOK SABHA
   11.   Shri Guharam Ajgalle

154th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/154threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:23]
   12.   Shri Kailash Baitha
   13.   Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
   14.   Shri Subhash Deshmukh
   15.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
   16.   Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria
   17.   Shri Sunil Khan
   18.   Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato
   19.   Shri Prakash Paranjpe
   20.   Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel
   21.   Shri Rajnarayan
   22.   Shri Bagida Ramakrishna
   23.   Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
   24.   Shrimati Rubab Sayeda
   25.   Shri Rana Gurjeet Singh
   26.   Shri Manvendra Singh
   27.   Shri Ganesh Singh
   28.   Shri Suraj Singh
   29.   Shri Chandramani Tripathi
   30.   Shri Girdhari Yadav
   31.   Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
           SECRETARIAT
           Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
           Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
           Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
           Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
           Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE-IV FOR ACTION TAKEN REPORT
     1.   Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato  —  Convenor
           RAJYA SABHA
     2.   Prof. M.M. Agarwal
     3.   Dr. Vijay Mallya
     4.   Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
     5.   Dr. K. Malaisamy
           RAJYA SABHA
     6.   Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria
     7.   Shri Sunil Khan
     8.   Shri Suraj Singh
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTRODUCTION
         I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having been authorised
by the Committee, hereby present this One Hundred Fifty-fourthReport on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Committee's 129th Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in the Regions of Delhi,
Noida and Ghaziabad.
2.      The Committee examined and considered the Action Taken Notes supplied by the Government (Ministry of Small
Scale Industries) on the recommendations contained in its 129 th Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in the Regions of
Delhi, Noida and Ghaziabad.
3.      The Sub-Committee-IV for the Action Taken Reports at its meeting held on 8 th December, 2004 considered and
adopted the Report.
4.      The Committee at its meeting held on 9th December, 2004 considered and adopted the Report.     
NEW DELHI;
9th December, 2004
SANTOSH BAGRODIA
Chairman,

154th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/154threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:23]
Department-related Parliamentary Standing
 Committee on Industry.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
REPORT
          The Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry deals with the Action
Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s 129 th Report on the Credit Flow to
SSI Sector in the Regions of Delhi, Noida and Ghaziabad pertaining to the Ministry of Small Scale Industries. The said
Report was presented to Rajya Sabha on the 19 th August, 2003 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 21 st August,
2003.
2.       Action Taken Notes were received from the Government in respect of the recommendations contained in the
129th Report. They have been categorized as follows:
          (i)    Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Government: 5.4, 5.9 and 5.13. (Chapter-
I).
          (ii)    Recommendations/Observations, which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies: 5,1, 5.5, 5.6, 5.8, 5.11, 5.12, 5.15 and 5.16 (Chapter-II). 
          (iii)   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted the replies of the
Government: 5.2, 5.3, 5.10 and 5.14 (Chapter-III).
          (iv)   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of theGovernment have not been received: 5.7
(Chapter-IV).
          (v)   Observations/Recommendations at a Glance (Chapter-V). The Committee is pleased to observe that the
Ministry of Small Scale Industries has accepted its recommendations as mentioned in Chapter-I of the Report.
4.       In respect of recommendations made in Para 5.12, 5.15 and 5.16 in Chapter-II the Committee is convinced with
the logic and explanation advocated by the Ministry of Small Scale Industries and therefore does not want to pursue
further.
5.       The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of recommendation contained in Chapter-III
and therefore the Committee desires that the Ministry of Small Scale Industries should furnish logical explanation in
respect of these recommendations.
6.       In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV, the Ministry of Small Scale Industries has either furnished
the interim replies or couched its language in vague terms like noted for compliance guidance, therefore, the Committee
desires that the Ministry of Small Scale Industries should furnish Action Taken Notes in respect of recommendations
categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the
Committee.
7.       The details of the Action Taken is being discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.

154th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/154threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:23]
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
1.1     Regular Flow of Funds for SSIs
1.1.1  Observation/Recommendation
          In order to ensure that there is no let up in the regular flow of funds for SSIs, the Committee recommends that
there should be enhancement in the quantum of composite loans; removal of procedural difficulties in the path of SSI
advances; sorting out issues relating to mortgages of land including removal of stamp duty and permitting equitable
mortgages, allowing access to low-cost funds to Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) for refinancing
SSI loans.(Para 5.4)
1.1.2  Action Taken/Comments
          In the review meeting of the Standing Advisory Committee held on 2 nd June, 2003, the banks had agreed to
enhance the limit of composite loan from Rs. 25 lakh to Rs. 50 lakh. Accordingly, a majority of the Public Sector Banks
have since issued necessary instructions regarding enhancing composite loan limit for SSIs to Rs.50 lakh. As regards,
removal of procedural difficulties for SSI advances, apart from simplification of loan applications and simplification in
procedure for computation of working capital on the basis of 20 per cent of the projected annual turnover, the RBI has
laid down time limits to ensure timely disbursement of loans stipulating that all loan applications upto Rs. 25,000/-
should be disposed off within two weeks and in other cases for loans up to Rs. 5 lakh within a period of four weeks,
provided the loan applications are complete in all respects. As already indicated, removal of stamp duty on land
mortgages, etc. come under the purview of the respective State Governments. For allowing access to low cost funds to
SIDBI for refinancing SSI loans, SIDBI is constantly pursuing with the Ministry of Finance, Government of India.
Recently, the Hon’ble Finance Minister has made an announcement regarding creation of a Small and Medium
Enterprises (SME) Fund of Rs. 10,000 crore by SIDBI for making available credit to small and medium enterprises at
200 basis points below PLR.
1.2     Soft Loans to SSIs
1.2.1  Observation/Recommendation
          The Government has specifically targeted the core issue of providing soft loans to SSIs, at lower rates of interest
to ensure the viability and make them most market insistent for their sustainability. The Committee recommends that the
Public sector banks should be advised to strictly follow the guidelines of the Government of India, Ministry of Finance
and Reserve Bank of India in regard to increasing SSI sector advance and facilitating industrial growth. The Committee
opines that flagrant violation of such directions/guidelines should be made penal offence.                                               
(Para 5.9)
1.2.2  Action Taken/Comments
          The Bank rate changes by the RBI combined with Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) and repo rate changes have
emerged as signalling device for interest rate changes The reduction in Bank rate announced in the statements on
Monetary and Credit Policy or outside the policy from time to time has resulted in a consequential reduction in the
lending rates. Banks have now the flexibility to offer lending rates on a fixed rate or on a floating rate. The reduction in
interest rates and the offer of floating rates will help the SSI units to procure funds at lower costs than what was
prevailing in earlier years. Banks have been advised that they may set the interest rate on advances to SSI sector keeping
in view prevailing general southward movement in interest rates. Furthermore, as per the announcement made by the
Hon’ble Finance Minister in the Union Budget 2003-04, banks are also required to adopt the interest rate band of 2 per
cent above and below their respective Prime Lending Rates (PLRs) for secured advances. Further, as per the decision
arrived at the meeting of the Standing Advisory Committee, banks have been advised that they may examine having at
least 3 slabs for rate of interest for advances up to Rs. 50,000, between Rs. 50,000 to Rs.2 lakh and above Rs. 2 lakh.
1.3     Role of RBI for ensuring smooth Credit Flow to SSI Sector
1.3.1  Observation/Recommendation
          The Committee has indicated the commendable role of RBI for ensuring smooth credit flow to SSI sector. The
RBI setup the Nayak Committee in 1991 to advise upon the aspects of adequacy and timeliness of credit to SSI. In its
report submitted in September, 1992, the Committee suggested to implement the several recommendations such as
granting of working capital credit to SSI units to be computed on basis of a minimum of 20 per cent of their projected

154th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/154threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:23]
annual turnover; giving preference to village industries, tiny industries and other small scale units while meeting credit
requirement sector; extension of Single Window Scheme of SBI to all districts; avoidance of delay in sanctioning and
disbursement of credit to SSI sector; non-insistence on compulsory deposit as a quid-pro-quo for sanctioning the credit
limit, opening of specialized branches; identification of sick units and urgent action to put them on the nursing
programme, the standardized loan application forms to be used by SSI units; imparting of necessary training to Bank
staff to handle the SSI clients. The Committee impress upon the Government that the recommendations of the Nayak
Committee should be adhered to by all the Banks.           (Para 5.13)
1.3.2  Action Taken/Comments
          The RBI has informed that the banks have been advised time and again for adhering to the stipulated norms for
computing working capital on the basis of Nayak Committee recommendations. It has also been clarified to the banks
that the norm of 20 per cent of the projected annual turnover is the minimum limit and that the banks are free to sanction
higher working capital limits at their discretion to SSIs requiring aggregate fund based capital upto Rs. 5 crore from the
banking sector. The banks are also required to arrive at a realistic projection of the turnover based on proper evaluation
of the past trends and future business prospects. Based on the deliberations at the meeting of Standing Advisory
Committee on SSI, banks have been again advised reiterating the instructions on computation of working capital limits.
The RBI has also advised the banks to extend their reach to the SSI sector by bringing in increasing number of tiny units
presently outside the banking reach, within the ambit of bank finance.
1.3.3  The RBI’s studies of Specialised SSI branches as also a few general branches (where sizeable advances are for
SSIs) revealed that banks were adhering to norms of Nayak Committee.

154th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/154threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:23]
CHAPTER -II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE
IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
2.1     Measures for Enabling SSI Units to have access to Bank Finance
2.1.1  Observation/Recommendation
          The Committee strongly feels that the Government should undertake following measures for enabling SSI units to
have access to bank finance:----
          (i)     To infuse customer friendly approach, undertaking of orientation course and adequate training for staff /
officers of commercial banks for a change in their attitude on lending to SSI sector;
          (ii)     Elimination of plethora of rules and requirements and thereby simplification of procedures for obtaining
credit from Banks. Arrangement may be made for land mortgage instead of stamp duty for enabling SSI units
to obtaining credit from bank against land mortgage;
          (iii)    Paternalistic Government umbrella for development of services through appropriate policy
prescription/legislative changes to ease the problems relating to stamp duty, registration;
          (iv)    Recapitalisation and revamping of State Financial Corporation (SFCs) with the help of SIDBI and IDBI
enabling SFCs to lend fixed capital to SSI units.
                                                                                                                                                      (Para 5.1)
2.1.2  Action Taken/Comments
          Regular training programmes are organized by the banks for infusing-customer friendly approach among the bank
officials. Furthermore, in pursuance to the decisions taken at the meeting of the Department Related Parliamentary
Committee held with the officials of banks/financial institutions during its study visit to Mumbai in June, 2001, RBI has
advised all the banks to conduct entrepreneurship development training programmes and also give exhaustive training to
their staff members for sensitizing them towards the needs of the SSI sector. The feedback received from the banks
reveals that several steps have been taken by banks in this regard.
          (i)     The application forms for loans have been made simple based on the Nayak Committee recommendations
and there is continuous endeavour to simplify the procedure further Computation of credit needs has also
been made simple by computing it on the basis of 20 per cent of the projected annual turnover in respect of
loans upto Rs. 5 crore. The banks have also been advised in July, 2001 that an effective monitoring system
may be put in place for capturing the entire process of sanctioning of loan i.e. from the initial stage of receipt
of application to the final stage of sanction or rejection, as the case may be. The issue concerning exemption
of stamp duty on land mortgage comes under the purview of respective State Governments, as ‘mortgage’
falls in the State List under the Constitution of India. SIDBI generally creates mortgage by deposit of title
deeds as a security for providing the financial assistance to SSI units. Mortgage by deposit of title deeds does
not attract any stamp duty in the Union Territory of Delhi. In Noida and Ghaziabad, which fall in the State of
Uttar Pradesh, stamp duty @ ½ per cent of the amount secured subject to a maximum of Rs. 10,000/- is
payable in such cases.
          (ii)     As explained above, the stamp duty on land mortgage is a State subject. Similarly, administrative changes
to ease the process of registration and payment of stamp duties also fall within the domain of the State
Governments.
          (iii)    The Government in consultation with Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) has formulated
a financial package for State Financial Corporations (SFCs). According to this package, SIDBI will provide
the following reliefs and concessions to SFCs:----                                                               
                      (a)    Interest on all outstanding loans of SFCs will be reduced by 2 per cent;
                      (b)    A rebate of 2 per cent in the rate of interest will be provided by SIDBI for all future refinance; and
                      (c)    A moratorium of one year shall be given for repayment of existing dues. The effective
implementation of these reliefs and concessions necessitate commensurate measures by State
Governments and SFCs. The package entails signing of MOUs by the State Government and SFCs
with SIDBI. It is expected that the above restructuring of the refinance portfolio of SIDBI for SFCs
would improve their viability and enable them to meet the needs of SSI sector.
2.2     Study the viability of SSI Bank Units
2.2.1  Observation/Recommendation
          The Committee is of the opinion that there is a strong need for a mechanism which could study the viability of

154th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/154threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:23]
SSI units. The Committee suggests that an independent agency needs to be set up. This agency should also make
available the credit rating of the SSIs. The Committee therefore, directs the Ministry of SSI to look into this issue and
take necessary steps.(Para 5.5)
2.2.2  Action Taken/Comments
          The Group of Ministers on SSI had decided that RBI should draw up revised, detailed, transparent and non-
discretionary guidelines for the rehabilitation of sick and potentially viable SSI units. Accordingly, the RBI constituted a
Working Group under the Chairmanship of Shri S.S. Kohli, the then Chairman of IBA. Based on the recommendations
of the Working Group, the RBI issued revised guidelines for the rehabilitation of sick and potentially viable SSI units on
16th January, 2002. The revised guidelines contain suitable measures to study viability of SSI unit by the individual
financing banks. As regards credit rating of the SSIs, Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) has been
working on a suitable model. The National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) is also working on a Rating Scheme for
Small Industries to be implemented through them.
2.3     Tax Relief on Income of individuals
2.3.1  Observation/Recommendation
          In order to boost the credit flow, the Committee feels that the Government should consider the tax relief on
income of individuals who make an investment in SSIs in the form of deposit in those units.                              (Para 5.6)
2.3.2  Action Taken/Comments
          The Ministry of Finance has undertaken reform in Direct Taxation over the last decade. The general direction of
these reforms is towards reducing the deductions/exemptions and thereby reducing general tax rates. Accordingly, new
tax concessions are not contemplated. However, the Income-tax Act already provides for a variety of fiscal incentives
for industrial activity, including SSIs. These concessions include a tax holiday for Undertakings set up in Backward
States and Districts, a tax holiday for Undertakings set up in certain special category States such as the North­-Eastern
States and Himachal Pradesh and Uttaranchal, a tax holiday for Undertakings engaged in the business of operating cold
chain and storage facilities, marketing and handling of Food grains, a Tax holiday for units in Special Economic Zones
and 100 per cent Export Oriented Units, etc. In addition, loans to SSI already get a preferential treatment over equity as
unlike dividends, interest payable by SSIs on Deposits made with it is fully allowable as a Tax-deductible expense in the
bands of the SSI.
2.4     Tax Exemptions
2.4.1  Observation/Recommendation
          The Committee further tells that tax exemptions may be allowed up to Rs. 2 lakhs with a view to motivate them to
show profits in their balance sheets and have enough cash flow to pay instalments of loans or upgrade the plant and
machinery. After 2 lakhs, there should be slabs of 10 per cent, 20 per cent and 25 per cent as corporate tax. This will
certainly give strength to SSI units to meet the challenges of the competitive
market.                                                              (Para 5.8)
2.4.2  Action Taken/Comments
          The Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) have informed that stability of Tax rates has been one of the corner-
stones of Government’s Tax policy. Raising of Taxable limit would not be possible, as it would skew the Tax-rate
structure. The Income-tax Act already provides for a variety of fiscal incentives for Small Scale Industries.
2.5     Recognition and Awards
2.5.1  Observation/Recommendation
          The Committee also recommends that the Industrial Area Manufacturers Associations, in the respective Industrial
areas should be involved to provide inputs regarding outstanding branches/officers for recognition and awards to
individual branches and or individual officers in the branches.
                                                                                                                                                  (Para 5.11)
2.5.2  Action Taken/Comments
          As regards the recommendation of the Committee that the Industrial Area Manufacturers Associations should be
involved to provide inputs regarding outstanding branches/officers for recognition and awards to individual
branches/officers, the RBI is of the view that it may not be appropriate to introduce such rewarding systems depending

154th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/154threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:23]
on the performance of SSI sector alone.
2.6     Ground of rejection of Loan Application
2.6.1  Observation/Recommendation
          As regards the rejection, the Committee recommends that if any proposal from SSI Sector is rejected, or not
entertained by any Bank Manager then
          (i)     the applicant should be informed in writing of the reasons for rejection and also the suggestions for
submission of the complete and valid application;
          (ii)     the rejection decision should be ratified by the next higher authority at the Zonal/Regional office.
                                                                                                                                                    (Para 5.12)
2.6.2  Action Taken/Comments
          The RBI has informed that instructions already exist in this regard which are reiterated to the banks from time to
time.
2.7     Proper Bankruptcy Laws
2.7.1  Observation/Recommendation
          In India, there are no proper bankruptcy laws. The process of restructuring and winding of companies is totally
ineffective and counterproductive. By the time, enterprises are declared sick, it is too late for restructuring. The
enterprise promoters get enough time to tunnel out all the assets leaving workers and creditors high and dry. In view of
the present situation, the Committee strongly recommends that a comprehensive bankruptcy law should be enacted
under which if an enterprise misses a payment exceeding hundred thousand rupees, creditors are given the right to take
legal action leading to the filing of bankruptcy by the enterprise. This process will shorten the bureaucratic procedures,
and therefore, provide better protection to workers and
creditors.                                                                                             (Para 5.15)
2.7.2  Action Taken/Comments
          Based on the recommendations of the Committee constituted under the Chairmanship of Justice V. Balakrishan
Eradi (Eradi Committee), Companies Act, 1956 has been amended through Companies (Second Amendment) Act, 2003
with the main objective of facilitating or expediting revival/rehabilitation of sick companies and protection of workers
interests/dues of creditors and where necessary, winding up of companies. Further, Sick Industrial Companies (Special
Provisions) Repeal Act, 2004 has also been passed by the Parliament.
2.8     Modernization Package for Powerlooms
2.8.1  Observation/Recommendation
          The Finance Minister in his Budget speech on the Finance Bill, 2003 stated that “The Government wanted to
totally protect the interest of the small and the self employed weavers and garment manufacturers. The Government had
announced a modernization package for powerlooms. The Government had also announced a financial and technical
package for the modernization of the entire textile industry like the Government had done it for the steel industry”. The
Government also propose to fully exempt from excise duty for unbranded woven and knitted readymade garments upto
the first level of Rs. 25 lakh provided that the annual turnover does not exceed Rs. 30 lakh. Almost 85 per cent of the
garment manufacturers are in this Rs. 20.00 lakh to Rs. 25.00 lakh bracket. Therefore, the Committee is of the view that
this exemption scheme should be extended to garments of rubberized textile fabrics, cotton benching, mosquito nets and
fabrics of mono-filarment.           (Para 5.16)
2.8.2  Action Taken/Comments
          Vide Notification No. 36/2003-CE, dated 30.04.2003, (i) fabrics of monofilament, (ii) rubberized textile fabrics,
and (iii) woven and unprocessed cotton belting, have already been exempted from central excise duty for the first annual
clearance of Rs. 25 lakhs provided that the annual turnover does not exceed Rs. 35 lakh. Vide Notification No. 70/2003-
CE, dated 04.09.2003, mosquito net fabrics have been unconditionally exempted from the whole of the central excise
duty. Further, mosquito nets is covered under the General SSI Excise Exemption Scheme (Notifications No. 8/2003-CE
and No. 9/2003-CE, both dated 1.3.2003).

154th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/154threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:23]
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE HAS NOT
ACCEPTED THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
3.1     Time Limit for Declaring a SSI Units as a Non Performance
3.1.1  Observation/Recommendation
          The Committee is of the opinion that the time limit for declaring a SSI unit as a non performance assets should be
increased taking into consideration the various factors such as delayed payments, blockage of credit flow, corruption,
enactment of Securitization Act etc. which are hindering the growth of small scale industries.            (Para 5.2)
3.1.2  Action Taken/Comments
          In line with the international practices and as per the recommendations made by the Committee on the Financial
System under the Chairmanship of Shri M. Narasimham, the Reserve Bank of India has introduced, in a phased manner,
prudential norms for income recognition, asset classification and provisioning for the advances portfolio of the banks so
as to move towards greater consistency and transparency in the public accounts. The policy of income recognition has to
be objective and based on record of recovery rather than on any subjective considerations. Likewise, the classification of
assets of banks has to be done on the basis of objective criteria, which would ensure a uniform and consistent
application of the norms. Furthermore, the provisioning needs to be made on the basis of the classification of assets
based on the period for which the asset has remained non-performing and the availability of security and the realizable
value thereof.
3.1.3  Further Recommendation
          The Committee appreciates the recommendations of the Committee on Financial System for prudential norms for
income reorganization, assets classification and provisioning for advances portfolio of banks are necessary for greater
consistency and transparency. As the provisioning needs to be made on the basis of classification of assets, the
Committee would like to be apprised of the criteria for prudential norms for income recognition and assest
classification. The Ministry should therefore clarify before the Committee the specific criteria set out to implement the
said norms.
3.2     State of Art Technology Changes
3.2.1  Observation/Recommendation
          The age when technology becomes rapidly obsolete, the cost of making state of art technology changes and of
pioneering areas with the inbuilt axiom, high risk, high return, the Committee observes that the assistance under venture
capital funds has assumed unprecedented importance. Just as the SIDBI’s National Venture Fund for development of
SSIs in software/IT industry in collaboration with Ministry of Information Technology and Government of India and the
Technology Development and Modernisation Fund (TDMF), there should be special Scheme in order to assist SSIs in
other areas. The Committee feels that the Commercial Banks should come forward in launching venture capital funds in
all its ramifications so as to effectively integrate and enhance the opportunities for Small Scale Industries in domestic
and International market. The banks should endeavour to set up more and more venture capital fund not only in
software/IT industry but also for high growth sectors such as bio-technology and food processing inter-alia.  The
Committee feels that Government should come forward to set up Technology Upgradation and Development Banks to
take stock of ground realities of sickness of SSI units due to obsolescence of technology and assist the units by ensuring
credit facilitation at appropriate time and thus save the sick but potentially viable SSI units before dying
out.                                                                                    (Para 5.3)
3.2.2  Action Taken/Comments
          To encourage Venture Capital funding to SSI units, the banks have been advised by the RBI that investment in
venture capital will be eligible for inclusion in priority sector lending. This is subject to the condition that the venture
capital funds/companies are registered with Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI). Further, in the recently held
meeting of the RBI’s Standing Advisory Committee on flow of institutional credit to SSI on 1st September, 2003, one of
the action points that emerged was that the banks should initiate innovative steps for increasing credit flow by means of
promoting Mutual Funds to SSI and venture capital funds, which has been communicated to all banks.
3.2.3  SIDB1 has so far promoted/contributed to 6 all India and 9 Regional Funds. Of these, 9 are IT and Software
dedicated, one is for the auto ancillary sector and 5 are general funds. Canbank Venture Capital Fund III has been set up
in collaboration with Canara Bank on equal sharing basis. Certain commercial banks have also joined hands with SIDBI

154th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/154threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:23]
in promoting APIDC Venture Capital Fund (Andhra Bank and Indian Overseas Bank), Auto Ancillary Fund (UCO
Bank), SARA Fund (Punjab & Sind Bank and ICICI Bank) and SICOM Venture Capital Fund (Ratnakar Bank Ltd. and
United Western Bank Ltd.). Apart from the above, SIDBI has agreed in-principle to contribute Rs.25 crore to the corpus
of SEAF India SME Fund. SIDBI has also agreed to contribute Rs.5 crore for setting up Micro Ventures Innovation
Fund in collaboration with National Innovation Foundation, Ahmedabad. As on date, SIDBI’s aggregate commitments
to the Venture Capital Funds is Rs. 150.13 crore and aggregate disbursements to the tune of Rs 83.36 crore.
3.2.4  SIDBI constituted an in-house team of officials in October, 2000 to look into the modalities of setting up of a
Technology Bank for the SSI. The in-house team submitted its report in March, 2001 on the possible framework of the
proposed Technology Bank. The report was tabled before the Board of Directors of SIDBI, which considered the report
and opined that the matter needed independent study by a reputed consultant. The study has been completed in June
2003 and the consultants have submitted their report, which is being analysed by SIDBI. Based on the report and the
road map outlined by the consultants, further action is being initiated for setting up the Technology Bank.
3.2.5  Further Recommendation
          The Committee observes that assistance under Venture Capital Fund has gained importance and the banks
accordingly have been advised by RBI that investment in the Venture Capital would be eligible for inclusion in priority
sector lending. The contribution made by SIDBI is certainly noteworthy. The Committee gathers an impression that
certain commercial banks are still approaching the SIDBI to join hands in promoting Venture Capital Funds.
          The Committee also takes note of number of funds set up by various banks at all India and regional level. The
Committee appreciates the progress made so far in this regard and feels that a lot more is yet to be done to reach the
desired level. The Committee observes that about half of the aggregate commitments of Venture Capital Funds could be
disbursed so far. The Committee would like to know the reasons for under utilization and also measures taken or being
taken by banks and funding agencies to promote the same. The Committee may also be apprised of the progress being
made by other banks and funding agencies which are, yet, to set up Venture Capital Funds.
          As regards the setting up of Technology Bank for the SSIs the Committee notes from the reply that the study has
already been completed and report is still being analyzed by SIDBI. The Committee feels that about three years have
been taken by the SIDBI since setting up of its In-house Committee for working out the modalities and road map is still
not cleared. The Committee conveys its concern over the delay in this regard. The Committee therefore directs the
Government and the SIDBI to expedite the setting up technology banks as soon as possible.
3.3     Industry Oriented Branches
3.3.1  Observation/Recommendation
          The increased competition has improved the working of various banks. This should be encouraged by opening
more industry oriented branches in the approved industrial areas. The Reserve Bank of India should be requested to
grant more licenses to banks for opening branches in the Industrial areas.
                                                                                                                                                    (Para 5.10)
3.3.2  Action Taken/Comments
          Banks are free to open Specialised Industrial Finance and SSI branches without RBI approval. They are only
required to obtain their Board’s approval and a licence from concerned Regional Office of RBI before opening the
branch to comply with Section 23 of Banking Regulation Act, 1949. As on 31st March, 2003, the specialised SSI bank
branches have increased to 417 in the country.
3.3.3  Further Recommendation
          Though banks are opening the SSI branches under the guidance and instructions issued by the concerned
Regional Office of RBI and their Board is approved, yet the Committee desires to know the updated position of
SSI branches as on 31st March, 2004.
3.4     Linkage between Term Loans and Working Capital
3.4.1  Observation/Recommendation
          The Committee also feels that another fact calling for attention is the need to provide a linkage between term
loans and working capital so that there is no duplicity in agencies providing it and thus saving the SSIs from caprice of
multiple sanctions. The narrow access to banks finance due to cumbersome procedure and the exhaustive regulations
prescribed by the bank warrant that the prevailing narrow access to bank finance affecting the productivity of units
engaged in SSI activities be made adequate and
conducive.                                                                                                              (Para 5.14)

154th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/154threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:23]
3.4.2  Action Taken/Comments
          The coordination between SFCs and banks in sanctioning the term loans and working capital facilities
respectively to an SSI unit is found to be a major problem faced by the units. This often results in units, which are ready
for production after availing the term loan from the SFCs, have to wait for the bank’s clearance on working capital. This
problem of SSI units is likely to be solved to a great extent by the enhancement of the composite loan limit to Rs. 50
lakh, which would enable majority of units to avail both the term loan and working capital from a Single Window.
3.4.3  Under the refinance window, SIDBI is operating the Single Window Scheme for providing term loan and working
capital through the same agency. The scheme is being operated through SFCs and banks.
3.4.4  Further Recommendation
          Though the Committee feels that lack of coordination between SFCs and banks in sanctioning the terms loans and
working capital facilities to SSI unit is a major problem faced by the units which could hopefully be solved by
enhancing the composite loan limit to Rs.50 lakh. The Committee direct the Ministry to furnish the details of its Single
Window Scheme.

154th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/154threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:23]
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
4.1     Delayed Payment Act
4.1.1  Observation/Recommendation
          The Committee also recommends that Delayed Payment Act should be given teeth to control and punish
organizations holding and delaying payments to SSI. Under the present Act, the facilitation committee should be a sub-
committee nominated by the Divisional Udyog Bandhu having full powers to arbitrate under the provisions of
arbitration act.(Para 5.7)
4.1.2  Action Taken/Comments
          The Government enacted Interest on Delayed Payments to Small Scale and Ancillary Industrial Undertakings Act
in 1993. However, the problem of delay in payment of bills for supplies made by Small Scale Industrial (SSI) units to
large industries continued despite enactment of a separate law. The Act was therefore, amended in 1998. In the amended
Act, the State Governments have been given an active role in the implementation of the provisions of the law with a
view to providing speedy relief to the SSI suppliers. The most important change that has been brought about by the
amendment Act is that the SSI suppliers can now approach the Industry Facilitation Councils (IFCs) for settlement of
their disputes with the buyers in regard to delay in payment etc. of the supplies made by them.
4.1.3  Representations were received from Industrial Associations for making the provisions of the Act more effective
so that necessary relief could be expeditiously provided to the SSI units. After holding consultations with Industrial
Associations and considering various recommendations received on amendments to the Delayed Payment Act, 1993, a
draft Cabinet Note is under circulation to the concerned Ministries/Departments for their comments.

154th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/154threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:23]
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER-V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
          The Committee appreciates the recommendations of the Committee on Financial System for prudential norms for
income reorganization, assets classification and provisioning for advances portfolio of banks are necessary for greater
consistency and transparency. As the provisioning needs to be made on the basis of classification of assets, the
Committee would like to be apprised of the criteria for prudential norms for income recognition and assest
classification. The Ministry should therefore clarify before the Committee the specific criteria set out to implement the
said norms.(Para 3.1.3)
          The Committee observes that assistance under Venture Capital Fund has gained importance and the banks
accordingly have been advised by RBI that investment in the Venture Capital would be eligible for inclusion in priority
sector lending. The contribution made by SIDBI is certainly noteworthy. The Committee gathers an impression that
certain commercial banks are still approaching the SIDBI to join hands in promoting Venture Capital Funds.
          The Committee also takes note of number of funds set up by various banks at all India and regional level. The
Committee appreciates the progress made so far in this regard and feels that a lot more is yet to be done to reach the
desired level. The Committee observes that about half of the aggregate commitments of Venture Capital Funds could be
disbursed so far. The Committee would like to know the reasons for under utilization and also measures taken or being
taken by banks and funding agencies to promote the same. The Committee may also be apprised of the progress being
made by other banks and funding agencies which are, yet, to set up Venture Capital Funds.
          As regards the setting up of Technology Bank for the SSIs the Committee notes from the reply that the study has
already been completed and report is still being analyzed by SIDBI. The Committee feels that about three years have
been taken by the SIDBI since setting up of its In-house Committee for working out the modalities and road map is still
not cleared. The Committee conveys its concern over the delay in this regard. The Committee therefore directs the
Government and the SIDBI to expedite the setting up technology banks as soon as possible.
                                                                                                                                                   (Para 3.2.5)
          Though banks are opening the SSI branches under the guidance and instructions issued by the concerned Regional
Office of RBI and their Board is approved, yet the Committee desires to know the updated position of SSI branches as
on 31st March, 2004.                                                                                                                      (Para 3.3.3)
          Though the Committee feels that lack of coordination between SFCs and banks in sanctioning the terms loans and
working capital facilities to SSI unit is a major problem faced by the units which could hopefully be solved by
enhancing the composite loan limit to Rs. 50 lakh. The Committee direct the Ministry to furnish the details of its Single
Window Scheme.         
                                                                                                                                                   (Para 3.4.4)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
MINUTES
 
I
FIRST MEETING
        The Sub-Committee-IV for Action Taken Reports (of Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Industry) met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 8 th December, 2004 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House,
New Delhi.
        PRESENT
   1.  Shri Santosh Bagrodia  ----  Chairman
   2.  Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato  ----  Convenor
        RAJYA SABHA
   3.  Prof. M.M. Agarwal
   4.  Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
   5.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
        LOK SABHA
   6.  Shri Sunil Khan
        SECRETARIAT

154th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/154threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:23]
        Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
        Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
        Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
        Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
2.     At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the Chairman of the Committee and Members of the Sub-Committee-IV to
the meeting. The Sub-Committee, thereafter, took up the following Reports for consideration:---
        (i)     154 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee's 129 th
Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in the Regions of Delhi, Noida and Ghaziabad (Ministry of Small Scale
Industries).
        (ii)    155 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee's 130 th
Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in Himachal Pradesh (Ministry of Small Scale Industries).
        (iii)    156th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 131 st
Report on constraints in Industrial Development of North-Eastern Region (Ministry of Heavy Industries and
Public Enterprises).
        (iv)   157 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 141 st
Report on Potential of Coir Industries in West Bengal and Andaman and Nicobar (Ministry of Agro and Rural
Industries).
        (v)    158 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee's 143 rd
Report on  Level Playing Field for the Indian Capital Goods Industry (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises).
        (vi)   159 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee's 145 th
Report on Problem being faced by Small Scale Industries in the Procurement of Steel (Ministry of Small Scale
Industries).
3.     After a brief discussion, all the above reports were adopted by the Sub-Committee.
4.     The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M.
X
TENTH MEETING
        The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 9 th
December, 2004 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
        PRESENT
   1.  Shri Santosh Bagrodia  ----  Chairman
        RAJYA SABHA
   2.  Prof. M.M. Agarwal
   3.  Shri Surendra Lath
   4.  Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
   5.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   6.  Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
   7.  Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
        LOK SABHA
   8.  Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
   9.  Shri Subhash Desmukh
10.  Shri Sunil Khan
11.  Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato
12.  Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel
13.  Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
14.  Shri Ganesh Singh
15.  Shri Chandramani Tripathi
16.  Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
        SECRETARIAT

154th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/154threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:23]
        Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
        Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
        Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
2.     At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting. The 
Committee, thereafter, took up the following Reports for consideration:---
        (i)     154 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee's 129 th
Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in the Regions of Delhi, Noida and Ghaziabad (Ministry of Small Scale
Industries).
        (ii)    155 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee's 130 th
Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in Himachal Pradesh (Ministry of Small Scale Industries).
        (iii)    156th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 131 st
Report on constraints in Industrial Development of North-Eastern Region (Ministry of Heavy Industries and
Public Enterprises).
        (iv)   157 th Report on Action Taken by the Government recommendations contained in the Committee’s 141 st
Report on Potential of Coir Industries in West Bengal and Andaman and Nicobar (Ministry of Agro and Rural
Industries).
        (v)    158 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee's 143 rd
Report on  Level Playing Field for the Indian Capital Goods Industry (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises).
        (vi)   159 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee's 145 th
Report on Problem being faced by Small Scale Industries in the Procurement of Steel (Ministry of Small Scale
Industries).
3.     After a brief discussion, all the reports were adopted by the Committee without any modification and decided to
present/lay from 154th to 156th Reports on 16th December, 2004 and from 157th to 159th Reports on the following day
i.e. 17th December, 2004.
4.     The Chairman, then, nominated Prof. M.M. Agarwal, in his absence Shri Surendra Lath and in their absence of
Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra for Rajya Sabha and Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato and in his absence Shri Sunil Khan for Lok
Sabha for presenting/laying 154 th to 156 th Report to both the Houses of the Parliament on 16 th December, 2004. The
Chairman nominated Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy and in his absence Shri Suresh Bhardwaj and in their absence of Dr. K.
Malaisamy in Rajya Sabha and Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria and in his absence Shri Swadesh Chakraborty in Lok Sabha for
presenting/laying 157th to 159 th Reports of the Committee to both the Houses of the Parliament on 17 th December,
2004.
5.     The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------