PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 226
RD  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 3 AUGUST, 2011)
RD  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 3 AUGUST, 2011)
RD  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 3 AUGUST, 2011)
RD  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 3 AUGUST, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST 3, 2011/SRAVANA, 1933 (SAKA)AUGUST 3, 2011/SRAVANA, 1933 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY 
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON INDUSTR Y
TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY SIXTH REPORT
ON
STUDY ON THE WORKING
OF
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING SYSTEM
PERTAINING TO
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES
(DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY SIXTH REPORT
ON
STUDY ON THE WORKING
OF
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING SYSTEM
PERTAINING TO
THE MINISTRY OF HEA VY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES
(DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 3 RD AUGUST, 2011)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 3 RD AUGUST, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST 3, 2011/SRA V ANA, 1933 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—7
4. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 9—12

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Date of Constitution 31 st August, 2010)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Tiruchi Siva — Chairman
2. Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy
3. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
4. Shri Ashk Ali Tak
5. Shri K.B. Shanappa
6. Shri Natuji H. Thakor
7. Shri S.P. Singh Baghel
8. Shri Nandamuri Harikrishna
9. Dr. Vijay Mallya
10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Suvendu Adhikari
12. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
13. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
14. Shri Bansagopal Chowdhury
15. Shri Sabbam Hari
16. Shrimati Poonam Veljibhai Jat
17. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
18. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
19. Shrimati Pakauri Lal
20. Shrimati Ingrid Mcleod
21. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal
22. Shri Devendra Nagpal
23. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey
24. Shri Kishanbhai V . Patel
25. Shri B.Y. Raghavendra
26. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa
27. Shii Arjun Charan Sethi
28. Shri Raju Shetti
29. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
30. Shri Ijyaraj Singh
31. Shrimati Putul Kumari
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry,
having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred and Twenty Sixth
Report on the Study on the Working of Memorandum of Understanding System pertaining to
Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises).
2. The Committee held detailed discussion with the Department of Public Enterprises and
various CPSEs and received valuable inputs for this Report.
3. I thank the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of Public
Enterprises) and various CPSEs for furnishing the valuable inputs during the meetings.
4. The Committee in its meeting held on 29
th July, 2011 considered and adopted the report.
TIRUCHI SIVA
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
29th July, 2011 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry

1
REPORT
When India began its long and arduous journey towards industrialisation to foster balanced
economic development, Fabian socialism was adopted as the guiding principle. Pandit Nehru’s
vision was to make India an economic powerhouse with the state owned industrial sector as its
backbone. He considered public sector undertakings as “engines of economic growth.” The
emergence of public sector was expected to play a pivotal role in the economic and industrial
development in the country. India’s economy was then primarily an agrarian economy with a weak
industrial base, low level of savings, inadequate investments and lack of infrastructure facilities. As
such, State’s intervention in all the sectors of the economy was inevitable since private sector
neither had necessary resources, the managerial and scientific skill, nor the will to undertake risks
associated with large long-gestation investments. Considering the gaping inequalities that existed in
the economic and social development, it became a pragmatic compulsion to use the public sector
as an instrument for self-reliant economic growth.
2. The approach led to large investments in public sector enterprises to accelerate the growth
of core sectors of the economy and to achieve a significant degree of indigenization in the critical
sectors. As a result, large number of enterprises was created out of “Sick Units” taken over from
the private sector inter alia, to protect the interest of workers. The Industrial Policy Resolution
of 1956 has been the guiding beacon, which gave the public sector a decisive role in the economy.
Nevertheless, after the initial concentration of public sector investment in key infrastructure areas,
public enterprises began to spread into all areas of the economy including non-infrastructure and
non-core areas.
3. Till the early 1980’s, when development was the overarching compulsion, the government
never bothered about the efficient performance of the PSUs. However, from the mid-1980 the
government started focusing on profit as a parameter for measuring their performance. The
financial crunch of the late 1980’s and the consequent spiking in the fiscal deficit compelled the
government to withdraw the budgetary support given to PSUs. On 24th July 1991 Government of
India announced the ‘Statement on Industrial Policy’ which inter- alia included Statement on Public
Sector Policy. The statement contains the following decisions:
“Portfolio of public sector investments will be reviewed with a view to focus the public
sector on strategic, high-tech and essential infrastructure...
Public enterprises which are chronically sick and which are unlikely to be turned around
will, for the formulation of revival/rehabilitation schemes, be referred to the Board for Industrial
and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR), or other similar high level institutions created for the
purpose. Social security mechanism will be created to protect the interests of workers likely to be
affected by such rehabilitation packages.
In order to raise resources and encourage wider public participation, a part of the
government’ s share holding in the public sector would be offered to mutual funds, financial
institutions, general public and workers.
There will be a greater thrust on performance improvement through the Memorandum of
Understanding (MoU) system through which managements would be granted greater autonomy and
will be held accountable. Technical expertise on the part of the Government would be upgraded
to make the MoU negotiations and implementation more effective.

2
To facilitate a fuller discussion on performance, the MoU signed between Government and the
public enterprises would be placed in Parliament. While focusing on major management issues, this
would also help place matters on day-to-day operations of public enterprises in their correct
perspective” .
4. As evident from the above ‘Statement on Industrial Policy’ the state protection to PSUs was
laid to rest and an era of open market economy was assured in. For the sake of performance
improvement, in the wake of severe competition from local and global players the Government
committed itself to a policy of liberalisation, privatization and globalization. The Government was
keen to make public enterprises as ‘self-managed enterprises’ instead of remaining as parasites on
the public exchequer.
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)
5. MoU is a mutually negotiated agreement between the management of the CPSEs and the
Government of India. Under this agreement, the enterprise undertakes to achieve targets contained
in MoU and set in the beginning of the year, making it a performance contract. The main purpose
of the MoU was to ensure a level playing field to the public sector enterprises Vis-á-Vis the private
corporate sector.
6. The genesis of the policy of MoU can be traced to the report of the Arjun Sengupta
Committee set up in 1984 to review the policy of the Government on CPSEs. One of the
recommendations of this committee was for the introduction of the system of MoU for
measurement of performance of public enterprises. The Committee laid emphasis on medium term
contract between the Government and the Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) and
recommended a five-year agreement that may be reviewed annually. Based on this, the Group of
Ministers (GoM) in December 1985 decided that the evaluation of performance of CPSEs should
be done by the Government on the basis of MoU. The MoU system was introduced on an
experimental basis in 1987-88 with four CPSEs signing MoU. It was based on the French system .
7. However, this system was revamped in 1989, and it moved closer to the “signalling system”
of the Pakistani and the Korean models as developed by Prof. Leroy P. Jones (Director, Public
Enterprises Programme, Boston University). The ‘performance contract’ under the MoU system,
moreover, got de-linked from the medium-term agreement as recommended by Arjun Sengupta
Committee. Under the new MoU system that was implemented from the financial year of 1989-90,
performance evaluation came to be based on the annual targets agreed upon between the
government and the CPSEs, rather than the five-year target. Another novel feature of the new
system was finalization of MoU under the overall supervision of a third party, namely, the MoU
Task Force constituted by the Department of Public Enterprises. The MoU Task Force is
independent of both the administrative ministry and the CPSE.
8. The perceived inefficiency of CPSEs as compared to private organizations, multiplicity of
command leading to conflict in setting objectives, lack of clarity of objectives and resultant dilution
of accountability, absence of functional autonomy, etc may be stated as the main reasons for
adoption of the system of MoU.
9. The MoU System was given a major impetus as part of the New Industrial Policy of
1991. Dr. Manmohan Singh, the then Finance Minister, in his Economic Survey (1996) opined
that MoU System had improved the working of Public Enterprises considerably. As a result, the
number of CPSEs signing MoU increased manifold during nineties. Thereafter, signing of MoU
has been made mandatory for all CPSEs. MoU being made mandatory may be seen as an
important watershed in the evolution of the MoU system. Because, till then, the Government had

3
adopted signing of MoU as a yardstick to delegate power to the CPSEs. But with even loss
incurring and sick CPSEs signing MoUs, it became impossible to allow autonomy to CPSEs on
this count. Further, the Government initiated Navratana and Miniratna Scheme in 1997 and
Maharatana Scheme in 2010 to delegate enhanced powers to the Boards of profit-making CPSEs.
The MoU system has, therefore, ceased to be a direct instrument of delegation of powers and
has transformed itself into a comprehensive system for evaluation of performance of CPSEs in
an objective and transparent manner. The MoU rating of CPSEs is a major input in determining
the ACR ratings of Chief Executives, Directors and senior executives of CPSEs and is also one
of the parameters considered for grant of Navratana and Maharatana status. The Performance
Related Pay being paid to employees of CPSEs is also linked to the MoU rating of CPSE. Thus,
autonomy and accountability of CPSE managements is directly linked to the MoU performance
of their company. MoU system is based on the principle of management by result rather than
by control and procedure. MoU is aimed at providing greater autonomy to public sector
enterprises vis-á.-vis  control of the Government. The main purpose of MoU system is to
facilitate empowerment of the CPSEs, enhancement of their performance and to ensure a level
playing field to public sector enterprise vis-á-vis  private sector enterprise. The management of
the enterprise, is nevertheless, made accountable to government through promise for performance
of ‘performance contract’. Thus the Government continues to have control over these enterprises
through setting targets in the beginning of the year and by ‘performance evaluation’ at the end
of the year.
10. The Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Ltd the MoU of which was studied by the Committee,
very rightly observed that “The main aim in introducing the concept of MoU in PSEs was to shift
from management by controls and procedures to management by results and objectives. To this
extent the MoU system has been effective in bringing about a shift in the functioning of PSEs.”
11. This opinion of the ONGC on MoU matches with the opinion of many of the PSEs across
the country. The Committee in one of its meetings in October 2010 heard the Secretary,
Department of Public Enterprises, who gave an overview on the MoU system.
12. During the course of many Study Tours undertaken by the Committee, it was found that
MoU, over the years, has been hailed as a robust mechanism to ensure the autonomy and
accountability of PSEs and make them competitive in the market environment. The Committee
while perusing V olume III of the Eleventh Five Year Plan document chanced upon a paragraph in
page No. 156 concerning MoUs. It stated that:
“The system of MoUs between CPSEs and the government has proved to
be ineffective and dysfunctional. While the CPSEs are expected to perform in
accordance with the norms, the government’s commitments are marginal and not
effectively monitored. There is a need to review and overhaul the system to ensure
effective operational autonomy and functioning of the CPSEs. Financial delegations,
particularly of the profit-making CPSEs, will have to be enhanced.”
13. The Committee, therefore, decided to study the MoU performance of certain PSEs and
evaluate the MoU itself. In pursuance of that objective the Committee undertook two study visits.
In the first visit, during the month of May 2011, the following PSUs were taken up for study;
Antrix Corporation Ltd., Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd., SAIL Ltd., Konkan Railways Corporation Ltd.
(KRCL), Indian Oil Corporation (IOC), Oil & Natural Gas Corporation Ltd. (ONGC) and Bharat
Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (BPCL). In a more recent study visit during the month of June, 2011
to Bhubaneswar-Mumbai-Goa organizations such as Eastern Coalfield Ltd. (ECL), Mahanadi
Coalfield Ltd. (MCL), Indian Rare Earths Ltd. (IREL), NALCO, Rourkela Steel Plant (RSP),
Containers Corporation of India (CONCOR), State Trading Corporation (STC), Rashtriya Chemicals

4
& Fertilizers Ltd. (RCF), Engineers India Ltd. (EIL), Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL), Minerals &
Metal Trading Corporation (MMTC) and Mazagon Dock Ltd. (MDL) were taken up.
14. The common thread that emerged from the study was that almost all the organisations were
satisfied with the current MoU system. Most of the PSUs stated very categorically that the
mandatory system of signing MoUs made a positive impact on the functioning of the PSEs. The
views expressed by the PSUs seem to converge on the issue that the provision of equal weightage
(of 50-50) to financial and non-financial parameters in the current MoU system has introduced
good balance. The recently added focus and emphasis on modern concepts like Corporate Social
Responsibility, Sustainable Development and Corporate Governance has also been well received.
The MoU parameters were thought to be well rounded and possibly a better reflection of the
current thinking in corporate and business circles. However, many are also of the opinion that the
current system should be reviewed on a regular basis by taking into account the changes in the
national and international business environment. During the interactions and from the replies to the
questionnaire sent to these organizations, the Committee has received the following suggestions:
15. One of the opinions was that the parameters such as added value and gross margin need
to be replaced with a better index. It is understood that added value is calculated by deducting
returns on land, labour and capital from gross margin. The Committee was informed that added
value and gross margin discourage companies from undertaking capital expansion programmes. The
Department of Public Enterprises is of the opinion that added value and gross margin are crucial
determinants in evaluating the performance of the public sector enterprises. It is understood that
the National Council of Applied Economic Research (NCAER) presented a report in September 2004
under the caption ‘Study on the Revamping of the MoU System’. In this study the NCAER has
endorsed the relevance of added value and gross margin. The Committee also feels that in a
increasingly dynamic and competitive market system land, labour and capital will play a
little lesser role in defining the business concerns of an enterprise. In fact, innovation will
be central to the success of modern day business ventures. It is gratifying for the
Committee to note that in the MoU system due weightage is given to research, development
and innovation. During the course of the interaction of the Committee Members with the
Officials of the Rourkela Steel Plant it was found that the plant did not allocate enough
resources for the research and development. The management of the Steel Plant confessed
that the research and development did not receive priority attention. It is rather
unfortunate that a public sector steel plant which spearheaded steel production in our
country after independence is lagging behind in research and development. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that PSEs must earmark specific and adequate fund for pursuing
research, development and innovation which are central to their success in the increasingly
commercial and business environment. The administrative Ministries of all the PSEs must
monitor the investment made by the concerned PSEs for this purpose. The Committee would
like to get a report in this respect from the administrative Ministries.
16. Some PSUs felt that the mandate of the Government under the MoU System is not to run
the enterprise, which has a full-fledged Board (including independent Directors) to deliberate on
commercial/financial/personnel matters in the furtherance of its objectives. Government nominee
directors as members of the PSE Board and the MoU can help the Government to keep vigil on
the performance. On a similar note, there was another prominent view that the Government ought
to be a facilitator and should assist the PSUs in securing orders and monitor whether the
organization is fulfilling the parameters and targets and not use MoU as a means to run the
organisation.
17. The PSEs engaged in oil exploration and productions are of the opinion that the present
guidelines for a 10 per cent growth on year to year basis is not in consonance with the nature

5
and character of the oil companies. It is felt by them that 10 per cent growth is meant for all
PSEs. They are of the opinion that this general prescription cannot be uniformly applied to all
PSEs. It is argued by them that sensitivity of the oil PSUs need to be addressed. Their point of
view is that they operate in matured fields from where oil is being extracted for several years and
there is hardly any opportunity to increase such extraction on a 10 per cent increase every year.
Therefore, they argue that the problem could be addressed through a bilateral negotiation between
the oil companies and the MoU task force each year. The ONGC has put forward such an
argument.
18. The Committee feels that our energy security depends on our efforts to explore and
exploit the oil resources available within the countr y. Therefore, the oil companies need to
upgrade their technology for augmenting the oil supply. It is in this context that Committee
recommends that more power must be given to the oil companies to exercise the choice for
greater investment.
19. It was observed by ONGC that “Regarding categorization of the CPSE’s as per DPE
guidelines, there should be a separate categorization governed by realistic guidelines that reflect the
actual progress made each year for Oil and Gas Exploration and Production (E&P) companies, as
exploration and production business is probabilistic as against processing and other business
activities.”
20. The Committee feels that the above observation of ONGC reflects the concerns of not only
ONGC but most of the oil companies. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that these points
raised by the ONGC may be kept in mind while signing MoUs.
21. Many suggested that the targets fixed at the beginning of the year should be flexible to the
extent that eventualities like drastic shortfall in traded quantity, unforeseen and extraneous factors,
etc are taken into account in evaluation.
22. The methodology of 10% increase every year included in the guidelines does not suit some
CPSEs as their products had a gestation period of 7 to 8 years for completion. For such a
Company fluctuating orders may result in non-incremental fixation of targets. Warships were cited
as example for this. Oil companies who have been producing at their peak for the last 25 to 50
years are facing natural decline in production, although new discoveries shall serve to balance the
decline for the present. A 10% increase in production every year is unrealistic as far as such
companies are concerned.
23. The Indian Rare Earths Ltd. requested that, “Production and sales targets are fixed on
realistic basis taking into account the resources at the disposal of CPSE instead of adopting fixed
formula. Particularly in case of CPSE involved in mining activity resources available at its command
is not likely to change within one year. Further, exclusion of any income or expenses from audited
accounts will result in drawing incorrect profit of CPSE”.
24. The Committee has of the opinion that the administrative Ministries need to be
more vigilant in ensuring that targets are realistically fixed taking into account the
technological capability of PSEs. The Committee takes note of the observation of the
Department of Public Enterprises that quite often the PSEs underpromise and overachieve.
Such kind of approach does not help the PSEs concerned to give their best. It is,
therefore, recommended that the administrative Ministry, the Department of Public
Enterprises and the Task Force must jointly ensure that the PSEs set their targets as per
their potential. Failure to do so will lead to their failure in the highly competitive
business environment.

6
25. Certain other CPSEs engaged in highly specialised and complex business activities felt that
the target setting in the MoU system, especially the selection of non-financial parameters and
relative weightages, had to take into account the specific/special nature of the activities of the
Company, the size of the Company, environmental & policy constraints and other relevant
considerations.
26. Another suggestion that has been brought to the notice of the Committee was that there are
Companies/ Organisations that are not just profit making business establishments, but which are to
be considered more as nation building and developmental organizations. The bottom line is that the
views of the CPSEs on MoUs vary based on the areas of operation and the business environment
in which they function. These factors have to be taken into consideration while drafting the targets.
27. It has been brought to the notice of the committee that in several PSEs the posts
of independent directors are lying vacant for quite some times. This situation has led to the
suboptimal performance of Board of Directors which adversely impact efficiency and
effectiveness of the PSEs. The Committee recommends for the immediate filling of these
vacant posts of independent directors to the respective PSEs.
28. The MoU targets should be fixed after addressing the ground realities faced by the CPSE
instead of adopting uniform formula. The unrealistic fixation leads to the difficulties in achieving
the targets which are sometimes beyond the control of management.
29. The Committee while examining some organizations found that these had spent crore
of rupees to felicitate medal winners of the Commonwealth Games. They showed such
expenses under the category of corporate social responsibility which is part of the MoU
system. When the Committee asked the representative of the Department of Public
Enterprises to clarify on the matter he maintained that that such activities do not come
under the CSR scheme and, therefore, the concerned PSEs would not get any points under
MoU performance. The DPE representative further stated that promotion of sports form
part of the CSR activity. However, he maintained that expenses incurred for the purpose of
felicitating award winning sports persons would not come under the category of promotion
of sports. The Committee took a strong view on the matter and expressed opinion that
CPSEs should not divert money meant for CSR activities for such programmes which
involved felicitation of sports persons. The funds allocated for CSR should be spent in such
a way which creates a long-term asset and such infrastructure which will be of lasting value
for society.
30. The Committee also took a serious note of this issue and observed that the
Department of Public Enterprises should issue some clarificatory guidelines to all CPSEs
which will enlighten them as to how the funds under CSR should be spent.
31. The Committee observes that the MoU system which initially focused attention on
accountability and autonomy of PSEs eventually stressed on their performance appraisal.
The Department of Public Enterprises maintained that a lot more has to be done by PSEs
to stress on both financial and non-financial parameters. The Committee welcomes the
measures taken by DPE to make MoU system more broad based by including three Ps which
in expanded form means profit, people and planet.
32. It is the age when the business enterprises have to be run on the basis of modern
principles which are different from the norms governing Government departments.
Therefore, the Committee feels that the MoU system should be such which would enable the
PSEs and its management to take advantage of the opportunities that are now available in
the market for maximizing their profits. While doing so, the PSEs concerned must avoid the

7
problems and threats which might pose danger to its commercial viability. The non-financial
parameters in the MoU are often described as soft bellies. It is important, therefore, to give
adequate weightage to both financial and non-financial parameters.
33. The time has now come for the corporate bodies not only to use their strategic assets
but also take advantage of the opportunities available on a pro active basis. A laid back
approach will not help in furthering the cause of business. The Committee, therefore, feels
that MoU system must go beyond financial performance and give importance to the issue
of productivity improvement.

MINUTES

XVII
SEVENTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 29 th July, 2011 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri Tiruchi Siva — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri G . Sanjeeva Reddy
2. Shri Ashk Ali Tak
3. Shri K.B. Shanappa
4. Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor
5. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
6. Shri Nandamuri Harikrishna
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Bansagopal Chowdhury
8. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
9. Shrimati Ingrid Mcleod
10. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
11. Shri Raju Shetti
12. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
13. Shrimati Putual Kumari
SECRETARIAT
Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Assistant Director
1. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and briefed them that the agenda of
the meeting, was to consider and adopt the 225
th and 226 th reports of the Committee on the Revival
and Restructuring of Hindustan Machine Tools Ltd. and the Study on the Working of Memorandum
of Understanding System, respectively.
2. The revised version of 225
th report, was taken up for consideration again as its adoption
was deferred during the last meeting held on 21.07.11 keeping in view the suggestions/points put
11

12
forth by some of the members. The Chairman informed that the relevant portions of the BIFR
report concerning revival proposals of the HMT has been added in the draft report.
3. The 226 th report of the Committee on the Study on the Working of Memorandum of
Understanding System was based on the study visits undertaken by the Committee during the
months of May and June 2011. The Committee during its visits had held discussions with the
management of around 19 PSUs on the subject and the findings/observations of the Committee
during the visits formed the crux of the report.
4. Thereafter, both the Reports were taken up for, consideration. After a brief deliberation of
the issues, the Committee unanimously adopted the 225
th and 226 th Draft Reports.
5. The Committee then decided to present/lay four of its reports i.e., 223 rd Report on Revival
and Restructuring of North Eastern Handicrafts and Handlooms Development Corporation Ltd. &
224
th Report ‘on Revival and Restructuring of Hindustan Photo Films Manufacturing Company Ltd.
on 2 nd August 2011 and the 225 th Report on Revival and Restructuring of Hindustan Machine Tools
Ltd. & 226 th Report on the Study on the Working of Memorandum of Understanding System on
3rd August 2011, respectively in both the Houses of Parliament during the ensuing Monsoon Session.
The Committee authorized its Chairman, and in his absence, Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy, Member,
Rajya Sabha, and in absence of both the Chairman and Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy, Prof. S.P. Singh
Baghel, MP Rajya Sabha to present the 223
rd and 224 th Reports in the Rajya Sabha. The Committee
also authorized Shri Ijyaraj Singh and in his absence Shrimati Ingrid Mcleod, Members, Lok Sabha
to lay copies of the same Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha. Further, Chairman, and in his
absence, Shri K.B. Shanappa, Member, Rajya Sabha, and in the absence of both the Chairman and
Shri K.B. Shanappa, Shri Ash Ali Tak, M.P. Rajya Sabha were authorized by the Committee to
present the 225
th and 226 th Reports in the Rajya Sabha and, Shri M. Krishnaswamy and in his
absence Shri Arjun Charan Sethi, Members, Lok Sabha to lay copies of the same Reports on the
Table of the Lok Sabha.
6. The meeting adjourned at 12.10 
P.M.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.