Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON INDUSTRY
 
REPORT NO. 
241
TWO HUNDRED FORTY-FIRST REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 21st March, 2013) 
(Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 21st March, 2013)  
Action Taken Note on the Two Hundred Thirty Third Report 
of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2012-13)
pertaining to the Ministry of Heavy Industries and
Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises)


PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON INDUSTRY
TWO HUNDRED FORTY-FIRST REPORT
Action Taken Note on the Two Hundred Thirty Third Report
of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2012-13)
pertaining to the Ministry of Heavy Industries and
Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  21 st March, 2013)
(Laid on the table of the Lok Sabha on  21 st March, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—13
(i) Chapter–I
Recommendations/Observations,  which have  been accepted  by the
Ministry ............................................................................................................... 2—6
(ii) Chapter–II
Recommendations/Observations, which the Committee does not desire
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies .......................................... 7—9
(iii) Chapter–III
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has
either not accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the
Ministry to review its replies ......................................................................... 10—11
(iv) Chapter–IV
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the
Ministry have not been received .................................................................... 12—13
4. M
INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 15—18

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Date of Constitution  31 st August , 2012)
1. Shri Tiruchi Siva — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Narendra Budania
3. Shri Ashk Ali Tak
4. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu
5. Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor
6. Shri Basawaraj Patil
7. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
8. Shri Vivek Gupta
9. Shri Nandamuri Harikrishna
10. Shri M.P. Achuthan
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
12. Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa
13. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
14. Shrimati Poonamben Veljibhai Jat
15. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
16. Shri Hassan Khan
17. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar
18. Shrimati Ingrid Mcleod
19. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal
20. Shri Somen Mitra
21. Shri P.R. Natarajan
22. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey
23. Shri Jayaram Pangi
24. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
25. Shri B.Y . Raghavendra
26. Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat
27. Shri Ijyaraj Singh
28. Ch. Lal Singh
29. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
30. Shri E.G . Sugavanam
31. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Roshan Lal, Deputy Director
Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry,
having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred Forty-First Report on
Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises
(Department of Public Enterprises) on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two
Hundred Thirty-third Report on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) pertaining to Department of
Public Enterprises.
2. I thank the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of Public
Enterprises) for furnishing the Action Taken Notes on the recommendations contained in the
Committee’s Two Hundred Thirty-third Report.
3. The Committee in its meeting held on the 19
th March, 2013 considered and adopted the
Report.
TIRUCHI SIV A
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
19th March, 2013 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry.

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises) on the
recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred Thirty-third Report on the Demands
For Grants (2012-13) pertaining to Department of Public Enterprises.
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises) in respect of the recommendations contained in the
Report. These have been categorized as follows:
Chapter-I– The recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the Ministry.
The Committee is pleased to observe that the Ministry has accepted its recommendations
as mentioned in the Chapter–I of the Report.
Chapter-II – The recommendation/observations, which the Committee does not desire to
pursue in view of the Government’s replies.
In respect of these recommendations the Committee is convinced with the logic and
explanations advanced by the Ministry and therefore does not want to pursue them for the present.
Chapter-III – The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has
either not accepted replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its reply.
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of recommendations
contained in Chapter–III and desires that the Ministry should furnish logical explanations thereof.
Chapter-IV – The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the
Ministry have not been received.
In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either furnished
the interim replies or couched its language in vague terms therefore, the Committee desires that
the Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in respects of recommendations categorized in
Chapter-IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the
Committee.
3. The details of the ATR is being discussed in the succeeding pages.

2
CHAPTER-I
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry
Recommendations/Observations
1. The Committee is given to understand that normally money earmarked for spending under
the plan head is not transferred to the non-plan head. Of course, the Department must have re-
appropriated the money under the explicit approval of the Finance Ministry. However, it is to be
borne in mind that the lack of funds to meet the non-plan expenditure is indicative of absence of
sound planning by the DPE. It must foresee and anticipate such spending and approach the Finance
Ministry for allocation of funds for the purpose of meeting non-plan expenditure. It strongly
recommends that the DPE must not divert funds from the plan to non-plan head. The officials of
the DPE must foresee the non-plan expenditure and accordingly submit their estimates to the
Ministry of Finance for adequate allocation of funds. The Committee hopes that the Department
will adopt a proper strategy so that it does not divert the plan fund for the non-plan expenditure.
The Committee strongly feels that the Department must spend the money put under the plan head
to achieve the desired results. (Para 14)
Action Taken Note
This Department is in agreement with the observations of the Hon’ble Committee. During
the financial year 2011-12, an amount of Rs.1.50 crore was earmarked for Plan head Research,
Development and consultancy on generic issues related to central Public Sector Enterprises and
State Level Public Enterprises (RDC). As Department envisaged not utilizing this amount, because
of some unforeseen and other reasons, Ministry of Finance was requested for surrender of
Rs.66 lakhs out of the total amount of Rs.1.50 crore under RDC. Ministry of Finance agreed to
the proposal. Further, as there was requirement of funds, in Non-Plan (11-12) this Department
requested the M/o Finance for providing the additional funds under the Non-Plan, which they
agreed. Nevertheless, the observations of the Hon’ble Committee about the anticipation and
foreseeing the spending under Non-plan have been conveyed to the concerned Divisions in this
Department and also noted for compliance. In the year 2012-13, a proper strategy is being framed
to utilize the funds under Plan head RDC to achieve the desired results.
Recommendations/Observations
2. The Committee takes note of the fact that the DPE intends to focus attention on the
deficiencies and weaknesses of the employees of the SLPES so that it could take measures to
mitigate or rectify them and improve their capabilities. But, while doing so, it would be self-
defeating to ignore the strengths of the employees whose skills are to be developed. In the syllabus
of the modern management discipline SWOT (Strength, Weakness, Opportunity and Threats) has
been adopted to get a broad view of the dark and brighter sides of the human resources deployed
in an enterprise. In ignoring the strengths the positive aspects would be completely lost sight of.
The concept of ‘Core Competence’ has been increasingly emphasized in the modern organization
to highlight the inherent resilience and capabilities of the employees. It would be appropriate for
the department to stress on ‘Core Competence’ while adopting the SWOT analysis. This would
enable the Department and the concerned enterprises to have a better grasp of the talent pool
2

3
available at their disposal and their plus and minus dimensions. The Committee recommends that
the good performance of the SLPEs may be factored into any decision to allocate funds for skill
development. Besides, the weightage also should be given to the enterprises which function in core
areas of our economy which are critical to economic growth and expansion. The Committee also
hastens to add that the SLPEs utilizing locally available resources and creating job opportunities
may be accorded priority. (Para 17)
Action Taken Note
The directions of the Standing Committee have been incorporated in the proposed new Plan
Scheme.
Recommendations/Observations
3. The figures in the Budget Documents at Table 2 shows that the allocation (RE) for the
Scheme of CRR for 2010-11 was Rs. 7.58 crore, but the Actuals for the year is shown as Rs.8.03
crore. The Committee fails to understand as to how the utilization figures for 2010-11 were higher
than the allocation made for year. Furthermore, if the Table 1 figures for allocation (Rs.8.90 crore)
is taken in face value, the Actuals for 2010-11 in the Budget Document should have been Rs.8.63
crore (96.97% of Rs.8.90 crore) instead of Rs. 8.03 crore. Similarly, while considering the figures
of Table-1, the allocation for 2011-12 as furnished by DPE is Rs.8.90 crore whereas in the Budget
Document puts it at Rs.7.80 crore. (Para 27)
4. The Committee observes that such variation in figures presented before a Parliamentary
Committee, engaged in scrutinizing the Demand for Grants is totally unacceptable. The Committee
expects a clear cut explanation in this regard. It is imperative that the Department shall take note
of this and ensure strict compliance in future. (Para 28)
Action Taken Note
In 2010-11, RE under CRR was Rs. 8.63 crore which includes Rs. 7.58 crore for
implementation of CRR Scheme in other than NE Region and Rs. 1.03 crore in NE Region. In
2010-11, actual expenditure of Rs. 8.03 crore under CRR includes Rs. 7.43 crore in other than
NE Region and Rs. 0.60 crore in NE Region. During 2011-12, RE budget allocation was Rs. 8.90
crore under CRR including allocation for all regions including NER. The position is given in a
tabular form as under:
(Rs. in crore )
Y ear BE RE Fund Remarks
utilized
2010-11 8.90 8.63 8.03* Allocation and utilization of funds is for all regions
including NE Region.
2011-12 8.90 8.90 8.17*
* Balance funds transferred to Non-lapsable Pool
Henceforth, the figures regarding allocation of funds and their utilization would be presented
with greater clarity.
Recommendations/Observations
5. The Committee has persistently noted that funds allocated to North Eastern Areas and are

4
taken forward to next financial years. Of course, the committee appreciates the fact that in case
of North Eastern Region, the funds allocated would not lapse. The North Eastern Areas of the
country do always get the special attention of the Union Government. Fund earmarked for this
region has to be utilized properly for the cause of improving that region and accelerating the
process of industrialization. It is important, therefore, to accelerate the process of utilization of
funds for training VRS optees. The Committee also finds it difficult to fathom as to why the
Budget Document reflects the Actual expenditure for the North Eastern Areas for 2010-11 as ‘nil’,
when the Department claims to have utilized Rs. 6 crore. This sort of anomalies in figure may lead
to misunderstanding and, therefore, the Committee demands an explanation from the Departments
concerned. The Committee firmly recommends that the Department should iron out such
incongruities and improve their performance in the North Eastern Areas. (Para 36)
Action Taken Note
In the year 2010-11, 700 VRS optees were trained in NE Region and Rs. 0.60 crore was
utilized under the CRR scheme. CRR Scheme has not got momentum in NE Region mainly because
of non-availability of substantial VRS optees in the region. VRS is not very sizeable in the units
located in NE Region and often, immediately after separation, they migrate to their native places/
states and change their domicile. DPE is making all efforts to cover the backlog of VRS
optees even though it is sometime difficult to locate them in a sizable number in a cluster. Nodal
agencies have been motivated to operate and cover more candidates in NE Region. Besides CRR,
in 2012-13, some state specific proposals involving CPSEs and SLPEs have also been planned to
be implemented in NE Region.
As per the existing norm, 10% of total plan fund is earmarked for NE region. This
allocation is provided in the Account Head – North Eastern Areas. As given to understand by the
Ministry of Finance, this being non-functional head, the expenditure cannot be booked directly
under it and the same is to be met from functional head, i.e. head under CRR in the instant case.
Since total actual expenditure, including that towards NE was within the allocation of functional
Head, the re-appropriation from NE was not sought. As such, even though the expenditure in NE
Head is ‘nil’, expenditure for NE region under CRR Scheme was incurred.
Recommendations/Observations
6. (i) The Committee takes note that the MoU System as it exists today is broadly based on
the recommendation of NCAER made in the year 2003. It is the considered opinion
of the Committee that the MoU system, which has an overarching influence on the
performance of the CPSEs, has to be in tune with the latest trends for successful
operation of the PSEs.
(ii) Accordingly, it is recommended that DPE may engage an accredited organization to
revisit the MoU system and assess it for the purpose of revitalizing it and making it
more effective.
(iii) The system should be more flexible and receptive to the feedback received from the
CPSEs. It is worthwhile to note that certain profit making organizations must not be
allowed to opt for soft targets solely on the ground that they have performed better.
In fact, in a highly competitive environment such organizations need to set better
targets for themselves for full flowering of their potentialities. The Prime Minister of
our country while giving away the MoU and SCOPE Awards to best performing
Central Public Sector Enterprises referred to MoU system and said that, “We cannot

5
be satisfied with the status quo”. He made that observation in the context of the
determination of the Government to make CPSEs stronger and competitive. An
overhauled MoU system must serve this cause. (Para 41)
Action Taken Note
(i) MoU System as it exists now is predominantly based on NCAER recommendations of
2004, but it has evolved and changed over the years and new initiatives have been
introduced from time to time. The parameters selected are a good mix of financial,
dynamic and efficiency indicators which are strategically important for CPSEs. Thus,
under the present system, an attempt has been made to strike a balance between
financial and non-financial parameters. Targets include performance of the CPSE under
Corporate Social Responsibility, R&D, Sustainable Development, Human Resources
Management, Corporate Governance and Compliance of DPE Guidelines.
As CPSEs have to operate in a free market, they cannot continue to depend upon
Government assistance. The MoU also emphasizes on projects management and fresh
order book from Government/Private/Foreign with corresponding weightages. MoU
appears to be an appropriate instrument where the issues involving inter-ministry/inter-
CPSEs coordination can be taken up more effectively.
Adoption of innovative practices is included as a new parameter with some weightage
in the MoU. Customer satisfaction, quality, safety, Capital expenditure/Joint Ventures,
Globalization, etc. are also taken as MoU Parameters.
Thus, MoU System is now a performance driven, forward looking management tool to
facilitate empowerment and enhancement of performance of CPSEs.
(ii) and (iii) These pertinent issues are under examination by DPE. DPE has formed a
Working Group headed by Chairman Task Force to review the existing MoU System
and to suggest improvements to make it more effective.
Besides, DPE is also in the process of engaging an External Agency to conduct the
evaluation of MoU System. Request for Proposal is being issued.
Reports/Recommendations received will be examined by DPE in consultation with the
administrative Ministries/departments of concerned CPSEs and placed before the High
Power Committee on MoU headed by Cabinet Secretary for bringing in suitable
changes in the MoU System.
Recommendations/Observations
7. (i) The Committee was constrained to note that there are certain Central Public Sector
Enterprises which do not subscribe to the MoU discipline and protocol. It has noted that
such departure from MoU discipline has taken place in spite of the intervention of the
Cabinet Secretary. It is sad commentary on the functioning of our system. The
Committee finds it unacceptable that certain PSEs are not amenable to the MoU regime.
(ii) The Committee is sad to note that certain CPSEs do not submit certain documents at
the time of evaluation of their functioning. The Committee was informed that 36
CPSEs failed to submit the required document to the DPE for evaluation. The
Committee feels that action must be initiated against such organizations which remain
out of the ambit of the MoU. The Committee notes that incentives are there for CPSEs
to submit to the MoU system. The Committee strongly recommends that there must
be stringent action and disincentives as well to enforce the MoU system. (Para 42)

6
Action Taken Note
(i) and (ii) For CPSEs, which do not sign or delay in signing the MoU, their
performance in MoU is rated as ‘Poor’ and the same to be reflected in Annual
Performance Appraisal Report (APAR) of the Chief Executive of CPSE.
MoU Guideline issued by DPE provides that those CPSEs which do not
submit performance Evaluation Report with annual audited data by the
prescribed date will not be evaluated by DPE and CPSEs will be rated ‘Poor’
in the MoU and they will not be eligible for Performance Related Pay (PRP).
Recommendations/Observations
8. Further, the Committee is strongly in favour of introducing disincentives and punitive
measures against those PSEs which desist from entering into MoU discipline and those which do
not comply with the MoU agreements already signed. (Para 43)
Action Taken Note
As regards initiating disincentives and punitive measures against such defaulting CPSEs,
DPE has been writing to the concerned administrative Ministry/Department under whose jurisdiction
they fall.
The Working Group on MoU formed by DPE is, examining inter alia , this issue of not
subscribing to discipline of MoU by CPSEs. Their recommendations will be examined by DPE and
suitable measures will be taken.

7
CHAPTER-II
Recommendations/Observations, which the Committee does
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies
Recommendations/Observations
1. The Committee strongly feels that the vision and mission of the DPE must be further
expanded to include issues like research and development capabilities and manpower planning in the
absence of which the CPSEs quite often do not generate greater productivity and incur loss leading
to their sickness and closure. The issue of research and development is of course the responsibility
of the concerned public sector enterprises. But if the DPE is guided by vision and mission to
enhance the research and development capability and other critical factors which are essential for
making our PSEs technologically advanced and competitive, then it would better help the DPE to
take the cause of public sector enterprises forward. The Committee feels that the vision and
mission of the DPE incorporating such factors would be more impactful on the CPSEs for making
them competitive and result oriented. It would also make the CPSEs more aware of the fact that
for their survival and growth these have to stand on their own and prove their worth in the
expanding market and global economy. Such a modified vision and mission statement would also
enable the DPE officials to emphasise on the issue during their interactions with CPSE
representatives. (Para 6)
Action Taken Note
DPE is primarily concerned with the policy formulation on general matters pertaining to
CPSEs and in line with this mandate DPE lays down policy guidelines on performance improvement
and evaluation, autonomy and financial delegation and personnel management in CPSEs. DPE has
already finalized its Results-Framework Document (RFD) for the year 2012-13 on 2nd May, 2012
as per direction of Cabinet Secretariat. It may also be pointed out that the Vision statement of any
organization is having long term relevance. As per its mandate, DPE’s Vision is to evolve policies,
reform programmes, guidelines and mechanisms towards the establishment of a strong and
effective public sector. The aspects of Research and Development activities and Manpower
Planning are covered by the Vision Statement presently incorporated in RFD of DPE. It may also
be mentioned that Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) has already issued Guidelines on
Research and Development (R&D) and Human Resource Management (HRM) for Central Public
Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) as a mandatory component of MoU which is applicable from the year
2012-13. It is further pointed out that DPE has already issued Advisory on professionalization of
the below Board level management in CPSEs which covers the issue of Manpower Planning.
Therefore, a proposal to suitably incorporate Research and Development and Manpower
Planning in the Mission statement of DPE at the time of finalizing RFD for the year 2013-14 will
be submitted for the approval of competent authority.
Recommendations/Observations
2. The Committee, while taking note of the programme for skill development of SLPEs, is
constrained to observe that the Department of Public Enterprises has no scheme for training its
own officers both at the national level institutes and in the reputed training establishments located
7

8
in some of the world class universities and institutes. The officials of the DPE are quite often
engaged in imparting training facilities. They are also engaged in finalizing the MoUs where
weightage is given to several parameters which are indispensable for enhancing growth,
productivity and competitiveness of the PSEs. If these officers are not adequately trained, both at
the national and international levels, their expertise and competence will remain stagnant. It is,
therefore, strongly recommended that a separate scheme for the employees and officers of the DPE
should be formulated for their training within India and abroad. (Para 18)
Action Taken Note
DPE has very small establishment with a total 126 sanctioned staff strength. All these posts
except Group ‘D’ posts have been encadred with various organised Service Cadre like CSS, CSSS,
CSCS, D/o Official Language, IES, ISS, SSS, IAS, IRS, IRTS, ICoAS etc. Matters relating to
training of Officers/Officials are observed by relevant Service Cadres. However, once joining the
DPE officers are sent for attending Workshops, Seminars etc in India/abroad, as per the office
exigencies. Nevertheless, now special emphasis is being given to such training areas.
Recommendations/Observations
3. The Committee takes note of the fact that the DPE is periodically reviewing the CRR
scheme to make it useful to the beneficiaries. A scheme like CRR becomes more meaningful when
the targeted beneficiaries are made employable through training imparted to them. The skills they
acquire need to be certified by an accredited agency so that the training they received is recognized
and valued. (Para 24)
Action Taken Note
The scheme is reviewed on continuous basis. From 2012-13 onwards, a system for Third
Party Evaluation is being introduced for the first time to make the CRR Scheme more robust and
effective. Further improvements in the Scheme including post training certification of candidates is
under consideration for introduction in phases.
Recommendations/Observations
4. The Committee is surprised to note that there is failure on the part of the DPE to secure
the Annual Compliance Reports from the CPSEs. An appropriate strategy has to be devised to
receive such Reports from the concerned PSEs. It is important that Committee must be informed
about the action taken in this regard. (Para 45)
Action Taken Note
The Department of Public Enterprises had issued the guidelines regarding submission of
Annual Compliance Report by the CPSEs vide its OM dated 29.07.2010. This OM was issued by
DPE in compliance of the recommendation made by the Department Related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Industry (DRPSC) in its 216th Report to the effect that DPE should ask for the
Annual Compliance Reports from the CPSEs about the implementation of the Policies and
Guidelines formulated by DPE from time to time. While accepting the above recommendation of
DRPSC, DPE had requested all CPSEs to furnish the Annual Compliance Reports within 30 days
from the end of the preceding financial year to their concerned administrative Ministry, and the
administrative Ministries/Departments were requested to furnish the consolidated Compliance Report
in respect of all CPSEs under their respective administrative control to DPE by 30 June every year.
The OM dated 29.07.2010 was followed by another OM dated 28.06.2011 wherein DPE prescribed

9
the format for submission of Annual Compliance Reports by the concerned administrative
Ministries/Departments. As, the Reports were received from only a few Ministries/CPSEs, all
administrative Ministries/Departments were reminded on 29.03.2012 to furnish the consolidated
Annual Compliance Report for the year 2011-12 in the prescribed format.
Secretary, Department of Public Enterprises has taken up the matter of delay in the
submission of Annual Compliance Reports with Secretaries of Administrative Ministries/Departments
vide DO letter dated 29.05.2012. Secretaries of all Administrative Ministries/Departments were
requested to depute their senior officers to furnish Annual Compliance Reports to DPE. In a series
of meetings convened by Secretary (DPE) with all Administrative Ministries/Departments from 8th
June to 26th June, 2012 senior officers of all 39 administrative Ministries/Department were
sensitized about the need of timely submission of Annual compliance Reports in respect of CPSEs
under their administrative control. As a result, compliance reports have been received in respect of
38 CPSEs, and DPE has issued another reminder on 12.07.2012 to the concerned administrative
Ministries from which replies have not yet been received. It is proposed to establish a system of
convening meetings with all Administrative Ministries/Departments on an annual basis to ensure
timely receipt of Annual Compliance Reports from all administrative Ministries.

10
CHAPTER-III
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee
has either not accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked
the Ministry to review its replies
Recommendations/Observations
1. The Committee is given to understand that the Public Enterprises Selection Board (PESB)
is part of the Department of Personnel and Training. The Committee is surprised to note that it
is the DoPT which is the administrative Ministry for the PESB. Possibly the PESB was made part
of the DoPT when there was no Department of Public Enterprises. Now, that the DPE is in
existence for several years, it would be prudent to bring the PESB under the control of the DPE.
The Committee strongly recommends that such a change must take place for the purpose of
streamlining and quickening the process of succession planning in the PSEs. Apart from the PSEs
and their administrative Ministry the domain knowledge concerning the functioning of the PSEs is
with the DPE. It finalises their MoUs and sets their targets both in the financial and non-financial
sectors. It is, therefore, appropriate that PESB must function under the jurisdiction of DPE. At a
time when the Government of India is emphasizing on the need to reform the functioning the
Central Public Sector Enterprises, it is extremely important to include within the reform process
the decision to transfer the PESB from the control of DoPT to DPE. Realising the importance of
the recommendation it must be done irrespective of any resistance from any quarter.
(Para 20)
Action Taken Note
This issue was taken up at highest level in the Ministry of HI&PE with the highest level
in the Government, for consideration of the matter of transfer of Public Enterprises Selection Board
(PESB) from Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT) to Department of Public Enterprises
(DPE). The matter was duly examined at highest level in consultation with concerned stake holders.
It has been conveyed that no change in the existing allocation of business in respect of PESB is
considered necessary.
Further Recommendation
The Committee, for two reasons, considers this reply of the Government to be far
from satisfactory. Foremost, the reply only states that the issue of transfer of Public
Enterprises Selection Board (PESB) from Department of Personnel & Training (DoPT) to
Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) was considered at the highest level in the
Government and it has been decided that no change in the allocation of business to this
effect was necessary, whereas, the rationale behind the decision is not reflected in the reply.
The Committee expects a reply from the Department with regard to its recommendation to
be explanatory and want it to contain the logic behind the decision taken on the
recommendation.
Further, the Committee is of the firm and considered opinion that the transfer of
the Public Enterprises Selection Board (PESB) from Department of Personnel & Training
(DoPT) to Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) is a functional prerequisite in the
10

11
professionalization of the management of CPSEs and thus can have a cascading effect on
the efficient running of various CPSEs. Taking these into account, the Committee reiterates
its recommendation in the strongest terms.
Recommendations/Observations
2. The Committee is not happy to note that the reduction in expenditure took place because
some States organized their workshops on their own due to delayed approvals of the workshops
to be conducted by the DPE. It also established the point that there was a lack of coordination
between the DPE and the States concerned. Even earlier the Committee has observed that lack of
coordination among Ministries and several Departments of Governments have resulted in policy
paralysis and adversely affecting the functioning of PSEs. The Committee recommends that funds
allocated for such important schemes should be fully utilized. (Para 32)
Action Taken Note
The recommendations of the Committee to (fully) utilize the funds allocated for such
Schemes will be adhered to in all earnest.
Further Recommendation
Though the reply of the Government commits that funds provided for training
programmes will be fully utilized, the Committee would like the Government to comment
on the aspect of lack of coordination between Departments of the Government of India and
the Union and State Governments in implementing such schemes to the full.

12
CHAPTER-IV
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of the Ministry have not been received
Recommendations/Observations
1. The Committee finds that the time taken to process the proposal for revival and
restructuring of a PSU is too long. The delay caused in this regard compounds the problem. The
Committee was given to understand that BRPSE cannot take punitive action or even a strong view
if its recommendations are not followed. In contrast, the views of BIFR are given importance due
to the fact that it has a statutory backing. The Committee is given to understand that the BIFR
is soon to be replaced by the National Company law Tribunal (NCLT). In this scenario, the
Committee recommends that when NCLT is put in place, its mandate should avoid any duplication
of work with BRPSE. The Committee also strongly feels that the revival proposal of sick PSEs
must be disposed of within a specified time avoiding unnecessary delay. (Para 48)
Action Taken Note
The observation and recommendation of the Committee on National Company Law Tribunal
(NCLT) has been brought to the notice of the M/o Corporate Affairs for consideration in the
formulation of mandate of NCLT.
The administrative Ministries/Departments of the CPSEs are informed to take note of the
concern of the Committee for necessary action to dispose the revival proposals of sick CPSEs
under their control in a time frame.
Recommendations/Observations
2. It is deplorable that there are 300 vacant positions of non-official Directors on the Board
of more than 100 scheduled CPSEs. However, the recommendations of Search Committee for
filling up 100 of these vacant positions have already been conveyed to the concerned Ministries for
obtaining approval of competent authority. This must be done expeditiously. (Para 50)
3. The Committee is of the view that professionalization of Boards of CPSEs is an
indispensable necessity for making them more competitive and viable in the emerging market
economy. The good corporate governance can be ensured by professionalization of board of
directors. The existing vacancies of 300 posts of non-functional Directors must be filled up
urgently without which the effective performance of CPSEs would be adversely affected. These
vacancies indicate lack of vision, planning and non responsive attitude to vital issues concerning
the functions of PSEs. The Committee would like to reiterate the point that DPE has to be the
nodal Department under the jurisdiction of which must function the Public Enterprises Selection
Board. The Committee strongly recommends for the filling up of vacancies of non-officials
Directors in CPSEs within a minimum period of one month and also to ensure that such vacancies
do not exist beyond the period of a financial quarter in any case. (Para 51)
Action Taken Note
The selection and appointment of non-official Directors on the Boards of CPSEs is a
12

13
continuous process involving furnishing of proposals by the concerned administrative Ministry,
recommendations by the Search Committee and approval by the competent authority. Following the
above recommendations, the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) has taken the following
actions to expedite filling up of vacant positions of non-official Directors on the Boards of CPSEs.
Secretary, Department of Public Enterprises has conveyed the above recommendation to Secretaries
of all administrative Ministries/Department in May, 2012 and requested them to take necessary steps
to ensure that requisite numbers of non-official Directors are appointed on the Boards of CPSEs
under their respective administrative control. Thereafter, DPE organized interaction meetings with
senior officials of all (39) administrative Ministries/Departments during the month of June, 2012
wherein the urgent need to fill vacant positions of non-official Directors as recommended by the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry was reiterated. As a result, there
has been significant increase in the number of proposals for appointment of non-official Directors
being submitted to DPE. Further, Secretary, Department of Public Enterprises, in July, 2012 has
again taken up this matter with Secretaries of those Ministries/Departments in whose CPSEs there
are substantial number of vacant positions of non-official Directors, impressing them again to take
immediate steps to fill such vacant positions.

MINUTES

XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 03.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 19 th March, 2013 in Committee Room A,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Tiruchi Siva — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ashk Ali Tak
3. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu
4. Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor
5. Shri Basawaraj Patil
6. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
7. Shri. Vivek Gupta
8. Shri M.P. Achuthan
LOK SABHA
9. Shrimati Poonamben Veljibhai Jat
10. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal
11. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey
12. Shri Jayaram Pangi
13. Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat
14. Shri Ijyaraj Singh
15. Shri E.G . Sugavanam
SECRETARIAT
Shri S. N. Sahu, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Roshan Lal, Deputy Director
Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members and briefed them that
the agenda for the meeting, was to consider and adopt the 236
th ATR pertaining to the Department
of Public Enterprises on MoU performance, 239 th ATR on the Credit Facilities to MSME sector
pertaining to Ministry of MS&ME, 238 th, 240 th and 241 st ATRs pertaining to the Department of
Heavy Industry, Ministry of MS&ME and Department of Public Enterprises, respectively, on their
respective Demands for Grants (2012-13).
17

18
2. Thereafter, the Committee took up the Reports for consideration. After some deliberation,
the Committee unanimously adopted all the Draft Reports.
3. Afterwards, the Committee decided to present/lay five of its reports i.e., the 236 th ATR
pertaining to the Department of Public Enterprises on MoU performance, 239 th ATR on the Credit
Facilities to MSME sector pertaining to Ministry of MS&ME, 238 th 240 th and 241 st ATRs pertaining
to the Department of Heavy Industry, Ministry of MS&ME and Department of Public Enterprises,
respectively on 21
st March, 2013 in both the Houses of Parliament. The Committee authorized its
Chairman, and in his absence, Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu, Member, Rajya Sabha, and in absence
of both Shri M.P. Achuthan, Member, Rajya Sabha to present the 236
th, 238 th, 239 th, 240 th and 24 st
Reports in the Rajya Sabha. The Committee also authorized Shri Ijyaraj Singh Member, Lok Sabha
and in his absence Shrimati Poonamben Veljibhai Jat, Member, Lok Sabha to lay copies of the same
Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
The meeting adjourned at 03.58 
P.M.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.