192nd Report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/192ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 13:06:02]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
ONE HUNDRED –NINETY  SECOND REPORT
ON
REPORT ON THE DALMIA DADRI CEMENT LIMITED ( ACQUISITION AND
TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKING) AMENDMENT BILL, 2006
(MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES)
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 23RD NOVEMBER, 2006)
(LAID ON THE TABLE  OF THE  LOK SABHA ON 24TH NOVEMBER, 2006)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
                             NOVEMBER, 2006/AGRAHAYANA, 1928  (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
1.            COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2.            INTRODUCTION                        
3.            REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE    
4.            OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE  COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE
5.            MINUTES                                                                                                                      
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
(Date of Constitution – 5th August 2006  )
 
                        Shri Santosh Bagrodia                      —            Chairman
    
      RAJYA SABHA
Shri  G. Sanjeeva Reddy
Dr. Prabha Thakur
Shri Kalraj Mishra 
Smt. Hema Malini  
Dr. K. Malaisamy       
Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
Dr. Vijay Mallya 
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan          
O.T.Lepcha
                   
                           LOK SABHA
Shri Guharam Ajgalle
Shri S.K. Biswamuthiary 
Shri Ajoy Chakraborty    
Shri Swadesh Chakraborty                
Shri Subhash   Sureshchandra Deshmukh       
Shri Ram Singh Kaswan           
Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria           
Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani                                               

192nd Report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/192ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 13:06:02]
Shri Kishanbhai V.  Patel
Shri P.Rajendran    
Shri Badiga  Ramakrishna
Shri  Gurjeet Singh Rana
Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana           
Shri Rajnarayan Budholiya
Shri K.C. Pallanisamy                  
 Kunwar  Manvendra Singh               
Shri Ganesh Singh               
Shri V.K. Thummar                     
Shri Girdhari Yadav
Shri Umakant Yadav
Shri Mohan S. Delkar 
            Secretariat
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K.Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Girija Shanker Prasad, Committee Officer
I N T R O D U C T I ON
 
 
I,  the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry,  having   been authorised  by
the Committee, hereby present this One Hundred – Ninety  Second Report on the  Dalmia Dadri Cement Limited (
Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Amendment Bill, 2006 ( Ministry of  Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises). 
 
2.         The Bill was referred to the Committee on 4
th September, 2006 for examination and report.  The Committee 
examined and  considered  the Dalmia Dadri Cement Limited ( Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Amendment
Bill, 2006 in details and formulated its observations and recommendations thereon.  
 
3.        I thank the representatives of Ministries of Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises, Law and Justice and the
Cement Corporation of India, for their valuable inputs to the Committee.
 
4.         The Committee at its meeting held on 20th November,  2006 considered and adopted the Report.
 
NEW DELHI;        
20
th November, 2006.
SANTOSH BAGRODIA
Chairman
Department -related Parliamentary
                    Standing Committee on Industry
REPORT
 
CHAPTER - I
 
1.         The Dalmia Dadri Cement Ltd.(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertaking) Amendment Bill, 2006 was
introduced  in Lok Sabha on 28th July, 2006 and was referred to this Committee on 4th September 2006 for examination
and report.
2.         The Statement of Objects and Reason, states as under:
“The Cement Corporation of India Limited (CCI), being a public sector enterprise under the administrative control of
the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of Heavy Industry,), has become a sick industrial
company as defined under the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 and a reference in respect of
which has been made to the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) during 1996.  The BIFR had
circulated  a Draft Rehabilitation Scheme(DRS) for revival of the CCI.  The DRS, inter alia, provide for closure and sale
of assets of the seven non-operating plants and expansion or modernization of the remaining three plants.  The assets of

192nd Report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/192ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 13:06:02]
one of the seven non-operating plants proposed to be closed, namely, the Charkhi Dadri Cement Plant in Haryana, were
acquired under the provisions of the Dalmia Dadri Cement Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act,
1981’.
 
In view of the judgement of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, in the Centre for Public Interest Litigation vs.  Union
of India, (2003) 7 SCC 532, it has been decided to suitably amend the Dalmia Dadri Cement Ltd. (Acquisition and
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1981 so as to empower the CCI to close and dispose off the assets of the Charkhi Dadri
Cement Plant.”
 
 
3.         The Committee held three meetings to examine, consider and adopt the Bill. Ministry of Heavy Industries and
public Enterprises along with Cement Corporation of India explained the background and intent of the Bill in their
written and oral presentations before the Committee.
 
While examining the Bill, the Committee availed the opportunity to assess the performance of the Cement Corporation
of India Ltd. as the Bill has a critical bearing over the overall rehabilitation of the CCI.
Cement Corporation of India
In the presentation before the Committee, the CCI informed that the Company was established in January 1965 with
Paid up Capital of Rs. 446.82 crores 100% owned by Government of India.  However, by 31
st March 2006 the Company
had accumulated losses of Rs. 1321.02 crores which reduced its net worth to negative to the tune of of Rs. 874.20
crores.    At present the Company owns ten units of which only three units at Bokajan, Rajban and Tandur are
operational remaining seven units at Mandhar, Kurkunta, Naya Gaun, Akaltara, Adilabad, Charkhi Dadri and Delhi
Grinding Units have been  rendered non-operational since long.  As such of the total install capacity of 38.48 LMT, CCI
has only 36% (13.96 LMT) capacity as operative, where as remaining 64% (24.52 LMT) capacity is lying idle.  In any
case the CCIs installed capacity is meager 2.6% of the total installed capacity in the country. 
 
 
The Committee was informed that obsolete technology rendered CCI units inefficient and un-economical in a
competitive market. Plants were some thirty years old. Of the authorized capital of Rs. 700 crores, total equity capital of
Rs. 446.82 crores has been invested in the Company over a period of some 40 years. The Committee   notes that where
as Government had been injecting Non-Planned Funds to pay salary and other dues, no concerted Planned expenditure
was made to modernize these Plants.
 
 
In its written presentation, the Committee was informed that the  CCI was referred to BIFR in  1995 after its net worth
eroded and was declared sick in August, 1996.  In June, 1998,  BIFR circulated first Draft Rehabilitation Scheme (DRS)
with a proposed cost of some Rs.41.60 crores of which Rs. 35 crores were for the planned expenditure and remaining
Rs.6.60 crores were meant to clear the VRS dues.  However, Government of India did not make commitment and the
DRS lapsed.
 
The Second DRS was formulated in 1999 which projected the rehabilitation cost at Rs. 109 crores but was allowed to
lapse due to not commitment.
 
In March 2001, the process of sale for CCI was initiated. SBI Caps was  appointed as the Merchant Banker by IFCI, the
operating agency. However in response  to the Globel Tender,   only two bids were received for the Rajban Plant.  No
bid for other plants was received.  Even the two bids for the Rajban unit were below the reserved price and therefore no
sale could take place.
 
Subsequently, M/s Holtec and M/s NCMB were appointed consultants in September, 2004 to conduct the techno-
economic studies.  The recommendations of the consultants have been assessed at various levels by BIFR, BRPSE and
Committee of Secretaries.   Based on these recommendations the revival scheme for CCI was approved by the Union
Cabinet in March, 2006 and subsequently by BIFR in May, 2006.
 

192nd Report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/192ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 13:06:02]
 
The Committee was informed that the BRPSE even considered feasibility of a Joint Venture as a probable method for
the rehabilitation of CCI. The proposal eventually was not found feasible.
 
The Committee noted that with such financial situation, the Board of the Company did not have much options left but to
accept the DRS as approved by the BIFR. The Board of CCI in its 273
rd and 278th meetings accepted the DRS.
 
As per the revival scheme, the seven non-operative units of the CCI are to be closed and sold as per the valuation done
by Asset Sale Committee constituted by BIFR.  The revival scheme also envisages the expansion and modernization of
remaining three operational plants at Bokanjan, Tandur and Rajban with estimated cost of Rs. 141.11 crores.  The
revival scheme includes waiver of outstanding interest dues of Rs. 886.22 crores on the Government of India loans and
conversion of GOI loan of Rs. 355.43 crores into share capital.  It further seeks to freeze the interest on outstanding GOI
loan beyond March, 2005.  In addition to restructuring the previous liabilities, the revival scheme recommends a fresh
planned assistance of Rs. 30.67 crores for the expansion and modernization of operational units and also a renewed non-
plan loan of Rs. 153.62 crores to clear the outstanding dues towards creditors and VRS dues of employees. In addition
to this revival package, the Government has already provided a budgetary support of Rs. 176.30 crores over the years
for the payment of salary and other dues in non-functional units.
 
In its written reply to the Committee, the Ministry informed that after such costly rehabilitation, the capacity of
functional units will increase from present 1.39 lakh MT/ annum to 1.64 lakh MT/annum.
 
The Committee was informed that the CCI expects Rs. 617.76 crores as sale proceeds of its seven non-functional units.
Of this only Rs 141.11 crores will be used for modernization and expansion, remaining Rs. 476.65 crores will be used to
settle the dues.
 
The Committee takes serious view of the massive cost of delay in implementing the revival scheme.   The revival which
could have cost only Rs. 41.60 crores in 1998, has now swollen to Rs. 1577.05 crores in 2006.  This cost will
rehabilitate only three of the currently operational units.  For six years the losses and liabilities have been allowed to
accumulate whereas assets have eroded during the same period. With a negative net worth of the Company, a major part
of the sale proceeds of the seven units are likely to be used in settling the old dues instead of funding upgradation and
expansion of the remaining units. This fact is corroborated by the representatives of the CCI, who confirmed that only
Rs. 141.11 crores will be used for expansion and modernization out total Rs. 617.76 crores as probable sale proceeds.
And only 0.25 lakh MT of additional capacity will be added to the three operational plants. The remaining fund that
could have been used for capital expenditure will be used in settling the dues that have mounted due to delay.   On the
other hand, as a part of rehabilitation, the Government will be required to infuse another Rs. 30.67 crores for capital
expenditure and shall have to waive its dues worth  Rs. 1250 crores.  The Committee finds it alarming waste of
resources.  It is alarming that this wastage took place despite the fact that the Government held 100% of equity stake in
the Company. In view of the Government’s ownership of the CCI, the Committee specifically asked the Ministry about
the views and opinions of the Government Directors on the Board of CCI during the loss making years. However no
specific reply was provided by the Ministry on this specific query. Neither any accountability has been fixed for such
situation.
 
The Committee expresses its  apprehension that if most of the sale proceed are to be spent on settling previous dues
instead of expanding prospective business, there was only a limited chance of long term viability of CCI even after such
rehabilitation, as there will be only a very limited addition in the capacity. The Committee observes that the
Government should take a view of the current trends in the cement sector, where private players were expanding their
capacities, acquiring new plants and even global cement giants picking up stakes in Indian cement sector. In competition
with such players the CCI, with its limited capacity will remain untenable and may eventually seek Budgetary support
from the Government.
The Committee recommends that the Government must take into account the current trends and prospects in cement
sector and also factor  above mentioned facts while disposing off the seven non-operational units of the CCI and should
try to maximize the sale proceeds of these units. 
 

192nd Report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/192ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 13:06:02]
Dalmia Dadri Cement Limited
In a written reply by the Ministry the Committee was informed regarding the circumstances under which the Dalmia
Dadri Cement Ltd. was acquired by the Government of India in 1981. The Company was rendered non-functional in
March, 1980, and the case for its liquidation was pending before High Court of Punjab and Haryana. The Government
of India had however acquired it with a view of securing proper management so as to serve the interest of general public
by ensuring the continued manufacture, production and distribution of Cement. 
After acquisition in 1981 by Government of India the unit was actually commissioned in May,1982.  The Government
incurred a rehabilitation cost of Rs. 2.51 crores.  The original installed capacity of the unit was 1.74 lakh MT per
annum. The unit has 201 acres of land for its factory and township.   It also has 1232.77 acres of leased mines.
However, the objective with which the Units was acquired, was defeated   within four years of its acquisition as the unit
started incurring losses  from 1985 and was eventually rendered non-operational in 1996.  Till 31
st March, 2006 the unit
had accumulated losses of Rs. 130.93 crores.  It is paying Rs. 5.43 lakhs monthly in idle wages to 25 regular employees.
During its examination the Committee sought to know the circumstances under which the units started incurring losses
within four years off its acquisition.   The Committee was informed that the poor quality of limestone and the semi dry
process of production were the two major causes which had major bearing over the performance of the unit.   The
Committee was informed that as the conversion to dry process entailed huge investment, therefore Government did not
consider it feasible to convert the Unit to Dry process, though it should have been more efficient process.
The Committee observes that the Government had not assessed quality of the limestone prior to Unit’s acquisition, an
omission that eventually had a critical bearing over its financial viability.
The Committee however recommends Asset Sale Committee should re-assess the valuation of the plant and the land of
the Dalmia Dadri Cement Ltd.  in transparent manner.   In context of prevailing price of land in that region and the
current growth in the Cement sector.
The Committee recommends that the Government should consider these observations of the Committee while disposing
of Dalmia Dadri Cement Ltd. under the provision of proposed Amendment Bill.    
 
CHAPTER - II
Clause by Clause consideration
1.         The Committee having examined the financial status of the Company, Objects and Reasons for bringing the Bill
and also having expressed its concerns over the certain issues as elaborated in the Report,  took up Clause by Clause
consideration of  the Bill in its meeting on the 9
th November 2006.
Clause 2
2.         In  Section 9 of the Dalmia Dadri Cement Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of  Undertakings) Act, 1981, for
the words “ do in relation to its undertakings”,   the words, letters, figures and brackets “ do in relation to its
undertakings, including the power to dispose off the assets of the Undertakings of the Company vested upon it, by the
notification of the Government of India,  in the Ministry  of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises, Department   of
Heavy Industry number S.O. 502(E), dated the        23
rd June, 1981, under sub-section(I) of section 6, if such disposal of
the        assets is considered necessary by the   Cement   Corporation due to legal or financial   considerations”  shall  be
substituted.
The Clause was adopted without suggesting any amendment.
Clause  1
3.         This Act may be called the Dalmia Dadri Cement Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of   Undertakings)
Amendment Act, 2006.
The Clause was adopted without suggesting any amendment. 
The enacting formula and the title of the Bill were also adopted without suggesting any amendment.
            The Committee recommend that the Bill may be passed as reported by the Committee.
Observations/Recommendations
  of the Committee at a glance
 
The Committee takes serious view of the massive cost of delay in implementing the revival scheme.   The revival which
could have cost only Rs. 41.60 crores in 1998, has now swollen to Rs. 1577.05 crores in 2006.  This cost will
rehabilitate only three of the currently operational units.  For six years the losses and liabilities have been allowed to
accumulate whereas assets have eroded during the same period. With a negative net worth of the Company, a major part
of the sale proceeds of the seven units are likely to be used in settling the old dues instead of funding upgradation and
expansion of the remaining units. This fact is corroborated by the representatives of the CCI, who confirmed that only

192nd Report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/192ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 13:06:02]
Rs. 141.11 crores will be used for expansion and modernization out total Rs. 617.76 crores as probable sale proceeds.
And only 0.25 lakh MT of additional capacity will be added to the three operational plants. The remaining fund that
could have been used for capital expenditure will be used in settling the dues that have mounted due to delay.  On the
other hand, as a part of rehabilitation, the Government will be required to infuse another Rs. 30.67 crores for capital
expenditure and shall have to waive its dues worth some Rs. 1250 crores.  The Committee finds it alarming waste of
resources.  It is alarming that this wastage took place despite the fact that the Government held 100% of equity stake in
the Company. In view of the Government’s ownership of the CCI, the Committee specifically asked the Ministry about
the views and opinions of the Government Directors on the Board of CCI during the loss making years. However no
specific reply was provided by the Ministry on this specific query. Neither any accountability has been fixed for such
situation. ( Para 16)
 
The Committee expresses its  apprehension that if most of the sale proceed are to be spent on settling previous dues
instead of expanding prospective business, there was only a limited chance of long term viability of CCI even after such
rehabilitation, as there will be only a very limited addition in the capacity. The Committee   observes that the
Government should take a view of the current trends in the cement sector, where private players were expanding their
capacities, acquiring new plants and even global cement giants picking up stakes in Indian cement sector. In competition
with such players the CCI, with its limited capacity will remain untenable and may eventually seek Budgetary support
from the Government. ( Para 17)
 The Committee recommends that the Government must take into account the current trends and prospects in cement
sector and also factor  above mentioned facts while disposing off the seven non-operational units of the CCI and should
try to maximize the sale proceeds of these units.  (Para 18)
 
The Committee also recommends Asset Sale Committee should re-assess the valuation of the plant and the land of the
Dalmia Dadri Cement Ltd. In context of prevailing price of land in that region and the current growth in the Cement
sector.( Para 24)
 
The Committee recommends at the Government may consider these observations of the Committee while disposing of
Dalmia Dadri Cement Ltd. Under the provision of proposed Amendment Bill.    ( Para 25)