 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021/Pausha, 1943 (Saka) 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
310 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND TENTH REPORT 
ON 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 304th Report of the 
Committee on 
Demands for Grants (2021-22)  
pertaining to 
the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22nd December, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd February, 2022) 

 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021/Pausha, 1943 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY FIRST REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON  247TH  REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
ON 
 IMPLEMENTATION OF  INTEREST SUBSIDY 
ELEGIBILITY CERTIFICATE (ISEC) SCHEME  
 
PERTAINING TO 
THREE HUNDRED AND TENTH REPORT 
ON 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the 304th Report of the Committee on 
Demands for Grants (2021-22)  
pertaining to 
the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22nd December, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd February, 2022) 

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE........................................... (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION..      ................................................................................... (ii) 
3. ACRONYMS.        ........................................................................................... (iii)-(iv) 
4. REPORT.................................................................................................... 1- 46 
   
 Chapter I      
 
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by       
the Ministry................................................ 
 
      1 -  14 
 Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not 
desire to pursue further in view of the Ministry’s 
replies...................................................... 
 
  15 - 26 
 Chapter III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the 
Committee has not accepted repl ies of the Ministry 
………………..................................................... 
 
 27 – 45 
 Chapter IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Ministry are still 
awaited………………………………………………...  
 
 46 - 46 
5. ANNEXURE ............................................................................................... 47 – 48 
6. MINUTES ........................................................................................... 
 
49 – 51 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
DEPARTMENT- RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
(Constituted  w.e.f.  13th September, 2021) 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 1. Dr. K. Keshava Rao         -       Chairman 
  2.  Shri Hardwar Dubey    
 3. Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
 4. Shri Shwait Malik 
 5. Shrimati Ranee Narah  
 6. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
 7. Shri Sanjay Seth 
 8. Shri Abdul Wahab 
 9.  Dr. Amee Yajnik 
 10.  *Vacant 
     LOK SABHA 
 11.   Shri Hanuman Beniwal 
 12.   Ms. Mimi Chakraborty 
 13.   Shri Bharatsinghji Shankarji Dabhi 
 14.   Shri Hemant Godse  
 15.   Dr. S. T. Hasan 
 16.   Shri Ravi Kishan 
 17.   Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanjibhai Kundariya 
 18.   Shri Ravinder Kushawaha 
 19.   Shrimati Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
 20.   Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
 21.   Shri Ramprit Mandal 
 22.   Shri Vincent H. Pala 
 23.   Shri Chirag Kumar Paswan 
 24.   Shri T. R. V. S. Ramesh 
 25.   Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy  
 26.   Ms. Jothimani S.  
 27.   Shrimati Gomti Sai 
 28.   Shri Sunil Soren 
 29.   Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare 
 30.   Shri Thirunavukkarasar S.U. 
 31.   Shri Vijay Kumar (alias) Vijay Vasanth 
   SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Jagdish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
2.   Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Secretary 
3.   Shri Narendra Kumar, Additional Director 
4.   Smt. Sreeja. V., Deputy Secretary 
5.   Shri. Pratap Shenoy, Under Secretary 
6.   Shri Anuj Verma, Assistant Research Officer 
__________________________________________________________________________ 
*Vacancy caused due to resignation of Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar from DRPSC on Industry w.e.f. 
08.11.2021, notified on 12th November, 2021. 
 
(i) 
 

 
INTRODUCTION 
  
  I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Co mmittee, hereby present this Three Hundred 
and Tenth Report on the Action Taken by the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises on the recommendations /observations of the Committee on Industry 
contained in the Committee’s 304th Report on Demands for Grants (2021-22).  
  
2. The 304th Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Industry was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 17 th March, 2021 and laid on the 
Table of the Lok Sabha on 17th March, 2021. 
 
3. The Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises furnished the Action 
Taken Notes on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s 304th Report, of 
the Committee on Industry on 3rd September, 2021. 
  
4. The Committee in its meeting held on 21st December, 202 1 considered and 
adopted the Report. 
 
  
 
 
New Delhi 
21 December, 2021 
Agrahayana 30, 1943 (Saka) 
 
Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 

 
ACRONYMS 
 
ADD Antidumping Duties 
APAC Asia Pacific Accreditation Co-operation 
ASPIRE A Scheme for Promoting Innovation, Rural Industry and 
Entrepreneurship 
AWF Artisan Welfare Fund 
B.E. Budget Estimate 
BCD Basic Customs Duty 
BSM Buyer Seller Meet 
CC Cash Credit 
CFC Common Facility Centres 
CHAMPIONS Creation and Harmonious Application of Modern Processes 
CIPET Central Institute of Petrochemicals Engineering & 
Technology 
CMDs Chairman & Managing Director 
CLCSS Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme 
CLCS-TUS Credit Linked Capital Subsidy & Technology Upgradation 
Scheme 
COVID-19 Corona Virus Disease-19 
CoEs Centres of Excellence 
CPSEs Central Public Sector Enterprises 
CSCs Commons Service Centres 
CVD Countervailing Duties 
DIC District Industries Center 
DFG Demands for Grants 
DLTFC District Level Task Force Committee 
ECLGS Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme 
EDP Entrepreneurship Development Programme 
EEPC Engineering Export Promotion Council 
FY Financial Year 
GECL Guaranteed Emergency Credit Line Scheme 
GeM Government e-Marketplace 
GoI Government of India 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
IC International Cooperation 
IDEMI Institute for Design of Electrical Measuring Instrument 
IIM Indian Institute of Management 
ILAC International Laboratory Accreditation Co-operation 
ISEC Interest Subsidy Eligibility Certificate 
KIs Khadi Institutions 
KVIs Khadi and Village Industries 
KVIB Khadi & Village Industries Board 
KVIC Khadi and Village Industries Commission 
LBIs Livelihood Business Incubators 
MLIs Member Lending Institutions 
 
(iii) 

 
 
MM Margin Money 
MMDA Modified Market Development Assistance 
M/o MSME Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
MSMEs Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
MSEs Micro and Small Enterprises 
MSME-DIs Micro, Small &Medium Enterprises Development Institutes 
MSECDP Micro & Small Enterprises Cluster Development Programme 
NABL National Accreditation Board for laboratories 
NCGTC National Credit Guarantee Trustee Company 
NER North Eastern Region 
NGO Non-Governmental Organization 
NIELIT National Institute of Electronics and Information Technology 
NIFT National Institute of Fashion Technology 
NI-MSME National Institute for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
NSSHO National SC-ST Hub Offices 
NSIC National Small Industries Corporation 
NSQF National Skills Qualifications Framework 
NSTFDC National Scheduled Tribes Finance  and Development 
Corporation 
NEZ North Eastern Zone 
Pas Promoter Agencies 
PMEGP Prime Minister’s Employment Generation Programme 
PMSBY Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana 
PSU Public Sector Undertaking 
R&D Research & Development 
R.E. Revised Estimate 
RSETI Rural Self Employment Training Institutes 
RUDSETI Rural Development and Self Employment Training Institute 
SCLCSS Special Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme 
SHGs Self Help Groups 
SVDPs Special Vendor Development Programs 
SFURTI Scheme of Fund for Regeneration of Traditional Industries 
TBIs Technology Business Incubators 
TReDS Trade Receivables Discounting System 
VDP Vendor Development Programme 
VLEs Village Level Entrepreneurs 
ZED Zero Defect and Zero Effect 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

 
 
1 
 
REPORT 
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the 
Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises on the recommendations  contained in the 
Committee’s 304th Report on the Demands for Grants (2021-22) pertaining to M/o MSME. 
 
2.  Action Taken Note have  been received from the Ministry of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises  in respect of the recommendations /observations contained in the          
304th Report. These have been categorized as follows: 
 
Chapter-I-       The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry 
  Para:  28, 37, 53, 61, 73, 74, 83, 85, 86, 87, 88 and 103 (Total: 12) 
 
Chapter-II-  The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to   
pursue further in view of the Ministry’s replies. 
Para: 11, 12, 15, 17, 25, 31, 41, 43, 56, 62, 69, 70, 90 and 104 (Total: 14) 
 
Chapter-III-  The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has not 
accepted replies of the Ministry.  
  Para: 3, 4, 13, 23, 24, 38, 39, 42, 48, 49, 54, 63, 65, 78, 79 and 84  
(Total: 16) 
 
Chapter-IV- Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Ministry are still awaited.  
Para: 55  (Total: 01) 
 
3. The details of the Action Taken Replies of the Ministry and further recommendations/ 
observations of the Committee thereon wherever found necessary are given in the succeeding pages. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
 
Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1. The Committee appreciates the effort made by the Ministry in respect of 
creating e -market linkages for strengthening the MSME Sector and recommends 
that the Ministry should analyze the marketing system of MSMEs of developed 
countries and their system of ne wer technology adoption for their development 
and adopt the best practices followed internationally for advancement and 
development of indigenous MSMEs.  
 
(Para 28) 
 
Action Taken 
 
The Procurement and Marketing Support Scheme provides market support 
to MSMEs by promoting new market access initiatives like 
organising/participation in Trade Fairs/Exhibitions, Vendor Development 
Programmes etc. with in the country. The International Cooperation (IC) Scheme 
provides financial supp ort to the MSME sector for participating in international 
exhibitions/fairs to exhibit their products.  The recommendation of Committee has 
been noted for further necessary action. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2. PMEGP is one of the flagship Schemes of the  Ministry of MSME which is 
capable of generating large -scale employment for youth of the country, 
particularly during the Covid Pandemic. The Committee , however, finds that an 
amount Rs. 2000 crore has been allocated for the Scheme for FY 2021-2022 vis-à-
vis allocation of Rs. 2500 crores during 2020 -2021. The Committee recommends 
that more allocations should be demanded by the Ministry at the RE stage for 
effective implementation of the Scheme. 
(Para 37) 
Action Taken 
 
An amount of Rs.1905.80 crores (Margin Money of Rs.1877.33 crores+ 
Backward & Forward Linkages of Rs.28.47 crores) was allocated under the 
PMEGP Scheme for the year 2020 -21 at Revised Estimates (RE) stage. In 
addition, an unspent balance of Rs. 499.28 crore as on 1 st April, 2020 was also 
available. During the FY 2020 -21, PMEGP has performed very well and achieved 
its annual targets by assisting 74,415 applicants in setting up new microenterprises 

 
 
3 
 
through disbursing a subsidy of Rs. 2,188 crores and generating employment 
opportunities for an estimated 5.7 lakh persons.   
 
Banks during 2020 -21 have sanctioned about one lakh applications, which 
are 50% more over the last year. Approval rate of the applications forwarded to 
the banks also increased from 21.6% in 2019 -20 to 25.6% in 2020 -21. This has 
been PMEGP’s best performance since its inception in 2008 -09 despite COVID 
challenges throughout the year.  
 
For the FY 2021 -22 (Budget Estimate) an amount of Rs. 2000.00 crores 
(MM of Rs.1900 crores + B&F 100.00 crores) have been allocated. However, a 
target for setting up of at least one lakh new units under PMEGP for the year 
2021-22 has been fixed. The additional budget requirement will accordingly be 
requested in due course through Supplementary Grants.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3. The Committee notes that the BE for SFURTI Scheme for FY 2020 -21 i.e. 
Rs. 464.85 crore was reduced at the RE Stage to Rs. 300 crore and the Actual 
Expenditure was only Rs. 192.54 crores till 31 st January, 2021. The Committee 
also notes that against a projected Budget Estimate of Rs. 500 crores for the 
SFRUTI Scheme for FY 2021-2022, an allocation of only Rs. 170 crores has been 
made. The Committee expresses its concern over the low utilization pat tern and 
reduction in allocations for an important Scheme of the Ministry, which is capable 
of generating employment in a large scale in the rural areas for the artisans, 
particularly during the Covid Pandemic. The Committee recommends that a 
holistic evaluation study of the Scheme may be conducted and based on the said 
study more allocations should be projected by the Ministry at the RE Stage for 
effective implementation of SFURTI Scheme for benefit of the traditional artisans. 
 
(Para 53) 
 
Action Taken 
 
The RE for the year 2020 -21 was Rs. 350 crores out of which Rs.349.110 
cores was utilized which is 99.74% of the RE. For FY 2021 -2022, more funds 
shall be sought at RE stage based on the progress to implement the Scheme.  An 
evaluation study of the Scheme has been under taken by IIM Lucknow.  Based on 
the report and internal assessment, the Scheme shall be carried forward with 
required changes for the benefit of the traditional artisans across the country.  

 
 
4 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
4. The Committee observes that one of the most important objectives of the 
implementation of various Schemes under Coir Board is the creation of 
employment especially in rural areas of the country. For this purpose, Coir Board 
is providing training on various  aspects of production and development of 
new/innovative products. The Committee recommends that Ministry should make 
these training courses popular through various social publicity mediums available 
so that large number of people especially from younger g eneration may get 
attracted to such training courses, which will culminate in fruitful employment. 
 
(Para 61) 
 
Action Taken 
 
Presently, the Coir Board through its Regional /Sub Regional Offices is 
making efforts to  popularize its training courses through the concerned District 
Industries Centers, Directorate of Industries, Coir Project Offices,  SHGs, NGOs, 
various co -operative societies etc. Further, through the conduct of promotional 
programs viz. Entrepreneurship Development Programme, Awareness 
Programme, Workshops, seminars etc., more people including the younger 
generation are being made aware about coir training courses.  On the website of 
the Board, videos and e-tutorials on various coir processing and applications have 
been uploaded. During the year 2020 -21, 29 National/ Regional level webinars on 
various topics on coir and Schemes and services were conducted which were 
attended virtually by more th an 35,000 participants/ viewers including from other 
social media like WhatsApp groups, Face book, You Tube etc. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
5. During the lockdown periods the availability of raw material was disrupted 
which affected the operations of MSMEs adversely. Further, the prices of raw 
material have risen exorbitantly in the recent times which have significantly 
affected the businesses of  the MSMEs and their profits have significantly 
decreased. In this given scenario, NSIC can play a significant role by 
coordinating with the respective Ministries to ensure unhindered supply of raw 
material to MSMEs and also provided support and interventi ons to the MSMEs in 
the export of their products. The Committee expresses its satisfaction that NSIC 
performed well since II Quarter and facilitated the MSMEs to the tune of Rs. 
1234.91 crores. The Committee is however, of the view that the Ministry should  

 
 
5 
 
also explore other possibilities for raw material supply to MSMEs instead of 
solely depending on NSIC to meet the raw material requirements of MSMEs . 
 
 
(Para 73) 
 
6. The Committee recommends that a robust procurement system should be 
evolved which could ensure unhindered and timely supply of raw materials to 
MSMEs at reasonable price. The Committee recommends that required steps 
should be taken to keep the prices of ra w material reasonable, including giving 
some sort of subsidy, so that MSMEs can run their businesses smoothly.  
 
(Para 74) 
 
Action Taken (For Para 73 and 74) 
 
To ensure regular supply of raw material to MSMEs, National Small 
Industries Corporation (NSIC), a CPSE under this Ministry , facilitates MSMEs in 
meeting their raw material requirements. For this purpose, NSIC enters into 
arrangements with bulk manufacturers for supply of raw materials to MSMEs. 
NSIC also provides financial assistance to MSMEs under i ts Raw Material 
Assistance Scheme against bank guarantee for payment to suppliers. 
 
Further, Government of India has taken various steps to ensure continuous 
supply of raw materials to MSMEs. Some of the steps taken to meet the raw 
material demands of MSMEs in the Steel Sector are as under:  
 Guidelines have been issued on 24.06.2020 by Ministry of Steel for 
providing limited quantum of four product categories of steel (hot rolled 
coil, cold rolled coil, wire rods and alloy steel bars) to MSME members of 
Engineering Export Promotion Council (EEPC) at export parity price by 
domestic producers.  
 Relief has also been provided to metal recyclers by exempting Basic 
Customs Duty (BCD) on steel scrap and reducing BCD to 2.5% on copper 
scrap as well as revocation/temporary revocation of ADD and CVD on 
certain steel products.  
 Besides, production of iron  ore and steel by mining companies and major 
steel producers has been increased to ensure steady availability of steel for 
use by MSMEs. 
 
 

 
 
6 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
7. The Committee observes that NSIC through its Vendor Development 
Programmes sensitize and facilitate MSEs, including SC/ST enterprises, to 
become qualified vendors to public sector enterprises and other Government 
Departments as per the provision of 25% mandatory procurement under Public 
Procurement Policy. Of this, 4% should be from SC/ST MSEs. However, during 
its visit to Kolkata, Hyderabad and Mumbai in January, 2020, the Committee 
found that while the PSUs and Government procurement from MSEs has been 
gradually improving, procurement from SC/ST units is negligible. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends that there should be more Vendor Development 
Programmes organized to popularize Public Procurement Policy among MSEs 
especially SC/ST and Women entrepreneurs. 
(Para 83) 
 
Action Taken 
 
Under National SC -ST Hub, Special Vendor Development Progr ams 
(SVDPs) are organized through NSSH Offices in coordination with 
CPSEs/Central Ministries and local industry associations to encourage the SC/ST 
enterprises to be part of public procurement. Post such outreach activities, training 
in e-tendering and handholding support for participation in Govt. Tenders are also 
provided to interested SC -ST entrepreneurs through the National SC -ST Hub 
offices located at various places. Since its inception, 335SVDPs have been 
organized under the NSSH. In addition, more th an 1500SVDPs have been 
conducted in collaboration with CPSEs and various Industry Associations.  
 
Since the inception of the NSSH, there has been a 10-fold growth in the public 
procurement from SC/ST MSEs. The procurement made from SC/ST MSEs from 
FY 2015-16 to FY 2020-21 are as under: 
 
 
Year FY 
15-16 
 
FY 16 -
17 
 
FY 17 -
18 
 
FY 18 -
19 
 
FY 19 -
20 
 
FY 
20-21 
 
Order 
Value 
(Rs. Cr.) 
99.37 328 544 824 692 534 
 
However, the recommendation of the Committee has been noted.  
 

 
 
7 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
8. The Committee observes that under National SC/ST Hub, the Actual 
Expenditure has always been less than the BE. The Committee is concerned about 
the under-utilization of allocated funds meant for the marginalized communities of 
the society. The Committee recommends that Ministry should endeavor to improve 
the situation by ensuring that the budget earmarked for SC/ST Hub Scheme is 
utilized fully for the benefit of the communities. Creating awareness among SC/ST 
entrepreneurs, ground level support and handhold ing of SC/ST entrepreneurs may 
work well in improving the performance of this Scheme. Underutilization of funds 
is a serious cause of concern for the Committee; therefore, Ministry is advised to 
ensure full utilization of funds. 
(Para 85) 
 
Action Taken 
 
Interventions introduced under National SC -ST Hub are demand driven.  For 
wider outreach of the various interventions of Hub and subsequently increase the 
utilization of fund, various awareness campaigns are being organised. Inaddition, 
NSSH is leveraging t he network of 5,000+ Commons Service Centres (CSCs) 
Village Level Entrepreneurs (VLEs) and 9,000 Post Offices for generating 
awareness of the Scheme among SC/ST entrepreneurs. 
 
Further, based on the Third -Party evaluation report, the scope of NSSH is 
proposed to be expanded viz., inclusion of services sector under SCLCSS, 
enhancement in financial assistance under various reimbursement interventions, 
distribution of latest  technology toolkits, reimbursement of registration fee of all 
Government promoted e-commerce, etc. All efforts will be made to ensure that the 
funds allocated for the Scheme are utilized fully. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
9. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should create an All -India 
Database of SC/ST entrepreneurs’ locations a nd vocations and share the same 
with CPSEs so that CPSEs can locate SC/ST units easily for availing their 
services. Also, the SC/ST Hub should run NSQF compliant skill development 
programmes for SC/ST technicians who could take contract jobs and services t hat 
CPSEs outsource. 
(Para 86) 
 
 
 

 
 
8 
 
Action Taken 
 
A database of more than 1,00,000 potential SC -ST MSEs has been created 
under National SC/ST Hub. The data is being shared with various CPSEs based on 
their product requirement on regular basis. With respect to NSQF compliant 
courses, the Ministry of MSME h as collaborated with various Govt. and 
autonomous training institutions such as MSME Tool Rooms / Technology 
Centers, Rural Self Employment Training Institutes (RSETI), NIELIT, CIPET, 
etc. Various skill development NSQF compliant training programs (both 
residential and non -residential type) are being conducted under the National         
SC-ST Hub. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
10. The trend under Public Procurement Policy has not been encouraging over 
the years. The Committee therefore, recommends that the t rend should be 
reversed and adequate steps should be taken by the Ministry to ensure fair 
participation of SC/ST MSEs in Public Procurement Policy.  The Committee also 
recommends that more special VDPs should be organized for SC/ST 
entrepreneurs for improvi ng their participation in Public Procurement Policy. 
The Ministry should also adopt handholding approach while promoting SC/ST 
entrepreneurs.   
(Para 87) 
 
Action Taken 
 
337 Special Vendor Development Programmes (SVDPs) have been organised 
with CPSEs having  participation of 10,554 SC/ST candidates across the country. 
Considering the challenges due to COVID -19 Pandemic, 91 online Vendors 
Development Programmes have been organized in FY 2020 -21, wherein 2743 
SC/ST candidates participated. Details of the SVDPs/ BSMs organized by NSSH 
offices are as follows: 
 
FY              No of SDVP     Participants 
FY 2016-17  -          38                   1561 
FY 2017-18  -          60                   1889 
FY 2018-19  -          76                   2440 
FY 2019-20  -          70                   1921 
FY 2020-21  -          91 (Virtual)    2743 

 
 
9 
 
 
After these outreach activities, training in e -tendering is also provided 
through National SC -ST Hub Offices to the interested SC -ST entrepreneurs. 
Further, the eligible entrepreneurs are provided handholding support for 
participation in Government Tenders. 
  
In addition to the above, for improving the participation of SC -ST MSEs in 
the public procurement the following action have also been undertaken:  
 
(1) Taken up with GeM for introduction of social category filter on the GeM  
     portal; 
 
       (2) Under CPSE outreach programs, 136 CPSEs have appointed Nodal  
  Officers for procurement from SC/ST MSEs. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
11. The Committee observes that many Schemes of the Ministry are not working 
satisfactorily in North Eastern Region and has a very negligible presence in these 
areas.  Even the number of ISEC issued under Khadi and Polyvastra are also not 
impressive. The Committee recommends that serious effo rts should be made by the 
Ministry to benefit the people of NER through its various Schemes with the help of 
State Governments particularly potential women and SC/ST entrepreneurs be 
encouraged to participate in the growth process. 
 
(Para 88) 
 
Action Taken 
 
Under the Scheme, "Establishment  of new Technology Centers/ Extension 
Centers”,20 Technology Centers and 100 Extension  Centers are being established 
under Hub  and Spoke model so as to cover the maximum  part of the country 
including aspirational districts, the North Eastern Region depending upon the need 
of the MSME’s skill seekers from the catchment areas.  
 
As far as six components of CLCS -TUS (ZED, Lean, Incubation, Design, 
IPR, Digital MSME) are concerned, efforts have been made with the help of all 
concerned stakeholders for SC/ST/women and NER entrepreneurs encouraged to 
participate as a part of the Scheme. 
 
To encourage the projects in NER & women and SC/ST entrepreneurs:  
 

 
 
10 
 
 The limit of GoI grant is upto 90% in NE & Hill states for setting up  
common Facility Centres (CFCs). 
 For Industrial Estate & Flatted Factory Complex, the limit of GoI grant is 
upto 80% in NE & Hill States. 
PMS Scheme is being implemented in NER. Various MSE units belonging to 
NER/SC/ST/Women are availing benefits under the PMS Scheme such as 
participation in Trade Fairs/Exhibitions, organising Trade Fairs, Vendor 
development programmes and Workshops etc. Further, efforts are being made to 
increase more participation of NER Region, women and SC/ST Entrepreneurs 
through regional MSME - Development Institutes. 
 
To provide mentoring and handholding support to SC/ST entrepreneurs in 
NER, a dedicated National SC/ST Hub Offic e has been established in Guwahati 
and Shillong. This NSSHO offers technical support to SC -ST MSEs on bid 
participation, finance facilitation, participation in special vendor development 
programmes, CPSE connects, e -tender trainings, GeM, Udyam registratio n etc. In 
addition, funds have been made available to the respective agency nominated by 
various NE States under National SC/ST towards creation of an ecosystem 
focusing on the growth of SC-ST MSEs. Such fund is being utilized by the agency 
for developing market linkages, Vendor Development programs, SC -ST MSEs 
participation in Domestic/International exhibitions and skill development.  
 
It is stated that 53% in terms of Margin Money and 56.31% in term of 
employment generated have already been achieved under PMEGP in North 
Eastern Region against the target sets.  Revised targets and achievements in NER 
during the year 2020-21 as of 30.03.2021 is given as under: 
 
 
Revised TARGET- 2020-21(RE) ACHIEVEMENT-2020-21 (as on 
30.03.2021) 
No. of 
projects 
Margin 
Money (Rs. 
in lakhs) 
Employ. 
(Nos) 
No. of 
projects 
Margin Money  
(Rs. in lakhs) 
 
Employ. 
(Nos) 
10175 26646.00 81400 
5730 
(56.31%) 
14136.97 
(53.05%) 
45840 
(56.31%) 
 
  
State-level Bankers Committee meetings, State Level Monitoring Committee 
meetings, Bankers’ review meetings, Zonal review meetings, Top Level Bankers 

 
 
11 
 
Review Meetings etc. are organized from time to time to review the performance 
of the Scheme at the ground level to achieve the targets. 
 
The Interest Subsidy Eligibility Certificate (ISEC) Scheme: 
a) ISEC Scheme was introduced in May 1977 to mobilize funds from the 
banking institutions to fill the gaps in the actual fund requirement and 
availability from budgetary sources. 
b) The Scheme is applicable for all registered Khadi Institutions/Coop 
Societies/Trusts under KVIC/KVIB. 
c) The Khadi Institutions shall pay 4% interest and the difference between 
the actual lending rate of interest minus 4% which will be borne by KVIC. 
d) ISEC limit is fixed for the Khadi Institutions based on their level of 
production and/or sales and the estimated requirement of funds in 
accordance with the prescribed pattern of assistance of KVIC to meet the 
working capital requirement.   
Reasons f or non -availment of 100% of ISEC issued by KVIC by Khadi 
Institutions: 
 
i. KVIC and banks were following different methods of assessing the 
working capital requirements of the KIs.  
ii. KVIC is assessing the Working Capital based on the target fixed on 
Production, Retail Sales, Wholesales, Vastragar, Raw Material and 
processing only, whereas, the banks are considering available opening 
inventory level of finished goods and credit facilities being extended by 
the trade creditors also. 
iii. Besides RBI guidelines each ba nk has issued internal guidelines also for 
the assessment of working capital based on the turn over with the 
institution’s contribution. 
iv. The recycling of working capital (i.e., operating cycle) is being assessed 
@ 16 months by KVIC, whereas the banks are c alculating at a maximum 
of 4 months as applicable for other Textile Industries.  
v. Bankers are mostly considering fixing the C.C. limit @ 20% on the total 
turnover of the Khadi Institutions as that of extending loan facilities to the 
private/commercial establishments. 
vi. Bankers are expecting to realize sundry debtor’s dues by 90 days.  

 
 
12 
 
vii. Bankers are insisting to maintain 130% stock on hand  on the C.C.   
limit fixed by them. 
viii.     The banks are also insisting on collateral security for some cases and   
failure to furnish by the KIs also results in lesser availment. 
 
Due to the above reasons, bankers are not coming forward for extending the 
credit facilities by honouring the ISEC issued by KVIC in general and NER in 
particular. 
 
However, the matter is being examined  in the Ministry to relook at the 
present methodology for estimation of ISEC value for Khadi Institutions. There 
must be uniformity between the methodology used by KVIC to issue ISEC 
certificate and the working capital calculation methodology adopted by ba nks, to 
reduce the gap between ISEC being certified by KVIC and working capital 
amount sanctioned by banks. 
 
With a view to creating greater awareness among the bankers, KVIC is 
taking up the core subject matter in the SLBC meetings.  
 
Coir based skill deve lopmental activities in the North Eastern Region are 
being implemented through Board’s Sub Regional Office located at Guwahati.  
The details of the programmes implemented in the last three years in NE Region 
are as given below:  
Sl. 
No 
Name of 
Programme 
2017-
18 
2018-
19 
2019-
20 
2020-21  
(as on 
28.3.21) 
1 Training on 
manufacturing of 
Value-Added Coir 
Products 
(no. of Trainees) 
233 437 399 477 
2 Training on 
spinning under 
Mahila Coir 
267 438 400 580 

 
 
13 
 
Yojana 
(no. of Trainees) 
3 Entrepreneurship 
Development 
Programme(no. of 
prog.)  
3 4 5 5 
4 Awareness 
Programme 
(no. of 
programmes) 
5 6 5 3 
5 Workshop (no. of 
programmes) 
2 4 4 4 
6 Exposure Tour(no. 
of prog.) 
1 2 0 0 
 
MGIRI has organized many Awareness workshops, Entrepreneurship  and 
Skill development training programmes for the NER focusing on women, youths, 
SC/ST, farmers, etc. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
12. The Committee notes that Ministry has launched CHAMPIONS Portal for 
grievance redressal of MSME units but many small units are not aware about this 
portal and its functions. The Committee recommends that adequate steps should 
be taken by the Ministry to create awareness about this portal and more 
budgetary allocations be made for publicity purposes. The use of the Portal  may 
be made as simple as possible and also the portal should have an option for Hindi 
language as well as the Regional languages for ease of understanding.  
 
(Para 103) 
 
Action Taken 
 
Regular publicity is done for the promotion of the CHAMPIONS portal 
through its 68 CHAMPIONS State Control Rooms, spread across the country, 

 
 
14 
 
through various Media channels, Webinars/Seminars, Skill Development Training 
programmes etc. Suggestions of  the Committee are well taken and under due 
deliberation for providing support and better outreach through Hindi and other 
local languages. Further, efforts are being made towards translation of the portal 
in other vernacular languages. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
15 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
13. The Committee observes that the allocations of the Ministry were either 
reduced or enhanced at the R.E. stage, but the actual expenditure incurred mos t of 
the time is less than the Revised Estimate. The Committee is therefore, of the 
opinion that proper estimation should be done by the Ministry beforehand to 
ensure that budget is utilized optimally as far as possible. The Ministry should 
also monitor th e output of its various Schemes, including individual components 
so that the output targets are achieved timely. 
(Para 11) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
 
 
During the Financial Years 2018 -19 and 2019-20, the Revised Estimate (RE) 
was the same as the Budget Estimate (BE).  However, during 2020 -21 the RE was 
reduced to Rs. 5664.22 crores from the BE of Rs.7572.20 crores due to Covid-
related constraints.  It may , however, be seen that the expenditure incurred during 
2018-19, 2019 -20 and 2020 -21 was 99.40%, 95.81% and 99.70% respectively 
w.r.t. the RE.  The details are as under: 
(Rs. In crore) 
Year BE RE Actual % w.r.t. 
RE 
2018-19 6552.61 6552.61 6513.12 99.40 
2019-20 7011.29 7011.29 6717.53 95.81 
2020-21 7572.20 5664.22 5647.50 99.70 
 
There was thus no significant shortfall in actual expenditure with respect to 
the RE. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
14. The Budget Estimate for FY 2021 -22 is Rs. 15699.65 crore, which seems a 
significant increase vis -à-vis FY 2020 -21. However, out of this amount an 
allocation of Rs. 10,000 crore has been earmarked for the Guaranteed Emergency 
Credit Line Scheme (GECL) and i n effect Rs. 5699.65 crore is the actual 

 
 
16 
 
allocation, which is a reduction from the BE of  FY 2020 -21. The Committee is 
worried that in absence of adequate funds how the Ministry is planning to 
implement its various Schemes effectively in the present scenario of COVID -19 
Pandemic when MSME Sector is starved of funds. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry may ask for an enhanced allocation at the RE Stage 
for proper implementation of its flagship Schemes and strengthening of the MSME 
Sector.   
(Para 12) 
 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
The Ministry of MSME proposed Rs. 9318.38 crores as BE for the 
Financial Year 2021-22 excluding the Scheme Guaranteed Emergency Credit Line 
Scheme (GECL).  The Ministry was allocated Rs. 15,69 9.65 crores including Rs. 
10,000.00 crores for GECL Scheme as BE for FY 2021-22.   
 
Thus, the allocation for the ongoing Schemes is Rs.5699.65 crore at the BE 
stage, while Rs. 10,000 crores is allocated for GECL. As recommended by the 
Committee, the Minist ry will explore the options of seeking additional funds at 
the RE stage. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
15. The Committee observes that the Ministry could utilize only 66% of the RE 
for the FY 2020 -21 (up to January, 2021), which is a cause of concern. However, 
the Ministry cited COVID -19 Pandemic as the main reason for the 
underutilization of allocated funds. On the other hand, the Committee is of the 
opinion that the budget utilization should have been more because of the demand 
created due to COVID-19 Pandemic in the MSME Sector. The Committee is of the 
opinion that MSME Sector presently is in desperate need of funds. Therefore, the 
Ministry must ensure that the allocated budget is utilized optimally so that MSME 
Sector may thrive. 
 
    (Para 15) 
 
Action Taken 
 
The pace of expenditure up to January 2021 was slightly slow due to Covid -
19 pandemic.  However, during the last two months of the FY, the expenditure on 

 
 
17 
 
the Schemes increased substantially and the Ministry utili zed 99.70% of the funds 
allocated for 2020 -21 at RE stage. In the Financial Year 2021 -22 more than 22 
percent of the Budget Allocation has been spent in the first quarter ( i.e., April to 
June 2021). 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
16. The Committee notes that up to the end of 3 rd quarter of FY 2020 -21, the 
Ministry could utilize only 54% of the actual budget allocation i.e.,  Rs. 5664.22 
crore. The Committee is constrained to note the underutilization of allocated 
funds and  would like to know the reasons for continuously projecting  inflated 
demands and thereafter underutilizing the funds. The Committee , therefore, 
recommends that proper assessment and planning should be made beforehand in 
respect of utilization of funds quarter -wise so that there is no rush to spend more 
in the last quarters of the year. 
 
(Para 17) 
 
Action taken  
 
As mentioned above, the pace of expenditure in the first two quarters of 
2020-21 was low due to the C OVID 19 pandemic. As several Schemes required 
implementation on the ground, the pace of expenditure could not pick up during 
this period. However, in the third and the fourth quarter the expenditure picked up 
and the Ministry could utilize 99.70 percent of the RE allocation for the              
FY 2020-21. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
17. Recently, Khadi Prakritik Paint has been developed and launched by Khadi 
and Village Industries Commission. The paint is said to be cow dung based, eco -
friendly, non -toxic product with anti -fungal, anti -bacterial properties. It is 
claimed that the paint is cost -effective and odorless and has been  certified by 
Bureau of Indian Standards. The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the 
KVIC and recommends that such type of initiatives and innovations take place 
regularly with the combination of innovative ideas and latest technology. The  
Committee therefore, recommends that adequate funds should be allocated for 
R&D and Technology related support facilities in order to improve the quality of 
Khadi products vis-a-vis international products. 
 
(Para 25) 

 
 
18 
 
Action Taken 
 
As mentioned in the reply to quest ion 8  (Para 23 on pre -page), the 
Ministry/KVIC  proposes  to establish Centres of Excellence (CoEs) for Khadi 
with the technical support of NIFT for achieving the objectives such as, creation 
of new fabric and products, dissemination of quality standards f or fabrics and 
clothing, creation branding and publicity, create visual merchandising and 
packaging etc. 
 
 
The main hub of CoEs will be established in NIFT campus, Delhi and with 
its four spokes will be in NIFTs Centres at Kolkata, Bangalore, Shillong and 
Gandhinagar. The total financial cost for setting up of 5 CoEs will be Rs.20.00 
crore. The MoU has been signed between KVIC and NIFT on 19.02.2021. 
Thereafter, an amount of Rs. 496.32 lakhs towards 50% 1 st Installment fund has 
been released in favour of NIFT-New Delhi for establishing CoEs for Khadi. 
 
Besides, the Ministry through the Scheme of Funds for Regeneration of 
Traditional Industries (SFURTI) is setting up 12 khadi clusters with a Government 
of India support of Rs. 24.11 cr. The interventions made under the Scheme include 
innovation and adoption of new technologies to make Khadi products competitive 
in the following manner:  
 
(i)  Blending of khadi with other fabrics/natural yarns to produce best quality  
     sarees and dress materials without wrinkles and shrinkage, 
 
       (ii) Use of latest machines and software for creating new designs and for  
            Multiple coloured printing to attract customers nationally and       
            internationally. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
18. The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Ministry in providing 
financial help to Khadi artisans during Covid Pandemic through Artisan Welfare 
Fund Trust.  The Committee recommends that some kind of contingent fund or 
financial provision should be put in place by the Ministry keeping in view the 
welfare of the artisans associated with MSME Sector for the unforeseen situations 
like Covid Pandemic as a social security measure so that some kind of monetary 
help can be provided to artisans in times of distr ess in future. 
 
    (Para 31) 
 

 
 
19 
 
Action Taken  
 
In addition to the Artisan Welfare Fund Trust for the Khadi artisans, the 
Ministry has already directed the Coir Board in 2015 to implement the Pradhan  
Mantri Suraksha BimaYojana (PMSBY) for the welfare of the artisans in the coir 
sector. A proposal has also been taken up for the implementation of a Special 
Group Personal Accidental Insurance Scheme for the welfare of the coir workers. 
 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
19. During the course of discussion on the DFG (2021 -2022), the Committee 
observes that the constraints faced by KVIC/KVIB are due to procedural delays, 
inadequate technology up -gradation, underutilization of funds etc. Despite 
providing technical guidance to  the units in KVI, the problems of the units remain 
inadequately addressed, as a result there is suboptimal functioning of 
institutions/units and high drop outs among new entrants and low employment 
generation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that KVI C should come 
forward with a more pragmatic approach in coordination with all the 
stakeholders. Proper planning, monitoring and implementation of each Scheme 
are required to meet the primary objective of employment generation, particularly 
to counter COVID-19 Pandemic like situations in future.  
(Para 41) 
 
Action Taken  
 
For the successful implementation of the Schemes under KVIC, KVIC has 
adopted the following approach: 
 
 Providing training program to impart basic skills to the prospective 
beneficiaries. 
 Providing the new innovative Energy Efficient Electric Potter Wheel, Pug 
Mill, Energy -efficient AC clay blunger, Updraft pottery kiln, Pedal -
operated Agarbatti machines and Automatic Agarbatti  machines after 
completion of training to increase Agarbatti pro duction and enhance the 
income of the beneficiaries. 
 For the Migrant Workers, who had been badly affected by the loss of their 
jobs – as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic, necessary assistance had been 

 
 
20 
 
extended by distributing Bee Colonies to earn their livelihood. 
 To bring transparency and expedite the disbursement of Margin Money 
under the PMEGP Scheme, Ministry of MSME has introduced online 
Margin Money disbursement directly to financing bank branches through 
the PMEGP -Portal. It is in bilingual Hindi an d English in very simple 
languages.  
 Online EDP introduced and widened the scope of offline EDP training 
also in bilingual Hindi and English languages through the departmental 
training centres of KVIC, KVIB, DIC, MSME -DI, NSIC, Tool rooms of 
MSME, IDEMI, R SETI/RUDSETI, Non-departmental training centres of 
KVIC (selected) and other training centres of Central/State Govt. 
Introduction of online EDP in regional languages is under process.  
 Ministry of MSME has modified/simplified the existing PMEGP Scheme 
guidelines by discontinuing the role of the District Level Task Force 
Committee (DLTFC) and their role has been restricted to monitoring the 
performance of PMEGP Scheme on quarterly basis. Implemented 
Scorecard system for evaluating the applicants and placed on  PMEGP 
Online Portal. 
 A Geo -tagging portal has been developed by KVIC, about 1.80 lakh 
PMEGP units and all KVIC offices and their assets are already geo coded 
and mapped on the Geo portal. All Khadi institutions, SFURTI  Clusters, 
Khadi Sales outlets are un der the process of being geo coded. As 
suggested by the Ministry, the offices of DIC, MSME -DIs, NSICs, 
SFURTI, MSECDP clusters, will also be geo coded and mapped in due 
course. 
 MoU has been signed between KVIC and NSTFDC for implementation of 
PMEGP Scheme. 
 Identified 116 districts to implement the PMEGP Scheme to achieve the 
AatmaNirbhar Abhiyan, with a special focus to create employment 
opportunities for the local people as well as the migrated people.  
 KVIC has introduced a Call Centre for PMEGP applicants  linking with 
the online EDP portal. The Call Centre also facilitates the beneficiaries to 
redress the grievances related to PMEGP issues. 
 Ministry of MSME has launched a separate website namely, 

 
 
21 
 
‘champions.gov.in’, which is a single interactive platform c um control 
room, to receive online grievances and suggestions, a nd to provide prompt 
redressal. 
 
As regards implementation of the Khadi  programme is concerned, KVIC is 
allocating annual production/ sales targets to each KI considering the availability 
of infrastructure, manpower and available working fund and the programme is 
being reviewed/monitored on monthly basis to achieve the targeted performance 
thereby ensuring to provide sustainable employment to the spinners/weavers in the 
rural area. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
20. The Committee observes that Schemes like ISEC, PMEGP etc. of the 
Ministry are not working satisfactorily in North Eastern Region and has a very 
negligible presence in the NER.  Even the implementation of the Strengthening of 
Infrastructure of Existing Weak Khadi Institution Scheme is not encouraging. The 
Committee recommends that initiatives should be taken by the Ministry for revival 
of weak Khadi Institutions with the help of State Governments in the NER, which 
has a vigorous craft tradition and manifests itself in its various products  
from cane and bamboo handicrafts to metalwork and gorgeous textiles.  
 
(Para 43) 
Action Taken 
 
Interest Subsidy Eligibility Certificate (ISEC) is being issued on the basis of 
requirement of Working Capital as per the level of performance by the KIs. KVIC 
is taking steps to increase the availment of Bank Finance under ISEC in all States. 
However, appropriate steps will be initiated to improve the quantum of Khadi and 
Polyvastra performance in the North Eastern Region. 
 
KVIC through its Circular dated 07.05.202 1, in order to encourage more 
new Khadi Institutions in the NEZ, has exempted the Khadi Certification fee as 
well as the Khadi Mark Registration fee for development of Khadi  Programme in 
the NER.  
 
Proposed Action Plan for NER is as follows:           
 
 
 

 
 
22 
 
                                                                                           
 
                                                                      (Rs.in crores) 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of Scheme/Programme Budget 
Estimate-2021-
22 for NER 
1. MMDA 7.94 
2. ISEC 1.25 
3. Capacity Building under Khadi  Vikas 
Yojana 
1.00 
4. Workshed Scheme for Khadi Artisans 0.25 
5. Strengthening of Weak KIs 0.25 
6. Renovation of sales outlets 1.00 
7. Honey Mission 0.40 
8. PMEGP including B&FL 235.77 
 
Further, following initiatives have been taken by KVIC for the development 
of KVI activities in the NER: 
 
 One of the oldest Khadi institutions in Assam, which remained in a poor 
state due to insurgency for a long period, has been brought back to life by 
Khadi and V illage Industries Commission (KVIC). KVIC will develop 
this unit for reeling of elegant Eri Silk of Assam. Other Khadi activities 
like manufacturing of village industry products will also be started in 
future. This center will become a major employment cre ator for the local 
artisans. 
 KVIC commissioned a Monpa handmade paper making unit in Tawang 
which not only aims at reviving the art but also engaging the local youths 
with this art professionally and earn. Inauguration of the paper unit is a 
historic event for the locals. 
 The Hon’ble Union Minister of MSME inaugurated the Keshai Bio 
Product LLP Bamboo Agarbatti Stick manufacturing Unit at Barpeta 
Assam. 
 The financial support is being extended by KVIC to 
sick/weak/problematic khadi institutions under the Schemes for 
strengthening of infrastructure of existing weak khadi institutions and 14 
KIs of NEZ have been supported. KVIC will ensure that such benefits are 
extended to other khadi institutions which are in the sick/weak category.  
 

 
 
23 
 
The financial support is being extended by KVIC to sick/weak khadi 
institutions under the Schemes for strengthening of infrastructure of existing weak 
khadi institutions. 14 such institutions in the NER have been supported under the 
Scheme. KVIC will ensur e that such benefits are also extended to other khadi 
institutions which are in the sick/weak category. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
21. During the Covid Pandemic induced lockdowns, scores of migrant workers 
were forced to return to their native places and  had to stay back for months 
without any livelihood/ employment.  SFURTI is one such Scheme which has the 
potential to generate employment in rural areas with less investment for the 
artisans. The Committee recommends that Ministry should endeavor to set u p 
more SFURTI clusters and ensure that each and every district of the country has 
SFURTI clusters on the lines of one -district one -product to solve the problem of 
unemployment in rural areas.   
 
(Para 56) 
 
Action Taken 
 
Noted. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
22. The Committee notes that export performance of coir and coir products 
during 2020-21 is not encouraging, which may be due to Covid Pandemic and 
consequent lockdowns. The Committee recommends that necessary remedial 
measures may be taken by the Coir Boa rd for restoring the export performance as 
the impact of Covid is improving gradually. Further, the Committee recommends 
that high targets for exports should be set and endeavor should be made to 
achieve those targets by effective planning and execution. L atest technology and 
techniques should be adopted for making coir products more competitive to meet 
the international standards.  
(Para 62) 
 
Action Taken 
 
As a result of various efforts, the export of coir and coir products during 
2020-21 has shown  a considerable increase when compared to the export figures 
of the previous year.  The total exports of coir products from India during 2020 -21 

 
 
24 
 
is 11,63,213 MT valued at Rs. 3778.98crores as against 9,88,996MT valued at            
Rs. 2757.90  crores exported during the corresponding period of 2019 -20 thereby 
recording a growth of 17.60% in terms of quantity and 37.0%in terms of value.  
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
23. The Committee desires that the data regarding the CLCS Component may 
also be provided for its perusal thereof. Besides, Technology Upgradation is need 
of the hour as technology is evolving and changing at a fast pace day by day. 
Moreover, technology upgrad ation for MSME Sector is equally important to keep 
them competitive in the domestic as well as international market. The Committee 
recommends that some sort of international collaboration for technology 
sharing/transfer should be undertaken for all round d evelopment of indigenous 
MSMEs. Besides, more budgetary allocations should be made for adoption of 
latest and cutting-edge technology in view of the changing market scenarios.   
 
(Para 69) 
 
Action Taken 
 
The State wise data of CLCS component is attached as Annexure A. The 
observations of the Committee have been noted. The Committee's direction for 
technology sharing/upgradation and increased budgetary allocations has also been 
noted. It may be mentioned th at the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Component of 
the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy and Technology Upgradation  Programme 
(CLCS-TUS) was approved by the Government only up to 31.03.2020. The 
impact of the Scheme has been got evaluated through a third -party evaluation 
study. The report of the study has been received. A revised/modified Scheme for 
‘Credit Linked Capital Subsidy and technology upgradation’ is under 
consideration. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
24. The Committee is of the view that for Technology Upgradation, research 
and development are very important for all round development of MSME Sector. 
The Committee , therefore, recommends that more funds should be allocated, 
which is only Rs. 330.31 crores in  the BE for FY 2021 -2022 vis-à-vis Rs. 1095.67 
crores allocated at RE stage in FY 2020 -2021, for Technology Upgradation and 
R&D purposes for strengthening of the MSMEs.  
 
(Para 70) 

 
 
25 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
The proposed BE for 2021 -22 indicated, pertains to 6 compone nts of TUS 
and CLCSS (Rs. 115.31 crores + 200.00 crores). Under TUS,  it is submitted that, 
this office is implementing Credit Linked Capital Subsidy and Technology 
Upgradation Scheme (CLCS-TUS), which is aimed at promoting competitiveness 
amongst Indian Mi cro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) by the way of 
support for Design improvement and to promote and support untapped creativity 
of individual and to promote adoption of latest technologies in manufacturing as 
well as knowledge -based innovation MSMEs through Incubation across India. 
The CLCSS part of the Scheme was valid till 31 st March 2020. There is a 
provision of Rs. 200 crores to cater to the committed liabilities under the Scheme. 
A revamped CLCSS is under the active consideration of the Government. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
25. The Committee recommends that Testing & Certifications should be made 
convenient and cheaper for MSMEs and they should be provided some sort of 
subsidy for availing such testing facilities. It is also required t hat a mechanism 
should be developed so that testing can be done at Indian Centres whereas 
certificates for the same test could be issued from various global testing centres, 
which are acceptable in respective countries/regions.  
 
(Para 90) 
 
Action Taken 
 
In this regard, it is mentioned that MSME Testing Centres and testing 
stations are providing subsidy for test charge @ 25% to Micro Units and 10% to 
Small Industry manufacturing. 
 
All the Testing Centres and a few Testing stations are accredited with the 
National Accreditation Board for laboratories (NABL). In order to enable global 
acceptance of its accredited laboratories, NABL maintains linkages with the 
international bodies like the International Laboratory Accreditation Co -operation 
(ILAC) and Asia Pac ific Accreditation Co -operation (APAC). Hence, NABL 
Accredited laboratories receive a form of international recognition, which allows 
their data and results to be more readily accepted in overseas markets. 
Accreditation helps to reduce costs for manufactur ers and exporters who get their 
products or materials tested in accredited laboratories, by reducing or eliminating 
the need for retesting in another country. 

 
 
26 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
26. As a consequence of COVID -19 Pandemic and subsequent lockdowns, 
numerous MSMEs became stressed and could not sustain their businesses due to 
unavailability of working capital, raw material and manpower. Accordingly, the 
CGSSD Scheme has been designed to infuse capital in the form of subordinate 
debt to the MSMEs, which  have either become NPA or are on the verge of 
becoming NPA, to help them increase their liquidity. The Committee is of the view 
that the CGSSD Scheme has the capability of providing much desired liquidity to 
the MSMEs who are desperately in need of capital to sustain their business. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that all the procedures and technicalities for 
availing the benefits of the Scheme should be simplified; irreducible minimum 
interest should be charged; repayment tenure of the loan should be kept at the 
maximum and; a friendly and favourable approach should be adopted by the 
banks to help revive the MSMEs. 
    (Para 104) 
Action Taken 
 
The Scheme has since been extended for six months i.e., up to 30.09.2021. 
The guidelines of the Scheme are being revisited in consultation with the 
prominent stake holders including Industry Associations, Banks etc. to make it 
simpler. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
27 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not 
accepted the replies of the Ministry  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
27. The Committee hopes that the new classification of MSME would bring 
about positive changes in the MSME Sector. The Committee therefore, 
recommends that a study needs to be conducted to know the exact impact of 
COVID 19 Pandemic on the MSME sector and to as certain what benefits have 
accrued to the MSME sector by change of criteria for classification of MSMEs 
and introduction of various Schemes. The Committee may also be apprised about 
the findings of the study for perusal. 
 
(Para 3) 
Action Taken 
 
National Sm all Industries Corporation (NSIC) and the Khadi and Village 
Industries Commission (KVIC) have already done some studies to assess the 
impact of COVID-19 Pandemic on MSMEs. 
 
The study done by NSIC relates to the effect of COVID -19 on the 
beneficiaries of NSIC.  The major findings are as follows:- 
 
(i) 91% MSMEs were found to be functional. 
(ii) The five most critical problems faced by MSMEs are identified as 
Liquidity (55% units), Fresh Orders (17% units), Labour (9% units), 
Logistics (12% units) and availability of Raw Material (8% units.) 
The study conducted by the KVIC relates to the effect of Covid -19 on the 
beneficiaries under the PMEGP Scheme.  The findings of the s tudies are as 
follows:- 
(i) 88% of the beneficiaries of PMEGP Scheme reported that they were 
negatively affected due to COVID -19 while the remaining 12% 
stated that they were benefitted during Covid-19 Pandemic. 
 
(ii) Among the 88% who were affected, 57% stated that their units were 
shut down for some time during this period, while 30% reported drop 
in production and revenue. 

 
 
28 
 
(iii) Among the 12% who had benefitted, 65% stated that their business 
increased as they had units in retail and health sector and around 25% 
that their units benefitted as they were dealing with essential 
commodities or services.   
In addition, a dipstick study was conducted by the National Institute for  
Micro Small and Medium Enterprises  (NiMSME)  on credit  related issues , 
this reveals that the Hospitality and Tourism sectors have been adversely 
affected due to Covid-19 Pandemic. 
 
 
The Ministry has also commissioned a study on ‘Assessment of Sick/closed 
MSMEs,’ which will, inter -alia, include quantitative and qualitative effects of the 
Covid-19pandemic on sickness and closure of MSME units in the country. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 The Committee notes from the reply furnished by the Ministry that 
NSIC, KVIC & N IMSME had cond ucted the study to assess the impact  of 
COVID-19 pandemic on MSME Sector only. No study has been conducted to 
assess the benefits accrued to MSME Sect or due to the change in criteria for 
classification of MSMEs. The Committee, there, reiterates it’s 
recommendation and desires that the Committee may be apprised of the 
findings of the report. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
28. The Committee reiterates its recommendation contained in its297 th Report 
that the growth of MSMEs is concentrated in a few States only which induces the 
people to migrate to those areas in search of employment and livelihood. 
Therefore, the Ministry should work in the direction of rem oving all the existing 
geographical imbalances and ensure that equitable presence of MSMEs is there in 
all the States so that there is horizontal industrialization and adequate 
employment generation to tide over the situation created particularly due to 
COVID-19 Pandemic. 
 
(Para 4) 
Action Taken 
 
While formulating Schemes, the Ministry aims to ensure that suitable 
mechanisms /incentives for inclusivity both in terms of the beneficiaries and 
geographical spread are built into the Schemes. However, some of the Schemes, 

 
 
29 
 
being demand -driven, have not been adequately responded to from some of the 
regions in the country.  Presently, the process of taking fresh approvals for the on 
going Schemes for the period 2021 -22 to 2026 -27 is underway. W hile finalizing 
the Scheme proposals for the approval , requisite modifications are being made to 
address issues relating to better regional balance of MSMEs across the country.    
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 The Committee notes that the process of taking fresh approvals for the 
ongoing Schemes for the period 2021 -22 to 2026 -27 is under way. However, 
the aforementioned period is already in operation. The Committee impress 
upon the Ministry to expedite the proce ss of the taking fresh approvals or 
else modify the period of operation from 2021 -22 to 2026 -27 to 2022 -23 to 
2027-28, for better operational results, smooth implementation and proper 
monitoring vis-à-vis the period defined. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
29. The Committee is also of the opinion that the details of the action plan 
regarding the utilization of funds allocated under GECL Scheme should be 
worked out and furnished to the Committee for perusal.  
 
(Para 13) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
 
 
The Guarantee Emergency Credit Line (GECL) Scheme is implemented by 
the National Credit Guarantee Trust Company , which is under the administrative 
control of the Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance. The  
Ministry of  MSME is thus releasin g the funds for the corpus created for 
extending guarantees under this Scheme on the advice of the Department of  
Financial Services. The Scheme was earlier being implemented as the Emergency 
Credit Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS) by the Department of Financial Services. 
 
The Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS) was announced as 
part of the AatmaNirbhar Bharat Package in 2020 with the objective to help 
MSMEs/small businesses to meet their operational liabilities and resume 
businesses in view of the distress caused by the COVID -19 crisis, by providing 
member lending institutions (MLIs) 100 percent guarantee against any losses 
suffered by them due to non -repayment of the ECLGS funding by borrowers. An 
overall ceiling of Rs. 3 lakh crores of guarantees was approved.  

 
 
30 
 
 
Since its launch, the ECLGS has undergone extensions and changes keeping 
in view of the impact of Covid on various sectors of the economy and the 
emerging needs. All these changes were made within the overall ceiling of the Rs. 
3 lakh crores guarantee cover.   In May 2021, on account of the disrupt ions caused 
by the second wave of the COVID 19 pandemic to businesses across various 
sectors of the economy, the Government has further enlarged the scope of ECLGS 
as under: 
i. Overall cap of admissible guarantee has been raised by Rs. 1.5 lakh crore - 
from 3 lakh crore to 4.5 lakh crore. 
ii. Launch of fourth component as ECLGS 4.0:  Provided 100% guarantee to 
MLIs for extending loans up to Rs. 2 crores to hospitals/nursing 
homes/clinics/medical colleges for setting up on -site oxygen generation 
plants. Interest rate under this is capped at 7.5%; 
iii. Extension in period of repayment to ECLGS borrowers who are eligible for 
restructuring as per RBI guidelines of 05.05.2021; 
iv. Additional ECLGS assistance  of up to 10% of the outstanding as on 
29.02.2020 to borrowers covered un der ECLGS 1.0, in tandem with 
restructuring as per RBI guidelines of 05.05.2021; 
v. Removal of ceiling of Rs. 500 crores of loan outstanding for eligibility under 
ECLGS 3.0  subject to maximum additional ECLGS assistance to each 
borrower being limited to 40% or Rs.200 crore, whichever is lower; 
vi. Civil Aviation sector  (scheduled and non -scheduled airlines, chartered flight 
operators, air ambulances and airports) made eligible under ECLGS 3.0;  
vii. Validity of ECLGS extended to 30.09.2021  or till guarantees for an amou nt 
of Rs. 4.5 lakh crore are issued 
The design of ECGLS provides flexibility to quickly respond to emerging 
needs, as has been evidenced by the introduction of ECLGS 2.0, 3.0 and 4.0 as 
well as changes as mentioned above, all of which were within available  headroom 
of Rs . 3 lakh crores. Currently, about Rs. 2.73 lakh crores (2 -7-2021) of loans 
have been sanctioned under ECLGS. Keeping in view the changes announced in 
the Scheme recently, extension of limit of one time restructuring to Rs. 50 crores 
by RBI o n 04.06.2021 and the continuing adverse impact of COVID on 
businesses, it was decided to enhance the existing overall guarantee limit of Rs. 3 
lakh crores to Rs. 4.50 lakh crores. At 15% default estimation, the additional 
requirement of corpus is worked out at Rs. 22, 500 crores. 
 
As per the National Credit Guarantee Trustee Company (NCGTC), loans 
amounting to Rs 2.73 lakh crores have been sanctioned till 02.07.2021 out of 

 
 
31 
 
which final guarantees worth Rs. 2.48 lakh crores have been issued so far to MLIs 
benefitting around 1.14 crore borrowers. A brief performance of ECLGS as on 
02.07.2021 is as under: 
 
 
Type of Borrower Guarantees 
(In nos.) 
Guarantees 
(Amt. Rs. in 
crore) 
Micro Enterprises 1,01,92,105 63,524.57 
Small Enterprises 4,64,086 63,243.36 
Medium Enterprises 2,58,970 39,097.63 
Other Business Enterprises 5,16,680 82,906.96 
TOTAL 1,14,31,841 2,48,772.52 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 The Committee is of the opinion that the country is still not out of the 
woods in respect of recovery with respect to pre -pandemic levels and a lot of 
effort will be needed to reach towards the same. The Committee feels that the 
Ministry should take up efforts to ensure that the ECLGS Scheme is 
extended beyond 30.09.2021 and also lo ok into extending guarantees beyond 
the amount of Rs. 4.5 lakh crores so as to help the MSME Se ctor rise from 
the sh ocks it encountered due to Covid Pandemic and a revi ew of ECLGS 
Scheme may be under taken well before the end of this financial year to 
extend its reach to all corners of the country. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
30. The Committee is of the view that KVIC should concentrate more on its 
technology improvement and products upgradation aspect in this age of stiff 
competition with big market p layers. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
latest training programmes by experienced and experts having expertise in the 
field should be imparted to the artisans through its network of training institutions 
for product design and quality improvement  in order to promote export of Khadi 
products. Further, the Committee recommends that the process of revamping and 
reorientation of KVIs should also be done wherever required so that it helps in 
productivity development of Khadi and Village Industries. 
 
 (Para 23) 

 
 
32 
 
Action Taken 
 
KVIC is in the process of establishing Centres of Excellence (CoEs) for 
Khadi with the technical support of National Institute of Fashion Technology 
(NIFT) for achieving the objectives such as, creation of new fabric and products, 
dissemination of quality standards for fabrics and clothing, creation branding and 
publicity, create visual merchandising and packaging etc. 
 
The main hub of the CoEs will be established in NIFT campus, Delhi and 
its four spokes will be at the NIFTs  Centres at Kolkata, Bangalore, Shillong and 
Gandhinagar. The total financial cost for setting up the 5CoEs will be Rs. 20.00 
crores. The MoU has been signed between KVIC and NIFT on 19.02.2021.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
  
The Committee may be apprised of  the activities undertaken by the 
Centre of Excellence (COEs) once these centres are established.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
31. The Committee raised concern over difference in BE i.e. Rs. 905 crore for 
FY 2021-22 vis-à-vis BE for FY 2020 -21 i.e. Rs. 152 5 crore for Khadi Sector as 
this being an important sector which generates large scale employment for rural 
people. The Committee recommends that considering the importance of Khadi 
Sector and its employment generating potential, an increased budget alloca tion 
should be asked for at RE stage by the Ministry.  
 
(Para 24) 
Action Taken 
 
The break -up of BE 2020 -21 and BE 2021 -22 as mentioned in the above 
observation is as follows: 
(Rs.in Crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Scheme BE 2020 -
21 
BE 2021 -
22 
1 Khadi Grant 383.60 350.00 
2 Khadi Vikas Yojana 370.00 250.00 
3 Gramodyag Vikas Yojana 102.92 50.00 
4 Mission Solar Charkha 100.00 5.04 
5 SFURTI 464.85 170.00 
6 Coir Vikas Yojana 103.87 80.00 
 Total 1525.24 905.04 

 
 
33 
 
From the above table, it may be seen that the Khadi Sector includes 
allocation under SFURTI and Coir Vikas .  The specific allocation for the Khadi 
Sector during 2020-21and 2021-22 are as follows: 
 
        
(Rs.in Crore)  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Scheme BE 2020 -
21 
BE 2021 -
22 
1 Khadi Grant 383.60 350.00 
2 Khadi Vikas Yojana 370.00 250.00 
3 Gramodyag Vikas Yojana 102.92 50.00 
4 Mission Solar Charkha 100.00 5.04 
 Total 956.52 655.04 
 
As per the spending in the current financial year, additional  funds will be 
sought as per the requirement at RE stage. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee  is deeply concerned over the significant reduction in 
BE 2021 -22 vis-à-vis BE for FY 2020 -21 and the Committee would like to 
know the reasons behind the reductions  for such an important sector capable 
of providing large -scale employment in rural areas of the country . The 
Committee recommends that enhanced budgetary allocations should be 
asked for by Ministry for strengthening of Khadi Sector and empowerment 
of artisans associated with it, especially in view of the adverse impact of 
COVID-19 pandemic on Khadi Sector  and the hardships faced by the 
artisans working in Khadi Sector.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
32. The Committee is concerned to note that out of the total number of 
applications received under the Scheme, around 76% were forwarded to the 
banks, only 16% of the applications got sanctioned by the banks and a meager 
10% of applications got disbursements by the banks. Since PMEGP Scheme is one 
of the flagship Schemes of the Ministry, the Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should look into the matter and take steps for removing the hindrances 
and simplifying the procedures with minimal formalities and technicalities so as 
to ensure that off take of loan under the Scheme is improved. 
 
(Para 38) 
 
 

 
 
34 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
As per the PMEGP portal, the status of the applications is submitted as under:  
Details No. of 
Applications Percentage 
No. of Application received 4,81,096 100% 
No. of Application forwarded 
to the financing bank 3,77,558 79% against received 
Sanctioned by Banks 92,474 24% against forwarded 
to Bank 
 
Moreover, the following initiatives have been taken by the Ministry/KVIC for 
simplifying the procedures and achieving the targets: 
 In order to streamline the selection process, Ministry of MSME has 
modified/simplified the existing PMEGP guidelines by discontinuing the 
role of the District Level Task Force Committee (DLTFC) for 
recommendation of applications to financing banks. The rol e of DLTFC 
will be limited to monitor the performance of PMEGP Scheme on 
quarterly basis.  
 Implemented a Scorecard system for evaluating the applicants and placed 
on PMEGP Online Portal. 
 Webinars organised on various activities relating to setting up micro-
enterprises through the Samadhan Portal every Sunday for the awareness 
of youth and prospective entrepreneurs. So far , more than 3 lakhs people 
have gained knowledge of the Scheme. 
 Online Entrepreneurship Development Program (EDP) introduced and 
widened the scope of offline EDP training also in bilingual Hindi and 
English languages. 
 Technical Experts, Marketing experts and Retired/Ex Bank Officials 
appointed to provide handholding support to the new and old PMEGP 
beneficiaries.  
 KVIC has introduced a Call Centre for PMEGP applicants linking with the 
online EDP portal. The Call Centre also facilitates the beneficiaries to 
redress the grievances related to PMEGP issues.  

 
 
35 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee is con cerned about the low percent age of 
disbursements made by banks to the applicants  vis a vis  the total number of 
applications received  under PMEGP Scheme. Moreover, the Action Taken 
Reply is also silent o n the latest position vis a vis disbursements. The PMEGP 
Scheme is a flagship Scheme of the Ministry which promotes 
entrepreneurship among the youth of the country and creates large -scale 
employment in rural areas of the country.  The Committee desires to know 
the reasons behind such a meager amount of disbursements  by the banks  in 
respect of which the Ministry has chosen to remain silent for reasons best 
known to it.  The Committee , therefore,  recommends that remedial action 
should be taken by the Ministry in consultation/co-ordination with the banks, 
at the earliest , to remove the h urdles affecting the Scheme adversely.  The 
Committee also recommends to  simplify the whole procedure of availing 
loans for the applicants so that more and more applicants may avail the loans 
under the Scheme in a hassle -free manner  and b anks should also adopt 
friendly and favorable approach while considering the applications for loans. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
33. The Committee notes that there is huge difference between Margin Money 
allocation and Margin Money utilization in NER.  Also, the numbers o f units 
assisted are very few. Employment generation is also negligible. The Committee 
recommends that more clusters/LBIs/TBIs should be set up by the Ministry in NER 
to overcome the problems of unemployment, poverty, drudgery and migration. The 
Committee also recommends that massive awareness programmes should also be 
organized by the Ministry in NER to create awareness among people in NER 
regarding various beneficial programmes/Schemes implemented by the Ministry. 
 
(Para 39) 
 
Action Taken 
 
Under SFURTI Scheme, a total 401 projects have been approved under the 
Scheme till May 2021 out of which 73 clusters have been approved in the NER 
with GoI support of about Rs.162.57 crores that will benefit about 33,000 artisans.  
These are more than 18% of total approved projects under the Scheme.   
  
Under the ASPIRE Scheme, a total 124 projects have been approved under  
till May 2021 of which 24 LBI/TBI have been approved in the NER with GoI 

 
 
36 
 
support of Rs.19.20 crores.  These are more than 19% of total approved proj ects 
under the Scheme. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The performance of various MSME Schemes in the North Eastern 
Region has not been up to the mark. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its 
recommendation that adequate number of clusters/LBIs/TBIs should be 
operationalized in the NER to overcome the various problems like  
unemployment, poverty and migration. The Committee further recommends 
that wide publicity should be given to the various beneficial 
programmes/Schemes implemented by the Ministry in  the NER through 
various modes like TV, Radio, Social Media etc. to make more and more 
people aware about the Scheme for increasing the offtake of the Schemes. 
The operationalization of various projects under SFURTI and ASPIRE 
Schemes should be expedited as it has been observed that the whole process 
from approval of clusters/projects till its operationalization takes a very long 
time.  The Committee also recommends that Ministry should ascertain the 
various reasons behind the dismal performance of its vari ous Schemes in 
NER and take concrete remedial measures in order to improve the 
performance of the Schemes in NER. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
34. The Committee is of the view that the youths in urban as well as rural areas 
are not inclined to work in KVI Sector due to low wages and the hardships 
involved in it. Therefore, the Committee desires that the economic empowerment 
of the poor artisans can be enhanced by allowing the potential artisans (spinners 
and weavers) to work with the private Designer Houses  of national and 
international reputation without the approval of KVIC so that they could earn 
more wages from them directly. 
(Para 42) 
 
Action Taken 
 
30% and 10% of the Modified Market Development Assistance (MMDA) 
component is also disbursed by KVIC using online MMDA Portal through Direct 
Benefit Transfer (DBT) to the artisans and other karyakartas.  
 
KVIC has revised the spinning wages to Rs. 7.50 per hank and the weaving 
wages is also revised at the State Level depending on the prevailing wage 

 
 
37 
 
structure in the respective states. In addition to the spinning wages, 12% Artisan 
Welfare Fund (AWF) and 10% incentive are provided to all the spinners and 
weavers. 
 
In view of the revision of wages and other incentives, the Khadi artisans 
working are getting t he minimum wages and hence new artisans are expected to 
join the Khadi programme. 
 
The artisans can always enhance their earni ngs by working with designers 
or any professional agency.   
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee is not satisfied  with the reply furnished by the Ministry  
viz. “The artisans can always enhance their ea rnings by working with 
designers or any professional agency. ” The Committee had desired that 
economic empowerment of poor artisans can be enhanced by allowing them  
to work with private Design Houses of national and international repute with 
the approval of KVIC so that they could earn more wages from the m 
directly. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry to ensure a mechanism 
by which the poor artisans can approach the  Designer Houses or Vice -Versa 
under the monitoring or supervision of KVIC, so as to prevent exploitation 
by such Design Houses. 
  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
35. The Committee observes that the ISEC issued and bank finance provided to 
the Institutions is  not very encouraging, mainly due to the existence of problems 
like lack of awareness among the people or some kind of procedural hassles. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that adequate steps should be taken by the 
Ministry to organize awareness progra ms and utili ze social media to popularize 
the Scheme. To increase the off take, the procedures may be simplified, formalities 
may be kept at minimum, and banks may be educated about the Scheme and 
advised to adopt friendly and favorable approach while cons idering the 
applications and claims. 
 
(Para 48) 
 

 
 
38 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
36. The Committee observes that the ISEC issued and the amount disbursed to 
the Khadi Institutions in the North Eastern Regions is not very encouraging. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that reasons responsible for 
underperformance of the Scheme should be ascertained and informed to the 
Committee for perusal.  Remedial measures should also be taken by the Ministry 
for improving the off take of the Scheme in NER whic h is lagging behind in 
comparison to other states of the country. 
(Para 49) 
 
Action Taken (Reply to Para 48 and 49 same) 
 
Reasons for non -availment of 100% of the ISEC issued by KVIC by Khadi 
Institutions are as follows: 
 
i. KVIC and banks were following diff erent methods of assessing the 
working capital requirements of the KIs.  
ii. KVIC is assessing the Working Capital based on the target fixed on 
Production, Retail Sales, Wholesales, Vastragar, Raw Material and 
processing only, whereas, the banks are considering available opening 
inventory level of finished goods and credit facilities being extended by 
the trade creditors also. 
iii. Besides RBI guidelines each bank has issued internal guidelines also for 
the assessment of working capital based on the turn o ver with the 
institution’s contribution. 
iv. The recycling of working capital (i.e., operating cycle) is being assessed 
@ 16 months by KVIC, whereas the banks are calculating at a maximum 
of 4 months as applicable for other Textile Industries.  
v. Bankers are most ly considering fixing the C.C. limit @ 20% on the total 
turnover of the Khadi Institutions as that of extending loan facilities to the 
private/commercial establishments. 
vi. Bankers are expecting to realize sundry debtor’s dues by 90 days.  
vii. Bankers are insistin g to maintain 130% stock on hand for the C.C. 
limit fixed by them. 
viii. The banks are also insisting on collateral security for some cases and 
failure to furnish this by the KIs also results in lesser availment.  

 
 
39 
 
 
The above are some of the reasons for lower off take of the ISEC issued by 
KVIC in general and NEZ in particular. 
 
The matter is being examined in the Ministry to relook at the present 
methodology for estimation of ISEC value for Khadi Institutions. Efforts are being 
made to ensure uniformity between th e methodology used by KVIC to issue ISEC 
certificate and the working capital calculation methodology adopted by banks, to 
reduce the gap between ISEC being certified by KVIC and working capital 
amount sanctioned by banks. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation (Para 48) 
 
The Committee observes that different types of methodologies are 
being followed by KVIC and banks  in assessing the working capital 
requirements of the KIs , which is proving an impediment in issuance of 
ISECs for K hadi Institutions  throughout the country . This issue was also 
discussed in the Committee ’s meeting held on 8 th April, 2021 when banks 
CMDs were present in the meeting.  The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that Ministry and banks should work out a unanimous and uniform 
methodology regarding the working capital  requirements of KIs which is 
acceptable to both for increasing the offtake of the Scheme and the number 
of ISECs  to the KIs .  The Committee feels that lack of awareness may be a 
reason for the gaps between number of ISEC issued by KVIC and working 
capital amount sanctioned by banks.   The Committee further recommends 
that Ministry should organize massive awareness campaigns through various 
modes available to popularize the Scheme among general public.  
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation (Para 49) 
 
The Committee notes that the KVIC is assessing the recycling of 
working capital (working cycle) @ 16 months but on the other hand the 
banks are calculating it at 4 months  and this is the bone of contention 
between KVIC and banks and this s ituation is affecting the ISEC Scheme  
adversely. The Committee , therefore,  recommends that KVIC and banks 
should amicably discuss the matter and come at a consensus for bringing 
uniformity between the methodology used by KVIC to issue ISEC certificate 
and the working capital calculation methodology adopted by banks  for 
bridging the gaps between ISEC being certified by KVIC and working 
capital amount sanctioned by banks. 

 
 
40 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
37. The Committee is constrained to note that out of 371 clusters which have 
been approved, only 82 clusters are operational so far. The Commi ttee 
recommends that the process of setting up of SFURTI clusters should be 
expedited; targets should be set and ensure that the approved clusters are 
completed and become operational within the stipulated timeframe for benefit of 
artisans.   
(Para 54) 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
The implementation period of the projects envisaged under the Scheme in 
2014-15 and at the time of continuation of the Scheme in 2017 -18 was 3 years.  
This time period was revised to 12 -18 months in March 2020.  As on 30.4.2021, 
145 projects have become operational out of 401 approved which is about 36% of 
projects.  This is an improvement of 14% over earlier report (82/371 i.e. , 22% 
operational clusters).  With the reduced timelines, it is expected that more and 
more clusters shall become functional in the current year.  
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee is deeply concerned at the slow pace of 
operationalization of the SFURTI projects.  Normally, t he time taken from 
approval of the projects to the operationalization of the projects takes very 
long time, which adversely affects the whole Scheme and potential artisans  
and rural entrepreneurs . The Committee , therefore,  recommends that 
concrete and result -oriented steps should be taken by the Ministry to 
expedite the whole process of operationalization of SFURTI clusters/projects 
by removing all the hindrances such as pr ocedural delays , insufficiency of 
funds etc. for ensuring timely operationalization of the SFURTI projects. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
38. The Committee observes that the Skill Development Programmes  organised 
especially in respect of the ‘Physically Handicapped’ Category is not up to the 
mark. The Committee accordingly recommends that more Skill Development 
Programmes may be organized among various categories of people for improving 

 
 
41 
 
their skills for gainful employment in the coir sector. Online training sessions may 
also be organized as per feasibility and practicality. 
(Para 63) 
 
Action Taken 
 
The Coir Board is implementing skill development programmes for all categories 
of people including handicappe d artisans.  The videos and e -tutorials uploaded on 
the Board’s website can also be used by physically handicapped aspirants for 
getting online training on various coir technologies and processing and further 
starting self-employment. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 The Committee would like to be apprised of the number of Skill 
Development Programmes, number of persons  benefitted and the amount 
spent on these programmes. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
39. The Committee notes that an allocation of Rs. 100 crore was made in BE 
for Solar Charkha Mission for FY 2020 -21 but at the RE Stage , it got only Rs. 
0.04 crore. Further, for FY 2021 -22, an allocation of Rs. 5.04 crore has been 
made at BE Stage. The Committee recommends that more budgetary allocations 
should be made for such a good and eco -friendly Scheme capable of providing 
employment in rural areas and accordingly, the Ministry should project for more 
allocations at RE Stage for setting up of more Solar Charkha Clusters across the 
country. Besides, t he Ministry should provide timely interventions so that the 
Solar Charkha Clusters so set up are operationalized in an expeditious manner.  
 
(Para 65) 
 
Action Taken 
 
As part of the Scheme, 9 Promoter Agencies (PAs) were selected and they 
are yet to start the projects due to various reasons/challenges. The Scheme did not 
get a response on the expected lines. In view of this, and as per the advice of NITI 
Ayog and Ministry of Finance, the Scheme will be further taken up for 
extension/as new proposal based on the learnings of the already approved projects.  
 
 

 
 
42 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 The Committee would like to be intimated about the progress in the 
matter.  As already suggested, mor e funds may be sought at RE stage so that 
Solar Cha rkha clusters can be set up across the length and breadth of the 
country, thereby generating employment to the rural population.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
40. The Committee desired that delay in payments by CPSEs and Government 
Departments affects MSMEs adversely as they need cash flow to run their 
businesses. The Committee however, recommends that delayed payments of 
MSMEs from CPSEs be monitored through the SA MBANDH and SAMADHAAN 
Portals regularly and the pending payments of MSMEs may be cleared by CPSEs 
and other Government agencies at the earliest for strengthening the liquidity of 
MSMEs. 
(Para 78) 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
 With the Announcement of the package under A tmaNirbhar Bharat, a 
special sub -portal within SAMADHAAN has been created to track the delayed 
payment to the MSMEs from the CPSEs. 
 
Further, in case the process of resolution of grievances raised on 
SAMADHAN portal is taking time or no resolution is being  provided, provisions  
have been made under the CHAMPIONS portal to register grievances about non 
resolution of issues/grievances raised through the SAMADHAN portal.    
 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the grievances redressed 
though SAMADHAN por tal and CHAMPIONS portal respectively and the 
reasons for non -redressed of grievances even after the registration is done on 
CHAMPIONS portal. 
 
The Committee further impressed upon the Ministry to set up a timeline in 
which grievances in SAMADHAN portal no t redressed gets upgraded to 
CHAMPIONS portal with inbuilt mechanisms for penalising the persons 
responsible if the same is not redressed the CHAMPIONS portal within timeline 
defined.  
 

 
 
43 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 The Committee would like to be apprised of the grievances redressed 
through SAMADHAN Portal and CHAMPIONS Portal respectively and the 
reasons for non redressal of grievances even after the registration is done on 
CHAMPIONS Portal. The Committee further impress upon the M inistry to 
set u p a timeline within  which grievances in SAMADHAN Portal not 
redressed gets upgraded to CHAMPIONS Portal with inbuilt mechanisms for 
penalising the persons responsible if the same is not redressed in 
CHAMPIONS Portal within a timeline defined.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
41. The Committee notes that TReDS is a new initiative by the Ministry of 
MSME for resolving the problem of delayed payments to MSMEs by 
CPSEs/Government Agencies. Making penal provision of 1% per month for erring 
buyers will definitely prove to be a deterrent for defaulting buyers. The Committee 
expects that the penal provision is enforced in letter and spirit. The Committee 
hopes that TReDS will able to solve the problem of delayed payments and improve 
the liquidity position of  the MSMEs. The Committee recommends that TReDS 
should be implemented strictly and monitored regularly and the MSMEs may be 
exempted from paying charges for on -boarding this platform beyond 31 st March 
2021. 
(Para 79) 
 
Action Taken 
 
Presently, there is no such provision initiated by M/o MSME with respect to 
TReDS. However, this Ministry proposes to issue a notification related to TReDS 
which may include the enforcement and penal provisions relating to on  boarding 
and transacting on the TReDS platform. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee strongly feels that making penal provision of 1% per 
month for erring CPSEs will definitely prove to be a deterrent for default ing 
CPSEs.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that strict provisions against 
delayed payments need to be put in place to ensure timely release of 
payments by CPSEs which can immensely help the MSMEs to meet their 
working capital/credit  requirements for sustaining their businesses .  The 
Committee further recommends that necessary steps should also be taken for 

 
 
44 
 
issuance of notification in re spect of TReDS making penal provisions of 1% 
per month for defaulting CPSEs at the earliest.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
42. The Committee notes that the pace of expen diture under the NSCST Hub 
Scheme is not at all encouraging and that the allocation of Rs. 150 crores in the 
BE 2020-2021 has been reduced to Rs. 120 crores at the RE Stage. Further, the 
allocation for FY 2021-2022 has also been kept at Rs. 120 crores at t he BE Stage. 
The Committee fails to understand the reasons for such slow pace of expending in 
respect of such an important Scheme, which has been specially formulated for the 
marginalized section of the society. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
should take adequate steps to speed up the spending process, so that allocated 
amount gets utilized to the optimum.  
(Para 84) 
 
Action Taken 
 
To develop entrepreneurship among SC/ST population and for maximum 
on-ground penetration, several interventions have been introduced since inception 
of National SC/ST Hub. With the increase of awareness of these interventions 
among targeted beneficiaries, the utilization of funds is increasing year to year. An 
allocation of Rs. 150 crores was earmarked in BE 2020 -21 under the Hub. 
However, due to the Covid -19 pandemic, the off take under the interventions of 
Hub was not at the expected level. Further, facilitation of SC/ST MSEs for their 
participation in International as well as domestic exhibitions could not be made  
during the year. However, the entire allocation of Rs. 120 crores made in RE 
2020-21 under the Scheme has been utilized. 
 
In BE 2021 -22, an amount of Rs. 150 crores has been allocated under the 
National SC/ST Hub. Several modifications to make the Scheme more inclusive 
and effective have been proposed under the SFC Notes for its continuation in next 
financial cycle. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 The Committee observes that despite claims being made by the 
Ministry of the success of National SC -ST Hub Scheme, negligible results are 
being seen at the ground level. The National SC -ST Hub Scheme was 
launched with the aim of promoting entrepreneurship culture among 
marginalized sections of the society but the desired results are not being seen.  

 
 
45 
 
The proc urement from SC/ST entrepreneurs has remained around            
0.69 per cent for FY 2021 -22 as against 4 per cent annual sub -target set for 
central ministries, departments and PSUs to procure from SC/ST MSEs, as 
reported on SAMBANDH portal of the M/o MSME and there has been a 
continuous decline over the previous years. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that concrete steps should be taken by the Ministry to ensure 
adequate participation of SC /ST entrepreneurs in the Public Procurement 
Policy and meeting 4 per cent target for procurement  from SC/ST MSEs .  
Further, Ministry should also ensure to spend the budgetary allocations 
earmarked for National SC-ST Hub Scheme in time-bound manner to ensure 
optimum budget utilization. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
46 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
43. The Committee was apprised by the Ministry that besides 219 Districts, 56 
Aspirational Districts have also been covered under SFURTI. The Committee 
recommends that more attention should be paid to target more and more 
Aspirational Districts across the country as this can immensely improve the socio -
economic conditions of the inhabitants in those districts and improve the human 
development index. The Ministry may coordinate with the state governments and 
with concerted efforts desired results may be achieved .  
(Para 55) 
 
Action Taken 
 
As on 30.4.2021, 65 clusters have been approved in Aspirational Districts.  
Nodal Agencies under SFURTI Scheme have been advised to explore the 
possibility of setting up more clusters in the Aspirational Districts.  
 
******** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 

->9
- i€
?a
'- ;.€
-->
:
:
t,
\._t
>b..
48

49 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

50 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry 
 
IV 
Fourth Meeting  
 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry 
met at 10:30 a.m. on Tuesday, the 21st December, 2021 in Committee Room 
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
        1.        Dr. K. Keshava Rao         -   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2.    Shri Hardwar Dubey 
3.    Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
4.    Shri Shwait Malik  
5.    Shri Sanjay Seth 
6.   Shri Abdul Wahab  
7.    Dr. Amee Yajnik 
 
 
LOK SABHA 
8.    Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
9.    Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanjibhai Kundariya 
       10.    Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
       11.   Shri Ramprit Mandal 
       12.   Shri Vincent H. Pala 
       13.   Shrimati Gomti Sai 
       14.   Shri Sunil Soren 
       15.   Shri  Thirunavukkarasar S.U.   
       16.   Shri Vijay Kumar (alias) Vijay Vasanth 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Jagdish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
2.   Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Narendra Kumar, Additional Director 
4. Smt. Sreeja V., Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Pratap Shenoy, Under Secretary 
 

51 
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting. 
Thereafter, the Committ ee took up for consideration the draft 3 10th and 311th 
Action T aken Reports on the 304 th and 306 th Reports of the Committee 
pertaining to Demand for Grants (2021-22) of the Ministry of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises and Ministry of Heavy Industries respectively and 3 12th 
Report on the “Impact of COVID -19 Pandemic on MSME Sector and 
Mitigation Strategy adopted to counter it” . After a brief discus sion, the 
Committee adopted the draft 310th, 311th and 312th Reports unanimously. 
 
2. The Committee then decided to present/lay t he above Reports in both the 
Houses of Parliament on Wednesday, the 22 nd December, 2021. It was decided 
that the Reports may be presented in the Rajya Sabha by the Chairman and in 
his absence by Shri Sanjay Seth , MP and in his absence by Shri Narain Dass 
Gupta, MP. Likewise, the Committee decided that in the Lok Sabha, Shri 
Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi, MP and in his absence Shri Vincent H. Pala, MP 
would lay the Reports. 
  
3.  The Committee then adjourned at 10.55 a.m 
 
                      
 
  
New Delhi                 Narendra Kumar 
21st December, 2021            Additional Director             
 
*********** 