63rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/63rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:33]
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
63
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INDUSTRY
 
               
SIXTY THIRD REPORT
ON
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
49TH  REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON INDUSTRY ON “DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2001-2002)  PERTAINING TO THE  MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES AND AGRO &
RURAL INDUSTRIES ”
                                        
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON  19TH DECEMBER, 2001)
   (LAID ON THE TABLE  OF THE  LOK SABHA ON 19TH  DECEMBER, 2001)
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
DECEMBER,2001/AGRAHAYANA, 1923  (SAKA)
 
  
C O N T E N T S
 
                  
 1.       COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                               
 2.        PREFACE                                                                                                       
 3.        REPORT     
 
            (i)    CHAPTER – I
                                                                                         
Recommendations/Observations that have been                                     
accepted by the Government                      
 
(ii)
      CHAPTER–II                                                                                                
                                                                                                                 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
Replies of the Government have not been accepted by

63rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/63rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:33]
the Committee
 
(iii)   CHAPTER–III                                                                                                                                         
       Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s Replies
   
 (iv)   CHAPTER – IV
  
        
       Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the government have not recieved      
                                                                                                                             
  4.       OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
  5.        MINUTES                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                             
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
 
1.          Shri  Ramdas Agarwal   -   Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.
                    Shri Khan Gufran Zahidi
3.                    Dr. Faguni Ram
4.                    Shri P.K. Maheshwari
5.                    Dr. Manesh Chandra Sharma
6.                    Shri Jibon Roy
7.                    Shri Somappa R. Bommai
8.                    Smt. Saroj Dubey
9.                    Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhundar
10.                Shri S. Sivasubramanian
11.                Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha
12.                Prof. M.M. Aggawal
13.                Shri  Bangaru Laxman
 
LOK SABHA
 
14.
                Shri Chunnilal Thakur
15.                Shri Ramanand Singh
16.                Shri R. Basanagouda Patil
17.                Shri G. Mallikarjunappa
18.                Shri Tarachand Sahu
19.                Shri Anant Nayak
20.                Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
21.                Shri A. Narendra
22.                Shri A.C. Jose
23.                Shri Uttamarao Deorao Patil
24.                Shri K.P. Singh Deo
25.                Shri Thomas Hansda
26.                Shri Nepal Chandra Das
27.                Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
28.                Shri Sunil Khan
29.                Shri P. Rajendran
30.                Dr.  B.B. Ramaiah
31.                Shri M. Rajaiah
32.                Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
33.                Shri Deepak Kumar
34.                Shri Manjay Lal
35.                Shri Anant Mahadeoappa Gudhe
36.                Shri Ram Sajivan
37.                Shri K. Malaisamy

63rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/63rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:33]
38.                Shri Nagmani
 
(i)
 
39.                Shri Ramdas Athawale
40.                Shri Rizwan Zaheer
41.                Shri K.H. Muniyappa
42.                Shri G.J. Javiya
43.                Smt. Renu Kumari            
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director
Shri  P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
P R E F A C E
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having   been authorised  by the
Committee, hereby present this  Seventy-third  Report on the  Action Taken  by the Government on the Recommendations  contained
in  the  49th  Report of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry on Demands  for Grants     (2001-2002)
pertaining to  Ministry of  Small Scale Industries and Agro & Rural Industries.
 
2.         The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry  finalised and approved the Draft report at its meeting
held on the 11
th December, 2001.
 
3.         The 49th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry was presented to Rajya Sabha and
laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  the 24th May, 2001.
 
NEW DELHI;
December11,2001
RAMDAS  AGGARWAL
 Chairman 
Department-related Parliamentary
     Standing Committee on Industry
                                                                       
           
REPORT
 
                     The Sixty Third Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations
contained in49th Report of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry on the Demands For Grants
2000-2001 pertaining to the Ministry of Small Scale Industries and  Agro & Rural Industries  which was presented to Rajya
Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  the 8th August, 2001.
 
2.      Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the recommendations contained in the Report.
They have been categorized as follows:
          
 (i)        Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Government:- Para  1.9, 1.10, 2.4, 3.4, 4.4,
5.3, 6.5, 8.4, 8.6, 8.7, 8.9, 8.13, 9.3, 9.4, 11.3, 11.7, 12.2, 13.2,  14.2, 15.3, 15.5, 15.8, 16.7 and 19.2.  ( Chapter - I).
 
(ii)        Recommendation/Observation which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the government’s
replies: - Para 10.3, 13.13, 15.2, 15.9, 16.3, 18.3, and 18.4 .    (Chapter - II).
 
(iii)       Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies of the Government: -
Para 1.12, 3.5, 7.6, 8.11, 10.2, 11.5, 13.4, 13.6, 13.10, 13.12, 16.6, 17.2 and 17.4. (Chapter - III).
 
 (iv)      Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government have not been received:
-13.8. (Chapter – IV).

63rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/63rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:33]
        
  (v)      Observations/Recommendations at a Glance . (Chapter – V).
           CHAPTER I
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
 
 
 
ROLE OF MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES AND AGRO &
RURAL INDUSTRIES IN THE POST LIBERALISATION ERA
 
RECOMMENDATION
 
            Ministry’s role at this juncture becomes of paramount importance as it has to evolve mechanisms/directives/guidelines,
which will go a long way in shaping the course of things in future.  In view of these threats, safeguarding the interests of
indigenous industry is the major responsibility of the Ministry while formulating policies.  Government should provide level
playing field for the small scale industry to meet the challenges of stiff competition from global players.
 
COMMENTS
 
            To strengthen the small scale sector and  enhance its competitiveness, both domestically and globally, a comprehensive
policy package was announced on 30
th August, 2000 which inter-alia includes enhancement of excise exemption limit to Rs.1
crore, credit linked capital subsidy of 12% for technology up gradation, increase in investment limit in respect of industry related
service and business enterprises to Rs.10 lakh, enhancement of limit of collateral free composite loans from Rs.10 lakh to Rs.25
lakh, extension of  Integrated Infrastructure Development (IID) scheme to all areas, enhancement of limit of funding under
National Equity Fund Scheme of SIDBI from Rs.25 lakh to Rs. 50 lakh with 30% of the fund   earmarked for tiny sector, the
enhancement in eligibility limit under Credit Guarantee Scheme from Rs.10 lakh to Rs.25 lakh, the ongoing scheme of grant of
Rs.75,000 to each small scale enterprise for obtaining ISO 9000 Certification to be continued till the end of 10
th Plan, assistance of
one time capital grant of 50% on reimbursement basis to SSI associations etc.  
 
            The implementation of this policy package has been a focus area for the Ministry, 29 action points emerged out of this
package - follow up action has been completed in respect of 26 points.  This will go a long way in supporting SSIs.
 
            To enable hi-tech and export oriented industries in small scale sector, to have technology and quality upgradation and to be
able to have level playing field in the international market, Government de-reserved readymade garments.  The de-reservation of
toys and leather goods has also been effected recently.  The draft notification for enhancement of investment limit in respect of
hand tools and knitwears is laid before the Parliament and the final notification is expected shortly.
 
RECOMMENDATION
 
            The Committee has been given to understand that the competitive fervor unleashed by the liberalization process has led to a
paradigm shift in the nature of manufacturing activity in the country.  In such a scenario it has become imperative that the policy of
protection for small-scale sector should pave its way to a more proactive approach of helping such units to enhance their
competitiveness in a market driven economy.  If small and tiny enterprises have to compete in globalised environment they now
require an enabling and responsive environment, which provides adequate and timely credit and pragmatic institutional,
technological and infrastructural support.  The Committee hopes that the above proposals announced in the budget would mitigate
the hardships faced by the SSI Sector. The Government should, however, not feel complacent about this.
 
 
COMMENTS
 
            The Government is keeping constant watch on the changing environment. To ensure effective implementation of the
comprehensive policy package, there is a Policy Implementation Committee under the Chairmanship of AS & DC (SSI) and as
detailed above, action has already been completed in respect of 26 out of 29 points.  The Study Group on Development of Small
Scale Enterprises (Dr. S.P. Gupta Committee) has also submitted its final report, recommendations of which are under final
consideration of the Government.  The Working Group on SSI for the Tenth Plan is also looking into these issues particularly,
credit, technology, marketing and infrastructural support which could be provided to this sector.
 
 

63rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/63rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:33]
 
REDUCTION OF PLAN OUTLAY AT R.E. STAGE
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
            The Committee recommends that the Ministry should visualize the pros and cons of schemes before earmarking
funds.  Allocation of funds should be made depending on feasibility of scheme only.
 
 
COMMENTS
 
            This is correlated to Para 2.3, which pertains to the concern of the Committee regarding reduction in plan outlay at RE
stage. In this connection it is pertinent to note that BE and RE were same for SIDO for the year 2000-2001.However committee’s
observation has been noted.  The Working Group on Tenth Plan is also engaged in the task of recommending appropriate schemes
for the SSI Sector after taking into account the changed domestic and global scenario and also the targeted growth rate.
 
 
 
OFFICE OF DEVELOPMENT COMMISSIONER FOR
SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
            The Office of DC (SSI) which is also known as Small Industries Development Organisation is an apex body of the Ministry
and its role has increased to a great extent after the lifting of quantitative restrictions.  The Committee feels that the office of DC
should help the Small Scale Sector in evolving marketing strategies.  To help SSI sector, it should have well equipped computer
network for dissemination of information to that sector.  Technological upgradation is another area where its help to Small Scale
Sector is needed most and the office of DC should play a key role in improving the quality of the products of the SSI sector. 
Therefore, the office of DC needs to be further strengthened and, if necessary, its present allocation may be revised.
 
COMMENTS
 
            In order to strengthen the Office of DC (SSI), its Plan outlay has been enhanced from Rs. 266.50 crore in 1999-2000 to Rs.
379.55 crore in 2000-01 and further to Rs. 390.44 crore in 2001-2002. The Office has taken measures to enable the SSI Sector to
face the challenges after the removal of Quantitative Restrictions. Steps taken for providing market support include formulation of
SSI Exporters Market Development Assistance (SSI – MDA) Scheme to encourage the efforts of SSI Exporters in tapping and
developing overseas markets, organising Vendor Development Programmes–cum–Buyer–Seller–Meets and Exhibitions at different
locations all over the country, conducting Training  Programmes on Packaging for exports to acquaint SSI exporters with the latest
packaging techniques/standards, reservation of 358 items exclusively for purchases from Small Scale Sector under the Government
Stores Purchase Programme and  constitution of a sub-group on marketing and export for SSI Sector under the Chairmanship of
CMD, NSIC.
 
For Technology upgradation the following measures have been taken up:
 
Ø
      A Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme for Technology Upgradation was operationalised with effect from  1st
October, 2000  wherein 12% back ended Capital Subsidy is admissible on loans advanced  to small scale industries by
the scheduled commercial banks/designated SFCs for technology upgradation in select products/sub-products of known 
proven technologies.
 
Ø
      The office of DC(SSI) has introduced an incentive scheme of ISO-9000 certification, which aims at encouraging
technology upgradation and quality improvement in the SSI Sector and preparing it to face the global competition. The
scheme provides reimbursement of 70% of the amount spent for acquiring ISO 9000 certification(or its equivalent) upto
Rs. 75,000 to each SSI Unit. The Scheme has been in operation since March,1994 and 1384 cases have been reimbursed
upto 31.3.2001.The government has extented the scheme till the end of the 10
th Five Year Plan. The office of DC(SSI)
has simultaneously taken up Awareness & Motivational Programme on ISO 9000 and TQM Quality Systems.
 
Ø      Setting up of Incubation Centres in Sunrise Industries-The Secretaries of Ministries/Departments dealing with  Sunrise
Industries have been requested to consider the setting up of Incubation Centres in their respective areas. A Budget
provision of Rs.10 lakh has also been kept for the financial year 2001-2002 to provide the assistance, if required, by
them.
 

63rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/63rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:33]
Ø      Preparation of a Compendium of available technologies for the R&D Institutions in India and abroad jointly by SIDO,
SIDBI and NSIC.  NSIC’s compendium has been hosted on NSIC’s Web site.   SIDBI has recently prepared a
compendium on Technology for 12 key products / sub-sector in the SSI sector.  The compendium has been released on
September 6, 2001.
.
Ø      In order to encourage investment by SSI units in technology upgradation, RBI has advised all Scheduled Commercial
Banks on 15 th September, 2000 that the banks should develop Schemes to encourage investment by SSI units in
technology upgradation and harmonise the same with SIDBI Schemes.
 
Ø      A scheme providing One Time Capital Grant of 50%  to SSI Associations who wish to develop and operate Testing
Laboratories, provided they are of international standards has been introduced.
 
Ø
       WTO Cell has been set up in the Office of DC(SSI).  It is being strengthened.  The Cell is engaged in reviewing import
of key items, organising workshop on WTO, Intellectual Property Rights and will also assist SSI associations in taking
up cases of dumping.
 
Moreover, to address the computerisation related needs of SIDO, a project called Small Enterprises Information & Resource
Centre Network (SENET) was started on Ist April, 1997. The project was revised in March, 2000 to include office automation and
web enabled applications with a total project cost of Rs.1140.38 lakh.  It functions with 5 Technology Nodal Centres and 15 User
Centres, spread all over the country.
 
The Prime objective of SENET is to facilitate the networking amongst the information providers and seekers (National /
State level Industries Associations, NGOs and the entrepreneurs) as well as Central/ State Governments, other Central/ State
agencies engaged directly or indirectly in the promotion and development of the small scale sector.  The data base created by
SENET regarding investment opportunities in the country etc. will be put on world wide web (Internet) to facilitate global access
and making the website accessible by the entrepreneurs 24 hours (round the clock).
 
Further, the Ministry has recently launched its portal on SSI, which not only gives updated online information on
policies/programmes of the Ministry, but also provides links to other related web-sites.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.4
 
NATIONAL SMALL INDUSTRIES CORPORATION
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
            The  Committee observes that the Government is not providing financial assistance to the NSIC in the form of equity. 
NSIC is projected to generate Rs. 120.00 crore in budget 2000-01.  Devoid of equity support, NSIC would be hard pressed to
generate revenue on its own now.  The Committee therefore recommends that NSIC should take measures to increase IEBR and
explore ways and means for more revenue generation to become self sufficient.  Till NSIC becomes self reliant, the govt. may
continue to provide funds for the Corporation so that its development activities continue unabated.   
COMMENTS
 
            The Government continues to provide funds for the development activities. For the year 2001-2002, a plan budget of Rs. 29
crore has been provided to NSIC for Marketing Assistance, Development  of N.E. regions, Modernisation  programme, Exchange
variation losses and reimbursement of expenditure of NTSCs and Govt. purchases. A provision of Rs. 5.5 crore (Non Plan) has also
been made for NSIC for reimbursement of expenditure & Govt. purchases to NTSC Okhla, NTSC Rajkot and  NTSC Howrah.
            The Government had approved IEBR of Rs. 517.00 crore for the Corporation during the 9
th Plan period. During the first
four years of the 9th Plan period i.e. during 1997-98 to 2000-01, an amount of Rs. 478.91 crore has been raised by the Corporation
out of Rs. 517.00 crore proposed for the Ninth Five Year Plan.  Further NSIC has been given IEBR mobilisation target of Rs. 120
crore for 2000-2001. The NSIC has already been provided with an equity support of Rs. 58 crores during the Ninth Plan. Action on
enhancing the Equity support will be taken after considering the report of the Consultant appointed for the restructuring of the
NSIC.
 
 
OTHER SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES SCHEMES

63rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/63rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:33]
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
           
The Committee hopes that the schemes viz. Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme for Technology Upgradation, Integrated
Infrastructural Development Scheme, Technology Upgradation and collection of statistics etc. would be implemented successfully
and the targets fixed-both physical and financial would be achieved.  In view of lifting of Quantitative Restrictions, the time has
come to lay more emphasis on technological upgradation and modernisation.  For this purpose, if need be, allocation may be
increased.
 
COMMENTS
 
            The Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme has been recently operationalized by SIDBI (Nodal Agency) through scheduled
commercial banks/NSIC and an advance of Rs. 5.00 Crore has already been given to SIDBI last year. An outlay of Rs. 25 crore
exists for the current year. The progress of scheme would be closely monitored.  At present the scheme covers only 14 sub sectors
of SSI sector.  The scope and coverage of the scheme can be expanded by including more sub-sectors on the advice of Governing
Technology Advisory Board (GTAB) along with the enhancement of Budget provisions accordingly. 
 
            Under the UPTECH Scheme, 9 clusters of industries have been taken up for Modernisation and Technology Upgradation. In
addition, 2 National Programmes in collaboration with UNIDO have also been taken up. Funds allocated in RE for 2000-2001 for
UPTECH Scheme were stepped up considerably to give more emphasis on technology upgradation.
 
            The Integrated Infrastructure Development (IID) Scheme earlier covered backward districts/rural areas which were not
covered under the Growth Centres Scheme, being implemented by the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion. The scope
of the scheme has now been extended by covering  all areas in the country.
 
Under the modified scheme  50 percent reservation has been provided for the rural areas and    the funds available  under
the non-lapsable  pool for the North East will be made use  of  for Industrial Infrastructure Development, setting up of incubation
centres, for cluster development and for setting up of IIDs in the North East including Sikkim.
 
Various components of the Plan Scheme “ Collection of Statistics  of SSI “ are progressing as per the targets. The monthly
data for Index of Industrial Production (IIP) are being collected, compiled and supplied to CSO every month. IIP for the SSI Sector
is being compiled every quarter as per the targets. Registration data received from every State/UT Directorate is being compiled
every quarter and data on commulative number of SSI units registered with the State Directorate of Industries (SDIs) are being
continuously updated.   Survey of registered SSI units  is also progressing as per schedule and  report will be presented shortly. 
Preliminary work consisting of (i) designing of schedules for the Third Census of registered SSI units and for the sample survey of
unregistered units has been completed by Technology Sub Committee; (ii) Sample design for sample survey of unregistered units
has been finalised  by the same Committee; (iii) frame of registered SSI units registered upto 31
st March, 2001, are being updated
by the SDIs and (iv) mobilisation of manpower for the conduct of the census are being  undertaken by SDIs.
 
 
CENSUS OF SSI UNITS
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
            The Committee, therefore, recommends that the census should be undertaken and completed within the stipulated time
frame so as to evolve a uniform approach towards the SSI Units.  The funds earmarked for the purpose should be utilised in a
proper manner.
 
COMMENTS
 
After the announcement of Hon’ble Prime Minister to go in for a fresh census  covering, inter-alia, the incidence of sickness
and its causes, a Steering Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary (SSI & ARI) has been constituted to look into all the
aspects relating to the conduct of census. The Steering Committee in its first meeting decided that:
i.
                     The census would cover all the SSI units registered with State/UT Directorates of Industries up to 31.03.2001.
ii.                   The unregistered units will be covered through a sample survey.
iii.                  The reference year for the collection of information for this census would be 2000-2001.
iv.                 All the States/ UTs shall be requested to make available a computerised frame of SSI units registered up to 31-3-
2001, by May, 2001, in the prescribed format.
v.                   Two Sub-Committees will be constituted to look into various aspects in detail and make recommendations for
consideration and approval by the Steering Committee. The first Sub-Committee will be on technical matters under
the Chairmanship of Dr.N.S. Sastry, DG & CEO, NSSO. The second Sub-Committee under the Chairmanship of

63rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/63rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:33]
Additional Secretary & Development Commissioner (SSI) will deal with the administrative matters and also with
the implementation/ monitoring  in connection with the conduct of the Census.
 
As a follow-up of the meeting of Steering Committee, two Sub-Committees, Technical and Administrative, have been
formed to examine the technical and administrative aspects respectively for the conduct of the census. The Technical Sub-
Committee held two meetings and has finalised the format for data collection for the Census of registered units. For sample survey
of unregistered units, a Sub-Group has been formed by the Technical Sub-Committee to finalise the sample design, listing
schedules and schedule for data collection.
  
 Secretary (Industries) of all States/UTs have been  requested to make  necessary arrangements for mobilizing and training
the field staff, undertaking fieldwork for actual collection of data, subsequent processing and presentation of data.
 
  All  efforts will be made by this office to reduce the delay in the conduct of the census by the joint efforts of this office as
well as by all the Directorates of Industries of States/ UTs.
 
 
 
KHADI AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
The Committee recommends that special concessions should be provided to promote the use of Khadi as this sector has
large potential for employment generation in non-farm sector.  The Committee hopes that the new activities proposed to be started
would take off as expected and the targets set would be achieved.  A perfect planning is needed for this.
 
COMMENTS 
 
Recently this Ministry has announced the Khadi & Village Industries Package which inter-alia provides for options of
Marketing Development Assistance (MDA) and  for rebate, conversion of term loan into working capital loan, Quality assurance,
Design and Packaging Development,  strengthening  of R & D activities.  Besides, the Package includes insurance cover for khadi
workers.  
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
The Committee recommends that the Market Development Assistance Scheme (MDAS) be introduced for promotion of
Khadi sector.  While introducing the MDAS, the Government may find it difficult to continue rebate on khadi.  In view of the
people’s sentiments attached to khadi historically, it may not be possible to abolish rebate on khadi totally.  But Government may
consider reducing it gradually.
 
COMMENTS
 
In the recently announced Khadi Package, institutions could either opt for rebate or take 20% on the sales turnover if they
switch over to Market Development Assistance Scheme.
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
The Committee is contrained to note that the quality of khadi has deteriorated and on the other hand the prices have gone up and
khadi is no longer within the reach of poor man.  The original idea of making khadi available to poor people does not, therefore,
hold good any longer.  The Committee views this very seriously.  Necessary steps may be taken to improve the quality of khadi
products.  Similarly steps also may be taken to reduce the cost.  
 
COMMENTS
 
Efforts are being made to create suitable mechanism to motivate the institutions to adopt new designs through development
of linkages with reputed institutions like NID, NIFT etc. similarly quality assurance machanism is also being evolved for
improving the quality of Khadi fabric.
 
 

63rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/63rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:33]
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
The Committee recommends that dispensation of rural industries which is split with various ministries  should be integrated
under the aegis of a single ministry for smooth functioning.
 
COMMENTS
 
The Ministry of SSI & ARI  is responsible for promotion and development of Village Industries.  However, the
recommendation of the Committee has been noted. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
The Committee recommends that the administrative expenses for KVIC i.e. the non-plan expenditure may be reduced
suitably.
 
COMMENTS
 
This has been noted and the KVIC has been informed accordingly.
 
 
 
COIR INDUSTRY
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
The Committee recommends that new and varied forms of blended products especially other natural fibres which have
potential apart from pineapple banana etc. should be developed by Coir Board to promote this industry and suitable technology
may be developed. The Committee also suggests that Government should expand the mandate for Coir Board in this regard. This
will not only enable the Coir Board to be financially strong but also prevent the ecology of North-Eastern and Himalayan region
from being destroyed.
 
COMMENTS
 
The recommendations of the Committee that the  new and varied forms of blended products out of Coir with other natural fibres
should be developed by the Coir Board is a welcome suggestion. In fact, the Coir Board had already initiated action in this line. As
a first step the R&D wing of the Board is studying the properties of these fibres and the possibilities of blending them in varying
proportions. The Board is organizing a Workshop in association with the National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad for development
of new range of products using blended natural fibres. Craftsmen from the North Eastern Region and Uttaranchal have also been
invited to attend the 3 week long workshop. The workshop would provide the insights in to the possible avenues of product
development through a multifibre approach.
 
Regarding the scope of expanding Coir Board’s activities, it is clarified that for development of blended products, the Coir
Board does have the mandate. However, under the Act it does not have the mandate to undertake development and promotional
work exclusively on other natural  hard fibres.
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
The Committee also observes that the coir products which are eco-friendly have vast prospect of export. Attempts should be
made to increase the export of coir products in future. The Committee also recommends that steps should be taken to popularise the
use of coir.
 
COMMENTS
 
The Board has been implementing various Plan programmes aimed at the promotion of export of coir and coir products
from India. This includes the following:-
a)
      Participation in International Fairs.
b)      Participation in the International Erosion Control Association annual conference

63rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/63rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:33]
c)      Market Development Assistance for the development of export markets.
d)      Publicity in foreign countries.
e)      Organisation of Buyer Seller Meets.
 
The Board is also organising the India International Coir Fair, 2001, at Kochi from 11 th to 13th October, 2001 showcasing,
the capabilities of Indian Coir industry. All leading players in the field like manufacturers, exports, buyer from abroad  are expected
to participate in the fair and the Seminar being organized along with it. The Fair and Seminar will be an opportunity to understand
the market perception of Coir products, consumer preferences and elements of design, investment opportunities scope and potential
for joint ventures/partnership promotion etc.  The domestic trade dealers are also participating in the event which would in turn
help promote the use of coir and coir products.
 
 
CREDIT LINKED SUBSIDY SCHEME FOR TECHNOLOGY UPGRADATION
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
            The Committee recommends that in order to assist the SSIs  to develop state of the art technology, Ministry should
encourage SSIs to source technology from abroad.  The Government should set up structures/institutions to help SSI in making
assessment of technology available abroad and advise SSI on its appropriate price.  Technical counseling and financial assistance
also need to be made through institutional arrangements.
 
COMMENTS
 
            Agencies like the Asia & Pacific Cooperation for Technology Transfer (APCTT), Technology Bureau of Small Enterprises
(TBSE) & Technology Bureau of International Industrial Partnership (TBIIP) are engaged in exploring the technology options
available abroad. The Ministry of SSI & ARI has announced a policy measure on 30.8.2000 to strengthen TBSE so that it functions
effectively as a Technology Bank.  SIDBI has brought out a compendium of technology for 12 important SSI products/sub-sectors.
 
            The Technology transfer center of NSIC disseminates information on Technology sources to SSIs through data base and
compendiums. It organizes Technology Missions in coordination with International partner institutions for globalisation of SMEs
and arranges one to one business meetings under International Cooperation programme. It also organizes seminars/workshops for
sourcing technology for SSIs and technology marketing through internet based portal (Technology showcase).
 
 
LOANS TO SSI SECTOR IN THE KUTCH REGION OF GUJARAT
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
            The Committee desires that the Ministry should play a pro-active role in disbursal of loans to the SSI sector in the
earthquake affected region of Kutch.  The Committee advises the Ministry to set up a monitoring cell for the purpose and arrange
for loans for the SSI Sector for a period of at least 2 years.
 
COMMENTS
 
MOS(SSI &ARI) announced a relief package of Rs 376.55 crore on 16.5.2001       for SSI units affected by earthquake in
Gujarat. In order to ensure that relief assistance envisaged in the relief package reaches the affected units, a Monitoring Committee
has been set up under the chairmanship of Industries Commissioner, Government of Gujarat.
 
 
BILL DISCOUNTING SYSTEM
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
            The Committee recommends that the banks should set up subsidiaries for bill discounting and other services.  The factoring
system should be strengthened and made effective.  This would foster growth of trade and industry in the present liberalised
competitive environment.  The RBI and the government should also establish discount houses on the pattern of discount houses in
London and other cities to help small enterprises.  In case, it is essential, a legislation may be enacted in this regard on the lines of
other countries.
 
COMMENTS
 

63rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/63rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:33]
            The matter was taken up with RBI, who have informed that due to operational difficulties faced by the banks in
implementing the bill discipline, encouraging the bill culture could not be insisted upon. However, to motivate the corporate
borrowers to make use of the bills route, banks were given freedom to charge interest rates on discounting of bills without reference
to PLR, thereby enabling them to offer competitive rates of interest. Banks have also been advised to fix separate sub-limits
specifically for meeting the payment obligation in respect of purchases from the SSIs either on cash basis or on bills basis while
sanctioning/reviewing credit limits to their large corporate borrowers. For strengthening and popularising of factoring services,
legislation is under consideration of the Government of India.
 
 
SIDBI
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
            The Committee recommends that SIDBI should enlarge the scope of its assistance to small and medium enterprises. 
Expansion by SIDBI in the operational canvas will generate additional revenue for SIDBI thus helping it to undertake more
promotional and developmental activities for strengthening tiny/SSI Sector in the WTO regime.
 
COMMENTS
 
             SIDBI may expand its operational canvas to include ‘Small and Medium Enterprises’, when the definition of  SSIs is
amended  as recommended by the  Study Group on Development of Small Enterprises  under the Chairmanship of Dr. S.P.Gupta,
Member, Planning Commission.   However,  SIDBI has recently taken a number of measures to enlarge the scope of its ongoing
schemes for promotion and development of SSI sector. Some of the important measures are:
 
(1)
   The scope of TDMF Scheme has been enlarged by way of 
a)extending the scheme  to cover the entire country, b)raising of the corpus from Rs 200 crore to Rs 300 crore and c)
The scope of the scheme has been extended upto 2002-2003.
 
(2)
   The limit of projects covered under NEF Scheme extended from Rs 25 Lakh to Rs 50 Lakh.
 
(3)
   SIDBI has been designated as nodal agency to operate Credit Guarantee Scheme under which collateral free loans upto
Rs 25 lakh are provided guarantee cover.
 
(4)   SIDBI has been designated as nodal agency for operating Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme for technology
upgradation in specified sub-sectors in SSI Sector.
 
(5)   SIDBI has prepared a Compendium on the Technologies for SSI sector  which assesses technology status/gaps, needs
for technology upgradation and modernisation of SSIs with a vision of 2010.
 
(6)   SIDBI has set up a Foundation for Micro Credit with the mission to create national network of strong, viable and
sustainable micro finance institutions (MFIs) from the informal and formal sectors to provide micro finance services to
the poor, especially women.
 
 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE SUPPORT TO SSI SECTOR
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
            The Committee recommends that specialised facilities can be jointly funded by government and user industries and
thereafter handed over to specialist private agencies for maintenance.  Joint ventures between the government and industry
associations for the purpose can also be considered.
 
COMMENTS
 
            Under the Integrated Technology Upgradation and Management Programme (UPTECH), selected clusters are taken up for
technology upgradation and a diagnostic study is carried out. Based on the recommendations of the diagnostic study the Common
Facility Centres, if so required, are set up in collaboration with the Industry Associations and other agencies. Further, under the IID
Scheme, Associations/NGOs are welcome. For maintenance purposes under IID, implementing agencies have been advised to
make proper arrangements.
 

63rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/63rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:33]
Moreover, the Office of DC(SSI) is operating a scheme for setting up, modernisation/expansion of Testing Centres by
Industries’ Associations & State Governments. Under this scheme, one time Central Government grant-in-aid is given to the
registered Associations to meet the expenditure on plant & machinery not exceeding Rs 20 lakh or 50% of the cost of machinery
and equipments (whichever is lower), provided the State Government also commits itself to release matching funds to the
Associations. It is also stipulated under the scheme that Associations will provide fully developed infrastructure to accommodate
Testing Centres and will meet the recurring cost of running the Testing Centres.
 
 
ANTI-DUMPING DUTY
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
            The Committee observes that it takes 90 days to review economic fallout of imported goods in country and imposition of
anti-dumping duties thereon.  By that time huge financial losses would have already occurred to the country, which are
irretrievable.  The Committee observes that in order to preclude the possibility of economic losses, anti-dumping monitoring should
be expedited.  The Committee therefore recommends that the administrative ministry should review the pros and cons in this regard
and take timely action.  The system that exists in other countries may be examined.  India can also emulate such a system.
 
COMMENTS
The Anti-Dumping Authority in the Ministry of Commerce & Industry is fully geared up to decide any formal complaints of
dumping by any country expeditiously.  In view of the legitimate demand of the domestic industry to provide immediate relief in
the face of dumping faced by them, the Directorate General of Anti-dumping & Allied Duties (DGAD), has streamlined its process
of investigation and Preliminary Findings are now being issued within a period of two-and-a-half to three months from the date of
initiation as against over six months being taken in the previous years.
The DGAD also actively participated in the workshops/seminars in different parts of the country organized by Association
of Industries to disseminate information on anti-dumping laws and procedures and to facilitate the domestic industry in submitting
their properly documented petitions for initiation of cases. India is one of the leading users of Anti-Dumping  measures in the
world. As Per the WTO report of 2000 India was the most active member during the year 1999 in terms of initiation of Anti-
Dumping investigations followed by EU, USA, and Argentina. At the same time, the transparency and thoroughness of our
investigations is borne out by the fact that not a single case initiated by DGAD has been brought before the Dispute Settlement
Body by any of the exporting countries.  We have been using the anti-dumping mechanisms very effectively.
The Directorate takes approximately 3 months to bring the preliminary findings of an Anti-dumping initiation.  In terms of
time taken for issue of preliminary findings, India compares favourably with other important users of Anti-Dumping measures in
the world.
 
Country Average Time Taken
India Approx.3 months
USA Approx.4-5 months
EU Approx.7-8months
Australia Approx. 5 months
New Zealand Approx.5-6 months
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
            The Committee understands that enacting law in this matter is not the concern of this ministry.  The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the matter may be taken up with the concerned administrative ministry for making a law, if necessary.  Otherwise
necessary regulations may be prepared by the concerned Ministry and the Ministry of Small Scale Industries & Agro and Rural
Industries may pursue it.
 
COMMENTS

63rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/63rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:33]
The matter was taken up with Directorate General of Anti-dumping & Allied Duties(DGAD), Ministry of Commerce &
Industry, who have informed that the Designated Authority appointed by the Government conducts Anti-Dumping investigations in
India under Sections 9A, 9B and 9C of the Customs Tariff Act of 1975 as amended in 1995. According to the Anti-Dumping Rules
the initiation of Anti-Dumping investigations is undertaken when the domestic industry files a fully documented petition to the
Designated Authority with prima-facie evidence of dumping, injury and causal link between the dumping of the imported goods
and injury to the domestic industry. However, under the rule 5(4) of  the Customs Tariff Rules of 1995, the Designated Authority
may  initiate investigations suo-moto if it is satisfied with the information recevied from the Collector of Customs appointed under
the Customs Act, 1962 or from any other source that sufficient evidence exists regarding dumping of the foreign goods, material
injury to the domestic industry and causal link between the two.
Article VI of WTO Agreements prescribes the guidelines on Anti-Dumping measures to be followed by the member
countries for imposition of anti-dumping duties and countervailing duties. The guidelines are designed on the previous anti-
dumping code under Article VI of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and states as to how the member countries
can invoke anti-dumping duties against another member country. The new guidelines inter-alia provide time limits for various
stages of investigations to be conducted, the methodology of determination of the extent of anti-dumping and the measures to be
adopted by the member countries.
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
            The Committee feels that availability of imported commodities, relatively of cheap quality without carrying MRP and ISI
labels, poses a serious threat to the domestic industries, particularly the small scale sector.  The Government should look into this
matter on priority basis and take all appropriate measures to protect the interests of domestic industries from unfair competition
from imported goods.
 
COMMENTS
 
The Government is closely monitoring the imports and all necessary steps to safeguard the interests of the domestic industry
are being taken. A Notification has been issued by the Ministry of Commerce & Industry on 24.11.2000, regarding compliance of
all the conditions of the Standards of Weights and Measures (packaged commodity) Order, 1977, on imports as applicable to
domestic producers.  In addition, the importers of packaged commodities have to comply with the following conditions:
 
a)
      Name and address of the importer,
b)      Generic or common name of the commodity packed;
c)      Net quantity in terms of standard units of weights and measures, if the net quantity in the imported package is given to
any other unit, its equivalent in terms of standard units shall be declared by the importer;
d)      Month and year of packing in which the commodity is manufactured or packed or imported;
e)      Maximum retail sale  price (MRP) at which the commodity in packaged form may be sold to the ultimate consumer. 
This price shall include all taxes, local or otherwise, freight transport charges, commission payable to dealers and all
charges towards advertising, delivery, packing, forwarding and the like as the case may be.
 
The Notification also makes the import of 131 products subject to compliance with  the mandatory India quality standards
as applicable to  domestic goods.  For compliance of this requirement all manufacturers/ exporters of these products to India shall
be required to register themselves with the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS).  The list of 131 products includes various food
preservatives and additives, milk powder, infant milk food, certain kinds of cement, household and similar electrical appliances and
multi-purpose dry batteries.
 
 
CONCESSIONAL DUTY BENEFIT TO SSI SECTOR
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
            The Committee also desires that the items like footwear, agricultural implements etc. used by the poorer sections of the
society should be available at cheaper prices.  Government may consider reducing taxes on such items.
 
COMMENTS
 
            The matter was taken up with Ministry of Finance. They have informed that footwear of retail sale price not exceeding Rs.
125 per pair attract concessional rate of excise duty at 4% ad-valorem, whereas other footwear attract the normal duty of 16%.
Agricultural implements etc are generally manufactured in the SSI Sector which are exempt from excise duty for the first
clearances upto Rupees One Crore. Further agricultural, horticultural or forestry machinery for soil preparation or cultivation,

63rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/63rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:33]
mechanical appliances of a kind used in agriculture or horticulture, harvesting or threshing machinery, etc which are generally
manufactured in the organised sector attract nil rate of basic excise duty. Therefore, Government has already extended concessional
duty benefit to these sectors.
 
 
 
DISCLOSURE IN THE BALANCE SHEETS OF THE COMPANIES
ABOUT THE DUES PAYABLE TO SSI UNITS
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
            The Committee, recommends that the interest due or payable or paid to SSI units on account of delayed payments as per the
provisions of the Delayed Payments Act 1993 (as amended) may be shown separately in the Balance Sheet of Companies.
 
COMMENTS
 
            The Department of Company Affairs  in April, 1999 had notified an amendment (GSR 129.E dated 22.2.99) to Schedule-VI
of the companies Act,1956  making it mandatory for the companies to disclose in their balance sheets “all dues exceeding Rs. 1
lakh to the small scale sector which has been outstanding for a period exceeding 30 days.
 
 
 
           
CHAPTER-II
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW
OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES
 
 
 
CREDIT GUARANTEE SCHEME
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
            Committee is also of the view that the amount allocated under the  Credit Guarantee Scheme is too meager to serve a
meaningful purpose considering the gross under-financing of the sector by the banks.  Hence the Committee recommends that the
provision under the scheme may be enhanced substantially in initial years.  The larger the size of the corpus in the initial years, the
better credibility and viability of the scheme.
 
COMMENTS
 
            The initial corpus of Rs 125 crore has since been  enhanced to Rs 200 crore for the year 2001-2002 under the Credit
Guarantee Scheme.  The issue of providing the needed outlay is under consideration of the Working Group on the 10
th Five-Year
Plan.
 
 
 
PURCHASES FROM SSI UNITS BY THE DEPARTMENTS OF
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
            The Committee recommends that a percentage should be fixed for departments of the Government of India for purchases
from SSI units on a regular basis so as to promote the cause of SSI sector in the country.
 
COMMENTS
 
            Under the Government Stores Purchase Programme, 358 items are exclusively reserved for purchases from Small Scale
Sector. Moreover, Government of India, under the Chairmanship of CMD, has constituted a sub-group NSIC on marketing and

63rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/63rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:33]
export for SSI Sector for finalisation of Tenth Plan.  The sub-group on policy has also been constituted which would suggest
suitable measures to promote marketing of SSI goods.
 
 
 
ASSISTANCE TO SSI SECTORS TO FIGHT ANTI-DUMPING CASES
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
            The Committee suggests that financial and legal assistance be provided by the government to fight the anti-dumping cases
abroad and for filing antidumping petitions within the country.
 
COMMENTS
 
In pursuance of policy measures for promoting, strengthening and to give market support and protection to small scale
industries, it has been decided that the Office of DC(SSI) provide financial assistance upto Rs.1 lakh to the  SSI
Associations/Federations/ Councils/ Apex Trade Bodies, etc  in connection with fighting anti-dumping cases.  The financial
assistance will be given to meet a part of the cost incurred on anti - dumping proceedings/investigations.
 
It is also proposed to constitute a Panel of Experts on Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) and Anti-dumping Measures.  The
proposed panel will advise the SSI units in regard to various issues arising before the small-scale sector.
 
 
 
INPOSITION OF CONDITION OF GUARANTEE ON FOREIGN
PRODUCTS
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
            The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry is contemplating to implement the guarantee system in consultation
with the Ministry of Commerce.  The Committee recommends that an immediate action may be taken in this regard and
implemented expeditiously.
 
 
COMMENTS
 
            The matter was taken up with the Ministry of Commerce, who have informed that under the broad principles of WTO, the
condition of a guarantee/warranty can be imposed on imported products only if such guarantee/warranty is required for the
domestically produced goods also. Imposing such a condition only on imported goods will be a violation of the concept of National
Treatment Principal enunciated in the GATT/WTO Agreements.
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAX RELIEF TO SSI SECTOR
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
            The Committee suggests that the SAD on raw material be made MODVATABLE as this would reduce the raw material
cost.
 
COMMENTS
 
            The matter was taken up with Ministry of Finance, they have informed that SAD is levied on the imported goods in lieu of
the sales tax. Modvat Credit is admissible of the duties of excise only and not of sales tax. Therefore modvat credit (now renamed
as CENVAT credit) facility cannot be extended to SAD.
 
 
 

63rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/63rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:33]
EXPORTS BY SSI SECTOR
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
            The Committee observes that efforts made for export of SSI products are inadequate and there is need to improve the
quality of products for this purpose. The Committee recommends that exports should be increased by making SSI products
qualitatively better and cost effective.
 
 
COMMENTS
 
            The exports from the SSI sector have increased from Rs. 9664 crore in 1990-91 to Rs. 54200 crore in 1999-2000, which
implies that the efforts made for export of SSI products are not inadequate. However, the office of DC(SSI) has been
accommodating samples from SSI sector for display in the International Trade Fairs/ Exhibitions in SIDO pavilion abroad.
Preferences are given to SSI units who have quality marks. A separate Market Development Assistance Fund has been launched for
the SSI sector.  Assistance for obtaining ISO 9000 Certification is available.  Government also gives National Awards for quality
products.
 
 
 
     
 CHAPTER - III
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
 
 
SIMPLIFICATION OF RULES RELATING TO SSI SECTOR AND
REMOVAL OF INSPECTOR RAJ
 
RECOMMENDATION
 
            The Committee recommends that simplification of rules, regulation and amendment of labour laws may be done so that SSI
units are not subject to unnecessary harassment.  The Ministry of SSI and Agro & Rural Industries may take up the matter with the
concerned administrative ministries.  By taking these measures, the Committee feels that SSI sector would get a level playing field
to a large extent.
 
 
COMMENTS
 
            A Study has been entrusted to Administrative Staff College of India (ASCI), Hyderabad to study all the rules, regulations
and procedures affecting small scale sector and draft Single Comprehensive Law for Small Scale Sector. 
 
             A Group has been constituted under the Cabinet Secretary to suggest/recommend streamlining of inspections and repeal of
redundant laws and regulations applicable to the small scale sector.  On the recommendation of the Group, in respect of self-
certification and streamlining inspections, etc., letters have been sent by MOS (SSI) to the Chief Ministers of all the States and UTs
on 24.8.2001.The National Labour Commission is also considering the issues of reducing the rigors of labour laws.  Representation
has been given to the SSI Sector in the Labour Commission.
 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
 
            The Committee is of the opinion that any further delay in this area will result in a critical setback to the SSI Sector,
particularly in the post WTO scenario. The Committee feels that Government should take  action on all the initiatives as early as
possible.
 
            While the simplification and modernisation of laws is necessary, the Committee feels, there is an urgent need to eliminate
repeated inspections by inspectors from different departments. The Committee therefore recommends that complaint cell should be
set up to register complaints against the corrupt inspectors and there should be adequate provision in the rules to punish the corrupt

63rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/63rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:33]
inspectors.
 
 
THE OFFICE OF DEVELOPMENT COMMISSIONER
 
RECOMMENDATION
 
            The Committee recommends that the office of DC should gear up to face the new challenges arising out of W.T.O.
commitments and help the SSI units to reorganise themselves.  An all out effort towards providing information for market access,
giving technological and infrastructural support including training for quality control has to be made by the Ministry if the small
scale sector has to sustain itself in a free market economy and grow.
 
COMMENTS
 
The activities undertaken or proposed to be undertaken by the office of DC(SSI) for preparing SSIs to face the new
challenges arising out of WTO commitments and  due to Liberalisation & Globalisation include the following:-
 
Ø
      Launching of Ministry’s own portal on SSI, which not only gives updated online information on policies/programmes of
the Ministry, but also provides links to other related web-sites.
Ø      Preparation of a Compendium of available technologies for the R&D Institutions in India and abroad jointly by SIDO,
SIDBI and NSIC and which has been hosted on NSIC’s Web site.
Ø      In order to encourage investment by SSI units in technology upgradation, RBI has advised all Scheduled Commercial
Banks on 15 th September, 2000 that the banks  should develop Schemes to encourage investment by SSI units in
technology upgradation and harmonise the same with SIDBI Schemes.
Ø       Providing One Time Capital Grant of 50%  to SSI Associations who wish to develop and operate Testing Laboratories,
provided they are of international standards.
Ø      Extension of incentive scheme of ISO-9000 certification, which aims at encouraging technology upgradation and
quality improvement in the SSI Sector and preparing it to face the global competition till the end of the 10 th Five Year
Plan.
 
28 one day W.T.O. sensitization workshops all over the country have been organized to create awareness amongst the SSI
units, small scale industrial Associations, Central/State Govt. Administrative offices on the  W.T.O. Agreements.
 
An Interactive Session on World Trade Organization and the SSI Sector was organized on 8.9.2000 wherein Shri S.
Narayanan, Ambassador of India to W.T.O. was invited.  The senior officers of the Ministry of SSI&ARI, National Small
Industries Corporation, etc. attended the session.
 
Ministry of SSI&ARI is participating in the Meetings of the Inter-Ministerial Group constituted under the Chairmanship of
Commerce Secretary to assess the impact of removal of QRs and to suggest suitable corrective measures.
 
A standing group consisting of Commerce Secretary, Revenue Secretary, Secretary (SSI&ARI), Secretary  AHD and DGFT
has been created which will function as a “War Room” for tracking, collecting and analyzing data on 295 sensitive items which are
of importance to the public. Subsequently,  some more sensitive items (5) in the aforesaid list of sensitive items  have been  added.
 
A close liaison is being maintained with other concerned Ministries and Departments, like Ministry of Commerce &
Industry, Dte. General of Foreign Trade, Dte. General of Anti-dumping & Allied Duties so as to keep the office of DC(SSI)
updated with regard to WTO Agreements.
 
The concerned SSI Associations and SSI units are regularly advised in regard to recent developments related to
implementation of WTO agreements.
 
It is proposed to conduct sectoral studies in areas which have a strong SSI presence so as to formulate a pro-active strategy
and to fine tune the existing policies and programmes.  To begin with five sectoral studies are proposed to be undertaken with
UNDP assistance of US$20,000.  The “Terms of Reference” for these studies have since been framed and sent to UNDP for their
approval so that further action in this context could be initiated.
 
Industry Associations are being supported to develop monitoring mechanisms on the performance of five selected product
clusters in terms of growth, removal of QRs, surge in imports,  etc.  Already four such Associations have been identified.
 
It is proposed to organize 16 one-day workshops on Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) during 2001-2002 with the
assistance of WIPO.

63rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/63rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:33]
 
It is proposed to organise Seminars, all over India to disseminate information to the concerned Associations, under the
jurisdiction of concerned  SISIs(20).  These seminars will be organised in consultation with representatives of Dte. General of Anti-
Dumping & Allied Duties (DGAD) at various ports who are in a position to apprise various aspects of anti-dumping.
 
It is proposed to assist SSI association to fight dumping cases by assisting them to the tune of Rs. 1 lakh to each of them,
who wish to take up such cases.
 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
 
            The Committee is pleased to note that all round efforts to encourage, promote and sustain the SSI sectors are being made.
The Committee recommends that focus on the areas where Indian SSIs have traditional competence is required to be enhanced so
that they are able to grow and compete in the  new global economy. 
 
            India's traditional sector consists of 1) handicrafts 2) handloom 3) Khadi, village and cottage industries 4) Coir and 5)
sericulture. In the emerging economic climate the traditional sector needs support to facilitate their access to the market. The
Committee therefore suggests that the office of D.C. should make assessment of their projects and to communicate their worth to
the market.
 
 
 
PRIME MINISTER'S ROZGAR YOJANA
 
RECOMMENDATION
 
            The Committee recommends that efforts should be made to bridge the gap between the sanctioned cases and actual
disbursal of loans under PMRY.  The Committee also recommends that the number of beneficiaries should be increased.  If
necessary, allocation may be increased at RE stage.
 
COMMENTS
 
As per the report received from the RBI, loans were sanctioned to 7,91,850 persons during the years 1997-98; 1998-99 and
1999-2000.  During the year 2000-01 loans were sanctioned to 2,29,437 persons and disbursed to 1,27,890 persons against the
target of 2,20,000 as reported by the RBI.  The figure for disbursement is likely to go up as the cut off date for completion of
disbursement has been stipulated as 31.12.2001.
 
            However, the RBI has been requested to issue necessary instructions to the implementing banks to speed up the process of
disbursement to bridge the gap between sanctions and disbursements.  The State/UTs have also been requested to arrange training
and other pre-disbursal formalities so that the gap between the sanctions and disbursement is reduced. 
 
            To ensure the achievement of plan target of 2,20,000 at national level, better performing States are allocated additional
target in addition to basic targets.  However, some States/UTs could not achieve the basic target due to various socio-economic
factors e.g. militancy and unstable political situation and due to reluctance on the part of banks to disburse loan on account of poor
recovery of loan overdues.  However, the RBI as well as the States/UTs have been requested to achieve the allocated target and
bridge the gap between sanctions and disbursement. 
 
Over and above the plan target of 2.20 lakh for 2001-2002 an additional target of 1.07 lakh have been allocated to better
performing States/UTs.  Due to the requirement of undergoing training and completion of pre-disbursement formalities, the loan for
the cases sanctioned in the year 2001-2002 may also be disbursed in 2002-2003. Depending upon the requirement of funds, the
Budget Estimate for 2002-2003 will be worked out.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
 
The Committee feels that there is a need to keep a constant vigil over the loan disbursement under  PMRY particularly on
the non-target achieving states. Before allocating  fresh target it should be ensured that the earlier target has been achieved.
 
            The Committee further recommends that the R.B.I. should submit a status note indicating the number of loans sanctioned,
disbursed and rejected with reasons therefor for the year 2001-2002.
 
 

63rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/63rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:33]
K.V.I.C
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
The Committee is constrained to note the inordinate delay in reconstituting the Commission.  The term expired in
September, 1999 and the Ministry should have initiated steps well in advance for reconstitution of the Commission.  It is
unfortunate that even after one and a half years of expiry of the term, there is till no ray of hope for its reconstitution.  The
Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry should not resort to such dilly  dallying tactics.  The Commission may be
reconstituted immediately without further delay.
 
COMMENTS
 
The reconstitution of the Commission is under consideration.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
 
            The Committee is constrained to note that even after its recommendation, the Commission has not been constituted. The
stereotyped answer that it is under consideration does not in any way convince the Committee. The Committee strongly feels that
inordinate delay in the reconstitution of the commission is going to have serious long term implications including critical set- back
to the Khadi  Sector. Hence the reconstitution process may be completed without further delay.
 
 
 
CREDIT GUARANTEE SCHEME
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
 
            The Committee recommends that the policy package for credit guarantee scheme may be made operational at the earliest in
case it has not been made as yet.  The Committee also feels that the lengthy bureaucratic red tapism in clearing credit needs to be
removed and rules be simplified and made easy.
 
COMMENTS
 
            Credit Guarantee Scheme has been launched in August, 2000 to provide guarantee for loans upto Rs.25 lakh  extended by
the commercial banks, selected well performing Regional Rural Banks and other Financial Institutions  without any collateral 
including third party guarantee.  A Credit Guarantee Fund Trust of SIDBI (CGTSI) has been created to implement the Scheme.   18
Scheduled Commercial Bank, 1 Regional Rural Bank, National Small Industries Corporation and North Eastern Development
Finance Corporation have registered with CGTSI as Member Lending Institutions for availing guarantee facility. Upto July, 2001, 
2009 cases have been sanctioned with guarantee cover extended for an aggregate credit of Rs. 12.86 crore.
 
            The application forms for loans have been  simplified based on the recommendations of the Nayak Committee.
Computation of credit needs has also been made simple by computing it on the basis of 20% of the projected annual turnover upto a
borrowal limit of Rs.5 crore. As per the extant guidelines, application for credit limits up to Rs. 25000, is to be disposed of within a
fortnight and those for loans beyond Rs.25000 within 8 to 9 weeks. The recommendation of Study Group on Development of Small
Scale Enterprises (Dr S.P.Gupta Committee) that loan applications up to Rs 5 Lakh may be disposed within a month, is under
consideration.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS
 
            The Committee feels that the  S.P. Gupta  Committee recommendation on fast processing of loan applications be  dealt on a
priority  basis and an early decision be taken.
 
            The Committee notes that 18 scheduled commercial banks have registered with CGTSI as Member Lending Intuitions for 
availing guarantee facility. The Committee recommends that SIDBI should ensure that all the Public Sector banks should register
with it for the purpose.
 
 
 
SUPPORT TO UNDERTAKE R&D ACTIVITY BY SSI SECTOR
 

63rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/63rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:33]
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
            The Committee recommends that the government should create a corpus fund for supporting R&D activity of small scale
industry.  The Committee also feels that some of the SSI units consider R&D as an eye wash and do not put in considerable effort
on this.  There needs to be an attitudinal change in this regard.
 
COMMENTS
 
The Office of DC(SSI) is operating a scheme for setting up, modernisation/expansion of Testing Centres by Industries’
Associations & State Governments. Under this scheme, one time Central Government grant-in-aid is given to the registered
Associations to meet the expenditure on plant & machinery not exceeding Rs. 20 lakh or 50% of the cost of machinery and
equipments (whichever is lower), provided the State Government also commits itself to release matching funds to the Associations.
It is also stipulated under the scheme that Associations will provide fully developed infrastructure to accommodate Testing Centres
and will meet the recurring cost of running the Testing Centres.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS
 
            The Committee feels that the R&D efforts are not yielding the desired results. Government may make a thorough study in
the matter and take appropriate steps.
 
            The Committee further recommends that a mechanism should be evolved so that the links between technical institutes and
industries are established so that they can share each others experience.
 
SIDBI
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
            The Committee recommends that Ministry should impress upon the Ministry of Finance/RBI to assist SIDBI for raising low
cost resources so as to remain viable while taking up various developmental activities in the SSI sector.
 
COMMENTS
 
SIDBI has been requesting  Ministry of Finance and RBI to allow access to concessional sources of  funding to enable the
bank to continue concessional lending to SSIs and take developmental activities in tandem with the policy prescriptions of
Government in the WTO regime.  However, the requests are yet to be acceded to.  However, in view of the recommendation  made
by the Parliamentary Standing Committee, the matter  has been taken up with RBI and Ministry of Finance.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS
 
            The Committee  desires that the Ministry of Finance may be requested  to take an early decision in the matter particularly in
view of the situation  prevailing in the country.  The Ministry of Finance should not take it lightly.
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
            The Committee recommends that the tax – exempt status as provided in the Small Industries Development Bank of India
(Amendment) Act, 2000 may be retained.  Ministry of Finance may be approached to restore the status of SIDBI as before.
 
COMMENTS
 
             The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance to restore the tax-exempt status of SIDBI as before. In their
reply, Ministry of Finance has mentioned that a conscious policy decision was taken to remove Section 50 of SIDBI Act which
pertains to income tax exemption available to SIDBI. This decision has been taken in view of the fact that the institution is in
existence for a  considerable period now and has been working on commercial basis, therefore, there is no rationale for retaining
tax exemption while similar institutions are paying their taxes.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS
 
The Committee understands that the concessional resource support available to SIDBI            in earlier years from
Government of India/RBI have gradually depleted. By this, SIDBI has been forced to approach open market for mobilizing
resource requirements. The Committee has also been given to understand that expectations from various quarters for investment by

63rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/63rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:33]
the bank for various initiatives have been increasing on one side and also there has been increasing expectation for suitable returns
on investment made by various banks/institutions in SIDBI's equity. The retained earnings/internal generations have been a major
component of SIDBI in meeting its resource requirements. With the withdrawal of tax-exempt status, the retained earning of the
banks would be depleted which ultimately could affect the operations of SIDBI. The Committee, therefore, strongly feels that the
Government should reconsider the matter and restore tax-exempt status to SIDBI.
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
            The Committee, reiterating its earlier recommendation, further suggests that the necessary administrative powers be
bestowed on SIDBI to enable it to discharge its co-ordination role effectively.
 
COMMENTS
 
While the Charter has given SIDBI the responsibility of co-ordinating the functions of other institutions engaged in the
promotion, financing and development of industries in the small scale sector, it has not been given adequate administrative powers
to enforce or enlist the co-operation of other agencies engaged in the development of small scale industries. Though SIDBI has
been bestowed with some administrative controls over          SFCs under SFCs (Amendment) Act, 2000, no such provisions are
available in respect of assistance to  commercial banks and other State Level Institutions particularly State Industrial Development
Corporations (SIDCs).
 
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee of Industry in its 40
th Report had recommended that we should
take initiative and act as a watchdog to monitor the activities of Indian and Foreign Banks.  However, this would require adequate
provisions for SIDBI  to monitor the activities of primary lending institutions with regard to their assistance and  policies towards
SSI sector, for which necessary administrative powers would be required to be bestowed upon SIDBI under the SIDBI Act through
necessary amendments.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS
 
The Committee is of the opinion that the necessary amendments in the SIDBI Act  may be carried out for the purpose.
 
 
 
MEETINGS BETWEEN BANKS AND SSI  ASSOCIATIONS
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
            The Committee feels that there should be regular meeting of banks and SSIs representatives to monitor loan requirement of
SSI.  The Committee recommends that attitudinal changes should be brought in the mindset of lower level bank officials towards
the SSI units and they may be given proper training, incentives etc. for the purpose.   The Committee also recommends that a
sample survey may be conducted in four or five States to find out the extent to which it was implemented and the feed back may be
sent to the Committee.
COMMENTS
 
            RBI has constituted a Standing Committee to monitor credit flow to SSI Sector under the chairmanship of Deputy Governor
of RBI, which meets periodically. The SSI Associations are also members in this Committee. As a follow-up to observations of this
Standing Committee, five worst performing States have been identified and studies in one district in each of these States have been
undertaken by the RBI.
 
            Finance Minister also took a meeting with the banks on 13.7.2001 to monitor, inter-alia, the credit flow to SSI Sector.
 
            Training is being imparted by the individual banks to bank officials at regional and zonal levels for sensitizing them towards
the credit needs of the SSI Sector.
 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS
 
            The Standing Committee of RBI should keep a close watch on the performance. Sensitisation should not be made a one
time affairs.
 

63rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/63rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:33]
 
INDO-NEPAL TRADE TREATY
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
The Committee would like the Ministry to look into this aspect of unfair competition being posed by the imports from
Nepal. The Committee understands that the Indo-Nepal Trade Treaty is due for review during the later part of 2001. It would,
therefore, recommend that this matter may be looked into and corrective measures taken.
 
COMMENTS
 
            Import from Nepal is governed by the  Indo-Nepal Treaty on Trade and Transit. The Indo-Nepal Treaty was last amended in
December, 1996 and is valid upto 5
th December, 2001. The Treaty will be automatically renewed in the normal course if either side
gives no notice. During the last amendment in December, 1996, the existing value addition norms were deleted and all products
manufactured in Nepal were eligible for duty free exports to India.  In the absence of value addition norms there has been a rapid
growth of imports into India of some Nepalese commodities. This has led to representations from domestic industries in these
sectors. Representations have been received regarding excessive import of many products. The industry has pointed out that in
absence of proper  rules of origin, Nepal has become a re-export point for many of the products from China and other South Asian
countries. The provision of certificate of origin was dispensed with in the new treaty. This has given rise to a spurt in flow of
Chinese goods in the guise of Nepalese goods which has badly affected the Indian industry particularly small scale and medium
industry as they are unable to compete with the cheap Chinese goods which are coming via Nepal.
 
            The Indo-Nepal Treaty is due for review shortly and these concerns can be addressed at the time of review. In the best
interest of Indian Trade and Industry it is essential now to review the Indo-Nepal Treaty, making it mandatory for goods
manufactured in Nepal to be accompanied by the certificate of origin and prescribing value addition norms. Nepal's accession to
WTO is also to be negotiated shortly and these issues of Indian concerns can also be taken up at that time.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
 
            The Committee hopes that the anomalies arising out of Indo-Nepal treaty in the new scenario would be addressed to and
concrete measures would be taken to redress the grievances of Indian manufacturers at the time of review of the treaty.
 
 
 
MARKETING AND DISTRIBUTION COMPANIES
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
            The Committee, is of the view that the marketing and distribution companies need to be considered for being given the
status of industry for the purpose of getting financial assistance from banks and FIs as well as lead institutions.
 
COMMENTS
           
            The matter has been taken up with the Reserve Bank of India.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
 
            Ministry should pursue the  matter with RBI for  according the status of industry to  marketing and  distribution companies
 
 
 
MARKETING OF SSI PRODUCTS THROUGH PRIVATE SECTOR PARTICIPATION
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
            The  Committee recommends promotion  of private sector participation  in marketing of SSI products  through proper
incentives like granting tax relief in a  manner similar to 80 HHC currently available on exports for companies marketing SSI
products.
 
COMMENTS
 

63rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/63rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:33]
            The matter has been taken up with Ministry of Finance. The response of Ministry of Finance is awaited.
 
 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS
 
            The Committee  further recommends that marketing of SSI products through private sector   participation should be 
vigorously  pursued and tax relief on  such exports should be granted expeditiously.  The Ministry of  Finance may take an early
decision in the matter.
 
             
CHAPTER-IV
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
 
 
 
TAX RELIEF TO PRIVATE BANKS
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
            Committee recommends that tax relief may be provided to private banks in case they carve out certain percentage of the
funds to lend to the tiny sector.  Ministry of Finance may be approached in this regard.
 
COMMENTS
 
            The issue has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance.
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
 
            The Committee is of the opinion that any further delay in this area will result in a critical setback to the SSI Sector,
particularly in the post WTO scenario. The Committee feels that Government should take  action on all the initiatives as early as
possible.
 
            While the simplification and modernisation of laws is necessary, the Committee feels, there is an urgent need to eliminate
repeated inspections by inspectors from different departments. The Committee therefore recommends that complaint cell should be
set up to register complaints against the corrupt inspectors and there should be adequate provision in the rules to punish the corrupt
inspectors.
 
( 1.12 )
 
 
            The Committee is pleased to note that all round efforts to encourage, promote and sustain the SSI sectors are being
made. The Committee recommends that focus on the areas where Indian SSIs have traditional competence is required to be
enhanced so that they are able to grow and compete in the  new global economy. 
 
            India's traditional sector consists of 1) handicrafts 2) handloom 3) Khadi, village and cottage industries 4) Coir and 5)
sericulture. In the emerging economic climate the traditional sector needs support to facilitate their access to the market. The
Committee therefore suggests that the office of D.C. should make assessment of their projects and to communicate their worth to
the market.
( 3.5 )
 
 
The Committee feels that there is a need to keep a constant vigil over the loan disbursement under  PMRY particularly on
the non-target achieving states. Before allocating  fresh target it should be ensured that the earlier target has been achieved.
 
            The Committee further recommends that the R.B.I. should submit a status note indicating the number of loans sanctioned,

63rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/63rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:33]
disbursed and rejected with reasons therefor for the year 2001-2002.
( 7.6 )
 
            The Committee is constrained to note that even after its recommendation, the Commission has not been constituted. The
stereotyped answer is that it is under consideration. The Committee strongly feels that inordinate delay in the reconstitution of the
commission is going to have serious long term implications including critical set- back to the Khadi  Sector. Hence the
reconstitution process may be completed without further delay.
( 8.11 )
 
 
            The Committee feels that the  S.P. Gupta  Committee recommendation on fast processing of loan applications be  dealt on a
priority  basis and an early decision be taken.
 
            The Committee notes that 18 scheduled commercial banks have registered with CGTSI as Member Lending Intuitions for 
availing guarantee facility. The Committee recommends that SIDBI should ensure that all the Public Sector banks should register
with it for the purpose.
 ( 10.2 )
 
 
            The Committee feels that the R&D efforts are not yielding the desired results. Government may make a thorough study in
the matter and take appropriate steps.
 
            The Committee further recommends that a mechanism should be evolved so that the links between technical institutes and
industries are established so that they can share each others experience.
( 11.5 )
 
            The Committee  desires that the Ministry of Finance is required to take an early decision in the matter particularly in view
of the situation  prevailing in the country. The Ministry of Finance should not take it highly.
 
( 13.4 )
 
           
The Committee understands that the concessional resource support available to SIDBI            in earlier years from
Government of India/RBI have gradually depleted. By this, SIDBI has been forced to approach open market for mobilizing
resource requirements. The Committee has also been given to understand that expectations from various quarters for investment by
the bank for various initiatives have been increasing on one side and also there has been increasing expectation for suitable returns
on investment made by various banks/institutions in SIDBI's equity. The retained earnings/internal generations have been a major
component of SIDBI in meeting its resource requirements. With the withdrawal of tax-exempt status, the retained earning of the
banks would be depleted which ultimately could affect the operations of SIDBI. The Committee, therefore, strongly feels that the
Government should reconsider the matter and restore tax-exempt status to SIDBI.
 
( 13.6 )
 
 
The Committee is of the opinion that the necessary amendments in the SIDBI Act. may be carried out for the purpose.
( 13.10 )
 
            The Standing Committee of RBI should keep a close watch on the performance. Sensitisation should not be made a one
time affairs.
( 13.12 )
 
The Committee hopes that  the anomalies arising out of Indo-Nepal treaty in the new  scenario  would  be addressed to and
concrete measures would be taken to redress the grievances of  Indian manufacturers at the time of review of the treaty.
 
( 16.6 )
 
 
            Ministry should pursuse the  matter with RBI for according  the status of industry to marketing and  distribution companies.
( 17.2 )
 
 

63rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/63rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:33]
            The Committee further recommends that marketing of  SSI products through private sector participation should be
vigorously pursued and tax relief on such exports should be granted expeditiously.  The Ministry of Finance may take an early
decision in the matter.
( 17.4 )
MINUTES
 
XV
 
FIFTEENTH  MEETING
 
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry  met at 7.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the  11th 
December,  2001 in Committee  Room `A',  Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1.                  Shri Ramdas Agarwal  - Chairman
                                                    RAJYA  SABHA
 
2.
                  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
3.                  Shri P.K. Maheshwari
4.                  Dr. Faguni Ram
5.                  Smt. Saroj Dubey
6.                  Prof. M.M.Aggarwal
7.                  Shri Bangaru Laxman
 
LOK SABHA
 
8.
                  Shri  Ramdas Athawale
9.                  Shri Nepal Chandra Das
10.              Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
                                         11.      Shri K.P.Singh Deo
                                         12.      Shri  G. Mallikarjunappa
13.
  Shri P. Rajendran
14.           Shri Anant Nayak
                                         15.      Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
                                         16.      Shri Ram Sajivan
                                         17.      Smt. Renu Kumari
             
                                                    SECRETARIAT
 
1.      Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director
2.      Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
3.      Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
 
2.         At the outset, the Chairman  welcomed  the Members of the Committee and apprised the Committee about the subject of the
meeting.  The Committee, thereafter,   took up the following  Draft Reports for consideration  :-
 
            (i)                                *                                             *                                           *
 
(ii)                                        *                                    *                                  *
________________________________________________________________________*** Relates to other matters.
39
(iii)               Sixty Third Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 49 th Report of the
Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry on the Demands For Grants 2000-2001 pertaining to
the Ministry of Small Scale Industries and  Agro & Rural Industries.
 
After some discussions, the Reports were adopted with some changes.
 

63rd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/63rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:33]
3.         The   Committee   decided   that   the  Reports  may  be   presented   to  both   the   Houses   on the 19 th  December, 2001 
and   that  Shri K.P.Singh Deo   and  in  his   absence Shri A.C. Jose and, Prof. M.M. Aggarwal and in his absence Shri Bangaru
Laxman  may present the  61st, 62nd and 63rd  Reports to the Lok Sabha  and  the Rajya Sabha   respectively.
 
                    4.The Committee, thereafter, adjourned at 8.00 P.M.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 