 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
  
  
ONE HUNDRED-SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
GLOBALISATION AND CAPITAL GOODS INDUSTRY 
THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES,  
(MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES) 
  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 19 TH DECEMBER, 2002)
 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK  SABHA ON THE 19 TH DECEMBER, 2002) 
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2002/AGRAHAYANA, 1924 (SAKA) 
  
E-Mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 
Web site : http://parliamentofindia.nic.in 
CONTENTS 
                                                                                                                                                         
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
2. INTRODUCTION 
3. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
  CHAPTER – I   
  CHAPTER – II   
  CHAPTER – III   
4. OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
AT A GLANCE 
5. MINUTES 
Page 1 of 21106th report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/106threport.htm

             
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Date of Constitution - 1st January, 2002)
 
@1.   Dr. P.C. Alexander  ----  Chairman 
           RAJYA SABHA 
     2.   Prof. M.M. Agarwal 
     3.   Dr. Abrar Ahmed 
     4.   Shri Jayantilal Barot 
     5.   Shri Prasanta Chatterjee 
     6.   Shrimati Saroj Dubey 
     7.   Dr. Faguni Ram 
     8.   Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan 
     9.   Shri P.K. Maheshwari 
   10.   Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil 
   11.   Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy 
   12.   Shri S. Sivasubramanian 
   13.   Shrimati Sushree Devi 
   14.   Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
   15.   Vacant 
           LOK SABHA 
   16.   Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee 
   17.   Kumari Mamata Banerjee 
   18.   Shri Ajoy Chakraborty 
   19.   Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary 
   20.   Shri Nepal Chandra Das 
   21.   Shri Deepak Kumar 
   22.   Shri Thomas Hansda 
   23.   Dr. S. Jagathrakshakan 
   24.   Shri A.C. Jose 
   25.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
   26.   Shri Brijlal Khabri 
   27.   Shri Sunil Khan 
   28.   Shri Manjay Lal 
   29.   Dr. K. Malaisamy 
   30.   Shri A. Narendra 
   31.   Shri Ananta Nayak 
   32.   Shri Dayabhai V. Patel 
   33.   Shri Dharam Raj Singh Patel 
   34.   Shri Uttamrao Patil 
   35.   Shri Malyala Rajaiah 
   36.   Shri P. Rajendran 
   37.   Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
   38.   Shri Tarachand Sahu 
   39.   Shri Ramanand Singh 
@ Appointed Chairman and Member of the Committee w.e.f. 12th November, 2002 vice Shri T.N. 
Chaturvedi who ceased to be the Member of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 20th August, 2002. 
   40.   Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh 
   41.   Chowdhary Talib Hussain 
   42.   Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur 
Page 2 of 21106th report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/106threport.htm

   43.   Shrimati D.M. Vijaya Kumari 
   44.   Shri Beni Prasad Verma 
   45.   Vacant 
           SECRETARIAT 
           Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
           Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary 
           Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary 
           Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary 
           Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer 
  
INTRODUCTION 
         I, the Chairman of  the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having 
been authorised by the Committee, hereby present this One Hundred-Sixth Report on the Globalisation 
and capital goods industry pertaining to the Department of Public En terprises, Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises. 
2.      The Committee, in this context, held m eetings with various Minist ries and representatives o f
Industry Organisations on 16 th April, 8 th May, 25 th June, 12 th August and 27 th November, 2002 
respectively. 
3.      The Committee in its meeting held on 17th December, 2002 considered and adopted the Report.
 
  
CHAPTER – I 
INTRODUCTION 
         A new trend of global integration began to emerge all over the world in 1980s. This was facilitated
by the gradual integration of the world economics, which ensured free flow of capital and goods from
one country to another country. Foreign capital is now freely available to finance the large infrastructure
projects. Acceptance of WTO regime  by most of the countries has si nce led to a gradual abolition o f
quantitative restrictions and reduction duties and removal of restrictions on inter-country trade. 
1.1    In our context, the Industr ial Policy of 1991 starte d the process of de-lic ensing and except 18 
industries, licensing was withdrawn. The process of de-regul ation was aimed at en larging competition 
and allowing new firms to enter the market s. The market was opened up to domestic
entrepreneurs/industrialists, which as reserved for public sector unde rtakings, and foreign capital was
provided free entry up to 51% equity in high technol ogy areas. With the adve nt of globalization, when
World Bank-aided projects started to come to country, the lifting of import control and drastic reduction 
of import duties, competition from overseas posed a proble m to the domestic capital goods industry. It
has become difficult to stay in the race for this industry in the fa ce of stiff competition from the
multinational giants. 
1.2    Despite the tremendous odds even on date, there are examples of various domestic Indian
companies in sectors like automobi les, steel, engineering, etc. in both public and private sectors that
have successfully with stood the changes brought about by the liberalization of Indian economy; fo r
example Maruti cars are being exported and Tata have similar plans. TISCO has been recognized as one
of the least cost steel producers in the world and companies like IRCON, BHEL and L&T have been
successfully executing contracts abroad. These com panies have mana ged to meet the stiff com petition
NEW DELHI; 
17th December, 2002 
DR. P.C. ALEXANDER 
Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry. 
Page 3 of 21106th report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/106threport.htm

from foreign giants but the ab sence of a level playing field put increasing pressures on thei r
competitiveness and profitability. 
1.3    The Committee deliberated upon the matter and in its 36th Report observed as under:
 
         “One such company (BHEL) which has successfully withstood the changes brought about by 
the liberalization of Indian econom y. The impressive track record of  it calls for a special mention 
of its achievements. As a matter of fact, BHEL is a role model for other PSUs of Ministry of Heavy 
Industry. For, it has managed to stay in the race  despite the odds faced by  it as a result of stif f 
competition unleashed by the multina tional giants operating in its fi eld of specialization namely, 
manufacture of power plants. T hough BHEL has managed to sustain it s viability yet it is facing 
some unfair challenges. The abse nce of a level playing field vis-à-vis its multinational competitors 
has been posing stiff challenges to the company. This  is leading to an eve r-increasing pressure on 
its profitability. Despite this, the company has been constantly  upgrading its technology and has 
also been successful in acquiring state of the art technology used in HVDC  power projects. This 
reflects the commitments of the company as a whole to serve th e nation even when the odds are 
stacked against it. Therefor e, what this company requires is a li ttle help from th e Government in 
the form of suitable policy measures. In this re gard, the sub-committee draw s the attention of the 
Government to the issues of pr ice and purchase preference to BHEL, and import duty concessions 
to the foreign companies. Through  in some cases price and purchas e preference is granted to the 
PSUs, the positive results of this measure are negated by the import duty concessions extended to 
the foreign companies by the Government. These concessions and exempti ons are precisely the 
reasons for the playing field not be ing level for domestic companies or  for that matter PSUs as the 
bids offered by foreign players are much lower in comparison to the ones offered by PSUs. In other 
words, the competition is killed well before it begins. The Committee believes that the need of the 
hour is not to go back to the days of protectionism rather to provide  a level playing field to all the 
players for the sake of healthy competition. 
Committee’s Recommendations 
1.3.1   In view of the above, the Committee has come to the conclusion that the Government should take
necessary policy measures to extend 15% price and purchase preference to BHEL  
vis-à-vis its bids for domestic power projects. It also recommends that the Government should review its
policy of giving duty concessions to the foreign companies in as much as it leads to disadvantages to the
domestic companies especially the PSUs. It is the considered view  of the committee that foreign
companies should not be shown favour at the expense of domestic companies.” 
Comments from Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises are as under: 
       “The Ministry has taken up the following issues with the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of 
Commerce: 
1.    Restoration of refund of terminal excise duty as  available to domestic bidders in the Exim
Policy 1999-2000. 
2.    Continuance of the Price Preference of 15% to domestic bidders in case of World Bank/ADB
funded projects irrespective of the rate of customs duty. 
Alternatively….... 
Equipment imports in the case of project s funded by UN/World Bank/ADB should attract
customs duty of at least 15%. 
1.3.2   Ministry of Commerce declined the proposal of this ministry to restore refund of Terminal Excise
Duty (TED) in EXIM Policy 1999-2000, as these bene fits are directly rela ted to the incidence o f
Customs Duty (CD) and C ounter Veiling Duty (CVD) on the imports for the project, i.e. whenever the
imports are exempted from the incidence of CVD, the domestic supplier is given the benefit of refund of
TED. In the budget 2000-2001, in respect of power projects other than mega-power projects, fertilizer 
projects and refineries, CVD has been  increased to 16% and therefore the benefits of refund of TED is
withdrawn from such projects. 
Page 4 of 21106th report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/106threport.htm

1.3.3   A meeting was held by the Finance Secretary on 26.7.2000 to discuss the issue regarding the
competitiveness of domestic industries. As a follow up of this meeting, a note highlighting the following
three issues which are adversely affecting the dom estic industries was circul ated to the concerned
Ministries/Departments by the Department of Revenue: 
           (i)   Restoration of refund of TED in EXIM Policy 2000-01. 
           (ii)   Applicability of withdrawal of refund of TED for contracts finalized before 31.03.2000. 
           (iii)  Rescindment for Custom s Notification No. 85/99-CUS dated 06.07.1999 permitting imports 
at zero duty by projects funded by International organizations. 
1.3.4   After analyzing the view expressed by th e various concerned Depa rtments, Department o f
Revenue summarized the position and recommended to this Ministry to take up the issue with TRU and
DGFT. 
1.3.5   Accordingly, the issue rega rding restoration of TED for cont racts finalized before 31.3.2000 was
taken up with DGFT. DGFT have since replied that th e changes effected in the policy will be applicable
in respect of supplies affected from 1.4.2000 irrespective of whether LOI was opened prior to 31.3.2000
or after 31.3.2000. 
           The other issues mentioned in Sl. No. (i) and (iii) above have been taken up with the TRU. This is
still under consideration of TRU.” 
1.4      The Committee again considered the matter and in its 45th Report and  observed as under:
 
           The Committee now recommends that the Ministry of Finance sh ould take early decision in
respect of rescindment of Custom Notificati on No. 85/9/CUS dated 6.7.1999, which allows import at
zero duty and DGFT should consider, as  special case, to issue notificat ion for refund of terminal excise
duty for projects ordered/bids under International Competitive Bidding prior to 1.4.2000. 
1.4.1   The Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises has replied as under: 
           “Ministry of Finance, Department of  Revenue has been apprised of the observations of the 
Committee that they should take ear ly decision in respect of resci ndment of Custom Notification No.
85/9/CUS dated 6.7.1999 which allows import at zer o duty in respect of Wo rld Bank funded projects
and have been requested to convey its decision to this Department. 
14.2    Further, DGFT have been apprised of th e observations of the Com mittee that they should
consider, as a special case , to issue notification for refund of Terminal Excise  Duty (TED) for purchase
order/bids under international competitive bidding prior to 1.4.2000  and have been requested to
reconsider the issue and convey their decision to this Department. 
14.3    After re-examination of th e matter, DGFT have now sent th eir response in which they have
reiterated the stand taken by them earlier. They have stated that the issue regarding withdrawal of refund
of Terminal Excise Duty is li nked to the increase in the CVD to 16% a nnounced in the budged in
February 2000. As any import, which would have taken place after 1.4.2000 would have been subject to
the imposition of CVD, all the supplies affected from this date will not be entitled to refund of TED. 
14.4    Further, on this issue, DGFT are contesting a cour t case against M/S Ma lana Power Company in
which the latter as well as BHEL ha ve filed affidavits against Union of India. The ma tter is therefore
sub-judice.” 
1.5      The Committee further considered the matter and in its 59th Report recommends as under:
 
        Keeping in view the special role played by BHEL to the ec onomy of the country and to
enable it to face the global comp etition from foreign companies, the Committee recommends that
the Ministry of Finance should take early decision in respect  of rescindment of Customs
Notification No. 85/99/CUS date d 6.7.1999 which allows import at  zero duty. This would enable
domestic industry to avail 15% as was availabl e till July 1999, as per World Bank guidelines,
which allows this advantage to developing economies to face competition. 
        DGFT should also issue notif ication for refund of terminal excise dut y for projects
Page 5 of 21106th report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/106threport.htm

ordered/bid under International Competitive Bidding prior to 1.4.2000 when such a refund was
allowed under the extant EXIM pol icy but withdrawn subsequently. With the withdrawal of this
refund, the 16% ED being quite substantial cannot be expected to be absorbed by the
manufacturer. Further, since th e customers have frozen their project cost and the financial
structure based on the settled price and obtained approvals of competent/statutory authorities, they
are also not prepared to re-open their books and accept this additional duty burden. In such a 
situation, where customers are neit her agreeable to re-negotiate the prices to compensate the 
manufacturers, nor are they ready to pay the app licable excise duty, the re fund of terminal excise
duty for at least these projects which were ordered/LOI placed before 1.4.2000 under ICB must be
allowed under a special notification. 
1.6      Since the persuasive efforts of Department  of Heavy Industry were not bearing much fruit, the
Sub-Committee-III for Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises under the convenorship of  
Dr. B.B. Ramaiah, MP (Lok Sabha), observed that th ese issues needed to be approached through a
coordinated effort. The Committee also felt that there was a lack  of appreciation of expression o f
concerns expressed by th e DHI in respect of the said issues by the other Ministries. The Committee
therefore decided to hear both pub lic and private sectors engaged in  the capital goods sector. In this
context, the Committee was apprised  that CII in its pe r-budget memorandum (2002- 03) had stated as 
under: 
           z    The removal of the zero duty regime in 1999-2000 in the case  of fertilizer projects and 
refining of crude petroleu m and the imposition of 5% customs duty alongwith a
countervailing duty had reduced the cost disadvantage to domestic  industry to some extent.
However, there was an exception with respect to mega power projects, which were allowed to
import their requirements at zero customs. 
           z    Subsequently, during the year 1999 -2000, Customs Notification No. 85/99 dated 6.7.1999 
was issued amending the earlier notification No. 84/99 wherein all the goods imported into
India for execution of projec ts financed (Whether by lo an or grant) by the Unite d
Nations/World Bank/Asian Development Bank or any other international organization and the
project having been approved by Government of India were ex empted from customs duties
Prior to 6.7.1999 the benefit under Custom s Notification No. 84/97 dated 11.11.1997 were
limited to social sector projects. 
           z    As per the World Bank guide lines, a price preference of 15%  or Customs Duty whichever is
lower is allowed to domestic bidders on th e total package provided value ADDITION IS
MORE THEN 20% . With Zero customs duty in troduced by the above notification, the price
preference (to offset the additional domestic duties as well as other levies, which the domestic
industry is subject is vis-à-vis overseas supplier) has automatically been reduced to zero. This
has adversely affected the competitiveness of domestic industry. 
           z    Advisory group on tax policy and tax administration headed by Dr. Parthasarthi Shome, in its 
report recommended removal of zero cust oms duty under customs notification 85-89 to
enable the indigenous manufact urers to avail 15% price preference under the world ban k
guidelines. 
           z    The 4% SAD which was introduced in the budget 1998-99 to accord level playing field to the 
domestic industry has not been imposed on imports for fertili zer/coal mining/powe r
generation projects and setting up of crude petroleum refinery. 
           z    Export-import policy announced on 31 st March 2000 has withdrawn the refund of Terminal
Excise duty in case of fertil izer and power projects. This has created a situation where
indigenous manufacturers have been put to cost  disadvantage  compared to foreign suppliers.
Domestic manufacturers suffer inherent cost disadvantages to the extent of 18% to 28% of the
equipment price on account  of sales tax and other local le vies on inputs/final product, higher
cost of finance, infrastructure inadequacies etc. Indigenous manufacturer is allowed to impor t
its in puts at zero dut y under deemed ex port scheme instead of 5% a pplicable for direc t
Page 6 of 21106th report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/106threport.htm

imports by the project authorities.  Assuming an import content of 40% , this gives an advantage of only
2%. After taking into account  4% (effective 4.64%) Centra l Sales Tax applicable on
indigenous supplies and exempti on of SAD on direct imports, th ere is negative protection o f
2.64% on account of customs duties alone. 
1.7      The Committee decided to discuss the issu e with the representatives of Department of Heavy
Industry, Department of Revenue, Department of Economic Affairs,  Ministry of Power, Directo r
General of Foreign Trade and repres entatives of BHEL and CII. In this  report, the focus has been given
on the rescindment of the customs notification. The matter relating to refund of Terminal Excise Duty
will be dealt with separately. 
 
Page 7 of 21106th report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/106threport.htm

CHAPTER – II 
MEETINGS HELD WITH VARIOUS MINISTRIES AND CAPITAL GOODS SECTOR 
2.        The Committee held meetings on 16th April, 8th May, 25th June, 12th August and 28th November, 
2002. The deliberations of the Committee are given below data-wise: 
2.1      Meeting held on 16th April, 2002
 
2.1.1   Convenor apprised the commit tee that it would discuss the pr oposal for rescindment of Customs
Notification No. 85/99CUS dated 6.7.1999 which allowed import at  zero duty so as to enable domestic
industry to avail 15% price prefer ence as was available till July 1999, as pe r World Bank guidelines.
The Convenor apprised the Committee that cap ital goods industry was to be protected but
simultaneously the cost of user industries like power and fertilizer  projects should not go up. On the
whole, the capital cost and the product cost should come down. Even though the World Bank was giving
a number of privileges, the capita l goods industry was finding it difficult to surv ive. The zero duty had
caused the problem. He informed th e Committee that after hearing the secretaries of various Ministries
and representatives of CII, an attempt would be ma de to find a solution to this problem. Thereafter the
committee heard the above representatives from Government departments and CII. 
2.1.2   The discussion could not be concluded. The convenor  requested the representatives of CII to
prepare a note on the subject with possible solutions to this problem. 
2.2      Meeting held on 8th May, 2002
 
2.2.1   Convenor apprised the Committee that in its last meeting held on 16 th April 2002, discussion 
could not be conclude d and he requested CII to prepare a not e regarding imports at zero customs duty
against World Bank/Asian Development Bank’s fina nced projects. The Convenor summarized the view
points of CII and informed the Committee that World Bank as well  as Asian Development Bank had
been financing various kinds of projects for over two decades in India. Th ere was an established
procedure for inviting tenders and fo r evaluating them. The primary fe atures of the guidelines were as
follows: 
           1.     International Competitive Bidding has to be followed; 
           2.     The tenders submitted by fo reign bidders would be evalua ted without including customs
duty; and  
           3.     Price preference of 15% to dom estic bidders was allowed with the stipulation that it would
be admissible if in the total p ackage, there was value addition of 30% or more and the price
preference was not more than applicable customs duty. 
2.2.2   CIT further stated that the Central Board of Excise and Custom s Duty issued a notification No.
85/99 amending an earlier cust oms notification exempting cu stoms duty on import of goods fo r
execution of projects financed by  loan or grant by World Bank, As ian Development Bank or any othe r
international organization. The Wo rld Bank had allowed 15% Price Pr eference to domestic bidders to
offset the domestic duty/levies such as sales ta x, octrois, etc. and cert ain disadvantages due to
inadequate infrastructure and higher cost of finance. With zero customs duty from 6 th July 1999 fo r 
direct import by project authorities, the effect of  price preference of 15%  had automatically been
reduced to zero. 
2.2.3   Secretary, Ministry of Po wer, Secretary, Department of Revenue, and Director General o f
Foreign Trade raised the following objections: 
           1.    World Bank/ADB had stopped f unding power generation projects in India, the rescinding o f
the aforesaid customs notification had no practical significance. 
           2.    If the domestic price preference is restored, the project cost would go up. 
           3.    If domestic price preference was restored, overseas bidders would not be interested in
competing for projects funded by the World Bank/ADB. 
Page 8 of 21106th report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/106threport.htm

2.2.4   As regards point number 1 a bove, CMD, BHEL, drew attention to  the press report appearing in
the Financial Express dated 7.5.2002 wh ere Minister of Power was re ported to have stated that
Government of India would s eek financial assistance of  around $ 4 billion from ADB fo r
implementation of various power proj ects. If this was true, domestic companies would be placed at a
considerable disadvantage in th e absence of domestic pr ice preference. Also, the power transmission
sector continued to ava il of multilateral funding for its projects and dome stic companies including
BHEL were already at a disadvantag e while bidding for these projects. In  view of this, it would not be
correct to conclude that the issue had no practical significance. 
2.2.5   In so far as point number two was concerned, he stated that  although the project cost may have
the potential of increasing to this extent, this may not happen in all cases, as this would depend upon the
pricing strategies adopted by various bidders in specific projects. However, in the absence of domestic
price preference and the consequent  disadvantage suffered by domestic industry, it was likely that more
and more contracts would be w on by the overseas bidders who w ould quote their price in foreign
currencies. These companies would te nd to adopt a different pricing stra tegy in the absence of effective
competition from capable domestic companies. Also, as these projects got executed over a time frame of
3 to 4 years and given the propensit y of the Indian rupee to depreciat e (past experience shows that, on
the average, rupee depreciated @ 5 to 6% p.a), the completed cost of  power projects was likely to go up
by more than 3 to 4% on this account  alone. Also, if it was considered that in all such cases, the spares
and services for after-market maintenance of the equipment would have to be imported, there was the 
likelihood of lifetime cost of the project going up by a factor much mo re than the perceived benefit to
domestic industry on account of do mestic price preference. More over, the overall economic cost
involved in costly facilities se t up by domestic capital goods industr y could not be ignored and the
workers being rendered idle as a result of the domes tic price preference being denied to local industry.
India was one of the few developi ng countries (apart from China) to have built up a capable capital
equipment industry. 
2.2.6   Regarding point number 3, he stated that during the period from mid 70’s when multilateral 
funding of power projects started upto July 1999, when domestic price pr eference was available to local
industry in the case of projects funded by the World Bank/ADB in the power sector, there have been 43
international competitive bids in all of which ove rseas bidders competed. Out of these, BHEL was able
to win as many as 37 contracts registering a success rate of 86% without availing itself of domestic price
preference. In any case, in the case of World Bank/ADB funded tende rs, for evaluation, the CIF cost o f
imported equipment was compared with the ex-works  cost of domestic suppliers and the impact o f 
customs duty for imports as also excise duty for locally manufactured equipment were ignored. In such a
case, even if domestic price prefer ence were to be restored by withdr awal of zero customs duty regime,
the overseas bidders should have no concern, as the import duty attracted by their equipment would any
way not be considered for evaluation of their bid. As such, it was not correct to say that restoration o f
domestic price preference by resc inding the aforesaid customs notif ication would affect the overseas
bidder’s interest in competing for World Bank funded power projects in India. 
2.2.7   The committee also heard Secretary, Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises,  
Dr. Adarsh Kishore, Additional Se cretary, Ministry of Finance (Dep artment of Economic Affairs), Shri
M.S. Krishnamoorthy, Head (Engg. Business), CII, Shri Sarosh J.  Ghandy, Chairman, IECIAL and MD
(TELCO), Shri J.C. Mongia, Deputy Manager (ISGEC). 
2.2.8   Chairman, IECIAL, also apprised the comm ittee that the domestic  companies were facing
difficulties due to imports on zero  duty. Representative of CII pleaded for more time to  adjust to zero
duty regime. 
2.2.9   After going into the details of the problems, the Committee observed that a mechanism should be
found so that competitivene ss of the domestic companies was not affected due to zero duty on imports.
The Committee accordingly decided that a Group of Secretaries under the Chairmanship of Secretary,
Department of Revenue, may be c onstituted to examine the issue of Duty Free Goods and Services
under the International Competitiv e Bidding with reference to Cu stoms Notification No. 85/99 CUS
dated 6th July, 1999. The Grou p would com prise Secretary, Department of Revenue as Chairman , and
Page 9 of 21106th report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/106threport.htm

Secretary Department of Heavy Industries, Secret ary, Ministry of Power, Secretary, Commerce/DGFT,
as members. The Committee also au thorized Revenue Secretary to associate other persons if the
necessity was felt. The Committee desired that a report might be furnished within one month fo r
consideration of the Committee. 
2.3      Meeting held on 25th June, 2002
 
2.3.1   The Convenor apprised the Committ ee that at its last  meeting held on 8 th May, 2002, the 
Committee desired a group to be set up under the Chai rmanship of Revenue Secretary to examine the
issues of duty-free goods and serv ices under International Compet itive Bidding with reference to 
Customs Notification No. 85/99 which permitted zero duty imports. In pursuance of the directions of the
Committee, Department of Industry info rmed the Rajya Sabha Secretariat on 6 th June, 2002 that a 
Group had been set up with the following composition to examine the issue: 
           z     Chairman – Secretary, Department of Revenue 
           z     Members 
           z     Secretary, Department of Commerce; 
           z     Secretary, Department of Heavy Industry; and  
           z     Secretary, Ministry of Power. 
2.3.2   The Convenor thereafter requested the Secretar y, Department of Heavy I ndustries, to apprise the
Committee about the progress made in the matter. 
2.3.3   Secretary, Department of H eavy Industries, informed the Co mmittee that one meeting of the
Group had been held and all aspects were discusse d. The Group wanted some more information and the
DHI together with CII were compiling that information. The Group would require one more meeting and
thereafter they would be able to submit a report to the Committee. 
2.3.4   Secretary, Department of Heavy Industries, furthe r informed that it had come to the notice of the
Group that there was a document of  the World Bank which was the guide line for procurement, in which
there are certain provisions and in terpretations with regard to th e domestic preferen ces which can be
accorded and how the bids were to be evaluate d – the comparative evaluation between the domestic 
producer and the companies from abroad. The Gr oup would also consider that guideline and, i f
necessary, that could be reiterated in a Government circular or a clarification statement would be issued. 
2.3.5   The Convenor observed that th e World Bank issue was not only applicable to PSUs but also to
capital goods industries in general. The Committee’s objective was to utilize it for the development o f
the country and as such, necessary  modification/change in the notif ication may be made. He hoped that
the Group working on it would find a me chanism to resolve the issue. He  desired that the next meeting
on this issue would be held during the monsoon session of the Parliament. 
2.4      Meeting held on 12th August, 2002
 
2.4.1   The Convenor apprised the Committee that in pursuance of the directive of the Committee, the
Department of Revenue had cons tituted a Group of Secretaries vide their notification dated 6 th June, 
2000 to examine the issue of rescindment of Customs Notification 85/99 on import at zero duty. 
2.4.2   Secretary, Department of Heavy Industries, informed the Committee that the Group of Secretaries
held two meetings – on 21 st June and 23 rd July, 2002. In the first meet ing, the Group deliberate d
whether the Customs Notification 84/97 as ame nded by 85/99 effectively denied the domestic
manufacturers the advantage of  price preference available to  them under the World Bank/ADB
guidelines on procurement of goods. The Group felt that  the question of merit could be examined only
after relevant informati on was obtained. Secretary, De partment of Heavy Indus tries, further informed
that during the interim period the guidelines of the Worl d Bank were obtained and studied. Following
features of th e World Bank/ADB guidelines and current re gime of customs and excise exem ption
Page 10 of 21106th report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/106threport.htm

notifications emerged: 
           1.    Sales and similar taxes levied in connection with the sale or delivery of goods were not taken
into account while evaluating bids. 
           2.    Excise duty was taken into account while evaluating cost quoted by domestic industry, but
the excise duty and additional ex cise duty had also been exempt ed for goods supplied to such
multi-lateral financed projects vide Notification No. 10B/95-C.D. 
           3.    If the bid of a foreign bidder was found lowest, 15% or the a pplicable customs duty for the
tariff line, was added to the bid of the fo reign bidder to provide the price preference
advantage to the domestic i ndustry bidder as the World Ba nk guidelines required duty
applicable to non-exempt bidders to be taken into account. 
2.4.3   During the second meeting of the Group, th e Department of Economic Affairs, provided
evaluations done in the recent pa st in World Bank procurement, wh en price prefer ence was given.
Domestic bidders lost the tenders in those cases as their prices were higher de spite the price preference.
In view of the relief availabl e, the Group did not proc eed further regarding rescinding of the said
notification. 
2.4.4   In this regard, the Commit tee also heard Secretar y, Ministry of Power,  Additional Secretary,
Department of Economic Affairs, Director General of Foreign Trade, CMD, BHEL, and representatives
of CII. The Committee desired that in view of th e emerging position, a clarificatory statement should be
issued by the Department of Econom ic Affairs to remove the doubts, which had arisen in the matter o f
interpretation of the Customs Notification No. 85/99. 
2.5      Meeting held on 27th November, 2002
 
2.5.1   The Committee recalled that  at its meeting held on 12.8.2002, it desired that in view of the
emerging position, a clarificatory st atement should be issued by the Department of Economic Affairs to
remove the doubts, which had arisen in the matter of interpretation of the Customs Notification  No.
85/99. 
2.5.2   In the above background the Convenor informed  the Committee that De partment of Economic
Affairs had issued a circular on 15th November, 2002 which stated –  
        “It has been brought to the notice of th e Government that the posit ion regarding availability 
of price preference to domest ic manufacturers under the procur ement guidelines of the World
Bank, ADB and United Nations Organizations needs to  be clarified in view  of certain misgivings
arising out of Customs Notification No. 85/99. 
        It might be noted that procurem ent of goods and works under the World Bank, ADB and
United Nations Organizations is governed under the respective procurement guidelines issued by
the said Organizations. All these guidelines provide for a price pr eference to domestic
manufacturers up to a specified limit (15% in case of World Bank) or the customs duty applicable
to a ‘non-exempt’ importer, whichever is lower. 
        It has been clarified that despit e all imports under the proj ects financed by World Bank,
ADB and UN Organizations have been exempted of customs duty under the Customs Notification
No. 85/99, the ‘non-exempt’ impor ters continue to be subject to the customs duty under 
respective tariff lines. The bid evaluation w ould therefore be undertaken as per procurement
guidelines of these lending Organizations. Thus price preference under these guidelines, continue
to be available to all the eligible domestic ma nufacturers. As provided in these guidelines it is
essential that the above provisions are clearly stipulated in the Notice Inviting Tender (NIT). 
        Any case of such preference not havi ng been extended by any of the relevant Multilateral
Organisations may be brought to the notice of the Department of Ec onomic Affairs in the
Ministry of Finance." 
2.5.3   On enquiry as to whether the circular issued by the Depart ment of Economic Affairs would be
helpful for the public as well as private sectors, the CMD, BHEL and re presentatives of CII informed
Page 11 of 21106th report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/106threport.htm

that the circular would meet their requirements and they thanked the Committee. 
2.5.4   The Convenor expressed his happiness as the process has been  simplified. He thanked all
concerned as they had put together their heads to resolve the problem, which was otherwise not possible.
CHAPTER – III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
3.        The amendment of Customs Notification N o. 85/99 dated 6.7.1999 was issued amending the 
earlier Notification No. 84/99 permitting imports at zero duty for projects funded by international
Organizations. With th e notification, the preference polic y under World Ba nk guideline has
automatically reduced to zero and adversely affected the domestic industry. The Committee consistently
followed up the matter and recommende d for corrective measures in its 36 th, 45th and 59th Reports and 
had five meetings with several mi nistries and public and private sect or domestic industry to resolve the
matter. The World Bank issue is not only applicable  to Public Sector Undert akings but also to capital
goods industry in general. The Committee’s objective was to utilize it for the development of the
country. 
3.1      The Committee recalls that in the meetings held on 16 th April, 8th May and 25th June, 2002, The 
Ministries/Departments had expresse d their own reservations and concer ns but ultimately they realized
that if only they put their heads together they could resolve the i ssue. The Committee appreciates the
ministries and departments for their coordinated approach. 
3.2      Since globalization, the country is facing ma ny problems but at the sa me time the country cannot
go back. We have to see how to safeguard the country’s interest – both public and private sectors. 
3.3      Now, in view of the clarificatory notification issued by the Department of  Economic Affairs,
there is no need to rescind the Notification No. 85/99 and the Comm ittee hopes that the capital goods
industry of the country would be ab le to compete with the foreign bi dders in the projects funded by
international organizations. The Committee, however, urges upon the i ndustry to keep vigil and watch
with regard to any deviation of the World Bank gui deline by any international agency by not including
the price preference clause in the NIT (Notice I nviting Tender) and thereby depriving the domestic
industry to bid for the project and the industry should also immediately bring any instance to the notice
of Department of Economic Affairs in case such price preference is not extended to domestic industry
by any multinational organizations. 
3.4      The Committee understands more internati onal funded projects would come to the country in
future and the domestic industry w ould be able to reap the benefi t and contribute to the country’s 
development. 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
AT A GLANCE 
        In view of the above, the Comm ittee has come to the conclusion that the Government should take
necessary policy measures to  extend 15% price and pur chase preference to BHEL vis-à-vis its bids fo r 
domestic power projects. It also r ecommends that the Government sh ould review its policy of giving
duty concessions to the foreign companies in as mu ch as it leads to disadva ntages to the domestic
companies especially the PSUs. It is the consider ed view of the Committee that foreign companies
should not be shown favour at the expense of domestic companies. 
                                                                                                                                         (Para : 1.3.1) 
        The Committee now recommends that the Ministry of Finance should take early decision in respect
of rescindment of Customs Notification No. 85/9/CUS dated 6.7.1999, which allows import at zero duty
and DGFT should consider, as specia l case, to issue notification for refund of terminal excise duty fo r
projects ordered/bids under International Competitive Bidding prior to 1.4.2000. 
                                                                                                                                            (Para : 1.4) 
Page 12 of 21106th report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/106threport.htm

        Keeping in view the special role played by BHEL to the economy of the c ountry and to enable it to
face the global competition from foreign companies, the Committee recommends that the Ministry o f
Finance should take early decision in respect of rescindment of Customs Notification No. 85/99/CUS
dated 6.7.1999 which allows import at zero duty. This would enable domestic industry to avail 15% as
was available till July, 1999, as per World Bank guidelines, which allows  this advantage to developing
economies to face competition. 
        DGFT should also issue notification for re fund of terminal excise dut y for projects ordered/bid
under International Competitive Bidding prior to 1.4.2000 when such a refund was allowed under the
extant EXIM policy but withdrawn subsequently. With the withdrawal of this refund, the 16% ED being
quite substantial cannot be expected  to be absorbed by the manufactur er. Further, since the customers
have frozen their project cost a nd the financial structure based on the settled pr ice and obtained
approvals of competent/statutory au thorities, they are also not prep ared to re-open their books and 
accept this additional duty burden. In such a situation, where custom ers are neither agreeable to re-
negotiate the prices to compensate the manufacturers , nor are they ready to pay the applicable excise
duty, the refund of terminal excise duty for at least these projects which were ordered/LOI placed before
1.4.2000 under ICB must be allowed under a special
notification.                                                                                                                           (Para : 1.5) 
        The Committee recalls that in the meetings held on 16 th April, 8 th May and 25 th June, 2002, The 
Ministries/Departments had expresse d their own reservations and concer ns but ultimately they realized
that if only they put their heads together they could resolve the i ssue. The Committee appreciates the
Ministries and Departments for their coordinated approach.        (Para : 3.1) 
        Since globalization, the country is faci ng many problems but at the same time the country cannot
go back. We have to see how to safeguard the country’s interest – both public and private sectors 
                                                                                                                                            (Para : 3.2) 
        Now, in view of the clarificatory notifi cation issued by the Department of Economic Affairs, there
is no need to rescind the Notification No. 85/99 and the Committee hopes that the capital goods industry
of the country would be able to compete with the foreign bidders in the projects funded by international
organizations. The Committee, however, urges upon the industry to keep  vigil and watch with regard to
any deviation of the Worl d Bank guideline by any internationa l agency by not including the price
preference clause in the NIT (Notice Inviting Tender) and thereby depriving the domestic industry to bid
for the project and the i ndustry should also immediately bring any instance to the notice of Department
of Economic Affairs in case such  price preference is not exte nded to domestic industry by any
multinational organizations. 
                                                                                                                                            (Para : 3.3) 
        The Committee understands more international funded projects would come to the country in future
and the domestic industry would be able to reap the benefi t and contribute to the country’s 
development.          (Para : 3.4) 
  
  
MINUTES 
IV 
FOURTH  MEETING 
        The Sub-Committee for Heavy Industries  and Public Enterprises (of the Department-relate d 
Parliamentary Standing Co mmittee on Industry) met at  4.00 P.M. on Monday, the 16 th April, 2002 in 
Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
        PRESENT 
Page 13 of 21106th report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/106threport.htm

   1.  Dr. B.B. Ramaiah        ----          Convenor 
        RAJYA SABHA 
   2.  Shri P.K. Maheshwari 
        LOK SABHA 
   3.  Shri Ajoy Chakraborty 
   4.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
   5.  Shri Sunil Khan 
        SECRETARIAT 
        Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director 
        Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary 
        Shri Rakesh Naithani, Executive Officer 
        WITNESSES  
        Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises 
        1.  Shri Ravindra Gupta, Secretary 
        2.  Shri S.V. Bhave, Joint Secretary 
        3.  Shri V.K. Mutreja, Adviser (Tech.) 
        Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd. 
        Shri K.G. Ramachandran, CMD 
        Central Board of Excise & Customs 
        Shri K.L. Verma, Chairman 
        Confederation of Indian Industries 
        1.  Shri Tarun Das, Director General 
        2.  Shri Dilip Chenoy, Dy. Director General 
        3.  Shri M.S. Krishnamoorthy, Head (Engg. Business) 
        4.  Shri K.C. Ravi, Director 
        Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) 
        Shri C.M. Vasudeva, Secretary 
        Ministry of Power 
        Shri R.V. Shashi, Secretary (Power) 
        Ministry of Commerce 
        Shri M.L. Bhulani, Additional Director General, Foreign Trade 
        At the outset, the Convenor welcomed th e Members of the Sub-Commit tee and representatives o f 
various Ministries and CII. Conve nor apprised the Committee that it would discuss the proposal fo r
rescindment of Customs Notification No. 85/99 CUS dated 6.7.1999 whic h allowed import at zero duty
so as to enable domestic industry to avail 15% pri ce perference as was avai lable till July, 1999, as pe r
World Bank guidelines. The Committee would also di scuss the refund of Terminal Excise Duty fo r
projects ordered/bid under Internat ional Competitive Bidding prior to  1.4.2000 when such a refund was
allowed under the extant  EXIM policy but wit hdrawn subsequently. The Convenor apprised the
Committee that capital goods industry was to be protected but simultaneously the cost of user industries
like power and fertilizer projects should not go up. On the whole,  the capital cost and the product cost
should come down. Even though th e World Bank was giving a number of privileges, the capital goods
industry was finding it difficult to  survive. The zero duty had cause d the problem. He informed the
Committee that after hearing the Secr etaries of various Ministries and re presentatives of CII, an attempt
would be made to find a solution to this pr oblem. Therafter the Co mmittee heard the above
representatives from Government departments and CII. 
2.     The discussion could not be concluded. Th e Convenor requested the re presentatives of CII to
prepare a note on the subject  with possible solutions to this problem, for further discussion, at its
meeting to be held on 8th May, 2002. 
3.     A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. The witness then withdrew. 
Page 14 of 21106th report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/106threport.htm

        The Committee then adjourned at 5.40 P.M. 
 
Page 15 of 21106th report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/106threport.htm

VI 
SIXTH  MEETING 
        The Sub-Committee for Heavy Industries  and Public Enterprises (of the Department-relate d 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Indu stry) met at 4.00 P.M. on Monday, 8 th May, 2002 in Room 
No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
        PRESENT 
   1.  Dr. B.B. Ramaiah        ----          Convenor 
        RAJYA SABHA 
   2.  Shri P.K. Maheshwari 
        LOK SABHA 
   3.  Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee 
   4.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
   5.  Shri Deepak Kumar 
   6.  Shri Manjay Lal 
        SECRETARIAT 
        Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
        Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director 
        Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary 
        Shri Rakesh Naithani, Executive Officer 
        WITNESSES  
        Department of Heavy Industry (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises 
        1.   Shri B.N. Jha, Secretary 
        2.   Shri Ajoy Acharya, Joint Secretary 
        3.   Shri Pradeep Kumar, Joint Secretary 
        4.   Shri S.V. Bhave, Joint Secretary 
        5.   Shri V.K. Mutreja, Advisor (Tech.) 
        Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) 
        Shri S. Narayan, Secretary 
        Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) 
        Dr. Adarsh Kishore, Additional Secretary 
        Central Board of Excise and Customs 
        Shri K.L. Verma, Chairman 
        Ministry of Power 
        1.   Shri R.V. Shahi, Secretary 
        2.   Shri R. Ramanujam, Joint Secretary 
        Office of Director General of Foreign Trade 
        Shri N.L. Lakhanpal, DGFT 
        Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd. 
        Shri K.G. Ramachandran, CMD 
        Confederation of Indian Industries 
        1.   Shri M.S. Krishnamoorthy, Head (Engg. Business) 
        2.   Dr. K.C. Ravi, Director 
        3.   Shri K.S. Ghai, Adviser 
Page 16 of 21106th report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/106threport.htm

        4.   Ms. Charu Mathur, Deputy Director 
        5.   Shri Kuldip Goel, DGM (Projects) 
        6.   Shri Sarosh J. Ghandy, Chairman, IECIAL and MD (TELCO) 
        7.   Shri J.C. Mongia, Deputy Manager (ISGEC) 
        8.   Shri A.C. Sharma, AGM (ISGEC) 
        Indian Electrical & Electronics Manufacturers' Association 
        Shri B.S. Bhadaura 
        At the outset, Convenor welcomed the Secretaries and ot her officers of the Ministries and
representatives of industries' associations. Convenor apprised the Committee that in its last meeting held
on 16th April, 2002, discussion could not be concluded and he requested CII to prepare a note regarding
imports at zero customs duty agai nst World Bank/Asian Developmen t Bank's financed projects. The
Convenor summarised the view point s of CII and informed the commit tee that World Bank as well as
Asian Development Bank had been fi nancing various kinds of projects  for over two decades in India.
There was an established procedure for inviting tenders and for evaluating them. The primary features of
the guidelines were as follows: 
        (a)   International Competitive Bidding had to be followed; 
        (b)   Evaluation of tenders submitted by foreign bidders would be evaluated without including
customs duty; and 
        (c)   Price preference of 15% to domestic bidders was allowed with the stipulation that it would be
admissible if in the total package, there was value addition of 30% or  more and the price
preference was not more than applicable customs duty. 
2.     The Central Board of Excise and Customs Duty issued a notification No. 85/99 amending an earlier
customs notification exempting cust oms duty on import of goods for  ex ecution of projects financed by
loan or grant by World Bank, Asia n Development Bank or any othe r international organisation. The
World Bank had allowed 15%  Price Preference to dom estic bidders to offset  the domestic duty/levies
such as sales tax, octrois, etc. and certain disadvant ages due to inadequate infrastructure and higher cost
of finance. With zero customs duty from 6th Jul y, 1999 for direct import by pr oject authorities, the
effect of price preference of 15% had automatically been reduced to zero. Secretary, Ministry of Power,
Secretary, Department of Revenue, Director General of Foreign Trade raised the following objections: 
        (a)    World Bank/ADB had stopped fundi ng power generation projects in  India, the rescinding o f
the aforesaid customs notification had no practical significance; 
        (b)    If the domestic price preference was restored, the project cost would go up; and 
        (c)    If domestic price preference was restored, overseas bidders would not be interested in
competing for projects funded by the World Bank/ADB. 
3.     As regard point number 1 above, CMD, BHEL, drew attention to  the press report appearing in the
Financial Express dt. 7.5.2002 where Mini ster of Power was reported to ha ve stated that Government of
India would seek financial assi stance of around $ 4 billion from ADB for implementation of various
power projects. If this wa s true, domestic companies would be pla ced at a considerable disadvantage in
the absence of domestic price pref erence. Also, the power transmissi on sector continued to avail o f 
multilateral funding for its proj ects and domestic companies incl uding BHEL were already at a
disadvantage while bidding for these projects. In view of this, it would not be correct to conclude that
the issue had no practical significance. 
        In so far as point number two was concerne d, he stated that although the project cost may have the
potential of increasing to this ex tent, this may not happen in all cas es, as this would depend upon the
pricing strategies adopted by various bidders in specific projects. However, in the absence of domestic
price preference and the consequent  disadvantage suffered by domestic industry, it was likely that more
and more contracts would be w on by the overseas bidders who w ould quote their price in foreign
currencies. These companies would te nd to adopt a different pricing stra tegy in the absence of effective
competition from capable domestic companies. Also, as these projects got executed over a time frame of
3 to 4 years and given the propensity of the Indian ru pee to depreciate (past experience showed that, on
Page 17 of 21106th report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/106threport.htm

the average, rupee depreciated @ 5 to 6% p.a.), the completed cost of power projects was likely to go up
by more than 3 to 4% on this account  alone. Also, if it was considered that in all such cases, the spares
and services for after-market maintenance of the equipment would have to be imported, there was the 
likelihood of life time cost of the project going up by a factor much mo re than the perceived benefit to
domestic industry on account of Domestic Pric e Preference. Moreover, the overall economic cost
involved in costly facil ities set up by domestic ca pital goods industry and th e workers being rendered
idle as a result of the domestic price preference being denied to lo cal industry could not be ignored.
India was one of the few developi ng countries (apart from China)  to had built up a capable capital
equipment industry. 
        Regarding point number 3, he stated that during the period from mid 70's when multilateral funding
of power projects started upto July 1999, when domestic price preference was available to local industry
in the case of projects funded by the World Ba nk/ADB in the power sector, there had been 43
international competitive bids in all of which ove rseas bidders competed. Out of these, BHEL was able
to win as many as 37 contracts registering a success rate of 86% without availing itself of domestic price
preference. In any case, in the case of World Bank/ADB funded tende rs, for evaluation, the CIF cost o f
imported  equipment was compared with the ex-wor ks cost of domestic suppliers and the impact o f
customs duty for imports as also excise duty for locally manufactured equipment were ignored. In such a
case, even if domestic price prefer ence were to be restored by withdr awal of zero customs duty regime,
the overseas bidders should have no concern, as the import duty attracted by their equipment would any
way not be considered for evaluation of their bid. As such, it was not correct to say that restoration o f
domestic price preference by resc inding the aforesaid customs notif ication would affect the overseas
bidder's interest in competing for World Bank funded power projects in India. 
4.     The Sub-Committee also heard Secretary, Minist ry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises, Dr. 
Adarsh Kishore, Additional Secret ary, Minsitry of Finance (Depar tment of Economic Affaris), Shri
M.S. Krishnamoorthy, Head (Engg. Business), CII, Shri Sarosh J.  Ghandy, Chairman, IECIAL and MD
(TELCO), Shri J.C. Mongia, Deputy Manager (ISGEC). 
5.     Chairman, IECIAL, also apprised the Co mmittee that the domestic  companies were facing
difficulties due to imports on zero  duty. Representative of CII pleaded for more time to  adjust to zero
duty regime. 
6.     After going into the detail s of the problems, the Committee ob served that a mechanism should be
found so that competitivene ss of the domestic companies was not affected due to zero duty on imports.
The Sub-Committee accordingly decided that a Gr oup of Secretaries unde r the chairmanship o f
Secretary, Department of Revenue, may be constitu ted to examine the issue of Duty Free Goods and
Services under the International Competitive Biddi ng with reference to Cust oms Notification No. 85/99
CUS dated 6th July, 1999. The Group would comprise Se cretary, Department of Revenue as Chariman,
and Secretary Department of Heavy Industries, Secretary, Mi nistry of Power, Secretary,
Commerce/DGFT, as members. The Sub-Committee al so authorised Revenue Secretary to associate
other persons if the necessacity was felt. The Sub- Committee desired that a report might be furnishe d
within one month for consideration of the Committee. 
7.     The Sub-Committee recalled th at at its last meeting it decided to visit Bangalore and Mumbai in 
June and July 2002 respect ively. The Committee now d ecided that it would vi sit Bangalore from 9-13 
June and Mumbai in the first week of July, 2002. 
8.     The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 6.15 P.M. 
  
XII 
TWELFTH  MEETING 
        The Sub-Committee-III for Heavy Industr ies and Public Enterprises of the Department-relate d 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Indu stry met at 3.30 P.M. on Monday, 12 th August, 2002 in 
Room No. 67, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
Page 18 of 21106th report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/106threport.htm

        PRESENT 
   1.  Dr. B.B. Ramaiah        ----          Convenor 
        RAJYA SABHA 
   2.  Shri P.K. Maheshwari 
   3.  Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy 
   4.  Shri S. Sivasubramanian 
        LOK SABHA 
   5.  Shri Ajoy Chakraborty 
   6.  Shri Sunil Khan 
   7.  Shri Manjay Lal 
   8.  Dr. K. Malaisamy 
   9.  Shri A. Narendra 
10.  Shri Malyala Rajaiah 
        SECRETARIAT 
        Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director 
        Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary 
        Shri Rakesh Naithani, Executive Officer 
        WITNESSES  
        1.   Shri Ajai Vikram Singh, Secretary, Department of Revenue 
        2.   Shri B.N. Jha, Secretary, M/o Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises 
        3.   Shri N.S. Sisodia, Special Secretary, M/o Power 
        4.   Dr. Adarsh Kishore, Additional Secretary, Ministry of Finance, D/o Economic Affairs 
        5.   Shri S.V. Bhave, Joint Secretary, M/o Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises 
        6.   Shri L. Mansingh, DGFT 
        7.   Shri L.B. Singhal, Jt. DGFT 
        8.   Shri K.G. Ramachandran, CMD, BHEL 
        9.   Shri Kuldip Goel, AGM (Projects), CII 
        10.Shri N.B. Mathur, Adviser, CII 
        At the outset, the Convenor apprised th e Committee that in pursuan ce of the directive of Sub-
Committee-III of Department-related parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, the Department of
Revenue had constituted a Group of Secretaries vide their notification dated 6t h June, 2002 to examine
the issue of rescindment of Cu stoms Notification 85/99 on import at  zero duty. The Gr oup was chaired
by the Revenue Secretary and comprised Secretaries Department of Commerce, Department of Heavy
Industry and Ministry of Power. 
2.     Secretary, Department of Heavy Industries, informed the Committee that the Group of Secretaries
held two meeting - on 21st June and 23rd July 2002. In the firs t meeting, the Group deliberated whether 
the customs notification 84/97 as amended by 85/99 effectively denied  the domestic manufacturers the
advantage of price preference av ailable to them under the World Bank/ADB guidelines on procurement
of goods. The Group felt that the que stion of merit could be examined  only after relevant information
was obtained. Secretar y, Department of Heavy Industries, fu rther informed that  during the interim
period the guidelines of the Worl d Bank were obtained and studied. Following features of the World
Bank/ADB guidelines and current regime of customs and excise exemption notifications emerged: 
        z     sales and similar taxes levied in connection with the sale or delivery  of goods were not taken 
into account while evaluating bids. 
        z     excise duty was taken into account while evaluating cost quoted by domestic industry, but the 
excise duty and additional excise duty had al so been exempted for goods supplied to such
multi-lateral financed projects vide notification No. 10B/95-C.D. 
        z     if the bid of a foreign bidder was found lowest, 15% or the applicable customs duty for the
tariff line, was added to the bid of the foreign bidder to provide the price preference advantage
Page 19 of 21106th report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/106threport.htm

to the domestic industry bidder as the World Bank guidelines required duty applicable to non-exempt 
bidders to be taken into account. 
        During the second meeting of the Group, the Department of Economic Affairs provided evaluations
done in the recent past in World Bank procurement, when price preference was given. Domestic bidders
lost the tenders in those cases as their prices were higher despite the price preference. In view of the
relife available, the Group did not proceed further regarding rescinding of the said notification. 
3.     In this regard, the Committee also heard Secretary, Ministry of Power, Additional Secretary,
Department of Economic Affaris, Director General of Foreign Trade, CMD, BHEL, and representatives
of CII. The Committee desired that in view of th e emerging position, a clarificatory statement should be
issued by the Department of Econom ic Affairs to remove the doubts, which had arisen in the matter o f
interpretation of the customs notification No. 85/99. 
4.     Thereafter, the Secretary, Ministry of Powe r, brought to the notice of the Committee about the
issue  relating to refund of Termin al Excise Duty on the work orde rs placed before 30th April, 2002.
CMD, BHEL, and representatives of CII also pointed out the di sadvantages they faced due to
withdrawal of refund of Terminal Excuse Duty. In this regard, DGFT informed the Committee that the
refund of TED had been withdraw n on the basis of the recommendati on of the Chaturvedi Committee,
which had gone into the details re lating to the withdrawal of ex cise duty. The Convenor, therefore,
observed that the subject matter had wider implication and he desi red that a deta iled note might be
prepared by the Ministry of Power in consultation with th e Department of Heavy Industry to enable the
Sub-Committee to examine the merit of the case. 
5.     The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 P.M. 
  
XIV 
FOURTEENTH  MEETING 
        The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 17 th December, 2002 in Committee Room 'A', 
Ground Floor Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
        PRESENT 
   1.  Dr. P.C. Alexander  ----     Chairman 
        RAJYA SABHA 
   2.  Prof. M.M. Agarwal 
   3.  Shrimati Saroj Dubey 
   4.  Dr. Faguni Ram 
   5.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan 
   6.  Shri P.K. Maheshwari 
   7.  Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil 
   8.  Shri S. Sivasubramanian 
   9.  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
        LOK SABHA 
10.  Shrimati Jayashree Benerjee 
11.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das 
12.  Shri Thomas Hansda 
13.  Shri A.C. Jose 
14.  Shri Sunil Khan 
15.  Shri Manjay Lal 
16.  Shri A. Narendra 
17.  Shri Ananta Nayak 
18.  Shri P. Rajendran 
19.  Dr. B.B. Ramaiah 
20.  Chowdhary Talib Hussain 
Page 20 of 21106th report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/106threport.htm

21.  Shrimati D.M. Vijaya Kumari 
        SECRETARIAT 
        Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
        Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary 
        Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary 
        Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary 
2.     At the outset the Chariman welcomed the Members of the Com mittee and apprised them of agenda
for the meeting of the day. 
4.     The Committee, thereafter, took up Auto Poli cy for discussion. The Chai rman suggested, after its
reconstitution on 1st January, 2003, could have a meet ing in Chennai with al l Tyre Manufacturers.
Thereafter, the Chairman discussed with the Memb ers the scope of Auto Policy which aimed at to
promote integrated, phased, enduring and self-sustained growth of the Indian Automobile Industry.
Some suggestions like use of di ppers at night, higher ground cleara nce for car, investment of R&D,
excise duty on vehicles at the reas onable level, concessions to manuf acturer of multi utility vehicles
were discussed for incorporation in the report. 
5.     The Committee then adjourned at 5.45 P.M. 
         
  
3. * * * 
3.1 * * * 
3.2 * * * 
3.3 * * * 
3.4 * * * 
3.5 * * * 
***Relates to other matters. 
Page 21 of 21106th report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/106threport.htm