PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYASABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
THIRTY SIXT H REPOR T 
ON 
PSUs OF DEPARTM ENT OF THE HEAVY 
INDU STRY -DISINVESTMENT, SICKNE SS 
AND REVIVAL 
(PRESENTE D Ol'i 2 'n MAY, 2000) 
RAJY A SABHA SECRETAR IAT 
NEW I)EUIJ 
MAY, 2000/V A!SHAKIIA. !922 (SAKA) 

CONTENTS 
PAGES 
I. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMIITEE (i)·(l i) 
2 PREFACE (ii i) 
J. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 1·19 
4. OBSERVAT IONS/CONCLUSIONS AND 21·30 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE-
AT A GLANCE 
5. MINUTES 31·53 

-(f u --;:; I "" ' 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
I. Shri Ramdas Agarwal • Chairman 
RAJYASARHA 
2. Shri Khan Gufran Zahidi 
3. Shri Jibon Roy 
4. Shri Somappa R. Bommai 
5. Smt. Saroj Dubey 
6. Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhundar 
7. Shri S. Sivasubramanian 
8. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha 
9. Shri Shibu Soren 
LOK SABHA 
I 0. Shri Pon Radhakrishnan 
II . Shri Chunnilal Thakur 
12. Shri Ramanand Singh 
13. Shri R. Basanagouda Patil 
14. Shri G. Mallikarjunappa 
1 5. Shri Tarachand Sahu 
16. Shri Anant Nayal.. 
17. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
18. Shri A. Narendra 
19. Shri A.C. Jose 
20. Shri Uttamarao Ocorao Patil 
2 t. Shri K.P. Singh Oeo 
22. Shri Thomas llansda 
23. Shri Nepal Chandra Das 
24. Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary 
25. Shri Sunil Khan 
26. Shri P. Rajendran 
27. Shri B.B. Ramaiah 
28. Shri M. Rajaiah 
29. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh 
30. Shri Deepak Kumar 
31. Shri Dccpak Kumar 
32. Shri Man jay Lal 
33. Shri Anant Mahadeoappa Gudhe 
34. Shri Ram Sajivan 
35. Shri K. Malaisamy 
36. Shri Nagmani 
37. Shri Ramdas Athawale 
(i) 

38. Shri Rizwan Zaheer 
39. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
40. Shn G.J. Javiya, 
S£CRETARJAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Shn Tapas Das Gupta, Director 
Shri PC Pa1kray. Under Secretary 
Shn Mom RaJ Smgh. Commiuee Officer 
(ii) 

PREFACE 
I, the Chairman of the Dep~nment -related Parloamcntal)' Standint~ Commiucc on 
Industry. hereby present this Rcpon of Sub-Committee-Ill on PSUs of the LJepanment of 
Heavy Industry-Disinvestment, Sic~ncss and Revival The crm\hile Standing Committee on 
lnduStJ) at its meeting held on 14'' August. 1998 inter aha consmuted Sub-<.:omminee-111 to 
examine the i~sucs ofDisinvestmem. Sickness and Re\i,al in the PSUs of the Department of 
Heavy Industry 
2. lhe then Sub-Committee visited places and interacted with the workers and 
management of some I'SUs. A Report was prepared on the basis of on the spot study and 
placed before the Sub-Committee for consideration and adoption. The Sub-Cornmottee 
adopted the Report at its meeting held on 6111 January. 1999 
J. Titc same Report could not be adopted b) the full Committee a~ 11 became defunct 
consequent upon dis~olution of the 12"' Lo~ Sabha. 
4. The Repon was placed before the newly constituted Department Related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry chaired by Shri Ragha,jo (composition of the 
Committee at Annexure-11) on 8'" February. 2000 for consideration and adoption. The 
Members de~ircd to hear the Secreta'). Ministry of Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises 
before adophon of rhc Report, to ~eep abreast of the latest de\ elopmcnts in the PSUs of the 
Department of Heavy lndus!l) 
5. The Committee heard the vie\\S of the Secretary, Ministry of I Ieavy Industry & 
Public Enterprises on the 2"'1 March, 2000 and considered and adopted the Report with some 
amendment~ at its meeting held on 22nd March. :WOO. 
NEW DELl i!; 
2n.!May2000 
(iii) 
R.AMDAS AGARWAL 
Chwrman 
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Comm111ee on fndustr} 

RI:.PORT 
Department-Related Parliamentary Sta nding Com mittee on Industry at ats mccun g 
held on the 14th August. 1998 inter alia constituted Sub-Committee-Ill 10 exami ne the issue 
of dismvestment. sacl.ness and rcvaval in the PSUs of Departm ent of Heavy Industry of \1iniStJ') 
of lndustl). The Sub-Committee consisted of the folio" ing Members· 
COMPOSITION OF THE SU B-COM MITTEE 
I. Shn KoniJeta Rosa iah: Convenor 
MEMBERS 
, Shri (iO\ indrno <\dil. 
.> Shra Ramda~ A~·""·'' 
4. Shri Samo~h Bagrooia 
5. <;~.; '1.1 Srini\3~ 
f, Shri ViJ<~) Sh.,tJ.J, 
7 Shn J ua I Ora 111 
8 Shn Anand Ratnn Maurya 
9 Shri Nadend la Ohaskar Rao 
I 0. Shri Dun a Mcghc 
II. • Shri Bijoy Krishna llandiquc 
12 Shri Ananda Patha~ 
13 Shn K l'alana\\\ am~ 
14 Shr \1al)dla Ra;ai:~h 
15 Slur S ~. Palaninunrckam 
16. Prof. Jo~endra Kawade 
The Sub-Conunancc met on the 27th August, 1998 and decided to v r ~ll some of the PSlh 
or Department of I Ieavy Industry to have on·thc·spo t interac tHln w11h the worker~ and the 
Manageme nts of the select PSUs on Its subJeCt of stud}. Accordangl). the Sub-Co mmattec 
dec•ded to 'is it Ranchi, PaUla, Cakutta. Visal.hapatnam, and Hyderabad from l·lth to 21st 
September. 1998 to interact with the "orl.ers and Managements of Hca\} ~.nganeenng 
Corporation Ltd, Bharat \\ agon & cnginecnng Co. Ltd.. ()de Corporation of India 
Ltd .• Hmdustan Cables Ltd .• Andrew Yule 8:. Co. l.ld , Hindustan Paper Corporataon Ltd .. \lanang 
& Allied Mach mel) Corporataon Ltd .. Rharat Ophthalmic Glas~ Ltd, Bh<trJt Hca') Plate & 
Vessels Ltd, and Pr;tga Tools Ltd. The Sub-Conunitlcc illso decided 111 visrt Hangalnrc, Oot) 
and Mumbai from 25th to 10th October, I Q98 to intera~t with the ""rl.ers and 
Managements of I (,\11 Ltd., Hindu~tan l'h•)tO l'ilms Manufacturing Co. Ltd .. Nataonul 
Oic)Cie Corpomtaon of India Ltd. and Richard""' & Cruddas Ltd H<tving vi,itcJ th~ above­
named PSL1s. the Sub-Committee met wath the otlicials of Ocpartm~nt <)f Heavy lndustl) 
along \\ttb the CMD'MDs of thc:;c PSL!s on the 'arious problem' wnfrl•nting them and with 
the officials of Minastry of Steel. Ministl) of Coal, Raih'a) Board , 1\.lan"tl) of Petroleum . 
Ministry of Finance (Department of F'pcnditurc). Depanmcnt of I clc<ommunrcataon,., 
Ministry of Defence, :O.tinistl) of Finane~ (Baukang Division}. Rc,cnuc Seuetal) and 
Commerce Se"ctar) on the is>uc of "ork ordcP.> 10 the PSLs 'rsttcJ by the Sub·Committec. 
IYlm~rtcs of the mccltngs are appended <I> Annexure-!. 

-
2 
The Sub·Comminee met on the 21~ De<:embcr. 1998to consoder its draft Report Before 
adopting the draft Report, the Sub·Commottee decided to visit t"o plants of BHEL. namely 
13oolcr J>latll at riruchirapnl li and I Ieavy Powe r Equipment Plant at Hyderabad from 6'• to 101• 
January. 1999 It again met on the 6'• January. 1999 and adopted the draft Report "ith some 
amendments . It was abo decoded that obscn ·ations 'rccommendations of the Sub-Committee 
pertain ing to 1311EL wou ld be incorporated on the Rcpon after 11s study visit of two plants of 
Bl li3L. 
The 'ucceeding paragraphs contain a detailed account of Sub-Committee's 
di~cussions "'th the wor~ers and the \1anagementS of those PSL s of Department of lleav} 
lndLI'try which the Sub-Committee visoted. and ots observations and rcco mmenda1ions thereon 
HEAVY £;-;Gl'<EERING CORPORATION LIMIT EO, RANCIII 
The Sub·Comminee visited lleavy engineer ing Corporation Ltd .. Ranchi on 1·1.09.98 
and I 5.09.98 to have interaction with the worker.; and 'vlanagemcnt on the problem~ being 
faced by this PSl.' The Sub-Commottee was ~ho"n an Audio-vosual pre>entation 
hoghlighting HEC''s production capac ity, production units. an array of produc t>, technological 
know-how, Rc~carch and Development, existing manpower, IIEC's contrihution to various 
sectors of the economy. etc. After that the Sub-Committee "as taken around the variou> 
manufacturing unitS of the compan> These oncluded the Foundry Forge Plant, Heavy Machine 
Buildmg Plant and Heavy Machone Tools Plant. Whole interacting with the representatives 
of worke rs' Unions and Management of the Company, the following major points emerged 
during the course of the meetings · 
Point s Raised By The Workers' Representatives 
I. The Sub-Committee was informed that lack of adequate "ork orders 
especially from Coal India Ltd. and Steel Authority of India Ltd, was proving 
to be the biggest q(umblins bloc k in the company's efforts to regain ots lost 
health. 
2. A demand was raoscd that Government should generate sufficien t work orde rs for 
the company. 
3. Lack of work orders has resulted in workers sitting idle wtth only 35% of the 
total workforce beong utilised. 
4. As a natural corollary to this, some production assemblies have been closed 
down. 
5. Although, the delivery schedule of the orders has improved us compared to the 
past. the Management should strive hard in coordination with workers to meet 
the deliver) deadlines. 
6. The compa ny needs to be headed by a l'ull-time CMD instead of an ad-hoc or 
acting CMD and the person should be from the ranks of HEC only. 
7. Managerial accountab ility sho uld be fixed for the failures of the company on all 
the fronts. 
8. Workers have not been paid their statutory dues and there has not been ;my wage 
revision. 

3 
Two years exten~ion in set'\ ice should not be apphed in HEC and there should 
be no re-employmenr of the retired workers. 
10. Contract labourers have not been rcgularised. 
II . Huge assets of the company can be put to some" productive use. 
12. Government is not releasing adequate funds for implementation of the re• ivai 
package. 
13. Revival package needs to be implemented seriously . • 
14. Disinvestment is not in the larger interests of the company. 
15. HBC needs to be modernised at a grand scale. 
16. Last three years' functioning of the company should be probed by a lligh Power 
Committee, 
Points Raised B) The '\>tana~ement 
I. The company ha> not received the balance amount of Rs. l49 crorc of the total 
revival package ofRs.253 crore. 
2. Company has been facing an acute sho11agc of work order~ because its 
customers in the core sectors like Steel, Railways. Coal, Defence, etc. are 
not placing adequate orders on it. 
3. It is finding it d1fficult to execute whate' er orders it ha~. due to paucity of 
working cap1tal 
4. IIEC has drastically pruned its manpo'' cr from 22,000 to 9.·~00 . ~\on - productive 
workforce is being especially reduced. 
5. Company has taken various measures to cut down its operational cost•. 
6. Modernisation and switch-over to, latest technology is being so;lectl\cl} resorted 
to subject to the availability of funds 
7. Company is fully geared up to meet the challenges of achic,mg higher output 
targets and t1mely execution of work orders. 
8. Both Management ;md workc" are making all out efforts to revive the 
company. 
9. Losses of the company are being constantly reduced 
10. Compan) is gomg to appoint agent<, for markctmg its fimshed products. 

I I. Since the company has grea t potent ial for revival, di sinvestment is not 
desorabl e. 
12. Company has been unahle to rea lise its dues from SA IL and Coa l India Ltd. 
B hara t Wagon & Engine e ring Company Ltd., Patna 
The Sub-Committee had discussions "ith the representatives of worl.ers and the 
Management o f Bharat Wagon & Engi nccn ng Company Ltd. at Patna "" 16 9.1998 . 
During the course o f d e liberations. several points were raised by the m. These po ints c an 
be enu mcratcd as under: 
Points Ra ised By Th e Workers' Repr esentati ves 
I, Gove rnment sho uld purchase the share s of the com pany. 
2. Railways a re procuring wagons from private wagon manufacturers at cheape r 
rates. 
3. l ligh cos t of com ponents r esults in high cost of wagon manufactur ed by the 
company as compa red to i ts compe titors. 
4. Railways must pa} escalation cost as was being done earlier 
5. T he al lotment of tenders is done by Bharat Bhari Udyog Nigarr1 Ltd. the 
holdi ng company - on behalf of Bharat Wago n and Engmeering Compan y 
Ltd The compan)' should be freed from the hold of BBUNL . 
6. Gross mismanagc menl in the affairs of tht company sho uld be checked . 
7 Wage revision i~ due from Januaoy. 1997. 
Point s Rai sed By T he Mana gem ent 
I. The com pany is utilising 95 per cent of its prod uction capac ity. 
2. Loans provided by the Go' emmenr ot Indo a >hould be coO\ cned into cquil) so 
tha t com pan) is on a posit ion to borro " from the mar~ct. 
3. Company needs financ ial suppon from the Gove rnment to the tune o f Rs.25 
~rorc . 
4. Interests of the company are being hit hard by the supplie rs o f the compone nts 
who have formed a carte l to the dis ad vantage of the company. 
5 Railways should purchase components on behalf of the company so that the cost 
of the wagons can be reduced 
6. Rai lways should restor e the cost-escalation-adjus tme nt fac ility to t he 
compa ny. 

5 
7. Company supplo~s onl) 6 per cent of Railways total annual demand as against 
compa ny's c~pacity to ~up ply 9 per cen t of Railways total demand. 
8. Company need\ working autonom y in order to meet the challenges thrown up as 
a resuh of liberalos;otiou. 
C YCL E CORPORATION Of INDIA LIMITED, CALCUTTA 
TI1e ~ub- Commillcc had an occasion to interact "ith the representatives of "orkers 
and the Management of C}cle Corporation of India l.td at Calcuna on 17.9 98 A number 
of points on the present state of all'airs of the comp~n} \\ere brought to the notocc ul the Sub­
Commiuee by workers' representati,es a' '"~II as the Management. Thc,e I'•''"" are as 
follows: -
Points lhis col 11y Th e Workers' Rcprcscntativ ~s 
I. Company is facmg <ewre working capual constraints. 
2. The plant and the machine') ol the compan) are not upto the latest 
technologocal standards. 
J . Top and middlc-lc\cl manageroal posts arc I) ing vacan t. 
4. High intcrC$t burde n has adve rse I) affected the C\)lllpany 
S. Gove rnment shou ld provide finaotcial ass istance to hon<>ur company's 
statutory lmbilltoes due to the workers. 
6. Go' crnmcnt should eome out "ilh a lucrative volwltal} relorement scheme 
to rationalise the manpo"er. 
7. Company's past losses shou ld t>e \Hitrcn off as a measure to pro"d~ flownctal 
relief to it. 
8. Governme nt •hould protect com pa n ~ 's premiu m and popular brand Rd icg,h' 
Points Raised By The Manag ement 
l\on-a' ail:1biln~ of "orking capital " the big1;e>t problem before the compan~. 
2. Compan) 's future 1s uncenain . 
3. Obsolesce nce of plant and machinery IS another area of concern of the compa ny. 
4 The joint \•Cnture proposal needs to be approved immediately. 
5. Compan) needs budgetary suppon till the time tlte joint venture proposal i:. 
accepted 

6 
6. Financial assistance is required to trim the manpower by way ofVRS and to pay 
the statutory dues of the workers. 
HINDUSTAN CABLES LIMITED, CALCUTTA 
The Sub-Comminee interacted with the representatives of workers and the 
Management of the Company at Calcutta on 17.9.98. During the course of the discuss ions, 
several points were raised covering the entire gamut of prob lems cunfronting the company. The 
points raised arc as follows : 
Points Raised By The Workers' Representatives 
Company needs working capital to keep its manufacturing units running. 
2. Non-plan budgetary assistance is required to meet the cash losses of the 
company. 
J. (lovemme nt loans should be converted into equity and the interest on loans 
be waived. 
4. Government should prov ide financial assistance to pay the staunory dues of 
the workers. 
5. DOT should reserve 30% of its total annua l requiremem for HCL. 
6. HCL should be handed over to DOT. 
7. Disinvestment of the company and its conversion into a joint-ven ture are 
against the interests of the workers. 
8. Revival plan should immediately be approved by the Government. 
Points Raised By The Management 
I. Compa ny immediately needs Rs.75 crore in the form of ~quity from the 
Government. 
2. Lack of working capita l has led to the stoppage of production in some units of 
the company . 
3. Company is having to pay higher rate of interest on the loans. 
4. The Government loan of Rs.l48 crore. be converted into equity . 
5. Interest on loans be waived. 
6. Inadequac y of NRF assistance is not lening the company to imple ment 
planned VRS. 
7. Statutory dues of workers amounting to Rs.4S crore have not been paid. 

7 
8. Government shou ld provide guar antee for commercial loan from the financial 
institutions up to Rs.60 crore at least for a period of one year. 
9. IICL's reviva l package needs to be approved withou t any further delay. 
10. DOT should extend the facilit~ of purchase preference to HCL. 
I I. Comp any shoul d be conv erted into a joint venture. 
I~- DOrs orders to the extent of 30% be reserved for HCL with 50"/o advance . 
13. Company needs immediate place ment of order s of 68 LCKM by DOT for a 
period of one year alo ng with 75% advance. 
14. There should be a bilateral arrangement bet\\een DOT and HCL to help the 
latter. 
15. HCL should be transferred to the Department ofTelecommu nications. 
ANDREW YULE & COMPANY LIMIT ED, CALCUTTA 
The Sub-Committee heard the representative s of wor~crs and the Management of the 
Andrew Yule and Compnny Limited at Ca lcutta on 18.9.98 on the proble ms encou ntering the 
company. The poi nts di scusse d in the meetings arc as follow s: 
Point s Raised By The Workers' Representatives 
I. Lack of sufficient number of worl.. orders has led to the decline in the 
performance of the compa ny. 
2 Infusion of funds to bring a turnaround in the fortun es of the company is the need 
of the hour. 
3. finat)Cial assistanc e can help the company in the upgradation of technol ogy. 
4. A rev ival package is must for the com pany. 
5. Non-availabili t) of "o~ing capital has bad I) affected the execution of the 
order s . 
6 There is no JOb sccurit) to the "O~crs m• ing to the pre• aihng unccrtamty. 
7. "I he machinery and plants of some o f the manufactu ring units of the comp: 111> :ue 
'" bad shape and need immediate replacement. 
Points Raised By The Mnnugemrnt 
Acute shonag~ of working caprtal ha~ severely affected the compan) . 

8 
2. Company 's profitability has been erod ing d ue to very high interest rate on 
com mercia I borrowings. 
3. The re has been decline in the deman d for products of company's Engineering, 
Belt ing and E lect rical divisions due to less inves tmclll by the core sector 
c ustome rs. 
4. Recurring losses suffered by Belting and Engineering divisio ns have taken a 
heavy tol l on the company . 
S. Refusal of Financial Institu tions to accep t pre-payment o f loan has led to the 
dep letio n of company's tl nancial reso urces to the exte nt of Rs.36.42 crore. 
6. Company suffered massive losses in the year 1994-95. 
7, A Germa n Company called Phoenix A.G. has agreed to be a joint venture 
partne r in the Belting d ivision of the company. As per the agree ment, Phoe nix 
woul d hold 74% equity share whe reas 26% of the equity share wou ld rema in 
with the company . 
8. Talks with Howden Sirocco Ltd. for a joint ventu re for Engineering divis ion 
failed to materialise. Efforts are on to look for a joi nt ventu re partner for this 
unit 
9. It is very d ifficult to find a joint venture partner for Elect rical di vision before 
restructuring it. 
I 0. Various steps are being taken to consolidate the profitability of Te-a division. 
I I. Government has approved the financia l and business restructur ing of the 
Company. 
I-UN DUST AN PAPER CORPORAT ION LIMITE D, CALCUTTA 
The Sub-Co mmittee mel with the representa tives of workers a nd Managemen t of 
II industan Paper Corporation Limited at Calcutta on 18.9.98 and had a d ialogue with them 
o n the prob lems being encou ntered by the Company. The points raised in the meetings arc as 
given below : 
Points raise d by the Workers' Represen tati ves 
I. Govern ment loan to the company should be conven ed into eq uity. The 
Govern ment has agreed to convert only 50% of the loan into equity. It should, 
rat her, do I 00% convers ion. 
2. HPC has not received a ny money from the Government over the last few 
years. 
3. Tra nsport subs idy must be provided to the company's North-Eastern units. 

4. There IS no forumlord f.:cti\C partiCipatiOn of workers in the manage ment or 
the compan}. 
S. Efforts should be made to revive company's c losed or loss -making units . 
Points raised by the Management 
I. Transportati on and comm unication arc two major problem s being l~•ccd by the 
company's units especial ly i n the North -East. 
2. Budgeta ry supp o n is req uired to meet the cash ,losse s of M;mdya National 
Paper Mill and Nagala nd Pul p and f'aper Com pany . 
3. Government Depa nme nts!Mmistrics should allot firm orders to the company. 
4. Go,·ernment Depa nmc nts should ma~< time ly payments to the compan) 
aga inst the supplies. 
5. North-Eastern units should be give n transport subsidy. 
6. Railways should allot wago ns to the company ori prior ity basis . 
7. State govc rnmems should ens ure regula r s upply of power and the forest ra" 
materia l to the company's units. 
8. Anti-dumping duty sho uld be levied on the imported newspr int. 
,MlNING AND ALLIED MACHINERY CORPORATION LIMITED, DURGAPUR 
The Sub-Committee held discuss ions with the representat ives of workers and the 
Manageme nt of Mining and Allied Machinery Corpo ration Ltd. at Calcutta on 19.9.1998 on the 
prob lems plaguing the com pany. A n umber of issues were disc ussed in the meetings . The points 
raised durin g the course of the meetings are as fo llows: 
Points raised by the Workers' Representatives 
I. Com pany bad ly needs work orders to come out of red. 
2. 4 to 5 per cent o f Coa l India Limite d's orders would be helpfu l in rev iving 
MAMC . 
3. Deci sion to close down MAMC be kept in abeyance and a review of the 
dec ision should be done. 
4. Government assi stance in the form of working capital is requ ired. 
5. Government is not prepared to re lease Rs.l42 crore to the compa ny as advised 
by the BIFR. 
6. MAMC sho uld be handed over to the Coa l India Ltd. 

10 
7. Statutory dues of the worke rs ha,·e nor been paid for long 
8 (i,n crnmc01 should not mn a"a~ from its rcsr o n s ib i l it~ \lv.H ;, \ l.A viC. 
9 I he cost of winding ''P of this compa rl) "auld be much hit:h~r than its re' rval 
I 0. MAMC should be withdrawn from th~ DIFR. 
II. There has been no wage rev ision after 1991. 
Points rai sed by the Management 
The Company is faced wilh !he sce nario of negacive work i n ~ cap ital. 
2. Capac icy of 1hc plan! is under·ulilrscd due tt> the long pending of company's 
case before the BIFR. 
3. The compan) has 1101 been able to shed i1~ c~ccs~ manpower due to 1hc 
discCirHinuacion of VRS. 
4 PPClr off-ta~e nl underground mnlnll:' cyurpn1L·nl ha' ad\ersel) affec1ed 1he 
COOip<lll) , 
5. Huge :,oci~l ')' crhcads ;m: pro' ing IP be.· a ma"iSf' \! burden c.m the company. 
6. The re is absence of 'cc10rall inkage for mil bing compa ny's produclion capacit) 
created to caler to the demands of cor~ >CCiurs 
7 JFCJ was appointed operating agency b) 1hc 1311'R 10 prepare techno-economic 
feasibility report. IFCI rccomm..:nd~:d f1mll1cial re;tn•cluring and jnfu;ron 
of funds to !he tune of Rs. l ~2 crore over a period of time I lo\Vever. I here was 
no commitment from chc Governmc111 in tlus regard. 
8. !'he revival plan prepared b) MAMC. could lead to a turnaround of the 
t:ompany, 
9. The policy of purchase preference should continue in the rnterest of 
company's viabilil~ 
BHARA T OPHTHALMIC GLASS I.I~IITED, DURGAPUR 
The Sub-Conuniuce had 1111eracuon with the representatives of workers and the Managemcnl of 
13harat Opluhalmic Glass Ltd. at Calcutta on 19 ~9.98 10 have a feel of the company·~ woes 
During the course of the meetings. following point$ were raised 
Poinls raised by !he Workers' Representatives 
I. The company has no fund~ available wilh 11. 
1. lnfusi(ln of funds h) 1hc tunc llf Rs."S-30 ctorc ~~ rcquirc1l ill rnccl various 
liabilities of 1he C\>mpany 

11 
3. L<)an should be con,erted into cquil) . 
1. lntcrc>t accrued on lo.ttl> pr<>\f(icd b) GO\·emment be wal\ed 
S Old madt mcry needs to he •·cp1accd "ith new machinery based on the latest 
1CChllt>logy 
6. Compan) requtrc' one n1<>rc furnace to cornptcrncntthe C\IStmg one. 
7 Rc>carch and Development 1s the need of the hour 
8 Modcnusation of t~hnology is impcram e for the company to meet new 
emerging challenges. 
I he '"' i' al plan join tly prepared by the wor~ers and the Management did not 
get .upport from the Government. 
I 0 There has been no rcv.sion of "age5 of rhe \\Orkers which IS due from January. 
1992. 
Points raised by the Man~ ge ment 
There has been no capital investment in rhe compan) to replace the old 
machiner}. 
2. I here IS an urgent need for the mtroduct1on of new technology. 
J. The company needs to switch over to ' Contmuous Process Technology'. 
4. lmportaut board level posts are lying vacanl. 
5. The morale of the workers 15 \Cry low due tO non-revision of wages. 
6. Joint Revival Package' submiucd tO the BIFR, could revive rh~ company. 
7 Survl\al of this company ts on the national intcrc~t. 
BHARA T HEAVY PLATE & VF:SSELS LIM IT£0, VISA KHAPA TNAM 
The Sub-Commince "isitcd flhamt Heavy PlAte & Vessel~ Ltd., Visakhapntnam on 20.9.98 tO 
ha'c an aud1ence "ith the represcntames of workers and the Management of the company 
on the problems confronting 11. The folio" mg. potnts emerged out of the deliberations ; 
Points raised by the Work ers' Repre sentatives 
1. Compan) requore~ financial a~sistance to the tune of R:..IOO core from the 
Government. 
2. Privatisarion of the company will hit the intcrcsrs of the nation very hard. 

3_ Comp:my needs order, on regular basis from PSUs of core $cctors on price 
:•s well as purcha'e preference. 
4. Bharat Heavy Plate & Vessels Ltd should be dc-lin~cd from the holdm~ 
company Bharat Yantra Nigam Limited. 
5. Capital of the company needs to be restructured by con,erting the lonj,t-tenn 
loans into equity and waiving off the interest on loans. 
6. Disinvestment or con•cmon mto a .JOmt \cnture IS not dc>lr<'d. 
Points ndsed by the Management 
I. Cnpital restructuring plan prepared b) th~ compan:r needs to be acceptro 
2. Capital restructuring a•med at converting loan into equity, would help the 
company mobilise funds for wor ~ ing capital 
3 Capital investment to the tunc of Rs.JS crore in the form of loan from the 
Go,ernment will help the company instal new manufacturing faciluics 10 
order to improve its order book position. 
4. Company also needs funds to implement planned Voluntal) Retirement 
Scheme for reducing its manpower. 
5. rurchase preference should be extended to all orders of <til values 
6. I he qualification critcrta for t.warding LS rK comracts should be revie"cd to 
bnng BHPV in it~ ambit. 
7_ -1 per cent additional customs dut) should be levied on capna l goods also for 
creating level playing field for the company. 
PRAGA TOOLS LIMITED , HYDERABAD 
The Sub-Commiuee visited l'raga Tools Limned, H)derabad on 21 9.98 to hold discussions 
"ith the reprcsentati\eS of \\Orkcrs ;u1d the Management on the difficulties being faced by 
the compan). During the course of the discussion. the following points emerged· 
Points raised by the Workt>rs' Representatives 
I. Nc" industrial policy has adversely affected the company. 
2. Company reqmre> " ork orders to the tllne of RsJ0-40 crorc. 
3. fi nancoal crunch is hampering the execution of orders. 
4. Company is very much revivable. 
5. Praga Tools Ltd. should be de-linked from the HMT Lld. 

6. Company should be brought under the adm inis trat ive contr o l of Ministry of 
Defe nce 
l'oints raised by th e Manage men t 
I. Nc" economic policy coupled with the disintegration of the erstwhile USSR 
has dealt a seve re blow to the company . 
Machine too ls rn ~• rkc t being in a very tight posit ion ha$ furt her compounded 
compa1ly's woes. 
3. Proceeds rrom sell ing the present plant site will be uti lised for the reviva l of the 
compnny 
4. H\11 is no\ respons ibk for Praga l"ools dec line. 
5. Tran,fe rring the ~ompan y under the adm inistrative contro l of the Mnustry llf 
Defe nce wil l m~t make any di fference. 
6 Rcviv~1l pla n would be a shot in the ann of the com pany. 
7. Company will have to go in for a jo int venture even after the approval of the 
revival plan. 
HINDUSTAN MACHINE TOOLS LIMITED, 13ANGALORE 
The Sub-Co mmittee had a dialogue with the represen tatives of workers and the 
Managc mcm of I IMT Ltd. at 13angalore on 26. I 0.98 to have first hand accou nt of the problems 
bese tting th is major PSU of the cou nt!) . During the course of the del iberat ions , the following 
points were raised: 
Points raised b)' the Worker ·s' Representa tives 
1. Company's prob kms Sl:trtcd with the com menc~ mc nt of the libc ralisat ion 
process . 
2. Watch manufact uring division needs work ing capital. 
3. There is an urgent need for the infusio n o f funds by way o f providing enou gh 
IH,dgetary supp ort. 
4 . Mach ine tools divis ion needs 10 be modernised to keep pace with the 
demand s for high-prec ision tools. 
5. Stat utory dues of the workers have not been paid to them. 
6 . Arrear dues a> a result o f wage revis ion in 1992 hnve not been released. 
7. T he turnarOtllld plan or the company n eed;: >Uppon fm nl the gove mment. 

14 
8 G01 emoncnt should e~uicate HMl out of its present cnsis 
9 uovern mcru departments and PSl); should give preference to t he products of 
IIMT. 
I 0 Company . hould make its own efforts to generate fupds before going to the 
Government for help. 
II I here rs a need to reduce the production co.t and enhance the proJuctrvit) 
12 VRS >hould be implemented rn a "U> that it ·does not lead to the e~od u s of 
s~ i lied rna II PO" cr 
Points raised by the Management 
L Company ha> not been able t\l earn profits rn >pite of regi>tering hike in 
lllrnoL er in the last five years. 
2 I luge cmpiO)CC costs and hea') rntercst burden are the t"o maJor causes for 
the present state of the company. 
3 Company llccd; tL1 reduce rts ernpltr)cC expenses b;. "ay of offering VRS. 
4 Company hn~ defaulted in the payment of principal amount of the loans and 
the interest accl'lred thcroon. 
5. Statutory dues to the tunc of Rs.39 70 crorc and arrears amountrng to 
Rs 51 .94 crorc haLe not been pdrd to the employees. 
6. Another maJor cause for the sicknc~~ of the compan) is the cumulath c loss of 
Rs.J73 crt)rC incurred by some of the units of the company. 
7. Company needs to reduce its over-grown debt burden. 
8. Company has categorised its unrts imo (i) viable units. (ii) units th<ll can be 
made viable. and (iii) unviab le units. with a vic" to bring about a turnaround of 
the .:ompany. 
9. Tumaround plan rncludes organisational. manp<"•er and financial 
restructuring 
l 0 Alier restr·ucturing, HMT Ltd. \\vuld become the Holding Conrran) "it h 
three subsidinries for manufacturrng machine tools. tractOrs und watches. 
HINDUSTA."' PHOTO FILMS LIMITED , OOTY 
The Sub·Commrttee visited Hindustan Photo Hlms Ltd .. Ooty on 28.10.98 tO haLe an 
on the spot interaction "ith the representatiL cs of workers and the M:rnagcment tor 
acquainting rtself "itlr the hardships being faced by this PSU. During the cour>e of the 
meetings. followrng points \\Cre raised : 

IS 
Points raised by the Workers' ~epresentatives 
I. Til l 1991 -92. the company enjoyed brand IO)'alty in the marl.ct. 
2. Due to lack of Capital. company has not been able to fulfil its market demands. 
3. Go,ernment did not pro\lde "orl..ing cap1tal to the compan~ especial!) at a 
time "hen cumpan~'s t'unds "ere di\'ened to establ"h the nc\\ plant 
4 Financial in~titutions arc not prepared to P"" ide fund\ to the compan~ becau<c 
of 1ts outstanding interest dues. 
S. Financial restructurong could help the compan~ rc:.urrect itself . 
6. Although company's tcchnologoc:ol base i:. \ery sou nd. it 1:. facing uneth1cal 
compct1tion from rnultinntio11als 
7. Bureau of lndus1rial Costs and Prices should fi~ the minimum price for X-ra> 
film s. 
8. Company has the prospects of being a v1ablc PSU provided the right kind of 
suppon is extended to it 
Point s raised by the Managem ent 
I. Survival of a company of such an impon like that of liP~ IS essential for the 
self-sufficient) of the count<) 
2. Opening up of the economy has adve rse ly hitlhe inte resiS of the company. 
3. Diversion of working capital of the compan ) for the inswllation of the 
new plant dried up coonpan) 's working cap ital pool. 
4. Company has a high interest burden. 
S. High overhead costs are responsible for the negative performance of the 
company. 
6. Aller liberalisation, marketi ng of the company was not geared up to face the 
competition from the multinationals. 
7. Rationalisation of duty stru¢ture by removal of custo ms du t) on raw material 
and enhancing it on semi-finished and finished photo goods. could enable the 
company to take on the multinationals . 
8. Customs duty exemption to photo goods imponed from 'lepal under the 
Indo-Ne pal Treaty has funher compounded the prob lems of the com pan). 
9. Government should conven its loan to the company into equity and waive 
intere st accrued thereon. 

16 
I 0. Government ~hould ulso pro\ 1dc financial '"PJ>Ort 10 the compan~ 10 enable 
it to honour~~~ Slalutor) comrnurnent:-.. 
II . GO\crnment 'hould 'land !tuaramcc to the wor!.ing capital loans and dccl~re a 
sew n years imc1est holiday on cx1sting.lonns provided by at. 
I:!. Compan~ ha> entered 1n10 a ma .. cttng agreement '"'h Mls l'h1l Coq>oratll>ll ft>r 
providing a wiucr reach 10 it> products. 
13. GO\crnrnem dcpa11mcms should place orders wath the compa11y on prcfercmial 
basis. · 
1-1. There IS need for an aurac11vC VRS package to reduce the excess manpower 
or the company 
NAT IONAL BICYCLE CORPORATION OF INDIA l,IMITEO, MUMBAI 
1 he Sub-( omm111Cc met the representative~ of the workers and the Mana11ement of :-;a~ i onal 
nic) clc Corporation of India Ltd. At Mumhni on 10.1 0.98 to elicit their vicv.s on the problems 
confrontang thear com pan) . The follov. ing poims were raased dunng the course oft he mcctangs 
Poi nts raised by the Worker s' ReJJrcsentativcs 
I. Fina11caal assistance IS require(.) from the Gow rnment as it has prov1ded to other 
PSUs 
2. Company cun be revived provided the Government agrees w finance our 
re\ i\~1 pac!,agc 
3. Workers arc ready 10 run the company on co-operati\e bas1; 
~ - There should be wage rcv1sion on the lines of the 5th f'a} Co rnmi ,~ t o n's 
r~<.: ommcndac ions. 
5. In case of this company's clos11re, employees should be given jobs in the public 
SCCtOt 
6. Government should accept AAII'R's suggestion that company can be 
rehabilitated b) its promoter a.e. the Government itself 
7 In case of failure to revive the compan) an attractive VRS package should be 
offered to the workers. 
l'oinb raised by the Management 
I. The company was referred to the BI~R in 199:!. 
2. 131FR came to the conclusion that this compony be wound up. 
3. Operoting agency was also of the view that the rev1val scheme is not 1 inble 

17 
4. The matter is no" pending before the High Coun. 
5. Effons are on to get the VRS package for the employees approved . It 1s 
before the Cabinet. 
6. Company could be convened into a Co-operative if a proposal for this comes 
from the workers. 
7. 90 per cent of the workers of company's Mumbai unit are willing to avail 
of the VRS. In case of company's Ghaziabad unit around 50 per cent or less than 
that are for accepting VRS. 
RJCHARDSON & CRUDDAS LIMITED, MUMBAI 
The Sub-Committee held discussion with the representatives of worker~ and the 
Management of Richardson & Cruddas Ltd. at Mumbai on 30.10.98 to have first hand view of 
the problems being faced by the company. The points raised during the course of d1scussion 
are as follows · 
Points raised by the Worker$' Representatives 
I. The Government should once again stan providing funds to the company . 
2. Company needs work orders on a regular basis. 
3. Government departments and PSUs shou ld pl a~e orders on the company. 
4. VRS should be reintroduced in the company. 
5 Bonus ceiling should be enhanced. 
Points raised by the Management 
I. Implementation of planned VRS pro' ed advantageous as the company could 
reduce its excess workforce. 
2. Order book position of the company has considerably improved and now stands 
at Rs. l l5 crore for the current fiscal 
3. Out of four manufacturing units, one is still incurring losses. 
4. Funds are required for the implementation of VRS in compan y's loss making 
unit at Bycula, Mumbai. 
5. Despite being • L-1' bidder, the company is not gening sufficient orders from 
Government depanments and PSUs 

18 
BOILER I>LANT, TlRUCHlRAPALLI AND HEAVY POWER EQUIPMENT PLANT, 
HYDERABAD, BHEL 
The Sub-Committee visited Boiler Plant of BHEL at Tiruchirapalli from 7'' to 9" 
January, 1999 and held discussion with the workers and !he management of !he plant . On the I 0 .. 
January , 1999. the Sub-Committee visned the Heavy Power Equipment Plant at Hyderabad and 
interacted with the workers and the management of the plant. 
Points raised by the Representatives of workers of Boiler Plant, Tirucbirapalli 
I. Existing duty slructure suitS !he private sector an'd in a way acts as a disadvantage 
to public sector companies. 
2. There should be more functional autonomy. 
3. Wage revision is a long over-due demand yet to be met by the Government . 
4. Management should take steps to acquamt and train with !he latest technology. 
5. Contract labourers should be regularised at the ear liest 
Points raised by the Management of Boiler Plant, Tiruchinapalli 
I. Due to non-materialisation of orders, !he turnover and the profitability have been 
affected in the outgoing financial year. 
2. Off loading_ of equity share by 32 to 35% has increased !he accountability of !he 
company . 
3. Only limited disinvestment is good for the company. 
4. Management of !he company should not be taken over by outsiders. 
5. There should be a level playing field for domestic companies vis-a-vis foreign 
companies. 
6. I 5% price preference should be extended to BHEL. 
7. Competitive bidding will enhance our chances of getting order~. 
Points raised by the representatives .of workers of Heavy Equipment 
Power Plant, Hyd erabad 
I. Work order posotion has seen a dramatic change ever since liberalisation was set 
into motion. 
2. Neyveli Lignite Corporation is giving preference to a multinational company 
instead of placing orders on BHEL. 
3. Wages of the workers need urgent revision. 
4. More work orders are needed to check the decline in the profitability of the 
company. 
- J 

19 
Points rai$ed by the Management of Hea\'Y Equipment Power Plant, Hydcrabad 
I. Resource crunch in power sector has left on adverse impact on BHEL. 
2. Cost and time overruns have consciously been reduced. 
3. Optimum emphasis is put on quality management. 
4. Decline in work orders has affected the performance of the company 

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
A< is evidem from the subject of SIUd) assigned to the Sub-Comminee. it was 
required to lool.. into the issues of disinvestment. sickness and revival of Public Sector 
Undertakings under the administrat ive domain of the Department of Heavy Industry of Ministry 
of Industry. According ly, the Sub-Comminee embarked upon the most talked about and 
debated issue. namely the survival of public sector giants in the changed scenario of Indian 
economy. The Sub-Committee, while having interaction "ith the workers and 
Manageme nts of select 14 PSUs of the Department of Heavy lndusiry, had an opportunity to 
ana ly<e the factors respons ible for the present slate of decline. These giants which were to 
anain "commanding heights" are no" trapped in a cesspool of uncenaint) These PSUs. for 
long. have lived under a protective regime and the opcntng up of the economy has meam opening 
of noodga tes of unforeseen troubles for some of them. Transition from a 'closed eco nomy' 
to a free market economy' has caught them unawares und exposed their vulnerability . 
But at the same time it would be a tra\ e;,ty of truth to put the blame for the failures of these 
PSUs squa re I} on the libcralis;ttion process. Liberalisation , d> such. has had an impact on the 
overull industria l scenario . Out the saga of decline in the stnndtng of some of these PSUs 
dates back to a time "hen libcralisation had not even da,.ned ott Indian eco nomy. 
Massive take-over of hundreds of industries under private sector. lack of functioning autonomy 
tO the management. mal-administration and lo" le,el of participative management and man) 
other factors have contrib uted to the decline. Understandab ly. there were a host of extraneous 
reasons which cu lminated into the present crisis. During their heyday, these cOtnl}anies 
enjo)ed the fruttS ofto~al monopoly. It was the time, when the market "as a 'seller's market' 
No" they ha•e to operate in a ' buyer's market'. State protectionism can no longer he there to 
sh ield them against the onslaught unleashed by thctr rivals. Clearly , it's a ~unple case of gross 
managerial inefficiency and s h ~~r lack of foresightedness on the pan of those who have been at 
the helm of affairs The destin} mal..crs of these companies failed to evolve a \\Or~ culture 
marked \dth professional prudence and entrepreneurial dextcrit) Perhap~. this is the reason 
wh) the rudiments of a health) work culture based on unnagging comnlttment to the worJ.. 
ethics could not be evolved . And to negate the provcrbta l sayin!,t that success ha> mAny fathers 
but failure ha> none. it would be totall) justified to hold the Government . the Managements 
and the workers cquall~ rc>ponsiblc for the me~>) state of affairs m these public 
sector giants. Gove rnmental interference. managerial ineffictcncy and workers' lack of 
commitment to work have left these companies far behind the private sector companies . 
Public Sector. it was envisioned, would pave the way for the private ~ector like u true 
harbinger lronicall). the privmc sector, contrary to the expectation:.. has completcl) overtaken 
the public sector 
I he above conclusions of the Sub-Committee should not be con~tru cd ns a tota l 
negation of the achie,cmenb and the contribution of these gtants w the Herculean tas~ 
of nation buildtng. There is no gainsaying the fact that these companies 1\Cre not e~tablished 
as profit gcnernti ng concerns. rather they had an altruistic socio-cconomtc mission to fulfil 
The fact that foundations of these companies were laid to build a solid indu~tria l infra,truc turc 
to fa,tlitate indu>tn~l gro"th and de\'clopmcnt of the nallon, and also to achic, ·e self-reliance can 
also rwt he denied. '\or their contribution to the socto·economrc development of the 
coulltt}'s far nung regions and the welfar.: and the uplift of the mhabitant~ of those rcgiiJns. can 
be tgnored As 3 matter of fnct. the high cost of thc'e social O\crhcads arc no" provi ng to 
be the bij!.gest liabihttes of these PSt;s. 
21 

12 
Apan from this. ;mother obJecuve which wa> sought to be t'ullillcd through them 
was the gcncratton ol amp le Clliploymcnt opponunitics for the grow ing population o f the 
country As a re$ult, rnajoroty of them are over-staffed and are finding it beyo nd their means 
to suswin thetr over-gro"n world(ucc. Excessive manpower tS. thu~. the biggest 
impediment m their march to regam their lost hea lth Given the circumstances. public sector 
compantc' cannot be expected to stand up to the challenges be1ng posed to them by the 
private sector l ndoubtcdl~. the odds are heavily stacked againSt them l'hese companies 
were 1101 <II all conce i, cd as tt'tn fMitiCS merely engaged in the industrial producticm. rather they 
had a much gn'<Her role to play. Although the players arc the same, the tield tS no longer il 
level play ing one It is precise ly the reason. why this Sub-Committee feels that pub lic sector 
need:. to be l oo ~cd at wrth an intention to search souls rather than find fault 
l'hts ~ub-Comnllltcc. \\htlc confabulating with the workers and the Managements of 
these PSlh found certain commonaluies among them fhat rs why tt "ould like 10 make 
some acro>s·t hc-board recommendations so that u111form w lutions to some of these common 
problems could he found: 
1. 0 1 these problems. one major problem whose tentacle s arc spread over jus t ahout 
CVCf) PSU. is the loans gi\cn to th~m by the Go\cr nment Conversion or these loans IntO 
equity would not on I~ reduce the burden of debt and the interest accrued on it but would also 
enable these beleaguered PSlh to cmhark on a major financral restructuring. Besides, thc>e 
companies "111 he in a po~i t ron to get commercral borrowings to meet their immediate 
requirement for working cap ital. 
It is, therefore , the considered view of this Sub-Co mmittee that the 
Department of Heavy lmlu s tl') shouJd prepare a comp rehen sive financial restructurin g 
packa ge for all these PSl!s so that the} are able to bounce back with 'igour and •itality. 
This Jl!lckal\l' should also add r·css itself to the interest accrued o n the loans, as mere 
conversion o f loan into equit)' would not serve any meaningful purpose in the absence of 
waiver of interest. 
2. Ano ther major problem whic h warrants the ancn tiort' of thi< Sub-Commi llee is the 
delay 111 the approval of rc,i\a l packages. h ts understood that the Departmen t of Hcav> 
lndu"tt; seems to ha•e a 1er) lac~adai~ical and indifferent approach tO\\ard' the preparation. 
appro\ al and tmplemcntauon of rcvi1al packages. 
The Sub-Committee feels that any delay in the "hol e process involving the 
revival of a company is almost like putting the cart before the horse. Apparently , it 
refle cts th e lnck of commitment and a sense of purpose on the part of the Department of 
Ilea \') hrdu\lry . It also smacks of a hidden approach to let these giants die their natural 
death. It i< the considered 'ic11 of this Sub-Comminee that the endeavo ur of the 
Go.ernm ent <hould not be to bulldoze these PSl '~ and raze their huge assets to the 
ground. rather it should help them to reg:~in thei r viability. Therefore, the Sub­
Committee recommends that the Department o f Ilea') Industry ~ hould make conscious 
efforts nnd <hould l e ~lVc no stone unturncd to help these P S lJ~ in the timely 
preparation, approval and implem ent ation of their revival packages. 
3 Close I~ linked "ith it is the disturbing fact of " hich the Sub-Comminee has ~ken a 
scriOll> note is the ine,plicahlc dithering on the part of the Department of llea'y lndustf) when 
it come' to "'!'POrting the re' i'al pac~age of a sick company. The Sub-Commmee came across a 
number of case> "lu:rein the Depanment bac~ed I)Ut m1hc eleventh hour in the proceedings of 

23 
th~ fliFR by expressing it' inabilil) to support the rcvt~al plan of a PSu referred h> the BIFR. 
1 h" amh~>alcncc in the approach of the Department lead' the Sub -Committee to conclude 
that tl has acted like a flir \\ Cather friend with an ulterior motive to uhimatcl) wa~ h tts hands off 
those I' ::. Us who arc m the monb und sta te. 
The Sub-Commillee , therefore, recommends to the Department of I Ieavy Industry 
to take the revival packa ges of the sick PSUs to their logical conclusion by assuring the 
BlfR of providing full financial backing to any such revival plan. 
4 rhc issue of non-payment of arrears and statutory dues of the cmpiO) cc~ of these 
PSUs merits this Sub-Committee's serious consideration a~ tt has a d~rect bearing on the 
\\tll-bemg of thousands of cmp lo)ees For year~ altoget her, there lias been no "age rev ision 
in some o f these PSUs . As a result, the morale o f the emp loyees has touched it> nad ir with a clear 
reflec tion o n their productivity and motivation. !'his apa rt, H maj ority of these PSUs have also 
d~ fa u lted in the payment o f statuto ry dues like gratuit y, providcm fund . etc. of the empl oyees. 
In some cases where the wage rcv i ~ion has been effected, employees have not bee n paid a rrears 
for long. 
The >'hole isJu~ is a s~nsi t ive one ~~ it affect' the ~mplnsecs in diff~rent ways. 
lienee, the Sub-Committee has taken a sympathetic not<· of iL Ac~ordingl~, tbe Sub­
Committee recommends that arrears and st:JtutOf') dues of the employees >hould be p:1id 
forthwith by earmarking •cparntc funds for the purpO)~. A ~lcplike this wuuld not only 
rabc the moth·ation!ll 1~,·~1 of the employee~ bur also impro\c the indu>tri:\1 relations to 
till' advantage of these l'Slls, 
5 A> descr ibed elsew here 111 this Report, these PSUs have long been nurtu red in the 
)ll<!dow of >late protectionbm With the change in the "vera II industrial ceonLHnk >ccnarin. they 
ha'e become the victims of circu=tances. Ther~ "'as a time, \\hen they dtd 11<11 have to toil 
hard to get "ork orders to keep thetr workshop' !llnning as the~ "ere assured of regular order:. 
I rom their customer PSUs 'Oepanmcnts. Things arc no longer the same a< they once 
u~ed I<' be 
llence, the prc:>em critical order book ptJ, tllon !'<1m, thcs(' I'Sl.'s arc not on I} locmg >tiff 
chJ IIengc from the indigcnou~ private sec tnr com ponte> but also from the multmtll ionals 
I he change-ove r from the days oJ"no -comp<'Hlion' 11.1 ~~~e ra of 'llcrcc competition' is the 
han~ of all the w(.tC> of' thcs~ I'SUs. 'I hal 1s why, thi~ Suh-Comnuttec stron~ly Jed< that these 
I'SL's de~cr\c a thoughtful ~on,idcration. Any ancmpt to downplay their 1mponance could 
ha'c 'crtous ramifications lor all concerned In the opinion of the Suh-(ommincc, theM: 
!'SUs should be gt\en enough clbo" room 10 ad~pt then1'ehcs tn accordance "ith the ne" 
rcaltttcs. For this, the} necJ some t.lcgn.'C of protecuon b~ "a} of r~;cl'\ mg a ti,ed pcr~cntagc of 
'"""orders of the cu>tolller PSlJ~IIJepartments for at lea'! another iour 10 fi,c ~cars so 
that they .m: able to gro" en.,ugh teeth to take on their r" als 
There fore , the Su b-Comm ittee rec om mends that the DcJ>arrmcnt of Hea vy 
ln<lu,lt~ should pt·eparc n detaile d PSU-wisc note l(h'ing each company's order book 
rcqutrcmcnr from the customer PSUs and tb~ Depart me n t~ of the Go,ernmcnt. Any 'uch 
note, then be pl:lced befor·c the lnion Cabine t fur h:l\ iug ueccssal"} in,truction; issued 
for all those customt•r PSt 'and Dcpanments for placing adequate orde rs on thc~c PSl~ 
of th~ D~partment of Heavy Industry. The Sub-Commillee hopes t hat Oepartment of 

24 
Rca' ') Industry would not be found wanting in its endeavour to pursue this line of action 
vi~orously. 
6. During the course of its >tudy. the Sub-Committee had a close look at the maMgerial 
aspe ct of these PSUs and the need for granting functional uutonomy to them. h was info rmed 
that lad. of professio nalism amongst the "vvanagement is mainly responsible for the sickness 
of these companies. Inept handling of the affairs has brought these PSUs to such a pass. Lack 
of functional ;tutono my also aggravated the state !)f aff'airs. 
Theref o re, in the opinion of the Sub-Committee, the need of the h o uri~ to appoint 
full -time and seasoned professionals to run the nffairs of these companies and J!ivc them 
greater functinnal autonomy to enable them to deal with new emerging challen~es with 
boldness and in a professional manner. At tbe same time, Government should also lind out, 
apart from the extraneous reasons , the ad mioi stralive and managerial failure in respect of 
thcsr J>SUs and fix accountability and responsibility. 
7. Rationalisation of excc''"'e manpower ;, another Jrea of concern for these I>SlJs. 1\s 
stated c<~rli e r. one oft he motives behind these ~ompnnics. being in the pub lic sector as they are. 
wao to generate adequate number of employment opportunities for the gro" ing 
populace of the count(). Accordingly, 11 was 111 the fitness of things to adopt a liberal 
recruit ment policy. llowcver. the negative result of this libera l policy began to be felt with the 
onset of economic libcrulisation which caused dep letion of profit as it was no" beyond the reach 
of these PSlJ~ to sustain their large workforce. In case of a number of these PSUs. the presence 
of c~cc~sive manpower is proving to be a ma_Jor stumbling block in their attemp t to regain 
their lo't 'iahilit> Although, planned rationalisation of manpower by offering attractive VRS 
pac~age could pro'c to be a panacea. the allocat10n of funds from "\ational Rene"al Fund 
still remains far below the required mark. The Sub-Committee recommends that wherever 
planned VRS can f:.Cilihlle <1 turnaround, the Government should make requisite financial 
sup port avail:~ble to that PSU without any delay. Because dillydall ying defeats the 
VCI)' purpo~c of impl ementati on of a scheme. 
8 During its interaction with the officials of customer PSUsl Departments of these PSUs, 
the Sub-Commince "a'> informed that the deliver) record of these PSus 1S very poor. The 
Sub-Comminee recognises the need for timely execut ion of orders in order to avo id the 
subseque nt uclay in the completion of the projects of the customer PSUs departments as it, 
in tum. help> them to a' oid cost and time over-runs. 
The S ub-Co mmittee lms come to the conclusion tbat delivery track recor d of 
these I'S l's b not 'Cl)' sat i~fac tory and requires a major improvement Therefore , the 
Sub-Co mmitt ee recommend s that all these PSUs should C\•olvc a Jlr0 11er workable 
medmnism to meet the deadline s for the SUilPIY of orders placed on them. 
Accountability should be fixed for non-adherence to the dclhery schedules. 
9. A tn<~j or issue having 1ts impact on all these PSUs. is the lack of work orders from 
Government d~panme1m and customer PSUs Alrhough. there are informal bilateral 
arran~.:ments bct"ccn these I'Sl.is and their customer PSUsiDcpartmcnts for mutual 
tranMlction of business. there i• n need for giving these bilatc1·al arra ngements ~~ formul 
shape so that 1ssues like placement of adequate orders, timely execution of orders. disputes 
regarding payment of outstanding dues, etc. are discussed and sorted out amicabl)• for the 
mutual bencfi l of both the parties. 

25 
In lhe op1mon of lhi s Sub-Commiuee, these bila1eral arrangements should be 
given a concrete shape to facililate a constant dialogue belwccn PSUs of Depart men I of 
Jlcavy Jndu s1ry and their cus tomer Departments / PSUs for effecting greater tran saction 
of business between them. 
I 0. Since all lhese I'SUs are facing a seve re financia l crisis, it is qu ite logical that I hey 
explore all possibl e avenue~ to gel su fficient finances for I heir pressing requirement> from the 
mar~ct For getting commercial borrowings from the market, they need to have 1he 
guarantc;; of the Government for 1hi~ purpose . For want of Go,crnment guarantee , financial 
insutuu on> refuse to lend an) money to lhesc companoes. Their problem further gets 
aggra,ated as the~ neither get money from the Government nor fromJhe financoal onslotutions. 
In "e" of the difficuhocs beins raced by the Government in the allocation ofrcquored funds to 
the>" compan ies. it is io1cuonhcnt upon the Govern ment to help them mobilise funds from 
the mnr ~c t. 
The Sub-Committe<' urges upon I he Government to stand guarantee to the market 
borrowings of all those I'SUs who arc looking toward s the capital market for !heir 
finan cia l requirements. 
fhc Sub-Committee \\QUid no" like 10 address ttself to the specific problems of 
the'c PSU' and rna~e suuablc obscnations/ recomrnendatoons accordingly 
HEAVY ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED 
I I. The revival package for the I Ieavy Engineering Corporation Ltd. required alloca tion of 
Rs.253 crore for its implcmcntntion, Ministry of Heavy Industry have informed that most of the 
funds have already been released . However. the company has not bee n able to achieve financia l 
and physical perlonnancc main ly due to poor order booktng . The Committee was als<l informed 
thai effons are on 10 impro\c the order book posi1ion of the compan} Re<:entl) the mancr was 
taJ..cn up "i1h the Minis1ries ofRatl"ays. Defence and 'vllncs and Minerals 
The Sub-Committee recommends that lbe Ministry of Heavy Industry should pursue 
the maHer vigorously with the Ministries of Railway s, Defence and Mines and Minerals to 
pro cure work orde r for Henvy En~ineering Corporation Ltd. so I hat the Compnny may be 
revived. 
BIIARAT WAGON & ENGIN.:ER ING COMPANY LIM ITED 
12. Bharat Wagon & Enginc~rins Company Limned has 1he prospects of perform ing much 
better than its present performance II requires a little financial suppon "htch could help ot 
overcome its immediate financia l hurdles. The Sub-Co mmillec recommend) thai the 
company should be provided wilh Rs.2S erore by the Government to enable it to meet its 
various financial requjremcnts. 
I 3. On the issue of purch:lsc or components by the Railways on behalf of the Bhnrat 
Wagon and Engineering Co. Ltd., to enable it 10 compete with its rival;;, the Sub­
Comm ittee feels tbat Railway s should resume this old practice £or tbe benefit of Bharat 
Wagon and Engineerin g Co. Ltd. 

26 
CYCLE CORPO IUTION OF INDIA LIMITED 
14. Corpo ration of India Limited, there should be no hesitation on the part of the Government 
to accord approval to the Joint V enture proposal submincd by a private company at the behest of 
th ~ Gove rnment of West Bengal. 
The Sub-Committee therefore, suggest s that expeditiou s decision be taken by the 
Government on the proposed Joint Venture pro posal for Cycle Coq>orati on of India Ltd . 
pend ing before it. In case the .Joint Venture proposal does not fru ct ify within a reasonable 
period of time, the Govern ment sho uld consider appropri ate measures as the situat ion 
warrants . 
HINDUSTAN CABLES LIM ITED 
15. Hindustan Cable Limited IS a majo r Public Sector company engaged in the rnanufacturc 
of tcleco m cables. The Sub-Committee was given to unders tand that the Company was. 1n fact, 
set up to meet the requirements of cables of telecom munication in th~ country . Subsequent ly, it 
also ~t•pplicd cables tn 1he Ministry of Railway~ However. m the l a~t fe" year, . due to 
slackening of orders from the Department ofTd~communications, the Company started incurring 
losses T he Sub-Committee was g1ven to understand that it has prepared a rc' !Val package. 
The Mmistry of H~·twy Industry have mformcd that a revival package has already been approved 
for the company. 
T he S ub-Committee recommends that there should not be any delay on the pan of 
Gover nment in timely and effective implementat ion of the revi•al package. The Sub­
Comtnill ee s ugges ts that the Governm ent should , on p riority, dil·ect the G()v~rnmeo t 
Departments to place large orders on tl1is Company, so as to bring it back to its old glory. 
The Soh-Committee would also suggest that the Government should fairly consider of 
bringing the Compan) under the administrati\'c fold of the Department of 
Telerommuoications. Immediate action in this regard would snve the compan) of any 
further losses 11nd it would obviate the need of, if any, non-plan assi~t.~ncc from th~ 
Government. 
ANDRI':W YULE & COMPANY LIMrTE D 
16. Although. the Government has approved the linanc1al and business restructuring of 
the t:ompany, the company is faced with acute ~hortagc of working capital for its various 
manufaclllring divisions. This in turn is adversely affecting the pcriormancc of the Com pan). 
The Sub-Committee. the refore, is of the view that Andrew Yule & Company Ltd. should 
be provided with requisite amount of funds to help extricate itself from the difficult 
situation it is in. 
HINDU STAN I>Al>J::R CORPORAT!Oili LIMITED 
17. The absence of transport subsidy facility to the North-Eastern units of Hindustan Paper 
Corporntion Ltd has severely affected the company'~ pcrfornu111ce. The produce of these 
units have lost their C<lrnpctitivcncss vwing to the high cost of transportat ion in th~ absence of 

27 
transpo rt subs1dy The S ub-Committee recommend s that tran sport sub~id y to the !'ionh ­
Enstern Unit s of the Hindustan Paper Corporation Ltd. must be pro>·ided. 
18 Mandya National Paper \ltlls. a subs1diary of Hindus1an Paper Corporation Ltd. 1s in 
the state of IHbernation Ond its needs tO be rcv1ved. f'hc proceS> for COII\Crllll!( II IIllO a jOint 
venture is on butt he dcla) in giving a concrete shape to the pro posal of a pm ;ne party IS nm m 
all helping the cause of this unu. The S ub-Committee reco mm ends that the JlrOtcss of findin g 
a ~uita ble joint ,·eo tore partner for Maod ya 'iational Paper Mills should be expedited. 
19. Hindus tan Newsprint l. imited has been bearin g the brunt of import of cheaper 
ne" spnnt . Th1s imported ne" sprint is eating into the mar~ ct base of ind1genous newsprint 
untt> 111 general In the' iew of the Sub-C ommitte e, there is an urgent need for impositio n 
of anti-dumping duty on the import ed newsprint to save the domestic newsprint 
manufacturin g units. 
Mlt'lol:"iG ANO ALLIED MACHINERY CORPORATION LIMITED 
~0. Mining & Allied Machinery Corporation Limited (MAMC) is unde r reference to BlfR 
stncc 1992. BIFR had appointed IFCI as the Operating Agency . IFCI engaged a con,ultant M/~ 
Raiji & Co. to prepare a Techno-Economic Feasibilit> Report. As per the report of M .s Raiji & 
Co Oovt. of India was to utject Rs.l42 crorc in cash nnd Rs.40 crorc for VRS apart from other 
financ•al restructuring . Thje Governing fcld that there "as linle justification for large scale 
infus10n of funds by the Government On 3.1.95. BIFR after hcarmg all concerned came to the 
conclusio n that it will be diffic ult to make net worth of the company positi\ C within a rca~o n ablc 
time lt. tltereforc, issued show cause notice on 11 .1.95 for winding up. Furthe r he<lrinp.s of BIFR 
ha'c been sta>ed by the Calcuna ~hgh Court 
An l~xpc n Group constituted 10 explore the pos~ i bi lity of revival of certain sick rsus of 
DHI including :vtA:vtC. Submitted tiS report which is under considera tion. 
MA \1C is facmg difficult order book positton. The total order book pos1tion as on 1.1.2000 is 
Rs.l l.45 cro rcs. The Ministry of Heavy Industry had tn the past taken up wtth the Department of 
Coal to place some orders for mining and othe r equipMlCiilS on MAMC. llowcver, CIL d id nm 
fa, o ur MAMC with orders due to poor perfonnance of MA\1C in deliveries 
The Sub-Committee recommend s that all out effort s should be m~d c to r evive 
Mining and Allied Machinery Corporation Ltd. Requisite fund s of Rs.l-12 crore apart from 
R~ .4 0 cro rcs for VRS shoul d be mad e available to the compan ). Apart from thi, , 
Governm ent should also arran ge placem ent or \\ Ork ord ers fro m Co;ll India Ltd. to the 
com pan y which is vital for its revival. 
BHARA T OPHT HALMIC GLASS LIMI T EO 
21 Bharat Ophthalmic Glass l.td. is the only company of its ~in d in the cou ntty ~ngagcd ut 
the production of flint bunons for correction of eyesights and some producb of stratcg1c import 
Despite this fnct, today the company finds itself a midst the threats of complete liq111dation. 1 he 
Sub-Comm ince has come to know that an Expert Committee has prepared 1ts report on viability 
of the company which i ~ at present under consid eration of Govemmcnt. The Sub-Com mittee 
hopes that something poSIU' e "ill come out in favour of nOGL. 

28 
The Sub-Com min~c recommends that Government should give right support to optimi se 
product ion to bring down ave rage cos1. Other cost reduction methods includ ing VRS may be 
e\ ohcd and loans etc. should be wrincn off to give BOGL a chance to sun 1\e 
BHARAT HEAVY PLATE & VESSELS LIMITED 
22. Bharat Heavy Plate & Vessels Limited is in a comparative ly better position vis-a-vis 
other I'SUs of Depanment of Heavy lnduslf)'. The company has an impressive track record 
and holds promising prospectS for the future . II could overcome its unmed1atc hardships 
provided rtght kind of suppon is extended to it by the Govemmenl. Given the company's present 
perfon nancc. the Sub-Com mittee feels that it deserves to be extended whateve r s uppon 11 
needs at this juncture . 
The Committee was informed that M/s S.B. 13illimoria & Company were engaged as 
co nsultant on 12.1.99 for locating a joint venture panner . The First Stage Report and the draft 
111formation memorandum submitted by the consultant envisaged financial r estructuring by 
conversion of 58% of outsta nding amount into equity and the balance amount of 42% to be repaid 
in equal instalments over the last three years of the projection penod at a commercial rate of 14%. 
The information memorandum has since been approved by the Competent Authority ~ nd send to 
the consultant on 13'h January, 2000. The con sullant will now issue advertisement for inviting 
offers. 
The Sub-Committee reco mmends that government should expedi te action in this 
rega rd so that a fresh lease of life cou ld be infuse d into the company. 
23. Fac ility of purchase preference for orders of value above Rs.S crorc and criterio n for 
being qua· ified as Lump Sum Tum Key (LSTK) conlractor arc two majo r factor.. "hich militate 
against the Interests of Bharat I Ieavy Plate & Vessels Ltd . On both these counts, t he custom er 
I'Sl is of the comp any espe cially in the petroleum, fertilizer and space research fields need to 
offe r litrlc concessions to it. 
The Sub-Committee feels that offering the~c concessions by customer PSUs/Dep~rtmcnts 
to their sis ter PSU would not harm the interests of anyone. Hence , the Sub-Committee 
urges upon the customer PSUs/Departments ofBharat Heavy Plate & Vessels Ltd. to offer 
these concessions to this company to help it consolidate its gain< 
PRAGA TOOLS UMITEO 
24 Pmga Tools Ltd., :1 subsidinry of IIMT Ltd. is a v1ctim of lil>crnlosaton M d 
disintegration of the e rstwh ile USSR It has had to sirnultaneouSI) fight on two lr<>nts A' a 
rc,ult . it ha' not been able to hold on to itself. The rcvi,a l plan prepared h) the State Ban~ ol 
H)d eraiMd holds the prombe to retrieve the company fro m the morns$ of s1ckness. l'he 
C'o mm ilt c~ "'as inronncd that a turn around pla11 for PTl. was pa111ally approved on 4 5 199<J It 
"as dcr1dcd w pn•' 1t.l~ fund' to the e\tent of Rs.~0.44 crore, Rs.I0.-19 crorc for n:1mhur;cment of 
'"'h lossc' for re>tormg the net wonh of PTI. to s ~ti sfac t ory level and R; Q,'l5 crorc for payment 
o r outstunding swt utory dues. In addi llnn, it was decided to prO\ ide K.s.8.55 cro rc for manpower 
rnuonali~1t1on out ol l'hich Rs.S.09 crorc have a tread) been n:lea~d Go,cmment guarantee to 
cover the entire exposu re of Rs.36 47 crore "as also provided. Restr ucturing pan ol the proposal 
i.e. convc r~ i n of existing loan mto equity and wa1ver of unpaid accumulated interest were referre d 
to 131FR Blf'Rs reccunmendN'Jns are still a"a1tcd. 

29 
The Sub-Committee feels when so much bas been done for Praga Tools Ltd., a little 
more help would be sufficient to make it a profit making company and action in this 
direction should be expedited. 
HINDUSTAN MACHINE TOOLS (HMT) LIMITED. 
25. llindustan Machine Tools (HMT) Ltd. has, for long. been a premier public sector 
company with an enormous brand loyalty in the market. Unfortunately. the strengths of the 
company have eroded over the years and today, desp ite having a constant increase in its 
turnover, it finds itself amidst a grim situation. To come out• of this. the company has 
categorised its various units into (i) viable units (ii) units which can be made viable and (iii) 
unvi~ble unots. Accordingly. it has prepared a comprehens1vc turnaround plan which 
enviSUji.CS organisatiOnal. manpower and financial restructuring. This plan is being 
e\aluated by various financial instttutions namel) lOBI. UTI. I:CI and Canara Bank. The 
Sub·Comminee was informed that Canara Bani.. has alread~ agreed to provide suppon for 
debt restructuring and the approval of other financial Institutions is awaited W1th these 
approvals, the ball will be in the Government's coun. The Sub-Committee recommends that 
not only the financial institutions but the Government also, should speedily accord 
approval to the turnaround plan in order to stem the rot afflicting the RMT Ltd. 
HINDUSTAN PROTO FlLMS MAN UFACTU IUNG COMPANY LIMITED 
26. Hindustan Photo Films Manufacturing Company Ltd. is the only company in the 
country engaged in the photo films manufacturing and is one of the world's six photo 
film manufacturers. Before liberalisation, it enjoyed total monopoly, but with the onset of 
liberalisation il began to lose its grip o1·er the market because of the availabilil) of 
Imported cheap photo goods of multinational> 1n the country. Presently. the company is in dire 
straits and muggling to weather the vagaries of liberalisation. For a re~·ersal in its fortunes , the 
company needs a major financial restructuring. In the opinion of the Sub-Committee, the 
Government should provide requ.i.'lite support for financial restructuring of the company 
in order to enable it to come out of the trap of sickness. 
27 The mterests of Hindustan Photo Films Manufacturing Company L1m1ted are being hit 
hard by the existing duty structure. Although, the customs duty on the polyester sub·base which 
is used for manufacturing films by HPF Ltd .. has been hrought down to nil, there is need for 
enhancing customs duty on the imported semi· finished and finished photo goods. Therefore, the 
Sub-Committee recommends a sleep increase in the customs duty levied on the import of 
semi-finished and finished photo goods to protect RPF Ltd. 
28. Another problem causing considerable damage to the Hindustan Photo Films 
Manufacturing Compan} Limited is the customs dut) exemption to the photo goods being 
imported from Nepal under the provisions of the Indo-Nepal Treaty. The~e impons are 
detrimental to the well being of HPF, Ltd. The Sub-Committee is of the view that the 
relevant provision of the treaty should be reviewed so that its adverse impact on the HPF 
Ltd. could be minimised. 

30 
NATIONAL BICYCLE CORPORATION OF INDIA LIMITED 
29. Since tbe Go;,·ernment bas already cleared tbe VRS package for National Bicycle 
Corpor.ttion of India Ltd., the Sub-Committee would like tbe Depa rtment of Hea vy 
Industry to ponder over tbe sugge,stion to make one more bid to resurrect Ibis company 
after the rationalisation of its manpower. 
RICHARDSON AND CRUDDAS LIMITED 
30. Richardson & Cruddas Ltd. is one of those PSl:fs which has successfully come out 
of red after the implementation of its revival package. But one of its units is still incurring 
losses due to excess manpower. The company needs funds to implement planned VRS in this 
unit located at Bycula, Mumbai. Tbe Sob-Committee, therefore, recommends immediate 
sanction of requisite funds for this purpose as any delay would not be in the interest of 
tbill company wbicb bas recovered tremendously. 
BHARAT HEAVY ELECTRICALS LIMITED 
31. One such company which has successfully withstood the changes brought about by the 
liberalisatton of Indian economy. The impressive track record of it calls for a specia l mention of 
its achievements. As a matter of fact, BHEL is a role model for othet PSUs of Ministry of Heavy 
lndust.ry. For, it has managed to stay in the race despite the odds faced by it as a result of stiff 
competition unleashed by the multinational giants operating in its field of specialisa tion namely, 
manufacture of power plants. Though, BHEL has managed to sustain its viability yet it is facing 
some unfair challenges. The absence of a level playing field vis-a-vis its multinational 
competitors has been posing stiff challenges to the company. This is leading to an ever increasing 
pressure QO the profitability of it. Despite this, the company has been constantly upgrading its 
technology and has also been successfu l in acquiring state of the art technology used in HVDC 
power projects. This renectS the commitment of the company as a whole to serve the nation even 
when the odds arc stacked against it. Therefore, what this company requires is linle help from 
the Government in the form of suitable policy measures. In this regard, the Sub-Comminee draws 
the attention of the Government to the issues of price and purchase preference to BHEL, and 
import duty concessions to the foreign companies. Though, in some cases price and purchase 
preference is granted to the PSUs, the positive results of this measure are negated by the import 
duty concessions extended to the foreign com panics by the Government. These concessions and 
exemptions are precisely the reasons for the playtng field not being level for domestic companies 
or for that matter PSUs as the bids offered by foreign players are much lower in comparison to 
the ones offered by PSUs. In other words, the competition is killed well before it begins. The 
Sub-Committee believes that the need of the hour is not to go back to the days of protectionism 
rather to provide a level playing field to all the players for the sake of healthy competition . 
In view of tbe above, the Sub-Commit!~ has come to the conclusion that the 
Government sbould take necessary policy measures to extend 15% price and purcha Je 
preference to BHEL vis-a-vis its bids for domestic power projects. It also recommends that 
the Government should review its policy of giving duty concc$Sions to the foreign companies 
inasmuch u it leads to disadvantages to tbe domestic companies espedaUy the PSUs. It is 
tbe considered view of tbe Sub-Committee tbat foreign companies should not be shown 
favour at the expense of domestic companies. 

IV 
FO URT H M EET ING 
The Sub-Committee met at 11 .00 A ~I. on rriday. tbe 16'" O~t obcr. 1998 in Room No. 53, 
First Floor. Parliament House, New Delhi. 
P RESEN T 
I . Shri Konijeti Rosaiah · Com-e11or 
RAJYASA BRA 
2. Shr i Govindrao Adik 
J. Shri Santosh Bagrodia 
L OKSAB HA 
4. Shri Jual Oram 
5. Shr i Anand Ratna Maurya 
6. Shri Nadendla Bhaskar Rae 
7. Shri Dutta Meghe 
8 Shri Oijoy Krishna handique 
9 Shri Mal) ala Rajaiah 
I 0. Shri S.S Palanimanickam · 
II . Prof JO£Cndra Kawade 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sat ish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Oflicc r 
W ITNESSES 
Ministry Of Industry (Depar t ment Of Heavy Industry) 
I. , 
3 
4 
5. 
Shri Ajai Vikram Singh, AS& FA 
Shri I) C. Samam, Joint Secretary 
Shn Pradcep Kumar, Joint Secreta!') 
Shn AJO} achal')·a. Joint Secrctal') 
Shri V.K. :.1urreja. Director 
33 

CMDs Of Public Sector Underta kings 
1 Shr~ G P. Pande)·. Actmg CMD. IIEC 
2. Shri B.P Sinha. MD. SW£1. 
3. Shri S. Chakmony. CMD. A YCL 
4. Shri S.P. Mukherjee. CMD. ceil 
5. Shri SuJil Banerjee. MD, BOGL 
6 Shri t\ K Ag&al'\\al, CMO, HC'I 
7 Shn I'.K. Rohatagi. CMD. MA \IC 
8 Shri A.R.K Rao. CMD. lii'C 
9. Shri fl Vcnkate~"ralu, MD. BIII'V 
10. Shri M. Rangareddy, MD, 1'1 L. 
Ministry Of Coal 
I. Shri P.K. Bancrjt. Additional Secreta!) 
2. Shri I' K Scn!_!upta. Chairman, Coal India 
Ministry Of Steel 
1. Shri Ashok i)asu. Sccrc1nry 
2. Shri Naresh Narnd. Jmnt Secretary 
3. Shri Arvind Pande, Chnirman. SAIL 
4. Shri S.C.K. l'atnc. Director. SA IL 
Ministry Of Finan ce ( Ocparlmcnt Of Expenditure) 
I. Shri h.A S Sal'lna. Secretary 
2. Shri J S. Vlathur. Additional secretary ( BudgetO 
3. Shri S C. Pandey. Otrcctor 
Railway Board 
I. Shri Ashok Kumar, Member (Mechanical) 
2 Shn Nnrcndra Sahu, Additional Member ( Stores) 
2. Resummg the do~cussion~ left inconclusive on the pOrcvious day. the Convcnl>r a~J..ed the 
Additional Secreta!) and Financial Advisor. Depanmcnt of hea•') InduS!!) to address the problem• 
and O>>Uc' concemmg t\ndrc\\ Yule & Compan} Ltd .. Hindustan Paper Corporation Ltd. Mining 
and Alhcd Machine!) Corporation Ltd .. Bharat Opthalmic Glass Ltd .. Bharat Hea\) Plate & 
Ve~eb Ltd and Praga Tools Ltd. lhe vic"s of the CMDs of the abow-named PSUs "en: also 
heard during the cou~c of the pre~cntation of the Additional Seeretary. Depanrncnt of Ilea'> 
lndu'tl) Once the dehberauon> involving the Additional Secrctal') and C'MDs \\ere over. the 
- 34 

Sub-Committee . then. tool. up the issue of \\Or!.. orders b)OO Rail"a)s. SAIL and Coal lndm Ltd. to 
Bhar,u Wagon & Engineering Company Ltd., Heav) Engmecring Corpora tion Ltd. and t\llnmg & 
Alltcd Machtn~ry Corporation Ltd .. respective I}. Thereafter , the Conve nor and Member ~ add ressed 
their vtcws on the issues raised and argued the PSUs and the customer Departm ents to work in 
tcndclll li11· survival and muwal bene lit. 
i\ 1crbatim llf thc proceed ings was kept 
J I he ~ub-Committce adjourned at I 15 PM 

v 
FIFTH MEETING 
The Sub-Committee met at 3.00 I' \1. on Monday. the 2., November. 1998 in Room No.63, 
First Floor, Parliament House. Nc" ~l hi . 
PRESE:"'T 
I . Shri Konijeti Rosaaah • Cotwcnor 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Shra Govindrao Adik 
3. Shri Santosh 13agrodin 
LOKSABHA 
4. Shri Jual Oram 
S. Shri Anand Ratna Maurya 
6. Shri Nadcndl:< Ohasknr Rno 
7. Shri Dutta Mcghc 
8. Slui Bijoy Krishna handique 
9. Shri Malyala Rajniah 
10. Shri S.S. Palnnimanickam 
II. Prof. Jogcndra Knwade 
SECRETAR IAT 
Shri Sati~h Kumar. Joan! Secretary 
Shri Tapas 0~~ Gupta. Director 
Shri Morn Raj Singh. Committee Officer 
WITNE SSES 
Ministry Of Indu~try (Ocp;lrtme ot Of Heavy Industry ) 
I. Shri Ajai Vikram Singh. AS& FA 
2. Shri Pan ~ aj Aggarwal, Director 
3. Shri V.K. Muareja. Director 
4. Shri B. Vcnkatcs,-ralu, 1\lD. BHVP 
Ministry of J>ctroleum ;ond Natural Gas 
S. Shri T.S. Vijayraghavan, Secretary 
6. Shri C.L. Bashal, Joint Secretary 
7. Shri P.M. Meena. Director 
8. Shri Satyanarayan. CMD. Engineers India Ltd. 
36 

9. Shn A.S. Som. Dorccoor. ONGC 
10. Shri J.K. Jam, Director, GAIL 
II . Shri H.P. Chandna, Direcoor. GAIL 
1 ~ . Shri S.N. Jha. Dirccoor, Indian Oil 
Ministry of Fiamocc (OCJI:lrtmenl of Expcndiourc} 
13. Shri E.A.S. Sarma. Secrcoary 
lol. Shri J.S Mathur, Addioional Secreta!) (Budget) 
2. lniuaung the discussoon. !he Convenor bricfl) oullined ohe pufPOSC of the meeoing and asked 
lhc Managmg Director of fihdl'at Heav) Plale & Vessel> Lid. (BHPV) 10 enlighoen the Sub­
Commincc aboul ohe problems beong faced by his company. Thereafter. tbe Addiuonal Secretary 
& rinancial advisor, Department of I Ieavy Industry daborated the official pOsition of his Department 
of vis-io-vis Bharat Heavy Plntc & Vessels Ltd. Then came up ohe issue of work orders 10 AIIPV 
b) rSUs of Minisory of Petroleum & Naoural Gas. Secretary, Minisory of Petroleum and naoural Gas 
r~plocs on ohis issue. Aflcr !he discussion on BHPV wa; over, ohc Secretary (Expendiourc ), Ministry 
nf Finance made a briefpresemaoion before !he Sub-Commmcc on the issue of tinancial asSIStance to 
ohe I'SUs of Departmenl of Hea") Industry. The comenor and the Members exprcsocd ohcor 'tews 
and gage suggestions on the issues discussed in the mecomg. 
A verbattm of the proceedings "as kepi. 
3. The Sub-Commiltec adjourned at 4.30 I'.M .. to meet again a1 11.00 AM. on the 3'• 
November, 1998. 
37 

VI 
SIXTH -MEETl~G 
The Sub-Commiltcc mel at II 00 A '1.1. on Tuesda~ . the 3"' 1\o,cmbcr. 1998 on Room 
l'o .63. Firol Floor. Parhamenl House, Nc" Delho 
PRESENT 
I. Shri KoniJCl> Rosaiah • Com•mor 
MEMBERS 
RA.JY A SAO IIA 
2. Shro Santosh llag.rodia 
L.OK SABli A 
J . Shri M. S rinivn~ 
4. Shri Vijay Shunkar 
5. Shri Dunn Mcghc 
6. Shri M~ l ya l a Rajaiah 
7. Shri S.S. Palanomanickaon 
8. Prof Jogendra Kawndc 
SECRETARI AT 
Shri fapas Das Gupta, Director 
Shri P.<.:. Pai~rny. Under Secretary 
Shro Mom RaJ Singh. Committee Ofiiccr 
WITNESSES 
Mini stry Or Ind ustry (Department Or Hea ~1· Indu str) ) 
6. Shri AJai Vikram Singh. AS& FA 
7 Shro Ajny acharya. Joint Secreta~ 
8. Shri Pan~aj Al).gan,al. Director 
CMDS or J>ublic Sector O nd c rlakin g~ 
I. Shri U. l'. Pandey. 1\cting CMD. li i::C 
2. Shri N.K Ag.garwal. CMD. IICL 
3 Shri M Rru1gnrcddy. MD, r•TL. 
38 

Mini stry Of Com munic a tion s (Depar tment Of Tele com ) 
1. Shri R.R.N. Prasad. Mcmb..:r ( Productio n ) 
1 Shri C Ramcsh. Adv1s0r ( l'roducllon) 
] Shri S. K. Pttrwar. Advisor ( F) 
Min istry Of Dd'rnc r ( De part ment Of Efence Production & Sull Jllies) 
Slu·i P1ahi1 Sengupta. Secretary 
2. Shri Om l'rak:1:>h. Joi1it s~nc tary 
3 'lhri KMnail Sin;th. Joint Secretary 
4 . Shri V.N. O~u r. Joint Sc"rctary 
Railway Bn:m l 
Sh ri :\silo~ K u m~r. 'vlcml>er ( Mechamcal) 
' Shri l"arendra \ahu . Additional Member (Store>) 
2. i\t the omsct. the Convenor briefed the Members and officials abo111 the purpose 01 
convening the meeting and asked the CMDs of heav) Engineering Corporation Ltd .. lli ndustan 
Cable, 11,1. and Praga Tools Ltd to enumerate their problems rcgan.ling gelling suffi c i ~nt wor~ l)rder< 
from c:lbtomer Depal1mcnts 1'111: Atldition•l >Ccr·etary & Financial Ad\ i>or. Department of I Ieavy 
lnd us t r~ :lisu prc,e nted his Dep~nm en!'. position on this issue. l hereafter, lvkmber ( mechanical). 
Rail"") lloard. Member ( l"roducuonl. Dcparunent of Telecom and Secrct~ry (DeJ>anmcut of 
D~l"e11<.:<.' production). Mtnrstry ,1r r>cr~ncc p rc~cmcd thcit· respective Ocpanmcm' s po'>itit)ll 1)11 the 
i>suc or work <lTdC" to the aho,c- named I'SUs. ·1 he Com enor and the Members ex1>re.ssed their 
v1c"s and urged the PSlJs and customer D~panments to cooperate "ith each other on the issue of 
\\ork orders. 
A 'crhat i m llf the proceedings was kepi. 
3 The Sub-Committee adj<>urned "I 1 I 0 I' \ 1.. 

VII 
SEVENTH -MEETING 
The Sub-Commincc met at 3.00 I' \1. on Tuesday • the 12'• 'lovember. 1998 in Comminec 
Room ·o· Ground rloor. Parliament ll ou~e Anncxe. '\ew Delhi. 
PRESENT 
I. Shri Konijeti Rosaiah • Com·cuor 
RAJ YA SAIJHA 
2. Shri Govondrao 1\dik 
3. Shri Santo5h 13a!,trodia 
LOK SABHA 
4. Shri M. Srin1vas 
;. Shri Vijay Shankar 
6. Shri AnMd Katno M<llorya 
7 Shri Nandendla 13hasknr Rao 
8. Shri Bijoy Krishna Handique 
9. Shri Jogendra Kawadc. 
SECRETARI AT 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director 
Shri P.C. Paikray. Under secretary 
WIT'IIE SSES 
Ministry Or Industry (Department OrHea• ·y Industry) 
I. Shro P. Shankar. Secretary 
2. Shri Ajo) achar)a. Joont Secretary 
3. Shri N Ramanuja. CMD. HMT 
Ministry or Fin:.ncc (Bankinj: Division) 
I. Shri C.M. Vasudcv, Special Secretary 
2 Shri Anoop Mishm. Joint Secretary 
3. Shri K IlL Mathur. Director 
2. To set the discussion in motion, the Convenor ohrcw sun light on the purpose oft he meeting 
and asked the CMO of HM I Ltd. to make a brief presentation before the Sub -Co m mince on the 
the problems confronting his company. After the presentation ofCMD. IIMT Ltd. was over the 
40 

Secreta') , Department of HcaY) Industry made the official position of his Departmem 1-nown on 
the os;ucs raised by the CMO He assured the Sub-Commutee of extending every pos>ible help to 
IIMT. Ltd. to bail it out of its present crisis. Thcraftcr, Special Secretary, Monostry of Finance 
(Oanking Division ) gave a general statemem on the issue of inve-stment by f'inancial Institution in 
the PSUs of Department of Heavy Industry. 
A verbatim of the proceedings was kept 
3 fhe Sub-Comminee adjourned at 4.55 PM to meet again at I LOO A \1 on the 13" 
No,cmber. 1998. 
41 

Vlll 
EIGHTH -~ETING 
The Sub-Comminee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 13"' November. 1998 in Commiuec 
Room ·o• Ground Floor, Parliament I louse Annexe, New Delhi ~ 
PRESENT 
I. Shri Konijeti Rosaiah ·Convenor 
RAJY A SABILA 
2. Shri Govindrao Adik 
J. Shri Snntosh Bagrod ia 
LOKSABHA 
4. Shri Vijny Shankar 
5. Shri Anand Rntna Maurya 
6. Shri Nandendln Bhaskar Rao 
7. Shri Bijoy Krishna Hnndiquc 
SECRET Afl.lA T 
Shri Tapas Oas Gupta, Director 
Shri P.C. Paikray, Under secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Com mince Officer 
WITNESSES 
Ministry Of Industry (Depart ment Of Heavy lodustry) 
I. Shri P. Shankar. Secreta!) 
2. Shri AJO) acharya. Joint Secretary 
3. Shn Pradeep Kumar. Joint Secretary 
4. Shri fl.K I ripathi. !).rector 
5. Shri Chaotan)a l'rakash. CMD, HPF 
6. Shri A.R K Rao. C\-11), HPC' 
7 Shri S.K. Sengupta, MD, MSPM 
Ministl") Of Commerce 
Shri 1'.1'. Prabhu. St·crctary 
42 

Ministry Of Financ e {Departm ent O f Revenue) 
I. Shri Javed Chowdhury. Secretary 
2. Shri S.D. Mohile. Chainnan and Special Secreta!) Central Board of Excise & Customs 
J. Shri R P. Verma, Member (Budget) 
2. Initiating the discuss ion, the Convenor outlined the objective of the meeting and asked the 
CMD of Hindustan Photo Films Ltd. to give a broef account of the problems being encoun tered by 
his company. After the p resentation of CMD, I IPF Ltd. was over, the Sec retary, depa rtment of 
Heavy Industry made his Department's official pos ition known to the Sub-Committee . Thereafter, 
the Convenor asked t he Commerce Secretary and Revenue Secretary to corn rn ~n t on the speci fic 
issues of the impact of Indo-Nepal Treaty (lnd the customs duty structute on HPF Ltd .. respect ively. 
Elaborating their respective Ministries' official position. both the Secreta ries assured the Sub­
Committee of extending fu ll coo peration to HPF to enable it to cornc out of red. 
3. After the discussion on HPF Ltd. "as over. the Sub-Committee then touched upon the 
problems of Mandya 1\ational Paper Mills for discussion. Accordingly , CMD. Hmdustan Paper 
Corporation Ltd. and MD, Mandya National Paper Mills were asked to enumerate the problems 
being faced by Mandya Narional Paper mills !'hereafter. the Secretary. Depanmcnt of Heavy 
Industry dwelt upon the issues raised by them. The Secretary informed the Sub-Committee that h1s 
Depanment "'as making all-out effons to revive Mand)'a National Paper Mills. He also mfom1cd 
that t alks were on to form a Joint-venture as a mca,urc to put the Mills back on rails. 
A verbatim of the proceed ings was kept. 
4. The Sub·Committee adjourned at 1.00 P.M. 

IX 
:-11:-/TH -MEETING 
The Sub-Commince met at 3.00 P \I. on Friday. the 21~ December, 1998 m Comminee 
Room ·A· Ground Floor. Parliament llouse Anncxe. Ne" Delhi. 
PRESENT 
I. Shri Konijcti Rosaoah · Com·enor 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Shri Go' ondrM Adik 
LOK SABiiA 
3. Shri Vojay S h ~nkar 
4. Shri Anand Rama Ma\orya 
5. Shri Mnlyal<O RnJ<Oiah 
6. Shri S.S. l'lan imanickaon 
7. Prof. Jo~c n dra Knwade 
S£CR£TARJAT 
Shri Satish Kumar. Joint Secretary 
Shr1 Ttopas l)a~ Uupta. Director 
Shri PC . Pai~rn~. L'ndcr secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Sough. Comminec Officer 
• 
2. At th~ outset. the Convenor elicited the views of the Members present on the contents of the 
Draft Report Some of the Mcmbcrs requested the Cor.\cnor for more time to enable th~m to go 
through the Draft Report t\ccordmgl). the Sub-Commincc decided to meet agaon on the 6' Janual'). 
1999 to consodcr the Draft Report 
3. Sub·Commince also dc.:ided m visit t"o plants of flHI:.L namcl~ Boolcr Plant at 
Tiruchirapalli and llea') Po\\Cr Equipment Plant at li~derabad . Accordmgl) . the Sub-Commonec 
authorosed the Convenor to finalise "'stud~ 'bit to Chennai. Tiruchirapalli and Hyderabad from 6" 
to I O" Janu~r). 1999. 
~ - The Sub-Committee. then. adjourned at ~.00 I'M oo meet a~ in al 100 P \t on the 6., 
Janual). 1999 to con,ider its Orali Rcpon before proceeding to(. hennao b) evening lloght fnr 1h 
stud~ visit. 
44 

X 
TENTH -MEETI NG 
The Sub-Committee met at 3.00 r M. on the 6., January. 1999 in main Committee Room, 
Ground floor. Parliamcm I louse Anne'\e, Ne" Delha 
PRESENT 
Shra Konijeu Rosaaah • Conven01 
LOKSAllHA 
I. Shri Anand Ratna Maurya 
2. Shri Nadcndla Aha~kar Rao 
4. Shri Anancla Pnthnk 
S. Shri S.S. Palnnimanickam 
SICCIU:TAR IAT 
Shri I apa• l)as Gupta, l)irector 
Shri Mom RaJ Singh. Committee Qfficcr 
3. The Convenor placed before the Members present a couple of modifications for being 
incorporated an the draft repon lhe Members present, having gone through the modiiication> 
agreed to incorponlte them in the draft Thcrcafl~r. the Sub-Committee, unanimously adopted the 
drah repon and decided to make funher addlttons to the repon after the completion of Phase-Iii stud) 
\'is it of Sub-Committee to Chcnnaa. firuchtrapalh and Hyderabad. 
4. The Sub-Commntce adjourned at 3 ·15 P \t. to reassemble at 5.30 f' \1 at Parliament JJ,)u,c 
Annexe to proceed for Chennai 
45 

I 
FIRST MEETlNG 
The Committee met at 3.00 I'M on Tuesday. the II'" Janual). 1000 in Room "'o. l39. Fir)! 
Floor. Parliament llou~c Annexc, Nc" Delhi. 
PRESENT 
I. Shri Raghavjt - Chamnan 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madha' >inh !>olankt 
3. Shn <;anto~h Oagrodia 
4. Shri Surcsh A Keswani 
5. Shri Ramda:. Ag.uw.tl 
6. Shn J ibon R,>y 
i. ';11fi SotMppa It flommai 
8. Smt. <;aroj DL1hc>· 
9. Shri Nug~ndra Nath OJha 
10. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
I I. Shri 11ha~aban M;t,ihi 
LOKSABIIA 
12. Shri Chunnilal I hakur 
13. Shri Ramanand Singh 
14 "hri R. OJ.,anagouda Patil 
15 Shri Anant Nayal.. 
16. Shn Ram Smsh Kaswan 
17. Shri A Narendra 
18. Shri Unamarno Deorao Pall I 
19 Shn K I' Sin)lh Dco 
20 Smt Rcnuka Cho"dhul) 
11 Shn 'epa I Chandra Oas 
,, Shn P. RaJcndran 
23. Shri 13.13. Ramamh 
24. Shn M Rajaiah 
25. Kull\,ar <;an Raj Singh 
~6. Shri Anant \1ahndcoappa Gudhc. 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar. Additional Secretary 
Shn Tapa> Das Gupta, Director 
Shri I'.C l'aikray. Under Secretary 
~hri M.R. Verma, Con•mittec Officer 
46 

The Chairman "elcomed the ne"l} nominated members of the Comm1ttee and requested 
them to introduce themsehc~. 
2 Thereafter. the Chairm3n apprised the Members of the activities undertaken by the previous 
Commmee and informed lhc Members that three 'iub-Comminees were tormcd for on 1he spot­
sltld) namely Sub-Committcc-1 on Problems being faced b) Steel Industry (bOih in Public and 
Pnvatc <;ector) : Sub-Commincc-11 on working of Pnme Minister's Rozgar Yojana {f>MRY) and 
Rural Employment Gcncrauon Programme (REGP) and Sub-Comminee-111 on PSU~ of Depanment 
of Hca'y lndustry- Disime~uncnt. Sickness and Revival. The Chairman further informed 1he 
\1embers that \\hile the stud)· Report of the Sub-C'omm1ttcc-lll was considered and adopted by the 
'luh-Cornmmee 1hc other I\\O rcf'('ns could not be considered and a~op1ed b) lhe re~peCII\'C Sub­
Committees due to the d1sS<>Iu11on of lhe 12" Lo~ Sabha resulting in the d1s~olut1on of the 
Commmee The Chatrman suggested that the present Commmee ma) take up 1he repon< for 
considcrauon. adop11on and prc<cntalion. After some discuss10n 11 was decided I hat the Reports may 
be 1akcn up by the present C:ommiucc for consideration. 'I he Cornminee also decided to take up the 
process of adoption and prcscnlation of the Report on the Aclion Taken No lc~ on the Committee's 
~3"
1 
Report on I he Demand~ for Grant> ( 1998-99) pertaining tO 1he Departmenl of Steel. 
3 • • • 
4. • • • 
5 • • • 
6. The Committee decided 10 meet at 3.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 2711' January, 2000, to finalise 
1hc constitution of Sub-Comminces and lhe specific subjects for their Sll1dy and also 10 consider and 
3dOpl lhc report of lhe Sub-CommHiec-111 {of previous Comminee) on "PSUs of Department of 
I Ieavy Industry· Disin~·estment. Sickness and Revival" and Report on the Acuon Taken Now on the 
23"' Report on Demands for Grams (1998-99) pertaining to the Department of Steel. 
7. The Committee lhenadjoumcd al3.45 PM 
• • • Relates 10 other mattc!rs 
47 

Ill 
THTRD MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M on Tuesday. the 8'' February, 2000. in Room No.l39. Fir~t 
Floor. Parliament House Annc~c. New Delhi. 
PRESF.NT 
I. Shn Ragha\j i - Charrman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madhavsinh So lan~i 
3. Shri Khan Gufran /.ahidi 
4. Shn J ibon Roy 
S Smt. Saroj Dubey 
6 Shn Nagendra Nath OJha 
LOKSABIL\ 
7. Shri Pon R;tdhakrbhnnn 
8. Shri R3manand Singh 
9. Shri R. lJasanago ud~ PMil 
I 0. Shri A. C. Jose 
I I. Shri I< P. Singh Deo 
12. Sml Renuka Chowdhury 
13. Shri Nepal Chanura Da~ 
14 Shn Ram Rnghun;uh Ch~udhol') 
I 5. Shrt <;unil I-. han 
16. Shri 1'. RaJcndran 
17 Kun\\ar S<lN RaJ '>tngh 
18. Shri Manjay l.al 
19 Shn Anant \lahadc,,appa (iudhc 
20. Shro ~hn Ramdas ,\th;t\\alc 
S[CR£TARio\T 
Shro PC Patkra). \ .ndcr S~crctal)' 
Shri :'>1om Raj Singh. Committee Officer 
1 he Chairman \\ek<'tnc<l the \lembcrs of the Committee before taking up the :1gcnda of 
the mecttns for the d.t) 
• • • 
J. • • • 
48 

4. Subsequently, the Committee took up the draft Repon of the Sub-Committee-Ill (of previous 
Committee) on PSUs of Depan ment of !Ieavy Industry · Disinvestment. Sickness and Revival for 
consideration and adoption. Some of the Members suggested that the Committee should first hear 
the Secretary. Depanrnent of Heavy Industry on the subject and the considerat ion and adoption of 
the Repon may be ta~en thereafter . After some discussion the suggestion was agreed to and it was 
decided that the Secretary, Depanment of Heavy Industry may be requested to appear before the 
Committee in the first week of March . 
5. • • • 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4. 15 P.M. 
49 

IV 
FOURTH MEETlNG 
The Commince met at 3.00 I'M . on Thursday, the 2"" March, 2000. in Commincc Room 
1\ ',Ground Floor, l"arloarnent House 1\nnexe, New Delhi. 
I. 
1. 
·1. 
PRESENT 
Chammm 
RAJYA SABHA 
Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
Shn J ibon Roy 
Slll'l Sh usubramanlan 
LOK Si\UiiA 
5 Shro Pon Radhakrishnan 
6 Shri Chunnilal Thakur 
7 Shri R<1m~nand Singh 
&. Shro G. Mallil.arJunappa 
<J Shri t\nant Nayak 
I 0 Shro Ram Singh Kas"an 
II. Shro A.C. Jose 
12. Shri Nepal Chandra Das 
13 Shro Ram Raghunath Chaudhary 
1 ~- Shri Sunil Khan 
15. Kun\\ar Sarv R:OJ Smgh 
16. Shri IJccpal.. Kumar 
17 Shri ManJ3) I al 
I 8 Shro Anant Mahadcoappa Gudhc 
1'1 Shn K. Malai~m} 
:!0. Shri K.H \ltuno)appa 
SECRETA RIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar. Addotoonal secretary 
Shri fapas Da~ Gupta, Director 
Shri P.C. l'aikray, Under Secreta<) 
Shri Mom Raj Singh. Committee Officer. 
50 

WITNESSES 
I. Shri T.S. Vijayraghavan. Secretary. 
2. Shri K.K Jaswa~ AS & FA 
3. Shri Pradeep Kumar. Joint Secretary 
4. Shn AJOY Acharya. Jomt Secretary 
5, Shri V.K Mutr~ja. Director 
6. Shri A.D .. Josh1. Otrcctor 
7. Shri B K Tripathi, Dtrector 
8. Shri Pankaj Agarwal. Director 
9. Shri V.D. Vatwani. Dy. G.M. BHEL 
I 0. Shri K .S. Sha" ne) . Deputy Secretary 
II Shn M.C. \ilmal. Deput~ Secretary 
At the outset. the Ch<1innan briefed the Members present about the purpose of the meeting. 
He stated that the 'iecretar). Muustry of llcavy Industries & Publoc Enterprises would depose before 
the Commiuee in connection "nh the finahsauon of the repon of the Sub-Commiuee-111 on PSU~ of 
the Dcpanment of Heary lndustr) and apprise the Comminee about the work order position. re' oval. 
disinvestment. joint ventures. VRS etc. in the 16 PSUs visited by the Sub-Comminee. The Chairman 
informed that the Commillee may meet on 22"" March to adopt the Repon and also meet on 27'' . 28'" 
and 29'' March to examine the Demands for Grants of the Mintstnes under its jurisdiction 
2. Thercaner. the Chatrman ask~d the Secreta') to introduce himself and also the witnesses 
accompanying him and bri~fthe commiHCc on the aforementioned mauer relating to the 16 PSUs. 
3. The Secreta'). then explained the status of work orders in PSUs, of the Depanmcnt of 
Heavy Industry and stated that the order book position was not satisfaciory. He informed that the 
Depanmcnt was making all out effons to ma.ximise order book position. Thereafter. he dwelt at 
length on the progress made towards wor~ order, revival package, joint ventures. disinvestment, VRS 
etc. 10 PSUs of the Depanmcnt since January, 1999, Some Members expressed discontent over the 
Government effom to wind up some companies. 
Members wanted that an objective assessment as to the pros and cons of" inding of the 
Company may be ta~en first and decision to wind up the sick and unviable PSUs ma} be taken 
thercaner. 
At the end, the Chairman asked the Secretary to provide a detailed note with regard to status of 
16 PSUs and the Secretary agreed for the same. 
4. A verba 11m of the proceedings was kept. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at4.40 P.M 
51 

. 
I · 
v 
FIFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 PM. on Wednesday, the 22od March, 2000, in Room No.l39. 
First Floor. Parliament House Annexe. New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
I. Shri RaghavJi Ch01rman 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
3. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
4. Shri J ibon Roy 
5. Smt. Saroj Dubey 
6. Sardar nalwinder Singh Bhundar 
7. Slui Nagendra Nath Ojha 
LOK SAJlHA 
8. Shri Pon Radhakrishnnn 
9. Shri Chunnilal Thakur 
I 0. Shri Ramanand Singh 
II . Shri R. Basanagouda Patil 
12. Shri G Mallikarjunappa 
13. Shri Tarachand Sahu 
14. Shri Anant Nayak 
15. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
16. Shri A. Narendra 
17. Shri A.C. Jose 
18. Shri K.P. Singh Deo 
19. Shri Nepal Chandra Das 
20. Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary 
21. Shri Sunil Khan 
22. Shri P. Rajendran 
23. Sbri B,B, Ramaiah 
24. Shri M. Rajaiah 
25. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh 
26. Shri Deepak Kumar 
27. Shri Manjay Lal 
28. Shri Anant Mahadeoappa Gudhe 
29. Shri Ram Sajivan 
JO. Shri Ramdas Athawale 
31 Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
52 

~r:C RF.TA RI AT 
Shri 1 ap<t> Da' (i upta. Di r~ctor 
Shr i P.C. Paikrn~. U nd ~r SccreWr) 
Shr i Mom Raj '-,inJ:!h. Com mittee Ofiiccr 
I he (\>mnllliC<" 1<1<1l- np the draft rcpon of the Sub·Commmcc·lll on PSU~ of the 
Depar t 111cnl of lle;t\ ~ I nd"''' ) . lli s Ill \ estmc nl. S icknc" nnu Re,·h al Sh" J ibon l ~ < l). M .f' 
pl'()jh)')Ctl som<: anH.:ndmc-ms lU the Repor1 for \,!O il s i d e rn li~ ' ll l)f lhc Cu m mi H~C rhc CnmmiUc:c 
dehber~ll t:d un the amcnc.lmccus •mg.g.csted h~ Shri Ro~ .. mtl ag.rc.:d hl tn\:r•rpurate ')UnH: 
amcndm~nts in the Rcpon. The Commincc. then tooL cogmtance of the '•>tc on 16 I'SUs of the 
Depanmcnt of Heav) Indus!!") \upp lied b) the Ministl") and in the light ol lm..-sl de,ck>pments. 
Chair man >ugges ted ~o m c c hanges ,,., the Repon wh1c h was agreed to. Sl1r1 K. P Sin)!h Dc(l. M.f'. 
also ,uggcsted !hat " here 1he Commi nee was recom mendin g abon 1 gi" ing functional mH<lllO<n~ to 
PSLs . 11 'hould be accompanied h) ii~ing of responsibilit~ and nccountnhilit~ fnr an~ act of 
<1m•~;,,on :tnd comm1ssion . His suggestion \\as al<,(> :1greed to lhc Rcpon . thereafter. "a' adopted 
as amt'ndcd. 
2. Chairm3n dir ected the Secretaria t to incorporate the amendments and read} th~ Rcpon for 
pre~cntation . 
J. rhe Commiuec then adjourned at 4.15 I '~~ 
53 