  
     
                                                                                                                          
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2013/ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) 
 
 
253 
TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY-THIRD REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON  244 TH  REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-14)  
 PERTAINING TO  
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES    
      
 (PRESENTED TO  THE RAJYA SABHA ON  10 th  December, 2013) 
( LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 10 th  December, 2013) 
 
 

  
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2013/ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY-THIRD REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON 244 TH  REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-14)  
 PERTAINING TO  
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES    
      
 (PRESENTED TO  THE RAJYA SABHA ON 10 th  December, 2013) 
( LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 10 th  December, 2013) 
 
 
 

  
 
CONTENTS 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …………………………………(i)  
2. INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………(ii) 
3. REPORT …………………………………………………………………….   1  
(i) CHAPTER-I 
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by 
the Ministry……………………………………………………………2-3 
 
(ii) CHAPTER-II 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies………………………4-17 
 
(iii) CHAPTER-III 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has 
either not accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry 
to review its replies…………………………………………………18-34 
 
(iv) CHAPTER-IV 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the  
Ministry have not been received…………………………………….35-48 
 
 4. MINUTES ……………………………………………………………………… 
                  
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE   
(Date of Constitution w.e.f.  31 st  August,  2013) 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
     
 1.  Shri K.C. Tyagi —       Chairman  
       2.  Shri M.P. Achuthan  
 3.  Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel  
 4.  Shri Narendra Budania 
    5.  Shri Vivek Gupta  
 6.  Dr. V. Maitreyan   
 7.  Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar  
 8.  Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
 9.  Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
10. Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor  
LOK SABHA 
 
 
11.   Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala 
12.   Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
13. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
14. Shrimati Poonamben Veljibhai Jat 
15. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
16. Shri Hassan Khan 
17. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
18. Shrimati Ingrid Mcleod  
19. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal 
20. Shri Somen Mitra 
21. Shri P. R. Natarajan 
22. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey 
23. Shri Jayaram Pangi 
24. Shri R. K. Singh Patel 
25. Shri B. Y. Raghavendra 
26.   Shri Ramsinh Rathwa  
27.   Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
28.   Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
29.   Ch. Lal Singh 
30.    Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
31.    Shri E.G. Sugavanam 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.      Shri A.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
2.      Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
3.      Shri Roshan Lal, Joint Director 
4.      Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 
 
 (i) 
 

  
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
  
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliame ntary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having   been authorized by the Committee , hereby present this Two Hundred 
and Fifty Third Report on Action Taken Notes furnis hed by the Ministry of Micro, Small 
and Medium Enterprises on the recommendations conta ined in the Committee’s Two 
Hundred and Forty Fourth Report on the Demands for Grants (2013-14).  
 
2. I thank the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises for furnishing the 
Action Taken Notes on the recommendations contained  in the Committee’s Two 
Hundred and Forty Fourth  Report. 
  
3. The Committee in its meeting held on 12 
th  November, 2013 considered and 
adopted the report. 
 
  
 
  
K.C. Tyagi 
                          Chairman                                                                                   
                Department -related Parliamentary  
                                                                                       Standing  Committee   on    Industry  
 
New Delhi 
November. 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 
 
REPORT 
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with  the Action Taken by the 
Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises on the recommendations contained in 
the Committee’s Two Hundred and Forty Fourth Report  on the Demands for Grants 
(2013-14)
 pertaining to Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. 
 
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises in respect of the recommendation s contained in the Report. These 
have been categorized as follows:  
 
Chapter –I   The recommendations/observations, which have bee n accepted by the 
Ministry. 
 
 The Committee is pleased to observe that the Minis try has accepted its 
recommendations as mentioned in the Chapter – I of the Report. 
 
Chapter -II   The recommendation/observations which the Committ ee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies. 
 
 In respect of these recommendations the Committee is convinced with the logic 
and explanations advanced by the Ministry and there fore do not want to pursue them for 
the present. 
 
Chapter -III    The recommendations/observations in respect of w hich the Committee 
has either not accepted replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its 
reply. 
 
 The Committee expresses its concern over the non-i mplementation of 
recommendations contained in Chapter – III and desi res that the Ministry should furnish 
logical explanations therefore. 
 
Chapter -IV    The recommendations/observations in respect of wh ich final replies of the 
Ministry have not been received. 
 
 In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either 
furnished the interim replies or couched its langua ge in vague terms like noted for 
compliance/guidance, therefore, the Committee desir es that the Ministry should furnish 
Action Taken Notes in respects of recommendations c ategorized in Chapter-IV in detail 
and to the point, as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee. 
 
3. The details of the ATR are being discussed in the succeeding pages. 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 
-2- 
CHAPTER-I 
 
Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 The Committee recalled that the Ministry had given  similar excuse of lack of 
demand, in respect of under-utilization of funds in  2011-12. It expresses serious concern 
that situation has not changed much over last year.  This trend goes against the 
Government’s policy of promoting this important sec tor as reflected in enhanced year on 
year allocations. The Committee is concerned over t he lack of enough demand for the 
Government’s schemes even to the extent of annual a llocation. If the Ministry is seeking 
year on year enhanced allocation for these Schemes,  it is obviously on the basis of 
enhanced estimated demand for the scheme. The reply  is an implicit admission that the 
Ministry has not been able to reach out to the targ eted group or it has not been able to 
educate people about these schemes or the procedure s in schemes are not sufficiently 
seamless and streamlined so as to attract potential  users. The Committee also noted that 
the Ministry had commissioned a third party evaluation of these schemes. The Committee 
would like to know the outcome of such evaluation w hat were the infirmities identified 
and the steps taken to remove them. 
(Para No. 24) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
The observation of the Committee is well taken. The  Ministry has taken several 
steps to ensure optimum utilization of funds. For t his, periodical review meetings are 
taken by Secretary (MSME) under various scheme being implemented by MSME. 
 
Evaluation study of all existing schemes of SME Division for their continuation in 
12th Plan have been conducted through independent a gencies. The evaluation reports 
indicates by and large that these schemes are succe ssful and beneficial for MSME sector. 
Based on the finding/ recommendations made by the e valuating agencies and discussions 
held with other stakeholders/ implementing agencies , necessary steps including 
organization of SFC/EFC and approval of competent a uthority for continuation of these 
schemes are under active consideration of the Ministry.   
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
-3- 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee found its interaction with select in dustry associations a useful 
experience. It received feedback from the ultimate consumers of these schemes. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may consider  and respond to their suggestions 
and concerns.  
(Para No. 176) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
 Ministry has been receiving representations/ sugge stions from various Industry 
Associations from time to time. There exists mechan ism of examinations of their 
suggestions in Ministry. Further, meeting/ consulta tions are also held with Industry 
Associations where required. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
-4- 
CHAPTER-II  
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do es not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee may be informed about the eight recom mendations of Prime 
Minister’s Task Force  that have been dropped / del inked and rationale for dropping the 
same. The Committee may also be informed about the status of implementation of 
remaining recommendations through the Action Taken Note. The Ministry must closely 
work with the Steering Committee in implementing th e recommendations. The 
Committee takes serious note of the fact that the p rominent Public Sector Banks are not 
adhering to the recommendations of PM’s Task Force and RBI guidelines in respect of 
credit to Micro sector. It recommends the Ministry to take up the issue with RBI and 
Steering Committee.                                                  
(Para No. 20) 
 
Action Taken 
 
Prime Minister’s Task Force (PMTF) made 85 recommen dations under various 
areas including credit, marketing, labour, rehabili tation and exit policy, 
infrastructure/technology/skill development and tax ation. Out of the 85 
recommendations; 
 
(i)  action on 39  recommendations have been completed. 
 
(ii)  action on 24 recommendations completed but follow up to be monitored. 
 
(iii) action on 14 recommendations at various stages of implementation and  
 
(iv)  8 recommendations dropped / delinked as decided in the 3 
rd  meeting of the  
Steering Group held on 1.8.2011 . The details are given below:  

  
-5- 
 
 
 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Para 
No. 
Recommendations 
 
 
Taxation Matters 
 
1. 5.4.3 To evaluate the impact of not allowing exemptions f or MSMEs under GST, 
the Federation of Industries in the North East Regi on to undertake studies of 
specific products produced in both MSME and large s ectors analyzing the 
cost impact of taxes on MSMEs vis-à-vis large enterprises.   
Labour Issues 
 
2. 5.5.2 The ESIC and EPF Acts may be examined by the Minist ry of Labour & 
Employment in consultation with stakeholders with a  view to find if the 
social security objectives under these Acts could b e met through other 
mechanisms. Further, the Ministry may also examine ways of utilizing 
Rs.5000 crore lying unclaimed with EPFO for the wel fare of workers and 
bring it for approval within 3 months.   
Infrastructure 
 
3. 5.6.1 Local bodies to set aside revenue to upgrade infras tructure. Alternatively, 
industrial estates could be notified as separate local bodies.  
A suitable reforms-cum-financial package (tentative ly estimated at Rs 500 
crore) may be evolved to incentivize the State Gove rnments, within 3 
months.       
(Observation of Steering Group: As different States  will have different 
views, scheme based on common views may not be feasible) 
4. 5.6.6 Encourage setting up/earmarking of at least one ind ustrial estate in each 
block for MSEs. Wherever possible, private sector p articipation may be 
encouraged.   
(Observation of Steering Group: Not practical) 
NER & J&K 
 
5. 5.11.9 Under the Growth Centre Scheme implemented by DIPP,  release of funds 
amounting to Rs. 33.35 crore for 5 functional centr es is pending. Since the 
scheme has been discontinued from 1.4.2009, the Min istry of MSME may 
honour these commitments by providing funds from th e Micro and Small 
Enterprises-Cluster Development Programme (MSE-CDP) .  (Observation of 
Steering Group: To be dropped in view of findings of evaluation study) 

  
-6- 
 
 
 The Ministry has been in touch with RBI on credit issues and RBI has informed 
that in terms of the recommendations of the PM’s Ta sk Force on MSMEs, Scheduled 
Commercial Banks have been advised vide their circular dated June 29, 2010 to achieve, 
inter alia, a 10% annual growth in number of micro enterprise accounts and ensure that 
60% of their total Micro and Small Enterprise (MSE)  advances should go to the micro 
enterprises by the year ended March 2013 and onward .  The RBI has also informed that 
the position of banks in this regard is monitored b y RBI on quarterly basis. Recently in 
January 2013, a High Level meeting with CMDs/ CEOs of all Public Sector Banks, 
major Private Sector Banks and Foreign Banks was he ld to impress upon them the need 
to step up credit to the MSME sector and more parti cularly to the micro and small 
enterprises.  
 Further, in view of the concerns emerging from the  deceleration in credit growth 
to the MSE sector, an Indian Banking Association (I BA)-led Sub-Committee (Chairman: 
Shri K.R. Kamath) was set up to suggest a structure d mechanism to be put in place by 
banks to monitor the entire gamut of credit related  issues pertaining to the sector. Based 
on the recommendations of the Committee, detailed g uidelines have been issued to the 
Scheduled Commercial Banks by RBI vide their circul ar dated May 9, 2013 according to 
which banks need to: 
6. 5.12.5 Under the Growth Centre Scheme implemented by DIPP,  release of funds 
amounting to Rs.5.75 crore for 1 functional centre is pending. Since the 
scheme has been discontinued from 1.4.2009, the M/o  MSME may honour 
these commitments by providing funds from the MSE-CDP.  
(Observation of Steering Group: To be dropped in vi ew of findings of 
evaluation study) 
7. 5.12.3 With regard to 410 sick units, which became sick due to disturbed conditions 
in J&K, financing pattern of restructuring/rehabili tation packages may 
include 70% as loan component from banks, 20% would  be interest free 
margin money from Government and balance 10% would be promoter’s own 
contribution. A Rs.100 crore fund may be set up for  this purpose from Plan 
resources of DIPP.  Funds may be provided to Jammu & Kashmir 
Development Finance Corporation (JKDFC) for channel izing to banks 
concerned. 
(Observation of Steering Group: Recommendation to b e subsumed under the 
overall scheme for rehabilitation of sick unit. In this regard, the Ministry 
have taken up this issue with RBI) 
8. 5.12.6 Regarding revival of JKSFC, State Government should  come out with 
definite plan to be examined by DFS.  
(Observation of Steering Group: Delinked from Task Force and to be taken 
up separately by PMO with DFS and State Government.  DFS to submit 
detailed note to PMO) 

  
 
-7- 
• put in place a system-driven comprehensive performa nce management 
information system (MIS) at every supervisory level  (branch, region, zone, head 
office) which should be critically evaluated on a regular basis; 
• put in place a system of e-tracking of MSE loan app lications and monitor the loan 
application disposal process in banks, giving branc h-wise, region-wise, zone-wise 
and State-wise positions.  
• monitor timely rehabilitation of sick MSE units. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
In previous years, except for 2012-13 only when Non -Planned Revenue 
expenditures increased from BE to RE stage and the Actual expenditure exceeded even 
the revised estimates, in other categories of alloc ations like Planned Revenue and Capital 
and Non-Planned Capital have been always been reduc ed in revised estimated and yet 
remained under-utilized.  
(Para No. 22) 
Action Taken  
 
 Under Non-Plan head, expenditure exceeded due to re vision of Dearness 
allowances, payment of medical claims, payment agai nst retirement benefits to such 
employees who opted voluntary retirement, Payment of Death gratuity etc. 
Under Plan head, the reason for less expenditure is  that most of schemes are 
demand driven. Non-receipt of Utilization certifica tes is also another reason for not 
releasing further grants.    
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
  
 Ministry seeks enhanced allocation an un-realisable  estimates.  The Ministry 
must seek allocation on the basis of actual achievement of previous years.  
Recommendation/Observation  
The Committee wonders why a critical programme like  National Manufacturing 
Competitiveness Programme (NMCP) has not been given separate allocation and instead   
 

  
-8- 
 
six of its components have been clubbed under Quality of Technology Support Institution 
& Programme.  
(Para No. 43) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 Separate allocations are made for each component o f NMCP. Most of the 
component of NMCP are focused on enhancing technolo gy upgradation through various 
means. Accordingly, NMCP schemes are clubbed under the head Quality of Technology 
Support Institution and Programme. The remaining co mponent pertains to Marketing. 
Accordingly, these components are clubbed under the head of MDA Programme. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee seek clarification on the high intere st rate and bank guarantee 
sought by NSIC, which make cumulative interest rate unaffordable. 
(Para No. 54) 
Action Taken 
 
 
 NSIC acts as a facilitator for MSMEs and caters to  their diverse requirements 
through its various activities. The major thrust of  its activities is for providing marketing 
support to the MSMEs by way of raw material assistances. The raw material assistance is  
a major area of NSIC's operation wherein major raw material required by such enterprises 
are being provided at the most competitive prices a nd also on time. NSIC enters into 
arrangement with bulk producers directly thereby re moving the layer of middle men like 
distributor and thus supply raw material at the com petitive price to MSMEs. NSIC 
facilitates MSMEs with the availability of raw mate rial on credit and for period of their 
requirements. In order to provide short term credit  support to MSMEs, the Corporation 
has been meeting its funding requirements by raisin g funds through borrowing from 
banks and financial institutions at commercial rate . The fund raised through borrowings 
is utilized to provide raw materials to MSMEs at th e competitive rates, which presently 
varies from 11.95% p.a. to 12.95% p.a. (simple rate of interest) depending upon the rating 
of the units. This is quite reasonable/ competitive  in the prevailing economic scenario. 
The material on credit is provided against the Bank Guarantee. This model has also been 

  
-9- 
 
 accepted by the MSMEs as evident from the growth o f the business under the said 
scheme. Total credit support to MSMEs under such ar rangement has been increased from 
Rs.656 crore in 2008-09 to Rs. 3864 crore (pre-audited) in the year 2012-13. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee notes that while Notes on Demands for  Grants show Rs 107.56 
crores as Planned allocation for Khadi Grant, the Ministry puts figure as Rs. 168.90 crore.  
The Committee asks the Ministry to explain the diff erence in figures regarding Planned 
allocations.  
(Para No. 81) 
Action Taken 
 
In the Notes on Demand for Grants for 2013-14, Rs. 107.56 crore has been shown 
as planned allocation for Non-NER and Rs. 11.34 cro re for NER totaling Rs. 118.90 
crore under Khadi Grant Head.  As such, there is no  difference in figures regarding 
planned allocation. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee fails to understand such uneven trend  in spending on S&T  
Projects.  It cautions against year-end rush in sanctioning the expenditure.  
(Para No. 84) 
Action Taken  
 Since the implementing agency was already having s ufficient balance available 
with it under the scheme, the Ministry did not agre e to the proposal of KVIC for release 
of funds under S& T.  As and when the utilization of unspent balance of the previous year 
by KVIC subsequently improved, the Ministry conside red the demand accordingly. 
Keeping in mind not to park the funds, the Ministry  released the funds at the appropriate 
time.  
Recommendation/Observation  
 
 

  
-10- 
 
 The Committee expresses its disappointment over rep eated under-utilization of 
funds meant for critical S&T project.   The Committ ee apprehends year-end expenditure.  
The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry  must make Planned Expenditures 
more discreetly. 
(Para No. 91) 
Action Taken 
 
 Funds amounting to Rs. 0.23 crore & Rs. 0.59 crore  were released for S&T 
projects against R.E. of Rs. 1.25 crore each under S&T (Khadi) & S&T (V.I.) 
respectively. As a matter of fact, the expenditure on the process of proposals under S&T 
were met out of unspent balance of previous year wh ich resulted in underutilization. 
However the Ministry has emphasized to KVIC to make  expenditure in a planned 
manner, uniformly distributed through the year.  
Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee expresses reservation over the practice of retaining meager 'Token 
allocations' for successive years for planned schem es, without approval of Planning 
Commission. Such practice obviously violates the ve ry concept of Parliamentary 
approval and oversight of Budget.    
(Para No. 94) 
Action Taken  
 
 As per the approved outlay, token allocations were  made in anticipation of the 
approval of the scheme with reference to Planning C ommission’s guidelines.  This was 
keeping in view that as and when the scheme is appr oved, a full allocation of funds 
would be made in the RE stage of the relevant Schem e.  Independent evaluation of 
existing Schemes is a necessary pre-condition for t heir continuation/merger into new / 
revamped scheme.  As soon as the evaluation reports  are received from the agencies, due 
process of appraisal and approval will be carried out.  
 
 
 
 

  
 
-11- 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 
 The Committee express reservation that such token a llocations are being 
retained  year on year without approval of Planning  Commission and, therefore, 
must be discontinued after a year in absence of requisite approval.  
Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee recommends that the views of stakeho lders in Khadi sector 
should be factored while formulating the implementation.  
(Para No. 113) 
Action Taken 
 
In this regard, it is to apprise that since beginni ng of implementation of the 
programme, KVIC  had  organized  National  level, State/Divisional  level  workshops  to  
disseminate awareness about the reform programme am ong stakeholders across the 
country. Apart from that, activity-specific worksho ps for setting up of Marketing 
Organization (MO) under PPP (Joint Venture) mode as  also, offering CSPs to existing 
Khadi institutions/federations under PPP mode and c onsultations with stakeholders for 
introduction of Khadi Mark were duly conducted. The  recommendations of the 
Committee will continue to be followed as and when required in future.  
To drive reform in the traditional sector like khad i, a number of challenges and 
contentious issues had to be resolved in several ro unds of consultation with KVIC, ADB, 
DEA and other major stakeholders such as khadi inst itutions in the country through 
extensive dialogues, and apprehensions were allayed .  A number of critical issues have 
now been sorted out and it is expected that the imp lementation will speed up during 
current year.  
Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee insists that the core objective of th e scheme is to provide 
opportunities to self employed entrepreneurs and to  generate job opportunities.  The 
success of the scheme shall always be judged in terms of these parameters and not in   

  
-12- 
terms of utilization of Margin Money only.  The Com mittee expresses its anguish over 
under achievement. 
(Para No. 120) 
Action Taken  
 It may be noted that during 2012-13, provisional fi gures indicate that a total of 
57,078 projects have actually been assisted under P MEGP against a target of 53,826 
projects as targeted in the outcome budget, creatin g employment  opportunities for an 
estimated 4.28 lakh persons and utilizing margin mo ney subsidy to the tune of 
Rs.1080.26 crore.  Thus, the compiled figures indic ate that the target has been achieved 
in so far as the number of projects is concerned.  
Recommendation/Observation  
 
 However, the Committee also came across the instan ces like Tamil Nadu were no 
fresh applications were being entertained for last few year for the need of adequate funds. 
The Committee takes strong view over such instances  which will defeat the very 
objective of the Scheme and bring it down in the esteem of people.  Instead of turning the 
applicant away, implementing agencies including Ban ks should proactively reach out to 
them. 
(Para No. 123) 
Action Taken  
 No ban on entertaining fresh applications under PM EGP was imposed by the 
Ministry.  However, commitment in excess to the ava ilable budgetary resources is not a 
desirable situation, and might put the beneficiarie s in unnecessary hardship/uncertainty.  
Hence KVIC was asked to ensure proper financial dis cipline keeping in view the budget 
aspect.  Even then, during 2012-13, Tamil Nadu was given Margin Money subsidy of Rs. 
60.84 crore against the original allocation of Rs. 35.84 crore to meet pending Margin 
Money claims arising out of its excess commitment u nder the Scheme after re-
distributing the amounts available against slow-performing states. 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee finds that these proposal regarding f inancing the expansion of 
existing PMEGP Units and synergizing PMEGP with schemes of Rural Development in   
 

  
-13- 
 
the naxal effected areas, should be acceptable to t he Ministry, provided that 
implementation should be efficient and target-oriented.  
(Para No. 128) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
 This aspect would be duly considered while process ing for continuation of the 
scheme to the XII Five Year Plan, along with recomm endations / observations of the 
report of independent evaluation. 
Recommendation/Observation
 
 
 The Committee wonders reduction in Non-Planned allo cation considering that 
committed expenditures including salary and other s tatutory dues of employees are met 
out of this allocation. In view of increase in the Non-Planned allocations over RE 2012-
13 pertaining to other agencies under the Ministry,  reduction in respect of Coir Board is 
noticeable. The Ministry may clarify if these obligatory expenditures are being duly met. 
(Para No. 132) 
Action Taken  
 
 Non-Plan budgetary allocation of the Coir Board fo r the year 2012-13 (BE) was 
Rs. 15.96 crore. This allocation was reduced to Rs.  11.58 crore in RE 2012-13. However, 
by that time the actual expenditure of Rs. 11.87 cr ore was already incurred, which 
exceeded the RE 2012-13 allocation for Non-Plan fund. 
 The matter was, therefore, taken up with CCA to in crease the Non-Plan allocation 
in the RE 2012-13 at least upto BE 2012-13 level. B udget & Accounts Section, vide their 
O.M. No. G-20011/09/2012-B&A dated 15.2.2013 revise d the Non-Plan allocation of 
Coir Board under RE 2012-13 to Rs. 14.97 crore. The reafter, two bills amounting to Rs. 
3.10 crore were sent to PAO for release of funds du ring March, 2013 with the 
concurrence of IF wing. The PAO cleared one bill am ounting to Rs. 1.96 crore and 
returned the other bill of Rs. 1.14 crore with the remarks that sanctioned amount exceed 
the ceiling of 15% of RE allocation applicable during March, 2013.  

  
-14-  
 On the advice of CCA, the matter was taken up with  Ministry of Finance to relax 
the 15% ceiling as the sanctioned amount was to be incurred for payment of pension and 
other terminal benefits of the employees of the Coi r Board. Ministry of Finance, vide 
their I.D. No. 14(7)BPD/2012 dated 22.3.2013 conveyed the approval of Secretary (Fin)  
and Secretary (Exp) for waiver of 15% ceiling in re spect of the proposed releases of Rs. 
1.14 crore. 
 Thus ultimately, whole of the RE allocation of Rs.  14.97 crore under the Non-
Plan fund was released to the Coir Board during 2012-13. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee notes that the target for 2012-13 wa s 900 units, however till 
31.12.2012, only 63 units (7% of the target) could be assisted.  Almost 10 fold increase in 
last quarter without spending any money under the scheme.  However, the Secretary, Coir 
Board in his presentation before the Committee stat ed that the target of 900 was 
surpassed and 934 units were established.  The Comm ittee seeks explanation on such 
difference in figures.  
(Para No. 135) 
Action Taken  
 
 The scheme of Rejuvenation, Modernization and Tech nology Upgradation of Coir 
Industry was approved by the Ministry during March, 2008 and release of funds made for 
implementation of the scheme. As per the operationa l guidelines of the scheme the 
beneficiaries have to purchase machinery from the e mpanelled machinery manufacturers 
under REMOT scheme. The first Evaluation and Steeri ng Committee meeting, held on 
19.5.2008 under the Chairmanship of Chairman Coir B oard, had decided to purchase coir 
machinery under REMOT scheme from the coir machiner y manufacturers already 
registered with Coir Board as separate empanelment of machinery manufacturer for 
supply of machinery  under REMOT scheme would be ti me consuming and it may be 
delay the implementation of REMOT scheme. The decis ion of the 1 
st  Evaluation and 
Steering Committee was communicated to the Ministry  and also placed before the High 
Level Apex Committee for consideration and approval . But the 4 th  High Level Apex 
Committee meeting held on 20.10.2011 while considering the amendments to the scheme 
operational guidelines directed that Coir Board should follow the extent provision of the   

  
-15- 
operational guidelines in letter and spirit. Hence,  the Board could not release any fund to 
the banks from November, 2011 onwards. Accordingly Coir Board had initiated action  
 for empanelment of machinery manufacturers by invi ting bids through paper 
notification. Initially the Board could empanel onl y 13 machines out of 73 machines 
specified for the units under the scheme. The 9 th  Evaluation and Steering Committee 
meeting held on 18.4.2012 had decided to continue the empanelment procedure.  
 
 In response to the subsequent paper notification, Board received 30 more bids for 
empanelment of machinery manufacturers under REMOT scheme. The12th Evaluation 
and Steering Committee meeting held on 9.8.2012 dec ided to empanel 39 machinery 
manufacturers for the supply of machineries under R EMOT scheme. The empanelled list 
was forwarded to all banks and filed offices of the  Board. Therefore, the Board could 
restart the implementation of the scheme from October, 2012 only. 
 During the year 2011-12 even though Government had  released an amount of Rs. 
10 crore Board was able to utilize only Rs. 2.04 cr ore for assisting 170 units due to the 
empanelment process. The Ministry permitted Coir Bo ard to carry forward unspent 
balance of Rs. 7.97 crore for utilizing during the year 2012-13. 
 After empanelment process the Banks returned the a pplications to the field 
offices/ beneficiaries for submitting revised quota tion from the empanelled list. 
Thereafter, beneficiaries have submitted quotations  from empanelled list and the Board 
has received loan sanction letters from the banks d uring the last quarter of 2012-13. Thus 
the Board has released an amount of Rs. 7.56 crore to the banks towards subsidy for 
assisting 977 units during the year 2012-13 and oth er miscellaneous expenditure out of 
the unspent balance of the previous year. 
 After the empanelment process was over under REMOT  scheme  all the pending 
cases of sanction of grants could be cleared and hu ndreds of units were assisted during 
the last quarter of the financial year 2012-13. Thi s is the reason for the substantial 
number of increase from 31.12.2012 observed by the Committee.   
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
-16- 
 
 
 
 The Committee appreciates the export performance i n Coir sector particularly 
considering the structural, technological and finan cial limitations. The Committee 
impresses that efforts should be made to realize full potential of this Sector.  
Para No. 142) 
Action Taken  
 During 2012-13, Coir Board organized participation  of 79 manufacturers and 
exporters in 14 international trade fairs including  virgin markets. With the concerted 
efforts of the Ministry of MSME, Coir Board and the  coir fraternity to overcome the 
adversities of global meltdown and Euro zone crisis, it was possible to export 4,29,501  
MT of Coir Products valued at Rs. 1116.03 crore with a growth of 5% in quantity and 6% 
in value.  
 
 During 2012-13, the Ministry of MSME and Coir Boar d proposes to organize 
participation of Indian coir sector in 22 internati onal fairs including 8 in virgin markets 
besides sponsoring delegations. the Ministry of MSM E and Coir Board also proposes to 
vigorously implement the publicity programme and th e scheme for providing External 
Market Development Assistance to exporters and entr epreneurs for undertaking market 
promotion activities.    
 Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee reiterates the pivotal role MSME Sec tor will play to bring about 
inclusive and equitable development, and in giving opportunity to self employed 
entrepreneurs to express their skills and innovatio n. In the spectre of overall economic 
slow down, only MSME could be a redeeming factor. W ith little support, it shows 
resilience to withstand the recession. This sector provides the foundation on which new 
corporate sector will be built. There are innumerab le inspiring success stories, where 
small entrepreneurs have achieved exemplary and ins piring success with their sheer 
resilience and acumen. As the spectre of jobless growth and informalisation of job market 
continues, the Government has recognized the vitali ty of this sector. Several Committees 
and instruments have been set up to suggest ways to  support this Sector. Government has 
increasingly been proving budgetary support to sche mes. The Committee has always 
supported the demand of the Ministry for higher funds. However, the constraints not only   

  
-17- 
 
about money, it is more about management, monitorin g and delivery of the schemes. It is 
issue of implementation and financial discipline, which rests squarely on the Ministry and 
implementing agencies. The structure of schemes is complex and involves multiple 
funding agencies who more often lack coordination. Scarce funds remain unutilized for 
most part of the year, there is year-end rush to spend. Balance unspent money is carried  
forward to subsequent year. Whether there is a appr oval of Ministry of Finance, to roll 
over the unspent balance of a continuing scheme to next year. Money is deposited in joint 
Bank accounts and remains un-used. Yet the Budget e stimates for next year are retained 
at same level. Umbrella allocations are made in Bud get, under which independent 
schemes are allocated independent meager funds, but  same is not reflected in the Budget 
document. These funds remain unutilized supposedly for lack of demand as indicated in 
Outcome Budgets. Yet the allocation is retained at same level. As the Ministry seeks 
more funds for the MSME sector, the Committee is ci rcumspect about the argument of 
lack of demand. There is a prevalent practice of se eking allocations for successive years, 
for Schemes like Special Scheme on PM’s Task Force,  Virtual SME University etc. 
which does not have the approval of Planning Commis sion or other competent authority. 
Also, there are recurrent discrepancies in figures provided by the Ministry vis-à-vis the 
Budget figures.       
(Para No.177) 
Action Taken 
 
 
 A lump sum outlay is approved and conveyed by Plan ning Commission to the 
Ministry. Ministry is implementing various schemes/  programmes. This lump sum outlay 
is distributed among various schemes/ programme by the Ministry taking into 
consideration of performance of last year, projected demands and targets.  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 

  
 
-18- 
 
CHAPTER-III  
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which th e Committee has either not 
accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its replies  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee notes with reservation that despite i ts critical observation in 235 th  
Report on Demands for Grants for the Ministry for 2 012 -13, regarding non-utilization of 
funds and its recommendation that Ministry must use  the money allocated to it for 
meeting its targets, the situation in 2012-13 remai ned the same. Scarce funds still remain 
un-utilised. The committee has always supported Min istry’s demand for more funds as it 
considered MSME sector critical for the inclusive a nd equitable socio-economic 
development. However, It observes a consistent unde r-utilization funds. The Committee 
reiterates its reservation over possible pattern of inflated demands by the Ministry.  
(Para No. 13)  
Recommendation/Observation  
                                   
 The Committee has reason to be circumspect about t he figures provided by the 
Ministry. There have been year-end rush in spending  the allocation. There is legitimate 
apprehension about the quality of expenditure. Also , in view of excessive achievement 
with lesser actual expenditure, the Committee appre hends if annual targets are kept at 
modest levels vis-a-vis annual budgetary allocations. 
(Para No. 16) 
Action Taken  (Para 13 & 16) 
 
 
For the development of Micro, Small and Medium Ente rprises (MSMEs), 
Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MS MEs) is implementing various 
schemes/ programmes in the area of credit, technolo gy, skill development and marketing. 
To implement  these schemes/ programme an outlay of  Rs. 2835.00 crore was allocated 
by Planning Commission to this Ministry. The reason  for shortfall in expenditure under 
various schemes are given below : 

  
 
-19- 
ARI Sector  
 
The Budget Estimates, funds released and utilized during the year 2012-13 
against major heads in respect of Coir Board are indicated below:- 
(Rs. in lakh) 
Head Budget 
Estimates 
Revised 
Estimates 
Opening 
Balance 
as on 
1.4.2012 
Funds 
released 
during 
2012-13 
Total 
funds 
availed 
(2012-
13) 
Funds 
utilized 
during 
(2012-
13) 
Balance 
availed 
as on 
31.3.2013 
Plan 
S&T 
700.00 
 700.00  46.94  231.13  278.07  277.97  0.10  
Plan 
General 
4500.00 
 2350.00  161.03  1776.13  1937.16  1848.95  88.21  
Plan 
REMOT 
1600.00 
 500.00  797.34  0.00  797.34  756.30  41.04  
SFURTI 4.00  1.00  31.90  0.00  31.90  0.00  31.90  
Total 6804.00  3551.00  1037.21  2007.26  3044.47  2883.22  161.25  
 
SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY 
 Under the scheme, only an amount of Rs. 231.13 lakh  was released by the 
Ministry against BE of Rs. 700.00 lakh.  Out of whi ch an amount of Rs. 141.67 was 
released during the month of July towards 1 
st  quarter.  No funds were released during the 
2nd  & 3 rd  quarters against this head in spite of Board’s req uest.  The restrictions imposed 
on the fund releases during March, 2013 have also c ontributed to the under utilization.  
An amount of Rs. 50 lakh towards NE and Rs. 39.47 lakh for Non-NE only was released  
during March 2013.  The utilization during 2012-13 could not reach the expected level 
due to these reasons.  An amount of Rs. 277.97 lakh s has been spent upto 31 st  March, 
2013 including North East Region. 
 
GENERAL  
 
 Under the Plan  - General, budgetary outlay totalin g to Rs. 4500 lakhs was 
earmarked for the year 2012-13.  The balance of Rs.  161.03 as on 01.04.2012 and the 
amount of Rs. 1776.13 released by the Ministry during the year 2012-13 was available  

  
 
-20- 
 
for utilization.  (Total Rs. 1937.16) out of which,  an amount of Rs. 1848.95 has been 
spent by the Board upto 31 st  March 2013 for the implementation of schemes under  Plan 
General including North East Region.  An amount of Rs. 88.21 lakh out of the amount 
released under NE allocation could not be spent due  to slow pace of expenditure in NE 
Region.  Out of the total budgetary outlay under Pl an General there were specific ear 
markings against SC/ST, TSP components totaling to Rs. 9.10 crore and Rs. 4.80 crore at 
the BE and RE stages respectively. Almost all,  the  schemes coming under this scheme 
like Domestic Market Promotion, Export Market Promo tion, Development of Production 
Infrastructure  etc. are generic nature where SC/ST  , TSP categorization is very difficult.  
The only plan scheme against which utilization unde r SC/ST can possible is the Skill 
Development and Quality Improvement.  The Board cou ld utilize an amount of Rs. 0.53 
crores under this head during 2012-13 for SC/ST cat egory.  An amount of Rs. 427 crores 
against RE could not be utilized during 2012-13 due  to the above reasons. It would be 
appropriate if the Ministry reduces the SC/ST compo nents in Coir Board’s Budget taking 
into account the generic nature of activities of th e Board like MDA, participation in 
Exhibitions, Publicity, Trade Information Service e tc. and limited possibilities for 
expenditure under SC/ST. 
 Another reason for the under utilization of funds under Plan General is that MDA 
to the State Governments are able to be released on ly during the last quarter of the 
financial year.  This is due to the fact that the s ubmission of claims by the State 
Governments are possible only during the final quar ter, possibly due to the delay in 
collection and compilation of claims from the benef iciary organizations.  Even though 
demand for release of funds to the tune of Rs. 6.39  crore was placed with the Ministry, 
the actual released were curtailed to Rs. 0.89 cror e on account of restriction of releases 
during the last quarter March, 2013. 
REMOT  
 As per the operational guidelines of the scheme the  beneficiaries have to purchase 
machinery from the machinery manufacturers empanell ed under REMOT Scheme.  The 
First Evaluation and Steering Committee meeting hel d on 19-05-2008 under the 
Chairmanship of Chairman Coir Board had decided to purchase coir machinery under  
 

  
 
-21- 
 
REMOT Scheme from the coir machinery manufacturers already registered with Coir 
Board as separate empanelment of machinery manufact urers for supply of machinery 
under REMOT Scheme would be time consuming and it m ay  delay the implementation 
of REMOT Scheme.  The decision of the 1 st  Evaluation and Steering Committee was 
communicated to the Ministry and also placed before  the High Level Apex Committee 
for consideration and approval.  But the 4 th  High Level Apex Committee meeting held on 
20.10.2011 while considering the amendments to the scheme operational guidelines 
directed that Coir Board should follow the extant p rovision of the operational guidelines 
in letter and spirit.  Hence, the Board could not r elease any fund to the banks from 
November, 2011 onwards.  Accordingly, Coir Board ha d initiated action for 
empanelment of machinery manufacturers by inviting bids through paper notification.  
Initially the Board could empanel the manufacturer of only 13 machines out of 73 
machines specified for the units under the scheme.  The 9 th  Evaluation and Steering 
Committee meeting held on 18.4.2012 had decided to continue the empanelment 
procedure. 
 In response to the subsequent paper notification, the Board received 30 more bids 
for empanelment of machinery manufacturers under RE MOT Scheme.  The 12 
th  
Evaluation and Steering Committee meeting held on 0 9.08.2012 decided to empanel 39 
machinery manufacturers for the supply of machineri es under REMOT Scheme.  The 
empanelled list was forwarded to all banks and fields offices of the Board.  Therefore, the 
Board Could restart the implementation of the scheme from October, 2012 only. 
 During the year 2011-12 even though Government had  released  an amount of Rs. 
10 crores Board was able to utilize only Rs. 2.04 c rores for assisting 170 units due to the 
non completion of empanelment process.  The Ministr y permitted Coir Board to carry 
forward unspent balance of Rs. 7.97 crore for utilizing during the year 2012-13. 
 After empanelment process the Banks have returned the applications to the field 
offices/beneficiaries for submitting revised quotat ion from the empanelled list of 
machinery manufacturers.  Thereafter, beneficiaries  have submitted quotations from 
empanelled list and the Board has received loan sanction letters from the banks during the 
last quarter of 2012-13.  Thus the Board has releas ed an amount of Rs. 7.56 crores to the 
banks towards subsidy for assisting 977 units during the year 2012-13 and other  

  
 
-22- 
 
miscellaneous expenditure.  The Board could not see k release of funds out of the 
budgetary outlay for 2012-13 due to the unspent bal ance carried forward from 2011-12.  
The under utilization allocation was therefore due to the time taken for empanelment of 
machinery manufacturers so as to ensure conformity with the operational guidelines for 
the REMOT scheme. 
 While on this it is worthwhile to point out that a  higher plan outlay (BE) of Rs. 
68.00 crore was fixed for 2012-13 against BE of Rs. 53.00 crore for 2011-12.  The higher 
outlay was fixed side by side with the enhancement of Five Year Plan allocations to Coir 
Board and the up scaling quantum of assistance envisaged in the 12 
th  Plan period.    
 
SME Sector  
Performance and Credit Rating Scheme and Marketing Assistance Scheme are 
demand driven scheme and these schemes are being im plemented through NSIC. An 
allocation of Rs. 83.00 crore was made in RE 2012-1 3 under these two schemes against 
which an amount of Rs. 66.55 crore was released dur ing the year. Funds were under 
utilization under these schemes in 2012-13 as unspe nt balance of previous year 
amounting to Rs. 27.41 crore under Performance and Credit Rating Scheme was available 
with NSIC. Under utilization of fund was also due t o delay in receipt of complete 
proposals under Marketing Assistance Scheme from im plementing agency and came 
under the purview of expenditure ceiling of 33% in the last quarter of the year. Further, 
funds allocated for SCSP and TSP were also utilizat ion as the response of targeted 
beneficiaries is less and therefore, sufficient  pr oposals for release of funds under these 
sub-heads was not received from under International Cooperation Scheme, was largely on  
account of non-receipt of sufficient number of elig ible proposals and also many 
application for claims could not be processed due t o non-receipt of the requisite 
documents from the applicant organizations. 
Under "Assistance to Training Institutions" Scheme a provision of Rs. 71 crore 
(Rs. 64 crore for training assistance and Rs. 7 cro re for capital assistance) was made. The 
entire provision of Rs. 7 crore under capital head remained unutilized due to non-receipt 
of firmed up proposals from State Govts./UTs. Furth er a sum of Rs. 5.77 crore could not 
be utilized because of expenditure ceiling of 33% in the last quarter of the financial year.  

  
 
-23- 
 
Under the Scheme "Surveys, Studies and Policies Res earch" there was lesser demand for 
conduct of surveys and studies, few studies were dr opped as similar studies were 
conducted by other agencies and proposed GST legislation, hence less expenditure.  
The schemes namely  Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS) and MS E-
Cluster Development Programme are demand driven and under these savings were due to 
receipt of less numbers of proposals. Under the MSE  CDP Scheme the projects are 
implemented by State Governments/ Implementing Agen cies (proposed by State 
Government) / SPVs. There is low pace of expenditur e because State Govts SPVs have 
not completed the requirements for setting up of CFCs and ID Projects.  
There are savings under the sub-schemes of Provisio ns of workshop/training, 
MDP/EDP/Skill Development programmes, TREAD & MSME- DIs  because fewer 
numbers of eligible proposals were received 
The saving was mainly under the Sub-scheme MDA-Sche me and Vander 
Development Programme because  fewer  number of eligible proposals were received and 
for SVDP saving was due to efficient utilization of fund respectively .  
Saving was due to non conducting of sample survey u nder ‘Quniquennial Census 
Scheme’ due to man power constraint and non receipt  of utilization certificates from 
State Governments. Also saving was mainly under the  Sub-Scheme National Award, 
DC(MSME) Library, Publicity & Exhibition and MSME-TC/TS. 
 
Remedial action taken to avoid the saving in future 
CLCSS, awareness programmes will be conducted besid es giving  mass publicity 
of the scheme through media. 
The monitoring of the expenditure for the schemes i s being undertaken regularly 
at various levels. Efforts would be made to motivat e larger number of youth / enterprises 
from the entire country to avail the benefits of the programme.  
The progress of the scheme was reviewed in meeting of steering committee of 
MSE-CDP under the chairmanship of Secretary (MSME).  3 meetings of the Steering 
committee have been held during 2011-12 and the pro gress of the scheme reviewed. 
Software has been developed for online application under MSE-CDP and implemented 
w.e.f. 1.4.2012, to ensure speedy implementation and transparency of the scheme.  

  
 
-24- 
 
Awareness is being created by organizing meeting / programmes so that SPV/ State Govt. 
is able to fulfill the requirements at the earliest . In principle approvals, which are valid 
for 6 months only, are being issued so that proposa ls are readied for final approval and 
speedy implementation.  
The monitoring of the expenditure for the schemes i s being undertaken regularly 
at various levels. Efforts would be made to motivat e larger number of youth / enterprises 
from the entire country to avail the benefits of the programme. 
 Due care is being taken in this regard by requesti ng all the State Governments 
under ‘Collection of Statistics Scheme ‘to furnish the Utilization Certificate (UC) in the 
prescribed format within stipulated time period and  the monitoring of the expenditure for 
the Schemes is being undertaken regularly at variou s levels.  Efforts would be made to 
motivate large number of youth/enterprises  from th e entire country to avail the benefits 
of the programmes.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee finds reply unacceptable.  The alloca tions are made with 
reference to estimated annual target but if year-on -year target are being under-
achieved advanced due to supposed lack of demand th an allocation too ought to be 
reduced.  How can unspent money not revert to Gover nment and used subsequent 
year? Remedial measures to avoid savings in future are generic and efficacy needs 
to be monitored. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee observes discrepancy in figures provi ded by the Ministry and 
those given in the Expenditure Budget (Vol II, Note s on Demands for Grants, 2013-14). 
The Ministry may elaborate.  
(Para No. 31) 
 
 
 

  
-25- 
Action Taken  
The report mentions that the allocation in Budget ( BE) 2011-12 was Rs. 19.70 
crore which was actually for Credit Support Program me (CSP) comprising two schemes 
namely Credit Guarantee Scheme (CGS) and Augmentation of Portfolio Risk Fund (PRF) 
under Micro Finance Programme as also TREAD. This, however, does not include 
allocation of Rs. 4 crore for North-Eastern Region (NER) under the scheme. The 
allocation of Rs. 1.00 crore under Credit Guarantee  Scheme in BE 2011-12 reported by 
the Ministry is for Credit Guarantee Scheme alone. 
In BE 2012-13, total allocation for CSP was Rs. 36 crore (comprising Rs. 29 crore 
for NER and Rs. 7.00 crore for other than NER), out  of which Rs. 35 crore were 
earmarked for CGS. 
In BE 2013-14, total allocation for CSP is Rs. 75 c rore (Rs.46.50 crore for NER 
and 28.50 crore for other than NER), out of which R s. 74.99 crore is for CGS and Rs. 
0.01 crore is for PRF.  
 In view of the above, there seems to be no discrep ancies in the figures reported by 
the Ministry.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee feels that allocation meant for NE u nder every Scheme 
should be clearly and separately mentioned and the Ministry’s note should refer to 
figures mentioned in Expenditure Budget.  Further, there is no mention of 
performance of such credit support programme in NER  in Ministry’s Annual 
Report. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee observes that achievement of targets is disproportionately high as 
compared to actual expenditure. 
(Para No. 47) 
Action Taken  
 Most of the components of NMCP were launched late during the 11 th  Five Year 
Plan. Although various ground work has been initiat ed and physical achievements were 
made, however financial expenditure is disproportio nately lower due to non release of 
funds for want of administrative clearance like; IF W concurrence, vetting by Deptt. of 
Legal Affairs etc. 

  
-26- 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 Ministry’s reply does not explain how annual target s could be over-achieved 
with a fraction of expenditure.  Yet, allocation ha s been retained this year at the 
same level.  The reply is not convincing.  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee finds such explanation inadequate. Th e explanation fails to 
elaborate as to how allocation meant for NSIC, coul d be earmarked for NE region. The 
Committee infusing equity into seek further elaboration in this regard.  
(Para No. 52) 
Action Taken  
 
 The Prime Minister's Task Force on MSMEs, in its r eport of January, 2010 
recommended that " The National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) sh ould be 
strengthened and made the apex organization for coo rdination of marketing support 
programme for MSMEs. For this purpose, the Governme nt may provide an equity 
support of Rs. 300 crore to NSIC ."  
 Accordingly, the proposal of Ministry of MEME was approved by CCEA for 
Equity Infusion of Rs. 300 crore in NSIC. As per th e approval of CCEA, the amount 
towards Equity Infusion in NSIC to be released in t hree tranches i.e. Rs. 155 crore in 
2011-12, Rs. 75 crore in 2012-13 and Rs. 70 crore i n 2013-14. Accordingly, the 
budgetary provision towards Equity Infusion during the year 2012-13 was made of Rs. 75 
crore, out of which Rs. 43.17 crore was earmarked f or NER to assist of its activities is 
for providing various schemes of the Corporation. T he major thrust of its activities is for 
providing marketing support to the MSMEs. Amongst t hese, raw material assistance is a 
major areas of NSIC's operation wherein the MSMEs a re assured of timely availability of 
raw materials as per the requirements at a competit ive price. NSIC facilitates MSMEs 
with the availability of raw material on credit and for period of their requirements. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
-27- 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 The Ministry has only repeated its reply in ATN as well.  No explanation has 
been given regarding the difference in figures.  No explanation has either been given 
as to how the figure of Rs. 43.17 crores for NER wa s obtained.  Moreover, out of 
allocation to NSIC  for equity infusion of Rs. 75 c rores, how can equity allocation be 
earmark to NER.  The Committee also observes that while marketing is a prominent 
part of NSICs mandate, not enough marketing emphasi s is being laid beyond 
exhibitions.   
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 The Committee notes that the annual target is like ly to be surpassed even with a 
lower allocation at RE stage . The Committee also notes the practice of using un-untilised 
funds of previous years. This practice violates the  sanctity of annual budget. The 
Committee wonders if this practice has been approved by the Ministry of Finance. 
(Para No. 61) 
Action Taken  
 In the month of September, 2012, an amount of Rs. 42.58 crore was released to 
NSIC to meet the expenditure under Performance & Cr edit Rating Scheme. Apart from 
this, an amount of Rs. 27.42 crore, which was remained unspent as on 31.3.2012, has also 
been utilized for the rating of MSEs during the current financial year. 
 In the year 2011-12, various rating agencies had r equested to increase the per unit 
subsidy amount, keeping in view the change in WPI ( wholesale price index) since the 
inception of the scheme in the year 2005. According ly, the budgetary provision in BE 
2012-13 was made envisaging the increase in the amo unt of per unit subsidy towards 
rating fee. As the proposal is still under consider ation, the fee/ per unit subsidy structure 
has not been enhanced so far.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 The Committee had sought to know whether the pract ice of using un-utilized 
money in subsequent year had the approval of Minist ry of Finance.  In absence of 
reply, the Committee presumes that such practice is  not as per the rules.  Similarly, 
while budget provisions took into account the possi ble rise in subsidy, the actual  
approval has not been obtained.  Yet year–on-year a llocations have been enhanced. 
This is an unacceptable situation. 

  
-28- 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
 
 The Committee expresses its concern over under-util isation of funds and 
corresponding under achievement of annual targets. As per the outcome Budget 2013-14, 
upto 31.12.12, the achievement under Mini Tool Room  and MSE Cluster Development 
programme (MSE-CDP) against annual targets, were dismal. If Ministry has sought  
 
higher annual allocation, it is also responsible to meeting the target. The Committee is not 
inclined to accept Ministry‘s contention that targets not achieved for the want of adequate 
proposals under the schemes. 
(Para No. 65) 
Action Taken  
 
 MSE-CDP is demand driven scheme. By introduction o f the transparent 
mechanism of web based on-line applications system w.e.f. 01.04.2012, open to public 
domain and with the clearance of around 320 proposa ls in last 4 Steering Committee 
Meetings (wherein final approval of 76 Diagnostic Study, 52 SI, 19 CFCs, 18 ID centres, 
with the total project cost Rs. 330.28 crores and G oI grant of Rs. 222.82 crore)  there has 
been an increasing and huge demand for MSE-CDP inte rvention from all corners of the 
country. 
 As on date, total 108 Diagnostic Study, 91 SI, 43 CFC, 41 ID projects are in 
progress with the total project cost of Rs. 604.59 crore, GoI grant of Rs. 404.01 crore. So 
far GoI release is only Rs. 82.67 crore and therefo re, GoI liability of Rs. 321.43 crore. 
The projects are critically monitored and release o f atleast Rs.80.00 crore out of GoI 
commitment of Rs. 321.43 crore is expected in this financial year  (2013 - 14). Last  year, 
 2012-13, the BE was Rs. 32.00 crore of which Rs. 1 8.51 crore given towards SCSP, TSP 
and RE was Rs.49.26 crore where Rs. 34.46 crore was  given towards SCSP and TSP. 
Expenditure of Rs. 23.43 crore out of which Rs. 20. 52 crores was released in grant for 
creation of capital assets (Gen) which is 175% of a llotted fund in RE. SCSP/TSP fund 
could not be utilized due to non-availability of such clusters, taken up of so far. 
 
 

  
-29- 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 
 The reply does not address Committee’s concern abo ut under-utilization of 
allocated funds for MSE-CDP and Mini Tool Rooms.  D espite, Ministry’s assertion 
of huge demand, the targets remain under-realised. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
 
 The Committee Expresses reservation over difference  in figures in documents 
presented to Parliament, which needs to be explained.  The Committee also observes  
 
under-utilisation of Funds.  The Committee also obs erves that no expenditure was made 
for half the Financial Year.  The Committee seeks f urther elaboration by the Ministry in 
this regard.  
(Para No. 87) 
Action Taken  
 
 Rs. 74.84 crore was shown in the budget allocation  in the Notes on Demand for 
Grants under VI Grant for 2012-13 and the Outcome B udget (2012-13) and the actual 
utilization was Rs. 44.88 crore only during the year 2012-13.  
Moreover, as has been explained above, during the f irst two quarters the 
programme was carried out from out of unspent balan ce of last year, which subsequently 
adjusted from onward releases. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 The Committee is apprehensive whether practice of utilizing unspent funds 
of previous years, has the approval of Ministry of Finance.  This practice has 
resulted in under-utilization of allocated fund for 2012-13.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee, however, wonders if the annual targ ets are kept at moderate 
levels. 
(Para No. 89) 
 

  
-30- 
Action Taken  
 
  The target in respect of production and sales wer e achieved out of unspent 
balance of the previous year and the funds released  during 2012-13 (upto 31.12.2012).  
The required information for the purpose of the ann ual report was collected by KVIC 
from their field offices.  The actual figures were reported after due compilation.  The 
annual target is fixed after taking in to account v arious factors such as achievement in 
previous years, Action Plan approved in the KVIC’s SFC meeting, year-wise allocation 
in Five year plan etc. However, as the entire alloc ation is eventually utilized, there is no 
under-targeting as far as production and sale are concerned. 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 Hoarding the balanced unspent fund of previous yea rs, indeed undermines 
the financial rules.  Targets should therefore be f ixed according to available funds 
and not solely on the basis of previous year’s achievement.  
 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee notes that annual allocations are be ing made to meet only 
committed obligations, yet there has been gross und er-utilisation in successive years.  
The money is deposited in joint bank accounts of re presentatives of institutions, which is 
carried forward to next years.  The Committee wonders  if the nodal  agencies or Scheme  
Steering Committee can monitor the expenditure from  joint bank accounts.  The Ministry 
should specify If such practices of depositing mone y in joint accounts and carrying the 
unused funds over to subsequent year, have the approval of the Ministry of Finance. 
(Para No. 102) 
Action Taken  
 
 As a matter of fact, the fund at the cluster level  is operated through an escrow 
account.  Purpose is to incur the expenditure as pe r the approved action plan for carrying 
out the specific activities in the programme.  Any fund carried over to the next year, was 
very much within the project period and within the approved budget.  Any unspent 
amount in escrow account is duly taken into conside ration while making subsequent 
release/demand for further funds by Nodal Agencies (NAs). 
 

  
-31- 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The reply does not explain the rational behind the  trend of seeking higher 
allocation in BE despite unspent balance in escrow account.  The allocation in B.E. 
is reduced significantly at RE stage. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee notes that there was no expenditure during half the Financial Year 
and that unspent balance has been carried over this  year.  The Ministry may clarify if it 
adhered to the norms set by the Ministry of Finance in this regard. 
(Para No. 106) 
Action Taken  
 
 Due to sufficient balance available with the implementing agency, the funds could 
not released by the Ministry, to avoid parking of funds.  
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee wonders if the Ministry takes into a ccount the unspent funds 
with implementing agency, before seeking budget all ocation from Government for 
its Schemes.  The Ministry must ensure that impleme nting agency must utilize 
scarce funds efficiently and not hoard the funds. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
 As per the Outcome Budget (2013-14), till 31.12.212 , no money was spent nor 
any achievement reported.  The Committee has observ ed a persistent trend of under 
achievement of targets and under-utilisation of fun ds.  Yet the allocation in BE 2013-14 
has been retained at Rs. 7.42 crores. The Committee  expresses its anguish over general 
prevalence of under-utilization of Planned funds, d espite budgetary support remaining at 
the same level. The Committee expects the Ministry to make proactive intervention to 
reach out to intended beneficiaries.  
(Para No. 109) 
 

  
-32- 
 
Action Taken 
 
During 2012-13, an amount of Rs. 3.52 crore was uti lized out of the available 
fund (including Rs. 2.31 crore released by the Mini stry).  The slow utilization was due to 
other competing schemes of the Ministry, which are more attractive and have less 
stringent conditions. 
Further, in order to streamline the implementation of the scheme, it has been 
decided to merge it into a revamped scheme of SFURT I as per the recommendation of 
Planning Commission’s Working Group.  
  EFC Memo has been circulated among the concerned Ministries in consultation 
with IF Wing for furnishing their views/comments.  EFC is expected to be held shortly. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
   The Committee does not accept with Ministry’s co ntention that the Scheme 
did not pick up due to other competing Schemes of t he Ministry.  It  is  the  
Ministry’s  responsibility  to bring out synergy am ong its Schemes to ensure 
efficient use of scarce resources.  The Committee rejects the trend of proliferation of 
Schemes that split resources, only to be merged aft er a few years of non- 
performance.  The Committee recommends that such ad-hocism must stop.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee expresses its reservation over repeat ed difference in figures 
contained in Budgetary documents that are presented  to Parliament. The Ministry should 
explain the recurrence of this difference in figures.  
(Para No. 116) 
Action Taken  
 
 In  plan budget for 2012-13,  Rs. 1146.10 crore was allocated for Non-NER and 
Rs. 130.18 crore was allocated for NER totaling Rs.  1276.28 crore and the same figure 
was also indicated in the Outcome Budget.  As such,  there is no discrepancy in figures in 
the budget document presented to Parliament. 
 

  
-33- 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee observes that allocation to NER with out showing in Budget 
figures has been the excuse to explain the differen ce in figures.  The Committee 
would like to know about the percentage of allocati on to NER under any Schemes 
and of the same should be clearly  indicated in the Budget Statement.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
   
 The Committee finds the scope and prospects in NE promising. The MSME and 
KVIC could prove to be most important vehicles for inclusive development of this region 
which has immense scope and skill. However, as per the Expenditure Budget (II) of the 
Budget document, the actual expenditure in 2010-11 and 2011-12, has been Nil.  Even 
for year 2013-14 the Planned allocation is shown as  Rs.31.83 crores, instead of Rs. 
297.70 crores as indicated above. The Committee would like clarification on the yet  
another difference in figures between Budget docume nts and those furnished by the 
Ministry.   
(Para No. 151) 
Action Taken  
As per accounting procedure, the actual expenditure  incurred during the year is 
re-appropriated to the functional head from the uti lization in the NE Region.  
Accordingly, the expenditure incurred in NE Region during 2010-11 and 2011-12 has 
been shown ‘NIL’ in the Expenditure Budget (II) of the budget document.  The planned 
allocation of Rs.31.83 crore for the year 2013-14 p ertains to NSIC under the sub 
programme “Investments in Public Sector Enterprises ”.  As such the planned allocation 
of Rs. 297.70 crore earmarked for North Eastern Areas for 2013-14 is correct.  
The details of budget estimate, revised estimate and actual expenditure for the last 
three years and budget estimate for 2012-13 for NER  States under PMEGP are detailed 
below: 
 
 
 

  
-34- 
                    (Rs. in crores)  
Year Budget Estimate Revised Estimate Actual Expend iture 
2009-10 32.64  24.68  36.72  
2010-11 83.60  83.60  83.75  
2011-12 80.00  80.00  126.07  
2012-13 (P) 123.80  123.80  95.85  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 The Ministry must take up the issue with Ministry of Finance to mention the 
allocation for NER upfront in Expenditure Budget in stead of incurring the 
expenditure by re-appropriation at the end of Finan cial Year.  Parliament must 
know before hand the allocation, Ministry proposes to commit for NER.   
 The Ministry may also explain as to how the invest ment in equity of NSIC, 
can be invested in NER.  The Committee would like t o know the process of 
devolving funds to NER, in absence of any clear allocation in the Budget. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
35- 
CHAPTER-IV  
 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which fi nal replies of the Ministry 
have not been received 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The committee recognizes that Section 8 of the MSM E Development Act, 2006 
makes filing of memorandum optional for micro, smal l and those medium enterprises 
engaged in service sector. However, in view of larg e number of un-registered units, who 
are excluded from the benefits given to registered units, the committee recommends that 
registration of MSME units should be encouraged. The Ministry should make registration 
simple and non-intrusive. It should facilitate online registration of unregistered units. The 
Ministry should also take the help of industry asso ciations in this regard. The Committee 
also recommends that in addition to non-tax benefit s as announced in the Budget, tax 
benefits too should be extended to the Units who have graduated from their category. 
(Para No. 8) 
Action Taken  
 As per the instructions/guidelines at S. No. 13 of  Schedule II for Procedure of 
Filing of Entrepreneurs Memorandum and other matter s, incidental thereto, the District 
Industries Centres have to issue the acknowledgemen t for the EM filed by the enterprises 
within five days of the receipt of the form of Memo randum by post or same day, if the 
form of Memorandum is submitted in person as well as online.  
 The issue of online filing of EM has already been taken up with State 
Governments/UT Administration. While some of the St ate Govts. like Tamilnadu, 
Gujarat, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh, Karnataka, Andhra P radesh, Uttrakhand, (EM-I), 
Jharkhand, Kerala and Assam have already implemente d online filing of EM under 
MSMED Act 2006, some State Govts. are in the process of implementing of the same. 
The recommendation for providing tax benefits upon graduation was taken up 
with the Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue and it has been informed that the  
 
 

  
-36- 
 
recommendation is not acceptable as the tax base on  which concessions could be 
provided does not align with the criterion of inves tment that defines MSMEs in the 
MSMED Act, 2006. A case in point is service tax, wh ere tax threshold exemption is 
based on the concept of value of taxable services ( section 67 of The Finance Act, 1994) 
and not linked to investments in equipments as in the case of MSMED Act, 2006.  
 At this stage concessions can further not be provi ded owing to ongoing 
preparations for introduction of Goods and Services Tax (GST). 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 Ministry has not responded on the steps taken to e ncourage un-registered 
units to register.  Ministry may provide the information accordingly. 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee observes a steep increase in settleme nt of claims under CGTMSE 
in alternate quarters since January 2012 and would like to know the reasons for such a 
trend. 
(Para No. 28) 
Action Taken  
As informed by Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micr o and Small Enterprises 
(CGTMSE), there is substantial increase in the lodg ement of applications under Credit 
Guarantee Scheme (CGS) for seeking guarantee cover since FY 2009-10. The guarantee 
approvals have increased from Rs. 6,875 crore in FY  2010 to Rs. 12,589 crore in FY 
2011 to Rs. 13,784 crore in FY 2012 and to Rs. 16,0 62  crore in FY 2013. This 
substantial increase in guarantee approvals since F Y 2010 had consequential impact on 
the claim settlement by CGTMSE. As a sequel, while claims for the  total amount of only 
Rs. 41 crore were settled in the calendar year 2011 , claims for an amount as high as Rs. 
114 crore (almost 3 times) were settled during cale ndar year 2012. The less settlement of 
claims during the quarter April-June 2012 and Octob er-December 2012 was mainly on 
account of temporary closure of number of claims fo r want of additional information 
from Member Lending Institutions (MLIs) to enable C GTMSE to process & approve the 
claims. 

  
-37- 
Further, with the increased number of guarantee app rovals over a period of time, 
the number of claims are likely to further increase  over a period of time. It may be 
mentioned that during FY 2013 (April-March), 11,232  number of claims for Rs. 175 
crore were settled as against 1,894 number of claims for Rs. 68 crore during FY 2012. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Ministry has not provided the reasons for sudd en rise in guarantee 
approvals since 2010-11. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
In view of inflation, the Committee concurred with the view of Ministry to 
enhance the credit ceiling to Rs. 2 crores from existing Rs. 1 crore . 
(Para No. 34) 
Action Taken  
The recommendation was taken up with CGTMSE and the y mentioned  that 
CGTMSE has been presently operating a scheme, on pi lot basis, namely Risk Sharing 
Facility II where credits  in the range of above  R s. 100 Lakh  and  upto Rs. 200 lakh to 
eligible borrowers by designated MLIs are provided guarantee cover under World Bank 
line of credit routed through SIDBI. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 Ministry has not given details of the Risk Sharing  Facility II.  How the funds 
are to be devolved from World Bank to the borrowers through SIDBI. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The committee acknowledges and appreciates the prov ision made in the Budget 
Speech that the refinance capability of the SIDBI h as been enhance form Rs. 5000 crores 
to Rs. 10,000 crores per year.  
(Para No. 37) 
 
 
 

  
-38- 
Action Taken  
SIDBI has informed that budget announcement of enha ncing the current level of 
refinancing capability of SIDBI from the existing Rs. 5000 crore to  Rs. 10,000 crore will 
further augment the credit flow to MSME sector, and  more so, at a time when the 
economy is trying to cope up with the effects of gl obal downturn.  This is expected to 
benefit over 3.5 lakh MSEs. 
The allocation of  Rs.10,000 crore under MSE Refina nce Fund is yet to be made 
by RBI.      
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
  
      
 The Committee expresses reservation over the fact t hat despite budget 
announcement, the RBI has not made allocation under  MSE Refinance Fund.  The 
Ministry must pursue the issue with Ministry of Fin ance and RBI for expeditious 
allocation of fund.  The Committee also expects the  Ministry to explore the 
possibility if SIDBI could provide fund at concessi onal rate to NSIC for its raw 
material procurement Scheme.  
 
Recommendation/Observation                                                                                                                                          
 
The Committee observes gross under utilization in 2 011-12, when more than 
Rs.100 crores remained un-utilised. However, in the  first quarter of FY 2012-13, Rs. 211 
crore were spent, but the expenditure came down dra stically in remaining quarters of FY 
2012-13. The Ministry may information if the un-uti lised money of 2011-12 was used in 
the first quarter of 2012-13. There was under-utili sation even in 2012-13. Yet, the 
allocation has been enhanced.  The Committee seeks an explanation in this regard and 
asks the Ministry to ensure prudence in demand estimates.  
(Para No. 42) 
Action Taken  
 Out of RE of Rs. 344.30 crore for the year 2011-12 , Rs. 241.20 crore were 
allocated under General Sub-head which were fully utilized. Remaining funds were under 
NER, SCSP, and TSP Sub-heads which remained un-util ized due to non-receipt of 
proposal under these categories. However, proposals worth approximately Rs. 200 crores  
 

  
-39- 
were pending under General category apart from abov e proposals of Rs. 241.20 crore, 
which were cleared in first quarter of Financial Ye ar 2012-13 on receipt of funds general 
category (Rs. 288.60 crore). Remaining funds worth of Rs. 76.81 crore under General 
Category were utilized in 2 nd  quarter. Funds worth Rs. 22.70 crore were made ava ilable 
to CLCSS by Re-appropriation from other schemes and  were utilized in the 4th Quarter 
under General category. During financial year 2012- 13 funds woth Rs. 80 crore under 
category NER,SCSP and TSP remained mostly utilized due to non-receipt of proposal  
under these categories. No un-utilized funds of FY 2011-12 were utilized in the 1st 
quarter FY 2012-13.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee notes with reservation that funds me ant for NER remain 
unutilized.  In such cases does the money goes to n on-lapsable fund with DONER.  
The Committee recommends that the statement of DFG should specifically mention 
the allocation for NER made under every Scheme.  Th e Committee should also be 
informed if funds are allocated under each Scheme o r on the basis of aggregate 
allocation.  In any case there is an under-utilization of funds. 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee also notes that one of the major thru st of NSIC is for provide 
marketing support to the MSMEs by way of registrati on of micro and small units under 
Government Stores Purchase Programme. The Committee  however, recommends that an 
effective mechanism should be put in place to monit or the implementation of this 
important policy. 
(Para No. 55) 
Action Taken  
 NSIC operates a Single Point Registration Scheme ( SPRP) under the Government 
of Purchase Programme, wherein the registered micro  & small enterprises get benefits of 
(a) issue of Tenders free of cost, (b) Exemption fr om payment of earnest money deposit, 
(c) Price matching option to the MSEs quoting price  band of L-1 plus 15%. As per the 
Public Procurement Policy, notified vied notificati on S.O.581(E) dated 23.3.2012, every 
Central Ministry/ Department / PSU is required to set an annual goal for procurement  
 

  
-40- 
 
from the MSE sector at the beginning of the year wi th the objective of achieving an 
overall procurement goal of minimum 20% of the annu al purchases of the products or 
services produced of rendered by MSEs from the latt er in a period of three years. A 
review committee set up under the policy monitors its implementation.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 In view of the Committee’s recommendation, Ministr y may inform the 
findings/conclusion of such Review Committee.  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 The Committee also concurs with the suggestion made  by one of the 
representative association to make mandatory for th e MNCs to source a certain 
percentage of procurement of electronic items from the MSMEs. 
(Para 56) 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
  
 The Committee is disappointed to note that the Mini stry has not forwarded 
its Action Taken/Comments on this recommendation.  The Committee, therefore, 
reiterates its earlier findings as stated in the sa id para and expects the Ministry to 
come out with a suitable action taken/reply.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee appreciates the World Bank assistance  to set up 15 tool rooms 
with imported high-tech machines. The Committee als o expects the Ministry to provide 
the terms of this assistance.  Details should be pr ovided regarding the agency that will 
implement this scheme and devolution of funds to the selected tool rooms. 
(Para No. 68) 
 
 
 

  
-41- 
 
Action Taken 
 
 Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Economic Affairs) a re concerned with external 
borrowings.  They have examined the proposal and po sed it to World Bank for 
consideration. The precise terms of World bank loan  will be known after the proposal to 
set up 15 Tool Rooms/ Technology Development Centre s during XII Plan is approved, 
and Government signs an MoU/ Agreement with World Bank. 
 The scheme will be implemented by Ministry of MSME  through societies 
(Autonomous Bodies) formed by Government. Funds for  implementation of the scheme 
will be released by Ministry of MSME to the individ ual Tool Room/ TDC separately as 
per their needs. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Ministry may provide terms of loan and details of MoU with World 
Bank. Whether existing individual Tool Rooms are ad ministered through 
autonomous societies.  It is surprising that budget  announcement has been made 
without deciding the terms of MoU. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
  
 However the Committee is apprehensive of the utili zation of this scheme 
considering that it has not been able to fully util ize the funds allocated under National 
Inclusive Innovation Fund. The Committee also expresses reservation that no action plan  
has yet been prepared by the despite Budget announc ement .It recommends that the 
Ministry should coordinate with the Ministry of Cor porate Affairs and Ministry of S&T, 
to get the relevant notification issued expeditiously. 
(Para No. 72) 
Action Taken  
 
 
 The funds allocated for National Inclusive Innovat ion Fund was not utilized 
during last year as the  scheme  was  not  approved  by the EFC. However, the  EFC  now  
 
 

  
-42- 
 
approved the proposal on 15.5.2013. It is expected that the fund will be utilized during 
the current financial year. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 Ministry may inform the objective and procedure of  implementing this 
Scheme and devolution of funds to targeted beneficiaries. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee notes Planned expenditure of Rs 1466  crore apart RE of Rs 
1402.09 crores.  Reason for such excess planned exp enditure.  The Committee notes 
increased released in first and fourth quarters and apprehends year-end rush and crowding 
of pending expenditure in first and fourth quarters .  The Committee would like further 
elaboration by the Ministry in this regard and whet her similar trend has persisted in 
previous years too. 
(Para No. 76) 
Action Taken  
The R.E. 2012-13 in respect of KVIC was Rs. 1548.79  crore (including Rs. 5.00 
crore for SFURTI) against which the planned expendi ture was to the extent of Rs. 
1466.20 crore.  It may be seen that the expenditure  is well within the allocation made 
under RE 2012-13.   
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
There is difference in figures.  Ministry has not e laborated on rush in 
expenditure during 1 st  and IV th  quarters.  
 
  
 
 The Committee suggests that the Ministry too should  intervene in resolving the 
long pending issues of MGIRI.  
(Para No. 97) 
 
 

  
-43- 
 
Action Taken 
 
Ministry gives due attention to the difficulties fa ced by MGIRI and taking active 
steps to resolve the pending issues. Necessary inst ructions /advise has already been given 
to KVIC and MGIRI to sort out the issue relating to land title.    
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 Ministry may inform of final outcome of such instr uctions and whether the 
MGIRI is now in position to utilize Budget allocation.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee considers that PMEGP is an important  scheme. In view of 
significant under-achievements in meeting physical gargets, the Committee recommends 
that efforts should be made to simplify the procedu re and streamline the processes. There 
appears to be disjoint at every level of approvals.  The Committee recommends that 
DTFC should mandatorily meet and approve the applic ations at quarterly basis. And 
should evaluate the applications after due diligence. The application should be considered 
against determined check-lists and benchmarks.  The re should be time bound approval at 
every level.  It would be helpful if the DTFC assig ns local Udyami Mitras for this 
scheme.  In case of rejection the reasons should be  communicated to the applicant in 
writing within a time-limit. The KVIC alongwith the  Banks should use Bank’s publicity 
platforms to publicise PMEGP.  So far only KVIC has  been publicizing the PMEGP. The 
PMEGP should be promoted and publicized as viable B anking product.  The Committee 
also recommends that issue of relaxing Service area  norm should be settled and notified 
expeditiously. This Procedural issue must not hampe r the Scheme.  For PMEGP entire 
district  should  be  considered  as one unit.  Every approved project should automatically 
stand covered under CGTMSE however; the guarantee f ee should be absorbed by the 
Bank.  The Committee also suggests that Ministry ma y consider having a Sub-Plan for 
the revivable sick PMEGP units. 
(Para No. 129) 
 
 

  
-44- 
 
Action Taken 
 
CEO, KVIC has written to all the District Collector s in the country requesting 
them to convene DTFC meeting regularly and to dispo se off the applications received 
within 30 days of its receipt at their end.  
It has now been decided by the Ministry that one mo re member may be added in 
the Task Force to represent urban local bodies of the District, such as Municipalities and  
Nagar Palikas and amongst the three representatives from Panchayats already provided in 
the DTFC, at least one among the three Panchayat re presentatives may be nominated 
from  Scheduled  Caste  or  Scheduled  Tribe and Wo man. The  additional  representative 
from urban local bodies as mentioned above will be nominated by the Chairman/District 
Magistrate/Deputy Commissioner/Collector by rotatio n as is being done in the case of 
three Panchayat representatives.  
 
With regards to the issue relating to restriction o f service area norm of Banks, 
CEO, KVIC has written to CMDs of Public Sector Bank s requesting to consider whether 
PMEGP can be exempted from the service area norm, s o that prospective micro-
entrepreneurs find it easy to get a loan.  In addit ion, to simplify the process, KVIC has 
already started accepting PMEGP applications online. 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Ministry may apprise the Committee on its reco mmendation regarding 
revival of PMEGP units and about joint publicity of  PMRGP with Banks.  KVIC 
State Directors should monitor the frequency of DFTC meetings and inform KVIC. 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
 For better and more efficient performance of the PM EGP, there was suggestion 
that was discussed in Committee that instead of giv ing the margin money, the 
Government should provide interest subvention beyon d a certain rate. Considering that 
there is a ceiling on the value of project, the tot al liability on interest rate subvention can 
be estimated. The Committee would like the Ministry  to consider this suggestion, for 
better performance of scheme.  
(Para No. 130) 

  
 
-45- 
Action Taken  
All possibilities to improve the delivery of the sc heme, including possibility for 
an interest rate subvention will be appropriately c onsidered alongwith findings of 
independent evaluations, while processing the scheme for continuation. 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
  
 The Ministry may inform the Committee of the terms  of reference for 
independent evaluation and the findings thereof.  T he Committee finds the Banks 
are still restrictive towards MSMEs.  This mindset needs to change.  The DLFTs 
should meet more regularly to clear the applications in time. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
  
 There is a difference between the figures for 2012 -13 as provided by the Ministry 
and those given in the Budget documents. The Commit tee reiterates its reservation over 
this recurrent trend.  The Ministry ought to reconc ile its figures as given in the 
Expenditure Budget (II) for the Ministry.  Further the Committee notes significant 
reduction in Planned allocation at RE stage to Rs 3 2.51 crores.  However, the Ministry 
released only Rs.19.31 crores to Coir Board.  It ha s been stated that the Coir Board spent 
unutilized balance of previous year.  Whether this recurrent practice of utilizing unused 
balance of previous year, in the Ministry, has the approval of Ministry of Finance. At RE 
stage only in case of Coir S&T the allocation was r etained at Rs 7 crores. However, no 
money was spent in I and III quarters and total exp enditure was Rs 2.31 crores uneven 
expenditure of Planned allocation. No money was spe nt under the important REMOT 
scheme through out the year.  The Committee feels t hat Coir industry is a promising 
sector for employment generation and export market.   While the Committee supports 
greater allocation for this Sector, it can not igno re the less than optimal performance on 
the part of Ministry and concerned agencies. These issues pertain the management, 
monitoring and financial efficiency by the Ministry and concerned agency. 
(Para No.140) 
 

  
-46- 
Action Taken  
With respect to the figures on RE and funds release d during the financial year to 
Coir Board a disparity has been noticed. RE and the  funds released for the year is Rs. 
35.51 crore and Rs. 20.07 crore respectively. 
 
Budgetary provision amounting to Rs. 700 lakh was m ade towards the scheme 
Science and Technology for the year 2012-13 in BE a nd RE. Opening balance of Rs. 
46.94 lakh was available as on 1.4.2012. Under the scheme, only an amount of Rs.231.13 
lakh was released by the Ministry. Out of which an amount of Rs. 141.67 lakh was 
released during the month of July towards 1st Quarter. No funds were released during the 
2nd & 3rd quarter against this head in spite of Boa rd's request. The restrictions imposed 
on the fund releases during March, 2013 have also c ontributed to the under utilization. 
An amount of Rs. 50 lakh towards NE and Rs. 39.47 l akh for Non NE only was released 
during March, 2013. The utilization during 2012-13 could not reach the expected level 
due to these reasons. An amount of Rs. 277.97 lakhs  has been spent upto 31.3.2012 
including NER. 
Since the 4th High Level Apex Committee meeting hel d on 20.10.20122 has 
directed that Coir Board should follow the extent p rovision of the operational guidelines 
in letter and spirit. Hence, the Board, has not rel eased any fund to the banks from 
November, 2011 to September, 2012. 
 
The Scheme of Rejuvenation, Modernization and Techn ology Upgradation of 
Coir Industry was approved by the Ministry during March, 2008 and released the fund for 
implementation of the scheme. As per the operationa l guidelines of the scheme the 
beneficiaries have to purchase machines from the em panelled machinery manufacturers 
under REMOT scheme. The first Evaluation and Steeri ng Committee meeting held on 
19.5.2008 under the Chairmanship of Chairman Coir B oard had decided to purchase coir 
machinery under REMOT scheme from the registered co ir machinery manufacturers of 
Coir Board as separate empanelled of machinery manu facture for supply of machinery 
under REMOT scheme would be time consuming and it may be delay the implementation 
of REMOT scheme. The decision of the 1 st  Evaluation and Steering Committee was 
communicated to the Ministry and also placed before  the High Level Apex Committee 
for consideration and approval. But the 4 th  High Level Apex Committee meeting held on  
 

  
-47- 
20.10.2011 while considering the amendments to the scheme operational guidelines 
directed that Coir Board should follow the extent p rovision of the operational guidelines 
in letter and spirit. Hence, the Board could not re lease any fund to the banks from 
November, 2011 onwards. Accordingly Coir Board had initiated action for empanelment 
of machinery manufacturers by inviting bids through  paper notification. Initially the 
Board could empanel only 13 machines out of 73 machines specified for the units under  
the scheme. The 9 th  Evaluation and Steering Committee meeting held on 18.4.2012 had 
decided to continue the empanelment procedure.  
 
In subsequent paper notification, Board has receive d 30 more bids for 
empanelment of machinery manufacturers under REMOT scheme. The 12th Evaluation 
and Steering Committee meeting held on 9.8.2012 has  decided to empanel 39 machinery 
manufacturers for the supply of machineries under R EMOT scheme. The empanelled list 
was forwarded to all banks and field offices of the  Board. Therefore, the Board could 
continue the implementation of the scheme from October, 2012 onwards. 
 
Further, the Banks have returned the applications to the field offices/ beneficiaries 
for submitting revised quotation from the empanelle d list. Thereafter, beneficiaries have 
submitted quotations from empanelled list and the B oard has received loan sanction 
letters from the banks during the last quarter of 2 012-13. Thus the Board had released an 
amount of Rs. 9.97 crore to the banks towards subsi dy for assisting 1147 units during the 
year 2011-12 and 2012-13 as shown below: 
 
Year No of units Subsidy released 
2011-12 170 units  Rs. 2.04 crore  
2012-13 977 units  Rs. 7.56 crore  
Total  1147 units  Rs. 9.97 crore  
 
Since the empanelment process was not completed bef ore March, 2012 the Board 
could not utilize the fund released by the Ministry  during 2011-12 and a balance amount 
of Rs. 7.97 crore was available with the Board as o n 1st April, 2012 under REMOT 
scheme. Hence, the Coir Board had requested permiss ion from the Ministry for utilizing 
the balance of previous year during the year 2012-13 and the Ministry had permitted Coir 
Board for utilizing the fund. 
 

  
-48- 
 
No release out of the budgetary allocation for 2012 -13 could be sought for due to 
the above reason and the availability of sufficient  funds with Coir Board from the 
unutilized amount for 2011-12.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Ministry may inform the Committee of the desir ability of empanelling 
the manufacturers instead of giving freedom to entr epreneurs to purchase 
equipments from registered manufacturers.  The Comm ittee would also like to 
know the basis of such empanelment?  Whether empane lled companies offer entire 
range of equipments and provide after sale services ?  Whether it will not result in 
cartelization at a later stage.  
 
******** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 