RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
EIGHTH REPORT 
ON 
THE TRADE MARKS BILL, 1993 
Presented on 21st April, 1994 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
APRIL, 1994/VAISAKHA, 1-916 (SAKA) 

CONTENTS 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE . . . . 
2 REPORT OF .THE COMMITTEE ....... . 
3. BILL AS REPORTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
4. THE SCHEDULE ............... . 
I 
5. APPENDICES 
I Press communique of thr. 26th Augu'>t. 1993. 
II. List of individuals/organi~ntions etc. from whom Mcmnrandn or cnmmcnts 
were received by the Committee ................. . 
III. List of witnesses who tendered evidence hcfore the Commiltl'C .. 
IV. Minutes of the meetings of the Committee .... ........ . 
Pages 
(iii)·(iv) 
1-5 
7-73 
75 
77 
78-79 
80 
R J.l}() 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMIITEE 
1. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Rao-Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri Anil Kumar 
4. Shrimati Chandrika Abhinandan Jain 
5. Shri J.P. Javali 
6. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
7. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mody 
8. Shri V. Rajeshwar Rao 
9. Shri Santosh · Kumar Sahu 
10. Shri K.K. Veerappan 
11. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav 
12. Shri Nyodek Yonggam 
*13. Shri Jibon Roy 
LOK SABHA 
14. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
15. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
Hi. Shrimati Kesharbai Sonajirao Kshirsagar 
17. Shrimati Pratibha Devisingh Patil 
18. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala 
19. Shri K. Ramamurthy 
20. Shri Balin Kuli 
21. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
22. Shri Vishweshwar Bhagat 
23. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
24. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
25. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
26. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
27. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
28. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan 
29. Sltri Rajendra Agnihotri 
30. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
31. Shri S.N. Vekaria 
32. Shri Ramdew Ram 
33. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katharia 
34. Shri Satyanarayan Jatiya 
35. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
•Nominated to the Committee on 10.1.94 

• 
36. Shri Naval Kishore Rai 
37. Shri Manjay Lal 
38 . Shri Rasheed Masood 
39. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
40. Shri Purna Chandra M:alik 
41. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
42. Shri P.G. Narayanan 
43. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri G .K. Saksena-Deputy Secretary 
Shri Shamsher Singh Rana-Under Secretary 
Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal-Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRIES 
I. Ministry of Industry 
1. Shri P.G. Mankad, Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. G.S. Jaiya, Director 
3. Shri Pushpendra Rai, Director 
4. Shri R.A. Acharya, Controller General of Trade Marks 
5. Shri K.C. Kailasam, Senior Joint Registrar of Trade Marks 
II. Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs 
1. Shri A.C.C. Unni, Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. Raghbir Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel 
3. Shri V.K. Bhasin, Deputy Legislative Counsel 
4. Shri S.D. Singh, Assistant Legislative Counsel 

EIGHTH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
I, the Chairman of ·the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, 
present this Eighth Report of the Committee on the Trade Marks Bill, 1993 with the Bill, 
as amended by the Committee, annexed thereto. 
2. The Bill was introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 19th April, 1993. It was referred 
to the Committee for examination and report through separate paras published in Rajya 
Sabha/Lok Sabha Bulletins Part II dated the 6th August, 1993 and 13th August, 1993 
respectively. 
3. The Committee held six meetings. A verbatim record of these meetings was kept. 
4. At its first meeting the Committee decided to invite Memoranda/suggestions from 
different organisations/bodies dealing with trade marks and also issue a pres..<~ communique 
in this reeard. Accordingly a press communique inviting memoranda from various 
individual!./organisations interested in the subject matter of the bill was issued on the- 26th 
August,_ 1993 to be submitted latest by 15th September, 1993 (Appendix I). 
5. 11. Memoranda containing views, opinions comments and suggestions on ttte various 
provisions and aspects of the Bill were received by the Committee from individuals, 
organisations, Trade Marks Attorneys, Legal practitioners and organisations conne~ted with 
Tr~de Marks (list at Appendix II). 
6. The Committee decided that the Memoranda received by it be sent to the Ministries 
of Industry/Law, Justice and Company Affairs for their comments. The comments of the 
Ministry of Industry endorsed by the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs were 
received and considered by the Committee. 
7. The Committee heard the oral evidence tendered by 13 witnesses who represented 
various organisations and bodies in addition to the oral evidence of the representatives of 
the Ministries of Industry and Law, Justice and Company Affairs. (Appendix III). 
8. The Committee decided that the evidence recorded and memoranda received should 
not be laid on the Table of both the Houses and that only a set of memoranda received by 
it from organisations/bodies/individuals be placed in the Parliament Library after'" the report 
is pJesented to the Houses for reference purposes. 
9. The Committee considered and adopted the draft report at its meeting held on the 
31 March, 1994. · 
10. Taking into account the documents, memoranda' and evidences in respect of the 
Trade Marks Bill, 1993 the Committee concludes as under:-
A trade marks is generally a visually perceptible sign used in relation to goods 
or services. The primary purpose of a trade mark is to identify the commercial or 
trade origins of the goods or services. As such a trade mark distinguishes a 
particular product from another product. It offers an assurance to the consumer that 
when he is buying a particular item with a trade mark he is purchasing the same 
item which he has been assured of its quality (9mposition etc. So a trade mark 
reflects the goodwill or reputation of a paJ1icular product. It is statutorily not 
compulsory for somebody to register a trade mark. If a Trade Mark is registered by 

some one in that case he has a built in right to the safety of that particular mark. To 
qualify for registration as a trade mark any mark must fulfil the criteria as undcr:-
(a) It should be distinctive. It should be something which can be separated from 
other marks .. 
(b) It must not cause any confusion or deception. 
(c) It should not contain scandalous or obscene matters. 
(d) It should not contain any matter which may hurt the religious susceptibilities of 
any class or section of the people. 
The registration of a trade mark does not confer any new right on the holder of the trade 
mark. It only ~upplements a right which is already existing. Therefore, a· trade mark is a 
cumulative and not alternative to the protection of the mark by the common law. 
As regards the replacement of the existing law on the subject namely the Trade and 
Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 by a New Bill which was under consideration of the Committee, 
the Government was of the opinion that the existing Act has served its purpose reasonably well. 
To bring a new Bill before the Parliament there were various other reasons also. One is that any 
Act relating to Trade Marks in the field of trade, "both national and inteJ:national evolves 
reflecting the changing realities of the market place. As such the existing Act having been there 
nearly for 30 and odd years started needing certain necessary amendments and changes. Similarly 
over a period of time the case law pertaining to trade marks got built up and there were a 
number of judicial pronouncements and\_gradually it was found that it would be desirable to 
incorpora~e these into the body of the Act. In some cases the increasing globalisation of trade 
also viewed some lacunae in the existing Act as.~ non tariff barrier. Accordingly the Government 
decided to bring the desired modifications in the Act as it felt that instead of bringing a number 
of modifications and amendments it would be more desirable to bring forward a new Bill. The 
present Bill according to the Government incorporates certain changes which were felt necessary 
thereby making if more comprehensive and more transparent. It provides for more specific and 
greater degree of protection against infringement and more punishment for the violators of the 
Act. 
11. The Government highlighted the following salient features of the Trade Marks Bill. 1993 
which were examined by the Committee:-
(a) Presently the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958" provides for registration 
of trade marks only of "goods". The one area which was not covered was 
"services". The present Bill seeks to cover seJYices in addition to goods under the 
trade marks protection. 
(b) The registration of trade marks which are imitations of well known trade marks is 
not to be permitted. EQlarging the grounds for refusal of registration and 
consequently provision of defensive registration of trade marks are proposed to 
be omitted from this Bill. 
(c) This Bill is taking away the system of maintaining registers of trade marks in part 
A and part B. At present part A trade Marks will inclUde those trade marks 
which are very clearly distinguishable and about which there would be no doubt 
whereas in part B trade marks the trade mark is not very distinguishable. This 
two tier system is proposed to be done away with in this Bill. 
(d) In view of doing away with Part A and Part B trade marks the Bill proposes that 
there will be oniy a single register and pot two ·registers. 
(e) The Bill proposes. to simplify the procedure of registration of registered users and 
enlarging the .scope of the use in ter;ms of a permitted use. 

(/) The Bill proposes to establish an Appellate Board for speedy disposal of appeals 
which presently go before the courts and due to pressure of work a speedy 
redressal is not forthcoming. 
(g) Tbe final authority relating to registration or certification of trade marks be 
vested in the Registrar instead of the Central Government. 
(h) The Bill proposes enhanced punishment for offences relating to tra de marks at 
par with the Copyright Act to prevent sale of spurious goods. In the Copyright 
Act offences are cognizable inviting a minimum punishment of 3 years whereas in 
the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act it is non-congnizable and punishment is 
for two year. So it is sought to be made cognizable and punishment to be 
enhanced to 3 years for infringement of trade marks. 
(i) The Bill proposes to prohibit use of someone else's trade mark like the name of a 
corporate company or a business concern. 
12. Some members of the Committee were of the opinion that the liberalisation of trade 
marks legislation may provide added advantage to the foreign multinational units. Instead, the 
policy should be to go .slow in according recognition to foreign trade marks with a view to 
encourage domestic initiatives in the same or similar lines of production. They emphasised the 
need to make efforts to encourage the use of indigenous trade marks. 
In the matter of inclusion of services in the jurisdiction of the Bill, they expressed the view 
that it should await the resolution of the current controversies that arose after the signing of 
GAIT treaty and the agreement by western countries to provide 5atisfactory trade concessions on 
a reciprocal basis. 
Also in view of the amendments required in the Indian Patents Act of 1970 consequent upon 
the GATT treaty they felt that the new legislation should await the changes in the Patents Law. 
Some members of the Committee specifically mentioned some modifications in various 
Oauses of the Bill under consideration Regarding Clause 2 of the Bill, some members were of 
the opinion that instead of "a device, shape of goods and packaging", there should be 
"description of device, shape of goods or packaging" because items having functional use should 
be dealt by Patents Law. 
Members were of the opinion that defensive registration may be c~ntinued as stipulated in 
the existing Act which is in force. Members while considering Clause 15 of the Bill pointed out 
that no mechanism for part cancellation of registration has been mentioned in the Bill. Members 
questioned the fate of the registration made in series if some of the marks in that series is 
subjected to non use Members of the Committee put forth a suggestion that Associated trade 
marks may be named as other individual trade mark. Commenting on Clause 18 of the Bill some 
Members expressed apprehension that provision of single application for multiple class could lead 
to blockage of trade mark for others. With regard to Clauses 37, 39 and 43 of the Bill, some 
Members of the Committee wanted that a limit should be imposed on consideration against 
assignment. Members were also of the opinion that instead of consent of the Registrar, 
assignment certificate should be provided for the validity of assignment. 
13. 'The changes suggested by the Committee in the Bill and the reasons therefc;»re are set out 
in the succeeding paras of this report:-
13.1 CLAUSE 2. - (i) The Committee observes that almost all the organisationslbodies/ 
individuals have desire<\ to retain the defjnition of "goods" jn the present Bill also because it is 
there in the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 and there are no obvious reasons for 
omission of this definition. The clause. has been amended accordingly. (ii) Cause 2(l)(g) of the 

Bill has been amended to excluse members of partnership from the scope of Association of 
persons. This will certainly help in removing any ambiguity since individual partners of a 
partnership will not be entitiled to use a registered trade mark separately and the mark can be 
used" only by the partnership. 1be amendment has been made in the clause. (iii) In Oause 2(/)(x) 
the words "construction and repair" "transport and storage" and "material treatment" at 
appropriate places have been incorporated in the Bill which will conform to the international 
classification of goods and services. 
13.2 CLAUSE 8. - In aause 8 of the Bill the word "shall" bas been substituted with the 
work word "may" which wiD give more flexibility to the law in its implementation. The language 
of rule 26(2) which was added to the rules framed under the existing Act bas been inserted as 
sulKlause (2) of clause 8. The Government has informed that this was added in 1992 to 
overcome the judgment of Madras High Court which held that the Registrar has no jurisdiction to 
register trade mark for goods which are not specifically enumerated in the classification of goods. 
This amendment will enable the Registrar to properly classify the goods as and when new kind of 
goods emerge into market. The amendment has been incorporated in the Bill. 
13.3 CLAUSE 9. - In sub-clause (1) of clause 9 the words "or is a wen known trade mark" 
have been added at the end of the proviso to extend registration to well known trade marks. The 
amendment has been incorporated in the Bill. 
(ii) The following Explimation has been adde.d to clause 9 of the Bill which reads as 
under:-
" Explanation: The nature of goods or services in relation to which the trade mark is used 
or proposed to be used shell not be a ground for refusal of registration". 
(iii) The Committee is of the opinion that any symbol relating to religion, gods, godesses, 
places of worship should not ordinarily be registered as a trade mark. However the Committee 
do not want to disturb the existing trade marks by prohibiting their registration as it will result in 
a chaos in the market. At the same time the Committee trusts that Oovernment will initiate 
appropriate action if someone complaints that a particular trade mark is hurting his religious 
susceptibilities. 
13.4 CLAUSE 11. - The words "has a reputation" have been substituted with the words 
"well-known" in clause 11 (2)(b) of the Bill. 
The Committee is of the opinion that the words "For the purposes of this Act" be added in 
the beginning in the Explanation II and accordingly the addition has been incorporated. 
13.5 CLAUSE 15. - In sulKlause (3) of clause 15 the words "same goods" the words 
"same or similar goods" have been substituted. The amendment has been incorporated. 
13.6 CLAUSE lS. -The following proviso has also been added after the Sub-clause (3) of 
clause to remove the present lacunae:-
"Provided that the Registrar shall not remove the mark from the register if an application 
i$ made in the prescribed form and prescribed fee and surcharge is paid within six months 
from the expiration of the last registration of the trade mark and shall renew the 
registration of the trade mark for a period of ten years under sub-section (2)." 
13.7 CLAUSE 29. --. In sub clause (5) of aause 29 the words "dealing in goods cr; services 
in respect of which the trade mark is registered" have been incorporated in the Bill. 
13.8 CLAUSE 12. - The Committee propose to omit the words "the English or" in para 
(a) of sulKlause (2) of 82 as aU over the world metric system is used and it would be illegal to 
use the word .. Enalith system" ~der the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986. The amendment 
bas been incorpcnted in the Bill. 

• 
13.9 CLAUSE 85. - This clause of the Bill deals with the composition of Appellate Board. 
The C.ommittee suggests that a Bench shall as far as may be of 2 members one of whom shall be 
judicial member ar.d other shall be a technical member having specialised knowledge and 
experience in the law of trade marks. The amendment has been incorporated in the Bill. 
13.10 CLAUSE 86. - This clause prescribes the qualifications for appointment as Chairman 
and Members of Appellate Board. The Committee considered certain clause related suggestions! 
amendments for incorporation in Clause 85. The Committee has not found such suggestions 
practicable and instead recommends deletion of para (b), (e) and (f) sub-clause (2) of Clause 86 
without making further changes in Clause 85 of the Bill. The deletion has been incorporated in 
the Bill. 
14. At this stage of deliberation, the Committee would like to have recommended some 
more amendments in the Bill on the basis of certain suggestions put forth before it but is not 
doing so because they can· be incorporated in the rules. The Committee, would, however, not 
miss to highlight its observations with regard to sub-clause (1) of Oause 92 which provides that 
any person aggrieved by an order or decision of the Registrar· under the Act, or the rules made 
thereunder, may, prefer an appeal to the Appellate Board within three months from the date on 
which the order or decision sought to be appealed against is communicated to such person 
preferring the appeal. Thus an aggrieved person can file an appeal as of right. The appeal 
provisions to the appellate Board as to be provided a new. The Committee has been informed 
that Forty-Second Amendment to the Constitution in 1976 inserted a new Part XIV A of the 
Constitution with a view to establishment of tribunals for reducing litigation. Decisions of such 
tribunals can only be challenged under Article 136 of the Constitution before the Supreme Court. 
The Committee, therefore, without persisting for an urgent addition of a special clause 
recommends that Government should include provision for the establishment of an Appellate 
Board envisaged under Part XIV A of the Constitution for the said purpose. The Committee is of 
the opinion that if required, Government should bringforth an amendment to the relevant 
provisions of the constitution for implementing the recommendation of the Committee in letter 
and spirit. The Committee trusts that Government would take a positive action in this regard in 
due course. 
15. All other modifications not enumerated in the foregoing paragraphs ar~ either of 
consequential or of drafting nature. 
16. The Committee recommends that the Bill as amended, be passed. 
NEW DELHI 
31st ~arch, 1994 
MOTURU HANUMANTHA RAO 
Chairman, 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry . 

Bill No. 23 of 1993 
THE TRADE MARKS BILL, 1993 
(as reported by the Standing Committee on Industry) 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions and interpretation. 
CHAPTER II 
THE REGISTER AND CONDITIONS FOR REGISTRATION 
3. Appointment of Registrar and other officers. 
4. Power of Registrar to withdraw or transfer cases, etc. 
5. Trade Marks Registry and offices thereof. 
6. The Register of Trade Marks. 
7. Classification of goods and services. 
8. Publication of alphabetical index. 
9. Absolute grounds for refusal of registration. 
10. Limitation as to ~olour. 
11. Relative grounds for refusal of registration. 
12. Registration in the case <!f honest concurrent use, etc. 
13. Prohibition of registration of names of chemical elements or 
International non-proprietary names. 
14. Use of names and representations of liying persons or persons 
recently dead. 
15. Registration of parts of trade marks and of trade marks as a 
series. 
16. Registration of trade marks as as~ciated trade marks. 
17. Effect of registration of parts of a mark. 
CHAPTER III 
PROCEDURE FOR AND DURATION OF REGISTRATION 
18. Application for registration. 
19. Withdrawal of acceptance. 
20. Adv.ertisement of application. 
21. Opposition to registration. 
22. Correction and amendment. 
CLAUSES 
23. Registration. 
24. Jointly owned tracle marks. 

25. Duration, renewal, removal and restoration of registration. 
26. Effect of removal from register for failure to pay fee for 
renewal. 
CHAPTER IV 
EFFECT OF REOISTRA noN 
'1:1. No. .action for infringement of unregistered trade mark. 
28. Rights conferred by registration. 
29. Infringement of registered trade marks. 
30. Limits on effect of registered trade mark. 
31. Rigistration to be prima facie evidence of validity. 
32. Protection of registration on ground of distinctiveness in certain 
cases. 
33. Effect of acquiescence. 
34. Saving for vested rights. 
35. Saving for use of name, address or description of goods or 
services. 
36. Saving for words used as name or description of an article or 
substanae or service. 
CHAPTER V 
AssiGNMENT AND TRANSMISSION 
37. Power of registered proprietor to assign and give receipts. 
38. Assignability and transmissibility of registered trade marks. 
39. Assignability and transmissibility of unregistered trade marks. 
40. Restriction on assignment or transmission where ·multiple ex­
clusive rights would be created. 
41. Restriction on assignment or transmission when exclusive rights 
would be created in different parts of India. 
42. Conditions for assignment' otherwise than in connection with 
the goodwill of a business. 
43. Assignability and transmissibility of certification trade marks. 
44. Assignability and transmissibility of associated trade marJc.s. 
45. Registration of assignments and transmissions. 
CHAPTER VI 
USE OF TRADE MARKS AND REGISTERED USERS 
46. Proposed use of trade mark by company to be fonned, etc. 
47. Removal from register and imposition of limitations on ground 
of non-use. 
48. Registered users. 
49. Registration as registered user. 
50.· Power of Registrar for veriation or cancellation of registration 
as registered user. 
CLAUSES 
51. Power of Registrar to call for information relating to agreement 
in respect of registered users. 
52. Right of registered user to take proceedings against infringe­
ment. 

53. No right of permitted user to take proceeding against infringe­
ment. 
54. Registered user not to have right of assignment or transmis­
sion. 
55. Use of one of associated or substantially identical trade marks 
equivalent to use of another. 
56. Use of trade mark for export trade and use when form of trade 
connection changes. 
CHAPTER VII 
REcnFICATION AND CORREcnON OF THE REGISTER 
57. Power to cancel or vary registration and to rectify the register. 
58. Correction of register. 
59. Alteration of registered trade marks. 
60. Adaptation of entries in register to amended or substituted 
Classification of goods or services. 
CHAPTER VIII 
CoLLEcnvE MARKS 
61. Special provisions for collective marks. 
62. Indication of geographical origin may be registered as collective 
mark, if such use is bona fide use in trade. 
63. Collective mark not to be misleading as to character or signi­
ficance. 
64. Application to be accompanied by regulations governing use of 
collective marks. 
65. Acceptance of application and regulations by Registrar. 
66. Regulations to be open to inspection. 
67. Amendment of regulations. 
68. Infringement proceedings by registered proprietor of collec­
tive mark. 
69. Additional grounds for removal of registration of collective 
mark. 
CHAPTER IX 
CERTIFICATION TRADE MARKS 
70. Certain provision of this Act not applicable to certification 
trade marks. 
71. Registration of certification trade marks. 
72. Applications for registration of certification trade marks. 
73. Consideration of application for registration by the Registrar. 
CLAUSES 
74. Opposition to registration of certification trade marks. 
75. Filing of regulations governing the use of a certification trade 
mark. 
76. Infringement of certification trade matk. 
77. Acts not constituting infringment of certification trade marks. 
78. Cancellation or varying of registration of certification trade 
mark. 

Clauses 
79. Rights conferred by registration of certification trade marks . 
CHAPTER X 
SPECIAL PROVISION FOR TEXTILE GOODS 
80. Textile goods. 
81. Restriction on registration of textile goods. 
82. Stamping of piece goods, cotton yarn and thread. 
83. Determination of character of textile goods by sampling. 
CHAPTER XI 
APPELLATE BOARD 
84. Establishment of Trade Marks Appellate Board . 
85. Composition of Appellate Board. 
86. Qualifications for appointment as Chairman and Members . 
87. Term of office of Chairman and Members. 
88. Senior-most member to act as Chairman or discharge his func­
tions in certain cirumstances. 
89. Salaries, allowances and other tenns and conditions of service 
of Chairman and Members. 
90. Resignation and removal. 
91. Staff of Appellate Board. 
92. Appeals to Appeiiate Board. 
93. Procedure and powers of Appellate Board. 
94. Bar of jurisdiction of courts, etc. 
95. Bar to appear before Appellate Board. 
96. Conditions as to making of interim orders. 
97. Power of Chairman to transfer cases from one bench to 
another. 
98. Procedure for application for rectification, etc., before Appel­
late Board. 
99. Appearance of Registrar in legal proceedings. 
100. Costs of Registrar in proceedings before Appellate Board. 
101. Transfer of pending proceedings to Appellate Board. 
CHAPTER XII 
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE 
102. Meaning of applying trade marks and trade description. 
103. Falsifying and falsely applying trade marks. 
104. Penalty for applying false trade marks, trade descriptions, etc. 
105. Penalty for selling goods or providing services to which false 
trade mark or false trade description is applied. 
106. Enhanced penalty on second or subsequent conviction. 
1Q7. Penalty for removing piece goods, etc., contrary to section 82. 
108. Penalty for falsely representing a trade mark as registered. 
109. Penalty for improperly describing a place of business as 
connected with the trade marks office. 

Oauses . 
110. Penalty for falsification of entries in the register. 
111. No offence in certain cases. 
112. Forfeiture of goods. 
113. Exemption of certain persons employed in ordinary course of 
business. 
114. Procedure where invalidity of registration is pleaded by the 
accused. 
115. Offences by companies. 
116. Cognizance of certain offences and the powers of police officer 
for search and seizure. 
117. Evidence 'of origin of goods imported by sea. 
118. Costs of defence or prosecution. 
119. Limitation of prosecution. 
120. Information as to commission of offence. 
121. Punishment of abetment in India of acts done out of India. 
122. Instructions of Central Government as to permissible variation to 
be observed by criminal courts. 
CHAPTER XIII 
Miscellaneous 
123. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
124. Certain persons to ~e public servants. 
125. Stay of proceedings where the validity of registration of the trade 
mark is questioned, etc. 
126. Application for rectification of register to be made to Appellate 
Board in certain cases. 
127. Implied warranty on sale of marked goods. 
128. Powers of Registrar. 
129. Exercise of discretionary power by Registrar. 
130. Evidence before Registrar. 
131. Death of party to a proceeding. 
132. Extension of time. 
133. Abandonment. 
'· -.:4 ~ .. , .~ . ..-.,-..... 1' • 
134. Preliminary advice by the Registrar as to distinctiveness. 
135. Suit for infringement, etc., to be instituted before District Court 
136. Relief in suits for infringement or for passing off. 
137. Registered user to be impleaded in certain proceedings. 
138. Evidence of entries in register, etc., and things done by toe 
Registrar. 
139. Registrar and other officers not compellable to produce register, 
etc. 

140. Power to require goods to show indication of origin. 
141. Power to require information of imported goods bearfng false 
trade marks. 
142. Certificate of validity. 
143. Groundless threats of legal proceedings. 
144. Address for service. 
145. Trade usage , etc., to he taken into consideration. 
146. Agents. 
147. Marks registered by an agent or representative without au-
thourity. 
148. Indexes. 
149. Documents open to public inspection. 
150. Reports of Registrar to be placed before Parliament. 
151. Fees and surcharge. 
152. Savings in respect of certain matters in Chapter XII. 
153. Declaration a:; to ownership of 11 :.de mark not registrable und er 
the Registration Act, 1 Q08. 
154. Government to be bound . 
155. Special provisions relating to applications for registration from 
citizens of convention countries. 
156. Provision as to reciprocity. 
157. Power of Central Government to remove difft ulties. 
158. Power to make rules. 
159. Amendment s. 
160. Repeal and savings. 
THE SCHEDULE. 

Bill No. 23 of 1993 
THE TRADE MARKS BILL, 1993 
(As RePORTED HY THE STANDING CoMMJ'ITEE ON lNou ~TRY) 
[Words underlined or side-lined indicate the amendments suggesied by the 
Committee, asterisks indicate omissions. j 
A 
BILL 
to amend and consolidate the law relating to trade marks to prol"ia • 
for registration and better protection of trade marks for goods ana 
services and for the prevention o.f the use of fraudulent marks. 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-fifth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:- -----
CHAPTER I 
PtH:O LIMIN/\ I{ y 
1. (I) This Act may be called the Trade Marks Act, 1994. 
(2) lt extendli to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by uotification in the Official Gazette, appoint: 
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different prnvi-
10 sions of this Act, and any reference in such provision to the commence­
ment of this Act shall be construed as a reference to be coming into 
force of that provision. 
2. (I) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requtres, -
(a) "Appellate· Bo.ard" means the Appellate 1.3oard established under 
15 .iection 84; 
_(b) "ass ignment" means an assignment in writing by act of the 
parties wncerned; 
(c) "associated trade marks" means trade marks deemed to be, or 
required to be, registered as associated trade marks under this Act; 
20 (d) "Bench" means a Bench of the Appeit<ite Board; 
(e) "certification trade mark" means a mark capable of distinguish­
ing the goods or services in connection with which it is used in the course 
of trade which are certified by the proprietor of the mark in respect of 
origin, material, mode of manufacture · of goods or performance of 
25 services, quality, accuracy or other characteristics from goods or services 
not so certified and registerable as such under Chapter IX in respect of 
those goods or services in the name, as proprietor of the certification 
trade mark, of that person·; 
(f) "Chairman" me~ns the Chairman of the Appellate Board; 
Short title . ex­
tent an'd ~ •m· 
mencement. 
nerinillll io; and 
ul!c:rpr,·t.l t h.lll 

(g) "collective mark" means a trade mark distinguishing 'the 
goods or services of members of an association of persons (not 
being a partnership within the meaning of the Partnership Act , .9 of 1932. 
1932) which is the proprietor of the mark uom those of others; 
(h)"deceptively similar".- A mark shall be deemed to be 5 
deceptively similar to another mark if it so neatly resembles that 
other mark as to be likely to deceive or cause confusion; 
(i) "false trade description" means-
(/) a trade description which is untrue or misleading in a 
material respect as regards the goods or 'services to which 10 
it is applied; or 
(II) any alteration of a trade description as r"'garos me goods 
or services to which it is applied, whether by way of 
addition, effacement or otherwise, where that alteration 
makes the description untrue or misleading in a material 15 
respect ; or 
(Ill) any trade description which denotes or implies that there 
are contained as regards the goods to which it is applied , 
more • • • metres than, there are contained there in • • • 
standards . metres; or 20 
(W) any mark or arrangement or combination thereof when 
applied-
(a) to goods in such a manner as to be likely to lead persons to 
believe.Ahat the goods are t he manufacture or merchandise 
of so,ne person other than the person whose merchandise 25 
or manufacture they really are; 
(b) in relation to services in such a manner as to be likely to 
lead persons to believe that the services are provided or 
rendered by some person other than the person whose 
services they , really are; or, 30 
(V) any false name or initials of a person applied to goods or 
services in such manner as if such name or initials were a 
trade description in any case where the name or initials-
(a) is or are not a trade mark or part of a t1ade mark; and 
(b) is or are identical with or deceptively similar to the 35 
name or initials of a person carrying on business. in 
connection with goods or services of the same descrip­
tion or both and who has not authorised the use of 
such name or initials; and 
(c) is or are either the name or initials of a fictitious 40 
person or of some person not bona. fide carrying on 
business in connection with such goods or services, 
and the fact-that a trade description is a trade mark or part of a 
trade mark shall not prevent such trade description being a false 
trade description within the meaning of this Act; 45 
(j) "goods" means any thing which is the subject of trade or 1 
manufacture; 
(k) "limitations" (with its grammatical variations) means any 
limitation of the exclus~ve right to the use of a trade mark given by 

the registration of a person as proprietor thereof, including 
limitations of that right as to mode or area of use within India 
or outside India; 
(I) "mark" includes a device, brand , heading, label, ticket, 
s name , signature, word, letter, numeral , the shape of goods , 
packaging, combination of colours of any combination thereof ; 
(m) "Member " means a Judicial Member or a Technical 
Menlber of the Appellate .Boai<f and includes the Chairman; 
(n) "name " includes any abbreviation of a n ame; 
10 (o) "notify" means to notify in the Trade Mark Journal 
published by the Registrar ; 
(p) "package" includes any case, box, container, covering, 
folder, receptacle , vessel, casket , bottle , wrapper, label, band , 
ticket , reel, frame , capsule, cap, lid, stopper and cork ; 
15 (q) "permitted use", in relation t o a registered trade mark , 
means the use of a trade mark-
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
(i) by a registered user of the trade mark in relation 
to goods or services-
(a) with which he is connected in the course of 
trade; and 
(b) in respect of which the trade mark remains 
registered for the time being; and 
(c) for which he is registered as registered user; 
and 
(d) which complies with a ny conditions or limita­
tions to which 'the registration of registered user is 
subject; or 
(ii) by a person other than the registered proprietor 
and registered user in relation to goods or services-
(a) with which he is connected i n the course of 
trade; and 
(b) in respect of which the trade mark remains 
registered for the time being; and 
(c) by consent of such resistered proprietor in a 
written agreement; and 
(d) which complies with any conditions or limita­
tions to which such user is subject and to which the 
registration of th~ trade mark is subject; 
(r) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under 
this Act; 
(s) "register" means the Register of Trade Marks refer­
red to in sub-section (1) of section 6; 
(t) ''reg~tered" (with its grammatical variations) means 
registered under this Act; 

(u) "registered proprietor", in relation to a trade mark, 
means the person for the time being entered in the register as 
proprietor of the trade mark.; 
(v) "registerC?d trade mark" means a trade, mark which is 
acturuly on the register and remaining in force; 5 
(w) "registered user" means a person who is for the time 
being registered as such under section 49; 
(x) "Registrar" means the Registrar of Trade Marks refer­
red To in section 3; 
(y) "service" means service of any description . which is I 10 
made available to potential users and includes the provision of 
services in connection with business of any industrial or 
commercial matters such as banking, communication, educa­
tion, financing, insurance, chit funds, real estate, transport, 
storage, material treatment, processing, supply of electrical or· 15 
other energy, boarding, lodging, entertainment, amusement, 
construction, repair, conveying of news or information and 
advertising; 
(z) "trade description" means any description, statement or 
other- indication, direct or indirect,-
(i) as to the number, quantity, measure, gauge or 
weight of any goods; or 
(ii) as to the standard of quality of any goods or 
services according to a classification commonly used or 
recognised in the trade; or 
(iii) as to fitness for the purpose, strength, perfor­
mance or behaviour of any goods, being "drugs" as 
defined in the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 or "food'' 
as defined in the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 
1954; or 
(iv) as to the place or country in which or the time at 
which any goods or services were made, produced or 
provided, as the case may be; or 
20 
25 
23. of 194{). 
37 of 1954. 
30 
(v) as to the name and address-or other indication of 
the identity of the manufacturer or of the person provid- 35 
ing the services or of the person for whom the goods are 
manufactured or services provided; or 
(vi) as to the mode of manufacture or producing any 
goods or providing services; or 
(vii) as to the material of which- any goods are com- 40 
posed; or 
(viii) as to any goods being _ the subject of an existing 
patent, .privilege or copyright, 
and includes-
(a) any description as the use of ariy mark which accordi1tg 45 

to the custom of the 'trade is commonly taken to be an 
indication of any of the above matters; 
(b) the description as to any imported goods contained in 
any bill of entry or shipping bil1; 
5 (c) any other description which is likely to be misunder-
stood or mistaken for all or any of the said matters; 
(E!) "trade mark" means a mark capable of being represented 
graphically and which is capable of distinguishing the goods or 
services of one person from those of others and may include, shape 
10 of goods, their packaging and combination of colours; and-
(i) in relation to Chapter XII (o~her than section 108), a 
registered trade mark or a mark used in relation to good~ or 
services for the purppse of indicating or so as to indi~ate a 
connection in the course of trade between the goods or 
15 services, as the case may be, and some person having the right 
as proprietor to use the mark; and 
(ii) in relation to other provisions of this Act, a mark used­
or proposed to be used in relation to goods or services for the 
purpose of indicating or so as to indicate a connection in the 
20 course of trade between the goods or services, as the case may 
be, and some person having the right either as proprietor or by 
way of permitted use, to use the mark whether with or without 
any indication of the identity of that person, and· includes a 
certification trade mark or collective mark; 
25 (zb) "transmission" means transmission by operation of law, 
devolution on the personal representative of a deceased person and 
any other mode of transfer, not being assignment; 
(zc) "tribunal" means the Registrar or, as the case may be, the 
AppeiTate Board, before which the proceeding concerned is 
30 pending. 
(2) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, any refer­
ence-
(a) to "trade mark" shall include reference to "collective mark" 
or "certification trade mark"; 
35 (b) to the use of a mark shall be construed as a reference to the 
use of a printed or other visual representation of the mark; 
(c) to the use of a mark,-
(i) in relation to goods, shall be construed as a reference to 
the use of the mark upon, or in any physical or in any other 
40 relation whatsoever, to such goods; 

Appointment of 
Registrar and 
other officers. 
Power of ReJiS­
trar to withdraw 
or transfer 
cases, etc. 
Trade Marks 
Registry and of· 
fices thereof . 
(U) in relation to semces, shall be construed as a reference 
to the use of the mark as or as part of any statement-About the 
availability, provision or performance of service; 
(d) to the Registrar shall be construed as including a reference 
to any officer when discharging the functions of the Registrar in 5 
pursuance of sub-section (2) of section 3; 
(e) to the Trade Marks Registry shall be construed as including 
a reference to any office of the Trade Marks Registry. 
(3) For the purposes of ·this Act, goods and services are as5<?clated 
with each other if it is likely that those goods might be sold or otherwise 10 
traded in and those services might be provided by the same business and 
so with descriptions of goods and descriptions of services. 
(4) For the purposes of this Act, "existing registered trade mark " 
means a trade mark registered under the Trade and Merchandise Marks 
Act, 1958 immediately before the commencement of this Act. 15 43 of 19S8. 
CHAPTER II 
THE REGISTER AND CONDmONS FOR REOISTRA TION 
3. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, ~tppoint a ~person to be known as the Controller­
General of Patents, Designs1 and Trade . Marks, who shall be the 
Registrar of Trade Marks for the purposes of this Ad. 
(2) The Central Government may appoint such other officers 
with such designations as it thinks fit for the purpose of discharg-
20 
ina, under the superintendence and direction of tt.e Registrar, sucla 
functions of the Registrar \Ioder this Ad as be may from time to 25 
time authorise them to discharge. 
4. Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of 
sub-section (2) of section 3, the Registrar may, by order in 
writing and for reasons to be recorded therein, withdraw any 
matter pending before an officer appointed under the said sub­
section (2) and deal with such matter himself either de novo or 
from the stage it was so withdrawn or transfer the same to 
another officer so appointed who may, subject to special direc­
tions in the order of transfer, proceed with the matter either 
de novo or from the stage it was so transferred. 
S. (1) For the purpose to this . Act, there shall be a trade · marks 
registry and the Trade Marks Registry established under the Trade 
and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958, shall be the Trade Marks 
Registry under this Act 
30 
35 
43 of 1958. 
(2) The bead office of The Trade Marks Registry shall be at 40 
such place as the Central Government may specify, and for the 
purpose of facilitating the registration of trade marks, there may 
be established at such places as the Central Government may think 
fit branch offices of the Trade Marks Registry. 

(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, define the territorial limits within which an office of the Trade 
Marks Registry may exercise its functions. 
( 4) There shall be a seal of the Trade Marks Registry . 
5 6. (1) For the purPQses of this Act, a record called the Register of 
Trade Marks shall be kept at the head office of the Trade Marks Registry 
wherein shall be entered all registered trade marks with the names, 
addresses and description of the proprietors, notifications of assignmeat 
and transmissions, the names, addresses and descriptions of registered 
10 us~rs, conditions, limitations and such other matters relating to registered 
trade marks as may be prescribed . 
(2) No notice of any trust, express or implied or const ructive , shall 
be enfered in the register and no such notice shall be receivabie by the 
Registrar. 
15 (3) The register shall be kept under the control and management of 
the Registrar. 
( 4) There shall be kept at each branch office of the Trade Marks 
Registry a copy of the register and such of the other documents mentioned 
in section t 49 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
20 Official Gazette, direct. 
I 
(5) The Register of Tra.de Marks , both Part A and Part B. existing 
at the commencem ent of this Act, shall be incorporated in and form part 
of the Register under this Act. 
7. (1) The Registrar shall classify goods and services as far as may 
25 be, in accordance with the International classification of goods and 
services for the purpose s of registration of trade marks. 
(2) Any que stion arising as to th e class within which any good s o r 
services fall shall be determined by the Registrar whose decision shall be 
final. 
30 8. (1) The Registrar m ay publish in the prescribed manne r an 
alphabetical index of classification of goods and services referr ed to iD 
section 7. 
/ 
(2) Where any goods or services are not specified i n the a lphabetical 
index of goods and services, p ublished under suh-section (1) , the 
351 classification of goods and services shall be determi ned by the Registrar 
in accordance with sub-section (2), of section 7. 
45 
9. (1) The trade marks-
(a) which are devoid of a ny distinctive characte r, t hat is to say, 
not capable of distinguishing the goods or services of one person 
from those of another perso n; 
(b) which consist exclusively of marks or indications which may 
serve in trade to designate the kind, quality, quantity, intended 
purpose, value, geographical origin or the time of productio n of the 
goods or rende.ring of the service or other characteristics of the 
goods or' service; 
Tire Register ot 
Trade Marks . 
Classification of 
goods and sa­
vices. 
Publication of 
alph abet ical 
index. 
Ah~olut e 
grounds for . re· 
fus<tl of r-:gi~tra· 
tion. 

LinHiillll'll a~ h> 
colour. 
Rdat1 ve ~munr l·. 
inr •du~;l nt r~· 
gJS!rJi it11), 
(c) which cOMist exclusively or marks or indications which · have 
become customary in ~he cUR~ftt language or in the bona fid~ and 
established practices of the trade, · 
shall not be registered: 
Provided that a trade mark shall not be refused registration if bt:fore 5 
the date of app lication for registration it has acquired a distinctive 
character as a result of the use made of it or is a well-known trade mark. --------
(2) A mark shall not be registered as a trade mark lf-
(a) it is of such nature as to deceive the public or cause 
confusion; 10 
(b) it contains or comprises of any matter likely to hurt the 
religious susceptibilities of any class or section of the citizens of 
India; 
(c) it comprises or contains scandalous or obscene matter; 
(d) its use is prohibited under the Emblems and Names IS 
(Prevention of Improper Use) Act, 1950. 12 of 1950. 
(3) A mark shall not be registered as a· trade mark if it consists 
exclusively of-
(a) the shape of goods which results from the nature of the 
goods themselves; or 
(b) the shape of goods which is necessary to obta in a technical 
result ; or 
(c) the ~hape which give s substantial value to the goods. 
20 
Explana tion. - For the purposes of this section, the nature of goods j 
CiT Services m rela tion to which the trade mark is used o r proposed to be . 25 
used shall not be a ground for refusal of registration. I 
10. (1) A trade mark may be limited wholly or in part to any 
combination of colours and any such limitation shall be taken into 
consideration by the tribunal having to decide on the distinctive character 
of the trade mark. 
(2) So far as a trade mar k is registered without limitation of colour, 
it shall be deemed to be registered for all ·colours. 
ll. (1) Save as provided m section 12, a tntde mark shall not be 
registe red if, beca use of-
30 
(a) its identity with an earlier trade mark and similarity of goods 35 
or services covered by the trade mark; or 
{b) its similarity to an earlier trade mark and the identity or 
similarity of the goods or serv.ices covered by the trade mark, 
there exists a likelihood of confus ion on the part of the pubhc, which 
includes the likelihood of association with the earlie r trade mark. 40 
(2) A trade mark which-
(a) is ide ntical with or similar to an earlier trade mark; and 
(b) is to be registered for goods or services which are not 

similar to those for which the earlier kade mark is registered in the 
name of a different proprietor, 
shall not be registered if or to the extent the earlier trade mark is a well­
known trade mark in India and the use of the later mark without due 
5 cause wouldtake unfair advant age of or be deterimen tal to the 
distinctive character .or repute of the earlier trade mark. 
(3) A trade mark shall not be registered if, or to the extent that, its 
use in India i s liable to be prevented-
(a) by virtue of any law in part icular the law of passing off 
10 protecting an unregistered trade mark used in the course of trade ; 
or 
(b) by virtue of law of copyright. 
(4) Nothing in this section shall prevent the registration of a trade 
mark where the proprietor of the earlier trade mark or other earlier ·right 
15 consents to the registration, and in such case the Registrar may register 
the mark urider special circumstances under section 12. 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
Explanation I.-fo r the purposes of this section, earlier trad~ mark 
means--
(a) .a registered trade mark or convention 31'Piication referred to 
in section 155 which has a date of application earlier than that of 
the trade mark in question, taking account , where approp riate , of 
the priorities claimed in res~ct of the trade marks; 
(b) a trade mark which, on the date of the application for 
registration of the trade mark in question, or where appr opriate , of 
the · priority claimed in respect of the application, was entitled to 
protection as a well-known . trade mark . 
Explanation //.-For the purposes of this Act, in determining 
whether a trade mark is well-known, account shall be taken of the 
knowledge of that trade mark in the relevant section of the public 
including knowledge in India obtained as a result of prometion of the 
trade mark . 
(5) A trade mark shall not be refused ~~egistration on the grounds 
specified in sub-sections (2) and (3) unless objection on any one or more 
of those grounds is raised in opposition proceedings by the proprietor of 
the earlier tra de mark. 
12. In the case of honest concurrent use or of other special 
circumstances which, in the opinion of the Registrar , make it proper so 
to do , he may permit the registration by more than one proprietor of the 
trade marks which are identical or similar (whether any such trade mark 
is already registered or not) in respect of the same or similar . goods or 
services, subject to such condi~ions and limitations, if any, as the 
Registrar may think fit to impose. 
13. No word-
Registration in 
the cMe of hon· 
est <»tK:urrenr 
use,. etc. 
t>rohibition of 
re,iltnttien of 
(a) which is the commonly used and accepted name of any names of dtemi -
single ohemical element or any single chemical compound (as :!.::' or 45 
·~ MIDU . 

Use of name~ 
and rerre~nta­
tion~ of living 
person s or per­
sons recently 
dead . 
Reg imation of 
pa r t~ of trade 
mark s and oi 
trade m:~rk s as a 
serie ~. 
Re gi~:ratt on uf 
trade marks as 
a~sod at~d tra de 
mark s. 
distinguished from a mixture) in respect of a chemical substance or 
preparation, or 
(b) which is declared by the World Health Organisation and 
notified in the prescribed manner by the Registrar from time to 
time , as an international non-proprietary name or which is decep- 5 
tively similar to such name, 
shall be registered as a trade mark .and any such registration shall be 
deemed for the purpose of section 57 to be an entry made in the regi.ster 
without sufficient cause or an entry wrongly remaining on the register. as 
the circumstances may require. 10 
14. Where an application is made for the fegistrat-ion of a trade 
mark which falsely suggests a connection with any li ~·ing person, or a 
person whose death took place within twenty years prior to the date of 
application for registration of the trade mark, the Registrar may, before 
he proceeds with the application, require the applicant to furnish him 15 
with the consent in writing of such living person or, as the case may be, 
of the legal representative of the deceased person to the connection 
appearing on the trade mark, and may refuse to ptoc.eed with the 
application unless the applicant furnishes the Registrar with suda 
consent . 20 
15. (1) Where the proprietor of a trade mark claims to be entitled to 
the exclusive use of any part thereof separately , he may apply to regi~ter 
the whole and the part as separate trade marks. 
(2) Each such separate trade mark shall satisfy all the conditions 
applying to, and have all the incidents of, an independent trade mark. 25 
(3) Where a person claiming to be the proprietor of several trade 
marks in respect of the same or similar goods or services ,or description 
of goods or de-scription of services which, while resembling each other in 
the material particulars thereof, yet differ in respect· of-
( a) statement of the goods or services in relation to which they, 30 
are respectively used or proposed to be used; er 
(b) statement of number, price, quality or names of places; or 
(c) other matter of a non-distinctive character which d0es not 
substantially affect the identity of the trade mark;· or 
(d) colour, 
seeks to register those trade marks, they may be registered as a series in 
one registration. 
16. (I) Where a trade mark which is registered, or is the subject of 
35 
an application for registration, in respect of any goods or services is 
identical with another trade mark which is registered, or is the subject of 40 
an application for registration, in the name of the same proprietor in 
respect of the same goods or description of goods or same services or 
description of services or so nearly resembles it as to be likely to deceive 
or cause confusion if used by a person other than the proprietor , the 
Registrar may, at any time, require that the trade marks shall be entered 45 
on the register as associated trade marks. 

(2) Where there is an identity or near resemblance of marks that 
are regis tered , or are the subject of applications for registration in the 
name of the same proprietor in respect of goods and in respect of 
services which are associated with those goods or goods of that 
5 description and with those services or service s of that description , sub­
secti on (1) applie s as it applies as where there is an identity or near 
resemblance of marks that are registered , or are the subject of 
application s for reg istrati on, in the name of the same proprietor in 
respect of t he same goo ds or description of goods or same service s o r 
10 descr iption of services. 
(3) Where a trade mark and any part ther eof are, in accordance with 
the provis ions of sub-section (1) of sect io n 1 5, registered as sepa rate 
trade marks in the name of the same proprietor, the y s hall be deemed to 
be, and shall be reg istered as, associa ted t rade marks. 
tS (4) All trade marks registered in accordance with th e provisions o f 
sub-section (3) of section 15 as a series in one regist ration shall be 
deemed to be, and shall be registere d as, associated trade ma rks. 
(5) On application made in the presc ribed manner by the registered 
proprietor of two or more trade marks registered as associated trade 
20 marks, the Registrar may dissolve the ussociation as respects any of them 
if he is satisfied that there would be no likel ihood of deception or 
confusion being caused if that trade mark were used by any other person 
in relation to any of the goods or services or both in respect of which it 
is registered and may amend the register accord ingly. 
25 17. (1) When a trade mark consists of several matters, its registra- Effect of regist· 
tion shall confer on the proprietor exclusive right to the use of the trade ration of part~ 
of a m;~rk. 
mark taken as a whole. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub~section (1), when a 
trade mark-
30 (a) contains any part -
(i) which is not the the subject of a separate application by 
the proprietor for registration as a trade mark; or 
(ii) .which is not separately registered by the proprietor as 
a trade mark; or · 
35 (b) contains any matter which is common to the trade or is 
otherwise of a non-distinctive character, 
the registration thereof shall not confer any exclus ive right in matter 
forming only a· part of the whole of the trade mark so registered. 
CHAPTER Ill 
40 PR:OCEDURE FOR AND OURA TJON OF REOISTRA TION 
1~. (1) Any person claiming to be the proprietor of a trade · m~1rk Application for 
used or proposed to be used by him, who is desirous of registering 1t, registration 
shall apply in writing to the Registrar in the prescribed manner for the 
registration of his trade mark. 

(2) A single application may be made for registration of a trade 
mark for different classes of goods and services and fee payable therefor 
shall be in respect of each such class of goods or services 
(3) Every applieation under sub-section (1) shall be filed in the 
office of the Trade Marks Registry within whose territorial limits the 5 
principal place of business in India of the applicant or in the case of joint 
applicants the principal place of business in India of the applicant whose 
name is first-mentioned in the application as having a place of business in 
India, is situate: 
Provided that where the applicant or any of the joint applicants does 10 
not carry on.business in India, the application shall be filed in the offiee 
of the Trade Marks Registry within whose territorial limits the place 
mentioned in tpe address for service in India as disclosed in the 
application, is situate. 
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Registrar may refuse 15 
the application or may accept it absolutely or subject to such amend­
ments, modification, conditions or limitations, if any, as he may think fit. 
(5) In the case of a refusal or conditional acceptance of an 
application , the Registrar shall record in writing the grounds for such 
refusal or conditional acceptance and the materials used by him in 20 
arriving at his decision. 
Withdrawal 
~~Cteptance. 
of 19. Where, after the acceptance of an application for registration of 
Mt,ertieement 
(f( application. 
a trade mark but before its registration, the Registrar is satisfied--
(a) that the application has been accepted in error; or 
(b) that in the circumstances of the case the trade mark should 25 
not be registered or should be registered subject to conditions or 
limitations or to conditions additional to or different from the 
conditions or limitations subject to which the application has been 
accepted, 
the Registrar may! after hearing the applicant if he so desires, withdraw 30 
the acceptance and proceed as if the application had not been accepted. 
28. (1) When an application for registration of a trade mark has 
been accepted, whether absolutely or subject to conditions or limitations, 
the Registrar shall, as soon as may be after acceptance, cause the 
application as accepted together with the conditions or limitations, if any 
subject to which it has been accepted, to be advertised in the prescribed 
manner; 
35 
Provided that the Registrar may cause the application to be 
advertised before acceptance if it relates to a trade mark to which sub­
section (1) of section 9 and sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 11 apply, or 40 
in any other c~se where it appears to him that it is expedient by reason of 
any exceptional circumstances so to do. 
(2) Where--
(a) an application has been advertised before acceptance 
under sub-section (1); or 45 
(b) after advertisement of an application,-

(i) an error in the applk:ation a. bMD. cerreded; or 
(ii) the application .._ ~ peiWiUad 1e lte amended 
under section 22, 
the Registrar may in his discretion cause the application to be advertised 
5 again or in any case falling under. clause (b) may, instead of causing the 
appli cation to be advertised again, notify in the prescribed manner the 
correction or amendment made in the application. 
21. (1) Any person may, within three months from the date of the Opposition 
advertisement or re-advertisement of an application for registration or registration. 
10 within such further period, not exceeding one month in the aggregate, as 
the Registrar, on application made to him in the prescribed manner and 
on payment of the prescribed fee, allows, give notice in writing in the 
prescribed manner to the Registrar, of opposition to the registration. 
(2) The· Registrar shall serve a copy of the notice on the applicant 
15 for registration and, within two months from the receipt by the applicant 
of such copy of the notice of opposition, the applicant shaH send tp the 
Registrar in the prescribed manner a counter-statement of the grounds 
on which he relies for his application, and· if he does not do so he shaH 
be deemed to have abandoned his application. 
20 (3) If the applicant sends such counter-statement, the Registrar shaH 
serve a copy thereof on the person giving notice of opposition. 
(4) Any evidence upon which the opponent and the applicant may 
rely shall be submitted in the prescribed manner and within the precribed 
time to the- Registrar, and the Registrar shall give an opportunity to 
25 them to be. heard, if ti1ey so desire. 
(5) The Registrar shall, after hearing the parties, if so required, and 
considering the evidence, decide whether and subject to what conditions 
or limitations, if any, the registration is to be permitted , and may take 
into account a ground of o~jection whether relied upon by the opponent 
30 or not. 
(6) Where a perso n giving no~ ice of opposition or an applicant 
sending a counter-statement after receipt of a copy of such notice neither 
resides nor·carries on business in India, the Registrar may require him to 
give security for the costs of proceedings before him, and in default of 
35 such security being duly g!ven, may treat the opposition or application as 
the case may be, as abandoned. 
40 
45 
(7) The Registrar may, on request, permit correction of any error in, 
or any amendment of, a notice of opposition or a counter-statement on 
such terms as. he thinks just . 
22. The R~gistrar may, on such terms as he thinks just, at any time 
whether before or after acceptance of an application for registration 
under section 18, permit the .~orrection of any error in or in connection 
with the application or permit an amendment of the application: 
1 Provided that if an amendment is made to a single application 
/
referred to in sub-section (2) of section 18 involving division of such 
application into two. or more applications, the date of making of the 
Correction and 
;~mendment. 

26 
Jinitial application shaU be deemed to be the date of making of the 
divided application s s o divided. 
Registration. 23. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 19, when an application 
Jointly owned 
trade mark s. 
Duration, rc· 
newal removal 
and restora tion 
of 1 egistration. 
for registration .of a trade mark has been accepted and either-
( a) The app lication has not bee n opposed and the time for 5 
notice of opposition has expired; or 
(b) the application has been opposed and the opposition has 
been decided in favour of the applicant, 
the Registrar shall register the said trade mark and the trade mark when 
registered .shall be registered as of the date of the making of the 10 
said application and the date shall , subje ct to the provisions of section 
155, be deem ed to be the date of registration. 
(2) On the registration of a trade mark , the Regi strar shall issue to 
the appli cant a certificate in the pre scribed form of the registration 
thereof, sealed with the seal of the trade Marks Registry. 15 
(3) Where registration of a trade mark is not completed within 
twelve month s from the date of the application by reason of default on 
the part of the applicant , the Registrar may , after giving noti ce t o the 
applicant in the prescribed manner , treat the application as abandoned 
unless i t i s c ompleted within the time s pecified in that behalf in the. 20 
notice. 
(4) The Regi strar may amend the register or a certificat e of 
registration for the pllrpos e of correcting a clerical error or an obv ious 
mastake. 
24. (1) Save as provided in sub-section (2) , nothing in this Act shall 25 
authorise the registration of two or more persons who use a trade ma rk 
independentl y, or propose so to use it, as joint proprietor:-. thereo f. 
(2) w ;1ere the relations bet ween two or more perso ns interes ted in .. 
trade mark are such that no one of them i s e ntitled as betwee n h imself 
and the o ther or others of them to use it except-
(a) on behalf of both or all of them; or 
(b) in relation to an ar ticle o r service with which both or all of t hem 
are conn ected in the course of trade , 
30 
those perso ns may be registered as joint proprietors of the trade mark, 
and this Act shall have effect i n relation to a ny rights to the use of the 35 
trade mark vested in those p ersons as if those rights had been vested in a 
single person. 
25. (1) The registratio n Qf a t rade n aark, after the commencement of 
this Act, shall be for a period of ten years, but may be renewed from 
time to time in accorda nce with the prov isions of this section. 40 
(2) The Regist-rar shall, o n application made by the registered 
propr ietor of a trade mark in the prescribed man ner and within thi! 
prescribed period and subject to p..tyment of the prescribed fee, renew 
the regist~ttti9!1 . of the trade mark for a petiod of ten years from the date 
of expirat1on of the original registration or of the last renewal of 45 

registration, as the case may be (which date is in this section referred to 
as the expiration of the last registration). 
(3) At the prescribed time before the expiration of the last 
registration of a trade ~ark the Registrar shall send notice in the 
5 prescribed manner to the registered proprietor of the date of expiration 
and the conditions as to payment of fees and otherwise upon which a 
renewal of registration may be obtained, and, if at the expiration of the 
time prescribed in that behalf those conditions have not been duly 
complied with the Registrar may remove the trade mark from the 
10 register: 
Provided that the Registrar shall not remove the trade mark from 
the register if an application is made in the prescribed form and the 
prescribed fee and surcharge is paid within six months from the 
expiration of the last registration of the trade mark and shall renew the 
15 registration of the trade mark for a period of ten years under sub-section 
(2). 
• • • • • 
(4) Where a trade mark has been removed from the register for non­
payment of the prescribed fee, the Registrar shall, after six months and 
20 within one year from the expiratiQn of the last registration of the trade 
mark, on receipt of an application in the prescribed form and on 
payment of the prescribed fee, if satisfied that it is just so to do, restore 
the trade mark to the register and renew the registration of the trade 
mark either generally or subject to such conditions or limitations as he 
25 thinks fit to impose, for a period of ten years from the expiration of the 
last registration. 
26. Where a trade mark has, been removed from the register for 
failure to pay the fee from renewal, it shall nevertheless, for the purpose 
of any application for the registration of another trade mark during one 
30 year, next after the date of the removal, be deemed to be a trade mark 
already on the register, unless the tribunal is satisfied either-
( a) that there has been no bona fide trade use of the trade 
mark which has been removed during the' two years immediately 
preceding its removal; or 
35 (b) that no deception or confusion would be likely to arise from 
40 
the use of the trade mark which is the subject of the application for 
registration by reason of any previous use of the trade mark which 
has been renlOved. 
CHAPTER IV 
EFFECf OF ~EGISTRATION 
27. (1) No person shall be entitled to institute any proceeding to 
prevent, or to recover damages for, the infringement of an unregistered 
trade · mark. 
(2) Nothing in this Act· shall be deemed to affect rights of action 
45 against any person for passing off goods or services as the goods of 
another person or as services provided by another person, or the 
remedies in respect thereoL · 
Effect of remov· 
at from regi~ter 
for failure to 
pay fe.: for re­
newal. 
No action for in­
fringement of 
unregistered 
trade mark. 

Rights conferred 
hy registration . 
lnfnn~ement of 
registered trade 
mark~ . 
28. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the registration of a 
trade mark shall, if valid, give to the registration proprietor of the trade 
mark the exclusive right to the use of the trade mark in relation to the 
goods or services in respect of which the trade mark is registered 
and to obtain relief in respect of infringement of the trade mark in the 5 
manner provided by this Act. 
(2) The exclusive right to the use of a trade mark given under sub­
section (1) shall be subject to any conditions and limitations to which the 
registration is subject. 
(3) Where two or more persons are registered proprietors of trade 10 
marks, which are identical with or nearly resemble each other. the 
exclusive right to the use of any of those marks shall not (except so far as 
their respective rights are subject to any conditions or limitations entered 
on the register) be deemed to have been acquired by any one of those 
persons as against any other of those persons merely by registration of the 15 
trade marks but each of those persons has otherwise the same rights as 
against other persons (not being registered users using by way of 
permittted use) as he would have if he were the sole registered proprietor. 
29. (1) A registered trade mark is infringed by a person who, not 
being a registered proprietor or a person using by way of permitted use, 20 
uses in the course of trade, a mark which is identical with , or deceptively 
similar to, the trade mark in relation to goods or services in respect of 
which the trade mark is registered and in such manner as to render the use 
of the mark likely to be taken as being use a trade mark. 
(2) A registered trade mark is infringed by a persnn s ho . not being a 25 
registered proprietor or a person using by way of permitt ~ d u~e . uses in 
the course of trade, a mark which because of-
(a) its identity with the registered trade mark and the similarity 
of the goods or services covered by such registered trade mark; or 
(b) its similarity to the registered trade mark and the identity or 30 
similarity of the goods or services covered by such registered trade 
mark; or 
(c) its identity with the registered trade mark and the identity of 
the goods or services covered by such registered trade mark, 
is likely to cause confusion on the part of the public, or which is likely to 35 
have an association with the registered trade mark. 
(3) In any case falling under cluse (c) of sub-section (2), the court 
shall presume that it is likely to cause confusion on the part of the public. 
(4) A registered trade mark is infringed by a person who , not being a 
registered proprietor or a person using by way of permitted use, uses in 40 
the course of trade, a mark which-
(a) is identical with or similar to the registered trade mark; and 
(b) is used in relation to goods or services which are not similar 
to those for which the trade mark is registered; and 
(c) the registered trade mark has a reputation in India and the 45 

use of the mark without due cause takes unfare advantage of or is 
detrimental to, the distinctive character or repute of the registered 
trade mark. 
(5) A registered trade mark is infringed by a person if he uses such 
5 registered trade mark, as his trade name or part of his trade name, or 
name of his business concern or part of the name, of his business 
concern dealing in goods or services in respect of wh ich the trade mark is 
r;gistered. · 
(6) For the purposes of the section, a person uses a registered mark, 
10 if, in particular, he---
( a) affixes it to goods or the packaging thereof; 
(b) offers or exposes goods for sale, puts them on the mark~t 
or stocks them for those purposes under the registered trade mark, 
or offers or supplies services under the registered trade mark; 
15 (c) imports or exports goods under the mark; or 
(d) uses the registered trade mark on business paJ1ers or in 
advertising. 
(7) A r egistered trade mark is infringed by a person who applies 
·.;uch regi•;tercd trade mark to a material intended to be used for labelling 
20 or ~tckaging goods, as a busine'is paper, or for advertising goods or 
services. provided such person, when he applied the mark , knew or had 
reason to beli·:ve that the application of the mark was not duly 
au thori!-.ed by the proprietor or a licensee. 
{8) A registered trade mark is infringed by any advertising of that 
25 trade mark if such advertising--
30 
35 
40 
' (a) takes unfair advantage of and is contrary to honest practices 
m industrial or commercial matters; or 
(b) is detrimental to the distinctive character, or 
(c) is against the reputation of the trade mark. 
(9) Where the distinctive elements of a registered trade mark consist 
of or include words, the trade mark ma~ be infringed by the spoken use 
of those words as well as hy their vi'iual representation and reference in 
this section to the use of a mark shall be construed accordingly. 
30. ( 1) Nothing in section 29 shall be construed as preventing the 
use of a registered trade mark by any person for· the purposes of 
identifying goods or services as those of the proprietor provided the 
use-
(a) is in accordance with honest practices in industrial or 
commercial matters , and 
(h) is not such as to take unfair advantage of or be detrimental 
to the distinctive character or repute of the trade mark. 
(2) A registered trade mark is not infringed where-
(a) the use in relation to goods or services indicates the .kind, 
quality, quantity, intended purpose. value, geographical origin, the 
Limits on effect 
of r~gistered 
, :.~de mark . 

time of production of goods or of rendering of ~rvices or other 
characteristics of goods or services; 
(b) a trade mark is registered subject to any conditions or 
limitations, the use of the trade mark in any manner in relation to 
goods to be sold or otherwise traded in, in any place, or in relation 5 
to goods to be exported to any market or .in relation to services for 
use or available for acceptance in any place or country outside India 
or in any other circumstances, to which, having regard to those 
conditions or limitations, the registration does not extend; 
(c) the use by a person of a trade mark- 10 
(i) in relation to · goods connected in the course of trade with 
the proprietor or a registered user of the trade mark if, as to those 
goods or a bulk of which they form part, the registered proprietor 
or the registered user conforming to the permitted use has applied 
the trade mark and has not subsequently removed or obliterated it, 15 
or has at any time expressly or impliedly consented to the use of the 
trade mark; or 
(ii) in relation to services to which the proprietor of such mark 
or of a registered user conforming to the permitted use has applied 
the mark, where the purpose and effect of the use of the mark is to 20 
indicate, in accordance with the fact, that those services have been 
performed by the proprietor or a registered user of the mark; 
(d) the use of a trade mark by a person in relation to goods 
adapted to form part of, or to be accessory to, other goods or 
services in relation to which the trade mark has been used without 25 
infringement of the right given by registration under this Act or 
might for the time being be so used, if the use of the trade mark is 
reasonably necessary in order to indicate that the goods or services 
are so adapted, and neither the purpose nor the effect of the use of 
the trade mark is to indicate, otherwise than in accordance with the 30 
fact, a connection in the course of trade between any persqt and 
the goods or services, as the case may be; 
(e) the use of a registered trade mark, being one of two or 
more trade marks registered under this Act which ?re identical or 
nearly resemble each Qther, m exercise of the right to the use of 35 
that t'rade mark given by registration under this Act. 
(3) Where the goods bearing a registered trade mark are lawfuJly 
acquired by a pe~on, the sale of the goods in the market or otherwise 
dealing in those goods by that person or by a person claiming under or 
through him is not infringement of a· trade ma(k by reason only of- 40 
(a) the registered trade mark having been assigned by the 
registered proprietor to some other person, after the acquisition of 
those goods; or 
(b) the goods having been put on the market under the 
registered trade mark by the proprietor or with his consent. 45 
(4) Sub-section (3) shall not apply where there exists legitimate 

reasons for the proprietor to oppose further dealings in the goods. in 
particular, where the condition of the goods has been changed or impaired 
after they have been put on the market. 
31. (1) In all legal proceedings relating to a trade mark registered 
S• under this Act (including applications under section 57). the original 
registration of the trade mark and of all subsequent assignments and 
transmissions of the trade mark shall be prima facie evidence of the 
validity thereof. 
(2) In all legal proceedings as aforesaid a registered trade mark shall 
10 not be held to be invalid on the ground that it was not a registrable trade 
mark under section 9 except upon evidence of distinctiveness and that 
such evidence was not submitted to the Registrar before registration, if it 
is proved that the trade mark had been so used by the registered 
proprietor or his predecessor in title as to have become distinctive at the 
15 date of registration. 
32. Where a trade mark is registered in breach of sub-section {I) of 
section 9, it shall not be declared invalid if, in consequence of the use 
which has been made of it, it has after registration and before 
commencement of any legal proceedings challenging the validity of such 
20 registration, acquired a distinctive character in relation to the good" or 
services for which it is registered. 
33. (1) Where the proprietor of an earlier trade mark has acquiescd 
for a continuous period of five years in the use of a registered tmde mark. 
being aware of that use, he shall no longer be entitled on the basis of that 
25 earlier trade mark-
(a) to apply for a dec:aration that the registration of the later trade 
mark is invalid, or 
(b) to oppose the use of the later trade mark in relation to the goods 
or services in relation to which it has been so used, 
30 unless the registration of the later trade mark was not applied in good 
faith. 
(2) Where sub-section (1) applies, the proprietor of the later trude 
mark is not enlitled to oppose the use of the earlier trade mark, or as the 
case may be, the exploitation of the earlier right, notwithstanding that the 
35 earlier trade mark may no longer be invoked against his later trade mark. 
34. Nothing in this Act shall entitle the proprietor or a registered user 
of registered trade Mark to interfere with or restrain the use by any person 
of a trade mark identical with or nearly resembling it in relation to goods 
or services in relation to which that person or a predeces sor in title of his 
40 has continuous)y used that trade mark from a date prior-
(a) to the use of the first-mentioned trade mark in realtion to those 
goods or services by the proprietor or a predecessor in title of his; or 
(b) to the date of registration of the first-mentioned trade mark 
in respect of those goods or services in the name of the proprietor or 
45 a predecessor in title of his; 
whichever is the earlier , and the Registrar shall not refuse (on such use 
Ro:gi,trauon to 
he prima facit' 
eVIllence of val· 
llhly 
f'1 otcrllt>ll •>f ro:· 
)!l'tr.HifHl on 
grnund nf di~· 
lllll'IIVC:IIC\S 111 
cc: rtalll c a~ C'\. 
'E t feet pf ac­
l)llle , c.:nce 
Sa' Ill!,: fnr Y c~ ­
t.:d llghh 

Saving for use of 
name, address 
or description of 
goods or ser· 
vices. 
Saving for words 
used as name or 
description of an 
article or subst· 
ance or service. 
being proved) to register the second-mentione~ trade mark by reason 
only of the registration of the first-mentioned trade mark. 
35. Nothing in this Act shaH entitle the proprietor or a registered 
user of a registered trade mark to interfere with any bona fide use by a 
person of his own name . or that of his place of business, or of the name, s 
or of the name of the place of business, of any of his predecessors in 
business, or the use by any person of any bona fide description of the 
character or quality of his goods or services. 
36. (1) The registration of a trade mark shaH not be deemed to 
have become invalid by reason only of any use after the date of the 10 
registration of any word or words which the trade mark contains or of 
which it consists as the name or description of an article or substance or 
service: 
Provided that, if it is proved either-
(a) that there is a well-known and established use of the said word. 1~ 
as the name or description of the article or substance or service by a 
person or persons carrying on trade therein, not being use in 
relation to goods or services connected in the course of trade with 
the proprietor or a registered user of the trade mark or (in the case 
of a certification trade mark) in relation to goods or services 20 
certified by the proprietor; or 
(b) that the artide or substance was formerly manufactured under a 
patent that a period of two years or more after the cesser of the 
patent has elapsed and that the said word is the only practicable 
name or description of the article, or substance, 25 
the provisions of sub-section (2) shall apply. 
(2) Where the facts mentioned in clause (a) or clause (b) of the 
proviso to sub-section {1) are proved with respect to any words, then,-
(a) for the purposes of any proceedings under section 57 if the trade 
mark consists solely of such words, the registration of the trade 30 
mark, so far as regards registration in respect of the article or 
substance in question or of any goods of the same description, or of 
the services or of any services of the same description, as the ca~e 
requires, shaH be deemed to be an entry wrongly remaining on the 
register; 35 
(b) for the purposes of any other legal proceedings relating to the 
trade mark,-
(i) if the trade mark consists solely of such words, all rights of 
the proprietor under this Act or any other law to the use of the trade 
m~;m ~ 
(ii) if the trade mark contains such words and other matter. all 
such rights of the proprietor to the use of such words. 
in relation to the article or substance or to any goods of the same 
description , or to the service or to any services of the same 
description, as the case requires, shall be deemed to have ceased on "45: 

the date on which the use mentioned in clause (a) of the proviso .to 
sub-section (1) first became well-known and establi shed or at the 
expiration of the period of two years mentioned in clause (b) of the 
said proviso. 
CHAPTER V 
Ac;stGNMENT AND TRANSMISSION 
37 •. The person for the time being entered in the register a 
proprietor of a trade mark shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and 
to any rights appearing from the regi ster to be vested in any other 
1{) person, have power to assign the trade mark, and to give effectual 
receipts for any consideration for such assignment. 
38. Notwithstanding anything in any other law to the contrary, a 
registered trade mark shall, subject to the provisions of this Chapter, be 
assignable and transmissible, whether with or without the goodwill of the 
15 business concerned and in respect either of all the goods or services in 
respect of which the trade mark is registered or of some only of those 
goods or services . 
' 
39. An unregistered trade mark may be assigned or transmitted with 
or without the goodwill of the business concerned. 
20 40. (1) Notwithstanding any thing in sections 38 and 39, a trade 
mark shall not be assignable or transmissible in a case in which as a 
result of the assignment or transmission there would in the circumstances 
subs ist, whether under this Act or any other law, exclusive rights in more 
than one of the persons concerned to the use, in relation to-
25 (a) same goods or ~ervices; 
(b) same description of goods or services; 
(c) goods or serv ices or description of goods and services which are 
associated with each other, 
of trade marks nearly resembling each other or of identical trade mark, if 
30 having regard to the similarity of the goods and services and to the 
similarity of the trade . marks, the use of the trade marks in exercise of 
those rights would be likely to deceive or cause confusion: 
Provided that an assignment or transmission shall not be deemed to 
be invalid under this sub-section if the exclusive rights subsisting as a 
35 result thereof in the persons concerned respectively are, having regard to 
limitation s imposed thereon, such as not to be exercisable by two or 
more of those persons in relation to goods to be sold, or o therwise 
traded in, within India otherwise than for export therefrom, or in 
relation to goods to be exported to the same m(\rket outside Ind ia or in 
40 relation to services for use at any place in India or any place outside 
India in relation to services availab le for acceptance in India. 
(2) The proprietor of a registered trade mark who proposes to 
assign it may submit to the Registrar in the prescribed manner a 
statement of case setting out the circumstances and the Registrar may 
45 issue to him a certificate stating whether, having regard to the similarity 
of the goods or services and of the trade marks referred to in the case, 
Power of regis· 
ten~d proprietor 
to assign and 
gtve receipts. 
Assignability 
and transmini· 
bility of regis: 
tered trade 
marks . 
Assignability 
and transmissi· 
bility of un-re­
gistered trade 
marks. 
Restriction on 
assignment or 
transmission 
where multiple· 
exclustve rights 
would be ere· 
a ted . 

Restriction on 
as~ignment or 
transmission 
when exclusive 
rights would be 
created in diffe· 
rent parts of 
India . 
Conditions for 
assignment 
other ·-wise than 
in connecti on 
witli the good­
will of a husi· 
ness. 
the proposed assignment would or would not be invalid under sub­
section {I), and a certificate so issued shall, subject to appeal and unless 
it is shown that the certificate was obtained by fraud or 
misrepresentation, be conclusive as to the validity or invalidity under 
sub-section (J) of .the assignment in so far as such validity or invalidity 5 
depends upon the facts set out in the case, but, as regards a certificate in 
favour of validity, only if application for the registration under section 45 
of the title of the person becoming entitled is made within six months 
from the date on which the certificate is issued. 
41. Notwithstanding anything in sections 38 and 39, a trade mark 10 
shall not be assig~able or transmissible in a case in which as a result of 
the assignment oJ transmission there would in the circumstances subsist, 
'whether under this Act or any other law-
(a) an exclusive right in one of the persons concerned , to the use of 
the trade mark limited. to use in relation to goods to be sold or 15 
otherwise traded in,- in any place in India, or in relation to services 
for use, or services available for acceptance in any place in India; 
and 
(b) an exclusive right in another of these persons concerned, to the 
use of a trade mark neraly resembling the first-mentioned trade mark or 20 
of an identical trade mark in relation t(}-
(i) the same goods or services; or 
(ii) the same description of goods or services; or 
(iii) services which are associated with those goods or goods of 
that description or goods which are associated with those services or 25 
services of that description, 
limited to use in relation to goods to be sold or otherwise traded in, or 
services for use, or available for acceptance, in any other place in India: 
Provided that in any such case, on application in -the prescribed 
manner by the proprietor of a trade mark who proposes to assign it, or 30 
by a person who claims that a registered trade mark has been transmitted 
to him or to a predecessor in title of his since the commencement of this 
Act, the -Registrar, if he is satisfied that in all the circumstances the use 
of the ~rade mark in exercise of the said rights would not be contrary 
t~ the public interest may approve the assignment or transmission 35 
alld an assignment or transmis~ion so approved shall not, unless it is 
shown that the approval was obtained by frau-d or misrepresentation, be 
deemed to be invalid under this section or section 40 if application for 
the registration under section 45 of the title . of the person becoming 
entittect is.made within six months from the date on which the approval 40 
is give~in the case ·of a transmission, was made befoLe that date. 
4l. Where. an assignment of a trade mark, whether registered or 
unregistered is made otherwise than in connection with the goodwill of 
the business in which the mark has been or is used, the assignment shall 
11"61 take effect unless the assignee, not later than the expiration of six 45 
inontbs from the date on which the assignm~nt is made or within such 
extended period, if any·, not exceeding three months in the aggregate , as 

the Registrar may allow, applies to the Registrar for directions with 
respect to the advertisement of the assignment, and advertises it in such 
form and manner and within such period as the Registrar may direct . 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, an assignment of a 
5 trade mark of the following description shall not be deemed to Qe an 
assignment made otherwise than in connection with the goodwiiJ of the 
business in which the mark is used, namely:-
(a)·. an assignment of a trade mark in respect only of some of the 
goods or services for which the trade mark is registered 
10 accompanied by the transfer of the goodwill of the business 
concerned in those goods or services only; Or 
(b) an assignment of a trade mark which is used in relation to 
goods exported from India or in relation to services for use outside 
India if the assignment is accompanied by the transfer of the 
15 goodwill of the export business only. 
43. A certification trade mark shall not be assignable or A~~is• ·lbility 
and 1 ransmissi­
!ransm issible otherwise than with the consent of the Registrar, for which bility of certifi 
application shall be made in writing in the prescribed manner. cation tradt 
m<Hks. 
44. Associated trad e marks shall be assignable and transmissible only 
20 as a whole and not separately, but , subject to the provisions of this Act , 
they shall, for all other purposes, be deemed to have been registered as 
separate trade marks . 
45. (1) Where a person becomes entitled by assignment or 
transmission to a registered trade mark , he shall apply in the prescribed 
25 manner to the Registrar to register his title, and the Registrar shall , on 
receipt of the application and on proof of title to his satisfaction, register 
him as the proprietor of the trade mark in respect of the goods or 
services in respect of which the assignment or transmi ssion has effect, 
and shall cause particulars of the assignment ot transmission to be 
30 entered on the register: 
Provided that where the vaJidity of an assignment or transmission is 
in dispute between the parties, the Registrar may refuse to register the 
assignment or transmission until the rights or' the parties have been 
determined by a competent court. 
35 (2) Except for the purpose of an application before the Registrar 
under sub-section {1) or an appeal from an order thereoa, or an 
application under section 57 or an appeal from an order thereon, a 
document or instrument in respect of which no entry has been made in 
the register in accordance with sub-sectio" (1), shall not be admitted in 
40 evidence by the Registrar or the. Appellate Board or any court in proof 
'Of title to the trade mark by assignment or transmission unless the 
Registrar or the Appellate Board or the court, as the case may be, 
otherwise directs. 
As<tgnability 
nnd trnnsm•~•i­
btlity of associ­
nted trade 
m:~rks . 
Registration of 
assi~;nments and 
transmissioo~s. 

Proposed use of 
trade mark hy 
company to be 
formed, etc . 
Removal from 
register and im­
position of limi­
tati ons on 
ground of non­
u~e. 
CHAPTER Vf 
USE OF TRADE MARKS AND REGISTERED USERS 
46. (1) No application for ·the registration of a trade mark in respect 
ef any goods or services shaH be refused nor shaH permission for such 
registration be withheJa, on the ground only that it appe~rs that the 5 
applicant does not use or propose to use the trade mark if the Registrar 
is satisfied that-
(a) a company is about to be formed and registered under the 
Companies Act, 1956 and that the applicant intends to assign the t of t956 
trade mark to that company with a view to the use thereof in 10 
relation to those goods or services by the company, or 
(b) ••• the proprietor intends it to be used by a person, as a 
registered user after the registration of the trade mark. 
-(2) The provisions of section 47 shall have effect , in relation to a 
trade mark registered under the powers conferred by this sub-section , as 15 
if for the reference, in clause (a) of sub-sec tion (1) of that section, to 
intention on the part of an applicant for registration that a trad e mark 
should be used by him there were substituted a reference to intention on 
his part that it should be used by the company or registered user 
concerned. 2P 
(3) The tribunal may, in a ~ase to whic.h sub-section (1) applies, 
require the applicant to give security for the costs of any proceedings 
relating to any opposition or appeal, and in default of such security being 
duly given, may treat the application as abandoned. 
(4) Where in a case to which sub-section (1) applies, a trade mark 25 
in respect of any goods or services is registered in the name of an 
applicant who, relies on intention to assign the trade mark to a company, 
then, unless within such period as may be pre scribed or within such 
further period not exceeding six months as the Registrar may, on 
application being made to him in the prescribed manner, allow, the 30 
company has been registered as the proprietor of the trade mark in 
respect of those goods or services, the registration shall cease to have 
effect in respect thereof at the exp iration of that period and the Registrar 
shall amend the register ac<:nrdi ngly. 
47. (1) A registered trade mark may be taken off the register in 35 
respect of the goods or services in · respect of which it is registered on 
application made in the prescribed manner to the Registrar or the 
Appellate Board by any person aggrieved on the ground either -
( a) that the trade mark was registered without any bona fide 
intention on the part of the applicant for registration that it should 40 
be used in relation to those goods or services by him or, in a case to 
which the provisions of section 46 apply, by the company concerned 
or the registered user, as the case may be, and that there has , in 
fact, been no bona fide use of the trade - mark in relation to those 
goods or services by any proprietor thereof f0r the time being up to 45 
a date three months before the date of the appl ication; or 

(b) that up t_o a date three months before the dtJte of the 
application, a continuous period of five years from "the date on 
which the trade mark is actually entered in the register or longer 
had elapsed during which the trade mark was registered and during 
5 which there was no bona fide use thereof in relation to those goods 
or services by any proprietor thereof for the time being: 
Provided that except where the applicant has been permitted under 
section 12 to register an identical or nearly resembling trade mark in 
respect of the goods or services in question, or where the tribunal is of 
10 opinion that he might properly be permitted so to register such a trade 
mark, the tribuna) may refuse an application under chiuse {a) Ot clause 
(b) in relation to any goods or services .. if it is shown that there has 
been, before the relevant date or during the relevant period, as the case 
may be, bona fide use of the trade mark by any proprietor thereof for 
15 the time being in relation to-
{i) goods or services of the same description; or 
{:i) goods or services associated with those goods or services of 
that description being goods or services, as the case may be, in 
respect of which the trade mark is registered. 
20 (2) Where in relation to any goods or services in respect of whiCh a 
trade mark is registered-
(a) the circumstances referred to in clause (b) of sub-section {I) 
are shown to exist so far as regards non-use of the trade mark in 
relation to goods to be sold, or otherwise traded in a particular 
25 place in India (otherwise than for export from India), or in relation 
to goods to be exported to a particular market outside India; or in 
relation to services for use or available for acceptance in a particular 
place in India or for use in a particular market outside India; and 
(b) a person has been permitted under section 12 to register an 
30 identical or nearly resembling trade mark in respect of those goods, 
under a registration extending to use in relation to goods to be so 
sold, or otherwise traded in, or in relation to goods to be so 
exported, ol' in relation to services for use or available for 
acceptance in that place or for use in that country , or the tribunal is 
35 of opinion th11t he might properly be permitted so to register such a 
trade mark , 
on application by that person in the prescribed manner to the Appellate 
Board or to the Registrar, the tribunal may impose on the registration of 
the first-mentione d trade mark such limitations as it thinks proper for 
40 securing that that registration shall cease to extend to such use. 
(3) An applicant shall not be entitled to rely for the purpose of 
clause (b) of sub-section (1) or for the purposes of sub-section (2) on any 
non-use of a trade mark whi~h is shown ta have been due to special 
circumstances in the trade, which includes restrictions on the use of the 
45 trade mark in India imposed by any law or regulation and not to any 
intention to abandon or not to use the trade mark in relation to the 
goods or services to which the application relates. 

RegiMered. 
users . 
Reg isll at ion as 
rt>gistered user. 
48. (1) Subject to the provis ions of section 49, a person other than 
the registered proprietor of a trade mark may be registered as to 
registered user thereof in respect of any or all of the goods or services in 
respect of which the trade mark is registered. 
(2) The permitted use of a trade mark shall be deemed to be used .5 
by the proprietor thereof, and shall be deemed not to be used by a 
person other than the proprietor, for the purposes of section 47 or for 
any other purpose for which such use is material under this Act or any 
other law. 
49. (1) Where it is proposed that a person should be registered as a 10 
registered user of a trade mark, the registered proprietor and the 
proposed registered user shall jointly apply in writing to the Registrar in 
the prescribed manner, and every such application shall be accompanied 
by-
( a) the agreement in writing or a duly authenticated copy 15 
thereof, entered into between the registered proprietor and the 
proposed registered user with respect to the permitted use of the 
trade mark; and 
(b) an affidavit made by the registered proprietor or by some 
person authorised to the satisfaction of the Registrar to act on his 20 
behalf ,-
(i) giving particulars of the relali onship , exis ting or 
proposed, between the registered proprietor and the proposed 
registered user , including particulars showing the degree of 
control by the proprietor over the permitted use which their 2.5 
relationship will confer and whether it is a term of their 
relationship that the proposed registered user shall be the sole 
registered user or that there shall be any other restriction as to 
persons for whose registration as register ed users application 
may be made; 30 
(ii) stat ing the good s or services in respect of which 
registration is proposed; 
(iii) stating the conditions or restrictions, if any, proposed 
with respect to the characteristics of the goods or services, to 
the mode or place of permitted use, or to any other matter: ~.5 
(iv) stati ng whether the permitted use is to be for a period 
or without limit of period , and , if for a period, the durati on 
thereof; and 
(c) such fur ther doc ume nts or other evidence as may be 
required by th.e Registrar or as may be presc ribed . 40 
(2) When the requirements of sub-section (1) have been complied 
with, the Registrar shall register the propo sed registered user in res~- ect 
of the goods or services as to which he is so sa tisfied. 
(3) The Registrar shall issue notice in the prescribed manner of the 
registration of a person as a registered user , to other registered users of 45 
the trade mark , if any. 

(4) The Registrar shaJl, if so requested by the applicant, take steps for 
securing that information given for the purposes of an application under this 
section (other than mattes entered in the register) is not disclosed to rivals 
in trade. 
5 50. ( 1) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 57, the 
registration of a person as registered user-
(a) may be varied by the Registrar as regards the goods or services 
in respect of which it has effect on the application in writing in the 
prescribed manner of the registered proprietor of the trade mark; 
10 (b) may be cancelled by the Registrar on the application in writing 
in the prescribed manner of the _registered proprietor or of the 
registered user or of any other registered user of the trade mark; 
(c) may be cancelled by the Registrar on the application in writing 
in the prescribed manner of any person on any of the foJlowing 
15 grounds, namely:-
(i) that the registered user has used the trade mark otherwise 
than in accordance with the agreement under clause (a) of sub­
section (1) of section 49 or in such way as to cause or to be likely 
to cause, deception or confusion; 
20 (ii) that the proprietor or the registered user misrepresen ted, 
or failed to disclose, some fact material .to the application for 
registration, which if accurately represented or disclosed would 
not have justified the registration of the registered user; 
(iii) that the circumstances have changed since the date of 
25 registration in such a way that at the date of such application for 
cancellation they would not have justified registration of the 
registered user; 
(iv) that the registration ought not to have been effected 
having regard to rights vested in the applicant by virtue of a 
30 contract in the performance of which he is interested; 
(d) may be cancelled by the Registrar of his own motion or on the 
application in writing in the prescribed manner of any person, on the 
ground that any stipulation in the agreement between the registered 
proprietor and the registered user regarding the quality of the goods or 
35 services in relation to which the trade mark is to be used is either not 
being enforced or is not being complied with; 
(e) may be cancelled by the Registrar in respect of any goods or 
services in relation to which the trade mark is no longer registered. 
(2) The Registrar shall issue notice in the prescribed manner of every ' 
40 application under this section to the registered proprietor and each 
regi5tered user (not being the applicant) of the trade mark. 
(3) The procedure for cancelling a registration shall be such a'S may be 
prescribed: 
Provided that before cancelling of registration, the registered 
45 ·proprietor shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
Power of . Regis· 
trnr for variation 
or cancellation 
of registration as 
registered user . 

Power of Regr~· 
trar to call fOC" 
information re· 
lating to agree· 
ment 111 rC:SJX'Ct 
of regrstc:red 
users. 
51. (1) The Registrar may, at any time during the continuance of 
the registration of the registered user, by notice in writing. require the 
registered proprietor to confirm to him within one month that the 
agreement filed under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 49 
continues to be in force. 
(2) If the registered proprietor fails to furnish the confirmation 
within one month as required under sub-section (1), the registered user 
shall cease to be the registered user on the day immediately after the 
expiry of the said period and the Registrar shall nottfy the same. 
5 
Right of regr\· 52. (1) Subject to any agreement subsistmg between the parties, a 10 
tered usc:rd tn registered user may institute proceedings for infringement in his own 
take: rrocee rng\ 'f h h . d . k' h . d ag:un~r infrrn)!c· name as 1 e were t e regtstere propnetor, rna mg t e regtstere 
mc:nt. proprietor a defendant and the rights and obligat aons of such registered 
user in such case being concurrent with those of the registered 
proprietor. 15 
No rrght of ,,c:r· 
mined user to 
take proceeding 
a&ain5t infrrngc:· 
mc:nt. 
Registe rc:d user 
not to have right 
of assignment or 
transmission 
Usc of one of 
a\sociated or 
substantrally 
identical tmdc: 
marks cqurv:l· 
lent to u\c: of 
another 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other Jaw, a 
registered proprietor so added as defendant shall not be liable for any 
costs unless he enters an appea rance and takes part in the proceedings. 
53. A person referred to in sub-clause (ii) of clause (p) of sub­
section ( 1) of section 2 shall have no right to institute any proceeding for 20 
any infringement. 
54. Nothing in this Act shall confer on a registered user of a trade 
mark any assignable or transm issible right to the use thereof. 
Explanation I.-The right of a registered cser of a trade mark shall 
not be deemed to have been assigned or transmitted within the meaning 25 
of this section in the following cases, namely:-
(a) where the registered user being an individual enters into a 
partnership with any other person for carrying on the business 
concerned; but in. any such case the firm may use the trade mark. if 
otherwise in force, only for so long as the registered user is a 30 
member of the firm; 
(b) where the registe red user being a firm subsequently 
undergoes a change in its constitution: but in any such case the 
reconstituted firm may use the trade mark, if otherwise in force, 
only for so long as any partner of the original firm at the time of its 35 
registration as registered user. continues to be a partner of the 
reconstituted firm. 
Explanation l/.-For the purposes of Explanation /, "firm" has the 
same meaning as in the Indian Partnership Act, 1932. 9 of 1932. 
SS. (1) Where under the provtsions of this Act use of a registered 40 
trade mark is required to be proved for any purpose the tribunal may, if 
and, so far as it shall think right, accept use of a registered associated 
trade mark. or of the trade mark with additions or alterations not 
substantially affecting its identity, as an equivalent for the use required 
to be proved. 45 
(2) The use of the whole of a registered trade mark shall. for the 

purpose of this Act. be Cletmed to be aho use of any trade mark being 
a part thereof and registered in accordance with sub-section (1) of 
section 15 in the name of the same proprietor. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything in section 32, the use of part of the 
5 registered trade mark in sub-section (2) shall not be conclusive as to its 
evidence of distinctiveness for any purpose under ·the Act. 
56. (1) The application in India of trade mark to goods to be 
exported from India or in relation to services for use outside India and 
any other act done in India in relation to goods to be so exported or 
10 services so rendered outside India which, if done in relation to goods to 
be sold or services provided or otherwise traded in within India would 
constitute use of a trade mark therein, shall be deemed to constitute 
use of the trade mark in relation to those goods or services for any 
purpose for which such use is material under this Act or any other Jaw. 
15 (2) The use of a registered trade mark in relation to goods or 
services between which and the person using the mark any form of 
connection in the course of trade subsists ~hall not be deemed to be 
likely to cau~e deception or confusion on the ground only that the mark 
has been or is used in relation to goods or services between which and 
20 the said person or a predecessor in title of that person a different form 
of connection in the course of trade subsisted or subsisted. 
CHAPTER VII 
REC.I'IFICATION AND CORRECfiON OF T HE REGISTER 
57. (1) On application made in the prescribed manner to the 
25 Appellate Board or to the Registrar by any person agrieved. the· 
tribunal may make such order as it may think fit for cancelling or 
varying the registration of a trade mark on the ground of any 
contraven tion, or failure to observe a condition entered on the register 
in relation thereto. 
30 (2) Any person aggrieved by the absence or omission from the 
register of any entry, or by any entry made in the register without 
sufficient cause, or by any entry wrongly .remaining on the register, or 
by any error or defect in any entry in the register, may apply in the 
prescribed manner to the Appellate Board or to the Registrar, and the 
35 tribunal may make such order for making, expunging or verying the 
entry as it may think fit. 
(3) The tribunal may in any proceeding under this section decide 
any question that may be necessary or expedient to decide in 
connection with the rectification of the register. 
40 (4) The tribunal, of its own motion, may, after giving notice in the 
prescribed manner to the parties concerned and after giving them an 
opportunity of being heard, make any order referred to in sub-section 
(1) or sub-section (2). 
(5) Any order of the Appellate Board rectifying the register shall 
45 direct that nptice of the rectification shall be served upon the Registrar 
in the prescribed manner who shall upon receipt of such notice rectify 
the register accordingly. 
u~e of trade 
mark for export 
trade and use 
when form of 
trade connection 
changes. 
Power to cancel 
or vary regis tra­
tion and to re 
c11fy tile re· 
gister . 

Couection of re· 
gister . 
Alteration of re· 
gistered trad e 
marks. 
Adaptation of 
entries in regi~­
te-r to amended 
or suo~tituted 
classification of 
goods or ser· 
vices. 
58. (1) The Registrar may, on application made in the prescribed 
manner by the registered proprietor,-
(a) correct any er.ror in the name, address or description of the 
registered proprietor of a trade mark, or any other entry relating to 
the trade mark; s 
(b) enter any change in the name., address or description of the 
person who is registered as proprietor of a trade mark; 
(c) cancel the entry of a trade mark on the register; 
(d) strike out any goods or classes, of goods or services from 
those in respect of which a trade mark is registered, 10 
and may make any consequential amendment or alteration in the 
certificate of registration and for that purpose, may require the certificate 
of registration to be produced to him. 
(2) The Registrar may, on application made in the prescribed 
manner by a registered user of a trade mark. and after notice to the 15 
registered proprietor, correct any error, or enter any change, in the 
name, address or descriptiort of the registered user. 
59. (1) The registered proprietor of a trade mark may apply in the 
prescribed manner to the Registrar for leave to add to or alter the trade 
)llark in any manner not substantially affecting the identity thereof . and 20 
the Registrar may refuse leave or may grant it on such tenns and subject 
to such limitations as he may think fit. 
(2) The Registrar may cause an application under this section to be 
advertised in the prescribed manner in any case where it appears to him 
that it is expedient so to do , and where he does so, if within the 25 
prescribed time from the date of the advertisement any person gives 
notice to the Registrar in the prescribed manner of opposition to the 
application, the Registrar shall, after hearin g the parties if so required, 
decide the matter. 
(3) Where leave is granted under this section, the trade mark as 30 
altered shall be advertised ir: the prescribed manner, unless the 
application has. already been advertised under sub-section (2) . 
. 60. (1) The Register shall not make any amendme nt of the register 
which would have the effect of adding any goods or classes of goods or 
services to those in respec t of which a trade mark is registered (whether 35 
in one or more classes) immediately before the amendments to be made 
or of antedat ing the registration of a trade mark in respect of any goods 
or services: 
Provided that this sub-section, shall not apply when the Registrar is 
satisfied that c9mpliance therewith would involve undue complexity arui 40 
that the addit ion or antedating, as the case may be, would not affect any 
substantial quant ity of goods or services and would not substantially 
prejudice the rights of any person. 
(2) A proposal so to amend the register shall be brought to the 
notice of the registered proprietor of the trade mark affected and 45 

5 
advertised in the prescribed manner, and may be opposed before the 
Registrar by any person aggrieved on the ground that the poposed 
amendment contravenes the provisions of sub-sectio _n ( 1). 
CHAPTER VIII 
COLLECTIVE MI\RKS 
61. (1) The provisions of this Act shall apply to collective marks 
subject to the provisions contained in this Chapter. 
(2) In ~lation to a collective mark the reference in caluse (z) of sub­
section (1) of section 2 to disti~guishing goods or services of one person 
10 from those of others shall be construed as a reference to distinguishing 
goods or services of members of an association of persons which is the 
proprietor of the mark from those of others. 
62. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (b) of sub 
section (1) of section 9, a collective mark which consists of any mark or 
15 indication which may serve, in trade, to designate the geographical origin 
of goods or services may be registered. 
(2) The registered proprietor of a collective mark shall not be 
entitled to prohibit the use of the mark or in particular by any person 
who is entitled to use the geographical name. 
20 63~ A collective mark shall not be registered. if it is likely to deceive 
or cause coMusion on the part of public in particular if it is likely to be 
taken to be something other than a collective mark, and in such case the 
Registrar may require that a mark in respect of which applicatior. is 
made for registration comprise some indication that it is a collective 
25 mark. · 
64. (1) An application for registration of a collective mark shall be 
accompanied by the regulations governing the use of such collective 
mark. 
(2) The regulations referred to in sub-section (1) shall specify the 
30 persons authorised to use the mark, the conditions of membership of !he 
association and, the conditions of use of the mark, including any 
sanctions against misuse and such other matters as may be prescribed. 
65. If it appears to the Registrar that the requirements for 
registration are satisfied, he shall accept the application together with the 
35 regulations, either unconditionally or subject to such conditions including 
amendments of the said regulations, if any, as he may deem fit or refuse 
to accept it and if accepted shall notify the regulations. 
66. The regulations referred to in sub-section (1) of section 64 shall 
be open to public inspection in the same way as the register as provided 
40 in section 149. 
67. Any amendment of regulations referred to in sub .. section (1) of 
section 64 shall not be effective unless the amended regulations are filed 
with the Registrar, and accepted and published by him in accordance 
45 with section 65. 
68. In a suit for infringement instituted by the registered proprietor 
Special provi· 
sions for collec­
tive marks. 
Indication of 
geographical ori· 
gin may he re· 
gistered as col­
lective mark . if 
~ ·1ch us~ is lmn11 
j1 fe use in trade. 
Collective n. rk 
not to he mis­
leading as to 
character or sig· 
nificance. 
Applica;ion to 
he accompanied 
by regulations 
governing use of 
collective marks. 
Acceptnnce of 
application and 
regulations hy 
Registrar. 
Regulations to 
be open to in· 
spection. 
Amendment of 
regulations. 
Infringement 
proceedings by 
registered prop· 
rietor of collec· 
tive mark. 

Addit iona l 
ground s for re­
moval of regist­
ration of collec­
tive marie 
Cert:~in provi­
sions of this Act 
not applicable to 
ce r tific:~tion 
trade marks. 
Registration of 
certific:~tion 
trade m:~rks . 
Applic:~tions for 
registration of 
certification 
1r:1<k marks. 
of a collective mark as plaintiff the court shall take into account any loss 
suffered or likely to be suffered by authorised users and m ay give such 
directions as it things fit as to the extent to which the plaintiff shan hold 
the proceeds of any pecuniary remedy on, behalf of such authorised 
users. 
the 
69. The registration or a coHective mark may also be removed from 
register on the ground-
5 
(a) that the manner in which the conective mark has been used 
by the proprietor or authorised user has caused it to become 
liable to mislead the public as a collective mark; or 10 
(b) That the proprietor has failed to observe, or to secure the 
observance of, the regulations governing the use of the 
mark . 
Explanation I.-For the purposes of this Chapter, unless the context 
otherwi se require s, "authorised user" means a member of an association 15 
authorised to use the registered coHective mark of that association. 
Explanation Il.-For the purposes of this Act, use of a co11ective 
mark by an authori sed user referred to in Explanation I shan be deemed 
to be the use by the registered proprietor thereof. 
CHAPTER IX 20 
CERTIH CATI ON TRADE MARKS 
70. The f ollowing provision of this Act shaU not apply to 
certification trade marks, that is to say,-
(aj Clause (a) and (c) of sub-section (1) of section 9; 
(b) section 18, 20 and 21, except as expressly applied by this 25 
Chapter; 
(c) sections 28, 29, 30, 41, 42, 47, 48, 49, 50, 52, 54 and sub­
section (2) of section 56; 
(d) Chapter XII, except section 108. 
71. A mark shaH not be registrable as a certification trade mark in 30 
the name of a person who carries on a t rade in g oods of the kind 
certified or a trade of the provision of services of the kind certified. 
72. (1) An application for the registration of a mark as a 
certification trade mark shall be made to the Registrar in the prescribed 
manner by the person proposed to be registered as the proprietor 35 
thereof, and accompanied by a draft of the regulations to be deposited 
under section 75. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 71, the provisions of sections 
18, 19 and 22 shall apply in relation to an application under this section 
as they apply in relation to an application under section 18, subject to 40 
the modification that references there in to acceptance of an application 
shaH be construed as references to authorisation to proceed with an 
application. 
(3) In dealing under the said provisions with an application under 

this section, the tribunal shall have regard to the like consideration s, so 
far as relevant, as if the application were an application under section 
18 and to any other consideration relevant to applications und er this 
section, including the desirability of securing that a certification trad e 
5 mark shall comprise some indication that it is a certification trade mark. 
73. (/) The Registrar shall consider the application made under 
section 72 with regard to the following matters, namely: -
(a) whether the applicant is competent to certify the good s in 
respect of which the mark is to be registered; 
10 (b) whether the draft of the regulations to be filed under section 75 
is satisfactory; 
(c) whether in all the circumstances the registration applied for 
would be to the public advantage, 
and may either-
15 (i) refuse the application; or 
20 
(ii) accept the application and approve the said draft of the 
regulations either without modification an unconditiona lly or 
subject to any conditions or limitations, or to any amendme nts 
or modification of the application or of the regulation s, which 
he thinks requisite having regard to any of the said matters . 
(2) Except in the case of acreptance and approval without 
modification and unconditionally, the Registrar shall not decide any 
matter under sub-section (1) without giving to the applicant an 
apportunity of being heard. 
25 74. When an application has been accepted , the Registrar shall, as 
soon as may be thereafter, cause the application as accepted to be 
advertised in the prescribed manner, the provisions of section 21 shall 
apply in relation to the registration of the mark as they apply in 
relation to an application under section 18. 
30 75. (1) There shall be filed at the Trade marks Registry in respect 
of every mark registered as a certification trade mart re&ulations for 
governing the use thereof, which shall include provisions as to the cases 
in which the proprietor is to certify goods or services and to authorise 
the use of the certification trade mark, and may contain any other 
35 provisions which the Registrar may by general or special order, require 
or permit to be inserted therein (including provisions conferring a right 
of appeal to the Registrar against any refusal of the propriet or. to 
certify goods or to authorise the use of the certification trade mark •t 
accordance ~ith the regulations); and regulations so filed shall be OJX · 
40 to inspection in like manner as the register as provided in st:ction 149 
(2) The regulations so filed may, on the appl icataon of the 
registered proprietor, be altered by the Registrar. 
(3) The Registrar may cause such application to be advertised in 
any case where it appears to him expedient so to do, and where he 
45 does so, if within the time specified in the advertisement any person 
gives notice of apposition to the application , the Registrar shall not 
Considerat ion of 
:~pph cation for 
registration by 
the Reg1strar . 
Oppos ition to 
registration of 
certi ficatio n 
trad e mark s 
F1lling of reaula­
tiolls ~ 
the use ol • ttr· 
tificat ion ~ 
mark. 

Infringement of 
certification 
trade mark. 
Acts not con· 
stituting infring· 
ement ot cerUh· 
cation trade 
m;trks. 
(';~ n ce lla llon or 
\:~ry ing of reg1st· 
r;~ tt on of cerllfi· 
cat ion trnde 
m:~ rk . 
decide the matter without giving the parties :ln opportunity of h~n~ ht'ard. 
76. The right conferred by section 79 is infringed by any person who 
not being the registered proprietor of the certifkation trad~ tn<Hk Or II 
person authoris~'> d hy him ia that hehalf umkr the regulations-filed under 
section 75, using it in accordance therewith. U'\es in the course of tn-1de. a 5 
mark ·which is identical with, or deceptively similar to the ccrtifiC'Htion 
trade mark in relation to any goods or servi<.·es in respe(:t of which it is 
registered, and in such manner as to ·render the usc of the mark likely to be 
taken as being a cause as a trade mark. 
77. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act. the following ·10 
acts do not constitute an infringement of the right to the use of a regi-.tl'rl·d 
certification trade marks-
(a) where a certification trade mark is regi.,tered suhjcct to any 
conditions or ljmitations entered on the register. the use of any such 
mark in any mode, in relation to goods to he sold or otherwise traded 15 
in any place, or in relation to· goods to be exported to any market or in 
relation to services for use or available for acceptance in any pl:tl'C, 
country or territory or in any other circumstances, to whkh having 
regard to any such limitations, the registration does not extend; 
(b) the use of a certification trade mark in relation to goods or 20 
services certified hy the proprietor of the mark if. as to those good' or 
services or" bulk of which they form part. the proprietor or another in 
accordance with his authorisation under the relevant regulation'\ ha s 
applied the niark and has not subsequently removed or ohliteratcd it, 
or the proprietor has at any time expressly or impliedly consented to 25 
the use of the mark; 
(c) the use of a certification trade mark in relation to goods or 
services adapted to form part of, or to be accessory to. other goods in 
relation to which the mark has been u~ed without infringement of the 
right given as aforesaid or might for the time being he so used. if the 3(1 
use of the mark is reasonably necessary in order to indicate that the 
goods or services :u e so adapted and neither the purpose nor the effect 
of the use of the mark is to indicate otherwise than in accordance with 
the fact that the goods or services are certified by the proprietor. 
(2) Clause (b) of sub- section (1) shall not apply to the case of use 35 
consisting of the applicat1on of a certification trade mark to goods or 
services, notwithstanding that they are such goods or services as are 
mentioned in that clause if such application is contrary to the regulations 
referred to in that clause . 
(3) Where a certification trade mark is one of two or more trade marks 40 
registered under this Act, which are identical or nearly resemhle eadi 
other, the use of any of those trade marks in exercise oft he right to the u~e 
of that trade mark given by registration, shall not be deemed to ht> ~n 
infringement of-the right so given to the use of any other of those trade 
marks. 45 
78. The Registrar may, on the application in the prescribed manner of 

any person aggrieved and after giving the proprietor an opport1:1nity of 
opposing the application, make such order as he thinks fit for expunging 
or varying any entry in the register relating to a certification trade mark, 
or for varying the regu lations, on any of the following grounds, 
5 namely:-
(a) that the proprietor is no longer competent, in the case of 
any of the goods or services in respect of which the mark is 
registered, to certify those goods or services; 
(b) that the proprietor has failed to observe any provisions of 
10 the regulations to be observed on his part; 
(c) that it is no longer to the public advantage that the mark 
should remain registered; 
(d) that it is requisite for the public advantage that if the mark 
remains registered, the regulations should be varied. 
15 79. (1) Subject to the provisions of sections 34, 35 and 77, the 
20 
registration of a person as a proprietor of certification trade mark in 
respect of any goods or services shall, if valid, give to that person the 
exclusive right to the use of the mark in relation to those goods or 
services. 
(2) The exclusive right to the use of a certifica tion trade mark given 
under sub-section (1) shall be subject to any conditions and limitations to 
which the registration is subject. 
CHAPTER X -
SPECIAL PROVISION FOR TEXTlLt GOODS 
Right~ conferred 
by registration 
of certificr1tion 
trade marks. 
25 80. The Central Government may prescribe classes of goods (in this Textile goods. 
Chapter referred to as textile goods) to the trade marks used in relation 
to which the provisions of this Chapter shall apply; and subject to the 
said provisions, the other provisions of this Act shall apply to such trade 
marks as they apply to trade marks used in relation to other classes of 
30 goods. 
35 
81. (1) In respect of textile goods being piece goods-
(a)· no mark consisting of a line heading alone shall be 
registrable as a trade mark; 
(b) a line heading shall not be deemed to be capable of 
distinguishing; 
(c) the registration of trade mark shall not give any exclusive 
right to the use of a line heading. 
(2) In re.spect of any texti le go~s, the registration of letters or 
numerals, or any combination thereof, shall be subject to such conditions 
40 and restrictions as may be prescribed. 
82. (1) Piece goods, such as are ordinarily sold by length or by the 
piece, which have been manufactured, bleached, dyed, printed or 
finished in premises which are a factory, as defined in the Factories· Act, 
63 of 1948. 1948, shall not be removed for sale !rom the list of such premises in 
45 which they underwent any of the said processes without having 
Re~triction on 
reg•strauon of 
textile goods . 
Stampmg <)f 
piece good~ . C<)t· 
!1)0 yn rn n nd 
thread . 

conspicuously stamped in international fonn of Indian numerals on each 
piece the length thereof••• in standard metres or in standard metres and 
a fraction of such a metre, according to the real length of the piece. and 
except when the good$ are sold from the factory for -export from India , 
without being conspicuously marked on each piece with · the name of th& 5 
manufacturer or of the occupier of the premises in which the piece was 
finally processed or of the wholesale purchaser in India of the piece. 
(2) Cotton yarn such as is ordinarily sold in bundles, and cotton 
thread, namely, sewing, darning, crochet or handicraft thread, which 
have been manufactured, bleached, dyed or finished in any premises not 10 
exempted by the rules made under section 83 shall not be removed for 
sale from those premises unless, in accordance with the said rules in the 
case of yarn-
(a) the bundles are conspicuously marked with an indication of 
the weight of yam in ••• the metric system in each bundle; and 15 
(b) the count of the yam contained in the bundle and in the 
case of thread each unit is conspicuously marked with the length or 
weight of thread in the 'unit and in such other manner as may be 
required by the said rules; and 
(c) except where the goods are sold from the premises for 20 
export from India, unless each bundle. or unit is conspicuously 
marked with the name of the manufacturer or of the wholesale 
purchaser in India of the goods: 
Provided that the rules made under section 83 shall exempt all 
premises where the work is done by members of one family with or 25 
without the assistance of not more than ten other employees, and all 
premises controlled by a co-operative society where no more than twenty 
workers are employed in the premises. 
Determination 83. (1) For the purposes of this Act the Central Government may 
of chara cter of ' 
textile goocl5 by make rules- 30 
51111\j)lillg. 
(a) to provide, with respect to any so<><fs which purport or are 
alleged to be of unifonn number , quantity, measure, gauge or 
weight for the. number of samples to be selected and tested and for 
the .selection of the samples. 
(b) to provide for the manner in which for the purposes of 35 
section 82 cotton yarn and cotton thread shall be marked with the 
particulars required by that section, and for the exemption of 
certain premises used for the manufacture, bleaching , dyeing or 
finishing of cotton yarn or cotton thre ad f rom the provisions o f that 
section ; and 40 
(c) declaring what classes of g oods are in cl ~ded in the 
expression "piece goods such as are ordinarily sold by length or by 
the piece" for the purpose of section 82, of this Act or clause (n) of 
sub-section (2) of section Jl of the Customs Act, 1962. 52 or 196 
(2) With respect to any goods for the selection and te~ting of 45 
samples of which provision is not made in any rules for the time being in 

force under sub-section (1), the court or officer of customs, as the case 
may be , having occasion to ascertain the number, quantity, measure, 
gauge or weight of the goods, shall, by order in writing, determine the 
number of samples to be selected and tested and the manner in which 
5 the samples are to be selected. 
(3) The average of the results of the testing in pursuance of rules 
under sub-section (/) or of an order under sub-section (2) shall be prima 
facie evidence of the number, quantity, measure, gauge or weight, as the 
case may be, of the goods. 
10 (4) If a person having any claim to, or in relation to. any goods of 
which samples have been selected and tested in pursuance of rules under 
sub-section (1), or of an order under sub-section (2), desires that any 
further samples of the -goods be selected and tested, such further samples 
sliall, on his written application and on the payment in -advance by him 
15 to the court or officer of customs, as the case may be, of such sums for 
defraying the cost of the further selection and testing as the court or 
officer may from time to time require, be selected and tested to such 
extent as may be permitted by rules made by the Central Government in 
this behalf or as, in the case of goods with respect to which provision is 
20 not made in such rules, the court or officer of customs may determine in 
the circumstances to be reasonable, the samples being selected in the 
manner prescribed under sub-section (1), or in sub-section (2), as the 
case may be. 
(5) The average of the results of the testing referred to in sub-
25 section (3) and of the further testing under sub-section (4) shall be 
conclusive proof of the number, quantity, measure , gauge or weight , as 
the case may be. of the goods. 
CHAPTER XI 
APPELLAT E BOARD 
30 84. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, establish an Appellate Board to be known as the Trade Marks 
Appellate Board to exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority 
conferred on it by or und~r this Act. 
85. (1) The Appellate Board shall consist of a Chairman and such 
35 .uumber of other Members, * * * as the Central Government may deem fit 
and, subject to the other provisions of this Act, the jurisdiction, powers 
and authority of the Appellate Board may be exercised by a Bench 
thereof. 
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a Bench shall consist 
40 of one Judicial Member and one Technical Member and shall sit at such 
place as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, specify. 
(3) Notwithstanding any thing contained in sub-section (2) , the 
Chairman-
45 (a) may, in addition to discharging the functions of the Judicial 
Member or Technical Member of the Bench to which he is 
Establishment of 
T rade Marks 
Appellate 
Board -
Composition of 
Appella te 
Board. 

Qualifica tions 
for appmntment 
as 01airman and 
Members. 
appointed, discharge the functions of the Judicial Member or, as the 
case may be, the Technical Member, of any other Bench; 
(b) may transfer ..a Member from one Bench to another Bench; 
(c) may authorise the Judicial Member of the Technical Member 
appointed to one Bench to discharge also the functions of the Judicial S 
Member or the Technical Member, as the case may be, of another 
Bench. 
(4) Where any Benches are constituted, the Central Government may, 
from time to time, by notification, make provisions as to the distribution of 
the business of the Appellate Board amongst the Benches and specify the 10 
matters whicli may be dealt with by each Bench. 
(5) If any question arises as to whether any matter falls within the 
purview of the business allocated to a Bench , the decision of the Chairman 
shall be final. 
Explanation.- For the removal of doubt, it is hereby declared that 15 
the expression "matter" includes an appeal under sectio"n 92. 
(6) If the Members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, they 
shall state the point or points on which they differ, and make a reference 
to the Chairman who shall ei!her hear the point or points himself or refer 
the case for hearing on such point or points by one or more of the otfier 20 
Members and such point or points shall be decided according to the 
opinion of the majorit y of the Members who have heard the case, 
including those who first heard it. 
86. (1) A person shall not be qualified for appointement as a 
Chairman, unless he- 25 
(a) is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court, or 
(b) has, for at least two years, held the office of a Member. 
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judicial 
Member, unless he-
( a) has been a Member of the Indian Legal Service and has 30 
held the post in Grade I of that Service for at least three years; 
of 
(b) has, for at least ten years, held a civil judicial office. 
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Technical 
Member, unless he- • 35 
(a) has, for at least ten years exercised functions of a 
tribunal under this Act or under the Trade and Merchandise Marks 
Act , 1958, or both, and has held a post not lower than the post of a 43 of 1958 
Joint Registrar for at least five years; or 
(b) has, for at least ten ye·ars, been an advocate of a proven 40 
specialised experience in trade mark law. 
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (5), the Chairman and 
every other Memb er shall be appointed by the President of. India . 
(5) No appointment of a person as the Chairman shall be made except 
after consultation wath the Chief Justice ot India. 45 

jf) 
15 
20 
87. The Cha irm an or other Members shall hold office as suc h for a 
term o f five years from the date on -which he enters upo n his office or 
un til he atta ins-
(<~) in the case of Chairman, the age of sixty-five 'yea rs; and 
(b) in the case of a Mem ber. the age of o;ixty-two years, 
whicheve r is earlier. 
88. ( 1) In tht C\ en of occurrence of any vac<!ncy in the office of the 
Chairman by reason of h1s death, resignation or otherwi -;e th ~ 
seniormost Member shall act t~s Chaitman until the date on which a new 
Chairman, appointed 111 accordanc e with the provisions of this Act to fil! 
o;uch vancancy, enters upon his office. 
(2) When the Chairman is unable to discharge his functions owing. to 
his absence, illness or any other cause, the senior-most Member shall 
discharge the functiOn:, of the Chairman unt~ the date on which the 
Chairman resumes h1s duty. 
89. The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and 
conditions of service (inclduing pens,on, gratuity and other retirement 
benefits) of the Chairman: a.od otJter Members shall be such as may be 
prescribed . ' 
90. (1) The Chairman or any other Member may, hy notice in 
writing under h1s hand addressed to the President of India, reo;ign his 
office: 
Provided that the Chairman or any orher Member shall. unless he is 
permitted by the President of India to relinquish his office sooner . 
2) continue to holll office until the expiry of hrce months from the date of 
receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor 
enters upon his office or unt il the expiry of his term of office. whichever 
is earher . 
(2) The Chairmar. or any other Member snail P.ot be removed from 
30 h1s office except by an order made by the President of India on the 
• ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after an inquiry made by a 
Judge of the Supreme Court in which the Chairman or other Member 
had been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges. 
35 (3) The Central Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure 
40 
for the investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity of the Chairman or 
other Member referred to in sub-sect ion (2). 
91. (1) The Central Government shall determine the nature and 
categnries or the officers and other employees required to assist the 
Appellate Board in the discharge of its functions and provide the 
Appellate Board with such officers and other employ~es as it may think 
fit. 
(2) The salaries and allowances and conditiot's or service of the 
officers and other emplo)'ee'i or the Appellate Board 'ihal! be such as may 
45 be prescribed. 
(3) The officer.: and other employees of the Appellate Board shall 
Term of office 
nf Chairmnn nnd 
~kmhel' 
Sc: naor nul~! 
1\lc:mher hl acl 
a' Ch:urm;m or 
dl\.:harge h" 
fiiiKIIOn\ Ill <:er· 
tnm cm:um­
<tances_ 
S:olnn.-, al-
lnwan.:~~ and 
olh.:r term~ nnd 
l'<llldlllt>n~ of 
<ervll'e of Chn1r· 
m~n and Mcm­
hers 
Re~•gnatlon and 
rem,>vnl. 
Staff of Appel· 
I<He Board 

Appeals to Ap· 
pellate Board. 
Procedure and 
powers of apr-el­
late Board . 
Bar of JUrisdic­
tion of ..:o mt~. 
etc . 
discharge their functions under the general superintendence of the 
Chairman, in the manner as may be prescribed. 
92. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order or decision of the 
Registrar under this Act, or the rules made thereunder may prefer an 
appeal to the Appellate Board within three months from the date on s 
which the order or decision sought to be appealed· asainst is 
communicated to such person preferring the appeal. 
(2) No appeal shall be a dmitted if it is preferred after the expiry of 
the period specified under sub-section (1): 
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the 10 
period· specified therefor, if the appellant satisfies the Appellate Board 
that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within the 
specified period. 
(3) An appeal to the AppelJate Board shalJ be in the prescribed 
form and shall be verified in the prescribed manner and shall be 15 
·accompanied by a copy of the order of decision appealed against and by 
such fees as may be prescribed: 
93. (1) the Appellate Board shall not, be bound by the procedure 
laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 but shall be guided by 5 of l908 
principles of natural justice and subject to such provisions of this Act ahd 20 
he rules made thereunder, the Appellate Board shaH have powers to 
regulate its own procedure including the fixing of piaces and times of its 
hearing. 
(2) the Appellate Board shaH have, for the purpose of discharging 
its functions under this' Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil. 25 
court under the Code of Civil Proced ue, 1908 while trying a suit in 5 of 1908. 
respect of .the following matters, namely:-
(a) receiving evidence; 
(b) issuing commissions for examination of witnesses; 
(c) requisitioning any public record; and 
(d) any other matter which may be prescribed . 
(3) Any proceeding before the Appellate Board shall be deemed to 
be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and 
for the purpose of section 196, of the Indian Penal q,de, and the 
Appellate Board shall be deemed to be a civil court for all the purposes 
of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure , 
1973. 
94. No Court or other authority shall have or, be entitled to, 
exercise any juri~idiction, powers or authority in relation to the mattc:n. 
referred to in sub-sectio~ (1) of section 92. 
30 
·s of 1860. 
35 
2 of 1974. 
40 
Bar to nppe:.r 95. On ceasing to hold office, the Chairman or other Members shall l>efore Appellate · 
Bo~rd. not appear before the Appellctte Board or the Registrar. 
Condition~ a~ to 
making of in­
terim orders. 
96. Notwithstanding· anything ·contained in any other provisions of 

this Act or in any other law for the time being in· force, no interim order 
(whether by way of injuction or stay or any other manner) shall be made 
on, or in any proceedings relating to, an appeal unless-
(a) copi~s of such appeal and of all documents in support of the 
5 plea for such interim order are furnished to the party a~ainst whom such 
appeal is made or proposed to be made; and 
(b) opoortunity is.given to such party to be heard b the matter 
97. On the application o( ~ny of the parties and after notice to the 
parties, and after hearing such of them as he may desire to be heard, or 
10 ou his own motion without such notice, the Chairman may transfer any 
case pending before one Bench, for disposal, to any other Bench. 
98. (1) An application for rectification of the register made to the 
Appellate- Board under sedion 57 shall be in such form as may he 
prescribed. 
15 (2) A certified copy of every order or judgment of the Appellate 
Board relating to a registered trade mark under this Act shall be 
communicated to the Registrar by the Board and the Registrar shall give 
effect to the order of the Board and shall, when so directed. amend the 
entries in, or rectifv, the register in accordance with such order. 
99. (1) The Registrar shall have the right to appear and be heard--
(a) in any legal proceedings before the :\.ppellate Board in 
which the relief sought includes alteration or rectification of t _ 
register or in which any question relating to the practice ot e 
Trade Marks Registry is raised· 
25 (b) in any appeal to the Board f10m an order of the 
30 
Registrar on an application for registration of a trade mark-
(i) which is not opposed, 2 .a ttlC application is either 
refused by the Registrar or is accepteo by him subject to any 
amendments, modifications. coditions or hmitattons, or 
(ii) which has been opposed and the Registrar considers 
that his appearance is necessary in the public interest, 
and the Registrar shall appear in any case if so directed by the Boarel. 
(2) Unless the Appellate Board otherwise directs, the Registrar may, 
in lieu of appearing, submit a statement in writing signed by him, giving 
35 such particulars as he thinks proper of the proceedings before him 
relating to the matter in issue or of the grounds of any decision given by 
him affecting it, or of the practice of the Trade Marks Registry in like 
cases, or of other matters relevant to the issues and within his knowlege 
as Registrar, and such statement shall be evidence in the proceeding. 
40 100. In all proceedings under this a"~t before the Appellate Board 
the costs of the Registrar shall be in the discrdion of the Board, but the 
Registrar shall not be ordered to pay the costs of any of the parties. 
101. All cases of appeals against any order or dt•cision of the 
Registrar and all cases pertaining to rectification of register. pending 
45 before any High Coort, shall be transferred to the Appeallate Board 
Pow~r of Chair­
man 10 transfer 
cases from one 
Bench to 
another. 
Procedure for 
apphc:ition for 
rectif~cauon 
etc., before Ap· 
pellate Board. 
Appearance of 
Registar in legal 
proceedings. 
Costs 0f Regis­
tar in proceed­
ings before Ap­
pell::tte Buard. 
Transfer of 
pending pro-
c~~dings to Ap· 
~)ellate Board. 

Meaning of ap· 
plying trade 
marks and trnde 
descriptions . 
Falsif) ing and 
falsely appl ymg 
trade mark~ . 
from the date as notified by the Central Government in the Official 
Gazette and the Appellate Board may proceed with the matter either de 
novo or from the stage it was so transferred. 
CHAPTER XII 
OFFENCES, PENAL TIES AND PROCEDURE 
102. (1) A person shall be deemed to apply a trade mark or mark or 
1rade description to goods or services who-
(a) applies it to the goods themselves or uses it in relation to services; 
or 
(b) applies it to any package in or with which the goods are sold. or 
exposed for sale, or had in possession for sale or for any purpo~e of 
trade or manufacture; or 
(c) places, encloses or annexes any goods which are sold, or exposed 
for sale, or had in possession for sale or for any purpose of trade or 
manufacture, in or with any package or other thing to which a trade 
mark or mark or trade description has been applied; or 
(d) uses a trade mark or mark or trade description in any manner 
reasonably likely to lead to the belief that the goods or services in 
connection with which it is used are designated or described by tlJat trade 
mark or mark or trade description; or 
(e) in relation to the goods or services uses a trade mark or trade 
description in any sign, advertisement, invoice, catalogl!le, business 
letter, business paper, price Jist or other commercial document, and 
goods are delivered or services are rendered to a person in pursuance 
of a request or ord~r made by reference to the trade mark or trade 
·description as so used. 
(2) A trade mark or mark or trade description shall be deemed to be 
applied to goods whether it is woven in, impressed on, or otherwise 
worked into, or annexed or affixed to, the goods or to any package or 
other thing. 
103. (1) A person shall be deemed to falsify a trade mark who. 
either,-
(a) without the assent of the proprietor of the trade mark makes that 
trade mark or a deceptively similar mark; or 
10 
lS 
20 
25 
30 
(b) falsify any genuine trade mark, whether by alteration, addition, 35 
effacement or otherwise. 
(2) A Person shall be deemed to falsely apply to goods or services a 
trade mark who, without the assent of the proprietor of the trade mark .-
(a) applies such trade mark or a deceptively similar mark to goods 
services or any package containing goods; 40 
(b) uses any package bearing a mark which is identical with or 
deceptively similar to the trade mark of such proprietor, for the 
purpose of packing, filling or wrapping therein any goods other than 
the genuine goods of the proprietor of the trade mark. 45 

(3) Any tradt: mark falsified as mentioned in sub-section ( 1) or 
falsely applied as mentioned in sub-section (2), is in this Act referred to 
as a false trade mark : 
(4) In any prosecution for falsifying a trade mark or falsely applying 
5 a trade mark to goods or services, ihe burden of proving the assent of 
the proprietor 'ihall lie on the accused. 
104. Any person who-
(a) falsifies any trade mark; or 
(b) falsely applies to goods or services any trade mark; or 
10 (c) makes , disposes of, or has in his possession, any die, block, 
machine , plate or other instrument for the purpose of falsifying. or of 
being used for falsifying , a trade mark; or 
(d) applies any false trade description to goods or services; or 
(e) applies to any goods to which an indication of the country or 
15 place in which they were made or produced or the name and 
address of the manufacturer or person for whom the goods are 
manufactured is required to be applied under section 140, a false 
indication of such country, place, name or address; or 
(f) tamper~ with, alters or effaces an indication of origin which has 
20 been applied to .any goocls to which it is required to be applied 
under section 140; or 
(g) causes any of the things above-mentioned in this section to be 
·done, 
shall, unless he proves that he acted, without intent to defraud. be 
25 punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be Jess than six 
months but which may extend to three years and with fine which shall 
not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to two lakh 
rupees: 
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reusons to be 
!JO mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a 
term of less than !lix months or a fine of Jess than fifty thousand rupees. 
105. Any person who sells, Jets for hire or exposes for sale, or hires 
or has in his possession for !~ale, goods or things; or provides or hires 
services·, to which any false trade mark or false trade description is 
35 applied or which, being required under section 140 J,o have applied to 
them an indication of the country or place in which they were made or 
produced or the name and address of the manufacturer, or person for 
whom tne goods arc manufactured or services provided as the case may 
be, are without the indications so required, shall, unless he proves.-
40 (a) that, having taken all r~asonable precautions against committing 
an offence against this sectior., he had at the time of commiso;ion of 
the alleged offence ·no reason to suspect the genuineness of the 
trade mark or trade description or that any offence had been 
committed in respect of the goods or services; or 
4) (b) that, on demand by or on behalf of the prosecutor , he gave all 
Penaltv for ap· 
plying' fats~ 
trade marks. 
trade descrip-
tion~. etc. 
Penally f0 1 ;,·1· 
ling gnnd' !··1 
pr<Widin!( ~er­
VIl'~~ to whtch 
fa be trade: m;u k 
or fat~.: l! ,,,1.: 
d~~cnpt~t>n " 
.1pplied . 
-. 

Enhanced penal­
ty on second or 
~ubsequent con­
viction 
Prnalty for re­
moving ptece 
goods, etc., con­
trary to ~cction 
82 
Penalty for 
false'y reprC'-
sentmg a trade 
mat k as regis­
t.ered. 
the information in his power with respect to the person from whom 
he obtained such goods or things or services; or 
(c) that otherwise he had acted innocently, 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 
six months but which may extend to three years and with fine which shall S 
not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to two lakh 
rupees: 
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special rea~ons to be 
mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a 
term of less than ~.ix months or a fine of less than fifty thousand rupees. 10 
106. •••Whoever having already been convicted of an offence under 
section 104 or section 105 is again convicted of any such offence shall be 
punishable for the second and for every subsequent offence, with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but whicJ-. 
may extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than one 
lakh rupees but which may extend to two lakh rupees: 
Provided that the court may, for adequa.e and special reason to be 
mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a 
term of less than one year or a fine of less than one lakh rupe es: 
15 
Provided further that for the purposes of this section, no cognizan ce 20 
shall be taken of any conviction made before the commencement of this 
Act. 
107. If any person removes or attempts to remove or causes or 
attempts to cause to be removed for sale from any premises referred tq 
in section 82 or sells or exposes for sale or has in his possession for sale 25 
or for any purpose of trade or manufacture piece goods or cotton yarn or 
cotton thread which is not marked as required by that section, every such 
piece and every such bundle of yarn and all such thread and everyt hing 
used for the packing thereof shall be forefeited to Government and s '" 
person shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousan d 30 
rupees. 
108. (I) No person shall make any representation-
(a) with respect to a mark, not being a registered trade mark, to the 
effect that it is a registered trade mark; or 
(b) with respect to a part of a registered trade mark not being a part 
separately registered as a trade mark, to the effect that it is 
separately registered as a trade mark; or 
(c) to the effect that a registered trade mark is registered in respec t 
of any goods or services in respect of which it is not in fact 
registered; or 
(d) to the effect that registration of a trade mark gives an exclusiv e 
right to the use thereof in any circumstances in which, having regar d 
to limitations entered on the register, the registration does not in 
fact give that right. 
35 
40 
(2) If any person contravenes any of the provisions of sub-section 45 

(1), he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a tenn which may 
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
(3) For the purposes of this section, the use in Iqdia in n!Iation to a 
trade mark of the word "registered", or of any other expression, symbol 
5 or sign referring whether eJepressly or impliedly to registration. shall be 
deemed to import a reference to regi:.;tration in the· register, except-
(a) where that word or other expression, symbol or sign is used in 
direct association with other words delinP.ated in characters at least 
as large as those in which that word or other expression, symbol or 
10 sign is delineated and indicating that the reference is to registration 
as a trade mark under the law of a country outside India being a 
country under the law of which the registration referred to is in fact 
in force; or 
(b) where that other expression, symbol or sign is of itself such as to 
15 indicate that rhe reference is to such registration as is mentioned in 
clause (a); or 
20 
25 
30 
35 
(c) where that word is used in relation to a mark registered as a 
trade mark under the law of a country outside India and in relation 
solely to goods to be exported to that country or in relation to 
services for use in that country. 
109. If any person uses on his place of business, or on any document 
issued by him, or otherwise, words which would' reasonably lead to the 
,beiief that his place of business is, or is officially connected with, the 
Trade Marks Office, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to two year, or with fine, or with both. 
110. If any person makes, or causes to be made, a false entry in the 
register, or a writing falsely purp~rting to be a copy of an en'try in the 
register, or produces or tenders or causes to be produced or tendered, in 
evidence any such writing, knowing the entry or writing to be false, he 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
two years, or with fine, or with both. 
111. The provi~ions of section-s 103, 104, 105 and 106 shall, in 
relation to a registered trade mark or proprietor of such mark, be subject 
to the rights created or recognised by this At:t, and no act or omission 
shall be deemed to be an offence under the af~resaid sections if.~ 
(a) the alleged offence relates to a registered trade mark and the act 
or omission is permitted under thb. Act; and 
(b) the alleged offence relates to a registered or an unregistered 
trade mark and the act or omission is permitted under any other law 
40 for the time being in force. 
Penalty for im­
properly describ­
ing a place of 
business as con­
nected with the 
Trade Marks 
Office. 
Penalty for fal­
sification of en­
tries in the re­
pster. 
No offence m 
certain case$ 
112. {1) Where a person is convicted of an offence under section Forfeiture 
104 or section 105 or section 106 or is acquitted .of <tn offence under goods. 
section 104 or section 105 _on proof that he acted without intent to 
defraud, or under section 105 on proof of the matters specified in clauses 
45 (a), (b) and (~) of that section, the court convicting or acquitting him 
may direct the forfeiture to Government of all goods and things by 

means of, or in relation to, which the offence ~as been cotnmitted, or 
but for such proof as aforesaid would have been committed. 
(2) When a forfeiture is directed on a conviction and an appeal lies 
against the conviction, an appeal shall lie against the forfeiture also. 
(3) When a forfeiture is directed on an acquittal and the goods or s 
things to which the direction relates are of value exceeding fifty rupees, 
an appeal against the forfeiture may be preferred, within thirty days from 
the date of the direction, to the court to which in appealable cases 
appeals lie from sentences of the court which directed the forfeiture. 
(1) When a forfeiture is directed on a conviction, the court, before 
whom the person is convicted, may order any forfeited articles to be 
destroyed or otherwise disposed of as the court thinks fit. 
10 
Exemption of 113. Where a person accused of an offence under section 104 
certain persons 
employed in or- proves-
dinnry course of (a) that in. the ordinary course of his business he is employed business. 15 
Procedure where 
invalidity qf · re.· 
gistration is 
pleaded by !!J~ 
lCCUSed . • 
on behalf of other persons to apply trade marks or trad e 
descriptions, or as, the case may be, to make dies, blocks, 
machines, plates· or other instruments for making, or being used in 
making, tPtde marks; and 
(b) that in the case which is the subject of the ch;.;rge he was so 
employed, and was not inter ested in the goods or other thing by 
~ay of profit or commission dependent on the sale of such goods or 
providing of services, as the case may be; an~-- .. .. 
(c) that, having taken "all reasonable precautions . against 
committing the offence charged, he had, at the time of the 
commission of the alleged offence, no reason t() suspect the 
genuineness of the trade mark or trade descripti ~n; and · 
(d) that, on d.emand made by or on behalf of the prosecutor, he 
gave all the iilformation in his power with respect to the per~ons on 
whose behalf the trade mark or trade description was applied, 
he· shall be acquitted. 
114. (1) Where the offence charged under section 104 or section 105 
or section 106 is in relation to a registered trade mark and the accused 
pleads that· the registration of the trade mark is inval id, the .following 
procedure shall be followed:-
20 
25 
30 
35 
(a) If the coti*ft is satisfied th~1t such defence is prime facie 
tenable, it shall not proceed with the charge but shall adjourn the 
proceeding for three.months from the date on which the plea of the 
accused is recorded to enable the ·accused to file an application 
before the Appellate ·-aoard under this Act, for the rectification of 40 
the register on the ground that the registration is invalid. 
(b) If the accused proves to the court that he has made sut:h 
application within the time so limited or within such further time as 
. the court may for sufficient cause allow, the further proceedings in 
the prosecution shall st~ild stayed till the disposal of such 45 
appli~o:ation for rectification . 

(c) lf within a period of three months or within such extended 
time as may be allowed by the court, the accused fails to apply to the 
-\.ppellate Board for rectification of the register, the court shall 
proceed with the case as if the registration were valid. 
5 (2) Where before the institution of a complaint of an offence referred 
to in sub-section (1), any application for the rectification of the register 
concerning the trade mark in question on the ground of invalidity of the 
registration thereof has already been properly made to and is pending 
before the tribunal, the court shall stay the further proceedings in the 
10 prosecution· pending the disposal of the application aforesaid and shall 
determine the charge against the accused in conformity with the result of 
the application for rectification in so far as the complainant reltes upon the 
registration of his mark. 
115. (1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a Offences hy 
15 c<_>mpany, the company as well as every person in charge of, and companies. 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of its business at the time of 
the commission of the offence shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
20 such person liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence was 
committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to 
prevent the commission of su~h offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an 
offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved 
25 that the offence has been wmmitted with the consent or connivance of, or 
that the commission of the offence is attributable to any neglect on the 
part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, 
such director , manager, secretary·or other officer shall also be deemed to 
be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
30 punished accordingly. 
Explanation.- For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or 
other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm. means a partner in the firm. 
35 116. (1) No court shall take cognizance of an offence under section 
108 or section 109 or section 110 except on comr.laint in writing made by 
the Registrar or any officer authorised by him in writing: 
Provided that in relation to clause (c) of sub-section (1) of sect ion 
108, a court shall take cognizance of an offence on the basis of a certific <J' ' 
40 issued by the Registrar to the effect that a registered trade mark has be , 
represented as registered in respect of any. goods or services in respect of 
which it is not in fact registered. 
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or J udical 
Magistrate of the first class shall try an offence under this Act. 
45 (3) The offences under section 104 or section 105 or section 106 shall 
be cognizable. 
Cognizance of 
certain offent>es 
and the power 
oi polKe officer 
tnr senn:h and 
seizu re . 

Evidence of ori­
gin of goods im­
ported by sea. 
Costs of defence 
or prosecution. 
limitation of 
prosecution. 
lnfonnatioll u 
to~ 
of~. 
r.wY ,, ot 
.-..... . 
llldia of IICJS 
doftc '*' of 
.... 
(4) Any police officer not below the rank of deputy superintendent 
or equivalent, may if .he is satisfied that any of the offences referred to in 
sub-section (3) has been, is being, or is likely to be , committed, search 
and seize without warrant the goods, die, block, machine, plate, other 
instruments or things involved in committing the offence, wherever 5 
found , and all the articles so siezed shall, as soon as practicable , be 
produced befo re:: a Judical Magistrate of the first class or Metropolitan 
Magistrate , as the case may be: 
Provided that the police o fficer . before making any search and 
seizure, shall obtain the opinion of the Regjstrar on facts involved in the 10 
offence relating to trade mark and shall abide by the opinion so 
obtained . 
(5) Any· person having an interest in any articl es seized under sub­
section ( 4), may , within fifteen days of such seizure , make an application 
to the Judicial Magistrate of the first class or Metropolitan Magistra te, as 15 
the case may be, for such articles being restored to him and the 
Magistrate , after hearing the applicant and the prosecution , s hall make 
such orde r on the . application as he may deem fit. 
117. In the case of goods brought into Indi a by s ea, eviden ce of the 
port of shipmen t s hall, in a prosecut ion for an offence under this Act o r 20 
under clause (b} of sect io n 112 of the Customs Act. 1962. relating to 
confiscation of goods under clause (d) of section 111 a nd notified by the 
Central Government under clause (n) of sub section (2) of section 11 of 
the said Act for the protection of trade marks relating to impo rt of 25 
goods, be prima facie evidence of the place or country in which the 
goods are made or produced. 
118. In any · prosecution under this Act, the court may order such 
costs to be paid by the accused to the complainant on by the com plaint 
to the accused, as the court deemed reasonab le having regard to all the 30 
circumstances of the case and the conduct of the par ties and the cost so 
awarded shall he recoverable as if they were a fine. 
119. No prosecution for an offence under this Act or under clause 
(b) of section 112 of the Customs Act. 1962 relati ng to confiscation of 52 of 1962. 
goods under clause (d) of secti on 111 and notified b~' the Central 35 
Government under clause (n) of sub-sec tion (2) of section 11 of the said 
Act for the protection of trade marks relating to import of goods shall be 
commenced after expiration of three years next after the commissi on of 
the offence charged, or two years after the discovery the reof by the 
prosecutor. whichever expiration first happens. 40 
120. An officer of the Government whose duty it is to take part in 
the enforcement of the provisions of this Outpter shall not be compelled 
in any court to say whence he got any information as to the commi~i on 
of any offence against this Act. 
Ill. I( any person, being within India, abets the commission, 45 
without lndi3 of any act which, if committed in India, woukl, under this 
Act, be an offence, he may be tried for such abetment in any place in 
India in which be may be found, and be pu,nisbed therefor with tbe 

punishment to which he would be liable if he had himself committed in 
that place the act which he abetted. 
122. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, issue instructions for the limits of variation, as regards number, 
quantity. measure, gauge or weight which are to be recognised by 
criminal courts as permissible in the case of any goods. 
CHAPTER XIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
123. No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against any person in 
10 respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in 
pursuance of this Act. 
124. Every person appointed under this Act and every Member uf 
the Appellate Board shall be deemed to be a public servant within the 
45 of a860. mea·ning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
15 125. ( 1) Where in any suit for the infringement of a trade mark-
( a) the defendant pleads that the registration of the plaintiff's 
trade mark is invalid; or 
(b) the defendant raises a defence under clause (e) of sub­
section (2) of section 30 and the plaintiff pleads the invalidity of 
20 registration of the defendant's trade mark.-
the court trying the suit (hereinafter referred to as the court). shall 
(i) if any proceedings for rectification of the register in relation 
to the plaintiffs or defendant's trade mark are pending before 
the Registrar or the Appellate Board. stay the suit pending the 
final disposal of such proceedings; 
(ii) if no such proceedings are pending and the court is satisfied 
thllt the plea regarding the invalidity of the registration of the 
plaintiff's or defendant's trade mark is prima ficie tenable. raise 
an issue regarding the same and adjourn the case for a period 
30 of three months from the date of the framing of the issue in 
order to enable the party concerned to apply to the Appellate 
Board for rectification of the register. 
(2)) If the party concerned proves to the court that he has made any 
such application as is referred to in clause (b) (ii) of sub-section (1) 
35 within the time specified therein or within such extended time as the 
court may for sufficient cause allow. the trial of the suit shall stand 
stayed until the final disposal of the rectification proceeding s. 
(3) If no s'\Jch application as aforesaid has been made within tiP 
time so specified or within such extended time as the court may allo 
40 the issue as to the validity of the registration of the trade mark 
concerned shall be deetued to have been abandoned and the court shall ., 
proceed with the suit in regard to the other issues in the case. 
(4) The final order mjt~ in any rectification proceedings referred to 
in sub-section (I) or sub-section (2) shall be binding upon the parties and 
-+5 the court shall dispose of the suit conformably to such order in so far as 
Instructions of 
Central Govern· 
ment as to pc:r· 
misible variation 
to I'IC ot>served 
t>y criminal 
courts . 
Protc:ctaOI\ of ac­
tion taken in 
good f;Jith. 
Certain persons 
to he public ~er­
vants . 
Stay of proc~ed· 
ir.~s where the 
v:Jl:dity of rc:gi~t­
rati,,n of the: 
trade mark is 
4"e ~ uoned. eto:. 

it relates to the issue as to the validity of the registration of the trade 
mark. 
(5) The stay of a suit for the infringement of a trade mark under this 
section shall not preclude the court from making any interlocutory order 
(including any order granting an injunction, directing ~ccounts to be 5 
kept, appointing a receiver or attaching any property) , during the period 
of the stay of the snit. 
Appltca11on for 126. (1) Where in a suit for infringement of a registered trade mark rectification of 
reg•~ter to be the validity of the registration of the plaintiffs trad e mark is questioned 
m:.de to Appel by the defendant or where m any such suit the defendant raises a 10 
late Board m defence under clause (e) of sub-section (2) of sect ion 30 and the plaintiff certam c:~ses . 
Implied warran· 
ty on sale of 
marked goods. 
Powers of Recis· 
trar. 
questions the validity of the registration of the defendant's trade mark, 
the issue as to the valid ity of the registration of the trade mark 
concerned shall be determined only on an application for the rectification 
of the register and notwithstanding anything contained in section 47 or 15 
section 57, such application shall be made to the Appellate Board and 
not the Registrar. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), where an application 
for rectification of the register is made to the Registrar under sectio n 47 
or section 57. the Registrar may, if he thinks fit, refer the app lication at 20 
any stage of the proceedings to the Appellate Board. 
127. Where a mark or a trade mark or trade description has been 
applied to the goods on sale or in the contract for ble of any goods or m 
relation to any service, the seller shall be deemed to warrant that the 
mark is <l genuine mark and not falsely applied, or that the trade 
descriptio is not a false trade description within the meaning of this 
Act, unless the contrary is expressed in writing signed by or on behalf of 
the seller and delivered at the time of the sale of goods or providing of 
services on contract to and accepted by the buyer. 
128. In all proceedings under this Act before the Regastrar .-
(a) the Registrar shall have all the powers of a civil court for 
the purposes of receiving evidence, administering oaths, enforcing 
the attendance of witnesses, compelling !he discovery and 
productaon of documents and issuing commissions for the 
25 
30 
exammation of watnesses; 35 
(b) the Registrar may, subject to any rules made in this behalf 
under section 158, make such orders as to costs as he considers 
reasonable, and any such order shall be executable as a decree of a 
civil co urt· 
Provided that the Registrar shall have no power to award costs 40 
to or against any party on an appeal to him against a refusal of the 
proprietor of a certification trade mark to certify goods or provision 
of services or to authorise the use of the mark; 
(c) the Registrar may, on an application made in the prescribed 
manner, review his own decision . 45 
EnKise of dis· 
cre11onary power 
by Reg•strar. 
129. Subject to the provisions of section 132, the Registrar shall not 

5 
exercise any discretionary or other power vested in him by this Act or 
the rules made thereunder adversely to a person applyi ng for the exercise 
of- ,tha~ power without (if so required by that person within the prescribed 
time) : giving to that person an opportunity of being heard . 
lJO. In any proc eeding under this Act before the Regist rar, eviden ce 
shall be given by affidav it: 
Provided that the Registrar may, if he thinks fit, take oral evidence 
in l ieu of, or in addition to , such evidence b y affidavit. 
Evidence before 
Registrar . 
131. If a person w ho is a party to a proceeding under this Act (not Death of party 
10 being a procee ding before that Appellate Board or a court) dies pend ing to a proceeding. 
the procee ding, the Registrar may, on reque st, and on proof to his 
satisfac tion of the transmission of the interest o f the deceased person, 
substitute in the procee ding his s uccessor in interest in his place, or, if 
the Regist rar is of opin ion that the interest of the deceased person is 
15 sufficiently represented by the surviving parties, permit the proceedi ng to 
continue withou t the substitut ion of his successor in interest. 
132. (1) If the Registrar is satisfied, on app lication made to him in 
the prescribed manner and accompanied by the prescribed fee, that there 
is sufficient cause for extending the time for doing any act (not being a 
20• time express ly provided in the Act), whether the time so specified has 
expired or not, he may, subject to such conditions as he may think fit to 
impose, extend the time and inform the parties accordingly. 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to req.uire the 
Registrar to h~ar the parties before disposing of an application for 
25 extension of time, and no appeal shall lie from any order of the Registrar 
under this sectio.'l. 
Extension 
time. 
133. Where, in the op1mon of the Registrar, an applicant is in Abandonment. 
default in the prosecution of an application filed under this Act or any 
Act relating to trade marks in force prior to the commencement 'of this 
30 Act, the Registrar may, by notice require the applicant to remedy the 
default within a time specified an after giving him, if so desired, an 
opportunity of being heard, treat the application as abandoned, unless 
the default is remedied within the time specified in the notice. 
of 
134. (1) The Registrar may, on application made to him in the- Preliminary 2d· 
"bed b h 1 f h VICe by the Re· 35 prescn manner y any person w o proposes to app y or t e gistrar as 10 dis-
registration of a trade mark, give advice as to whether the trade mark tinctiveness. 
appears to hi:O prima facie to be distinctive. 
(2) If, on an application for the registration of a trade mark as to 
which the Registrar has given advice as aforesaid in the affirmative made 
40 within three months after the advice was giyen, the Registrar, after 
fUrther investigation or consideration, gives notice, to the applicant of 
objection on the ground that the trade mark is not distjnctive, the 
applicant shall be entitled, on giving notice of withdrawal of the 
application within the prescribed period, to have repaid to him any fee 
-45 paid on the filing· of the application. 

Suit fnr infring<'· 
nu:nl. etc .. "' ht' 
instituted hcforc 
Di~trict Court . 
Relief in suits 
fnr infringement 
l'r fnr p:~s~mg 
off. 
135. (1) No suit-
( a) for the mfringement of a registered trade mark: or 
(b) relating to any right in a registered trade mark; or 
(c) for p;tssing off arising out of the use by the defendant of any 
trade mark which is identical with or deceptively similar to the 5 
plaintiffs trade mark. whether registered or unregistered, 
shall be instituted in any court inferior to a District Court having 
jurisdiction to try the suit. 
{2) For the purpose of clauses {a) and (b) of sub-section {1), a 
"District Court having jurisdiction" shall, notwithstanding anythin .g 10 
contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 or any other law for the 5 af 1908. 
time being in force. include a District Court within the local limits of 
whose jurisdiction. at the time of the institution of the suit or other 
proceeding. the person instituting the suit or proceeding or._ where there 
are more than one such persons any of them actually an voluntarily 15 
resides or carries on business or personally works for gain. 
Explanation.- for the purpose of sub-section (2). "person" includes 
rhe registered proprietor and the registered user. 
136. fl) The relief which a court may grant in any suit for 
infringement or for passing off referred to in section 135 includes 20 
injunction (subject to such terms, if any. as the court thinks fit) and at 
the option of the plaintiff. either damages or <.m account of profits, 
together with or without any order for the delivery-up of the infringing 
labels and marks for destruction or \!rasure . 
(2) The order of injunction under sub-section (1) may include an ex 25 
parte injunction or any interlocutory order for any of the following 
matters , namely: -
(a) for discovery of documents; 
(b) preserving of infringing goods. docum ents or other evidence 
which are related to the subject-matter of the suit; 30 
(c) restruining the defendant from disposing of or dealing with 
his assets in a manner which may adversely affect plaintiff's ability 
to recover damanges. costs or other pecuniary remedies which may 
be finally awarded to the plaintiff. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in !!lib-section (1 ), the court 35 
shall not grant relief by way of damages (other than nominal damages) 
or on account of profits in any case-
fa) where in a suit for infringement of a trade mark. the 
infringement compl:1ined of is in relation to a certification trade 
mark or collective mark; or -m 
rb) where in a suit for infringement the defendant satisfies the 
court-
(i) that at the time he commenced to use the t-rade mark 
complained of in the suit he was unaware and had no 

10 
15 
reasonable grqund for believing that the trade mark of the 
plaintiff was on the register or that the plaintiff was a 
registered user using by way of permitted use; and 
(ii) that when he became aware of the existence and nature 
of the plaintiffs right in the trade mark. he forthwith cesed to 
use the trade mark in relation to goods or services in respect of 
which it was registered; or 
(c) where in a suit for passing off the defendant satisfies the 
court-
(i) that at the time he commenced to use the trade mark 
complained of in the suit he was unaware and had no 
reasonable ground for believing that the trade mark of the 
plaintiff was in use; and 
(ii) that when he became aware of the existence and nature 
of the -plaintiffs trade mark he forthwith ceased to use the 
trade mark complained of. 
137. {1) In every proceeding under Chapter VII or under section 92, 
every registered user of a trade mark using by way of permitted use. who 
is not himself an applicant in respect of any proceeding under that 
20 Chapter or section, shall be made a party to the proceeding . 
25 
30 
35 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law. a 
registeted user so made a party to the proceeding shall not be liable for 
any costs unless he enters an appearance and takes pan in the 
proceeding . 
138. {1) A copy of any entry in the regi~er or of any document 
referred to in sub-section {1) of section 149 purporting to be certified by 
the Registrar and sealed with the seal of the Trade Marks Registry. shall 
be admitted in evidence in all 'courts and in all proceedings without 
further proof or production of the original. 
(2) A certificate purporting to be under the hand of the Registmr as 
to any entry , matter or thing that he is authorised by this Act or the 
rules to make or do shall be prima facie evidence of the entry having 
been made, and of the contents thereof, or of the matter or things 
having been done or not done. 
139. The Registrar or any officer of the Trade Marks Registry shall 
not, in any legal proceedings to which he is no~ a pany, be compellable 
to produce the register or any other docume"nt in his custody , the 
contents of which can be proved by the production of a certified copy 
issued under this Act or to appear as a witness to prove the matters 
40 therein recorded unless by o rder of the court made for special cuase. 
140. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, require that goods of any class specified in . the 
notification which are made or produced beyond the limits of India and 
imported into India, or which are made or produced within the limits of 
45 India, shall, from such date as may be appointed by the notification not 
being Jess than three months from its issue, have applied to them an 
~csi~tercd u~r 
lo ~ imrlcadcd 
in certain rro· 
cccdin~~ -
Evidence of en· 
lritJ in rcaiJitr. 
etc .. and thinp 
done hy the Rt· 
gimar . 
Rcaistrar Dftd 
other offiiCftl 
not camrriJabk 
to produce reJis­
ter. etc. 
Power to require 
goods 10 slklw 
indication of 
oricin. 

Power to require 
information ·of 
imported goods 
bearing false 
trade marks . 
Cenificate of 
validity. 
indication of the country or place in which they were made or produced, 
or of the name and address of the manufacturer or the person for whom 
the goods were manufactured. 
(2) The notification may specify the manner in which such indication 
shall be applied, that is to say, whether to goods themselves or in any 5 
other manner, and the times or occasions on which the presence of the 
indication shall be necessary, that is to say, whether on importation only, 
or also at the time of sale, whether by wholesale or retail or both. 
(3) No notification under this section shall be issued, unless 
application is made for its issue by persons or associations substantially 
representing .the interests of dealers in, or manufacturers, producers, or 
users of, the goods concerned, or unless the Central Government is 
otherwise convinced that it is necessary in the public interest to issue the 
notification, with or without such inquiry as the Central Government 
may consider necessary. 
( 4) The provisions of section 23 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, 
shall apply to the issue of a notification under this section as they apply 
to the ~aking of .a rule or bye-law the making of which is subject to the 
condition of previous publication. 
(5) A notification under this section shall not apply to goods made 
or produced beyond the limits of lndia and imported into India, if in 
respect of those goods, the Collector or Customs is satisfied at the time 
of importation that they are imended for exportation whether after 
transhipment in or transit through India or otherwise. 
141. (1) the proprietor or a liceu:iee of a registered trade mark may 
give notice in writing to the Collector of Customs to prohibit the 
importation of any goods if the import of the said goods constitute 
infringement under clause (c) of sub-section (6) of s.!ction 29-
(2) Where goods, which are prohibited to be imported into India by 
notification of the Central Government under clause (n) of sub-section 
(2) of section 11 of the Customs Act, 1962, for the protection of trade 
marks, and are liable to confiscation on importation under that Act, 
are imported into India, the Collector of Customs if, upon representation 
made to him, he has reason to believe that the trade mark complained of 
is used as a false trade mark, may require the importer of the goods, or­
his agent, to produce any documents in his possession relating to the 
goods and to furnish information as to the name and address of the 
person by whom the goods were consigned to India and the name and 
address of the person to whom the goods were sent in India. 
(3) The importer or his agent shall, within fourteen days, comply 
with the requirement as aforesaid, and if he fails to do so, he shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees. 
( 4) Any information obtained from the importer of the goods or his 
agent under this section may be communicated by the Collector or 
Customs to the registered proprietor or registered user of the trade mark 
which is alleged to have been used as a false trade mark. 
142. If in any legal proceeding for rectification of the register 
10 
15 
10 of'l897. 
20 
25 
30 
52 of 1982. 
35 
40 
45 

before the Appellate Board a decision is on contest given in favour of 
the registered proprietor of the trade mark on the issue as to the validity 
of the registration of the trade mark, the Appellate Board may grant a­
certificate to that effect, and if such a certificate is granted, then in any 
5 subsequent legal proceeding in which the said validity comes into 
question the said proprietor on obtaining a final order or judgement in 
his favour affirming validity of the registration of the . trade mark shall, 
unless tqe said final order or judgment for sufficient reason directs 
otherwise, be entitled to his full cost, charges and expenses as between 
10 legal practitioner and client. 
15 
20 
25 
143. (1) Where a person, by means of circulars, advertisements or 
otherwise, threatens a person with an action or proceeding for 
infringement of a trade mark which is registered, or alleged by the first 
mentioned person to be registered, or with some other like proceeding, a 
person aggrieved may, whether the person making the threat s is or is not 
the registered proprietor or the registered user of the trade mark, bring a 
suit against the first-mentioned person and may obtain a declaration to 
the effect that the threats are unjustifiable, and an injunction against the 
continuance of the threats, and may recover such damages (if any) as he 
has sustained, unless the first-mentioned person satisfies the court. that 
the trade mark is registered and that the acts in respect of which the 
proceedings were threatened constitute, or, if done, would constitute, an 
infr ingement of the trade mark. 
(2) The last preceding sub-section (ioes not apply if the registered 
proprietor of the trade mark, or a registered user acting in pursuance of 
sub-section (J) of section 52, with due diligence commences and 
prosecutes an action against the person threatened for infringement of 
the trade mark. 
(3) Nothing in this section shall render a legal practitioner or a 
30 registered trade marks agent liable to an action under this section in 
respect of an act done by him in his professional capacity on behalf of a 
client. 
35 
40 
45 
( 4) A suit under sub-section (J) shall not be instituted in any court 
inferior to a District Court. 
144. An address for service stated in an application or notice of 
opposition shall, for the purposes of the application or notice of 
opposition, be deemed to be the address of the appl icant or opponent , as 
the case may be, and all documents in relation to the applicati on or 
notice of opposition may be served by leaving them at or sending them 
by post to the address for service of ·the applicant or opponent, as ~~ie 
case may be. 
145. In any suit or other proceeding relating to a trade mark , the 
tribunal shall admit evidence· -Of the usages of the trade concerned and of 
apy relevant trade mark or trade name or get up legitimately used by 
other persons. 
146. Where, by or under this Act, any act, other · than the making of 
an affidavit, is required to be done before the Registrar by any person, 
Groundless 
threats of legal 
proceedings. 
Address for ser­
vice. 
Tr:tde usage, 
etc .. to be taken 
into considera­
tion. 
Agents. 

M;ork' reg1~1<.•rcd 
hy an agent \lr 
r<'prcs~nt<ltive 
without au-
tlwrity . 
the act may, subject to the ru les made in this behalL be done, instead of 
by that pe rson himself, by a person duly aut horised in the prescr ibed 
manner, who is-
( a) a legal practi tioner, or 
(b) a person registered in the prescr ibed manner as a trade :"1 
marks agent, or 
(c) a person 111 the sole and regular employment of the 
principal. 
147. If an agent or a representative of the proprietor of a registered 
trade mark, without authority uses or attempts to register or registers the. 
mark in his own name, the proprietor shall be entitled to · oppose the 
registration applied for or secure its cancellation or rectification of the 
register so as to bring him as the registe red proprietor of the said mark 
by assignment in his favour: 
I 
Provided that such action shall be taken within three years of the 
registered proprietor of the trade mark becoming aware of the conduct 
~)f the agent or representative. 
1-'8. Therf' shall be kept under the direction and supervision . of the 
Registrar,-
(a) an index of registered trade marks, 
(b) an index of trade marks in respect or which applications for 
registration are pending, 
(c) an index of the names of the proprietors of registered trade 
marks, and 
(d) an index of the names of registered users. 
10 
15 
20 
25 
[)OCllll\CIIIS open 
to public 111spec-
149. (1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (-/) of section 49,­
(a) the register and any document upon which any entry in the 
register_ is based: 
tion 
I{ E'IJOrl~ of Rc· 
)ll~llal 10 bc 
plac<'d befo1c 
l'a ll l<unent. 
(b) every notice of opposition to the registration of a trade 
mark, application for rectification before the Registrar, counter­
statement thereto, and any affidavit or documents filed by the parties 
in an~· proceedings before the Registrar; 
(c) all regulations deposited under section 64 or section 75, and 
all applications under section 67 or section 78 for var)·ing such 
regulations; 
(d) the indexes mentioned in section 148; and 
(c) such other documents as the Central Government may, b) 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify, 
shall, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, be open to public 
30 
35 
inspection at the Trade Marks Registry. 40 
(2) Any person may, on an application to the Registrar and on 
payment of such fees as may he prescribed, obtain a certified copy of any 
entry in the register or any document referred to in sub-section (1 ). 
150. The Central Government shall cau se to be placed bdore both 

\J'l 
Houses of Parliament om:c a year a report respecting the execution by or 
under the Registrar of this Act. 
151. (1) There shall be paid in respect of applivatitlllS and F ... t<~ •u•d 'ur-
I 
Ch;'Jfj!t' 
registration and other matters under this Act such fees and sure 1arge as 
5 may be prescribed by the Central <;Jovernment. 
(2) Where a fee is payable in respect of the doing of an act by the 
Registrar. the Registrar shall not do that act until the fee has been paid. 
(3) Where a fee is payable in respect of the filing of a document at 
the Trade Marks Registry. the document shall be deemed not to have 
10 been field at the Registry until the fee has been paid. 
. . Ch XII I II sa,·•n>:' ill re· 152. Nothtng tn apter s 1a - , 1 ~l'l • .,f n:rt;lin 
(a) exempt any person from any suit or other proceeding which ;~:·~~~~~ 
111 
Chap­
might, but for anything in that Chapter, be brought against him. or 
(b) entitle any person to refuse to make a compiete dist·ovcry. 
15 or to answer any question or interrogatory in any suit l'l' other 
proceeding. but such discovery or answer shall not be admissible in 
evidence against such person in any such prosecution for an offence 
under that Chapter or against clause (h) of section 112 of the 
52 of 1%2. Customs Act. 1962, relating to confiscation of good~ under clause (d) 
20 Qf section 111 of that Act and notified by the Central Government 
under clause (n) of sub-sect ion (2) of section ll thereof for the 
protection of trade marks relating to import of goods, or 
(c) be construed so as to render liable to any prosecution or 
punishment any servant of a master resident in India who in good 
2s faith acts in obedience to the instructions of such master. an1 .Hl 
demand made by or on behalf of the prosecutor.· has given full 
information as to his master'and as to the instructH•Ils which he has 
received from his master.· 
153. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Registration Ac~ 
30 lh of I<JOB. 1908, no document declaring or purporting to declare the ownership or 
title of a person to a traue mark other than a registered trade mark shall 
be registered under that Act. 
154. The provisions of this Act shall be binding on the Government. 
155. (1) With a view to the fulfilment of a treaty, convention or 
35 arrangement, with any country outside India whi.ch affords to citizens of 
India similar privileges as granted to its own citizens, the Central 
Government may, be notification in t,hc Official Gazette, declare suc h 
country to be a convention country for the purposes of this Act. 
(2) Where .a person has made an application for the registwtion of n 
40 trade mark in a convention country and that person, or his legal 
representative or assignee, makes an application for the registration of the 
trade mark in India within six months after the date on which the 
application was made in the convention country, rhe trade mark shall. if 
registrered under this Acr, be registered as of the date on which the 
45 application was made in the convention country and that date shall be 
deemed for the purposes of this Act to be the date of registration. 
Dt:claration a~ 
to owner~hip tlf 
trade mMk not 
register ahle 
under the Re· 
gistr;1tion Act, 
IIJOH. 
Government to 
be bnund . 
Special provi· 
~ ions relating h) 
;1pplic.1tions fnr 
registration from 
citizens of wn­
vo:ntinn l'Oun­
tries. 

Provision as to 
reciprocity . 
f'ower of Cent­
ral Government 
to remove dif­
ficulties. 
Power to make 
rules. 
(3) Where applications have been made for the registration of a 
trade mark in two or more convention countries, the period of six 
months referred to in the last preceding sub-section shall be reckoned 
from the date on which the earlier or earliest of those applications was 
made. 
(4). Nothing in this Act shall entitle the proprietor of a trade mark 
to recover damages for infringement which took place prior to the date 
of application for registration under this Act. 
156. Where any country specified by the Central Government in this 
behalf by notification in the Official Gazette does not accord to citizen. 
of India the same rights in respect of the registration and protection of 
trade marks as it accords to its own nationals, no national of such 
country shall be entitled, either solely or jointly with any other person-
5 
10 
( a) to apply for the registration of, or be registered as the proprietor 
M, a trade mark, Jl5 
(b) to be registered as the assignee of the proprietor of a registered 
trade mark , or 
(C) to apply for registration or be regiSlered as a registered user of a 
trade mark under section 49. 
157. (1) lf any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 20 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official 
Gazette, make such provisions not i'nconsistent with the provisions of this 
Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the 
expiry of five years from the commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall , as soon as may be 
after it is made , be laid before each House of Parliament. 
158. (1) The Central Government may , by notification in the 
Official Gazette and subject to the condition of previous publica tion , 
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
(i) the matters to be included in the Register of Trade Marks 
25 
30 
under sub-sec tion (1) o1 section 6; 35 
(ii) the manners ir. which the Registrar may notify a word as an 
international non-proprietary name under section 13; 
(iii) the manner of making an application for dissolution of an 
association under sub-section (5) of section 16; 
(iv) the manner of making an application for registration of a 40 
trade mark under sub-section (1) of section 18; 
(v) the manner of advertising of an ·application for registration 
under sub-section (1) and the manner -of notifying corrections or 
amendments under sub-section (2) of section 20; 

(vi) the manner of making an application and the fee 
payable for such application. giving notice under sub-section (1) 
and · sending counterstatements under sub-section (:?)·· and 
submission of evidence and the time therefor unde!' sub-section 
5 (4} of section 21; 
(vii) the form of certificate of registration under sub-section 
(2) and the manner of giving notice to the applicant under sub­
section (3) of section 23; 
(viii) the forms of application, the time within which such 
10 application is to be made and fee and surcharge if any payable 
with each application , under section 25 and the time within 
which the Regi strar shall send a notice and the manner of such 
notice under sub-section (3) of that section; 
(ix) the manner of submitting statement of cases under sub-
IS section (2) of section 40; 
(x) the manner of making an application by the proprietor 
of a trade mark under section 41; 
(xi) the manner of making an application for assignment or 
transmission of a certification trade mark under sect ion 43; 
20 (xii) the mann er of making an application to the Registrar 
to registe r title under sub-secti on (1) of sect ion 45; 
(xiii) the mann er in which and the period within which an 
application is to be made under sub-section (4) of section 46; 
(xiv) the manner of making an application under sub-section 
25 (2) of sect ion 47; 
(xv.) the manners of making an application, documents and 
other evidence to accompany such application sub-section (1) and 
the manner in which notice is to be issued under sub-section (3) 
of section 49; 
30 (xvi) the manner of making application under sub-section 
(1); the manner of issuing a notice under sub-section (2) and 
the procedure for cancelling a registration under sub-section (3) 
of section 50; 
(xvii) the manner of making application under sub-section (1) 
35 and (2j, the manner of giving notice under sub-section (4) and 
the manner of service of notice of rectification under sub-section 
(5) of section 57; 
(xviii) the manner of making an application under section 58; 
(xix) the manner of making an application under sub-section 
40 (1), the- n.:1nner of advertising an application, time and manner 
of notice by which application may be opposed under sub­
sections (2) and (3) of section 59; 
(xx) the manner of adverth;ement under sub-section (2) of 
section 60; 

(xxi) the other matters to be specified in the regulations under 
sub-section (2) of section 64; 
(xxii) the manner of making an application under sub-section 
(1) of section 72; 
(xxiii) the manner of advertising an application under section 74; 5 
(xxiv) the manner of making an application under section 78; 
(xxv) the dasses of goods under sect ion 80; . 
(xxvi) the conditions and restrictions under sub-section (2) of 
section 81; 
(xxvii) determination of character of textile goods by sa mpling 10 
under section 83; 
(xxviii) the salaries and allowances payable and other term s and 
conditions of service of the Chairman and other Members under 
section 89; 
(xxix) the procedure for investigation of misbehaviour or 15 
incapacity of the Chairman and other Members under sub-section 
( 3) of section 90; 
(xxx) the sala ries and allowances and other conditions of service 
of the officers and other employees of the Appellate Board under 
sub-section (2) and the manner in which the officers and other 26 
employees of the Appellate Board shall discharge their functions 
under sub-section (3) of section 91; 
(xxxi) the form of making an appeal, the manner of verification 
and the fee payable under sub-section (3) of section 92; 
(xxxii) the form in which and the particulars to be included in 
the application to the Appellate Board under section 98; 
(xxxiii) the manner of making an applicatioP for review under 
section 128; 
(xxxiv) the time within which an application is to be made to 
the Registrar for exercisi ng his discretionary power under 
section 129; 
(xxxv) the manner of making an application and the fee payable 
therefor under sub-section (1) of section 132; 
(xxxvi) the manner of making an application under sub-section 
(1) and the period for withdrawal of such application under sub­
sect ion (2) of sect ion 134; 
(xxxvii) the manner of authorising any person to act .and the 
manner of registration as a trade mark agent under section 146; 
(xxxviii) the conditions for inspection of documents under sub-
25 
30 
35 
section (1) and the fee payable for obtaining a certified copy of any 40 
entry in the register under sub-section (2) of section 149; 
.(xxxix) the fees and surcharge payable for making applications, . 
registration and other matters under seclion 151; 

(xi) any other matter which is required to be , or may be, 
prescribed. 
(3) Every rule made by the Central government under thi s Act , shalf 
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
5 Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 
and if, before the exp iry of the session immediately following the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both House s agree in making any 
modificati on in the rule or both Houses agree that the rul e shou ld not !>e 
10 rnad e, the rule shall there after have effect only in such m odified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, howe ver, that any such 
modi fication or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anyth ing previously don e under that rule . 
159. The enact ment specified in the Schedule shall be amended in Amendments. 
15 the mann er spec ified therein . 
43 of 1958. 160. (1) The Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 is hereby Repeal and snv-
repealcd. ings. 
(2) Without prejud ice to the provisions conta ined in the General 
w of um. Clauses Act, 1897, with respect to repeals, any notification , rule order, 
20 requirement, regi strat ion , certi ficate, notice , decision , determination, 
direction, approval , authorisation, consent, application, request or thing 
made, issued, given or done under the Trade and Merchandise Marks 
43 of 1958. Act, 1958 shall, if in force at the Commencement of this Act, continue to 
be in force and have effect as if made, issued , given or done under the 
25 co rresponding provisions of this Act. 
(3) The provisions of this Act shall apply to any appl ication for 
registration of a t;ade m<~rk pending at the commencement of this Act 
and to any proceedings consequent thereon and to any registration 
granted in pursuance thereof. 
30 (4) Subject 1b the prov isions of section 101 and notwithstanding any 
thing contained in any other provision of this Act , any legal proceeding 
pending in any court at the commencement of this Act may be continued 
in that court as if this Act had not been passed. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where a 
35 particular usc of a registered trade mark is not an infringement of a trade 
mark regi~tcred before the commencement of this Act, then the 
continued usc of that mark shall not be an infringement under thi~ Act. 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the date 
of expiration of registration of a trade mark registered before the 
40 commencement of this Act shall be the date immediately after the period 
of seven years for which it was registered or renewed: 
Provided that the registration of a defensive trade mark referred to 
43 of 195!i. in section 47 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 shall cease 
to have effect on the date immediately afte r the expiry of five years of 
-tS such commencement or after the expiry of the period for which it was 
registered o renewed. whichever is earlier. 

Year Act No. 
1956 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See Section 159) 
AMENDMENTS 
Short title 
The Com'panies 
Act . 1956 
Amendment 
(I) In section 20. for sub-section (2), the 
following sub-sections shall be sub-stituted. 
name!y:-
"(2) Without prejud ice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, a name which is identical 
with, or too nearly resembles,-
(i) the name by which a compan y in existence 
has been previously rq;istered, or 
(ii) a registered trade mark , or a trade mark 
which is subject of an application for 
regist(ation, of any other person under the 
Trade Marks Act, 1993, 
may be deemed to be undesirable by the Central 
Government within the meaning of sub-section(l ). 
(3) The Central Governmen t may, befo re 
deeming a name as undesirable under clause 
(ii) of sub-section (2), consu lt the Registrar of 
Trade Marks." 
(II) In section 22, in sub-section (I)-
(i) for the portion beginning with "if, 
through" and ending with "the first· 
mentioned company-". the following shall 
be substituted, namely:-
" lf. through inadvertence or otherwise, a 
company on its first re~st ratio n or on it~ 
registration by a new name. is registered by a 
name which,-
(i) in the opinion of the Central Governmen t. 
is identical with, or too ne01rly resembles, 
the name by which a company in .existence 
has been previously registered, whether 
under this Act or any previous comJ\anies 
law, the first-mentioned company, or 
(ii) on an application by a registered proprietor 
of a trade mark, is in the opinion of the 
Crntra l Government identical with, or too 
nearly resembles, a registered trade mark of 
such proprieto r under the Trade Marks 
Act, 1993, such compa ny·-"· 
(ii} the following proviso shall he added, 
namely:-
"Provided that no application under clause (ii) 
made hy a registered proprie tor of a trade mark 
after five years of coming to notice of registration 
of the company shall he considered hy the Central 
Government." 

APPENDIX-I 
26 August 1993 
PRESS COMMUNIQUE 
The Trade Marks Bill, 1993 which was introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 19th April, 1993 
and published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary Part II, Section 2, dated the 19th April , 
1993 has been referred to the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry for examination and report. The Committee consists of 42 Members of both the Houses 
of Parliament is headed by Shri Moturu Hanumantha Rao, M.P. 
l11e Bill inter-alia propose to amend an consolidate a law relating to Trade Marks to provide 
for registration and better protection of Trade Marks for goods and services and for the 
prevention of the use of fraudulent marks. 
The Committee has decided to invite suggestions/comments from concerned individuals , 
organisations and bodies on the various clauses of the Bill. Interested parties are, accordingly, 
requested through this Press Communique to send their views in the form of memorandum for 
the consideration of the Committee latest by 15th September, 1993. Copies of the memorandum 
may be sent to Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Under Secretary, Department Related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry , Rajya Sabha Secretariat, Parliament House, New Delhi 
(preferably with 75 copies both in English and Hindi of the Memorandum). 
Copies of the Bill for reference purposes are available in Parliament Library , New Delhi and 
Libraries of all the State Legislatures in different States. Copies may 3lso be obtained on specific 
request from Committee Officer, Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry , Rajya Sabha Secretariat, Room No. 123A, Third Floor, Parliament House , New Delhi . 
Sdi-
(TAPAS DAS GUPTA) 
UNDER SECRETARY 
Ph : 3034540 

APPENDIX-II 
LIST OF INDIVIDUALS/ORGANISATIONS ETC. FROM 
MEMORANDA OR COMMENTS WERE RECEIVED BY 
COMMITIEE 
1. Ramfry and Sagar 
Attorney-at-Law 
Remfry House . 
8, Nangal Raya Business Centre, 
New Delhi-110046. 
2. The All India Patent , 
Trade Marks Attorneys' Association, 
C/o Shah and Shah 
'A' Adiun Building, 5th Floor, 
1st Dhobi Talao, 
Bombay-400002. 
3. Trade Marks, Patents, Designs and Copyright 
Owners Association of India 
Army and Navy Building, 3rd Floor, 
Mahatma Gandhi Road, Fort. 
Bombay-400001. 
4. D.P. Ahuja and Company , 
53, Syed Amir Ali Avenue, 
Calcutta-700019. 
5. The Associated Chambers of Commerce 
and Industry of India, 
2nd Floor, Allahabad ·Bank Building, 
17, Parliament Street, 
New Delhi-110001. 
6. Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce 
and Industry of India, 
Federation House, 
Tansen Marg, 
New Delhi-110001. 
7. Dr. S. Vedaraman 
Controller General of Patents, Designs 
and Trade Marks (Retd.) 
Flat No. 508, 'C' Wing Manju Mahal 
35, Smt. Nargis Dutt Roftd, 
Bandnt, 
Bombay-400050. 
78 
wwo 
THE 

8. Daswani & Daswani, 
Patent and Trade Mark Attorneys 
Jabakusum House, 1st Floor, 
34, Chittanmjan Avenue, 
C<alcutta-7000 U. 
9. S/Shri D. Parthasarathy, J. Durga Rao and K. Hema 
Prakasa Roa, 
3-6-104, 
Skyline Theatre Lane, 
Himayathnagar, 
Hyderabad-500029. 
10. Centre of Indian Trade Unions, 
15, Talkatora Road, 
New Delhi-110001. 

APPENDIX-III 
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO TENDERED EVIDENCE BEFORE THE 
COMMITIEE 
A. Representatives of the Ministry of Industry 
1. Shri P.G. Mankad, Additional Secretary. 
2. Shri G.S. Jaiya, Director. 
3. Shri Puspendra Rai, Director, 
4. Shri R.A. Acharya, Controller General of Trade Marks. 
5. Shri K.C. Kailasam, Senior Joint Registrar of Trade Marks. 
B. Representatives of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company AfTairs 
1. Shri A.C.C. Unni, Additional Secretary. 
2. Dr. Rag!mbir Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel. 
3. Shri V.K. Bhasin, Deputy Legislative Counsel. 
4. Shri S.D. Singh, Assistant Legislative Counsel. 
C. Representatives of Organisations and Other Individuals who have submitted Memorandum on 
tbe Trade Marks Bill, 1993 
1. Rem fry and Sagar, New Delhi; 
2. The All India Patent, Trade 
Marks Attorneys' Association, 
Bombay; 
3. Trade Marks Patents, Design 
and Copyright Owners 
Association, Bombay; 
4. D.P. Ahuja and · Company, 
Calcutta; 
5. The Associated Chambers of 
Commerce and Industry of 
India, New Delhi; 
6. Federation of Indian 
Chambers of Commerce and 
1.ndustry, New Delhi; and 
: ( i) Shri R. Sampath Kumar 
(ii) Shri Rajendra Kumar 
( i) Shri V .F. Shah 
(ii) Shri L.B. Desai 
: ( i) Shri C.J. Mehimkar 
(ii) Shri A.V. Gadgil 
( i) Shri D.P. Ahuja 
(ii) Shri C.S. Rao 
( i) Shri Govind Hari Singhania 
(ii) Shri S Narayanaswamy 
( i) Shri O.K. Kwatra 
(ii) Shri Pravin Anand 
7. ·or. S. Vedaraman, former Controller Gerreral of Patents, Design and Trade Marks, Bombay. 

APPENDIX-IV 
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE 
·x1 
ELEVENTH MEETING 
·The Committee met at 6.00 PM on Wednesday the 25th August , 1993, in Committee Room 
No. 63, Firs t Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Moturu Hanum anth a Ra o - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Rajendra Prasa d Mody 
LOK SABHA 
3. Shrimat i Kesharbai Sonajirao. Kshir~ag ar 
4. Shrimati Prat ibh a Devis ingh Pat il 
5. Shri Balin Kuli 
6. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
7. Shri Harish Narayan Pr~hu Zantye 
8. Shrimati Sumitra MahaJan 
9. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kur1ar 
10. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
11. Shri Puran Cha ndra Malik 
12. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
13. Shri P.G. Na rayanan 
14. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri G.K. Sakseua, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Under Secretary 
Shn Sham Sher Singh, Under Secretary 
Shri S.P. Gvyal, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee considered the Trade Marks Bill, 1993 as Introduced in the Lok Sabha 
and referred to it for examination and report. ln this connect:on the Committee also considered 
the background note receiveu from the Ministry vf Industry and the Trade and Merc handise 
Marks Act, 1958. After some discussion the Committee decided to issue a press Communique 
inviting views from organisations/bodies and individuals on the subject matter of the Bill so as to 
reach the Secretariat· by 15th September, 19fJ3 
The Committee further dedded to pear the Secretary of the Ministry of Industry on 15th 
September, 1993 by way of preliminary briefing on the need for bringing the proposed legislation 
•Minutes of the 1st to Xth Meetings of the Commitree relate to other matters 
81 

and the difficulties faced by the Government in the administrution of the Trade and Marchandise 
Marks Act·, 1958. 
3 . • • • • • .• 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 7.00 P.M. 
XII 
TWELFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A .M. on Wednesday, the 15th September , 1993 in Committee 
Room No. 63, First Aoor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Rao-Chairman 
MEMUERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shrimati Chandrika Abhinandan Jain 
3. Shri Rajendra Prasa d Mody 
4. Shri V. R ajes hwar Rao 
5. Shri Ish D utt Yada v 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shr i K.H. Muni yappa 
7: Shrimat i Keshar bai Sonajirao Kshirsagar 
8. Shri mat i Pratibha Dev isingh Pa til 
9. Shri Balin Kuli 
10. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
11. Shri Chiranji Uil Sharma 
12 Shn Mullappally Ramachandran 
13. Shri Udaysingrao Gaakwad 
14. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
15. Shn Harish Narayan Prab hu Zantye 
16. Shri Rajcndra Agnihot n 
17. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
18. Shri S.N. Vekaria 
19. Shri Pr,tbhu Dayal Kat harla 
20. Shri Satyanarayan Jatiya 
21. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
22. Shri Manjay Lal 
23. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
24. Slui Puran Chandra Malik 
25. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
26. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
SECREA T ARIAT 
Shri G.K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
Shn Sh.tm_?her Singh Rana. Under Secretary 
Shri Jagmohan Sundriycal. Committee Officer 
• • • • • • - Relate!> to other matters. 

WITNESSES 
Representatives of the Ministry of Industry: 
1. Shri P.G. Mankad, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri G.S. Jaiya, Director 
3. Shri K.C. Kailasam, Joint Registrar of Trade Marks 
2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses on the various 
provisions of the Trade Marks Bill, 1993 . .The Committee felt that the issues points identified by 
the Members during the discussion need further clarifications. The Committee asked the 
witnesses to send a further on the raised during the discussion for its consideration. 
A verbatim record of the discussion was kept. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 1.45 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 16th 
September, 1993. 
·xvi 
SIXTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 12th October. 1993 in Committee Room 
'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Rao-Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RA)Y_A SABHA 
I 
2. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
3. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mody 
4. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
5. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav 
6. Shri· Nyodek Yonggam 
LOK SABHA 
' 7. Shri Guruda Kam at 
8. Shrimati ' Pratibha Devisingh Patil 
9. Shri Ram a Krishna Konathala 
10. Shri Balin Kuli 
11. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
12. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
13. Shri Mullappaly Ramachandran 
14. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
15. · Shri M. Baga Reddy 
16: Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
17. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan 
18. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
19. Sliri S.N. Vekaria 
20. Shri Satyanarayan Jatiya 
21. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
22. Shri Naval Kishore Rai 
23. Shri Manjay Lal 
Minutes of the Xlllth to XVth meetings of the Committee relate to other matters. 

24. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
25. Shri Puran Chandra Malik 
26. Shri Tcj Narayan Singh 
27. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri G.K. Saksena. DepuJy Secretary 
Shri S.S. Rana. Under Secretary 
Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal. Committee Officer 
WITNF . .SSES 
Representatives of the Ministry of Law. Justice and C'omJlllll~' Affllirs: 
l. Shri A.C.C. Unni, Additional Sc<:retary 
2. Dr. Raghuhir Singh, Joint Secretary and Lq!isl:ttiw Counsl'l 
3. Shri V.K. Bhasin. Deputy Legislative Counsd 
4. Slui S.D. Singh. Assistant Legislative C~nmsel 
2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the above nwntinned witnc''l'' on the Trade 
Marks Bill, 1993. The Committee directed the Secretariat to send :1 wpy l':1ch nf the 
memorand\•m received hy the Committ<.·e on the Bill to the witne•;-;cs and :tskcd tlwm tn send 
their comments on the suggest ions containe d therein within 2 weeks. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
3. The Committee further decided that the Minio;try of lndu-;try. hcing the adtni,,i,trative 
Ministrv. mav also be asked to suhmit their reactions on the M<.·mnranda rcn·ivcd hv the . . . 
Committee within two weeks. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 1.05 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on tlw Dth 
October. 1993. 
·x1x 
NINETEENTH MEETING 
The Commi ttee met from 11.00 A .M. to 1.45 P.M. and again from 3.00 P.M. to ~.:'0 f».~1. 
on Wednesday. the lOth November. 1993 in Committee Room 'A' Ground Floor. Parli :unent 
!louse Anncxc. New Delhi. 
I'RF .... 4;)ENT 
I. Slui Moturu Hanumantha Rao - Chairman 
MEMUERS 
RAJYA SAUHA 
2. Shrimati Chandrika Abhinandan Jain 
3. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
LOK SAUHA 
4. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
5. Shri Rama Krishna Konath~lla 
6. Shri Balin Kuli 
7. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
'\ linut~s ot the XVIIth :md XVIIIth meetings of the Committee relate to other ma1ters. 

• 
8. Shri Mullappally RamachanEiran 
9. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
10. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
11. Shri V. Dhanajaya Kumar 
12. Shri Ramdew Ram 
13. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
14. Shri Manjay La! 
15. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
16. Shri Purna Chandra Malik 
17. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
18. Shri P.G. Narayanan 
19. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri G .K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
Shri S.S. Rana, Under Secretary 
Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
I· Representatives of Organisations and Other Individuals who have Submitted Memorandum 
on the Trade Marks Bill, 1993 
1. Remfry and Sagar, New Delhi; (i) Shri R. Sampath Kumar 
(ii) Shri Rajendra Kumar 
2. The All India Patent, Trade Mark (i) Shri V.F. Shan 
Attorneys' Association, Bombay; (ii) Shri L.B. Desai 
3. Trade Marks Patents, Design and (i) Shri · C.J. Mehimkar 
Copyrignt Owners Association, Bombay: (ii) Shri A.V. Gadgil 
4. D.P. Ahuja and Company, Calcutta (i) Shri D .P. Ahuja 
(ii) Shri C.S. Rao 
5. The Associated Chambers of Commerce (i) Shri Govind Hari Singhania 
and Industry of India, New Delhi; (ii) Shri S. Narayanaswamy 
6. Federation of Indian Chambers of (i) Shri G.K. Kwatra 
Commerce and Industry, New Delhi; and: (ii) Shri Pravin Anand 
7. Dr. S. Vedaraman, former Controller 
General of Patents, Design and Trade 
Marks, Bombay. 
II • • • • • • 
2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the witnesses at I above on the v:-...ous clauses 
of the Trade Marks Bill, 1993. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
3 .••••• 
4 .••••• 
•Relates to other matters. 

5. .The Committee then adjourned at 5.50 · P.M. to meet again at 
11.00 A.M. on 11th November. 1993. 
·xx1 
TWENTY FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met from 11.00 A.M . on Thursday , the 25th November, 1993 in Committee 
ROOQl 'A' ground floor , Parliament House Annexe. New Delhi. 
,. 
Pl{ESENT 
1. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Rao - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shrimati Chan drika Abhinandan Jain 
4. Shri J.P . Javali 
5. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Balin Kuli 
7. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
8. Shri Mulla ppall y Ramachand ra n 
9. Shri 
10. Shri 
11. Shri 
12. Shri 
13. Shri 
H arish Narayan Zantye 
V. Dhanan jay Kuma r 
S.N. Vekaria 
Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
Manjay Lal 
14. Shrimati Suseela Gopala n 
15. Shri Puran Chandr;i Malik 
16. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
17. Shri P.G. Narayanan 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri S.S. Rana, Under Secretary 
Shri Jagmohan, Sundriyal, Committee O fficer 
SPECIAL INVITEES 
Representatives of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs; 
1. Dr. Raghubir Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Cou nsel 
2. Shri s.q. Singh, Assistant Legislative Counsel 
WITNESSES 
Representativ~ of the Minist ry of Industry: 
l. Shri P.G. ~ankad, Additional Secretary-
•Minutes of the XXth meeting of the Committee relates to other m01tters. 
-I 

2. Shri Puspendra Rai, Director 
3. Shri K.C . Kailsam, Senior Joint Registrar, Trade Marks 
4. Shri R.A. Acharya, Controller General of Trade Mttrks 
2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses in connection 
with the various clauses of the Trade Marks BiJJ. 1993. 
A varbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 1.30 P.M. to met again at 3',()0 P.M. on the 26th 
November, 1993. 
•XXVI 
TWENTY SIXTR MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 19th January, 1994 in Committee 
Room No. 63, First Aoor , Parliament House, New Delhi. · 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Rao - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shrimati Chandrika Abhinandan Jain 
4. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mody 
5. Shri V. Rajeshwar Rao 
6. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
7. Shri Jibon Roy 
LOK SABp 
8. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
9. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala 
10. Shri Man0ranjan Bhakta 
11. 'Shri Chiqmji Lal Sharma 
12. Shri Mullapally Ramachandran 
13. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
14. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
·/ 
15. Shri Harish Narayan Prabh1,1 Zantye 
16. Shri V. Dhana njaya Kumar 
17: Shri S.N . .Vekaria 
18. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katharia 
19. Shri Satyanarayan Jatiya 
20. Shri Manjay Lal 
21. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
' 22. Shri Puma Chandra Malik 
•Minutes of the XXIIand to XXVth ivieetings of the Committee relate to other matters. 

23. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
24. Shri P.O. Narayanan 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri O.K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
Shri S.S. Rana, Under Secretary 
Shri Jagmohan SundriyaJ, Committee Officer 
2. •• • • •. The Committee also directed the Secretariat to prepare_ the draft report on the 
Trade Marks BiJl, 1993. 
3. The Committee then considered its future programme and decided to meet on 8th. 9th 
and lOth February, 1994 respectively. 
A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 1.00 P.M. 
XXXIV 
THIRTY FOURTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 6.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 17th March, 1994 in Committee Room 
No. 63, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Rao- Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shrimati Chandrika Abhinandan Jain 
3. Shri J.P. JavaJi 
4. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
5. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mody 
6. Shri V. Rajeshwar Rao 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
8. Shrimati Pratibha Devisingh Patil 
9. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala 
10. Shri Balin ·Kuli 
11. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
12. Shri Vishveshwar Bhagat 
13. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
14 .. Shri Udaysingrao Laikwad 
15. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
16. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri 
17. Shri S.N. Vekaria 
• • • •• Relates to the other matters. 

18. Shri Manjay Lal 
19. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
20. Shri Purna Chandra Malik 
21. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
22. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramuiuh 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri G .K. Saksena, Deputy Secrctury 
Shri S.S. Rana., Under Secretary 
Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal , Committee Officer 
2 . • • • * 
3. Thereafter the Chairman of the Committee informed the Committee about receipt of Note 
of dis~ent from Shrimati Suseela Gopalan, M.P. and StSiui Purna Chandra Malik and Jibor Roy. 
M.P.s with regard to the draft Sixth Report on the Trade M;uks Bill, 1993. The Chairman 
directed the Secretariat to circulutc these notes to the Members of the Committee. The 
Committee then deferred the considerution of the said draft report and decided to take up the 
-;ame on 31st March, 1994. 
A sunumtry of the proceedings was kept. 
4. • 
5. The Committee then adjourn ed at 6.15 P.M. 
XL 
FORTIETH MEETING 
.. 
The C ommi ttee met at 3.00 P.M. on the 31st March, 1994 ir. Committ ee Room No . 63. 
Purliame nt House , New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Slui Moturu Hanum anth a Rao - Chairman 
MEMB ERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramda s Agarwal 
3. Slui J .P. Ja vali 
4. Shri Bhuban eswur Kalita 
5. Shri V. Rajeshwar Ra o 
6. Shri K.K. Veerappan 
7. Shri lsh Dutt Yadav 
8. Shri Jib on Ro y 
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri K.H . Mun!yap pa 
•xxxxx Relates tn other mattors. 

10. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala 
11. Shri Balin Kuli 
12. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
\ 13. Shri Vishveshwar Bhagat 
\ 
• 14. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
15. Shri Mullapally Ramachandran ,, . 
\ 
16. Shri 'M. · Baga Reddy 
17. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
18. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri 
19. Shri Ramdew Ram 
20. Shri Naval Kishore Rai 
21. Shri Manjay Lal 
22. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
23. Shri Purna Chandra Malik 
SECRETARIAT 
ShrL G. K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
Shri S. S. Ran a, Under Secretary-
. 
\ 
\ 
Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer 
I 
2. The Committee considered the draft Report on the Trade Marks Bill, 1993 and after some 
discussion adopted it unanimously with some minor changes. The Committee decided to present 
the Report on 21st April, 1994 and authorisec.! s-$h. Jibon Roy and Ramdas Agarwal to present 
the Report to the Rajya Sabh:i. The Committee authorised s-$h. Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
and Purna Chandra Malik to lay a copy of the Report on the Table of Lo~ Sabha on behalf of 
the Committee. 
A Summary of the Proceedings was kept. 
3. * * " 
:.!:-
4. * * * 
5. * '~ 
* * 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 P.M . 
. ... . •. Relates to other matters. 