90th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/90threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:49]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
NINETIETH REPORT
ON
SICKNESS IN SSI SECTOR
IN THE CITY OF KANPUR, UTTAR PRADESH
 
(PRESENTED TO HON'BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 20TH AUGUST, 2002)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 11TH DECEMBER, 2002)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 11TH DECEMBER, 2002)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2002/AGRAHAYANA, 1924 (SAKA)
E-mail: rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in
Website: http://parliamentofindia.nic.in
CONTENTS
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
      Introduction
     
      REPORT
 
      OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE – AT A GLANCE
MINUTES
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
     1.  Shri T.N. Chaturvedi  —  Chairman
          RAJYA  SABHA
     2.  Prof. M.M. Agarwal
     3.  Dr. Abrar Ahmed
     4.  Shri Jayantilal Barot
     5.  Shri Prasanta Chatterjee

90th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/90threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:49]
     6.  Shrimati Saroj Dubey
     7.  Dr. Faguni Ram
     8.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
     9.  Shri P.K. Maheshwari
   10.  Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
   11.  Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
   12.  Shri S. Sivasubramanian
   13.  Shrimati Sushree Devi
   14.  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
          LOK  SABHA
   15.  Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
   16.  Kumari Mamata Banerjee
   17.  Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
   18.  Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
   19.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das
   20.  Shri Deepak Kumar
   21.  Shri Thomas Hansda
   22.  Dr. S. Jagathrakshakan
   23.  Shri A.C. Jose
   24.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
   25.  Shri Brijlal Khabri
   26.  Shri Sunil Khan
   27.  Shri Manjay Lal
   28.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
   29.  Shri A. Narendra
   30.  Shri Ananta Nayak
   31.  Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
   32.  Shri Dharam Raj Singh Patel
   33.  Shri Uttamrao Patil
   34.  Shri Malyala Rajaiah
   35.  Shri P. Rajendran
   36.  Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
   37.  Shri Tarachand Sahu
   38.  Shri Ramanand Singh
   39.  Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
   40.  Chowdhary Talib Hussain
   41.  Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
   42.  Shrimati D.M. Vijaya Kumari
   43.  Shri Beni Prasad Verma
          SECRETARIAT
          Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
          Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director
          Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
          Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
          Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer

90th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/90threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:49]
  INTRODUCTION
          I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having been authorised
by the Committee, hereby present this Ninetieth Report on Sickness in SSI Sector in the city of Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh.
2.       The Committee, in this context, heard the oral evidence of SSI Associations on 4th June, 2002.
3.       The Committee in its meeting held on 9th August, 2002 considered and adopted the Report.
NEW DELHI;
August 9, 2002
DR. P.C. ALEXANDER
                                                                      Chairman,
              Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry.
REPORT
BACKGROUND
          Situated on the banks of the river Ganga, Kanpur stands as one of North India's major industrial centres with its
own historical, religious and commercial importance. The city, which was once described as Manchester of the East, is
one of the biggest producers of textile and leather products in Uttar Pradesh. These are exported in bulk from here.
About 50 tonnes of air cargo is generated from leather products only. Apart from leather and textile industries, fertilizer,
chemicals, two wheelers, soaps, pan masala, hosiery and engineering industries are also operating in the city.
1.1     The city hosts the world famous Lal Imli woollen factory, which was once the pride of the State. Besides, many
big companies such as LML Ltd., Kothari Products, Coca Cola, Pepsi, Duncans Industries Ltd. (Fertilizer factory),
Rotomac, Nerolac, Hindustan Lever, Ashok Masale, Goldie Spices, Mirza Tanners, Super House, BIC, NTC, GCMMF
(Amul) etc. have their offices/plants at Kanpur. The stockyards of HAL and SAIL are also located in the city. A large
number of ordnance factories and defence establishments such as DMSRDE, Small Arms Factory, Field Gun Factory
and Parachute Factory are also located in Kanpur. Gas Authority of India Ltd., NTPC, and perfume industries of
Kannauj are very close to Kanpur. A Software Technology Park is also being developed here. The city also hosts the
offices of the Directorate of Industries and Directorate of Handloom to look after these industries.
1.2     About 50 years ago, Kanpur was at second place in the country after Calcutta in terms of industrialisation.
However, in course of time, the city could not maintain its glory due to the closure of a number of industrial units
mainly comprising of textiles, iron and steel, engineering goods, etc. The famous industries Lal Imli Elgin Mills and
almost all the units of J.K. Group have been lying closed since long due to industrial downturn and lack of
infrastructural facilities particularly shortage of power, lack of technological upgradation and industrial unrest. Yet in
the State of Uttar Pradesh, Kanpur still holds an important place in terms of concentration of industries at one place.
STATUS  OF  SMALL  SCALE  INDUSTRIAL  UNITS  IN  KANPUR
2.       Certain special characteristics, which set the SSI sector apart in the Indian industrial environment, also hold good
for the small-scale industrial units operating in Kanpur. These include the decentralised nature of the sector, low capital
intensity, use of poor technology, making use of locally available resources only and its unsuitability for rural areas.
Study of the Subject by the Sub-Committee for the Ministry of Small Scale Industries
2.1     The above Sub-Committee decided to study the sickness of SSI sector in the city of Kanpur. The 
Sub-Committee comprised the following Members :
                 1.  Prof. M.M. Agarwal (RS) - Convenor
                 2.  Shri P. Rajendran (LS)
                 3.  Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh (LS)
                 4.  Shri Ramanand Singh (LS)
                 5.  Dr. Faguni Ram (RS)

90th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/90threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:49]
                 6.  Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary (LS)
`                7.  Dr. Abrar Ahmed (RS)
                 8.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan (RS)
                 9.  Shri Talib Hussain (LS)
               10.  Shri Dayabhai Patel (LS)
          The Sub-Committee visited Kanpur and heard the SSI associations on 9.10.2001. Again, the 
Sub-Committee heard select association in New Delhi on 4th June, 2002. The Sub-Committee heard the following SSI
Association in New Delhi :
                 1.  Indian Paints Association
                 2.  UP Hosiery Association
                 3.  UP Small Scale Soap Industries Association
                 4.  Panki Industries Association
                 5.  Associated Chamber of Commerce and Industry
Inter-active Session with the SSI Associations
2.2     During the course of the interactive session, the associations attributed reasons of sickness of SSI units to the
following factors :
Labour Problem
2.3     The associations brought it to the notice of the Committee that the Union Finance Minister had assured that units
employing less than one thousand persons would not be brought under the ambit of labour laws, but in reality, when
these units are required to resize their manpower, they are not able to do it as the employees go in for arbitration where
dates of hearing are fixed six months after filing the application. When labour is given some rights, they start
misbehaving with the management. Management of SSI units spend a lot of time in solving the problems posed by the
labourers. In Kanpur 90 per cent of SSI units have become sick due to leadership of labour. There is no power in the
hands of the management to discipline the labour.
          Wherever the statutory dues were paid in the industry, sickness started to surface and whenever workers were
made permanent, they stopped doing work and started misbehaviour with the management. Labour reforms should,
therefore, be done in a way so that the constraints coming in the way of running units could be removed. Hire and Fire
system may be one of the options which can be considered by the Government.
Erratic Power Supply
2.4     In Uttar Pradesh there is a daily power cut of four hours. As a result, only 60 per cent of production capacity can
be achieved. Four hours of total working hours are wasted as non-productive hours. Four hours' power cut is a daily
affair but sometimes it lasts for 10-12 hours, thus crippling the SSI units. State Power Corporation has absolute
authority in the matter of supplying of power. They do not listen to the problems of the SSI units. There should be a
State-Level Committee under the Chairmanship of a Judge, which should hear both sides and give decision which
should be mandatory.
          The Associations have suggested that like Telephone Department, State Power Body should publish a booklet
indicating contact numbers of officers who can be contacted in case of any difficulty. The time taken in taking a
decision and giving effect to it in the Power Department should also be reduced to minimise the problems of SSI units.
Lack of Testing Facility
2.5     There is no provision for a testing facility in Kanpur for the paint industry. Consequently, they have to go to
Kolkata for getting their products tested. To an enquiry the Association informed that IIT and CIGS do not have any

90th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/90threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:49]
provision for testing facilities for SSI units. These institutions cater to the needs of the defence sector only. Even if SSI
sector gets any tests done at these institutions, the test results are not accepted by other organisations like Railways, etc.
The Associations, therefore, requested for providing a testing facility for the paint industry.
Absence of Revival Route for the Sick Units
2.6     The Associations informed that when large industries fall sick, they could be revived through the revival package
given by the Bureau of Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR). But when a small sector industry becomes sick,
it has no route for revival. In case there is any revival route, the SSIs should be told about how to go about it.
Working Capital, Bank Loan without Collateral Security
2.7     Associations informed that SIDBI is making available loan without collateral security, but when the SSIs go to
any bank, the latter informed them that they have no information about such a system. All the banks should be informed
that loan without collateral security should be made available.
          The SSIs procure land, construct buildings/shed and purchase machinery on their own and thereafter seek loan
either from the market or from banks. When their turnover increases, their working capital requirement also increase.
They are trapped due to non-release of loan from banks.
Lack of Adoption of New Technologies
2.8     Adoption of new technologies is not taking place in the SSI sector and most of them are using obsolete
technology. Awareness about the new technology is limited to a limited circle only.
Lack of Quality Awareness resulting in poor products and high cost of production
2.9     Before embarking upon a particular industry, entrepreneurs are not aware about the marketability of their
products. Also, they use obsolete technology for production, manufacture poor quality products at high cost, and
compete with each other. Big industries on the other hand, with their better quality products and reasonable prices,
snatch away the market from the SSIs.
No Guideline about how to get bank loans
2.10   SSIs are totally at the mercy of the bank managers. If the manager is good and efficient, the SSIs get all assistance
and loan. Where the bank managers are indifferent, one has to pay a number of visits to the bank for obtaining relevant
forms. Even after obtaining and filling in forms, loans are not easily available as the bank officials  are wary of giving
loans, as they are not sure about the viability of the project. A guideline should be circulated to the SSIs to educate them
about how to get bank loans and bank officers should also be trained as to how to help the SSIs in getting loans.
Absence of proper Mechanism for Recovery of Bank Loan
2.11   Banks have no mechanism to recover loans. State Finance Corporations have the right under the Provision of
Arrears of Land Revenue to sell the closed unit to another unit to recover the amount of loan. In case of banks, the
matter goes to the Debt Recovery Tribunal and the condition of machines purchased by the sick units becomes worse
due to non-use. To obviate the situation, the banks should be given the right to sell the defaulter unit. This would
encourage the banks to give loans, as there would be a way to recover the loan.
No Mechanism to Access the Sickness of SSIs
2.12   Even if an industry falls sick, it does not mean that it will not survive. If the proper aid is given to the industry at
the initial stage of sickness, it can survive. The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has given a guideline for assessing the
sickness of SSI but it is on paper only. The banks and Financial Institutions (FIs) are not adhering to it. It should be
mandatory for the banks/Financial Institutions to adhere to the RBI guidelines regarding assessment of sickness of
industries. There should be an ombudsman with whom complaints against banks/Financial Institutions can be registered.
2.13   A number of Committees on SSIs had been formed but the Government does not monitor implementation of their
recommendations. Similarly, RBI guidelines are there for credit flow and rehabilitation of sick industries, but there is no
mechanism to monitor their implementation. The banks and FIs are not ready to talk to industry associations. They want

90th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/90threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:49]
to talk to borrowers only. Some mechanism should be evolved on a reasonable basis to hear the grievances of SSIs with
regard to non-implementation of the RBI guidelines by the individual banks.
Non-cooperation of Telecom Sector
2.14   Poor telecom network in semi-urban areas sometimes prove to be a hindrance for SSI units. A little
communication gap between the supplier and the client due to absence of proper telecommunication system may result
in business loss.
No Centre for Development of Cotton and Textile
2.15   Hosiery industry in Kanpur is linked with cotton and textile but there is no centre for Uttar Pradesh to develop
cotton and textile. Hosiery industry has to go all the way to Tirupur for development purpose. A process and product
development centre should be established at Kanpur to help the SSIs in the matter of technology. This will give hope to
the closed cotton and textile mills.
Industrial Unrest and Minimum Wages
2.16   Industrial unrest and wages are inter-linked. If the industry is using skilled labour, it cannot be engaged on
minimum wages. Wages are determined by demand and supply. Skilled workers will go to an industry where they get
higher wages. If the industry sticks to the stipulated minimum wages, it will give rise to industrial unrest, which will
hamper working of the industry. Government should make a fresh survey to define minimum wages.
Non-release of payments to SSIs by Buyers
2.17   Public Sector Undertakings and other large industries buy from SSIs on credit basis and the credit period varies
from three to six months. But SSIs are not able to realise the payment from such buyers and thus their money remains
blocked for a long period. The Delayed Payments Act, which is supposed to resolve the issue, proved to be ineffective.
Government should suitably amend the Act to make it more effective.
Employees Provident Fund and Employees State Insurance Corporation Act
2.18   Some deductions are made from the salaries of the labourers on account of Provident Fund. But when the
labourers change one unit after another, in most cases they do not get their dues due to non-availability of records. It is,
therefore, suggested that the employees may be issued passbooks and entries relating to amount deducted from their
salaries may be entered in them. They would be able to receive their dues from the units from which they retire on this
factual basis.
          In the case of ESIC, the benefits go to the owner or director of the unit and not to workers. A policy should be
evolved so that workers get their benefit and owners pay the premium for the same.
Arrival of MNCs and Concession to Khadi Industries in Soap Industry
2.19   With the arrival of MNCs and concession given to Khadi industries, sickness in the soap industry commenced.
The methodology and size of manpower required for hand made soap industry is the same in both the SSI and Khadi
industries. But Khadi industries get concession while SSIs do not get any such relief. Kanpur had 150 soap factories in
SSI sector. Today, it has not more than 20, which are struggling to alive. Soap is made out of imported non-edible oil on
which 55 per cent import tax is paid by the industry. For the last one and a half year the rate of import duty has been
raised to the extent of 45 per cent. In Nepal, there is no import duty. They import duty-free non-edible oil, manufacture
finished product and re-export to the third country. While the manufacturing cost of Nepal soap is Rs. 16, the same is
manufactured in Kanpur at a cost of Rs. 24. To save the soap industry in Kanpur, the rate of import duty on non-edible
oil has to be reduced.
Basic Infrastructure
2.20   Industries are given sites at places where basic infrastructure like roads, communication, drainage etc. are not
provided. Industrial sites are allotted far away from the urban area where basic amenities like drinking water are not
available. No redressal measures have been taken by the Government despite the fact that this was brought to their
notice.

90th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/90threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:49]
Law and Order Situation
2.21   Due to power cut, anti-social elements are thriving in industrial areas. State policy authority expresses their
helplessness, as they do not have enough force to tackle the law and order situation there. The SSI branches of banks are
located outside the urban area of Kanpur. It is quite difficult to go to the SSI branch to deposit or collect money. Banks
should be located in safe areas.
Uniform Taxation
2.22   Four per cent taxation has been imposed on hosiery industry. Due to this, it has become sick. The rate of taxation
should be uniform throughout the country, and like other States, the taxation rate should be one per cent on this industry.
Pollution Control
2.23   Pollution control for the industries is necessary, but generally, problems keep on cropping up due to various
reasons. Therefore, in industrial areas where SSIs are situated as a cluster, facilities should be provided by the
administration for setting up of a common effluent treatment plant.
Purchase Preference
2.24   Government  institutions are not giving priority to SSIs in the matter of purchase of various items, Government
bodies are purchasing items from outside the State although the same items are available in the State at competitive
rates.
Representation of SSIs in Legislative and Municipal Bodies
2.25   In the absence of any representation of SSIs in the State Legislature and Municipal Corporations, the problems of
SSIs are not highlighted and even if these are highlighted, Government does not take them seriously. A provision for
representation of SSIs should, therefore, be made so that they are given an opportunity of being heard.
Exhibition of spare parts of Railways
2.26   Exhibitions of articles related to spare parts used in railways may be organised to revive the engineering units
which are on the verge of closure in the adjoining areas of Kanpur. This will inspire the revival of engineering industry.
Non-acceptance of smaller denomination notes by the banks
2.27   SSIs receive their payments in smaller denomination notes (like one, two or five) and coins. The banks do not
accept these currencies. SSIs have to suffer the loss of approximately five per cent (brokerage) in payment on the coins.
RBI should give clear guidelines to bank to accept all types of currencies.
INTERACTIVE  SESSION  WITH  THE  MINISTRY  OF  SSI  AND  BANKS
3.       During the interactive session with the representatives of Ministry of Small Scale Industries and banks, the
Committee was given the following clarifications :
3.1     Power cut : The power situation, that is, generation, distribution and supply all over the country has been a cause
of concern. The generation does not meet demand. Ministry of SSI often takes up the problems with the State
Government to bring about improvement of power supply in the industrial areas.
3.2     Labour Laws : The Ministry of SSI has brought the concern of the industry to the notice of the Labour Ministry
and they have taken certain initiatives. Certain aspects of the problem, which relate to the industry, are already under
consideration of the Labour Ministry.
3.3     Technology Upgradation : One of the reasons for sickness or failure is lack of information and obsolete
technology. For promoting technology in the industry, the following steps have been taken :
                 a.  Industries are encouraged to take ISO 9000 certification and for that purpose, every SSI unit is given a
financial incentive of Rs. 75,000.

90th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/90threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:49]
                 b.  A one time capital grant of 50 per cent is being given to SSI associations for developing and operating
their testing laboratories.
                 c.  Scheme for transfer of technology through cluster.
                 d.  Certain financial institutions of DCSSI are implementing credit linked capital subsidy scheme.
                 e.  Technology Upgradation/Modernisation Fund.
                  f.  Technology Upgradation Fund for textile units.
3.4     Dissemination of Information : Dissemination of information is done through three methods :
                 a.  The Ministry of SSI have identified 500 industry associations all over the country. Whenever a new
scheme is introduced, the Ministry reports it to all of them.
                 b.  The Ministry has created an interactive portal. All information is available on the Ministry's website.
                 c.  The Ministry organises orientation courses, seminars, workshops, etc. for the benefit of SSIs.
3.5     Revival route : The RBI had appointed a Committee to study the rehabilitation of sick industries. The Committee
made recommendations and RBI had issued circulars for bringing the companies in the SSI sector out of sickness. The
package, among other things, includes revised advances, which would be more liberal. It also recommended on how to
define the viability of a unit and what should be the monitoring mechanism. It has also a particular instruction for banks
to identify sickness at an early stage and provide relief and rehabilitation steps within six months of identification. The
Ministry, the RBI, financial institutions and banks can check the sickness properly in a reasonable period of time.
3.6     Cheap Imports from Nepal : A new agreement has been signed with Nepal in March 2002. This takes care of
most of the problems. The component of value addition of the goods which comes from Nepal and which are said to be
Nepalese goods are actually sent by other countries through Nepal. These goods would not be accepted and agreement
signed with Nepal is a major step in this direction.
3.7     Purchase Preference : The purchase preference policy to be given to the SSI sector by Government Departments
and offices is available in the form of a guideline only. The Ministry of SSI has received a number of representations in
this regard. The Office of Development Commissioner is looking into it. Unless and until a pattern on the line of the
USA is adopted, which has relevant legislation, it would not be effective.
3.8     Coordination at Centre and State Levels : In order to have a coordination with different departments of Central
Government and State Governments, financial institutions and banks, the Ministry of SSI would bring forward a
legislation to redress the difficulties posed to the SSIs due to variety of reasons. The Ministry has already taken up
issues relating to labour laws with the Ministry of Labour. They have also taken up the matter regarding amendment in
Partnership Act with the Law Ministry.
3.9     Credit Flow from banks : Shri N.S. Mishra, General Manager, Bank of Baroda informed that as a result of a
host of measures taken by the Government/RBI in the wake of globalisation and liberalisation of Indian economy to
increase the flow of credit to the SSI sector and facilitate higher growth, a good number of new SSI units have been
coming up regularly.
          However, due to infrastructural bottlenecks particularly shortage of power, the incidence of sickness is very high
in these small-scale industrial units.
          As per data made available by the industries associations, the present position of industrial units/SSI at Kanpur is
as under :
Total number of industrial units financed by Banks in Kanpur 8690
Out of which
 
Total number of sick units 5475
No. of sick units rehabilitated by banks 305

90th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/90threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:49]
3.10   Shri S.S. Kohli, President of Indian Banks Association, informed the Committee that 6-8 weeks are taken by the
SSI branch of the bank to scrutinise the loan application. If any application is to be rejected, the branch has to take the
permission of its regional office. In that way, the loan application can be rejected by the zonal office or head office. On
asking why banks are not giving receipt after accepting application, he said that he would place the matter before the
appropriate authority.
3.11   He also informed that as per recommendations of the Nayak Committee, the RBI has prescribed loans for the SSI
on turnover basis. If any unit had a turnover of Rs. 10 lakhs in the previous year and comes with a loan application with
a projected turnover of Rupees one crore in the current year, it cannot be treated as a basis for giving loan. The lending
bank has to see whether the unit's machinery has the capacity to raise the turnover from Rs. 10 lakhs to Rs. 1 crore.
These are the problems the banks have to overcome before sanctioning loan applications.
3.12   He further suggested that (i) SSIs should not bank upon traditional items. SSIs should modernise themselves and
explore new areas where they can invest money for a reasonable good return; (ii) the associations should guide their
members about areas where they may invest their money and also discuss with the workers of units about the modalities
as to how to increase the productivity in a cordial atmosphere; (iii) the Delayed Payment Act has not been implemented
in the true sense resulting in non-payment to SSIs by PSUs and other big industries; (iv) a solution is to be found to help
the SSIs in this regard. He added that financial data to be furnished by the SSIs for getting loans are sometimes
incomplete. Information about the source of margin money, who would be getting the money, what is basis of projected
the turnover etc. is not given. The information given by SSIs should also match their books of accounts to justify their
loan applications. These are the basic problems.
3.13   As regards the problems of branch managers in giving loans, Shri Kohli observed that the problems posed by the
audit and CVC etc. are in the uppermost mind of the managers while scrutinising the loan applications, and requested
the Committee to look into this problem.
3.14   The Committee observed that the C.D. ratio in U.P. is much below the desired level and it should be increased.
Shri A.V. Seresai, CGM, RBI informed the Committee that CD ratio in Uttar Pradesh is 47.37 and this was not a good
picture. He further informed that the State Government have been impressed upon the need to increase the CD ratio.
COMMITTEE'S  RECOMMENDATIONS
4.       During the interactive sessions with the Ministry of Small Scale Industry, the Committee observed that
there was a big communication gap between the Ministry, banks, FIs on the one hand and the SSI Associations
and individual entrepreneurs on the other hand. The Committee, however, recommends that the Ministry of SSI
should address the issues illustrated in paras 2.2 to 2.27 of this report.
4.1     During the course of the meeting with the Ministry of SSI, the Committee noted that a number of good schemes
and measures have been formulated for the benefit of the SSI, while it appeared from the oral evidence tendered by the
associations that they have been left to fend for themselves to remove the misunderstanding. The Committee desired
that the Ministry should reach the grass-root level and for this purpose, it should hold regular orientation
courses, seminar, workshop etc. in Kanpur. The Committee hopes that this kind of action would enable the SSIs
to reap benefit of the schemes formulated for them by the Government of India.
4.2     During the course of the meeting, Secretary, Ministry of SSI in support of his contention that sickness in SSIs had
decreased, quoted the figures given by the RBI. The Committee observes that there was some mismatch between the
RBI figures and the associations's contention about the non-availability of credit. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry of Small Scale Industries should strictly monitor the credit flow to SSIs so that the
true picture in this regard emerges.
4.3     The Committee has been informed that the banks after taking the loan application neither give any receipt to the
applicant nor inform the reasons for rejecting application. The Committee recommends that the banks should give
receipt to the applicant after taking the application and inform the applicant within two months the reasons for
rejecting the application. Banks should be persuaded to be SSI friendly. As regards non-supply of required

90th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/90threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:49]
financial data by the applicants, the bank should give the applicant proper counselling at the initial stage of the
scrutiny of the application.
4.4     The Committee further recommends that all the lead banks should have interaction with the State
Industries' Association on regular basis regarding credit and its recovery etc. and the decisions taken in the
meeting may be conveyed to the Ministry of SSI and RBI for further necessary action.
4.5     The Government has been apprised of the problem of non-payment of dues by the PSUs and big industries to the
SSI. The Committee recommends that Government should take suitable steps to make the Delayed Payments Act
effective so that the money of SSIs are not blocked by the large industries for more than three months. The
Committee also recommends that Purchase Preference Policy should be made mandatory.
Action against Defaulter SSI Units
4.6     The Committee recommends that Government should find out a solution on the lines of State Financial
Corporation which can take action against the defaulters under the provision of Arrear of Land Revenue.
Charging of Interest by Banks
4.7     The Committee has been informed that as per RBI's recent instructions, NPAs are affected within three months of
sanction of loan. In addition, interest is charged every month, which in turn affects the credit availability. The Ministry
of SSI has taken up the matter with the RBI. The Committee recommends that Government should look into the matter
and come out with a suitable solution keeping in view the overall interest of SISIs.                                             
4.8     As regards the CD ratio of Uttar Pradesh, the Committee observes that the ratio is much below the desired level.
The Committee desires that Ministry of SSI and RBI should impress upon the State Government to find ways and means
for increasing the level of CD ratio in the State.
Motivation of Labour for Maximum Productivity
4.9     As regards labour problems, the Committee desires that SSI management should evolve ways and means to
motivate labour for maximum productivity. The Committee feels if labour is taken into confidence and is apprised of the
situation, they will lend their helping hand to the management for the overall benefit of the SSI Sector.
4.10
          The Committee understands that the Ministry of SSI has taken an initiative to bring forward a
comprehensive legislation before Parliament for forging coordination at the Central and State level for the
benefit of SSIs. The Committee feels that since materialization of such a measure will take its own time, the
Ministry should form a Task Force at the Ministry level to tackle the problems faced by the SSIs located in
and around Kanpur, especially when Kanpur has been declared as a Special Economic Zone (SEZ). The
Committee expects that the Central Government, in coordination with the Uttar Pradesh Government, RBI
and local banks will be able to restore the past glory of Kanpur and make it a vibrant centre of commercial
activities.
4.10
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE – AT A GLANCE
         
During the interactive sessions with the Ministry of Small Scale Industry, the Committee observed that there was a big
communication gap between the Ministry, banks, FIs on the one hand and the SSI Associations and individual
entrepreneurs on the other hand. The Committee, however, recommends that the Ministry of SSI should address the
issues illustrated in paras 2.2 to 2.27 of this report.                                                                                         (Para 4.0)
          During the course of the meeting with the Ministry of SSI, the Committee noted that a number of good schemes
and measures have been formulated for the benefit of the SSI, while it appeared from the oral evidence tendered by the
associations that they have been left to fend for themselves to remove the misunderstanding. The Committee desired
that the Ministry should reach the grass-root level and for this purpose, it should hold regular orientation
courses, seminar, workshop etc. in Kanpur. The Committee hopes that this kind of action would enable the SSIs
to reap benefit of the schemes formulated for them by the Government of India.                  (Para 4.1)

90th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/90threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:49]
          During the course of the meeting, Secretary, Ministry of SSI in support of his contention that sickness in SSIs had
decreased, quoted the figures given by the RBI. The Committee observes that there was some mismatch between the
RBI figures and the associations's contention about the non-availability of credit. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry of Small Scale Industries should strictly monitor the credit flow to SSIs so that the
true picture in this regard emerges.                                                                                                                        (Para
4.2)
          The Committee has been informed that the banks after taking the loan application neither give any receipt to the
applicant nor inform the reasons for rejecting application. The Committee recommends that the banks should give
receipt to the applicant after taking the application and inform the applicant within two months the reasons for
rejecting the application. Banks should be persuaded to be SSI friendly. As regards non-supply of required
financial data by the applicants, the bank should give the applicant proper counselling at the initial stage of the
scrutiny of the application.                                                                                             (Para 4.3)
          The Committee further recommends that all the lead banks should have interaction with the State
Industries' Association on regular basis regarding credit and its recovery etc. and the decisions taken in the
meeting may be conveyed to the Ministry of SSI and RBI for further necessary action.                         (Para 4.4)
          The Government has been apprised of the problem of non-payment of dues by the PSUs and big industries to the
SSI. The Committee recommends that Government should take suitable steps to make the Delayed Payments Act
effective so that the money of SSIs are not blocked by the large industries for more than three months. The
Committee also recommends that Purchase Preference Policy should be made mandatory.(Para 4.5)
Action against Defaulter SSI Units
          The Committee recommends that Government should find out a solution on the lines of State Financial
Corporation which can take action against the defaulters under the provision of Arrear of Land
Revenue.                                         (Para 4.6)
Charging of Interest by Banks
          The Committee has been informed that as per RBI's recent instructions, NPAs are affected within three months of
sanction of loan. In addition, interest is charged every month, which in turn affects the credit availability. The Ministry
of SSI has taken up the matter with the RBI. The Committee recommends that Government should look into the matter
and come out with a suitable solution keeping in view the overall interest of SISIs.                              (Para 4.7)
          As regards the CD ratio of Uttar Pradesh, the Committee observes that the ratio is much below the desired level.
The Committee desires that Ministry of SSI and RBI should impress upon the State Government to find ways and means
for increasing the level of CD ratio in the State.                                                                        (Para 4.8)
Motivation of Labour for Maximum Productivity
          As regards labour problems, the Committee desires that SSI management should evolve ways and means to
motivate labour for maximum productivity. The Committee feels if labour is taken into confidence and is apprised of the
situation, they will lend their helping hand to the management for the overall benefit of the SSI Sector.       (Para 4.9)
            The Committee understands that the Ministry of SSI has taken an initiative to bring forward a
comprehensive legislation before Parliament for forging coordination at the Central and State level for the
benefit of SSIs. The Committee feels that since materialization of such a measure will take its own time, the
Ministry should form a Task Force at the Ministry level to tackle the problems faced by the SSIs located in and
around Kanpur, especially when Kanpur has been declared as a Special Economic Zone (SEZ). The Committee
expects that the Central Government, in coordination with the Uttar Pradesh Government, RBI and local banks
will be able to restore the past glory of Kanpur and make it a vibrant centre of commercial activities.  (Para 4.10)

90th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/90threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:49]
MINUTES
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
          The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 9th August, 2002 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
          PRESENT
     1.  Shri T.N. Chaturvedi  —  Chairman
          RAJYA  SABHA
     2.  Dr. Abrar Ahmed
     3.  Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
     4.  Shrimati Saroj Dubey
     5.  Dr. Faguni Ram
     6.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
     7.  Shri P.K. Maheshwari
     8.  Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
     9.  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
          LOK  SABHA
   10.  Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
   11.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das
   12.  Shri A.C. Jose
   13.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
   14.  Shri Sunil Khan
   15.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
   16.  Shri A. Narendra
   17.  Shri P. Rajendran
   18.  Dr. B.B. Ramaiah
   19.  Chowdhary Talib Hussain
   20.  Shri Chunnilal Bhau Thakur
   21.  Shrimati D.M. Vijaya Kumari
          SECRETARIAT
          Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
          Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director
          Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
          Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
2.       Shri A.C. Jose, Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi and Dr. B.B. Ramaiah and other Members of the Committee felicitated
the Chairman of the Committee who had since been designated as the Governor of Karnataka. In the felicitation address,
all the three Convenors and other Members of the Committee appreciated 
the work done by the Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri T.N. Chaturvedi. They all were of 
the view that Shri Chaturvedi gave a new thrust and orientation to the working of the Committee and gave inspiration to
the Committee with his valuable contribution and personal interest in the day-to-day working of the Committee and in a
short span of four months, the Committee could present a record number of '23' reports.
2.       The Chairman, in response, observed that due to the hard work put in by the Sub-Committee it had been possible
to prepare such a large number of reports. He thanked the Convenors of all the Sub-Committees, Members of the
Committee and the Secretariat for extending cooperation to him to discharge his duties as the Chairman of the
Committee.

90th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/90threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:49]
3.       The Committee then took up the consideration of the following Draft Reports :-
                (a)  76th Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee's 53rd Report on Modernization,
Restructuring and Expansion Programmes of NALCO.
                (b)  77th Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee's 67th Report on Organization,
Structure and Performance Review of Indian Bureau of Mines.
                (c)  78th Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee's 68th Report on Working and
Performance Review of Mineral Exploration Corporation Ltd. (MECL).
                (d)  79th Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee's 65th Report on Modernization,
Restructuring and Expansion Programmes of Hindustan Copper Ltd. (HCL).
                (e)  80th Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee's 66th Report on Performance
Review of Jawahar Lal Nehru Aluminium Research Development and Design Centre.
                 (f)  81st Report on Sickness in SSI Sector of Cement Industry in Uttar Pradesh.
                (g)  82nd Report on MoU system in the Strategic Sector PSEs.
                (h)  83rd Report on MoU system in the Allied Sector PSEs.
                 (i)  84th Report on Implementation of Prime Minister's Rozgar Yojana (PMRY) in Andhra Pradesh,
Karnataka and Kerala.
                 (j)  85th Report on Implementation Status of Financial Assistance-cum-Restructuring Package and Revival of
Hindustan Steel Works Construction Ltd. (HSCL).
                (k)  86th Report on Performance Review of Metal Scrap Trade Corporation Ltd. (MSTC).
                 (l)  87th Report on Implementation status of Financial Assistance-cum-Restructuring Package and Revival of
Bharat Refractories Ltd. (BRL).
               (m)  88th Report on Performance review of Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL).
                (n)  89th Report on Modernisation, Restructuring and Expansion Programmes of Durgapur Steel Plant (DSP).
                (o)  90th Report on Sickness in SSI Sector in the City of Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh.
                (p)  91st Report on Coir Board – A performance Review.
4.       The Committee adopted all the above stated reports and authorized its Chairman to make corrections, if any, in
the reports. The Committee decided to present/lay the above mentioned reports on the 13th August, 2002. The
Committee for this purpose authorized its Chairman to present the reports in the Rajya Sabha and in his absence Shri
Khan Ghufran Zahidi and Prof. M.M. Agarwal to present the reports. The Committee also authorized Dr. B.B. Ramaiah
to lay the reports in the Lok Sabha and in his absence authorized Shri A.C. Jose and Shri A. Narendra to lay the reports.
5.       The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 P.M.