PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYASABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
FORTY-SECOND REPORT 
ON 
COAL INDIA (REGULATION OF TRANSFERS AND 
VALIDATION) BILL, 1995 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 27™-JULY, 2000) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 27TH JULY, 2000) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
JULY , 2000/SRA V ANA, 1922 (SAKA) 

! 

CONTENTS 
PAGES 
I. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i)-(ii) 
2. INTRODUCTION (iii) 
3. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE l-8 
4. OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 9-11 
OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE 
5. ANNEXURES 13-~ 
ANNEXURE-I (NOTE OF DISSENT GIVEN BY SHRI JIBON ROY 
AND SHRI SUNIL KHAN) 
ANNEXURE-II (BILL NO. OF 1995) 
6. MINUTES (RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE) 21-30 

COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
l. Shri Ramdas Agarwal - Chairman 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Shri Khan Gufran Zahidi 
3. Shri Jibon Roy 
4. Shri Somappa R. Bommai 
5. Smt. Saroj Dubey 
6. Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhundar 
7. Shri S. Sivasubramanian 
8. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha 
9. Shri Shibu Soren 
l 0. Dr. Faguni Ram 
11: Shri P.K. Maheshwari 
12. Prof. M.M. Aggawal 
13. Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma 
LOKSABHA 
14. Shri Pon Radhakrishnan 
15. Shri Chunnilal Thakur 
16. Shri Ramanand Singh 
17. Shri R. Basanagouda Patil 
18. Shri G. Mallikarjunappa 
19. Shri Tarachand Sahu 
20. Shri Anant Nayak 
21. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
22. Shri A. Narendra 
23. Shri A.C. Jose 
24. Shri Uttamarao Deorao Patil 
25. Shri K.P. Singh Deo 
26. Shri Thomas Hansda 
27. Shri Nepal Chandra Das 
28. Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary 
29. Shri Sunil Khan 
30. Shri P. Rajendran 
31. Dr. B.B. Ramaiah 
32. Shri M. Rajaiah 
33. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh 
34. Shri Deepak Kumar 
35. Shri Manjay Lal 
36. Shri Anant Mahadeoappa Gudhe 
3 7. Shri Ram Saj ivan 
38. Shri K. Malaisamy 
(i) 

39. Shri Nagmani 
40. Shri Ramdas Athawale 
41. Shri Rizwan Zaheer 
42. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
43. Shri G.J. Javiya, 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director 
Shri P.C. Paikray, Under Secretary 
Shri Momraj Singh, Committee Officer 
(ii) 

INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorised by the Committee, hereby present this Forty-Second Report 
on the coal India (Regulation ofTransfers and Validation) Bill, 1995. 
2. The Coal India (Regulation of Transfers and Validation) Bill, 1995 was introduced in 
Rajya Sabha on the 141h February, 1995 and was referred * to the Committee on Industry by the 
Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 2nd February, 2000 under Rule 270 (b) of the Rules of 
procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha for examination and report thereon. 
3. The Committee in its meeting held on 15th May, 2000 took oral evidence of Secretary of 
Ministry of Coal and Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel of Ministry of Law, Justice and 
Company Affairs ( Legislative Department). In Order to take stock of legal issues involved in the 
Bill, the Committee again heard Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel of the Ministry of Law, 
Justice and Company Affairs on 25th May, 2000. For further clarification, the Committee heard 
the .Secretary ofMinistry of Coal and Ministry Law, Justice and Company Affairs (Legislative 
Department) on 22nd June, 2000. The Committee also took up the clause-by-clause consideration 
of the Bill in the said meeting. 
4. The Committee wishes to thank the representatives of the Ministry of Coal and 
Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs ( Legislative Department) for appearing before the 
Committee for oral evidence and placing their considered views before the Committee. The 
Committee also wishes to thank the Ministry of Coal and the Ministry of Law, Justice and 
Company Affairs (Legislative Department) for furnishing the replies to the questionnaire and the 
points raised during the course of oral evidence. 
5. The Committee considered and adopted the report on the Bill in its meeting held on 19th 
July, 2000. 
6. A note of dissent given by Shri Jibon Roy, M.P. and Shri Sunil Khan, M.P. is appended 
to the report as Annexure-!. 
NEW DELHI." 
July, 19, 2000 
RAMDAS AGARWAL 
Chairman, 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
•Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II. No.37764 dated the 2na February 2000. 
(iii) 

REPORT 
The Coal India (Regulation of Transfers and Validation) Bill, 1995 was introduced in 
Rajya Sabha on the 14th February, 1995 and was referred to the Committee on Industry by the 
Hon 'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 2nd February, 2000 under Rule 270(b) of the Rules of 
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha for examination and report thereon. 
2. The Bill aims to empower the Central government to direct the transfer of the land, or of 
the rights, in or over land or of the right, title and interest in relation to a coal mine, coking coal 
mine or coke oven plant, vested in the Coal India Limited or in a subsidiary company to any 
subsidiary company of Coal India Limited or any other subsidiary company and to validate 
certain transfers of such land or rights. 
3. According to the statement of objects and reasons of the Bill, the coal industry was 
nationalized in two phases, that is, in 1972 and 1973. After nationalization, the coking and non­
coking coal mines in the Jharia coal field in Bihar and a few mines in Barakar and Mugma 
regions were directed to be vested in the Bharat Coking Coal Limited, Dhanbad. Most of the 
other coal mines in the states of Assam, Bihar, West Bengal, Orissa, Madhya Pradesh and 
Maharashtra were directed to be vested in the Coal Mines Authority Limited. Subsequently, a 
holding company namely, the Coal India Limited was set up with effect from the I st November, 
1975 initially with five subsidiaries. Later three more subsidiaries were created by delinking 
certain collieries from other subsidiaries. 
4. Ever since the nationalisation of the coal industry, though the land or rights in or over 
such land acquired under various Acts and the right, title interest in relation to a coal mine or a 
coke oven plant were directed to be vested in the Coal India Limited or its predecessor in title, its 
subsidiary companies were defacto managing such land, coal mines or plants. 
5. The statement of objects and reasons of the Bill points out that the absence of a formal 
legal title to the land or rights in or over such land or the right, title and interest in relation to a 
coal mine or coke oven plant, in the subsidiary companies has exposed them to litigation and 
other legal infirmities. While the Companies Act, I 956 contains provisions for reconstruction 
and amalgamations, such reconstruction or amalgamation could be given effect to prospectively 
only under that Act. 
6. Under the circumstances, the Bill intends to empower the Central Government to direct 
the transfer of land or the rights in or over such land or the right, title or interest in relation to a 
coal mine or coke oven plant vested in the Coal India Limited to a subsidiary company, or where 
such land or mine are vested in a subsidiary company, to another subsidiary company. It has also 
been considered necessary to validate all purported transfers of the land or rights in or over such 
land or the right, title and interest in relation to a coal mine or coke oven plant from the Coal 
India Limited to a subsidiary comp&ny and from one subsidiary company to another subsidiary 
company before the commencement ofthe proposed legislation. 
7. As a matter of fact all the transfers and distribution of the coal mines to various 
subsidiaries of CIL were made by administrative orders and therefore the subsidiaries have been 
enjoying only the defacto possession over them. The title over these mines/properties have not 
passed on to the subsidiary companies of CIL till now and in the eyes of law CIL is still holding 
title over these mines. 
8. The background note on the Bill furnished by the Ministry of Coal gives the details of 
circumstances under which the present Bill needs immediate legislation. In August, 1990, the 
Supreme Court decided a matter in which Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. was the appellant and the 
l 

Government of Bihar and others were the respondents. The subject matter ofthe appeal was the 
legality of grant of mining lease by the Government of Bihar to remove slurry discharged from 
the Sudamdih coal washery of BCCL and deposited on the land forming part of the land in 
Sudamdih which was earlier acquired under the provisions of the Coal Bearting Areas 
(Acquisition & Development) Act, 1957. After the Central Government acquired the land some 
time in 1961, it was subsequently transferred to National Coal Development Corporation Ltd. in 
1962. This land formed part of Sudamdih and Moonidih group of mines developed by the 
erstwhile NCDC. The Central Government subsequently directed the transfer of Sudamdih and 
Moonidih group of mines to BCCL and advised Coal India Ltd. to take necessary steps to 
implement the decision. While the Moonidih and Sudamdih group of mines were transferred and 
delivered to BCCL w.e.f. 1.4.1975, legal formalities of transfer could not be completed. In the 
appeal which was heard by Supreme Court, the major issues to be decided were( a) whether slurry 
is coal and (b) whether BCCL has got the right to challenge the lease granted to the private party 
by the Government of Bihar by virtue ()f its'O~rship of the land on which the slurry was being 
deposited. Shri Lal Narayan Sinha, former Attorney General who was defending the case in the 
Supreme Court on behalf of BCCL, anticipated that BCCL's case in the Supreme Court might 
suffer from a serious infirmity owing to the absence of formal transfer deeds of sudamdih and 
Moonidih group of mines from CIL. To cure this infirmity it was suggested that the best course 
would be to undertake appropriate legislation. The Supreme Court has since decided the matter 
and had held that (i) slurry is coal and (ii) the coal company is free to dispose it. However, the 
question of dejure possession of the properties by the coal companies and the rights and liabilities 
that go with it remained unresolved until it could be cured by legislation. To meet similar 
situation in other property litigations, it was considered essential that assets and liabilities vested 
in subsidiary companies were legally transferred to them with retrospective effect. The then 
Attorney General, Shri K. Parasaran, also endorsed the view of Shri Lal Narayan Sinha. 
9 The Bill was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 14.2.95 and thereafter it was referred to 
the Standing Committee on Energy for consideration. The Standing Committee on Energy 
presented its report to the Lok Sabha on 7th March, 1996 with the recommendation as under:-
" .. the proposed Bill, apparently serves no other purpose than to safeguard against the 
possibility of being challenged on grounds of lack of title to the subsidiary companies of Coal 
India Limited. The Committee, therefore, hold that what is required presently it to have a fresh 
lool< at the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973, and to eliminate such shortcomings, if any, 
as exist in its effective implementation. The Committee, therefore, are unable to recommend the 
Coal India (Regulation of Transfers and Validation Bill, 1995 to the Parliament for adoption." 
1 0. The above views of the standing Committee seem to suggest an amendment to the Coal 
Mines (Nationalisation ) Act, 1973 for the purposes intended to be served by the Bill. 
11. Under Section 3 of the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973 the right, title and interest 
of the private owners of the nationalised mines were transferred to and vested absolutely in the 
Central Government. Under Section 5(1) ofthe same Act, the right, title, interest, etc. ofthe coal 
mines were vested with the CIL. Section 5 (1) of the Act provides for one transfer of vesting by 
the Central Government to a Government company. The power has been once exercised. The 
Act does not provide for any subsequent power of the Central Government to change the 
transfere~. This is what has been proposed in the Bill. The Nationalisation Act does not provide 
for subsequent transfer of properties vested in CIL to the subsidiaries. Further, if the Coal Mines 
(Nationalisation) Act, 1973 is to be amended, it can only be done by an amending Act which once 
again would imply that a fresh Bill would have to be prepared. In order to enable retrospective 
validation of the transfers, such a fresh Bill would have substantially the same provisions as the 
2 

prov1s1ons in the current Bill. Therefore, it was administratively and legally necessary for 
Government to go ahead with the enactment of the proposal Bill. 
12. The Ministry of Coal informed the Committee that the Bill was referred to the Ministry 
of Law for their advice on the under mentioned two points:-
(i) A confirmation that the proposed Bill is in accordance with the Law of the Land; 
and 
(ii) The extent to which the proposed encroaches on the existing state Governments. 
13. The Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law gave their advice on the above two 
points on 9.5.97. On the first point Ministry of Coal gave a clear opinion that the Bill is in 
accordance with the Law of the Land. On the second point, however, Ministry of Law pointed 
out that the transfer of properties (i.e. nationalised coal mine) from CIL, the holding company ,to 
the subsidiaries company of the CIL by the proposed enactment to deprive the State Government 
of their legitimate revenue by way of Stamp Duty, Registration Fee etc. The opinion of the 
Ministry of Law on the second point was not acceptable to the Ministry of Coal because the 
transfer of the coal mines from CIL to the subsidiary had already taken place by administrative 
order~. 
14. The Ministry of Coal opines that the Bill intends to give retrospective effect to such 
transfer and therefore, the question of depriving the State Government of their revenue does not 
arise. This Ministry of Coal is of the opinion that the transfer under the Transfer of Properties 
Act would only give the title from the date of such transfers. Had the transfer of coal mines from 
CIL to subsidiaries taken place under the Transfer of Properties Act the opinion of the Ministry of 
Law would have been valid. The nationalisation of the private mines was done under the Coal 
Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973 and not under the Transfer of Properties Act. Even at the time 
of the nationalisation of the private coking and non-coking coal mines iii 1971-73, it could have 
been argued that since the nationalisation transferred the right, title and interest of the private 
owners in respect of their mines to the Central Government deprived the State Government of 
their revenue )(Stamp Duty, Registration Fee etc.) but this was not done. This Bill flows from the 
Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973 and the need for this Bill is to plug a gap retrospectively. 
15. When the Committee wanted to know as to what would be the status of Coal India Ltd., 
when once the rights are divested in the subsidiary companies, the Ministry of Coal informed as 
under:-
"Under Section 4 and 5 of Coking Coal Mines (Nationalisation Act) 1972 and under 
section 3 of the Coal Mines (Nationalisation Act) 1973 the right, title and interest of the private 
owners in respect of Coking Coal Mines and Non-Coking Coal Mines stood transferred to and 
vested absolutely in Central Government. Under section 7 of Coking Coal Mines (Nationalisation 
Act) 1972 and under section S(I) of Coal Mines (Nationalisation Act) 1973 the right, title and 
interest etc. of coal mines were vested with the Government Company CMAL (renamed as CIL). 
Thereafter by an administrative order issued by the Central Government nationalized coal 
industry was reorganized and the concept of Holding and Subsidiary companies introduced. 
Accordingly the new companies were incorporated and they were made ~ubsidiary companies of 
CIL and CIL became the holding company. Consequent on such reorganization and incorporation 
of subsidiary companies the administrative control of the mines in accordance with the 
geographical location was taken over by the respective subsidiary companies. They have been 
managing those coal mines as defacto owner despite no legal transfer of the ownership having 
been effected. It is significant to note that entire paid up shares of all the subsidiary companies are 
held by CIL. The proposed Coal India (Regulation of Transfers & Validation) Bill is to regulate 
transfer of the coal mines from CIL to subsidiaries and from one subsidiary to another in 
3 

accordance with the reorganisation of the coal industry from time to time. The status of CIL as a 
holding company would not, in any way be affected on transfer of ownership of coal mines in 
terms of the above stated BiiVAct. The holding company status of CIL would not be affected 
even after creation of more subsidiary companies or after formation of subsidiary companies of 
existing subsidiary companies and legal transfer of coal mines to these subsidiary companies 
from existing subsidiary companies. 
16. Replying to the query of the Committee regarding the objections of the State 
Governments received by the Ministry in connection with the Coal India (Regulation of Transfers 
& Validation) B.ill, 1995, the Ministry of Coal furnished the points of objection raised by 
Government of Assam and Government of Bihar on the said Bill. The Ministry of Coal informed 
the Committee that the Government of Assam have opposed the Bill on the following grounds 
(i) The lessee shall execute a Mining Lease Deed with the State Government 
concerned in respect of the coal mine in accordance with the Mineral Concession 
Rules, 1960 and the State Government s_hall have the right to determine the 
mining lease in respect of such coal mine, if the lease deed is not executed within 
the specified period due to any default on the part of the lessee. 
(ii) On expiry of the term of a lease, if Coal India or its subsidiary company, as the 
case may be, is not interested in any further renewal of the mining lease, the 
lessee shall hapd over the land, right, title and interest of the mining lease to the 
State Government. 
(iii) Coal India or its subsidiary company, as the case may be, shall handover all the 
isolated small pocket deposits of coal to the State Government, if the former has 
no plans for operating such deposits in near future. 
17. Regarding point no. 1, the Ministry of Coal contends that the lands, titles, etc., are vested 
in Coal Mines Authority Ltd./Coal India Ltd. following nationalization of Coal Mines in 1973 
which provided for deemed lease requiring no formal execution of mining lease under Mines and 
Minerals (Regulation & DCvel~p~ent~ Act, 1957 and Mineral Concessions Rules, 1960. This has 
been (RVided in Section 5(2) of the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973 stipulating that 
where 'the land,. 'Xc. vest in a subs~diary company under Sub-Secti?n ( 1} ~f Section 5 of the same 
Act, such substdtary company shall on and from the date of such vestmg, be deemed to have 
become the Jessee in relation to such coal mine or coking coal mine as if a fresh mining lease 
related to such a eoal mine or coking coal mine have been granted to it under the Mineral 
Concessions Rule, 1960. In view of this, the view of the State Government is not sustainable. 
18. As regards point no. 2, the Ministry of Coal pleads that the question of handing over the 
land, right, title or interest of a mining lease to the State Government does not arise. The lands, 
titles, etc., are vested in Coal India Limited following the nationalization of coal mines in 1973 
and deemed lease is created by law (commonly called as statutory lease) unlike a contractual 
lease granted under the Mines and Minerals (Regulation & Development) Act, 1975 by execution 
of regular deed. 
19. The Ministry of Coal overrides point no. 3 by pointing out the proviso under Section 
3(3)(c) of Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973 which provides for sub-leasing of isolated 
small pockets to the State Government undertakings or any person subject to fulfillment of the 
following conditions :-
(a) the reserves of coal in the area are in isolated small pockets or are not sufficient 
for scientific and economical development in a coordinated and integrated 
manner, and 
4 

(b) the coal produced by the sub-lease will not be required to be transported by rail. 
In view of the above provisions already incorporated in the Coal Mines 
(Nationalisation) Act, 1973 it is not considered necessary to incorporate handing 
over of isolated small pockets to the State Government or the State Government 
Undertaking, in the Bill. 
20. The six points of objections raised by Government of Bihar in connection with the Bill is 
as under ;-
(i) The very preamble stating that "the transfer of the land or of the rights in or over 
land" without the permission of the State Government or without getting it 
transferred under the Transfer of Properties Act harms the interest of the State 
Government. 
(ii) Similarly in Section 3(1) of the proposed bill the words ''the transfer of the land 
or rights in or over such land or the right, title and interest in relation to a Coal 
Mine, Coking Coal Mine" is violative of the provisions of the India Registration 
Act, Bihar Tenancy Act, Chhotanagpur Tenancy Act, Santhal Parganas Tenancy 
Act, Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act and Mineral 
Concession Rules, 1960. 
(iii) Sub-Section 2 of Section 3 of the said bill usurps the rights of the State 
Government to grant the Transfer of Mining leases under Mines and Minerals 
(Regulation and Development) Act and Mineral Concession Rules, 1960. The 
approval of the State Government as lessor of the Mineral rights must be 
obtained by the Coal India or any of its subsidiaries Company before transferring 
a mining lease to one of its subsidiary <:;ompany or anoth_er subsidiary company. 
(iv) The Coal India or its subsidiary company, who becomes the transferee under the 
proposed bill cannot be tel')lled as a new lessee. This will be a case of substitution 
by operation of law, and this deprives the State Government from exercising its 
rights to grant/renew the Coal Mining lease. 
(v) The State Government will have no objection if the right, title and interest in 
relation to a Coal Mine, Coking Coal Mine or Coke oven Plant is transferred 
from Coal India, or its subsidiary to any of its other subsidiary as envisaged 
under the Companies Act but it cannot agree to such provision which infringes its 
right under the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act and 
Mineral Concession Rules, 1960. 
(vi) Besides the above noted facts, the promulgation of the proposed bill will deprive 
the State Government of it revenue by way of fee on transfer of mining lease and 
stamp duty for its registration. 
21. With regards to point no. 1 of Government of Bihar, the Ministry of Coal views that 
since the properties have already been vested with the Central Government by a special Act of 
Parliament, i.e., the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973. VIS 3 of the Coal Mines 
(Nationalisation) Act, 1973 the right, title and interest of the coal mines were transferred to and 
vested absolutely in the Central Government free from all encumbrances. U/S 5( 1) of the same 
Act, the right, title, interest, etc. of the coal mines have been vested with the CIL. Since these are 
nationalized properties, transfer of these properties from CIL to a subsidiary or from one 
subsidiary to another subsidiary of the CIL does not attract the provisions of the Transfer of 
Propert}LAct. 
5 

22. Regarding point No. 2 of Bihar Government, the Ministry of Coal points out that since 
the proposed enactment seeks to regularizes or validate the transfer of the properties already 
vested with the CIL u/s 5(1) of the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973 therefore, the Bill 
flows from the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act. It is noteworthy that Sec.28 of the Act has an 
over-riding provision which stipulates that the Nationalisation Act shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith in any other law for the time being in force. 
Therefore, the Ministry of Coal argues that the propose enactment overrides the Acts of State 
Legislature like Bihar Tenancy Act, Chhotanagpur Tenancy Act, Santhal Parganas Tenancy A~t. 
23. As regards the point of violation of the provisions of the Mines and Minerals (Regulation 
and Development) Act, 1957 (MMRD Act) and Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 (MCR-1960), 
the Ministry of Coal put forth the following arguments :-
"The acquisition of mines by the Central government under the Nationlisation Act is not 
as a result of the actual grant by the State Government as done under Mineral Concession Rules 
(MCR), 1960 framed under MMRD Act, 1957 but by a legal fiction. The legal fictions have their 
limitations. In the matter of grant of mining lease by the State, the MMRD Act and the MCR 
contemplated a particular area dimensions in respect of different minerals within which, in its 
discretion, the State is to grant lease. Quite clearly such provisions in the matter of an actual grant 
could not be applied in the case ofNationalisation by a legal fiction, as provided in the Act. The 
effect of deeming provision is of particular importance". 
24. The Ministry of Coal , further , clarifies that the provision of MCR , 1960 cannot be lifted 
and applied in toto to the Coal Mines Nationalised under the 1973 Act. Section 4 of the 
Nationalisation Act brings in the legal fiction of a grant under the Mineral Concession Rules 
(MCR). While Section 6 of the same Act provides that by the force of the very vesting, such 
acquired property will stand freed and discharged from any trust, ob~igations, mortgage, charge, 
lien and ~ other encumbrances affecting such property in any manner, shall be deemed to have 
been withdrawn. The provisions of Section 6 of the 1973 Act wipes out all encumbrances. The 
expression "encumbrances" has been judicially interpreted to include any burden on property, any 
right or interest created by the owner in limitation of his own. The Ministry pinpoints that by 
virtue of the provisions of the Coal Mines Nationalization Act , the concept of legal fiction of ... 
graQt under the Mineral Concession Rules (MCR) must yield to the provisions of the wiping out 
the encumbral'\ces. The main objective is stipulated in the preamble of the Nationalisation Act and 
that being the purpose and. the context, the provisions of the Mineral Concession Rules (MCR) 
cannot be applied in toto . The preamble attached to the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act 1973 
reads as under :-
"An Act to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the right, title and interest of the owner~ in 
respect of the coal mines specified in the schedule with a view to reorganizing and reconstructltig 
such coal mines so as to ensure the rational, coordinated and scientific development and 
utilisation of coal resources consistent with the growing requirements of the country, in order that 
the ownership and control of such resources are vested in the State and thereby so distributed as 
best to sub serve the common good, and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto". 
25. The Ministry of Coal pointed out that the word "State" in the above cited preamble of the 
Nationalisation Act is obviously the "Union of India". The Ministry concluded that Section 28 of 
(Nationalisation) Act 1973 carries an overriding effect in terms of which where there is conflict 
between the Coal mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973 and MMRD Act and MCR framed there 
under, then the provision of the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act 1973 will override the 
provisions of MMRD Act, etc., protento. Therefore, the exclusive ownership and control and the 
distribution/transfer of the property by the Central Government in fulfillment of the objective of 
the Nationalisation Act will always prevail upon the provisions of the MMRD Act, 1957 and the 
6 

MCR, 1960 framed hereunder. Section 3(2) of the Bill provides that if the right, etc, is vested 
with a subsidiary uls 3(1) of the proposed enactment, that subsidiary will become a deemed lessee 
as if a fresh mining lease has been granted to it under MCR 1960 framed under Section 13 of 
MMRD Act, 1957. As such, the proposed enactment is not violative of the MMRD Act and 
Mineral Concession Rules, 1960. However, if there is any conflict between the Nationalisation 
Act and MMRD Act, the former will prevail by virtue of the overriding provision in Sec. 28 of 
the Nationalisation Act. 
26. As regards point no. 3, the Ministry of Coal argues that U/S 4 of the Coal Mines 
(Nationalisation) Act, 1973 , the Central Government became deemed lessee of the State 
Government. Similarly, after the nationalized mines were transferred to the CIL uls 5(1) of the 
Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973, the CIL became the deemed lessee as per Sec. 5(2) of the 
same Act. The deemed leases are not contractual leases granted under MMRD Act, 1957 read 
with the Mineral Concession Rules (MCR), 1960. The deemed leases are created by a fiction of 
law, Sec. 3(2) of the Bill, intends to make the subsidiary the deemed lessee of the State 
Government after the rights, etc., are transferred to it by CIL or another subsidiary. 
27. Pertaining to the point no. 4, the Bill does not intend to make Coal India as the transferee 
since the nationalized mines have already been transferred to CIL uls 5( 1) of the Coal Mines 
(Nationalisation) Act 1973, Sec. 3 (2) of the Bill is just an exlension of that provision in the 
Nationalisation Act. Since the deemed leases have already been created by a fiction of law uls 
5(2) of the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973, there is no scope of discretion with the State 
Government to grant or renew the same coal mining leases. 
28. Regarding the point no. 5, the Ministry of Coal opines that the transfer of properties 
under the Companies Act does not make much material difference over the ownership of the 
transferred properties. It has already been clarified that the Bill does not infringe the rights of the 
State Government under MMRD Act and Mineral Concession Rules (MCR) by virtue of Sec. 28, 
of the Nationalisation Act, the provision ofthe Nationalisation Act will prevail over MMRD Act 
and Mineral Concession Rules (MCR). 
29. With regard to point no. 6, the Ministry of Coal views that the properties in question is 
the national properties so, in the national interest their transfer should be exempted from the 
payment of stamp duty. Transfer of funds from Central Government to State Government is not 
national income. Had the properties been under private ownership, payment of stamp duty would 
have been justified. Moreover, transfer of these properties under Transfer of Property Act and 
registration of the transfers on payment of stamp duties are not possible since the properties have 
already been transferred and registration of transfer with a retrospective effect is not possible. As 
regards future transfers, payment of stamp duty is not justified since these are nationalized 
properties. New transfers of properties acquired under Coal Bearing (CB) Act is also not justified 
since the Coal Bearing (CB) Act is also a Central Act under which the acquired properties vest 
absolutely with the Central Government/CIL. 
30. The Ministry of Coal held the view that CIL is the holding company and the proposed 
Legislation in no way dilutes the control and power of CIL over its subsidiaries. The Secretary , 
Coal, spoke as under:-
"As far as the holding company control is concerned, that is in no way diluted, because the 
Articles of Association of Coal India still stipulate that a subsidiary company before it can 
transfer any substantial interest in its property, has to take the approval of Coal India. In any 
case, 100 percent of the paid-up capital of the subsidiaries is with Coal India. So, there is no 
question that the control of the Coal India would, in any way, get diluted after the property is 
transferred. It is only to take care of the legal anomaly that we want the property to be transferred 
so that they do not get into any legal problems in respect of management of these mines". 
7 

3,1 The Secretary, Coal, reiterates his stand on the issue of CIL being a holding company as 
under 
"The second question is whether Coal India is a holding company today. Our answer­
we have given in writing very clearly-is 'yes; it is a holding company'; the relationship between a 
holding company and a subsidiary has been explained in our written replies to your queries. 
Whether it will remain a holding company in the post-transfer situation, we have said, "yes , it 
will remain a holding company". In the case of the north-eastern coalfield, it will be directly in 
charge of the operations because there is no subsidiary for the north-eastern region at the moment. 
Tomorrow, if the company decides to set up a subsidiary; again, this Bill takes into account that 
kind of a situation where there may be a requirement of transfer of property". 
32. Clarifying the issues, the Chainnan , Coal India Limited, opined that as per the provisions 
of the Articles of Association of subsidiary companies, there are certain to be given to the 
subsidiaries but it always says that the subsidiary companies cannot do certain things without the 
approval from Coal India because major decisions have been reserved e.g., it cannot dispose of a 
substantial part of their assets without approval from Coal India. The Chairman, Coal India 
Limited, stated as under :-
"The position today is that there is some arrangement which is governed by the Articles 
of Association. The Articles of Association says that up to a certain limit, a subsidiary can 
mobilize. Beyond that, if it is going to a foreign company or going in for a joint venture, then it is 
the Coal India. This is codified. The Articles of Association will remain. It does not alter. This is 
a codified thing". 
33. The representative of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law Justice and Company 
Affairs endorsed the view points of the Ministry of Coal that CIL is a holding company and by 
passing the present Bill, the status of CIL over the subsidiaries as ·qlanaging and controlling 
agency will remain unaltered. 
8 

OBSERVATION/CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
The Committee observes that main object ofthe Coal India (Regulation of Transfers and 
Validation) Bill, 1995 is to empower the Central Government to direct the transfer of land, on the 
rights in or over or of the right, title and interest in relation to a Coal Mine, Coking Coal Mine or 
Coke Oven Plant, vested in Coal India Limited or in a subsidiary company to any subsidiary 
company and to validate certain transfers of such land or sights. Speaking on practical terms, the 
proposed legislation simply aims at legalisations of transfers of properties from Coal India 
Limited to its subsidiaries and that too without vitiating the managing and controlling mechanism 
of Coal India Limited over its subsidiaries. The Bill aims at turning the situation from de facto to 
de jure. De facto transfer of property has already taken place through administrative orders. 
2. The Committee feels that the necessity of the proposed enactment arose due to 
shortcomings in the Coal Nationalisation Act, under which provision was made for taking over 
all the mines by the Central Government, not by Coal India. Under that Act, Government was 
given the power to transfer it to the Government Company, which was done to erstwhile CMAL 
and now Coal India Limited. There was no provision in the Nationalisation Act for second 
transfer from Coal India to its subsidiaries which have already been done through administrative 
order. Therefore, the proposed legislation is a validation legislation for enabling the Government 
to provide -legal basis to a defacto transfer and convert the same into de-jure. 
3. The Committee understands the problem of giving validation to the transfer of properties 
through the Coal Nationalisation Validation Act, because, unfortunately, the properties of Coal 
India today, which are sought to be transferred to the subsidiaries, are not all covered by the 
nationalization scheme, that is so, because the Coal Mines Nationalisation Act had a very specific 
schedule attached to the Act which designated the mines that were to be taken over. It is 
noteworthy that there are other transfer of properties under the Coal-~earing, Act and the Land 
Acquisition Act, which would still not be covered. The same transfer couldn't be done through 
the Transfer of property Act because the said Act allows only prospective transfer. So, the 
Committee is of the view that the only way to clear up the mess of ownership is to bring forth a 
separate legislation. 
4. The Committee notes the Opinion/suggestion of Shri Lal Narayan Sinha, former 
Attorney General (who was defending the case in the Supreme Court on behalf of BCCL) and 
then Attorney General, Shri K. Parasnath, who endorsed the view of Shri Lal Narayan Sinha for 
undertaking the recourse for appropriate legislation so that, as on date, whatever is held by 
subsidiaries, could be transferred to them without involving any legal wrangle. 
5. The Committee understands that CIL have created a structure of subsidiaries but the 
subsidiaries had not been transferred the property in legal sense, therefore, existing structure of 
arrangement may lead to some kind of problem in future. The problem occurred in Bharat 
Coking Coal Ltd. VS Government of Bihar and others and the Supreme Court decided the 
matter. However, the question of de-jure possession of the properties by the Coal companies and 
the rights and liabilities that go with it remained unresolved which is intended to be cured by the 
proposed legislation. 
6. The Committee, while examining the points of objections raised by the Governments of 
Assam and Bihar on the present Bill and the comments of the Ministry of Coal, is ofthe view that 
the Ministry of Coal has successfully clarified the points of objections of both the state 
Governments. The Committee observes that the lands, titles etc. vested in Coal Mines Authority 
Ltd/Coal India Ltd. following nationalization of Coal Mines in 1973 which provided for deemed 
9 

lease require no formal execution of mining lease under Mines and Minerals (Regulation & 
Development) Act, 1957 and Mineral Concession Rules, 1960. 
7. The Committee is also of the opinion that since Section 3 of the Coal Mines 
(Nationalisation) Act, 1973 transfers and vests the right, title and interest of the Coal Mines in 
the Central Government free from all encumbrances and Section-S( I) of the said Act has vested 
the right, title, interest etc., of the Coal Mines with the CIL and because these are nationalized 
properties, the transfer of these properties from CIL to a subsidiary or from one subsidiary to 
another subsidiary of the CIL, does not harm the interest of the State(s). 
8. The Committee endorses the view that the proposed enactment overrides the Acts of 
State Legislature namely Bihar Tenancy Act, Chhotanagpur Tenancy Act, Santhal Parganas 
Tenancy Act because, it flows from the Coal Mines (Nationalisation ) Act and Section-28 of the 
Coal Nationalisation Act has an overriding provision stipulating that the Nationalisation Act shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything in consisting therewith in any other law for the time being 
in force. 
9. The Committee also notes and endorses the contention of the Ministry of Coal that since 
the acquisition of Mines by the Central Government under the Nationalisation Act is not as a 
,.result of the actual grant by the state as done under Minerals Concession Rules (MCR}, 1960 
framed under MMRD Act. 1957 but by a legal fiction and also because Section-28 of the 
Nationalisation Act, 1973 having an overriding effect in terms of which where there is conflict 
between the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973 and MMRD Act and MCR framed there 
under, then the provision of the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973 wHI override the 
provisions of MMRD Act. etc., therefore, the question that the proposed enactment violates the 
provision of MMRD Act and MCR does not arise. 
10. During the course of oral-evidence of Secretaries to the Department of Legislation 
(Ministry of Law Justice and Company Affairs) and the Ministry of Coal, the Committee got an 
assurance that the Bill will not dilute the control of Coal India over the subsidiaries. The 
Secretary, Coal, assured that the Bill will do nothing to dilute the Government's ownership of 
either the Coal India or the subsidiaries i.e., the control of Government over the subsidiaries 
would be as complete as of Coal India. Under the Article, of Association of Subsidiary 
Companies, the Subsidiary Companies cannot do certain things without the approval from Coal 
India e.g., it cannot dispose of a substantial part of its assets without approval from Coal India 
neither the majo'r investment decision of the subsidiaries can be done without the approval of 
Coal·lndia. The Articles of Association also says that, if the subsidiary is going to a foreign 
company or going in for a joint venture, it has to go "in and through" the Coal lndia.The 
Committee is satisfied with the explanation of the Migistry of Coal and the Ministry of Law, 
Justice and Company Affairs (Legislative Depart!}lellt). 
11. Having heard the Secretaries.__ Ministry of Coal and Legislative Department, Ministry of 
Law Justice and Company Affairs and the clarifications given by them to the various queries and 
having considered the papers furnished by the Ministry, the Committee agrees* with the proposal 
of the Ministry to empower the Central Government to direct the transfer of the land or of the 
right, title and interest in relation to a coal mine, coking coal mine or coke oven plant, vested in 
the Coal India Limited or in subsidiary company to any subsidiary company of Coal India 
Limited or any other subsidiary company and to validate certain transfers of such land or rights. 
12. The Committee decided to adopt Clause 2, 3 & 4 in the original form. 
13. Clause 1 i.e., the Enacting Formula and the Title, were adopted, with changes of 
consequential nature, namely, "1995 and Forty-Sixth" to be substituted by "2000" and Fifty-first, 
respectively. 
10 

14. The Committee therefore, recommends the Coal India (Regulation of Transfers and 
Validation) Bill, 1995 as amended to the Parliament for adoption. 
11 

ANNEXURES 

ANNEXURE-I 
NOTE OF DISSENT GIVEN BY SHRI JIBON ROY AND SHRI SUNIL KHAN 
We do not agree with the majority view of the Committee while examining the 
clause by clause consideration ofthe Coal India (the Regulation of Transfers and validation) 
Bill, 1995. Our views on the Bill is as under:-
"The Bill basically provides enabling facilities to government of 
India to privatize/disinvest the Coal India, part by part. This intention is not 
mentioned in the statement of objective. The bill, if passed in the present 
form, will make the Coal India redundant. If the statement of objective is 
taken in its face value, in that case the problem faced by the Coal India 
could have been settled by transforming the Coal India as unitary form of 
Holding Company as in the case of SAIL. All the more under the existing 
provision of company's Act, Coal India cannot transfer its assets to its 
subsidiaries." 
Henceforth, we are of the view that the Government is forcing an illegal thing into 
legality. Therefore, we oppose the bill. 
t5 

ANNEXURE-II 
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA 
14 FEB 1995 
Bill No. I of 1995 
THE COAL INDIA (REGULATION OF TRANSFERS AND 
VALIDATION) BILL, 1995 
A 
BILL 
to empower the Central Government to direct the transfer of the land, or of the rights in or 
over land or of the right, title and interest in relation to a coal mine, coking coal mine or 
coke oven plant, vested in the Coal India Limited or in a subsidiary company to any 
subsidiary company of Coal India Limited or any other subsidiary company and to validate 
certain transfers of such land or rights. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
I of 1956 
1.( l) This Act may be called the Coal India (Regulation and 
Validation) Amendment Act, 1995. 
(2) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Coal India" means the coal India Limited, a Government 
company incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956 having its 
registered office at Calcutta and includes its predecessor Government 
company, namely, the Coal Mines Authority Limited; 
(b) "subsidiary company" means the following subsidiary 
companies of Coal India, namely:-
(i) the Central Coal Fields Limited, Ranchi and includes it 
predecessor Government company, namely, the National 
Coal DeveiO'pment Corporation Limited, Ranchi; 
(ii) the Bharat Coking Coal Limited, Dhanbad; 
(iii) the Western Coal Fields Limited, Nagpur; 
16 
Short title. 
Definitions. 

(iv) the Eastern Coal Fields Limited. Sanctoria; 
(v) the Central Mine Planning and design Institute Limited, 
Ranchi; 
(vi) the South-Eastern Coal Fields Limited, Bilaspur; 
(vii) the Northern Coal Fields Limited, Singrauli; 
(viii) the Mahanadi Coal Fields Limited, Sambalpur 
and includes such other subsidiary company of Coal India as may 
be incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956 from time to time; 
(c) words and expressions used herein and not defined but 
defined in the Coking Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 or 
the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973, shall have the meanings, 
respectively, assigned to them in those Acts. 
Power 
Central 
Government 
of 3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that a 
subsidiary company is willing to comply, or has complied, with such 
tenns and conditions as that Government may think fit to impose, 
direct, by notification in the Official Gazette, that the land or rights in or 
over such land or the right,. title and interest in relation to a coal mine, 
coking coal mine or a coke oven plant vested in the Coal India shall, 
instead of continuing to vest in the Coal India, vest in that subsidiary 
to direct 
transfer of 
land, rights, 
title or 
interest. 
Validation 
of certain 
transfers. 
company or, where such land or right, title or interest vests in a subsidiary 
company, in another subsidiary company. 
(2) Where the land or rights in or over such land or the right, title and 
interest in relation to a coal mine, coking coal mine or a coke oven plant 
vest in a subsidiary company under sub-section (1), such subsidiary 
company shall, on and from the date of sue~ vesting, be deemed to have 
become the Jessee in relation to such coal mirie or coking coal mine as if a 
fresh mining lease in relation to such coal mine or coking coal mine had 
been granted to it under the Mineral Concession Rules 1960 made under 
section 13 of the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 
1957 for the maximum period for which such lease could have been 
granted under those rules, and all the rights and liabilities of Coal India or, 
as the case may be, the subsidiary company in relation to such coal mine or 
coking coal mine shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to 
have become the rights and liabilities, respectively, of subsidiary company 
first-mentioned. 
4. A subsidiary company which was operating, or was in control of, any 
coal mine, coking coal mine or coke oven plant which was vested in the 
Coal India or any other subsidiary company immediately before the 
commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to have been vested with the 
land or rights in or over such land or the right, title and interest in relation 
17 
1 of 1956 
36 of1972. 
26 of 1973 
67 of 1957 

to such coal mine, coking coal mine or coke oven plant and such vesting 
shall be' deemed to have been valid and effective at all material times as if a 
direction had been made by the Central Government under sub-section (1) 
of section 3 and accordingly no suit or other proceeding shall be instituted, 
maintained or continued in any court on the ground that such subsidiary 
company was not competent to operate or control such coal mine, coking 
coal mine or coke oven plant. 
19 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The coal industry was nationalised in two phases, that is, in 1972 and· 1973. After 
nationalisation, the coking and non-coking coal mines in the Jharia CoalFields in Bihar and a few 
mines in Barakar and Mugma regions were directed to be vested in the Bharat Coking Coal 
Limited, Dhanbad. Most of the other coal mines in the States of Assam, Bihar, West Bengal, 
Orissa, Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra were directed to be vested in the Coal Mines Authority 
Limited. Subsequently, a holding company, namely, the Coal1ndia Limited was set up with effect 
from the 1st November, 1975, initially with five subsidiaries. Later three more subsidiaries were 
created by del inking certain collieries from other subsidiaries. 
2. Ever since the nationalisation of the coal industry, though the land or rights in or over such land 
acquired under various Acts and the right, title and interest in relation to a coal mine or a coke 
oven plant were directed to be \lested in the Coal India Limited or its predecessor in title, its 
subsidiary companies were de facto managing such land, coal mines or plants. 
3. The absence of a formal legal title to the land or rights in or over such land or the right, title and 
interest in relation to a coal mine or coke oven plant, in the subsidiary companies has exposed 
them to litigation and other legal infirmities. While the Companies Act, 1956 contains provisions 
for reconstruction and amalgamations, such reconstruction or amalgamation could be given effect 
to prospectively only under that Act. 
4. It has, therefore, been considered necessary to empower the Central Government to direct the 
transfer of land or the rights in or over such land or the right, title or interest in relation to a coal 
mine or coke oven plant vested in the Coal India Limited to a subsidiary company, or where such 
land or mine are vested in a subsidiary company, to another subsidiary company. It has also been 
considered necessary to validate all purported transfers of the land or rights in or over such land or 
the right, title and interest in relation to a coal mine or coke oven plant from the Coal India 
Limited to a subsidiary company and from one subsidiary company to another subsidiary company 
before the commencement of the proposed legislation. 
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
J'1 

RAJYASABHA 
A 
BILL 
to empower the Central Government to direct the transfer of the land, or of the rights in or over 
land or of the right, title and interest in relation to a coal mine, coking coal mine or coke oven 
plant vested in the Coal India Limited or i"n a subsidiary company to any subsidiary company of 
Coal India Limited or any other subsidiary company and to validate certain transfers of such land 
or rights. 
(Shri Ajit Kumar Panja, Minister of State in the Ministry ofCoal.) 

MINUTES 

' 

XII 
TWELFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Monday, the l51h May, 2000, in Room No. 63, First 
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
l. Shri Ramdas Agarwal Chairman 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Shri Khan Gufran Zahidi 
3. Shri J ibon Roy 
4. Smt. Saroj Dubey 
5. Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
6. Shri S. Sivasubramanian 
7. Shri Shibu Soren 
8. Dr. Faguni Ram 
9. Prof. M.M. Aggarwal 
LOKSABHA 
I 0. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
11. Shri Uttamarao Deorao Patil 
12. Shri Thomas Hansda 
13. Shri Sunil Khan 
14. Shri P. Rajendran 
15. Shri B.B. Ramaiah 
16. Shri Manjay Lal 
17. Shri Ram Sajivan 
18. Shri K. Malaisamy 
19. Shri Ramdas Athawale 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional, Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Officer. 
WITNESSES 
Department Of Coal 
I. Shri S.S. Boparai, K.C, Secretary (Coal) 
2. Shri C.D. Arha, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Devdas Chhotray, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri A. Banerji, Director 
5. Shri N.K. Sharma, Director (Technical), Coal India Ltd. 
6. Shri S.K. Ambasta, ChiefGeneral Manager, Coal India Ltd. 
23 

Legislative Department (Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs) 
Dr. K.N. Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel 
2. * * * 
3. Thereafter, the Chainnan welcomed the Secretary and officials of the Department of 
Coal (Ministry of Mines and Minerals) and the Joint Secretary and Legislative Council from 
Legislative Department ( Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs). After that, he 
requested the Secretary to commence his presentation on Bills, namely, the Coal India Ltd. 
(Regulation of Transfers and Validation ) Bill, 1995 and the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) 
Amendment Bill, 2000. 
4. The Secretary, Coal explained the salient features of the Coal India (Regulation of 
Transfers and Validation) Bill, 1995, and the necessity for bringing the proposed Bill. After 
the presentation the Members asked various questions relating to the Bill and the Secretary and 
his colleagues responded accordingly. Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel made certain 
clarification with regard to legal aspects of the Bill. 
5. Thereafter, the Secretary, Coal, explained various provisions contained in the Coal 
Mines (Nationalisation) Amendment Bill, 2000. He also analysed the circumstances to bring 
the proposed Bill. After his presentation, the Members present sought the clarification on 
certain points and the Secretary and his colleagues answered the Members' queries. 
A verbatim of the proceedings ofthe meeting was kept. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 5.20 P.M. to meet again on 3.00 P.M. on 25
1
h May, 
2000. 
***Relates to the other matter. 
24 

XIII 
THIRTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 251h May, 2000, in Committee Room 
·A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
I. Shri Ramdas Agarwal Chairman 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
3. Shri Jibon Roy 
4. Smt. Saroj Dubey 
5. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha 
6. Dr. Faguni Ram 
7. Prof. M.M. Aggarwal 
LOKSABHA 
8. Shri Pon Radhakrishnan 
9. Shri Chunni Lal Thakur 
10. Shri Ramanand Singh 
11. Shri G. Mallikarjunappa 
12. Shri Tarachand Sahu 
13. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
14. Shri A.C. Jose 
15. Shri Uttamarao Deorao Patil 
16. Shri Sunil Khan 
17. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh 
18. Shri Manjay Lal 
19. Shri Ram Sajivan 
20. Shri Nagmani 
21. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director 
Shri P.C. Paikray, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
Legislative Department (Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs) 
1. Dr. K.N. Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel 
2. Shri P.C. Aggarwal, Additional Legislative Counsel 

.., * * * .... 
3. The Chairman thereafter welcomed Dr. K.N. Chaturv.edi, Joint Secretary and Legislat.ive 
Counsel and Shri P.C. Aggarw-al, Additional Legislative Counsel from the Legislative Department 
and requested Dr. Chaturvedi to commence his presentation. Dr. Chaturvedi expressed the views 
of the Legislative Department on the Coal India (Regulation of Transfers and Validation) Bill, 
1995 and explained the important provisions of the Bill. The Members present sought certain 
clarifications from the Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel on various issues. 
4. Since the replies were not up to the satisfaction of the Committee, the Chairman desired 
that a questionnaire may be got prepared and sent to the Secretary Legislative Department and 
Department of Coal. He also requested Members of the Committee to send their questionnaire to 
the Rajya Sabha Secretariat at the earliest so that a consolidated questionnaire may be sent to these 
Departments. 
A verbatim of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 P.M. 
••• Relates to other matter, 
26 

XIV 
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 22nd June, 2000, in Committee 
Room 'B', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
l. · Shri Ramdas Agarwal Chairman 
· RAJY A SABHA 
2. Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
3. Shri J ibon Roy 
4. Shri Somappa R. Bommai 
5. Smt. Saroj Dubey 
6. Shri S. Sivasubramanian 
7. Shri P.K. Maheshwari 
8. Prof. M.M. Aggarwal 
9. Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma 
LOKSABHA 
10. Shri Pon Radhakrishnan 
II. Shri R. Basanagouda Patil 
12. Shri G. Mallikarjunappa 
13. Shri Anant Nayak 
14. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
15. Shri A.C. Jose 
16. Shri Uttamarao Deorao Patil 
17. Shri K.P. Singh Deo 
18. Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary 
19. Shri Sunil Khan 
20. Shri P. Rajendran 
21. Shri B.B. Ramaiah 
22. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh 
23. Shri Anant Mahadeoappa Gudhe 
24. Shri Ram Sajivan 
25. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional. Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Officer 
27 

LIST OF WITNESSES OF MINISTRY OF COAL FOR ORAL EVIDENCE 
1. Shri V. N. Kaul, Secretary 
2. Shri C. D. Arha, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Devdas Chhotray, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri A. Banerji, Director 
5. Shri P. K. Sengupta, Chairman, CIL 
6. Shri N. K. Sharma, Director {Tech.) CIL 
7. Shri M. N. Ghosh, Chief Legal Manager 
LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT, (MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPANY 
AFFAIRS) 
1. Dr. S. C. Jain, Secretary 
2. Dr. K. N. Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel 
3. Shri P. C. Agarwal, Additional Legislative Counsel 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meetings of the Committee. 
3. * * * * 
4. The Committee then adjourned for lunch to reassemble again at 3.00 p.m. to hear the oral 
evidence of Secretaries, Ministry of Coal and Legislative Department (Ministry of Law, Justice 
and Company Affairs) on the Coal India Limited (Regulations of Transfer and validation) Bill, 
1995. 
5. The Chairman welcomed the Secretaries and Officials of Ministry of Coal and Legislative 
Department. The Chairman also welcomed the Members of a Parliamentary delegation from 
Namibia, led by Hon'ble Michael Hishikushitja, M.P. and Chairman of the National Council 
Standing Committee on Constitutional and Legal Affairs who were on study visit of the 
Committee System under Indian Parliamentary System. 
6. The Secretary, Coal explained the salient features of Coal India (Regulation of Transfers 
and Validation) Bill, 1995 and the imminent requirement for bringing the proposed Bill. After his 
presentation, the Members asked various questions pertaining to the Bill and the Secretary and his 
colleagues responded. The Secretary, Legislative Department made certain clarifications with 
regard to legal aspects of the Bill. 
7. Thereafter, the Committee adjourned for tea-break to reassemble again to take up the 
clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill. 
8. After the tea-break, the Committee reassembled and took-up clause-by-clause 
consideration of the Bill. The Committee decided to adopt clauses 2,3, and 4 in the original form, 
while clause -1 i.e. the Enacting Formula and the Title, were adopted, with changes of 
consequential nature, namely, "1995 and Forty-Sixth" to be substituted by '2000' and Fifty-first, 
respectively. 
9. However, two Members, namely, Shri Jibon Roy and Shri Sunil Khan submitted their note 
of dissent, whereupon, the Chairman assured them that their note of dissent would be appended to 
the Committee's Report on the Bill. 
A verbatim of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
10. The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M. 
* * * Relates to other matter. 
28 

XVII 
SEVENTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the l91h July, 2000, in Room No. 53, 
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
I. Shri Ramdas Agarwal Chairman 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Smt. Saroj Dubey 
3. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha 
4. Dr. Faguni Ram 
5. Prof. M.M. Aggarwal 
6. Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma 
LOKSABHA 
7. Shri Pon Radhakrishnan 
8. Shri Ramanand Sing 
9. Shri G. Mallikarjunappa 
10. Shri Tarachand Sahu 
II. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
12. Shri K.P. Singh Deo 
13. Shri Thaomas Hansda 
14. Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary 
15. Shri Sunil Khan 
16. Shri M. Rajaiah 
17. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh 
18. Shri Manjay La! 
19. Shri Anant Mahadeoappa Gudhe 
20. Shri K. Malaisamy 
21. Shri Rizwan Zaheer 
22. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional, Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Officer 
2. Before commencing the agenda for the day the Chairman welcomed the Members of the 
Committee. 
29 

3. Thereafter, the Committee took up the draft report on coal India ( Regulation of 
Transfers and Validation) Bill, 1995 for consideration . After a brief discussion, the Draft 
Report was adopted. However, it was decided that the element verbatim records of the 
meetings (held on 151h and 251h May 22nd June and 91h March, 2000 pertaining to the 
discussions on the said Bill may be presented/laid to both the House of Parliament. 
4. The Committee then decided to present the Report on Coal India (Regulation of 
Transfers and Validation) Bill, \~995 to both the House of Parliament on Thursday, the 27'" 
July, 2000. For this, the Chairman nominated the following Members to present the Report. 
(I) Nomination of Members for the presentation of Reports to the Rajya Sabha 
The Chairman Committee on Industry will present the Reports to the Rajya Sabha 
alongwirh Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha, M.P. 
5. 
(II) Nomination of Members for the presentation of Reports to the Lok Sabha 
I. Shri K.P. Singh Deo 
2. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
* * * 
A verbatim record of the meeting was kept. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 3.50 P.M. 
* * * Relates to other matter. 
30 

... .. ;-_ 
' . . ,· 
'' 
.. 