PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
476/ RS F-l·A 
TWENTY-FIRST REPORT 
ON 
INDUSTRIAL SITUATION 
(Presented on the 17th March, 1997) 
. r 
RAJY A SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 1997/Phalguna, 1918 (Saka) 
Ind. 21197 

• 
476/RS F-l·B 

CONTENTS 
PAGES 
1. CoMPOSITION OF THE CoMMITIEE • • • . • • • • • • • • • • . . • • . • • • . • • • • • . (i)-(ii) 
2. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE. . • • • • • • • • • • • • . • • • • • • • • . • • • • . . • • • 1-3 
3. APPENDICES 
(i) Minutes of the Meetings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5-12 
(ii) Reports of Sub-Committees. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13--168 

COMPOSmON OF THE COMMITIEE 
Shri Ashok Mitra __ Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Maurice Kujur 
3. Syed Sibtey Razi 
4. Shri Govindrao Adik 
5. Shri Rajubhai A. Parm~ 
6. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
7. Shrimati Anandiben Jethabhai Patel 
8. Shri Kanak Mal Katara 
9. Shri Ram Deo Bhandari 
10. Shri Anil Kumar 
11. Shri T.M. Venkatachalam 
12. Shrimati Jayaprada Nahata 
13. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
14. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
15. Chaudhari Chunni Lal 
LOK SABRA 
16. Shrimati Jayawantiben Mehta 
17. Shri Ritlal Pd. Verma 
18. Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
19. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
20. Shri Nitish Bharadwaj 
21. Shri Namdevrao Diwathe 
22. Shri Ananth Kumar 
23. Shri M.K. Patil 
24. Shri Shyamlal Bansiwal 
"'25. Shri Sunderlal Patwa 
26. Shri Nawal Kishore Sharma 
27. Kumari Frida Topno 
28. Shri Sanat Mehta 
29. Shri Udaysinghrao Gaikwad 
30. Shri Chitturi Ravindra 
31. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
32. Shri Pradeep Bhattacharya 
33. Dr. N. Subramanyam 
34. Shrimati Usha Meena 
35. Shri B.L. Shankar 
36. Shri Naval Kishore Rai 
37. Shri Sunil Khan 
38. Shri L. Adaikalaraj 
39. Shri M. Ramananthan 
"Nominated w.e.t 26.2.97 vide the vacancy caused due to the death pf Shri Xavier Arakkal, M.P., Lok Sabba. 
(i) 

(ii) 
40. Shri Anandrao Adsul 
41. Shri V. Alagirisamy 
42. Shri Bhakta Charan Das 
43. Shri Chandra Sekhar 
44. Shri Darbara Singh 
45. Shri P.C. Thomas 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Om Parkash, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Deepak Goyal, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Officer 

TWENTY-FIRST REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
Having been authorised by the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Industry, I, Ashok Mitra, hereby present the Twenty-first Report of the Committee. 
At the mid point of the fiscal year 1996-97 widespread misgivings were being expressed 
on the uncertain state of industrial growth in the country. The rates of growth of mining, 
power generation and other infrastructure industries were significantly lower compared to 
what these were in the corresponding months of the previous year; the rate of growth of 
manufacturing too was below expectations. Stock exchanges were marked by strong bearish 
sentiments, and there was few evidence of fresh investment activity. At its meeting on 
October 29, 1996 the Committee felt that it would be useful to have a wide-scale survey 
undertaken on its behalf to examine in depth the underlying factors inhibiting industrial 
growth. It was further decided that to facilitate the survey, five Sub-Committees be 
constituted which will assume responsibility for different areas of study. One Sub-Committee 
proposed to analyse the factors inhibiting industrial groups while two other Sub-Committees 
were assigned to concentrate on the problems which directly pertain to the activities of the 
Ministry of Industry, while two other Sub-Committees were assigned to cover the area of 
functioning of the Ministry of Steel and Ministry of Mines respectively. 
The reports finalised by the five Sub-Committees .are placed below. The purpose of this 
brief introduction is to draw attention to some of the more salient conclusions reached by 
the Sub-Committees at the end of their labour. Each Sub-Committee thought it useful to 
visit important metropolitan cities as well as several interior centres of the country in order 
to gain insight at first hand into the problems encountered in the different spheres of 
industrial activity, both organised and non-organised. 
Sub-Committee-III studied at some length the factors which explain the slowing down of 
industrial growth in the current year compared to the trends obtained in 1995-96. While 
arriving at its conclusions, the Sub-Committee has taken into account the generally 
depressed state of industrial growth in the years 1991-92, 1992-93 and 1993-94 as well. 
According to the Sub-Committee, the drying up of the process of investment in the different 
sectors of the economy needs to be reversed as early as possible. lnfrastructural growth in 
particular has been badly affected by the lack of capital formation. This is particularly in 
regard to the power sector. The Sub-Committee is concerned about monetary policy and the 
role in general of the Reserve Bank of India has been less than 'growth-friendly' in recent 
years. In the opinion of the Sub-Committee, the State should play a more active role in 
encouraging investment across-the-board and there must be appropriate resource allocation 
so that all major projects in the State sector should be completed within a given time frame. 
The establishment of a nodal agency which will monitor investments in the infrastructure 
industries and also coordinate between public and private sector activities is, in the view of 
the Sub-Committee, worth consideration. The Sub-Committee· has, in this connection, 
referred to the gradually disappearing role of the Planning Commission in the planning of 
,savings investment and growth in the country, which it regards as unfortunate. 
Sub-Committee-! concentrated on the problems faced by the small-scale industrial 
sector. It has a number of observations concerning the issue of raising the limits of 
investment in re-defining small and tiny sectors. The latest decisions of the government have 
partially 
1 

2 
taken care of the suggestions offered by the Sub-Committee, but perhaps a few new 
questions have reached their head. The Sub-Committee is also of the view that the 
Government has the responsibility to ensure that liberalisation carried to excess does not 
create problems of survival for the small-scale units. The Sub-Committee has comments to 
offer on the limits of commercial turnover for determining concessions with respect to excise 
duties. In this matter too, the budget for 1997-98 contained provisions which will need to be 
examined in the light of the Sub-Committees recommendations. The Sub-Committee has 
strongly U{ged for a fresh census of small-scale industrial units including those engaged in 
fulfilment of specific export obligations. It has expressed concern about the bottlenecks in 
the supply of inputs faced by the small-sector, and it wants the Government to undertake a 
s~cial review of the subsidies and other fiscal concessions to encourage further development 
in small-scale activities. The Committee has some comments to offer on the problems faced 
by the coir industry and the difficulties posed by the high interest rate structure and the 
general reluctance of the banks to offer credit. The Sub-Committee has invited. attention 'to 
the necessity to facilitate supply of gas and power, equipment to the small-scale units. 
Government agencies, in view of the Sub-Committee,_ should take an active interest in 
improving the infrastructure such, as roads, drainage, etc., in areas where the small-scale 
industries are located. It has also suggestions to offer on such issues as a more satisfactory 
integration of activities between the Centre and the State Governments. It is a matter of 
regret, the Committee feels, that several State Governments do not still have a separate 
Directorate. or Department to deal with the problems of small industries. 
Sub-Committee-IV visited the major centres of activities and operations under aegis of 
the Ministry of Mines including Hindustan Copper Limited, Hindustan Zinc Lhruted, 
National Aluminium Corporation, Bharat Gold Mines, the Geological· Survey of India and 
the Indian Bureau of Mines. It has drawn attention to the problems faced by both Hindustan 
Zinc Limited and Hindustan Copper Limited because of the progressive lowering of tariff 
barriers which have affected the marketing of products of these two major units on which 
the ·Government has invested considerable amount in the past. This issue, the Sub­
CqJ;nmittee is of the opinion must be the subject of constant review between the Ministry of 
Mines and the Mini~try of Finance. There must be augmentation of funds, the Sub­
Committee feels, both for the Geological Survey of India and the Indian Bureau ·of Mines to 
enable them expand their activities. The Sub-Committee has commented that the rates of 
duty of royalty· on non-coal items must be uniformly converted from specific to ad valorem 
as a matter of policy. It is also the Sub-Committee's point of view that the Government 
should continue to assume direct responsibility for social welfare work pertaining to the 
workers engaged in the mining areas. 
Sub-Committee-11 visited a number of major industrial centres affected by problems of 
~losure and sickness of units both in the private and public sectors. It set for itself to two 
assignments: (1) review the working of the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) 
Act, 1985 as well as of the performance of the Board of Industrial and Financial 
Reconstruction towards the restructuring of units in difficulties; and (2) analyse the problems 
that stand in the way of using the resources of the National Renewal Fund not for payment 
of mere 'golden hand shake' to laid-off workers but for a meaningful reconstruction. of sick 
units. 
The Sub-Committee has several comments to offer on the slow pace of work by the 
BIFR. It has a number of suggestions for reforming the Sick Industrial Undertakings Act, to 
enable proceedings before the BIFR could be speeded up and surplus land available to the 
units be made easily available for purposes of the rehabilitation of the units. It has also 

3 
suggestions on how the process of consultations within the BIFR could be telescoped. The 
Sub-Committee is firmly of the view that the resources available with the NRF should be 
deployed to revive and expand the Area Employment Regeneration Schemes. The Sub­
Committee has made specific recommendations with regard to modalities for the revival of 
units belonging to the National Textile Corporation and the North-Eastern Paper Mills 
Corporation. 
It is to be hoped that the Ministries of Industry, the Ministry of SteE!l and the Ministry 
of Mines along with their relevant departments and directorates will carefully e:xamine the 
recommendations of the Sub-Committees. They should expeditiously offer their view on 
those of the recommendations of the Sub-Committees that are easily implementable and 
those they would like to examine· further. The Committee would urge the Ministry that the 
suggestions made by Sub-Committee regarding amendments to the. Sick Industrial 
Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985, reviewing the performance of BIFR and the 
restructuring of the National Renewal Fund are ex~mined in detail and the Ministry's view 
on these recommendations communicated to the Ministry of Finance. 
In any event the Committee will have a further opportunity to gc> into the issues 
covered by the reports of the Sub-Committees at the time of examination of the Demands 
for Grants for 1997~98 and the Annual Reports of the· Ministries concerned. 
NswDELHI; 
lOth March, 1997 
ASHOK MITRA, 
Chairman, 
Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing· 
Committee on Industry .. 

APPENDICES 

1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
......... 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 

.• 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS 
XI 
ELEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 9th October, 1996 in Committee 
Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ashok Mitra - Chairman 
RAJYA· SABHA 
2. Shri Maurice Kujur 
3. Syed Sibtey Razi 
4. Shri Govindrao Adik 
5. Shri Rajubhai A. Parmar 
6. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
7. Shri Kanak Mal Katara 
8. Shri Ram Deo Bhandari 
9. Shri T.M. Venkatachalam 
LOK SABRA 
10. Shiimati Jayawantiben Mehta 
11. Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
12. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
13. Shri Nitish Bharadwaj 
14. Shri Namdevrao Diwathe 
15. Shri M.K. Patil 
16. Shri Nawal Kishore Sharma 
17. Shri Sanat Mehta 
18. Shri Udaysinghrao Gaikwad 
19. Dr. N. Subramanyam 
20. Shrimati Usha Meena 
21. Shri Sunil Khan 
22. Shri Anandrao Adsul 
23. Shri Bhakta Charan Das 
24. Shri P.C. Thomas 
25. Shri Xavier Arakkal 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Om Parkash, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Deepak Goyal, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Officer 
7 

8 
The Committee discussed issues that could be taken up for detailed analysis and 
appraisal in the course of the next few months. A proposal was mooted to set-up four sub­
committees to study simultaneously four specified problems. It was agreed that the 
Committee would meet again on October, 29 next at 11.00 A.M. to finalise the programme 
of work in this. connection on the basis of a note to be circulated by the Secretariat ahead of 
the date of the meeting. 
2. Some discussion took place concerning a point of order raised by a member of the 
Committee at the time of the placement of the Eighteenth Report of the Committee in the 
Rajya Sabha. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 1.50 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, 
the 29th October, 1996. · 

XII 
TWELFI'H MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 29th October, 1996 in Committee 
Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ashok Mitra - Chairman 
RAJYA SABBA 
2. Syed Sibtey Razi 
3. Shri Govindrao Adik 
4. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
5. Shrimati Anandiben Jethabhai · Patel 
6. Shri Kanak Mal Katara 
7. Shri Ram Deo Bhandari 
8. Shri Anil Kumar 
9. Shri T.M. Venkatachalam 
10. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
LOK SABBA 
11. Shrimati J ayawantiben Mehta 
12. Shri Ritlal Pd. Verma 
13. Shri Radha Mot-an Singh 
14. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
15. Shri Namdevrao Diwathe 
16. Shri M.K. Patil 
17. Shri Shyamlal Bansiwal 
18. Shri Nawal Kishore Sharma 
19. Kumari Frida Topno 
20. Shri Sanat Mehta 
21. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
22. Shri Pradeep Bhattacharya 
23. Dr. N. Subramanyam 
24. Shri B .L. Shankar 
25. Shri Naval Kishore Rai 
26. Shri Sunil Khan 
27. Shri M. Ramananthan 
28. Shri Anandrao Adsul 
29. Shri Bhakta Charan Das 
30. Shri P. C. Thomas 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Om Parkash, Deputy Secretary 
9 

10 
Shri Deepak Goyal, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee considered the draft composition of the Sub-Committees and the 
business to be transacted by them. After some discussion, the following Sub-Committees and 
their composition were approved:-
I. SUB-COMMI'ITEE ON SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES 
1. Shrimati Jayawantiben Mehta -- Convenor 
2. Shri Maurice Kujur 
3. Shri Rajubhai A. Parmar 
4. Shrimati Anandiben Jethabhai Patel 
S. Shri Anil Kumar 
6. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
7. Shri Namd~vrao Diwathe 
8. Shri Shyamlal Bansiwal 
9. Shri Nawal Kishore Sharma 
10. Dr. N. Subramanyam 
11. Shri Anandrao Adsul 
IT. SUB-COMMITIEE ON THE FUNCTIONING OF THE NATIONAL RENEWAL FUND 
AND THE B.I.F.R. 
1. Shri Sanat Mehta -- Convenor 
2. Shri Govindrao Adik 
3. Shrimati Jayaprada Nahata 
4. Shri Nitish Bharadwaj 
S. Shri M.K: Patil 
6 .. Shri Naval Kishore Rai 
7. Shri Sunil Khan 
ID. · SUB·COMMITIEE ON TRENDS IN INDUSTRIAL OUTPUT 
l. · Shri M .. Ramananthan -- Convenor 
2. Syed Sibtey Razi 
3. Shri T.M. Venkatachalam 
4. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
S. Shri Chitturi Ravindra 
6. Shri B.L. Shankar 
7. Shri V. Alagirisamy 
8. Shri Chandra Sekhar 
9. Shri Xavier Arakkal 
IV. SUB-COMMITTEE ON MINING SECTOR 
1. Shri R&m Deo Bhandari -- Convenor 
2.. Shri l(anak Mal Katara 
3. Shri Ritlal Pd. Verma 
4. Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
S. Kumari Frida Topno 
6. Shri Udaisinghrao Gaikwad 
7. Shri K. H. Muniyappa 
8. Shri Bhakta Charan Das 

11 
V. SUB-COMMITTEE ON STEEL SECTOR 
1. Shri Pradeep Bhattacharya -- Convenor 
2. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
3. Shri Ananth Kumar 
4. Shrimati Usha Meena 
5. Shri L. Adaikalaraj 
6. Shri Darbara Singh 
7. Shri P. C. Thomas 
3. The Committee authorised the Chairman to make any changes in the Sub­
Committees, if required. 
4. The Convenors of the Sub-Committees were authorised to chalk out the programme 
of work of their respective Sub-Committee in consultation with the Members. The 
Committee authorised the Chairman to seek approval of the Hon'ble Chairman. Rajya 
Sabha for the visits of the Sub-Committees as finalised from time to time. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 11.45 A.M. 
476/ RS F-2-A 

XIII 
TlllRTEENTH MEETING 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry met at 10.00 
A.M. on Monday, the lOth March, 1997 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ashok Mitra - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Kanak Mal Katara 
3. Shri T.M. Venkatachalam 
4. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
5. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shrimati Jayawantiben Mehta 
7. Shri Ritlal Pd. Verma 
8. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
9. Shri Nitish Bharadwaj 
10. Shri M.K. Patil 
11. Shri Shyamlal Bansiwal 
12. Shri Sunderlal Patwa 
13. Shri Sunil Khan 
14. Shri V. Alagirisamy 
15. Shri Bhakta Charan Das 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Om Parkash, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Deepak Go.Yal, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Officer 
2. * 
3. * 
* * 
* * 
4. The Committee next took up for consideration the draft 21st report and adopted the 
same with certain minor modifications to be carried out in consultation with the Convenors 
of the Sub-Committees. 
4.1 The Committee decided to present the report to both the Houses of Parliament on 
Monday the 17th March, 1997. 
4.2 The Committee authorised the Chairman and in his absence Shri Jayant Kumar 
Malhoutra to present the report in the Rajya Sabha and Shrimati Jayawantiben Mehta and 
Shri Nawal Kishore Sharma to present the report in the Lok Sabha. 
5. The Committee thereafter finalised its schedule of meetings for consideration of the 
Demands for Grants of the Ministries which come under its purview, for the year 1997-98. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 10.40 A.M. 
•••Relates to other matters. 
12 
476/ RS F-2·B 

APPENDIX-II 
STUDY REPORTS OF 
SUB-COMMITTEES 

STUDY REPORT(S) 
OF 
SUB-COMMITTEE-I 

REPORT OF SUB-COMMITTEE-I (OF DEPARTMENT- RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITIEE ON INDUSTRY) ON SMALL SCALE 
INDUSTRY 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry at its meeting 
held on the 29th October, 1996, constituted five Sub-Committees including one on Small 
Scale Industry. The Sub-Committee consisted ·:>f the following:-
!. Shrimati Jayawantiben Mehta -- Convenor 
MEMBERS 
2. Shri Maurice Kujur 
3. Shri Rajubhai A. Parmar 
4. Shrimati Anandiben Jethabai Patel 
5. Shri Anil Kumar 
6. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
7. Shri Namdevrao Diwathe 
8. Shri Shyamlal Bansiwal 
9. Shri Nawal Kishore Sharma 
10. Dr. N. Subramanyam 
11. Shri Anandrao Adsul 
2. The Sub-Committee has been assigned the job of undertaking a review of the role 
played by the small scale industries, including agro-based and other rural industries in the 
context of recent developments of the country and the problems they have encountered. The 
review covers aspects of problems including the need or otherwise of re-defining small-scale 
and tiny sector activities, the policy of reservations applied toward them, a critique of 
taxation and duty structures, appraisal of schemes of financial accommodation preffered by 
banks, financial institutions and State and Union Governments. The factors underlying 
endemic problem of sickness that often visited small-scale and rural industries also formed a 
part of the study. It is often alleged that while statutory and other measures are laid down 
for protecting small-scale industries from intrusion by outsiders, including multinational 
entities, in practice the measures are flouted with impunity, which render the entire legal 
structure of protection infructuous. The issues relevant in this connection also form a part of 
the study of the Sub-Committee. 
3. The Sub-Committee met on the 18th November, 1996 and decided that a detailed 
Questionnaire be prepared covering the area of study of the Sub-Committee. The Sub­
Committee also decided to visit Cochin, Bangalore and Chennai during January, 1997 for 
the purpose of interaction with the concerned people and an on-the-spot study. A copy of 
the Questionnaire alongwith the comments of the Ministry of Industry thereon covering the 
area of study of Sub-Committee is enclosed as ANNEXURE-I. 
4. The Sub-Committee undertook the study visit to Cochin, Bangalore and Chennai 
from the 2nd to 9th January, 1997 and had interaction with (i) the representatives of ape~ 
organisations of manufacturers, .exporters and workers engaged in main small scale industries 
in the States of Kerala, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu; (ii) the representatives of Nationalised 
Banks, Financial Institutions, Reserve Bank of India, etc. on the availability or otherwise of 
17 

18 
finances to the small scale industries and (iii) the representatives of the Government of 
Kerala, Kamataka and Tamil Nadu, respectively, in order elicit their views on the problems 
of small scale industry in their State. The list of representatives with whom the Committee 
had interaction during the course of the study visit is enclosed as ANNEXURE-II. The Sub­
Committee also visited some small scale units at Cochin, Bangalore, Mysore and Chennai 
with a view to see their functioning and for a better comprehension of their problems. The 
list of units visited by the Sub-Committee is enclosed as ANNEXURE-III. 
5. A brief summary of the points that arose during the course of the study visit are 
contained in the succeeding paragraphs. 
I. COCIDN (2ND TO 4TH JANUARY, 1997) 
A. Discussion with Representatives of Apex Organisations of manufacturers, exporters 
and workers engaged in main small scale industries in the State on 2.1.97 
(i) Small Scale Industries in Kerala were engaged in industries based on Coir, 
Coconut, Cashew, Spices, Sea Food, Rubber, etc. 
(ii) Representatives of all categories of Small Scale Industries complained about 
the higher rate of interest on term loans and the conditions precedent to their 
grant like, furnishing of collateral securities, etc. There was a demand that the 
gestation period for the term loan should be a minimum of 2 years of which 
12 inonths should be a interest holiday. The rate of interest on term loan 
should not be more that 6%. The Export Oriented Units in small scale sector 
should be provided with level playing field when compared with Multi-nationals 
that raise loans at an interest rate of 6%. 
(iii) The existing limit on investment in plant and machinery of Rs. 60 lakhs for the 
purpose of excise exemption should be raised to Rs. 1.00 to 2.00 crores. 
(iv) The limit turnover of Rs. 30 lakhs for excise exemption should be raised to 
Rs. 1.00 crore. 
(v) In order to avoid harassment at the hands of authorities collecting Sales-tax, 
Income-tax, etc. only excise duty may be collected from small scale industries. 
(vi) Keeping in view the high cost of advertisement, there should be a central 
subsidy for the purpose. 
(vii) Testing facilities should be made available in various parts of the country at 
concessional rates. 
(viii) Cost of packing for processed foods. in India is almost 65% of the cost of 
production. Concession should be provided in excise duty for packaging 
materials for new products for atleast 2 years from the commencement of 
commercial production. 
(ix) Presently, manufacture of value added products from fresh coconut is a priority 
industry only for Industry Ministry and not for the Reserve Bank of India. This 
should be re-classified as a priority industry for Reserve Bank of India as well 
to enable the Commercial Banks to provide finance on priority basis, to new 
integrated coconut processing units. 

(x) 
(xi) 
(xii) 
(xiii) 
(xiv) 
(xv) 
(xvi) 
(xvii) 
(xviii) 
(xix) 
(xx) 
19 
Workers engaged in Coir are presently unorganised, as a result of which there 
is competition among the small manufacturers who supply their products to the 
big exporters. These small manufacturers do not get reasonable price of their 
products. These small manufacturers may be encouraged to form Cooperatives 
so that their exploitation is checked. 80% of the work force engaged in coir 
industry are women. 
The exporters of Coir desired that the requirements of Minimum Export Price 
and Export Quality Inspection, should be abolished. But, the president, 
Travancore Coir Factories' Workers Union maintained that the requirement of 
Minimum Export price should be continued and the quality inspection before 
export should be strictly implemented because the minimum wages for coir 
workers are based upon the minimum export price. 
Copra processing industry in the State has not b~en able to keep pace with the 
changes ushered in other milling sectors elsewhere in the country. There is a 
need for modernisation of the plants but adequate financial assistance is not 
forthcoming either from Central Government or from the Coconut 
Development Board for converting the out-moded rotaries into expellers. 
100% Export Oriented Units (EOUs) operating outside export promotion 
zones are allowed exemption froin State Sales Tax only for a period of 5 years 
from the date of approval of the unit and,, on the other hand, EOUs situated in 
the Cochin Export Promotion Zone are allowed exemption from Sales Tax 
without any time limit. The exemption should be extended uniformly to all the 
EO Us. 
100% EOUs should get full Central Sales Tax exemption instead of Central 
Sales Tax reimbursement. 
There is a shortage of power in the State which is adversely l!ffecting the 
production of small scale industries. Efforts should be made to ensure more 
power supply to the State from the power grid. The Central Government 
should also permit setting up of more thermal and hydro power projects for the 
State. 
Reluctance on the part of financial institutions to give adequate and timely 
finance is one of the reasons for lack of development of small scale industries 
in Kerala. The Credit Deposit Ratio which is presently 45% should be raised 
to at least 75%. 
Small Scale Industries should be provided credit at lower rates of interest. 
Normally, 20% of the annual turnover should be made available as working 
capital credit. In Kerala, this is less than 5%. Immediate action should be 
taken to enhance the provision of working capital credit to enable the small 
scale units to work profitably. 
There should be an insurance scheme for the small scale industries to cover the 
risk of industrial loans given by financial institutions to small scale units and 
the provisions for collateral security should be done away. A nominal premium 
may be charged and collected by the Bank from the industrial unit and paid to 
the insurance company. If the loan gets struck up, the financial institution can 
get it from the insurance company. 
The Kerala State Small Industries Association· did not favour an abnormal rise 
in the investment limit of Small Scale Industries from the existing Rs. 60 lakhs 
because as per their assessment, 90% of the small scale units had an 
investment of less than F.s. 20 lakhs. Terefore, raising of limits may pave 

20 
the way for large business houses to peneterate and use the facility and benefits 
of this priority sector. Therefore, the investment limit in plant and machinery 
should not be raised beyond Rs. 1.00 crore. 
(xxi) The two Growth Centres sanctioned for Kerala have not yet been established. 
These may be established expeditiously. 
(xxii) The functioning of State Finance Corporations should be reviewed in order to 
improve their efficiency in providing adequate and timely finance to the small 
scale industries. 
(xxiii) There are a large number of sick small scale industries in the State. The 
financial institutions were not adhering to the guidelines given by the Reserve 
Bank of India for their revival. Government should evolve more liberal and 
practical steps for rehabilitation of these sick units. 
(xxiv) All agricultural produce including spices are not getting the sales tax exemption 
under Section 5(3) of the Central Sales Tax Act. The exemption is available if 
it is exported in the same form in which it is· purchased. This is acting as a 
disincentive for manufacturing/processing of value added products. The 
processing and manufacturing units, particularly in small scale sector, generate 
large employment opportunities mostly for women. Therefore, sales tax 
exemption may be given to units engaged in processing and manufacturing of 
value added products in spices. 
(xxv) Under EXIM Policy, a special provision exists for import of clove, cassia and 
cinnamon by traditional importers of these items for stock and sale. As these 
importers are also required to fulfil export obligation by exporting selected 
spices, they underquote prices and somehow fulfil the export obligation. This is 
very badly affecting the entire spices industry. 
(xxvi) As per the Spices Board Act, the Board is responsible only for promoting 
export of spices and spices products (except· Cardamom), whereas the total 
production/development of spices are the responsibility of Union Ministry of 
Agriculture and State Agriculture/Horticulture Departments. These two 
departments lack coordination and export focus. Without basic production 
data, the industry is finding it very difficult to plan proper strategies for 
maximising export of spices and spice products. The Committee .should look 
into this issue and recommend proper coordination with all connected agencies/ 
organisations for appropriate planning and implementation of various schemes. 
(xxvii) In the area of export promotion activities cashew never received adequate care 
and assistance due to it from the Government of India. The details of grant in 
aid received by/sanctioned to the Council from MDA and under Plan for its 
activities during the VIII Plan period were are as follows: 
M.D.A. Rs. 76.61 lakhs 
PLAN FUNDS 
TOTAL 
EXPORT EARNINGS 
Rs. 76.00 lakhs 
Rs. 152.61 lakhs 
Rs 579298 lakhs 
The total export earning .from cashew during VIII period estimated at Rs. 5793 
crores where as the Government assistance for export promotion was only 1.4 
crores constituting 0.02% of the export earnings from cashew. 

21 
(:xxviii) The Cashew Export Promotion Council bad drawn up a few proposals for 
taking up export promotion activities envisaging an expenditure of Rs. 60 
crores and submitted the same to Government of India for clearance under 
Ninth Plan. The Government of India may be persuaded to sanction the 
schemes proposed by the Council and release adequate funds for export 
promotion activities. 
(xxix) The Central Sales Tax Act provides for grant of Sales Tax exemption for 
commodities bought in the course of export. State Governments are levying 
Sales Tax on raw cashewnuts on the ground that raw cashewnuts and cashew 
kernels are two separate commodities and hence. the provision un~er Central 
Sales Tax are not applicable to raw cashewnuts. Therefore, the Central Sales 
Tax Act may be amended in such a way that raw cashewnuts and cashew 
kernels are treated as a single commodity for granting exemption for Sales Tax 
as in the case of groundnuts. Alternatively, the State Government may be 
persuaded to grant exemption to raw cashewnuts from Sales Tax/Purchase Tax 
and other State levies to make cashew kernels competitive in the international 
markets. 
(xxx) The Government of India had introduced schemes for grant of REP licences/ 
Exim Scrips/Special Import Licences, etc. as incentives to exporters. The 
premia realised on the transfer or sale of these enable the exporters to offer 
competitive rates for their goods in the international markets and thereby 
enable them to maintain/improve their export performance. 
Sales Tax authorities in different States assess the exporters to Sales Tax 
on premia received by the exporters on the sale of REP licences/Exim Scrips/ 
Special Import Licences, treating them as sale of goods. This has resulted in 
the exporters losing part of the incentives which the Central Government bas 
thoughtfully provided to them as an export promotion measure. 
Therefore, the incentives and assistance provided by Government of India 
for exports may be formulated in such a way that the benefits are not taken 
away by State Governments. 
B. Discussions with the Representatives of Banks and Financial Institutions on 4.1.97 
The State Bank of Travancore had the largest number of branches in the State i.e. 542 
out of the total of 993. Other main commercial banks which bad their establishment in 
Kerala were S.B.I. with 223 branches, Canara Bank 224 branches, I.O.B., Syndicate Bank 
and U.B.I. with a little over 100 branches. 
2. The representatives of State Bank of Travancore informed the Committee that they 
have taken significant steps for providing liberal financial assistance and taken creative 
measures to help the SSI sector. 
3. As regards the financing of SSis, the Committee was informed that the State Bank of 
Travancore bad set up a Development I>epartment for Small Industries and Small Business 
Finance for monitoring the bank's lending under SSI sector. The Bank also bad a: full­
fledged Technical Consultancy Cell which was well equipped to take up the work relating to 
project apraisals, viability studies, rehabilitation studies, etc. The bank also bad (a) Green 
Channel Qearance Scheme; and (b) Specialised SSI branches in 85 identified districts to 
facilitate the financing of small scale industries. The Bank further informed the Committee 
that the recommendations of the Nayak Committee had been implemented by them. They 
were a1so implementing the Seven Point Action Plan formulated by the Government of India 
for improving the flow of credit to SSI. 

22 
4. The following constraints were, however, brought to the notice of the Committee by 
the Commercial Banks:-
a. high mortality rate and low recovery percentage; 
b. non availability of financial data in the format required by the bank; 
c. delay in release of Government subsidy/incentives, causing paucity of funds; 
d. the problem of delayed payments by large unitsiPSUs; 
e. delay on the part of the promoter to bring in the stipulated margin; 
f. inflated project cost; 
g. no proper project reports; 
h. diversion of funds; 
1. transactions are not routed through channels, to avoid· tax; 
j. non-maintenance of proper books of a((counts; 
k. receivables not supported by cheques, bills etc.; 
1. delay in getting/non availability of power; 
m. marketing problems; 
n. managerial deficiencies on the part of the entrepreneur; and 
o. procedural delays in setting up industries. 
C. Discussions with the Representatives of the State Government of Kerala on 4.1.97 
The representatives of the State Government informed the Committee that the economy 
of the State was basically agrarian, although there had been a decline in the share of 
agriculture in the State's income in the last few years. After the announcement of the New 
Industrial Policy of 1991, the State Gpvernment have followed a two pronged strategy for 
development of industry, viz. (i) provision of requisite infrastructural support for 
establishment of industries; and {ii) extension of promotional support in the form of 
monitory and fiscal incentives, training and marketing support, etc. 
2. The State was a pioneer in setting up the Kerala Industrial lnfrastructural 
Development Corporation (KINFRA) for developing and managing infrastructure for 
industrial units. The Export Promotion Industrial Park at Kochi, Apparel Park at 
Thiruvananthapuram and the Integrated Infrastructure Township at Palakkad were some of 
the ongoing projects of the Corporation. 
3. The KSIDC, the premier promotional agency for industry in the State and the KPC 
the prime lending agency for the SSI, were the two major institutions in the State sector 
which have spearheaded the growth of industry in the last two years. 
4. The Small Scale Sector, with around 1,54,818 registered units as on November 30, 
1996 continued to show a positive growth trend with an average rate of 15%, which is above 
the all India average. It is estimated that the total investment in this sector would be of tht 
order of Rs. 1,74,182 lakhs, employing approximately 8.18 lakhs persons. 
5. The State Government have been implementing various schemes viz.,­
(i) provision of subsidised technical know-how; 

23 
(ii) allotment of developed land and factory shed in industrial estates; 
(iii) provision of 50% of promoter's margin subject to a maximum of Rs. 1 lakh or 
20% of the project cost whichever is less; 
(iv) subsidy at the rate of 15% of Fixed Capital Investment upto a limit of Rs. 15 
lakhs; and 
(v) various schemes for tax exemption, concessional sales tax rates, price preference, 
special incentive for women etc. The State had also taken up the sick unit revival 
programme in a big way. 
6. The Committee was informed that the credit deposit ratio in the State is low as 
compared to other States i.e. 45%. It was mainly due to reluctance on the part of the 
financial institutions to give adequate and timely finance to the SSis. The State Government 
felt that the C.D. ratio should be raised with the co-operation of the commercial banks. 
II. KARNATAKA (STH TO 7TH JANUARY, 1997) 
A. Discussions with the Representatives of Apex Organisations of Manufacturers, 
Exporters and Workers on 5.1.97 
1. The Committee had interaction with the representatives of organisations of 
manufacturers, exporters of various items. Briefly, the small scale industries in the State 
were faced with various type of problems as enumerated below: 
' 
1. FINANCE Inadequate Working Capital. Delayed Supply. High rate of interest. 
2. MARKETING 
3. INFRASTRUC­
TURE 
4. INTERFACE 
WITH 
BUREAUCRACY 
5. CEILING 
ON 
INVESTMENT 
FOR SSI 
6. CENTRAL 
EXCISE 
7. SALES TAX 
Absence of need based finance. Insistence of Collateral Security. 
High margin money. Rigidity in repayment call. Indifferent attitude 
in lending. Absence of realistic Working Capital has curtailed 
capacity utilisation to about 45%. Large number of sick units in the 
State. 
Government Department violating all policy norms. No preference 
to local units. No waiver of EMP. Price preference not allowed. 
Purchases still based on Lowest Quotation basis. 
Bad roads and poor accessibility. Congested clusters. Uncared for 
Surroundings. Worst Power Supply. Poor Welfare facilities. Below 
Standard. Communication. Unimpressive Public Image. 
Too many inspections. Enormous form filling. Unproductive 
statutory obligations. Irksome procedure. Very high harassment 
potential. Non-availability of C. Form. 
The Present ceiling of Rs. 60 lakhs fixed many years ago. To be 
enhanced as follows: 
Tiny Units : Rs. 25 lakhs 
S.S.I. units : Rs 1.00 crore 
Ancillary : Rs. 1.25 crore 
Execution limit to be enhanced to Rs. 75 lakhs. Single tariff for Ute 
SSI products. 
All State levies to be integrated into one levy at a uniform rate of 
8% for Small Scale Industries. 

8. E.S.I. 
SCHEMES 
9. EXIT POLICY 
10. EXEMPTION 
FROM 
STATUTORY 
REGULATIONS 
24 
Hospital facilities inadequate medicines not available. Scheme 
misused. To be made optional for SSI. 
Small entrepreneUrs should find it easy to wind up their 
establishment and retire when .reguired. 
SSI's employing less than 50 persons should be totally freed from all 
statutory obligatiOns. 
2. The representatives of KASSIA sqggested that small scale industry should be given 
nomination in the Rajya Sabha in order to reflect the views, problems and aspirations 
of small industries in a realistic m~ner. 
3. The representatives of Agarbathi Manufacturers Association pointed out that 
agarbathi manufacturing units employing even one person came under the purview 
of the Factories Act. They were of the view that this industry was using neither any 
machine nor power and therefore it should be exempted from the purview of the 
Factories Act.· During 1990 the Government of Kama taka had exempted agarbathi 
industry from Section 85 of the Factories Act. It has however, again been notified 
under the said Section in the year 1995. The agarbathi industry may be exempted as 
in the past. 
4. The representatives of Consortium Electronics Industries informed the Committee 
that the procedures involved in the processing in the customs, excise and labour 
department were complicated and these needed to be simplified in the interest of the 
industry. 
5. The manufacturers of agarbathi who. were In quite a number in the State emphasized 
before the Committee for:-
(i) exemption from import duty in respect of aroma chemicals and essential oils and 
resinoids used in the agarbathis so that the rates of the Indian products are 
competitive in the international market; 
(ii) value addition norms may be reduced to 100% from the existing 600%; 
(iii) duty drawback rates should be revised upwards 'to atleast 12%; 
(iv) concrete efforts be made to grow charcoal and jigat which were becoming scarce; 
and 
(v) land may be earmarked and activities relating to growing of these items be taken 
on a warfooting. 
6. The representatives of Karnataka Small Scale Leather Industries Association raised 
the point regarding giving preference to local small scale industries upto 15% and 
waiver of tender fee and earnest money deposited in their case. They also raised the 
issue wherein the State Police Department, in violation of the government 
instructions, placed orders for belts to Uttar Pradesh instead of following the 
prevalent procedure o( buying the same from their own State. 
7. The craftsmen at the Handicraft Unit at Poompuhar, Mahabalipuram, informed the 
Committee that they were not able to get any finance for the purchase of sandal 
wood which is very costly. These craftsmen were engaged in carving show pieces out 
of sandal wood. 

25 
B. Discussions with the Representatives of Banks and Financial. Institutions on 7 .1.97 
The Committee was informed that the banks and financial institutions have been 
implementing the Nayak Committees' recommendations to ensure adequate and timely flow 
of credit. The bankers were also effectively implementing on an on-going basis the Finance 
Ministry's Seven Point Action Plan for the SSis. Referring to the major problems being 
faced by the b;:mks and financial institutions the Committee was informed that there was--
(a) lack of will and integrity on the part of entrepreneurs. Many times, units are 
established just to avail the benefits available from the Government, particularly, in 
case of small loans; 
(b) not disclosing the entire operations to the Bankers. Failure to submit the 
information/requirements like financial statements, stock statements etc. called for 
in time; 
(c) diversion of funds for acquisition of fixed assets and assets outside the business­
which hampers the day-to-day functions of the unit; and 
(d) resorting to overtrading by borrowing funds at very high cost from outside sources. 
2. Suggesting various measures for overall development of SSI sector the representatives 
of the Syndicate Bank informed the Committee that government should provide adequate 
data base for use of SSI units in order to help them in placing their investments etc. They 
also emphasized upon the need for frequent interaction by various agencies with the industry 
associations to tackle the problems. 
C. Discussions with the Representatives of State Government on 7 .1.97 
The representatives of the State Government informed the Committee that Karnataka 
was a pioneer in industrial development in the country. Development of SSis had been a 
very significant feature of Karnataka's economic development in the recent years. There 
were 1628 SSI units in the State in the year 1960 and the figure stood at 1,75,380 by the end 
of March, 1996. The largest concentration of SSI units in the State were in food and 
beverages followed by textile and wood products. Major segments of small scale industries in 
the State were electronics, beedies, agarbathi, readymade garments, bakery and roofing 
tiles. 
2. The State Government had established a Karnataka State Financial Corporation to 
provide finance to medium and small scale industries in the State. The State had also set up 
a Karnataka Industrial Investment & Development Corporation for providing finance to 
large scale industries in the State. The Government of India had approved the establishment 
of Growth Centres at Hassan, Dharwad and Raichur. Besides, Government of Karnataka 
have also proposed setting up of seven mini Growth Centres at Bijapur, Kolar, Chitradurga, 
Chikmagalur, Gadag, Nippani and Bellary. 
3. The State Government was adopting the following measures to promote industrial 
development in the State:- • 
(i) A new industrial policy for the period 1996-2001 has been announced by the 
Government of Kamataka which lays great stress on development of infrastructure 
facilities. 
(ii) Karnataka Udyog Mitra has been set up to streamline the activities of Single 
Window Agency in the State. 
(iii) An export promotion park is being set up at Whitefield near Bangalore to promote 
exports. 
(iv) A foreign investment promotion board has been set up. 

26 
(v) The State Government has announced new Textile Policy in August, 96. 
(vi) A programme called VISWA has been launched in 1991 with the objective of providing 
continuous employment to artisans. 
(vii) Subsidy scheme to tiny sector food processing industries has been announced. 
(viii) Karnataka Council for Technology Upgradation has been set up. 
ill. CHENNAI (7TH TO 9TH JANUARY, 1997) 
A. Discussion with the Representatives of Organisations of Manufacturers, Exporters and 
Workers for Small Scale Industries, (9.1.97) 
1. The SmaJi Seale Industry Management Association suggested to the Committee to 
i~crease the investment limit in respect of Tiny Units from the existing limit of Rs.5 lakhs to 
20 lakhs for the purpose of exemption from excise duty and if that is agreed to, the 
investment for small scale could then be revised upto one crore. 
2. Though the existing procedure for grant of loan or financial assistance to the Small 
Scale Industries was simple, but, credit was not flowing in adequate quantity to the SSis. 
3. SIDBI has not been functioning properly. The SSI had the hope that SIDBI would 
cater to the needs to Tiny and Small Scale Industries but, it had turned to be a mini IDBI. 
The Small Industries Management Association suggested that the SIDBI should become a 
full fledged Bank funding the Small Sca]e Industry directly with at least two branches 
opened in the cluster areas. 
4. The representatives of the Skin & Hide· Tanners and Merchants' Association 
emphasised upon streamlining the lending procedure for small scale units, particularly, in 
regard to the time frame. They also felt the requirement of having meetings between the SSI 
Department and the units with a view to find out solutions to the problems. 
5. The Tamil Nadu Metalware Manufacturers and Merchants Association pleaded 
before the Committee for abolition of excise duty on L.P.G. stove and Stainless Steel Water 
Filter manufactured by Small Scale Units. They also requested that Stainless Steel Sheets 
manufactured by SAIL should be made available to them at concessional rates. 
6. The representatives of the National Confederation of Small Industry who had also 
appeared before the Committee pleaded for:-
(a) increase in the exemption limit on excise duty upto Rs. 1.5 crores and 2 
crores, in place of the existing limit of Rs. 60 lakhs and Rs. 75 lakhs 
. respectively; • 
(b) decision on sanctioning ·loan should be taken within a period of 30 days; 
(c) there should be a uniform definition of tiny industry and industries with 
investment in plant and machinery upto Rs. 1~ lakhs should be placed in that 
category; 
(d) there was normally a complaint from the employees about the quality of health 
care being made available by the ESI and that there was a need for 
improvement; and 
(e) expert committees may be set up to look into the issue of reservation of items 
as well as to do away with the imposition of Inspector Raj on tiny and SSI 
units. 
7. The representatives of beedi industry who also appeared before the Committee 
brought to the notice of the Committee that-
(a) beedi industry had been classified as a non-priority industry resulting in 
difficulties in obtention of finance from the banks; 
(b) there were legal loopholes in allowing an excise exemption to the beedi 

27 
manufacturers in the bracket of 20 lakh beedies and that the same should be 
done away with; and 
(c) bri nging down the duty on mini cigarettes had hit the beedi industry as the 
prices of cigarette has come down to as low as 15 paise per cigarette. 
B. Discussions with the Representatives of Banks and Financial InStitutions (9.1.97) 
1. The representatives of various nationalised banks operating in the State of Tamil Nadu 
including the representatives of the Reserve Bank of India and the State financial institutions 
explained to the Committee the various schemes which were in operation as also the steps 
being taken by them for the purpose of providing finance to the Small Scale Industries in the 
State. 
2. The representatives of Indian Bank informed the Committee that they were 
implementing-
( a) Composite Loan Scheme; 
(b) National Equity Fund Scheme; 
(c) Single Window Scheme; 
(d) Scheme for SOST and Physically Handicapped Entrepreneurs; 
(e) Scheme for Wompt Entrepreneurs. 
3. The experience of'Indian Bank had been that the repayment of loan. by SSis was not 
satisfactory. The State Level Inter Institutional Committee meeting was being held at every 
quarter to discuss and redress the grievances of SSI customers. Further, the Bank had also 
set up an Advisory and Grievance Committee functioning at the Zonal offices. A few 
regional offices had also formed such committees. These committees included representatives 
from industrial associations as well. 
4. The representatives of the State Bank of India also enumerated the various schemes 
being implemented by them. They however pointed out the following problems in relation to 
lending to SSI:-
( a) Most of the SSI units are started by technocrats or by individuals who have practical 
training only in the line they are manufacturing. They have little experience or 
knowledge about other aspects of running an industry-like general administration, 
pricing, marketing, inventory management, finance management etc. Therefore, they 
tend to rely largely upon Chartered Accountants for guidance in these areas. 
Chartered Accountants are not always available for them; 
(b) The financial statements required from a SSI unit to ·assess its working capital needs 
and to determine its financial strength generally tend to be prepared with tax aspect in 
view. Financial assistance of Rs. 250 crores to Small Scale Industrialists was provided 
during the year 1995-96. A similar quantum of assistance has been provided during the 
year 1996-97 also. As of date, 30% of the total credit have been provided to Small 
Scale Industries, extended by all the Commercial Banks in Tamil Nadu. 
C. Discussions with the Representatives of the State Government of TamU Nadu (9.1.97) 
1. The Committee was informed that the Department of Industries and Commerce is 
the proud mother of several corporations like SIDO, T ANSI etc. The Department of 
Industries and Commerce implemented a variety of programmes to provide financial 
assistance and to offer guidance/service to the existing as well as new industries. These 
programmes were implemented with accent on the development and modernisation of 
industries, upgradation of technology and quality control. The package of services offered 
476/RS F-3·A 
~-., .... . '·· ... ' 

28 
were multi-dimentional and need based so that the industrial production is stepped up 
substantially every year. 
2. Rebudgetary and financial aspects were taken care of by the Government 
undertakings like Tamil Nadu. Small .It;tdustries Corporation Limited, Tamil Nadu Small 
Industries Development Corporation Ltd., State Industries Promotion Corporation of Tamil 
Nadu Limited;Tamil Nadu Industrial Investment Corporation Ltd., Tamil Nad\1 Industrial 
Development Corporation Ltd. etc. 
I 
3. In Tamil Nadu, 29 District Industries Centres were functioning which included the 
new District Industries Centres formed at Villupuram Ramasamy Padayachiar District with 
effect from 30.9.1993. \ 
4. The representatives of SIS!, Chennai while giving a brief introduction stated that 
Tamil Nadu have spearheaded the small industry movem,ent in the country. Beginning from 
a modest level of 7386 units in the mid-fifties the sector has grown considerably in size. As 
on November, 1996 there were 2, 55, 777 permanently registered SSI units and almost and 
equal number of units are provisionally registered. Estimates are that a considerable number 
of small units remain unregistered and the units almost equal to 50% of the registered units 
exist in the tiny and the artisan sector. 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
1. The Committee notes that the limits on investment in the plant and machinery of 
Rs. 60 lakhs (Rs. 75 lakhs in the case of export oriented units) for classification of an 
industry as a Small Scale Industry were fixed quite some time back. There have been a 
demand from almost every section of the Industry with whom the Committee interacted 
during the course of the study visit for suitable increase in the investment limit. ':fhe 
Committee, accordingly, recommends that the existing limits on investment may be revised 
upward to Rs. 1.00 crore (Rs. 1.25 crore in the case of export oriented units) for the 
purpose of classifying any industry as a Small Scale Industry. 
2. The Committee notes that the limits of annual turn over of Rs. 30 lakhs, Rs. 50 
lakhs and Rs. 75 lakhs for concessions in excise duty in varying degrees were determined 
quite some time back. The Committee recommends that these limits may be revised to 
Rs. 1.00 crores. Rs. 2.00 crores and Rs. 3.00 crores, respectively, taking into consideration 
the increase in the cost of production that has taken place over the period of time. 
3. The Sub-Committee notes that the problems being faced by the SSI are numerous. In 
order that the State Governments are able to pay adequate attention to these problems, the 
Sub-Committee recommends that there should be a separate Directorate or Ministry for the 
Small Scale Industry in the States. 
4. The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction over the fact that no census has taken 
place after the last census of Small Scale Industry which was held for the year 1987-88 and 
that the Central Ministry has no data to indicate the trends of manufacture of reserved and 
non-reserved items after the year 1987-88. The Committee feels that the Government would 
not be able to take proper decisions with regard to the promotion of the Small Scale 
Industry in the absence of basic statistics pertaining to these industries. It is also desirable 
that such statistics should be maintained at the State level even as had been pointed out by 
some of the bankers during the. course of the study visit. The Sub-Committee accordingly 
recommends that the Ministry of Industry sh9uld take immediate steps for undertaking the 
476/RS F-3-B 

29 
census of the Small Scale Industries and the State Governments may also be persuaded in this 
regard. 
5. The Committee notes with dissatisfaction that there is no clear cut machinery at 
present for monitoring whether the large/medium sector industries were complying with the 
requirement of export obligation of a minimum of the 75% of its production in case they 
create fresh capacity in an item in the reserved area. The Committee feels that non­
compliance of this condition would seriously affect the protective cover provided to the 
Small Scale Industry. The Committee further feels that obtention of a bond from the parties 
by the DGFT for the purpose of fulfilling the export obligation is not sufficient enough to 
ensure compliance. The Sub-Committee accordingly recommends that the compliance of the 
provisions of export obligation should be monitored more meticulously in the interest of the 
Small Scale Sector. 
6. The Sub-Committee is not convinced with the position as stated by the Ministry of 
Industry that there is no distinction between reserved and non-reserved items on the issue of 
exemption from excise duties. In the opinion of the Committee, relaxation in excise duty is a 
very valuable concession but the same has been denied to the industries engaged in the 
manufacture of reserved items. The Sub-Committee feels that the existing practice negates 
the very concept of reservation of items for the Small Scale Sector. The Sub-Committee, 
accordingly, recommends that the Government should review this aspect and see if 
concessions in excise duty can be allowed on the basis of the criteria whether an industry in 
manufacturing an item in the reserved list. 
7. The Sub-Committee notes that the laws framed by Government for the protection of 
SSis are not being properly implemented. The Sub-Committee accordingly, recommends that 
the SSis should be protected from undue competition on account of the entry of big companies 
in the sphere of activities reserved for Small Scale Sector. The Sub-Committee further 
recommends that areas reserved for SSI must be vigorously monitored against encroachment 
by MNCs and large companies and severe action must be taken against the infringing 
company. It not only harms the cause of SSI but it violates Indian laws as well. \ 
8. The Single Window Scheme deviced by Government for the convenience of SSis 
was reported not to befunctioning properly. The Sub-Committee, accordingly, recommends 
that the bottlenecks in the implementation of the Single Window System may be examined 
through interaction between the representatives of the Central and State Governments and 
suitable remedial measures be taken up. Government may consider placing the Single Window 
System effective under a separate Director appointed for SSI by the Directorate which shall , 
look into all aspects ranging from registration and setting up of the unit, providing technical, 
financial and marketing assistance and coordination between the Central ·and the State 
Departments. 
9. The Sub-Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Industry had taken 
up with the Ministry of Finance in their pre-budget proposal for allowing some fiscal 
concessions to the SSis for promotion of research and development. The Sub-Committee 
recommends that the Ministry of Industry should pursue this matter with the Ministry of 
Finance once again for the purpose of promotion of Small Scale Industry. 
10. The Sub-Committee during the course of its study visit noted that the SSis lacked 
the resources for undertaking Research and Development activities for upgradation of the 
technology at their own level. There was also a demand for provision of making facilities 
from the Government side. The Sub-Committee accordingly recommends that the 
Government should take more initiative for making available latest technology to Small Scale 
... , 

30 
Sector so that their products are cost effective and receptive in the market. Government 
should also take Immediate steps for enhancing marketing facilities to the SSI units. 
11. The Committee notes that the Coir Industry is presently unorgc-·1ised and that 80% 
of the work force engaged in Coir Industry are women. The Committee recommends that the 
technology being adopted in the Coir Industry needs to be modernised for the conv~nience of 
the workt!rs engaged in the industry majority of which are women. 
12. Most of the representatives of the manufacturers and the exporters at the places 
visited by the Sub-Committee complained that they were not getting adequate financial 
support from the Commercial Banks and the Financial Institutions. Some of them also 
complained about the higher rate of interest being charged in the country starting from 16%. 
It was brought to the notice of the Committee that the rate of interest world over was 
around 6% and therefore, the Small Scale Units in the country, particularly, the ones 
engaged in export did not have equal level playing field as compared to their competitors in 
the open market. The Sub-Committee recommends that the Ministry of Industry may take up 
these issues with the Ministry of Finance. The Sub-Committee further recommends that 
Government should charge lower rate of interest on loans advanced to Small Scale Industries. 
In addition to reducing the interest rates for the SSI units, their debt equity should be raised 
to 4:1. 
13. There·· were complaints from many quarters regarding the complicated procedure 
prescribed for sanction of loans to the Small Scale Industries.. The Sub-Committee 
accordingly recommends that the Commercial Banks should come out with a check list for the 
information of the general public for the purpose of obtaining loan so that the unnecessary 
delay in the course of complying with the procedural requirements is avoided. 
14. The position regarding repayment of loans advanced by Commercial Banks was not 
reported to be very good during the course of the Sub-Committees visit. The representatives 
of the manufacturers at Cochin proposed for an insurance scheme for the Small Scale 
Industries to cover up the risk of industrial loans given by the Commercial Banks/Financial 
Institutions in order to do away with the requirement of collateral security. The Sub· 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may examine the feasibility of this proposal because 
this could increase the now to finances to the SSis which is restricted hitherto. Banks while 
discounting the Bills of Small Scale Industries, in case of default i.e non payment by large 
company should only proceed against the larger companies. The Sub-Committee further 
recommends the Ministry of Industry to exaunine the possibility of SIDBI entering into direct 
lending as suggested by the Small Scale Industries Management Association at Madras. The 
refinancing of SSis by NABARD may however, continue. 
15. The Committee notes with dissatisfaction that the number of sick units in the States 
visited by the Sub-Committee were very large. The representatives of financial institutions at 
Bangalore were posed with the questiO.,.I) of rehabilitation of the sick units in their State to 
which no satisfactory reply came forward. The Sub-Committee recommends that the Banks 
and Financial Institutions should stimulate their efforts and should adopt a more liberal policy 
for revival of such sick units. The Sub-Committee further recommends that the 
recommendations of Naik Committee in this regard should be implemented strictly. 
16. One of the main reasons for sickness of industry which was brought to the notice of 
the Sub-Committee during the course of the discussions with the representatives of banks 
and financial institutions at Bangalore was that the SSis did not get adequate working 
capital. Although commercial banks in all the three States have stated that !hey are 
implementing the recommendations of the Naik Committee bat it is feared that the SSis are 

31 
not getting working capital at the rate of 20% of the turnover as prescribed by the Naik 
Committee. The Sub-Committee recommends that the financial Institutions and banks should 
make available the required working capital to the SSis because insumcient financial 
assistance 'is of no use either to the unit or to the rmanclal institution. 
17. The Sub-Committee was informed during the course of its visit to the Handicraft 
Unit of Poompuhar, Mahabalipuram that the craftsmen were required to buy sandalwood of 
their own and it took them 15 days to one month to carve one piece. The cost of 
sandalwood being quite high, these craftsmen were subjected to serious hardship. Keeping 
this in view, the Committee recommends that the local nationalised banks and the financial 
institutions of the States should come forward for their rescue and they should be provided 
with loans for purchase of sandalwood for short durations upto the sale of their carvings. 
18. The Committee is unhappy to note that the Small Scale Industry almost everywhere 
faces a problem on account of the non-availability/duplicate of 'C' Forms leading to 
imposition of high rate of interest by way of penalty on the entrepreneurs without any fault 
of theirs. The SSis are subjected to enormous harassment on this account. The Committee 
recommends that corruption on account of the non-avilabllity of 'C' Forms should be done 
away with Immediately by making the forms available easlly or the State Governments should 
amend their relevent rules, accordingly. 
19. The Committee notes that almost all SSI units were being troubled off and on by 
the Inspectors from different Departments both of the Central and State Governments. The 
representatives of manufacturers at Cochin pleaded before the Committee that the SSis 
which were managing their affairs of their own should atleast be left free from the unlawful 
interference of inspectors of various Government Agencies. The Sub-Committee accordingly, 
recommends that Government should take Immediate steps for doing away with tb.e unlawful 
interference of the Inspectors in the activities of the Small Scale Industries. There should be 
an end to the 'Inspector Raj.' 
20. The Sub-Committee during the course of, the study visit noted that industry as a 
whole and the Small Scale Industry in particular are faced with power shortage. The· 
Committee was informed that there was a 30% power cut in Kerala for the industrial sector. 
The power situation was not satisfactory even in Kamataka and Tamil Nadu. In the view of 
the Sub-Committee, power is one .of the most important input in industrial production and it 
is not possible for the small scale units to go in for captive power generation. The larger 
units may, of course, manage to arrange for captive p.>wer generation but, for both category 
of manufacturers, products do not remain cost effective. The Sub-Committee accordingly 
recommends that the Ministry of Industry, realising of importance of power in the industrial 
sector, should immediately coordinate with the Central Ministry of Power so that the short 
term as well as the long term measures could be taken to meet the requirement of power of 
the Small Scale Sector. 
21. The Sub-Committee during the course of its study visit noted that the SSis have not 
been provided with adequate infrastructure facilities like roads, drainage, sanitation, 
surrounding cleanlines, etc. The Sub-Committee accordingly recoliunends that- ~e Central 
and the State Governments should take immediate steps tor the development of· such 
infrastructural facilities for the SSis. 
22. Many of the SSis visited by the Sub-Committee, complained .about non-availability 
of raw materials at reasonable prices and there was also a demand of subsidy from certain 
category of SSis. An example in this regard is Aggarbatti Industry at Kamataka which 
brought to the notice of the Sub-Committee the imminent threat of shortage of bamboo 
..... 

32 
sticks resulting in the closure of the industry. They also demanded either a quota or 
concession in excise duty on perfumes used for Aggarbatti Industries. The Sub-Committee 
accordingly recommends that Government should take immediate steps to ensure that raw 
material is available to the SSis at subsidised rates and quota should be allocated wherever 
required. The Sub-Committee further recommends that SSis engaged in the areas of 
educatioD,_.&n-aud--defence should. ~.aUowed -special facUitie~. 
23. The Sub-Committee during the course of its study visit noted that the workers 
engaged in the SSis were not provided with the basic amenities like drinking water, toilet 
facilities, accommodation, creche facilities, etc. The Sub-Committee recommends that 
Government should pay more attention towards the implementation of rules and regulations 
in this regard •. 
24. The Sub-Committee is constrained to note that the ESI contribution deducted from 
the salary of the workers in the SSis is not being utilised for their benefit. The health 
services provided under the ESI being far from satisfactory, the workers are compelled to go 
in for private treatment which they get easily and without any loss of salary. The Sub· 
Committee accordingly recommends that (a) the amolJnt to be spent by Government on the 
health care of the workers should be given directly to the workers in any suitable form like 
medic~ allowance etc. so that they are able to derive an actual benefit: and (b) steps may be 
taken to meet expenditure on education of the children of employees of SSI Units and 
allowapce like Children Education Allowance should be given to them. The Sub-Committee 
further recommends that industries with less than SO workers should be allowed to opt either 
for ESJC or Workmen Compensation with medical benefit through private insurance. 
25. Various types of problems faced by the Small Scale Industries were brought to the 
notice Qf the Sub-Committee during the course of the study visit. Many of these problems 
had a b~aring on the State Government. Some of the problems had a bearing on the Central 
Government also. To name a few, the Aggarbatti Manufacturers resented the notification of 
Aggarbatti Industry under section 85 of the Factories Act. Another example is that of the 
problem posed by the Leather Manufacturers Association at Bangalore complaining that the 
State Government was not giving preference to their product and were placing orders for 
supply of leather belts to U.P. Government. Yet another example in this regard is the 
grievance of manufacturers of beedi regarding categorisation of beedi industry as a non­
priority industry. It was brought to the notice of the Committee that in the Agra-Ferozabad 
region, G;,ts was supplied to the Small Scale Industries @ Rs. 5100-55()(Y-per cubic meter as 
compared to the rate of Rs. 1800-35()()1.. per cubic meter at which it is being supplied in 
other part~ of the country. The Sub-Committee is not satisfied with this position and it 
strongly recommends that the supply of gas to the SSis at Agra-Ferozabad areas may be made 
~t the same rate at which.it is being supplied to SSis in other parts of the country. A women 
entrepreneur at Bangalore engaged in the dealing of note books for the school children 
pointed out that duty on the note books should be done away with. These are serious 
problems in the view of the Sub-Committee which should be redressed urgently. 
26. The Sub-Committee, however, feels that multiple agencies are involved for the 
redressal <;>f these problems. In order to redress these grievances, the Sub-Committee 
recommen4s that there should be a constant interaction between the Industries Department of 
Central and State Governments. The representatives of the Finance Department of the 
Central Government and the State Governments should also be associated in these meetings 
because mo$t of the problems of Small Scale Industry have a financial bearing also. The Sub­
Committee further. recommends that there should be a periodic Secretary level meetings of the 
Industries ~partment of States and the Central Government in which the representatives of 

33 
the Finance Department of the Central and State Governments be also present. The Ministry 
of industry should also consider the possibility of having Minister level meetings between the 
Central and the State Governnl~nts at reasonable intervals. The Sub-Committee feels that this 
would go a long way in redressing the grievances of the Small Scale Industry. 
27. The Sub-Committee recommends that Goveriunent should interact with the concerned 
SSis every three months for implementation and follow lip-or -the ·recommenaaUons or· the 
Sub-Committee. 
28. The Sub-Committee feels that the Small Scale entrepreneurs are doing a wonderful 
job for the country and every effort should be made to encourage them. They are providing 
large number of jobs to the people of the country. The Sub-Committee, accordingly, 
recommends that Government should institute a President's Award for the best SSI unit on 
the criteria of quality and production. 
Summary of the Recommendations 
The recommendations of the Sub-Committee are summarised as follows: 
(1) the existing limits on investment in plant and machinery may be revised upward to 
Rs. 1.00 crore (Rs. 1.25 crores in the case of export oriented units) for the purpose 
of classifying any industry as a Small Scale Industry. 
(2) The Committee notes that the limits of annual turn over of Rs. 30 lakhs, Rs. 50 
lakhs and Rs. 75 lakhs for concessions in excise duty in varying degrees were 
determined quite some time back. the Committee recommends that these limits 
may be revised to Rs. 1.00 crore, Rs. 2.00 crores and Rs. 3.00 crores, respectively, 
taking into consideration the increase in the cost of production that has taken place 
over the period of time. 
(3) There should be a separate Directorate or Ministry for the Small Scale Industry in 
the States. 
( 4) the Ministry of Industry should take immediate steps for undertaking the census of 
the Small Scale Industries and the State Governments may also be persuaded in 
this regard. 
(5) The Compliance on the provisions of export obligation should be monitored more 
meticulously in the interest of the Small Scale Sector. 
( 6) The Sub-Committee is not convinced with the position as stated by the Ministry of 
Industry that there is no distinction between reserved and non-reserved items on 
the issue of exemption from excise duties. In the opinion of the Committee, 
relaxation in excise duty is a very valuable concession but the same bas been denied 
to the industries engaged in the manufacture of reserved items. The Sub­
Committee feels that the existing practice negates the very concept of reservation of 
items. for the Small Scale Sector. The Sub-Committee, accordingly, recommends 
that the Government should review this aspect and see if concessions in excise duty 
can be allowed on the basis of the criteria whether an industry is manufacturing an 
item in the reserved list. 
(7) The Sub-Committee further notes that the laws framed by Government for the 
protection of SSis are not being properly implemented. The Sub-Committee, 
accordingly, recommends that the SSis should be protected from undue 
comp,tition on account of the entry of big companies in the sphere of activities 
reserved for small scale sector. The Sub-Committee further recommends that areas 
reserved for SSI must be vigorously monitored against encroachment by MNCs and 
large companies and severe action must be taken against the infringing company. It 
not only harms the cause of SSI but it violates Indian laws as well. 

34 
(8) The botOenecks in the implementation of the Single Window System may be examined 
throop Interaction between the representatives of the Central and State Governments 
and suitable remedial measures be taken up. Government may consider placing the 
Single Window System effective under a separate Director appointed for SSI by the \ 
Directorate which shaD look Into all aspects ranging from registration and setting up 
of the unit, providing teclmieal, financial and marketing assistance and coordination 
between the Central and the State Departments. 
(9) The ·sub-Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Industry had taken up 
with the Ministry of Finance in their pre-budget proposal for allowing some fiscal 
~ncessions to the SSis for promotion of reSearch and development. The Sub- · 
COmmittee recommends U.at the Ministry of Industry should pursue this matter with 
the Ministry of Finance once again for the purpose of promotion of Small Scale 
lndustnr. 
(10) Government should take more initiative for making available latest technology to 
small scale sector so that their products are cost effective and receptive in the market. 
Government should also take immediate steps for providing marketing taenities to 
the SSI units. 
(11) The Committee recommends that the technology being adopted in the coir industry 
needs to be modernised for the convenience of the workers engaged in the industry, 
80%. of which are women. 
(12) The Ministry of Industry may take up the ma~ter regarding problems being faced by 
SSis in getting adequate financial support from commercial banks/financial 
Institution with the Ministry of Finance. 
The Government should charge lower rate of interest on loans advanced to small 
scale Industries in addition to reducing the Interest rates for the SSI units, their debt 
equity should be raised to 4:1. 
(13) There were complaints from many quarters regarding the complicated procedure 
prescribed for sanction of loans to the Small Scale Industries. The Sub-Committee, 
accordingly, recommends that the Commercial Banks should come out with a check 
list for the Information of the general public for the purpose of obtaining loan so that 
the unnecessary delay In the course of complying with the procedural requirements is 
avoided. 
(14) The Ministry may examine the feasibnity of the prdposal of an Insurance scheme for 
the SSis to cover up the risk of Industrial loans given by commercial banks/rmancial 
institutions in order to do away with the requirement of collateral security because 
this could increase the Dow of rmances to the SSis which is restricted hitherto Banks 
while discounting the BOis of Small Scale Industries in case of default i.e. non 
payment by large company should only proceed against the large companies. The 
Sub-Committee further recommends the Ministry of Industry to examine the 
possibnity of SIDBI entering into direct lending as suggested by the Small Scale 
Industries Management Association at Madras. The refinancing of SSis by NABARD 
may however, continue. 
(15) The Banks and Financial Institutions should stimulate their efforts and should adopt 
a more liberal policy for revival of such sick units. The Sub-Committee further 
recommends that the recommendations of Naik Committee in this regard should be 
implemented strictly. · 
(16) The financial institutions and banks should make available ~~-;quired working 
capital to ~e SSis because insumcient financial assistance is of'i'IP Us, either to the 
unit or to the financial institution. ' 
. . 

35 
(17) The Sub-Committee was informed during the course of its visit to the Handicraft 
Unit of Poompuhar, Mahabalipuram that the craftsmen were required to buy 
sandalwood of their own and it took them 15 days to one month to carve one 
piece. The cost of sandalwood being quite high, these craftsmen were subjected to 
serious hardship. Keeping this in view, the Committee recommends that the lo~all 
nationalised banks and the financial institutions of the States should come forward 
for their rescue and they should be provided with loans for purchase of 
sandalwood for short durations upto the sale of their carvings. 
(18) Corruption on account of the non-availabDity of 'C' Forms should be done away 
with immediately be making the forms available easily or the State Governments 
should amend their relevent rules accordingly. 
(19) The Government should take immediate steps for doing away with the unlawful 
interference of the Inspectors in the activities of the Small Scale Industries. There 
should be an end to the 'Inspector Raj'. 
(20) The Ministry of Industry, realising of importance of power in the industrial 
sector, should immecliately coordinate with the Central Ministry of Power so that 
the short term as well as the long term measures could be taken to meet the 
requirement of power of the Small Scale Sector. 
{21) The Sub-Committee during the course of its study visit, noted that the SSis have 
not been provid,ed with adequate infrastructure facilities like roads, drainage, 
sanitation, surrounding cleanliness, etc. The Sub-Committee accordingly, 
recommends that the Central and the State Governments should take immediate 
steps for the development of such infrastructural facDities for the SSis. 
(22) The Government should take immediate steps to ensure that raw material is 
available to the SSis at subsidised rates and quota should be allocated wherever 
required. The Sub-Committee further recoou;nends that SSis engaged in the areas 
of education, art and defence should be allowed special facilities. 
(23) The Sub-Committee during the course of its study visit noted that the workers 
engaged in the SSis were not provided with the basic amenities like drinking 
water, toilet facilities, accommodation, creche facilities, etc. The Sub-Committee 
recommends that Government should pay more attention towards the 
implementation of rules and regulations in this regard. 
(24) The amount to be spent by Government on the health care of the workers should 
be .given directly to the workers in any suitable form like medical allowance etc. 
so that they are able to derive an actual benefit; and (b) steps may be ·taken to 
meet expenditure on education of the children of employees of SSI units and 
allowance like Chil(,lren Education Allowance should be given to them. 
(25) The supply of gas to the SSis at Agra-Ferozabad areas may be made at the same 
rate at which it is being supplied to SSis in other parts of the country. 
(26) The Sub-Committee, however, feels that multiple agencies are involved for the 
redressal of these problems. In order to redress these grievances, the Sub­
Committee recommends that there should be a constant interaction between the 
Industries Department of Central and State Governments. The representatives of 
the Finance Department of the Central Government and the State Governments 
should also be associated in these meetings because most of the problems of Small 

36 
Scale Industry have a financial bearing also. The Sub-Committee further 
recommends that there should be a periodic Secretary level meetings of the 
Industries Department of States and the Central Government in which the 
representatives of the Finance Department of the Central and State Governments 
be also present. The Ministry of Industry should also consider the posslbillty of 
having Minist'r level meetings between the Central and the State Governments at 
reasonable intervals. The Sub-Committee feels that this would go a long way in 
redressing the grievances of the Small St!ale Industry. 
(27) The Government should Interact with the concerned SSis every three months for 
implementation and follow up of the r4!Commendatioqs of the Sub-Committee. 
(28) The Government should institute a President,s Award for the best SSI unit on the 
criteria of quaiJfy and production. 

ANNEXURE-I 
QUESTIONNAIRE FOR SUB-COMMITTEE-I (OF DEPARTMENT 
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY) ON 
SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES 
ANSWER TO THE QUESTIONNAIRE SUPPLIED 
Reservation Policy 
1. 
Questions 
What are the categories and types of 
items which have been reserved 
exclusively for manufacture in the Small 
Scale Sector? It has been stated that, at 
present, there are 836 sueh: items. 
37 
Answers 
. At present, 836 items are reserved for 
production in the small sacle sector. 
Number of items falling under each 
category of product is indicated 
below:-
1. Food & Allied Industries 19 
2. Textile products including 
hosiery 22 
3. Wood and wood products 14 
4. Paper products 31 
~. Leather and leather 
' products including 
footwear 18 
6. Rubber products 22 
7. Plastic products 66 
8. Chemical and chemical 
products 182 
9. Glass and ceramics 27 
'10. Mechanical Engineering 201 
11. Electrical Machines, 
appliances, etc. 48 
12. Electronic equipment and 
components 9 
13. Transport equipment, auto 
parts, bicycle parts 102 
14. Miscellaneous (sports 
goods, stationery items, 
etc.) 75 

38 
Questions 
2. What is the criterion for calling an 
industry a 'Small Scale Industry'? 
Whether this criteria is uniform for all 
the items or different criteria have been 
fixed for different categories of items. 
3. Reserved Items (836) constitutes about 
36% of the total items (7500). But, 
reserved items account only for 11 o/o of 
the total items manufactured in the 
small scale sector. It means that 89% of 
the products manufactured by small 
scale industries are under non-reserved 
category? Can it be said that SSis are 
drifting from reserved items to non­
reserved ones. 
4. Whether there has been an increase in 
the production by the small scale 
industries during the past 5 years. If so, 
what has been the trend in the 
manufacture of (i) reserved items; 
(ii) non-reserved items in the small scale 
5. 
· sector. Whether the trend has been 
towards deviation from the reserved 
item to the non-reserved ones in the 
small scale · sector? 
It has been stated that creation of fresh 
capacity in the- large/medium sector in 
reserved areas is permitted only if the 
units agree to export obligation of a 
minimum of 75% of its production. 
Whether large/medhim sector industries 
have resorted to this course of action. If 
so, a few examples in that regard. What 
is the machinery in place to ensure that 
the units availing of this facility, do 
infact fulfil the obligation. 
Answers 
Criteria for calling an industry a small 
scale industry is investment in plant & 
machinery which is, at present, upto 
Rs. 60 lakhs. In the case of ancillary 
and export oriented SSI units, it is upto 
Rs. 75 lakhs. This criteria is uniform for 
all the items. 
In April 1967, only 47 items were 
reserved for small scale sector which 
was increased upto 504 items in April 
1978 after their conversion into National 
Industrial Oassification (NIC) code. 
The number increased to 807 items in 
1978 itself. Then it increased to 873 
items in· October 1984. There was some 
decline in the number thereafter and it 
came down to 835 in March 1989 and 
increased to 836 in July 1989 and for 
the last seven years it is stagnant at 836. 
Hence, it is not correct to say that SSis 
are drifting from reserved items to non­
reserved items. 
The last Census of Small Scale 
Industries was held for the year 1987-
88. This office has no data to indicate 
the trend of the manufacture of 
reserved items and non-reserved items 
separately after 1987-88. 
No clearcut machinery, at present, 
exists for monitoring this aspect. It is 
because while the licence is granted by 
the Department of Industrial Policy & 
Promotion, exports are regulated by 
Ministry of Commerce and the item 
might fall under the administrative 
control of some other Ministry like 
Petroleum, Chemicals, Food Processing, 
Electronics, Textiles, etc. Action is 
taken only when some complaints are 

6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
39 
Questions 
Whether the protection/ concessions are 
available only in those small scale 
industries which are engaged in the 
manufacture of reserved items and not 
to the ones which are engaged in 
manufacture of non-reserved items. 
It has been stated by the Ministry ·that 
the reservation policy was initiated in 
1967 but it was introduced in a 
"meaningful" way only in 1979-80. 
What is the import of the word 
"meaningful"? 
What are the concessions available to 
SSis engaged in export of (i) reserved 
items; (ii) non-reserved items. Whether 
there is any distinction between the 
two? 
What is the total numbe( of reserved 
items which are not being manufactured 
in the small scale sector? In that case 
who are manufacturing these items? Is 
it the medium/large scale industries? 
Answers 
received. The Department of Industrial 
Policy & Promotion has observed that 
the action in this case can be taken only 
by the administrative Ministry. On 
persistence pressure by this department, 
DGFf has now started taking a bond 
from the parties who manufacture 
reserved items and are also exporting to 
ensure that they fulfil export obligation. 
There is no protection or concession 
meant only for reserved items or those 
which are non-reserved. These are 
universally applicable to all items 
manufactured in the small scale sector. 
Reservation was introduced in a 
meaningful way only in 1979-80 because 
from 1967 to 1976 the number of 
reserved items raised between 47 to 
180. It was only 1978-79 when the 
number of items increased to 807. 
Hence, the term "meaningful" is used in 
the context of reserving substantial 
number of items. for small scale sector. 
There are no separate concessions to 
SSI units engaged in exports of reserved 
and non-reserved items. There is no 
distinction between two. 
According to 2nd All India Census of 
Registered SSI Units held for the year 
1987-88, 233 items are not being 
manufactured in the small scale sector. 
However, this conclusion is not correct 
in view of the following:- ·. 
(i) The Department tried to verify 
from the State Government and 
SSI Associations and most of the 
State Governments and SSI 
Associations informed that quite a 
large number of these items are 
being manufactured. 
(ii) The SSI Census was only for 
registered units and not for 
unregistered units so if these items 
are being manufactured by the 

40 
Questions 
10. What is the procedure for a SSI to avail 
of the concessions/benefit admissible to 
it. Whether any complaints have .been 
received in this regard? 
11. What are the 10 to 15 items from the 
reserved list which the medium/large 
scale industries want to take out from 
the existing reserved list. Whether the 
small scale industries are opposed to 
this. · 
Answers 
unregistered units then definitely 
census of registered units would 
not reveal it. 
(iii) Census data indicated non-
manufacture of many items also 
because of the fact that in the 
registration certificate issued by the 
Directorate of Industries only 
broad heading of the item being 
manufactured are mentioned and 
not the specific products in many 
cases. For example, it may say, 
Plastic Consumer Items and may 
not say Plastic Mug or Soap Cases, 
etc. separately. Further, these are 
·mostly the low value items such as, 
Tent Polls, Toilet Paper, Ice bag 
Rubber, Buckets, Umbrella 
Frames, Babies' bath tubs, Nail 
Puller, Safety Pins, etc. This office 
has not information if any large 
scale unit is manufacturing these 
items. 
Development of SSI is Primarily the 
responsibility of State Government and 
they provide benefits in terms of plots, 
sheds, sales tax rebate, etc. The State 
Government themselves decide the 
procedure for granting the concessions/ 
benefits. Ministry of Finance 
administers the excise duty exemption 
and they have formulated their own 
procedure for excise duties. Complaints 
whenever received regarding procedural 
difficulties in raising loan or availing 
excise exemption are taken up with the 
concerned department/authorities. 
Some of the items for which demand 
has been made by medium ana large 
scale industries for dereservation are Ice 
cream, bread, biscuits, confectionary, 
poultry feed, rice milling, leather foot 
wear, wooden furniture, acrylic sheets, 
toys, etc. small scale industry 
associations through their 
representations have been approaching 
against dereservation. 

41 
Questions 
12. The new industrial policy is for 
openness and competition. Whether 
Government propose to continue to 
extend the concessions to the small 
scale industries engaged manufacturer 
of both reserved and non-reserved 
items. 
• 
13. Whether the policy of reservation items 
is providing any protection/help to SSis 
when the trend is of increase in the 
production of non-reserved item in the 
small scale sector as compared to the 
reserved ones. 
14. Out of the 34 extreme focussed 
products for export, 12 are reserved for 
small scale sector. Whether there is a 
demand from large/medium scale 
industries for restricting this list? 
15. Whether certain discrepancies have 
been brought to the Governments 
notice regarding placement of similar 
type of items in reserved/non-reserved 
categories like (i) spoon/forks and 
cutlery (ii) washing machine/automatic 
washing machine and (iii) cupboard/ 
storewell? 
16. Whether it is a fact that MNCs are 
· engaged in the manufacture of reserved 
item. If so, how they have been 
permitted? Whether SSis face threat 
from MNCs? 
Answers 
Government has constituted an "Expert 
Committee on Small Enterprises" under 
the chairmanship of Dr. Abid Hussain, 
former Member of Planning 
Commission to review the policies and 
programmes for small and medium 
enterprises and to suggest measures for 
facilitating the growth of viable and 
efficient enterprises that can adjust to 
technological change and remain 
internationally competitive. The report 
of the Committee is expected during the 
current financial year. Any decision on 
this issue will be taken only after the 
receipt and examination of the report. 
When the number of reserved items 
(836) are only 11.3% of the total 
(7500), they account for 36% of the 
total number of working units and 
28.3% of production. As such, the 
policy of protection has helped in 
creating large number of entrepreneurs, 
employment and has been contributing 
significantly to production. 
This department has not received any 
representation for restricting this list of 
reserved items out of the list of 34 
extreme focussed products. 
Spoon/forks-cutlery, washing machine 
(non-programmable type) and storage 
cupboard are reserved for small scale 
sector. There is no discrepancy brought 
to our notice. 
MNCs or any large scale unit can 
manufacture reserved items only when 
they receive the licence and also agree 
to abide by the export obligation of 
75%. There may also be some large/ 

42 
Questions 
17. Whether Government are aware of the 
problem of availability of 'C' form for 
the SSis? 
18. There is general complaint that items 
manufactured by the SSI units 
particularly electrical goods are of poor 
quality. Whether it is obligatory on the 
point of SSis to adhere to the lSI 
specification? 
19. The extent to which readymade 
garments export has increased direction­
wise to non-quota countries during last 
three years? 
Answers 
multi-national companies who were 
manufacturing these items before the 
introdqction of reservation of that item 
are allowed to manufacture the same 
under COB licence. If any unit violates 
this policy, legal action against the unit 
is initiated by the concerned 
administrative Ministry/Department. 
The violation is punishable under 
Section 24 of Industrial (Development 
& Regulation) Act, 1951. 
No. complaints have been received 
relating to the non-availability of 'C' 
form from the SSI units. 
Yes, there ha'9e been complaints of 
manufacture of sub-standard electrical 
goods by SSI units. As per the quality 
control orders for some of the electrical 
appliances enforced by the government, 
it is obligatory for manufacturers 
including the SSis to adhere to the 
relevant lSI specifications. It is given to 
understand that many SSI units are not 
complying with the requirements as per 
the quality control orders. 
Export of Readymade Glll'IIJeaf6 during tiJe Jut 
three years: 
Year Number Value out of 
(lakh) (Rs. which &hart 
crores) of non-
quota 
countries 
(%) 
1993 9052 10668 20.4 
1994 9962 13825.8 22.2* 
1995 10602 14306 23.8* 
• Till Jan.-Sept. 

43 
Questions 
20. It is proposed to have a study with 
regard to the status of units in large and 
medium scale sector in leather footwear 
industry. The study is to include the 
impact on the small scale sector in the 
event of the dereservation of the item. 
The Ministry have stated In their 
background note that these matters 
are proposed to be studied in detail in 
the study to be given to liM, 
Ahmedabad on the . strength and 
weaknesses of small scale sector. 
Whether the study has been evaluated 
to liM and if not since what are the 
constraints in this regard. 
21. A view has been expressed that it would 
be appropriate if a study is undertaken 
to find out how the policy of reservation 
has come in the way of export 
promotion in respect of the 12 items 
which are reserved for the SSI sector. 
Whether such a study has been 
undertaken and if not, the reasons 
therefor? 
22. What is the implication of the Ministry's 
statement that due to the delicensing of 
the industrial sector and the reduction 
in the rates of tariff and taxes, the 
margin of protection to SSI sector has 
drastically come down. 
476/RS f..-.4-A 
Answers 
Share of Non-Quota Countries 
(Percentage) 
Countries 1993 1994* 1995* 
U.A.E. 4.76 3.52 2.56 
Japan 3.41 3.2Q 3.95 
Switzerland 3.41 2.33 2.52 
C.I.S. 4.94 4.99 3.70 
Australia 1.39 1.16 1.61 
"Till Jan-Sept. 
A. study on the strength and weaknesses 
of small scale sector has been entrusted 
to liM, Ahmedabad. The report is 
expected by June 1997. 
Though there has been no demand for 
such a study from any comer, it is 
planned to undertake this study in the 
next financial year. 
De-licensing of industrial sector has 
opened up the sector (whether large, 
medium or small) for setting up units 
for manufacture of delicensed items. 
Now, they are not required to obtain 
any permission or licence excepting 
some items reserved for Government or 
SSI sector. As a result, any large unit 
can manufacture any item and thus can 
pose a threat/competition to the units 
producing same items in the small 
sector. The protection zone has been 
narrowed by reduction of tariffs, SSI 
units are eligible for full excise 

44 
Questions 
23. As per the Second All India Census of 
Small Scale Units, 233 reserved items 
are not being manufactured in the 
registered units. When was this census 
undertaken? 
Taxation Policy 
1. What are the concessions in (i) Excise 
duty (ii) Import duty (iii) Sales Tax to 
SSis engaged in manufacture of (a) 
reserved items (b) non-reserved items. 
Whether there is any distinction in the 
concession for the two categories of 
SSis. 
Answers 
exemption, i.e., Rs. 30 lakhs and 
concessional exemption upto Rs. 75 
lakhs. In addition, there were nil rate of 
duty on many items upto 1994-95 which 
were withdrawn for large number of 
items. Higher the excise duty on any 
item large is the zone of protection. 
Now if the duty has been reduced from 
say 80% earlier to 30% now this zone 
of protection has been reduced. 
Further, large scale units avail 
MODV AT and the effective rate of 
excise duty paid by the large scale 
sector is less. SSI sector cannot avail 
MODVAT because of excise 
exemption, procurement of inputs from 
retail market and inability to produce 
necessary documents. 
The 2nd All India Census of Registered 
Small Scale Units was held in the year 
1991 for the base year 1987-88. 
Concessions in excise duty are full 
exemption upto annual turnover of Rs. 
30 lakhs, 10% less than the normal duty 
subject to the minimum of 5 percentage 
points between Rs. 30 lakhs to Rs. 50 
lakhs and 5 percentage less than normal 
duty subject to the minimum of 5% 
upto a turnover of Rs. 75 lakhs. 
There is no concession to the SSI units 
available on import duty. 
Sales tax concessions are provided by 
the State Governments. However, there 
is practically no reduction in duty. The 
State Governments mostly provide sales 
tax loan or deferment of sales tax 
payment etc. The quantum and nature 
of these concessions varies from State to 
State. 
None of the above mentioned three 
fiscal concessions make any distinction 

45 
Questions 
2. What is the definition of SSI for the 
purpose of availing various tax 
concessions? 
3. Excise exemption is one of the major 
concessions for SSis and there were last 
determined 1986-87 by when 
Government would be. able to revise the 
excise exemption limit keeping in view 
the rise of inflation and cost of inputs? 
4. What is the position of exemption from 
excise duty with regard to reserved 
items? 
5. Whether cigarette lighters have been 
exempted from excise duty and gas 
stove lighters have not been given 
exemption. What are the reasons 
therefor? 
Answers 
between reserved and non-reserved 
items. 
For the excise exemption scheme the 
criteria is not the identification of unit 
in terms of investment in plant & 
machinery but annual turnover. Any 
unit whose annual turnover is less than 
Rs. 300 lakhs whether registered or 
unregistered are entitled for excise 
exemption. 
The Deptt. of SSI&ARI has been 
requesting Ministry of Finance for 
enhancement of SSI exemption ceiling 
for the last four years on the ground of 
cost escalation after 1986-87 and 
inflation but the same has not been 
accepted by Ministry of Finance 
because:-
(i) Only 2% of the 27 lakh SSI units 
are registered with Central Excise 
authorities . 
. (ii) 90% of the SSI units have turnover 
less than Rs. 30 lakhs and all such 
units are exempted from excise 
duty. 
(iii) Loss of excise revenue of large 
magnitude cannot be afforded 
when there is a big budget deficit. 
There is no distinction between reserved 
and non-reserved items on the issue of 
exemption from excise duty. 
Exempting an item from excise duty 
comes under the administrative purview 
of Ministry of Finance. A copy of this 
question ~as been sent to Deptt. of 
Revenue, ··~Ministry of Finance to 
ascertain the reasons for non-grant of 
excise exemption to Gas Stove Lighters. 

46 
Questions 
6. What are the main items in respect of 
which demand for exemption is pending 
from the SSI units and what action has 
been· taken in this regard? 
7. Whether any special concessions are 
available to SSls in comparison to 
medium1arge industries in direct taxes. 
8. Whether any concessions are existinw 
contemglated for SSis for the purpose 
at promotion of Research & 
Development? 
9. What is the justification for withdrawal 
of the scheme meant for industrial units 
in rural and backward areas under 
Section 80 HH and 80 HHA of the 
Income Tax Act with effect from 1st 
April, 1990 and what action is being 
taken to review the scheme under 
Section 80 lA so that SSis are able to 
avail the benefit of the. scheme. 
10. Government have own a fund modified 
its procedures and at present (i) SSis 
manufacturing goods bearing others 
brand names do not get any excise 
exemption; (ii) buyers of goods from 
SSis do not get any incentives to buy 
any inputs and raw materials from SSis; 
and (iii) all excisable items are not 
covered under the excise exemption 
scheme. Does this not imply that 
Government" are shrinking the 
incentives for SSis? 
Answers 
The main items for which demand for 
exci_se exemption is pending frOlll. the 
SSI units are Wrist watches, 
Polyurethene, Sandal wood oil and 
Computer components. We have been 
including these items in our pre-budget 
proposal being sent to Ministry of 
Finance every year for the last four 
years. We shall be again including these 
items for excise exemption in our pre­
budget proposal for 1997-98. 
No special concessions are available to 
SSis in comparison to medium1arge 
industries in direct taxes. 
Last year, we had taken up this matter 
with Ministry of Finance in our pre­
budget proposal. However, there has 
been no positive response. We shall be 
taking up this matter again. 
The schemes of direct tax concession to 
industrial units in rural and backward 
areas for the SSI units were applicable 
only upto March 1990. The Government 
did not decide to extend it beyond that 
date since similar exemptions are . now 
available under Section 80 lA. ·This 
Section provides for five year tax 
holiday for the units in the specified 
backward areas. 
Yes, it means that the fiscal benefit 
available to SSI units are shrinking that 
is why this department has been taking 
this issue with Ministry of Finance 
through pre-budget proposals. 
\\\ 

47 
Questions 
11. What is Government's view regarding 
adoption of simplified and unified 
taxation system for SSis as in the case 
of shopkeepers who are to pay a tax of 
Rs. 140(}1.. p.a.? 
12. What are the constraints regarding 
implementation of Chellaih Committee's 
recommendations on excise exemption? 
Sickness in small scale Industries 
1. Whether the number of sick industrial 
units is on an increase during the past 5 
years? If so, the reasons of failure to 
contain this trend. 
Answers 
This department has taken up this 
matter with Ministry of Finance to allow 
flat rate of Income Tax as in the case of 
shopkeepers for the tiny units, i.e., for 
those units whose investment in plant-&-~ 
machinery is less than Rs. 5 lakhs. The 
flat rate, however, will not be justifiable 
in respect of large SSI units since their 
turnover and consequent profit may be 
very high and it may be difficult to fix a 
flat tax. 
The matter comes under the 
administrative purview of Ministry of 
Finance. A copy of the question has 
been forwarded to them. 
The percentage of sick SSI units as 
compared to borrowal accounts has 
been hovering between 7% to 8.5% 
during the last five years with marginal 
variation. The number of sick industrial 
units has not been showing increase 
during the last five years as could be 
seen from the table below:-
March 1991 
March 1992 
March 1993 
March 1994 
March 1995 
No. of No of %age 
SSI sick 
Accovnts SSis 
with 
banks 
(Iakhs) 
31.72 2.21 
29.23 2.45 
30.40 2.38 
30.19 2.56 
32.25 2.69 
6.96 
8.38 
7.82 
8.48 
8.34 
,,... 
Less than 10% of units being sick cannot be 
considered very high. As per the report of Nayak 
Committee appointed by RBI 
(1991-92), sickness stems mainly from various 
internal weaknesses such as 

48 
Questions 
2. There are various schemes in operation 
for containing and removal of sickness in 
small scale industries. Whether the small 
scale industries are getting due benefit of 
the schemes and if not, what are the 
bottlenecks in the way and what 
corrective action Government 
contemplates in this regard. 
3. SSI sector has been stated to suffer from certain 
di$advantages which arise from factors like poor 
technology information. Whether the situation 
can to a certain extent be remedied through a 
consortium approach. 
Marketing of SSI Products 
1. There are a number of schemes of 
Central and State Government for the 
purpose of promoting sale of products 
of small scale industries. What is the 
extent to which the benefit of these 
schemes is being availed by the SSis. 
Answers 
limited financial resources, lack of 
organisational, financial and managerial 
skill and expertise. The external factors 
causing siclmess relate to difficulty in 
availability of raw materials and other 
inputs including power, marketing 
difficulties, delayed and inadequate 
credit, labour problem, faulty appraisal 
of projects, dissension among partners, 
etc. 
State Level Inter-Institutional Committee 
(SLIIC) set up by RBI in all States under 
the Chairmanship of Secretary (Industry) 
looks after the problem of sickness of SSI 
units. The reports are that at times this 
Committee has not been meeting 
regularly. Central Government has urged 
upon the States to hold regular meetings. 
The units identified as potentially viable 
are put under nursing programme. 
According to . RBI, the position in this 
regard is as under:-
Potentially viable sick 
units 
March 1991 
March 1992 
March 1993 
March 1994 
March 1995 
16,140 
19,210 
21,649 
16,580 
15,539 
Those put 
under 
nursing 
programme 
13,224 
13,289 
12,218 
11,378 
10,371 
SSI units are scattered all over the country and 
they produce a large variety of items, i.e, over 
7500. As such a consortium approach may not 
help the entire SSI sector. However, this strategy 
could be adopted for some important clusters. 
Marketing is primarily an enterpreneurs 
function. In a liberalised economy of 
ours a secure and a guaranteed market 
cannot be provided to entrepreneur 
by the State. Nevertheless, the 
Government is helping SSI sector 
m market promotion even under 

2. 
49 
Questions 
The exposure through Trade Fairs! 
Exhibitions is limited. What is the 
percentage of SSis which get ·an 
opportunity to promote their sales 
through Trade Fairs-Exhibitions in a 
year? 
Credit Policy 
1. Whether Government contemplate a 
strong legislation for strict 
implementation in order to make 
available more finance to SSis. 
Answers 
the competitive setting. A number of 
SSI units are availing Government 
scheme and Government ·purchase 
programmes. The SSI units are 
increasingly participating in 
Government tenders and have 
successfully supplied stores to Defence, 
Railway, CPWDs, PWDs, State 
Electricity Boards, . Port Trusts, PSUs 
State Undertakings, Central and State 
run hospitals, Health Centres, Posts & 
·Telegraph, Central and State 
Government Departments and their 
attached offices, aided and unaided 
Government organisations and so on. It 
is not possible to quantify the SSI 
involvement on account of a very vast 
network of Government purchases 
spread throughout the country and 
multiplicity of Central and State 
Government purchasing organisations 
involved in such purchases.· 
Nevertheless, the SSI units by any 
stretch of imagination are frontrunners 
in Government purchase programmes 
and market promotion schemes of the 
Government. 
The basic purpose of participation in 
Trade Fairs and Exhibitions is not to 
promote direct sales within the 
Exhibition arena but to provide wide 
possible exposure to intermediate and 
final consumers visiting the exhibitions. 
It provides a venue of direct contact 
between producers and consumers and 
thereby promote marketing prospects. It 
is not possible to quantify the 
percentage of SSis which got 
opportunity to promote sales in these 
exhibitions but it can safely be stated 
that such participation creates 
widespread awareness of SSI 
manufacturers which gives sweeping 
advantage to the sector as a whole. 
There is no proposal for introducing a 
strong legislation for strict 
implementation for making more 
finance available to SSis. After Nayak 

2. 
3.-
4. 
50 
Questions 
What action has been talcen towards 
simplification of procedures so that the 
small scale industries are able to avail of 
the finances from Commercial Banks 
and Financial Institutions conveniently 
and promptly? 
Whether commercial banks and 
financial institutions are satisfied with 
the repayment of loans advances by 
them to the small scale industries? What 
steps Government contemplate to 
strengthen this area? 
Whether the Single Window Clearance 
Scheme for the small scale industries is 
working satisfactorily. What is the 
nature of the complaints received in this 
regard? 
Answers 
Committee made recommendations, 
Government accepted most of them and 
RBI issued necessary instructions (1993-
94). As a further follow up, Seven Point 
Action Plan was initiated in 1995-96. 
Necessary modifications such as 
enhancing the scope of National Equity 
Fund, Introduction of Technology 
Development & Modernisation Fund 
Scheme, raising the limit of Single 
Window Scheme has also been done 
during the last two years. The progress 
of these schemes are also being 
monitored from time to time by the 
Ministry of Finance and also by this 
department. 
Siniplification of procedure was one of 
the seven points of Seven Point Action 
Plan initiated in 1995-96 to meet the 
flow of credit to SSI sector. RBI has 
introduced simplified application forms 
in respect of loans below Rs. 2 lakhs. 
They are holding regular meetings with 
entrepreneurs and making necessary 
changes in producers as feasible. 
This problem varies from bank to bank. 
However, the figures to outstanding 
credit in respect of sick units shows that 
the outstanding amount has come down 
from Rs. 3680 crores at the end of 
March 1994 to Rs. 3547 crores in 1995. 
As the matter pertains to Banking 
Division, a copy of this question has 
been sent to them. 
The Single Window Scheme is operated 
through SFCs and Public Sector Banks. 
SIDBI provides refinance loans upto 
Rs. 1 crore under the scheme. The main 
problem faced by SFCs is that they are 
mainly term lending institutions. Once 
they provide working capital as well as 
term loan for project they expect that 
the working capital part would be taken 
care by the public sector banks 
after erection of the factory is 
over. The banks are taking long 
time in appraising the projects 
in some cases. As a result 
the capital of SFCs, which 
are not in a very good 

51 
Questions 
Health Care of Workers 
1. 
2. 
The workers and labours engaged in 
SSis seen to be neglected in the matter 
of health care. What corrective action 
Government propose in this regard? 
Labour laws need to be simplified. 
Answers 
financial position, remains tied up and 
they are not able to provide finance to 
new SSI units. Banks have been 
requested to complete the' appraisal 
quickly and take over the working 
capital component at the earliest. 
The matter comes under the 
administrative purview of Ministry of 
Labour. Statutory laws have been 
enacted to protect the interest of 
labourerS'\vorkers. The Employees' 
State Insurance Act, 1948 (modified 
from time to time) provides for benefits 
to employees in case of sickness, 
maternity and employment injury to 
workers employed in or in connection 
with work in factories. 
There is a consistent demand for 
changes in various labour laws 
applicable to small scale industries, e.g. 
Provident Fund Act, ESI Act, Factories 
Act, etc. Application of these laws have 
two procedural implications: compulsion 
for preparation and maintenance of 
recordstegisters, etc. for fulfilment of 
the obligations under these legislations 
and visit of the Inspectors to the units 
to ensure and enforce compliance. The 
application of above laws affect tiny 
units the most. The tiny entrepreneurs 
are already burdened with the day to 
day responsibilities of purchase of raw 
materials, running of the machines, 
marketing of products, etc. Over and 
above, the entrepreneurs are required 
to maintain records in compliance of the 
labour related legislations. To that 
extent, the time available with them for 
production and marketing activities 
become less. The visits of the inspectors 
in the factory premises may cause 
further harassment of the 
entrepreneurs. The State Industries 
Ministers' Conference was organised in 
June 1993 to consider issues relating to 
simplification of rules and procedures 

52 
Questions Answers 
SSis. The Conference of Industry 
Ministers had made some 
recommendations regarding relaxation 
or changes in some labour laws. 
However, there was no unanimity. 

ANNEXURE-II 
LIST OF REPRESENTATIVES WITH WHOM THE COMMITTEE BAD INTERACTION 
DURING THE COURSE OF STUDY VISIT 
I. Representatives of Apex Organisations of Manufacturers, Exporters and Workers 
engaged in main SSis. 
A. Cochin (Kerala) 
1. Shri T.G. Lal, President, 
Indian Coir Exporters Chambers, Alleppey, Cochin. 
2. Shri John Chacko, President, 
Travancore Coir Mats & Matting Association. 
3. Shri Mathew Joseph, 
Indian Coir Association, Cochin. 
4. Shri K. Sugunendran, Chairman, 
Indian Coir Association, Cochin. 
5. Shri K. Sreedharan, Secretary, 
Kerala State Small Scale Coir Mfrs. Federation, All~ppey, Cochin. 
6. Shri Mavavalan L. Paul, Chairman, 
Kerasree Coconut Products Pvt. Ltd., 
Alappuzha Distt. Ker~la. 
7. Shri George Paul, Chairman, 
All India Spices Exporters Forum, Cochin. 
8. Shri Joseph Varghen, 
Elenjikal Exports Pvt. Ltd., Pathiruthy, Cochin. 
9. Shri Antony Varghise, 
Kohithara Exports Ltd., Cochin. 
10. Shri T.K. Shahal Hassan Musaliar, Chairman, 
Cahsew Export Promotion Council of India, Cochin. 
11. Shri V.K. Ibrahim, Vice-President, 
Kingston Industries, Muppathadom. -,, 
B. Bangalore (Karnataka) 
12. Shri K.N. Jayalingappa, President, 
ITI ancillary Association, Bangalore. 
13. Shri C.R. Janardhana, President, 
Karnataka State Printers Association, Bangalore. 
14. Shri Khaleel Ahmed, Secretary, 
Karnataka Leather Industries Association, Bangalore. 
53 

54 
15. Shri B.J. Shreedharan, Vice-President, 
Federation of Association of SSis, Bangalore. 
16. Shri S. Philip Lewis, President, 
Federation of Karnataka Ancillary Industries, Bangalore. 
17. Shrirnati Chitra Bharath Kumar, Vice-President, 
Association of Women Enterpreneurs of Karnataka, Bangalore. 
18. Shri D.R. Srikantaiah, Vice-President, 
Federation of Karnataka Chambers of Commerce & Industry, Bangalore. 
19. Shri Keerthi Kumar, President, 
KASSIA, Bangalore. 
20. Shri D. Vasudev, Past President, 
KASSIA, Bangalore. 
21. Shri V .P. Prabhakar, KASSIA, Bangalore. 
22. Shri S. Babu, Chairman, FICCI, Bangalore. 
23. Shri Jai Prakash, President, 
B.E.L. Ancillary Units, Bangalore. 
24. Shri K.S. Shankar, President, 
All India Agarbathis Mfrs. Association, Bangalore. 
C. Chennai (Tamil Nadu) 
25. Shri V.P. Nairnur Rahman, Vice-President, 
All India Skin & Hide Tanners & Merchants' Association, Chennai. 
26. Shri P. V. Sam bar dan, 
Tamil Nadu Small & Tiny Industries Association, Chennai. 
27. Shri S. Abdul Rahim, Secretary, 
Pallavaram Tanners' Association, Chennai. 
28. Shri P. Balasubramanian, Executive Director, 
Indian Leather Products Association, Chennai. 
29. Shri M.S. Parthasarthy, President, 
National Confederation of Small Industries, Chennai. 
30. Shri V.S. Narasimhan, President, 
Small Industries Management Association, Chennai. 
31. Shri A.G. Abdul Aleem, 
Beedi Manufacturers Association, Vellore. 
32. Shri Ikram Shariff, 
Madras Provincial Beedi Factory Owners' Association. 

55 
II. Representatives of Nationalised Banks and Financial Institutions 
A. Cochin (Kerala) 
1. Shri B. Ramaniraj, Chief General Manager, Reserve Bank of India, Trivandrum 
2. Shri M. Premkumar, Assistant General Manager, NABARD, Ernakulam 
3. Shri Raghupathy, Manager, NABARD, Trivandrum 
4. Shri A. Vikraman, General Manager, SIDBI, Ernakulam 
5. Shri N. Ashok Kumar, General Manager, Kerala Fina.nce Corporation, 
Trivandrum 
6. Shri R. Natarajan, Deputy General Manager, State Bank of India, Erna\mlam 
7. Shri Job Abraham, Chief Manager, State Bank of Travancore 
8. Shri B.R. Pai, Deputy General Manager, Canara Bank 
9. Shri A. Subramoniam, Assistant General Manager, Indian Overseas Bank 
10. Shri Abraham Varghese, Chief Manager, Bank of Baroda 
11. Shri M.N. Ramakrishnan, Chief Manager, UCO Bank 
12. Shri K. Rahaman, Assistant General Manager, Union Bank of India 
13. Shri K.M. Surenc4:anathan, Deputy Chief Officer, Bank of India 
14. ~ S. Pal, Assistant General Manager, Syndicate Bank . ' 
15. Shri A. Muthukumara Swamy, Zonal Manager, Indian Bank 
16. Shri K. Rap1achandran,. Chief Manager, Dhanalakshmi Bank Ltd. 
17. Shri Abraham, K. George, Chief Manager, Federal Bank Ltd. 
B. Bangalore (Karnataka) 
1. Dr. N.K. Thingalaya, Chairman & Managing Director, Syndicate Bank 
2. Shri P.K. Biswas, Chief General Manager, Reserve Bank of India 
3. Shri K.R. Jagannathan, Manager, Reserve Bank of India 
4. Mrs. Shakuntala Aiyer, General Manager, Reserve Bank of India 
5. Shri A.S. Kini, General Manager, SIDBI 
6. Shri S. Thyagarajan, Senior Manager, NSIC, Bangalore 
7. Shri V. Srinivasan, Chief General Manager, NABARD 
8. Shri V.R. Gundannavar, General Manager, State Bank of India 
9. Shri S.S. Bhat, Senior Manager, Canara Bank 
10. Shri O.K. Modiger, Senior Manager, Bank of Baroda 
11. Shri R. Seethapathy, Manager, Indian Bank 
12. Shri M.A. Ramachandra, Manager, Central Bank of India 
13. ~hri S. Thyagarajan, Senior Manager, NSIC, Bangalore 

56 
14. Shri S.R. Chandrabhana Seth, Executive Director, Kamataka State Finance 
Corporation, Bangalore 
15. Shri V.K. Sharma, Manager, Oriental Bank of Commerce 
16. Shri N. Subbappaiah, Chief Manager, Andhra Bank 
17. Shri K. Bhaskar Rao, Chief General Manager, State Bank of Mysore 
18. Shri A.D. Punja, General Manager, Vijaya Bank 
19. Shri M.S. Kamath, Assistant General Manager, Corporation Bank 
20. Shri P. Anandarajan, Deputy Chief Officer, UCO Bank 
21. Shri R. Nagesh, Assistant General Manager, KSIIDC, Bangalore 
22. Shri L.A. Noronha, Chief Engineer, Kamataka Electricity Board, Bangalore 
C. Chennai (Tamil Nadu) 
1. Shri K. Subramanian, Chairman & Managing Director, Indian Overseas Bank 
2. Shri S. Rajagopal, Chairman & Managing Director, Indian Bank 
3. Shri G.P. Muniappan, Chief General Manager, Reserve Bank of India 
4. Shri R. Naga Rajen, Chief General Manager, State Bank of India 
5. Shri R.C. Sharma, General Manager (CB), State Bapk of India 
6. Shri B.N. Murthy, Deputy General Manager, Canara Bank 
7. Shri N.A. Naganathan, Deputy General Manager, Syndicate Bank 
8. Shri N.R. Nagarajen, General Manager, Indian Overseas Bank 
9. Shri R.V. Shastri, Executive Director, Indian Overseas Corporation 
m. Representatives of Central/State Governments 
A. CochiiJ (Kerala) 
1. Shri K.B. Pillai, Chairman, MPEDA 
2. Shri M. Arvindakshan, Chairman, Coconut Development Board, Ministry of 
Agriculture 
3. Shri K.G. Joseph, Chairman, Coir Board, Cochin 
4. Shri M.M. Chacko, Director, Coir Development Board, Cochin 
5. Mrs. Arona Sundarajan, Director, Department of Industries & Commerce, Cochin 
6. Shri K.P. Kamalakaran, NSIC, Cochin 
7. Shri V.K.K. Nair, Secretary, Spices Board, Cochin 
8. Shri G.R. Nair, General Manager, SIDCO, Cochin 
9. Dr. K.G. Nair, Chief Executive Cashew Export Promotion Council, Cochin 
B. Bangalore 
1. Shri C.N. Seetharam, Additional Director (SSI) Department of Industries & 
Commerce, Bangalo,re 

57 
2. Shri V. Ramnath, Managing Director, Kamataka Small Industries Marketing 
Corporation 
3. Shri Arvind Jadhav, Commissioner for Industries and Director of Industries & 
Commerce 
4. Shri N. Nagavandra Swamy, Managing Director, Kamataka Leather Industries 
Development Corporation 
5. Shri A.S. Kini, General Manager, SIDBI 
6. Shri B.P. Singh, General Manager, IDBI 
7. Shri S.V. Srinivasan·, Chief Executive Gen. Manager, NABARD 
8. Shri R. Suresh, Managing Director, Kamataka SSis Development Corporation 
9. Shri S.G. Sethuraman, Chief Manager, KSSIDC, Bangalore 
10. Shri S. Thyagarajan, Manager, NSIC 
11. Shri Dasaiah, Chief Executive Officer, Kamataka State Khadi & Village Industries 
Board 
12. Shri C. Guruprasanna, Director, KVIC 
13. Shri Vijay Ghore, Chairman, Kamataka Electricity Board 
14. Shri N. Gukul Ram, Managing Director, Kamataka State Road Transport 
Corporation 
15. Shri K.S. Narayanan, Chairman & Managing Director Kudremukh Iron Ore 
Company Ltd. Bangalore 
16. Shri G. Nagaraju, Director, Centre for Entrepreneurship Development of Kamataka 
17. Dr. A. Parthasarthy, Government Tool Room & Training Centre, Bangalore 
18. Shri B.N. Sampath Kumar, Executive Director, Kamataka Council for Technology 
Upgradation, Bangalore 
C. CbelJlJai 
1. Mrs. O.P. Sosamma, Secretary, Department of Small Scale Industries, Chennai 
2. Shri R.N. Choubay, Managing Director, SIDCO, Chennai 
3. Shri M. Shanmugam, Project Officer, Poompuhar, Tamil Nadu Handicrafts 
Development Corpn. 
4. Shri V. Velayathan, Joint Project Director, Department of Industries & Commerce 
5. Shri R. Ramalingam, General Manager, Department of Industries & Commerce 
6. Shri S. Elangoian, Deputy Chief of Inspector, Factory Inspectorate, Chennai 
7. Shri V.S. Karunakaran, Director, SISI, Chennai 
8. Shri S. Gopalakrishnan, Regional Joint Director, Department of Industries & 
Commerce 
9. Dr. R. Natharajan, Special Officer, Department of Industries & Commerce 
10. Shri M. Kutaralingam, Director, Department of Industries & Commerce 

58 
11. Shri N. Gopalakrishnan, Assistant Commissioner, Department of Commercial Taxes 
12. Shri Naresh Gupta, Chairman & Managing Director, Tamil Nadu Industrial 
Investment Corporation 
13. Shri M. Ghouse Mohiuddin, General Manager, SIDBI 
-14. Col. H.C. Sharma, Regional Director, NSIC 
15. ·shri M.B. Pranesh, Development Commissioner, Madras Export Processing Zone 

ANNEXURE-III 
LIST OF SSis UNITS VISITED BY SUB-COMMI't11m 
A. Cochin 
1. Pottekatt Rubbers, Kalamassery Elite Food, Kalamassery 
2. Unique Patterns, Kalamassery 
3. Vithoga Chemicals, Kalamassery 
4. D. V. Deo & Company, Kalamassery 
5. Buena Vista, Edayar 
6. Star Refinery, Edayar 
7. Sreenivas Roller Flour Mills, Edayar 
8. Surya Kiran, Edayar 
9. Nenmony Agro Mills 
10. A.V. Thomas & Company, Aluva 
B. Bangalore 
1. Vasu Agarbathis, Mysore 
2. Kama taka Silk Industries Corporation Ltd., Mysore 
C. Cbennal 
1. Chervo Leather Manufacturers, Guindy, Chennai 
2. Prabhakar Products, Guindy, Chennai 
3. Ambassador Garments Pvt. Ltd., Tambaram, Chennai 
4. Handicraft Unit, Poompuhar, Mahabalipuram 
59 
476/ RS F-5-A 
~ (~ r.-
~-~.. . : Jt 

476/RS F-5·8 

STUDY REPORT(S) 
OF 
SUB-COMMITTEE-II 

REPORT OF THE ~..COMMITTEE·D ON THE FUNcriONING 
OF NATIONAL RENEWAL FUND (NRF) AND BOARD FOR 
INDUSTRIAL AND FINANCIAL RECONSTRUCTION (BIFR) 
I, the Convenor of Sub-Committee-IT (of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry) having been authorised by the Sub-Committee, present its 
Report on the functioning of NRF and BIFR, 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Comlnittee on Industry in its meeting 
held on the 29th October, 1996, constituted five Sub-Committees on different subjects. The 
Sub-Committee-IT was assigned . the job of studying the functioning of National Renewal 
Fund (NRF) vis-a-vis its objectives set at the time of i~ inception in 1992, and the Board for 
Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) with reference to some of the sick industrial 
units. The Sub-Committee consisted of the following Members : 
1. Shri Sanat Mehta-Convenor 
MEMBERS 
2. Shri Govindrao Adik 
3. Shrimati Jayaprada Nahata 
4. Choudhary Chunni Lal 
S. Shri M.K. Patil 
6. Shri Naval Kishore Rai 
7. Shri Sunil Khan 
2. The Sub-Committee in its first meeting held on the lOth December, 1996, decided to visit 
Ahmedabad, Mumbai, Nepanagar-(Indore) and Calcutta from 6th to lOth January, 1997 to 
hold discussions with the management and trade unions representatives of some of the sick 
units. ' 
3. Accordingly, the Sub-Committee visited Ahmedabad on the 6th, Mumbai on the 7th, 
Indore on the 8th and Calcutta on the 9th and lOth January, 1997, and held discussions with 
the representatives of different public sector enterprises and their trade unions. The names 
of the representatives with whom the Sub-Committee interacted during its visit are placed at 
An~ure. · 
4. The Sub-Committee also heard the Secretary (Industrial Development), Secretary (Heavy 
Industry), Secretary (Textiles) and Additional Secretary (Banking) on the subject in its 
meetinc held on the 28th January, 1997. 
5. The Sub-Committee considered and adopted the draft Report in its meeting held on the 
19~ February, 1997. 
Ahmedabad 
Textile LliliOur Association (TLA): 
6. The 1LA lamented that Ahmedabad, once the Manchester of India, has now turned into 
a graveyard of closed textile mills. Thousands of workers of the closed mills have still not 
been paid their terminal benefits forcing them to lead a miserable life.. They demanded 
immediate payment of legal dues to such workers to enable them to rehabilitate themselves. 
63 

64 
The Association also felt that the stipend for the trainees, training period and other financial 
limits put under the NRF needed suitable revision. 
State Government Omclals : 
7. It was impressed upon that the benefit of NRF should cover displaced ·workers prior to 
1991 also as it presently covers post-1991 workers. There should be a provision to train the 
children of the workers as most of the workers are quite old and relatively less productive. 
Revision of stipend and training period under the NRF was also emphasised. It was felt that 
the procedure under the BIFR was cumbersome and time-consuming and needed suitable 
amendment. Besides, the following points relating to NRF and BIFR were emphasised: 
(i) Strengthening the expertise in BIFR; 
(ii) Abolition of AAIFR due to its redundancy; 
(iii) Decentralisation of BIFR; 
(iv) Converting BIFR into Liquidation Court to avoid going to High Court; 
(v) Making cut-off dates in SICA mandatory; 
(vi) Expediting decision making by BIFR; 
(vii) Expanding the scope of NRF to cover the State level undertakings and the private 
sector units; and 
(viii) Creation of State Renewal Fund in all States by contributions from employees, 
workers, Central and State Gov~mments and financial institutions for providing 
resources for restructuring for the State level public and private enterprises and 
payment of wages and other legal dues to the employees of the closed units. 
8. The representatives of the Gandhi Labour Institute (GLI) informed that after 24th July, 
1991, 48000 workers were displaced. Among these, nearly 33,000 workers are only from 
Ahmedabad. The present scheme of NRF is applicable to this group only. 49,000 workers 
displaced between 1977 and 1990 are unfortunately not eligible for training and 
redeployment under the NRF for which there seems to be no rationale. Recently, 14,000 
workers have been rendered unemployed because of closure of GSTC Mills. Consequently, 
1.11 lakh workers have been rendered jobless in the last decade and a half. Majority of the 
workers displaced from the private sector mills have not been paid their legal dues. The GLI 
has retrained more than 5000 workers in various vocational trades during the last 18 month 
and most of them are engaged in self-employment. 
9. The representatives of GLI also highlighted the following points for a policy decision by 
the Government of India for effective retraining and redeployment scheme: 
(a) The workers who are 50-plus in age often request for nominating their dependents 
for training which should be permitted under the scheme. 
(b) There are 10% of the workers who are suffering from various types of diseases and 
1% of them are dead. There is a necessity to take a dependent from this category 
for training with the . available benefits to ensure their effective deployment to 
support the family. 
I , 
(c) Fmancial assistance to set-up self-employment by the retrained workers in view of 
poor response from the ·banks. 

65 
(d) The ideal training period should be twenty days per month for four months and for 
four hours a day. 
(e) A provision for tool kit immediately after retraining is expected to motivate workers 
to continue the work for which they have taken training. 
(f) 49,000 workers displaced between 1977 and 1990 should be covered the NRF 
scheme. This is the demand from the workers displaced before 1991. 
(g) While private closed mills have not paid legitimate dues of workers rendered 
unemployed, GSTC has paid about Rs. 250 crores to the 14000 employees now 
rendered jobless. Government of India should share this burden on the State 
Exchequer. 
Trade Union representaUves : 
10. The representatives of NTC Mills Technicians and Officers' Staff Union, Gujarat 
Trade Union Munch and Centre of India Trade Unions were of the view that eight units of 
the NTC could be revived if sufficient fund to modernise these units is made available. The 
Operating Agency (IDBI) has also recommended revival of NTC Gujarat and ATIRA 
(Ahmedabad Textile Research Association) appointed by the Central Government has also 
reported that nine out of ten mills could be made viable. They also informed that the 
Rehabilitation Scheme for the employees opting for Voluntary Retirement Scheme (VRS) 
has not been implemented so far. Even the workers have not received their payment for 
November and December, 1996. The representatives were also of the view that the present 
procedure of BIFR takes a long time and needed to be cut short. They also felt that while 
the Management was favoured by the BIFR, the workers were often ignored. 
Mumbai 
NaUonal Bicycle CorporaUon of India Ltd. (N,CIL): 
11. The NBCIL established by Birla Group in 1939 was taken over by Government of 
India in 1974 and was nationalised in 1980, thus making it as a wholly-owned Government 
Company. The Company has two factories-one at Mumbai and the other at Ghaziabad. 
The total manpower in the company is presently 679 with an annual wages bill of Rs. 3.20 
Crores. The Compamy has a total liability of Rs. 133.95 Crores. It has a net loss of 
Rs. 12.70 Crores in 1993-94, Rs. 13.90 Crores in 1994-95 and Rs. 15.69 Crores in 1995-96. 
12. As the Company was chronically sick, it was referred to BIFR in February, 1992. 
The BIFR after hearing the concerned parties finally came to the conclusion in 1993 that the 
NBCIL be wound up and forwarded the relevant papers of its hearings to the High Court of 
Mumbai for further nece'Ssary action. 
13. In February, 1996, the National Bicycle Kamgar Sangh, Ghaziabad, through its 
counsel submitted that workers unions of Ghaziabad and Mumbai units have agreed to come 
together and with the help of a Consultant prepared a draft proposal for revival of the 
company. It was requested that the said proposal should be examined by the Operating 
Agency (OA) and the Government. The AAIFR authorities thereupon directed the OA to 
examine the rehabilitation proposal, hold meetings of the concerned parties and submit a 
Report to AAIFR. The OA reported that the draft proposal submitted by the Unions did 
not inspire much Confidence and submitted that a final view can be taken only after taking 
into account the techno-economic viability study and market potential of the proposed 

66 
motorised tri-cycle. The AAIFR then directed the Central Government to get a techno­
economic study conducted. The report of the study is yet to be submitted. Meanwhile, the 
~ also directed the uni~ns to inform it in writing their final decision regarding 
formation of workers cooperative to take over the management of NBCIL, if rehabilitation 
scheme is evolved. The next date of hearing is fixed for 7th February, 1997. 
14. The Sub-Committee was also informed that some employees of the Company have 
also filed a writ petition in the High Court of Delhi against the BIFR's order of 1993, 
besides hearing of winding petition by the High Court of Mumbai. As the case is pending in 
different Courts and the AAIFR, the Government is not in a position to plan any further 
action unless a revival package is evolved. 
15. Nearly 683 employees have opted for VRS from 1990-91 to 1993-94, with a total 
payment of about Rs. 7.28 Crores. The scheme which was in operation till September, 1993 
was withdrawn by Government of Ind~due to BIFR's. recommendation for winding up of 
the Company during its hearing on 5th OctoQ_er, 1993. Even today 466 VRS applications are 
pending with the Company. H the scheme is e~d to all the employees of the Company 
the majority of them are likely to opt for it. ', 
NatlODIII Bicycle Karmacbarl Sangb : 
16. The National Bicycle Karmachari Sangh in its submission emphasised the following 
pointS:-
(i) The duty of every welfare state is the welfare of its people through providing jobs 
and generation of employment. Even our Constitution lays ample emphasis on this. 
Therefore, Government should make such laws which may help sick units to become 
viable and thereby generate employment. 
(ii) BIFR should be equipped with more legal powers and have the status of a full 
fledged statutory body so that its order could be binding for Promoters and other 
parties. 
(iii) BIFR should have its own team of technical/ financial experts to examine and make 
revival schemes for sick companies rather· than depending upon outside agencies. 
(iv) BIFR should consider all the reasons of sickness, such as outdated plants and 
machinery, corruption in the Management, mismanagement, etc. 
(v) BIFR should be authorised to sanction I recommend loans from NRF for revival of 
sick units. 
(vi) Government of India should protect the interests of workers by means of reviving all 
sick industrial units and guaranteeing their employment as unemployment \l}ay cause 
social unrest in the country. 
(vii) The scheme of retraining of retrenched employees should be stopped which is being 
funded from NRF because there is no point in training a qualified and trained 
worker. Instead, efforts should be to revive the sick company with the help of this 
fund. 
(viii) BIFR should be empowered to direct promoters of the Company to arrange funds 
for revival from its other units which are economically viable. 
\ (ix) BIFR's Chairman should be a Judge of the Supreme Court or any High Court. 
(x) The use of petroleum-propelled vehicles should be discouraged to reduce import of 
petroleum and the use of bicycle should be encouraged. Therefore, NBCIL and 
CCIL, Calcutta should be revived to restrict monopoly of other bicycle 
manufacturers. 
17. The Director, Centre for Workers' Management, Delhi in his submission before the 

67 
Sub-Comittee stated that the NRF has in effect been reduced to an unemployment 
generation fund. The major share of NRF funds have been used to pay for Voluntary 
Retirement Scheme in the public sector without a clear focus on the precise needs of these 
enterprises. This has not oruy resulted in the rendering of workers unemployed but also 
dearth of skilled workers in many enterprises. Very little attention has been paid to the 
schemes for re-training, redeployment and counselling and placement services under the 
National Renewal Grant Fund (NRGF) and the coverage under them is extremely small. 
The primary focus of these schemes is to develop entrepreneurship. Studies, however, 
indicate that across the world less than 1% of workers trained for entrepreneurship were 
actually able to set-up small enterprises while even fewer succeded. 
18. The Sub-Committee was also informed that the NRF has failed to make a 
meaningful contribution to sick industries. This is particularly the case where the sick 
Company was found to be viable by the BIFR and the workers were willing to take-over the 
sick Company through workers' cooperative. The workers take-over however, does not 
fructify since the workers are not able to satisfy the banks and financial institutions of their 
ability to raise finances. Necessary funds for the take-over and the rehabilitation of sick 
Companies through worker's cooperative have not been forthcoming from the NRF. 
19. With regard to the functioning of BIFR, the Sub-Committee was informed that one 
fundamental problem is the role of banks and financial institutions in the revival of sick 
enterprises, their failure to comply with the BIFR directions and the inability of BIFR to 
discipline these institutions. In a majority of cases, where workers' t~ke-overs failed to 
fructify the enterprises, was because of the fact that banks and financial institutions and the 
State Government concerned failed to provide the requisite and permissiple reliefs and 
concessions. Even where workers or their unions have managed to convince the banks and 
financial institutions of their capability to successfully run an enterprise as a worker's 
Cooperative, the State Government or one of its agencies refuses to cooperate. There is 
absolutely no mechanism for ensuring the responsibility of banks and financial institutions 
through the existing mechanism of Sick Industrial Companies (special provisions) Act, 1985 
(SICA). The BIFR is entirely dependent on these institutions in their role as OAs for 
technical advice and support. The decisions of the BIFR are often delayed due to 
lackadaisical approach of OAs. Presently, there are no penalties on delays on the part of 
OAs. 
Rashtriya MUI Mazdoor Sangh : 
20. The Rashtriya Mill Mazdoor Sangh in its presentation submitted that the SICA 
nowhere acknowledges that the Workers' Union is the sole bargaining agent. The workers 
being one of the most important factors of production and the emphasis on workers' 
participation in management in the Constitution, suitable changes in the SICA is required. 
The Sangh felt that the decentralization of the BIFR bench at New Delhi and at places like 
Calcutta, Chennai, Mumbai and Bangalore assigning territorial jurisdiction will help in the 
expeditious disposal of cases. The workers being an integral part of an industrial unit can 
supply vital information regarding mismanagement, wastage, non-use of machinery, etc. and 
should be associated at every stage through their recognized unions to avoid future 
complications. The Sangh also submitted that workers' Legal dues should be paid prior to 
transfer of property or take-over. Presently, their legal dues remain unpaid for a number of 
years, it was also submitted that the BIFR should take serious cognizance of non­
implementation of sanctioned scheme on the part of the company and issue appropriate 
orders to OA. It is usually seen that the sanctioned schemes are not implemented by the 
Company perhaps to make the Company sick again. The Sangh lamented that while huge 

68 
amount has been spent on VRs-no amount is being spent on modernisation or 
restructuring of the sick units. It also demanded adequate representation of workers· on 
BIFR benches. 
Indore 
N•ps Limit•d, N•panagar: 
21. Nepa Limited, a pioneer unit in the newsprint sector, has been in existence for the 
last four decades. Presently, it has an installed capacity of 88,000 tonnes. It has been 
supplying newsprint to the major newspaper establishments spread all over the country. The 
Mill with a manpower of nearly 4500 workers is presently facing the following problems:-
(i) changing scenario due to liberalisation and globalisation; 
(ii) decanalization and duty free direct import of newsprint; 
(iii) changes in the newsprint allocation and distribution policy; 
(iv) the competitive edge of new, modem and economic size newsprint units like 
'Hindustan Newsprint Ltd., Mysore Paper Mills and 1NPL; 
(v) higher cost of production due to very old plant and equipments; 
(vi) indiscipline, lack of team spirit, law and order problem and interference from state 
agencies, etc.; 
(vii) conventional forest raw material from longer leads adds to high cost of production; 
(viii) low pay scales do not attract talented manpower; . 
(ix) heavy financial liability to the tune of Rs. 63.50 crores as on 31.12.96. 
22. The Nepa Mill is closed since August, 1996 on account of serious financial 
constraints due to adverse market conditions for indigenous ·newsprint arising out of 
liberalised import of newsprint under OGL. Because of non-payment of energy bill, Madhya 
Pradesh Electricity Board (MPEB) disconnected power supply and is not inclined to. restore 
power unless commitment to clear the dues in 15 to 20 instalments alongwith current 
monthly bills of Rs. 2.5 crores (approx) is given. In the absence of grid power, the 
production is suspended since August, 1996. 
· 23. The Management of Nepa Limited apprised the Sub-Committee that their approach 
to face the situation is to immediately diversify into cultural varieties of writing and printing 
papers besides newsprint, to become self-sufficient in power and steam requirements, to 
revamp the existing Pulp Mill and to install a Sugar mill of 5000 TCD capacity for obtaining 
150 TPD bagasse pulp, where sugar will be a by-product. The Management suggested that if 
following steps are taken immediately, the loss making unit can be converted into a profit 
making unit after gestation period of only two years: 
(a) Conversion of Government loan of Rs. 32.50 crores into equity; 
(b) Waiver/defennent of TMC and surcharge of Rs. 22.31 crores by MPEB; 
(c) Investment of a capital expenditure of Rs. 37 crores for 15 MW TO set and Boiler; 

69 
(d) Investment of Rs. 38 crores for the revamping of the existing Pulp Mill; 
(e) Installation of a Sugar Mill and Bagasse Pulping unit of Rs. 150 crores. 
Joint Front of NeJHI MiUs Trade Unions: 
24. The Joint Front of Nepa Mills Trade Unions in their submission before the Sub­
Committee highlighted the following issues/points:-
(i) The problems of the workers are not adequately brought to the notice of the Board 
and the Ministry of Industry due to absence of a Director on·the Board representing 
labour. Therefore, a senior level person drawn from the Trade Unions in Madhya 
Pradesh should be nominated on the Board immediately; 
(ii) The wages of Nepa employees have not been revised since 1st January, 1992. The 
wage revision since 1st January, 1997 has also become due. The workers and their 
families are financially broken as the prices are rising continuously. Relief should, 
therefore, be provided to the workers through immediate·payment of their dues from 
1st January, 1992. 
(iii) Anti-dumping duty may be imposed on imported newsprint. 
(iv) Excise duty on craft paper may be reduced for a certain period of time; 
(v) Budegtary support for implementation of Mill development/upgradation scheme of 
Rs. 280 crores. 
(vi) Imposition of custom duty of atleast 40% on import of newsprint and restoration of 
important ratio of 4:1. 
(vii) An opportunity may be given to the workers of Nepa Limited to restart the 
production. An amount of Rs. 15 crores may be given for purchase of essential 
inputs; 
(viii) Financial restructuring by conversion of outstanding Government loans into equity 
and waiving of the accrued interest on loans, including penal interest upto 31.3.96. 
(ix) Waival of accumulated loss of Rs.39 crores upto 31.3.96. 
Calcutta 
Bum Stcndard Company Limited : 
25. The Bum Standard Company Limited (BSCL), a Gove ... 1ment company was formed 
out of the two renowned firms - Bum & Company Ltd. and Indian Standard Wagon 
Company Limited following their nationalisation in April 1975. Since 11.6.1987, Bharat 
Bhari Udyog Nigam Ltd. (BBUNL) has been formed by the Government act as a Holding 
Company for the subsidiary companies in Eastern India including Bum Standard Company 
Ltd. 
26. BSCL is the largest rolling stock manufacturer in the country. It has diversified into 
other non-traditional areas like Tram cars, mining equipment like Roof Supports, Scrapper 
chain conveyors, Mine Car Tripplers, etc. The business activities of the company could 
broadly be classified into (i) Railway Engineering items, (ii) Offshore Division, 
(iii) Refractory Division and (iv) Project Division. 

70 
27. During 1993-94, 1994-95 and 1995-96, the company suffered huge cash loss of Rs. 85 
crores. There was no generation of fund due to poor operational performance. The company 
was compelled to defer payment of statutory liabilities which has accumulated to Rs. 19 crores 
of which Provident Fund and arrear of salary attribute to about Rs. 12 crores. 
28. The total manpower position of all the units as on 30.11.96 is 9813. 2738 employees 
have so far availed themselves of the benefit of VRS. About 250-300 employees are 
expected to be separated through VRS against budget allocation of Rs. 6 crores for the year 
1996-97. 
29. The Industrial Relations during the year 1995-96, by and large, remained cordial. 
However, because of delayed payment of salary and wages, there were sproadic incidents of 
demonstration, strikes and gheraos. 
30. The company has been declared sick by the BIFR in its meeting held on 20.1.1995. 
a revival package is still awaited. 
31. The main reasons for the sickness of the company, according to the Management, 
have been the following:-
( a) Large manpower. 
(b) Imbalances and inadequacies in the warning and high overheads with respect to 
actual performance. 
(c) Total dependence or Railway Authorities for the orders of wagons and its 
components. 
(d) Lack of appropriate framework and facilities for diversification. 
(e) Constraints in streamlining the production due to lack of investment. 
{f) Subsistance of procedural bottle-necks. 
32. The company requires the following assistance from Government:-
(i) Four Refractory units, namely, Raniganj, Gulfurbari, Jabalpur and Niwar are 
chronically sick and economically unviable since inception. These units have 
incurred a cash loss of Rs. 116.78 crores till 31.3.96. The entire non-plan 
assistance received from the Government till 31.3.96 amounting to Rs. 6782 
crores had to be diverted to these sick refractory units. Till the BIFR package is 
worked out and fmally accepted by Government, Government may assist BSCL 
to the extent of the yearly cash loss suffered by it atleast, from 1995-96 onwards. 
" I 
(ii) The Offshore Division of the company has no work since November, 1993. 
Recently, , a repair work of Rs. 7 crores has been received which is under 
executiQI1· Even the order is executed, there will be hardly any margin. 
(iii) A minimum plan assistance of Rs. 8 crores is required for modernisation and 
capital investment to increase production and productivity level in both the 
Engineering Units and Salem works. 
(iv) Government assistance is required for settling the dispute with Me Dennott 
International Inc. amicably and providing necessary funds for payment of dues. 
(v) Government being the promoter is requested to take a positive view on the 
revival package, which is under fmalisation. 

71 
(vi) The pay scales of the officers of the PSUs have been revised by the Government 
w.e.l 1.1.1992. This has not been implement.. in BSCL. This has resulted in 
demoralisation amongst the Officers. In addition, this is causing exodus of 
talents in the company. Government may, therefore, give clearance for the 
implementation of revised pay scales to officers. The company is confident of 
meeting the additional cost involved without any budgetary support in view of 
the improved business scenario of wagon industry. 
(vii) Government assistance is required for reverting to the earlier system of 
allocating wagon orders against rolling stock programme with BICP defined 
prices. The Public Sector should continue to get 60% of total wagon order 
allocated. The system of open tendering introduced in 1995-96 should be 
discontinued. 
Trade Unions of BSCL : 
33. The Trade Unions of BS~L emphasised on quick finalisation of BIFR proceedings. 
They lamented for lack of finan ' support for modernisation of the Howrah Unit which is 
in dire need of immediate renov~;.;d.m. They informed the Sub-Committee that the advances 
for rail wagons are being used for other purposes other than procurement of raw materials. 
There is no financial accountability of the Management. Officer-staff ratio also needs to be 
maintained. They were of the view that if there is proper and smooth flow of input, 
manufacture of 6-8 wagons per day · is feasible. They also felt that the Management of 
Howrah Unit should be revamped as it is not able to face the challenges. 
Tyre Corporation of India Limited: 
34. The Tyre Corporation of India Limited (TCIL) was formed by nationalisation of two 
sick private sector companies Incheck Tyres Limited and National Rubber Manufacturers 
Limited in 1984. TCIL is the only public sector company in Automotive Tyre Industry. 
35. Due to change in the Sick Industrial Companies (special provisions) Act, 1985, 
TCIL had to be referred t9 BlFR in June, 1992 and IDBI was appointed as the Operating 
Agency (OA) to exaniiiie the. techno-economic viability of the company and to prepare a 
scheme for revival and rehaJ>ilitation. The OA was advised by the BIFR to make separate 
scheme for revival of (i) Tyre' l~vision, Kankinara and (ii) IRP division, Tangra considering 
separate profit centre and unit-Wise viability. The final package for revival of the two units 
has since been submitted by the OA in February, 1996. The BIFR approved the scheme for 
implementation. However; Government of India has preferred an appeal against BIFR order 
with AAIFR and stay order has been granted in the matter. 
36. In vie\\ of non-implementation of the BIFR approved package, the company is in 
dire need of working capital for increasing/continuing its production. Consequently, the 
company has started production of other brand Automotive Tyres on conversion basis for 
other private Tyre .Companies to utilise the available idle plant capacity and to reduce the 
cash loss of the unit. The production of own brand tyre is almost negligible. The Production 
at IRP Division (Tangra) remained suspended since August, 1993 due to low pr.·ductivity 
and negative contribution. 

72 
37. The net loss of the company during the last ~ee years is:-
• (Rs. in crores) 
(i) Tyre Division, Kankinara 
(ii) IRP Division, Tangra 
1993-94 
14.71 
16.26 
1994-95 
28.72 
15.71 
1995-96 
29.37 
15.21 
38. The Operating Agency appointed by BIFR has recommended reduction in 
manpower through VRS. A total of 977 employees have opted for VRS. Consequently, the 
manpower which was 3576 as on 31.10.92 has come down to 2052 as on 31.12.96. 
39. The·future outlook of the company is fully dependent upon the implementation of 
the BIFR Revival package. 
Tl'lllll Unions of TCIL: 
40. Various Trade Unions of the TCIL felt that modernisation and expansion 
programmes of TCn., were not taken up in time. Modernisation scheme at an estimated 
capital outlay of Rs. 66.71 crores was drawn up only for Tyre Division at Kankinara in 
1987-88 but no scheme was taken up for IRP Division Tangra, Calcutta. Production in this 
Division has been kept suspended since August, 1993 and the long established reputed 
market of the products of this Division has been allowed to erode. The representatives 
informed the Sub-Committee that Government of India is committed to revive the TCIL and 
referred to an announcement in the Parliament by the Hon 'ble Minister of Industry for 
release of Rs. 4 crores for resumption of production at IRD Division, Tangra. The amount 
is, however, yet to be released. They submitted that the employees of TCIL had undergone 
much sufferings during the last four years, sacrified a lot and agreed to all the conditions 
stipulated by BIFR, including closure of Kalyani Unit. They demanded immediate 
implementation of the BIFR sanctioned scheme in toto as further delay will incur more cash 
losses and will adversely affect the viability of the Scheme. 
Jt~sop & CompGny Limit1d: 
41. The Jessop &. Company Umited (JCL) is a public sector undertaking engaged in 
design, development, manufacture and commissioning of:-
(i) Railway Rolling Stock, EMU Coaches and wagons for Indian Railways. 
(ii) Heavy duty cranes for steel plants and ports. 
(iii) Road construction Equipment i.e. Road Rollers, Vibratory Rollers, Motors 
Grader etc. 
(iv) Mining machineries like Longwall Roof Supports system and accessories for mining 
~ industry. 
(v) Paper machinery. 
42. The Sub-Committee was informed that after take-over by Government of India in 
1973, the company continued its operation as an on-going concern but practically there was 
no .fresh infusion of fund. Due to increase in business activity in the area of Mining and 
Paper Machinery the company was, however, in a position to earn profit for consecutive 
period of three years i.e. from 1987-88 to 1989-90. Due to dearth of orders coupled with 
working capital problem, the company started incurring losses form 1990-91 onwards. Due to 
successive cash loss incurred by the company, the net worth became negative as on 31.3.94 
and the company was· referred to BIFR under SICA in February, 1995. The State 

73 
Bank of India who were appointed as O.A. by the BIFR Bench for formulating the revival 
package, has since submitted its sch!'me to the Bench. As per direction of BIFR, further 
study is being carried out in regard to productivity norm and manpower assessment by a 
reputed Consultant. The following reasons for sickness have been advanced by the 
Management of JCL:-
(a) Jessop was the major supplier of Mining equipment to the coal sector and the 
turnover went up toRs. 67 crores in 1989-90. Due to lack of adequate fund the Coal 
sector was reluctant to place further orders and turnover went down to Rs. 2.S crores 
during 1993-94. Besides, the order for manufacture and supply of MG Coaches was 
closed in 1993-94 due to conversion from Metre Gauge to Broad Gauge by the 
Railways affecting the company's turnover to the tone of Rs. 15 crores. 
(b) Shortage of Working Capital. 
(c) High financial charges because of penal rate of interest in State Bank of India and 
inclusion of interest on Government plan and non-plan loans. 
(d) The current average age of the workmen is about 49 years, which is· very high for a 
heavy engineering company. 
(e) Old and obsolete plant and machinery-adequate upgradationlmodemisation could 
not be undertaken due to paucity of fund. 
43. The combination of the aforesaid reasons resulted in decline in the performance of 
the company over successive years and by the end of 1993-94, the company had an 
accumulated loss of Rs. 156.76 crores. The net worth of the company became negative and it 
was referred to BIFR in February, 1995. 
44. In the last hearing of BIFR Bench held on 25th September, 1996, BIFR Bench, 
Government of India, OA and representatives of employees unanimously agreed that Jessop 
should be revived as per the guidelines suggested by O.A. After implementation of BIFR 
package, which would definitely ease out the working capital problem, the company is 
hopeful that it will be able to tum around and generate profit from the first year of 
operation. 
Joint AcUon Committee lor 11Save Jessoy': 
45. The Joint Action Committee for "Save Jessop" in their submission highlighted the 
following issueslpoints:-
(a) Immediate approval by Government of India to the Revival Scheme prepared by the 
Operating Agency; 
(b) Pending finalisation of Revival Scheme, immediate grant of non-plan assistance of 
Rs. 10 crores as working capital for maintaining production for the remaining period 
of the current financial year; and 
(c) Immediate grant of Rs. 10 crores for payment of gratuity to employees which is due 
for the last four years. 
Mining & Allied Machinery Corporation Ud.: 
46. The Mining & Allied Machinery Corporation Limited (MAMC), Durgapur in West 
Bengal, a Government of India Enterprise, was set up in 1965 in technical and financial 
collaboration with the then USSR to manufacture Mining Equipment for underground coal 

74 
mining and other mineral mining. The plant at Durgapur was conceived as an independent 
unit with all infrastructural facilities like Foundries, Forge Shop, Structural Shop, Machine 
Shop, Laboratories, etc. 
47. As part of financial restructuring in 1981-82, the Government gave some relief to 
the company by way of waival of interest on Government loans, conversion of interest into 
non-plan loan and moratorium on repayment of loan upto March, 1985. In 1987. the 
company was allowed benefit of a comprehensive restructuring by writing off plan and non­
plan loan with waival of outstanding interest on Government loans. As a result of the 
restructuring, the company was able to minimise its cash losses to Rs. 2 lakhs during 1986-87 
but high wage bill and slower pace of development of underground mining and limited 
diversification had an adverse effect and the company could not maintain the profitability on 
sustainable basis. 
48. The large capacity of equipment manufacture and an elaborate social infrastructure 
for its more than 6000 employees right at the beginning of the company's operation without 
taking stock of the market for its range of products, made the viability of operation suspect 
right from the inception of the company. The under-utilisation of mining equipment 
manufacturing capacity forced the company to undertake diversification of its product range. 
But diversification efforts could not hear the desired result as not adequate funds were made 
available to reinforce its manufacturing infrastructure. Even today, the company is faced 
with a number of problems. Cash credit account with the SBI remains inoperative for the 
last many years. No Bank guarantee facility is available. The complete erosion in working 
capital of the company has made provision of plant inputs for production, a difficult 
proposition. 
49. In 1989, VRS was introduced in the company to lessen the burden of manpower. 
2129 employees were benefited under this Scheme. With the help of VRS and attrition, the 
manpower of the company has been reduced from 7700 to the present strength of 4320. The 
manpower strength of around 2500 is considered adequate for viability of the company. · 
50. In 1992, the company was referred to the BIFR after erosion of its net worth and 
the BIFR in its order in January, 1995 issued a show cause notice for winding up of the 
company. A stay order on the proceedings of the BIFR has been issued by the Calcutta 
High· Court and the matter rests there. 
Workers' Unions: 
51. .The workers' unions were of the view that every effort should be made to revive the 
company to save the workers from hunger and unemployment. They suggested that MAMC 
could be revived if it is merged with Coal India Limited (CIL} as the company was formed 
for ·manufacturing coal equipments required by CIL. They demanded payment of all dues to 
the workers as they are undergoing severe financial difficulties. They also felt that policy of 
the company underwent frequent changes with every change of the top brass of the 
company. This has affected the functioning of the Company adversely. 
}Jharat Ophthalmic Glass Limited : 
52. The Bharat Ophthalmic Glass Limited (BOGL) was incorporated in 1972 by taking 
over a sick unit Ophthabriic Glass Plant of National Instruments Limited, Calcutta, a public 
sector undertaking. 

75 
53. The company is presently engaged in manufacturing of the following items under 
Batch Process Technology (BPT): 
(a) Ophthalmic Flint Buttons for making double vision lenses required for correction of 
near vision of human eyesight. 
(b) Optical Glass Items for making lenses required for precision instruments of Strategic 
establishments like Defence, Space Research Centres, etc. 
(c) Radiation Shielding Window Glasses for protection from nuclear radiation in reactor 
chambers of various atomic research centres of strategic importance. 
' 
54. As a result of taking over a sick unit and with product range of negative 
contribution particularly because of outdated Batch Process Technology, the company was 
constrained to diversify its product range. However, due to funds contraints, the 
diversification did not have the desired result. 
55. As a result of low capacity utilisation and uneven competition from imported 
products with latest Technology of mass production and dumping of such products by the 
then Russia, in particular, the company continued to incur financial losses and its net worth 
became negative. 
56. Consequently, the company was referred to BIFR in 1992. Finally, after a number 
of hearing, the BIFR ordered winding up of the company in February, 1996. On 26.3.96 the 
Unions and Management of the company filed two separate appeals to AAIFR against the 
order of BIFR. The AAIFR in its final order dated 11.6.96 remanded back the case to BIFR 
with direction to prepare a Revival Plan by IDBI taking into consideration the restructuring 
of capital including conversion of DHI (GOI's) loan into equity and waival of interest as on 
31.3.96, being the cut-off date. The IDBI has since submitted its Plan to BIFR and the 
Government has been asked to submit its opinion on the plan. 
Workers' Unions : 
57. The representatives of Workers' Unions were highly critical of the Management of 
the company. They felt that the Management was inefficient and corrupt and was not 
responsive to the needs of the company. It should be immediately revamped, in toto, to 
bring better results. The Management should have technical and financial experts. They 
were of the view that if Rs. 50 crores is made available immediatly to the company and the 
Management is revamped, the company has the potential of running into a viable unit. 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
58. BIFR and AAIFR under Sick Industries Companies Act (SICA) 1985 and National 
Renewal Fund have been established to deal with the growing industrial sickness in the large 
and medium industries in the public and private organised sectors and for restructuring of 
the industries in India. At present the industrial sickness in India is of massive proportion 
which is eating into the vitals of Indian economy and has made India a high cost and low 
productivity economy making it non-competitive in the world market. 
59. BIFR is supposed to prevent the industrial sickness by restructuring a unit, cure the 
industrial sickness by rehabilitating and/or restructuring the unit and facilitate exit of the 
terminally sick units. The objective of establishing NRF is to provide a social safety net for 
476/RS F-6-A 

76 
the affected workers both in organised public and private sectors and the unorganised sectors. 
due to macro economic adjustment and the Structural Adjustment Programme (Government 
of India, 1991). The objectives of NRF are: 
(i) To provide assistance to cover the cost of retraining and redeployment of 
employees arising as a result of modernisation, technology upgradation, and 
industrial restructuring. 
(ii) To provide funds, where necessary, for compensation of employees affected by 
restructuring or closure of industrial units both in the public and private sectors. 
(iii) To provide funds for Employment Generation Schemes both in the organised and 
unorganised sectors in order to provide a social safety net for labour, (GOI, 1992-
93). Hence the whole endeavour of NRF is to reduce the adverse impact of the 
New Economic Policy, NRF is supposed to ensure transition from regulated 
economy to market economy with minimum adverse impacts on the people. 
60. However, most of the representations made before the Sub-Committee felt that the 
two instruments of BIFR and NRF have not been able to fulfil the objectives for which they 
were established. Therefore, there is urgent need for strengthening these two instruments by 
restructuring them so that they can deal with growing industrial sickness in an effective 
manner. 
61. At the outset, the Sub-Committee felt that BIFR has not been able to serve the 
purpose for which it was created. Meanwhile, after the New Economic Policy of 
Government of India, SICA was amended in 1991 to bring Public Sector Undertakings 
under its purview. The Act was further amended in 1994. The constitution of NRF and 
amendment of SICA to bring Public Sector Undertakings under its purview created a hope 
that the loss making and sick PSUs will now be restructured and will make profit, and these 
goals will be achieved smoothly while providing safety net to the affected workers. 
62. The expenditure of five years indicates that nothing much happened on both these 
fronts. On the contrary, the Sub-Committee during its discussion with various forums got an 
impression that because of reference to BIFR and delayed decision, Banks discontinued the 
Working Capital which these PSUs were getting earlier and crisis became friore severe. Even 
funds from NRF which by September, 1996 covered 94, 332 employees under VRS could not 
bring them out of sickness or losses. At some places complaint was received that enough 
grant from NRF was not given even though employees were willing to accept VRS. The Sub· 
Committee feels that it is worth examination that instead of spreading the coverage of NRF to 
all PSUs, whether it would have been worthwhile to concentrate on few, so that at least these 
few units would have come out of sickness. Gujarat State Textile Corporation has done this 
with the help of Government of Gujarat and had saved the State from continuous annual 
losses of GSTC. 
63. The Sub-Committee carried an impression that in the case of Tyre Corporation of 
India things would not have been that dimcult if proper attention and immediate action were 
taken. 
64. During examination of Secretary (Heavy Industry), he stated that all 49 operating 
enterprises of the department are in direct competition with private sector. Of these, 13 are 
profit making the remaining 34 are making losses, 26 of these loss making public enterprises 
have been referred to BIFR. 
65. He resumed up by stating that a comprehensive package of measures of financial 
476/ RS F-6-B 

77 
restructuring, induction of J.V. partner with technology and marketing strengths, 
rationalisation of manpower through VRS, providing funds as per package by creating a 
'revolving fund to ensure quick and timely infusion of funds in accordance with approved plans 
by BIFR and CCEA will go a long way. 
66. The Sub-Committee strongly feels that much time has passed since reference of 26 public 
enterprises to BIFR and so the above mentioned measures should be immediately taken without 
much loss of time and units should be revived. 
67. The Sub-Committee also got an impression that out of the Units which the Sub· 
Committee visited except a few, all are recoverable according to the Secretary (Heavy Industry). 
The Sub-Committee feels that this task should be immediately completed so that premise given in 
Common Minimum Programme with regard to 'Industrial Sickness' can be fulfilled. 
68. The Second general observation the Sub-Committee wants to make is with regard to 
utilising surplus land to revive the sick units mainly in the case of Textile Mills. 
69. During appearance before the Sub-Committee, Secretary (Textiles) gave some details. 
He mentioned that the revised turnaround package was approved by the Cabinet in 1995 May. 
The total amount which was to be invested in modernisation was Rs. 2005 crores. It was 
expected that 79 mills would be modernised and 18 mills would be merged with viable ones. This 
turnaround package was based on the funds which were to be obtained by sale of surplus land in 
the NTC Mills. The amount that could have been realised was Rs. 2350 crores. 
70. The fact is that we have not been able to sell the lands. The main reason was that most 
of these sale proceeds was to come from city of Mumbai. Almost Rs. 1900 crores was to come 
from sale of surplus land of Mumbai Mills. The Maharashtra Government which was requested 
to give permission for sale of these lands did not give it and, therefore, turnaround package 
could not be implemented because of paucity of funds. 
71. In this connection, it will be interesting to note that the problem of surplus land of 
Textile Mills in Mumbai has dogged successive State Governments at least for two decades. 
Apart from the above mentioned scheme narrated by Secretary (Textiles), even recently 
Maharashtra Government has appointed a study Group to avoid piecemeal and isolated 
development, and Government has asked the Study Group to prepare an integrated 
development plan for the mill lands. This has also not yielded any result. 
72. The Sub-Committee feels that this problem is not attended in proper perspective. Plight 
of 80,000 textile workers in Mumbai and almost equal number in Ahmedabad cannot be ignored 
by any Government. It is a sad commentary on us that the scheme evolved by the Government 
of India is put off, while regeneration of Ahmedabad Scheme sent py Government of Gujarat 
and recommended by Empowered Committee of NRF to Cabinet has remained 
unimplemented. It is estimated that Textile Mills in Mumbai are located on 600 acres of prime 
land in Central Bombay. Same is the situation in Ahmedabad. 
73. Because of such position, now it seems that financial agencies have started approaching 
Courts to dispose of land and the properties of closed textile mills or mills under liquidation. 
The Sub-Committee is afraid that if this is allowed, the valuable properties, machinery and 
prime land will be disposed of at throwaway prices. Recent decision on ARYODA YA ENG. & 
MFG. CO. LTD. (MILL), Ahmedabad by Gujarat High Court is indicative. 
74. There are several representations with regard to the functioning of BIFR under SICA 
1985. 

78 
Slow and costly process of BIFR 
75. Most of the representations have highlighted that process in BIFR is time consuming 
and costly particularly for workers and trade unions. Therefore, there is need to speed up 
process in the BIFR and make it cost effective. The suggestion for this is to decentralize the 
BIFR by creating regional benches in the States where the incidence of industrial sickness is 
very high. (Suggested by RMMS Mumbai, Mr. K.N. Raval, Senior Advocate, Ahmedabad 
and Dr. S.S. Mehta, GLI, Ahmedabad). A decentralised State level BIFR will be able to 
cover , even small scale units which are at present not considered by the BIFR. Government 
should not hesitate to provide more than one bench at Delhi, if so required to expedite the 
cases and process ·thereon. 
76. The number of benches are inadequate to deal with the volume of work. As result of 
this the companies which ar.e defined as potentially sick, namely those whose networth is 
eroded by more than SO percent and not wholly, are by and large not faling the forms and 
there is inadequate monitoring process to ensure preventive work. Unless the number of 
benches are increased, this monitoring can not be done. With the decentralised State level 
BIFRs, this ina~equacy wm also be taken care of. 
77. Benches are mostly manned by retired Government servants. Goswami Committee 
bas pointed out that the members of BIFR are generalists. Most of the members of BIFR 
are retired or seconded officers from the civil services. It is necessary to associate 
professional management consultants or even functioning or retired Public Sector 
Undertakings officials, who h~ve field experience of running an industry to man the benches. 
(Mr. K.N. Raval Advocate, Dr. S.S. Mehta, Gandhi Labour Institute). In fact, Section 4(3) 
of SICA, 1985 states that BIFR members should have special knowledge an professional 
experience of not less than fifteen years in science, technology, economics, banking industry, 
law, labour matters, industrial finance, industrial management, industrial reconstruction, 
administration, investment, accountancy of marketing. 
78. The Sub-Committee also feels that as we have acceptef;l: policy of liberalisation 
with human face there should be also suitable members from' 'labour movement on these 
benches. Not only this, but at present, concerned Labour Union in neither made party nor 
called upon to appear. The Sub-Committee feels that concerned Labour Union should also be 
given opportunity to appear before BIFR. 
79. The Sub-Committee also feels that wherever in any case workers of the unit offer to 
turnaround the unit by forming Workers CooperatiiVe, BIFJ{ should give priority to such 
workers cooperative and give necessary support once such scheme is approved. 
80.· BIFR bas, by and large, appointed senior retired Government officers as its 
nominee directors on the Board of sick companies. This requires to be looked into for 
ensuring that the concerned persons take a more protective role and do not restrict their 
participation in the process of revival merely to attend the Board meetings. They should be 
called upon to continuously visit the plant and give monthly report of their visits so that the 
BIFR is kept informed of the developments in the company on a day-do-day basis. A constant 
monitoring scheme should be provided to have the best possible results. 
81. The Act provides for an operating agency to be appointed by the BIFR from the 
several financial institutions like IDBI, IFCt etc. Some of these institutions are reluctant to 
act as such because of time and other constraints. Sometimes the institutions are not able to 
take a fresh view and continue to give the assessment of the viability of prospects on the 
basis of their past perception and in a given case, even past prejudices. It is, th·erefore, 

79 
suggested that the BIFR should be equipped with an independent agency manned by 
competent persons to assess the viability of various schemes which may 'be suggested. The 
practice of appointing the concerned financial institutions as the operating agency can never 
give a fresh picture or approach which is sometimes absolutely critical for reviving the 
company. This will require amendment of Section 3(1) (i). 
82. BIFR should have power to sanction the scheme without the consent of the concerned 
bank or rmancial institution if BIFR is satisfied that the scheme is workable even though 
institutions are not willing to consent. This will require amendment of Section 18. 
83. The power to give interim directions is restricted to Section 22(a) of the Act which 
permits BIFR to prevent disposition of assets. This is inadequate. BIFR must be given far 
more interim powers pending the inquiry not only to prevent disposition of assets, but also, in 
a given case appoint a provisional receiver in case where the company's operations are shut 
down or a provisional manager or agent to take over the management and run the 
management of the existing unit in any opinion is formed that the unit is being operative in a 
dishonest or fraudulent manner. 
84. The method of functioning by which the BIFR hearings take place like a court 
hearing is not fully appropriate. Such hearing should take place at the final stage but in the 
interaganum there should be greater interaction between the operating agency of the BIFR, as 
suggested earlier, and the company so that the various implications can be gone into in detail. 
85. One of the greatest attractions of taking over a sick unit is setting of losses U'S. 72(a) 
of the Income Tax Act. Earlier, BIFR had power to sanction the schel.e with orders U'S. 
72(a). Now even if the BIFR sanctions the scheme approval under section 72(a) is still 
required. This is time consuming and leads to duplication of efforts and there is no reason 
why the BIFR should not have the power to grant relief U'S.72(a). 
86. One of the reasons of dewy of about two to three years is that in over 50 percent of 
the cases owners have challenged before the AAIFR the closure as recommended by BIFR. 
During the pendency of the appeal to AAIFR, all legal proceedings are suspended U'S. 22 of 
SICA. Therefore, it is recommended that since AAIFR is redundant and leads to unnecessary 
delay and therefore AAIFR should be abolished. Instead, the expertise in the BIFR should be 
increased so that judgement by BIFR is based on better information. 
SICA to Override ULCA for a Viable Area Employment Regeneration Project 
87. SICA 1985 overrides Section 25 M, Section 25 N and Section 25 0 of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947 for the purpose of restructuring of a unit uls. 18(4) of SICA 1985. In a 
similar way SICA 1985 should override Urban Land Ceiling Act for the purpose of a Viable 
Area Employment Regeneration Scheme for the prompt re-entry for new viable economic 
activities. The best example is that of proposed Ahmedabad Local Economy Rejuvination 
Trust (ALERT) to be created out of the sale of redeveloped land of 15 mills under 
liquidation which would have created over 50,000 jobs. 
SICA to Override . FERA 
88. Under Section 32 of SICA it overrides all Acts except Foreign Exchange Regulation 
ACT (FERA), 1973 and Urban Land (Ceiling & Regulation) Act (ULCRA), 1976. It is 
suggested that SICA should override FERA so that non-resident Indians are encouraged to 
take over the sick companies. 
89. BIFR is empowered to recommend liquidation. According to the present procedure 

80 
these cases have to be referred to the High Court. In the cases which are before BIFR under 
SICA 1985, the Companies Act may be amended to authorize the BIFR to pass the orders for 
winding up as if it were in the liquidation court. (Section 20-1 of SICA). This step will save 
about ~12 months. 
90. There is a legal ambiguity in Section 20 of SICA that requires clarification and 
amendment. Section 20(4) states that (i) notwithstanding contained in Section 20(2) and 20(3), 
BIFR can sell the assets of a company that is recommended to be wound up and (ii) the sale 
proceeds must be forwarded to the concerned High Court for distribution according to Section 
529 A of the Companies Act. The first part implies that Section (I) is winding up. However, if 
this is so, then once the opinion of winding up is forwarded to the High Court, the case goes 
outside SICA and enters the realm of the Companies Act. That being so the courts can insist 
that sales u/s. 20(4) of (SICA) be structured according to the time delaying detail, strictly 
sequential procedures laid down by the Companies Act, the Companies (Court) rules and the 
civil procedure court. Therefore, this ambiguity in Section 20 should be removed so that BIFR 
can sell the assets of a company after deciding to wind it up u1; 20 (1). 
Policy Package for Restructuring Industry and Sector 
91. BIFR has been so far dealing on case to case basis, even though it is very apparent 
that the sickness is in the industry/sector like cotton and jute textile industry as a whole for 
preventing further sickness in the sector, sectorial recommendations are necessary. Therefore, 
BIFR must also apply its mind for restructuring of the sector or a policy package for the 
industry/sector which would be a preventive measure which is one of the objective of the BIFR 
and SICA. 
92. This issue is highlighted before the Sub-Committee on the basis of cases with regard 
to NEPA, NTC and Kamani Tubes. It was brought to the notice of the Sub-Committee that 
NEPA was a thriving industrial unit with positive networth. It has been supplying newsprints 
to the major newspaper establishments spread all over the country who were making huge 
profits. NEPA Mill is closed since August, 1996 on account of serious financial constraints due 
to adverse market conditions for indigenous newsprints arising out of liberalised import of 
newsprint under OGL. Because of the non-payment of energy bill, Madhya Pradesh 
Electricity Board disconnected power supply. 
93. The management suggested that if some policy measures are taken immediately, the 
loss making unit can be converted into a profit making unit in only two years. These are the 
preventive steps which should be taken by BIFR. 
94. The case of NTC is another unique one. If all the units of NTC are aggregated they 
become unviable. However, several individual units under NTC are viable, but since they can 
not be examined individually by the BIFR and therefore they are also turning sick. It is also a 
matter of policy which should be taken up by BIFR. 
95. The third case is of the Kamani Tubes and other workers cooperatives recommended 
by BIFR. Even after the BIFR has recommended that these units must be taken over by the 
workers cooperatives the banks and financial institutions continue to treat them as sick units. 
Therefore, inspite of the sacrifices by the workers, the tum around has not taken place 
because the banks and financial institutions have not played their assigned role to which they 
have agreed in the BIFR. Therefore, BIFR should make it mandatory for the banks and the 
financial institutions that once they have recommended a case for rehabilitation they should 
come forward and help in the turnaround of these units. This is an important issue for policy 
making. 

81 
96. At present, 185 references of the Government companies have been made to BIFR, 
of which 140 were registered. Registration with BIFR means that its functioning becomes 
loose and losses increased and turnaround becomes more and more difficult as time goes off. 
The efforts are slackened by the authorities. The flow of funds particularly working capital 
flow is difficult to get. The purpose of referring public sector units to BIFR, was that they 
should recommend its restructuring to make them viable. This has not happened. Therefore, 
BIFR as a matter of policy should take up and recommend restructuring of the public sector 
units without delay. 
Performance of NRF 
97. The National Renewal fund of Rs. 200 crores was established by Government of 
India in 1991-92 to provide a social safety net for the affected workers, both in public, 
private and unorganised sectors due to macro-economic adjustment and the structural 
adjustment programme. Between 1992-93 and 1996-97, Rs. 3100 crores have been allocated 
to National Renewal Fund. Of this, Rs. 1769.66 crores have been transferred to Public 
Account. Rs. 1505.17 crores have been released for voluntary retirement scheme of 94,332 
workers in the Central Government Public undertakings upto 30th September, 1996. 
98. All the representation made before the Sub-Committee have found the working of 
the National Renewal Fund very unsatisfactory and a large deviation from the original 
objectives. NRF has failed to provide the social safety net for the workers, both in the 
organised and unorganised sectors. NRF has in no way reduced the adverse impact of the 
macro economic adjustment and the structural adjustment programme on the workers. 
99. The biggest failure of the NRF is to provide for the Area Employment Regeneration 
Scheme which was supposed to be the key to success of the objective of NRF. The original 
budget allocation of NRF Rs. 150 crores for Ahmedabad project of area regeneration was 
not transferred because of the bureaucratic rigidity. The Empowered Committee of the NRF 
and even other concerned officials found this scheme viable and yet the funds were not 
released and therefore the benefits of the NRF have not come forth. The failure to 
implement area regeneration project under NRF in a sad commentary on the functioning of 
NRF. The implementation of the area regeneration project and its success would have 
ensured the faith and confidence of the workers in the NRF and the Government. Even now 
if NRF has to make significant impact in the labour market then it is only through proper 
implementation area regeneration schemes in Ahmedabad, Kanpur, Indore, Calcutta, etc. 
Therefore, the Sub-Committee feels and recommends very strongly that NRF must be utilised 
to provide social safety net to workers and it must adhere to its original objectives as spelt out 
in 1991-92. Leaving apart the generation of new jobs, the rehabilitation of workers should be 
done in such a manner that they do not remain without work. 
100. Non-implementation of the area regeneration projects have another implicit 
danger. In places like Ahmedabad, Mumbai, Calcutta, Kanpur and Indore where large 
amount of valuable land resource are lying unutilised if they are not recycled in a planned 
manner, it would result into haphazard growth of the area leading to environmental 
problems. There is also· possibility that this valuable land might be grabbed by the builder 
lobby at throw away prices without any significant benefit to the society. This is the lesson 
which we have in some places in Ahmedabad and in Mumbai. By not taking up area 
regeneration scheme a great opportunity has been lost of developing a suitable policy 
package to recycle the valuable land resource. 
101. Voluntary Retirement Scheme has been able to get rid of 94,332 workers upto 30th 

82 
September, 1996 but it is not necessary that it might have led to becoming those units viable 
and therefore obviously VRS to 94,332 workers does not fulfil any objective or any benefit 
to the society. 
102. In a major sense VRS is a very unproductive scheme which has neither helped the 
country nor the concerned units or even the workers who have taken VRS or the workers 
who have remained behind. 
103. Even the retraining programme undertaken under NRF has remained of a very 
small size looking to the requirement of the affected workers. Even where the programme 
has taken its roots (Ahmedabad, Indore, etc.), the institutions running such programme find 
that the structure is too rigid. 
104. At Ahmedabad, Gandhi Labour Institute which runs the training programme, told 
the Sub-Committee to: 
(a) relax the age limit which is of 35 years 
(b) lower the educational qualification 
(c) lengthen the duration of course from 50 days to 180 days 
(d) increase the stipend 
105. The Sub-Sub-Committee feels that the Ministry should give little more flexibility 
looking to the local environment and largely accept the suggestions. 
106. In initial period of NRF it was also mentioned that the problem of legal dues of the 
affected workers will get priority. But nothing has so far happened in this matter. Workers 
of 46 Textile Mills of Ahmedabad have not received their legal dues of Rs. 222 crores. And 
when these Units are taken into liquidation and assets are disposed of, it is not likely that 
workers will get even sizable portion of their dues. This problem also needs some solution. 
107. Thus most of the trade unions and workers have found the functioning of NRF to 
be very unsatisfactory and non-productive. The following suggestions have come forward 
with regard to the concept of social safety net: 
(i) At present, it seems that NRF has come to a standstill. It seems there is no 
provision for it in 1996-97 and onwards. This implies that the adverse impact of 
macro economic adjustment and structural adjustment programmes on workers has 
come to an end. This is not true. The adverse impact would continue in the new 
economic regime. Therefore, the social safety net would be required. Therefore, 
NRF should be augmented by creating State Renewal Funds. Punjab and 
Rajasthan have already created State Renewal Fund but unfortunately only for 
State level public enterprises. Gujarat has also proposed State Renewal Fund which 
is likely to be funded by the Asian Development Bank. The major objectives of the 
NRF and SRF will be to provide human face to liberalisation. The State Renewal 
Fund but unfortunately only for State level public enterprises. Gujarat has also 
proposed State Renewal Fund can be created through a regular contribution from 
healthy units by the de facto partner of the unit, i.e. the entrepreneur, the 
employees, the financial institutions, Central and State Governments. It can also 
be supported by NRF. Such a fund on a regular basis can provide social safety net 
on a continuous basis. 
(ii) The Centre for Worker's Management, Mumbai has drawn the attention of the 
Sub-Committee that the present scheme for retraining, redeployment and 
counselling is extremely small. It has suggested that the schemes for retraining need 
to be fine-tuned with the specific skills and capabilities of workers concerned as· 

83 
well as in relation with where realistic and feasible opportunities of redeployment 
exist. On the question of development of small business for generating employment, 
this scheme also needs to be extended to the creation of new enterprises through 
workers cooperatives. 
(iii) The Working Committee of INTUC expresses its reservations over the present 
functioning of NRF. It is of the view that NRF should be converted into a statutory 
fund through a new law assuring adequate representation to the working class so 
that funds may flow directly to the NRF instead of the Consolidated Fund of India. 
108. Taking the views expressed before the sub-Committee, the Sub-Committee felt that 
the functioning of NRF has totally neglected the area of providing funds for Employment 
Generation schemes, both in the organised and unorganised sector in order to provide a social 
safety net for labour. VRS existed even before NRF was created. The basic approach should 
be to provide immediate alternative employment to an affected worker who became 
unemployed for no fault of his. At one stage NRF made an effort to evolve some scheme of 
unemployment insurance. One does not know why that effort was abandoned. 
109. The Sub-Committee urges upon the Government to consider the views expressed 
and suggestions made before the Sub-Committee seriously and give NRF the proper status and 
see that aims enumerated at the time of formation of NRF are achieved during the Ninth 
Plan. 
110. Overall representations before the Sub-Committee has been that functioning of the 
BIFR and NRF is not very satisfactory. However, they are very important for the 
imple~ntation of the new economic policy with a human face which, of course, calls for 
restructuring them on the lines suggested above. 
SANAT MEHTA 
Convenor, 
Sub-Committee II on NRF and BIFR. 

ANNEXURE 
LIST OF PERSONS WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE SUB-COMMITTEE 
6.1.1997 Ahmedabad 
1. Representatives of the Government of Gujarat: 
(i) Shri Girishchandra K. Parmar, 
Minister of State, Labour & Employment 
(ii) Shri Ashok Narayan, 
Additional Chief Secretary 
(iii) Dr. P.K. Das, 
Director-Ge.neral, Gandhi Labour Institute 
(iv) Shri· S.K. Mohapatra, 
Secretary Industries 
(v) Shri Anis M. Mankad, 
Addl. Director, Employment & Training, Gandhinagar 
(vi) Shri Niranjan Joshi, 
Deputy Secretary, Labour & Employment Department 
(vii) Shri B.B. Patel, 
Prof. of Economic GLI. 
2. Representatives of the Mlnistry of Industry · 
(Deptt. of Industrial Development), .Government ·of India: 
(i) Shri Sohan Lal, Director 
(ii) Shri Sunil K. Lohani, Under Secretary 
3. Representatives of the NTC Mills Technicians and Officers Staff Union (Gujarat): 
(i) Shri Suresh R. Patel, Chairman 
(ii) Shri lrshadbaig Mirza President 
(iii) Shri Bharat V. Shah, General Secretary 
4. Representative of School of Planning: 
Prof. Barjor Mehta, Director 
5. Representative of Gandhi Labour Institute: 
Prof. S.S. Mehta, Prof. of Economics 
6. Representative of Gujarat State, CITU: 
Shri Subodh Mehta, President 
7 .1.97 Mumbai 
1. Representatives of the Management of National Bicycle Corporation of India 
Limlted: -
(i) Shri D. Dipitivilasa, Chairman & Managing Director 
(ii) Shri V.S. Deshpande, Deputy General Manager (F/W) 
(iii) Shri S.K. Singh, Deputy General Manager (Cord/CVO) 
(iv) Shri C.P. Tiwari, Deputy General Manager (Admp.) 
2. Representatives of the Kamgar Union National Bicycle Corporation of India Limited: 
(i) Shri H.P. Singh, President 
(ii) Shri V.M. Vichare, Secretary 
(iii) Shrimati Meena Memon, Advisor 
84 

85 
3. Representatives of Sbramik Utk.arsb Sabha: 
(i) Shri K.N. Mokal, President 
(ii) Shri Jairam Yadav, Unit Secretary 
(iii) Shri V.B. Nagwakar, Unit President 
4. Representatives of N.B.C.T.L. Ghaziab~d: 
(i) Shri Abadh K. Bhor, Vice President 
(ii) Shri S.M. Shukla, General Secretary 
(iii) Shri Munesh Singh, Member 
(iv) Shri B.K. Panchal, Member 
5. Representatives of Centre for Workers' Management, New Delhi: 
(i) Shri D. Thankappan, Director 
(ii) Shri Gautam Mody, Economist 
6. Representatives of Rastriya Mill Mazdoor Sangh: 
(i) Shri G.B. Paral, Vice President 
(ii) Shri R.D. Hulamate, Vice-President 
(iii) Shri K.G. Danse, Secretary 
(iv) Shri Prashakar Kunte, Member 
(v) Shri G.B. Gawde, Office Secretary 
7. Representatives of the INTUC (Maharashtra): 
(i) Shri Narendra Tidka, President 
(ii) Shri Haribhan Naik, General Secretary 
8.1.1997 Indore 
1. Representatives of Management of NEPA Ltd.: 
(i) Shri V.K. Gupta, Chairman & Managing Director 
(ii) Shri N.V. Subramanian, Secretary 
(iii) Shri S. Krishnamurty, General Manager (Mktg.) 
(iv) Shri P.D. Sharma, Deputy General Manager (P. & Admn.) 
(v) Shri S.K. Ghosh, General Manager (Works) 
(vi) Shri N.P. Gupta, General Manager (Com.) 
(vii) Shri N.R. Patel, Deputy Manager (Project) 
(viii) Shri B. Mukerjee, Sr. Manager (F&A) 
(ix) Shri O.P. Tailor, Sr. Manager (F&A) 
(x) Shri R.N. Kulthe, PSS to CMD 
2. Representative of the Ministry of Industry, Department of Heavy Industry, Government 
of India: 
Shri K. Narayanan, Desk Officer 
3. Representatives of INTUC (Indore): 
(i) Shri D.T. Mahajan, President 
(ii) Shri P .K. Singh, General Secretary 
(iii) Shri S. Tiwari, Working President 
4. Representatives of Kagaruduag Supervisors Association: 
(i) Shri R. G. Sharma, President 
(ii) Shri A. Vaishnav, Working President 
(iii) Shri I.H. Jafri, Secretary 
(iv) Shri L.S. Sanger, Executive Member 

86 
5. Representatives of Karamchari Sangh: 
(i) Shri Mimmohan Dawre, President 
(ii) Shri K. Ahamad, General Secretary 
6. Representatives of Supervisory Staff Association: 
(i) Shri P.K. Luthra, Working President 
(ii) Shri D. Dutta, General Secretary 
7. Representative of B.M.S. Nepanagar : 
Shri S.K. Choure, General Secretary 
8. Representative of Nepa-darpan: 
Shri P.S. Bais, Editor 
9.1.1997 Calcutta 
1. Representatives of Management of Burn Standard Co. Ltd.: 
(i) Shri S.N. Ghosh, DGM-in-charge 
(ii) Shri K.K. Chatterjee, General Manager (CPD) 
(iii) Shri I.C. Sinha, Director (Engg.) 
(iv) Shri B.D. Ghosh; Director (Pers.) 
(v) Shri S.K. Kar, Director (Fin) 
2. Representative of the Ministry of Industry, Government of India, New Delhi : 
Shri G.S. Bothyal, Under Secretary 
3. Representatives of the Burn Employees' Union: 
(i) Shri Pradip Kumar Chatterjee, Jt. Secretary 
(ii) Shri Biswanath Das, Joint Secretary 
4. Representatives of the Burn Shramik Union (CITU): 
(i) Shri K.K. Roy, Joint Secretary 
(ii) Shri Shyamal Sharmadhikary, Treasurer 
5. Representatives of Burn Labour Union (HMS): 
(i) Shri Subodh Kar, General Secretary 
(ii) Shri Uttam Kar, Treasurer 
(iii) Shri Piyal Kantidhar, Joint Secretary 
(iv) Shri Debarata Basu, Joint Secretary 
6. Representatives of Burn Standard Officers' Association: 
(i) Shri Subir Kumar Ghosh, Joint Secretary 
(ii) Shri Anutosh Bandyopadhyay, Joint Secretary 
7. Representatives of Burn Standard Ltd. Employees Association: 
(i) Shri K.S. Rao., Acting Joint Secretary 
(ii) Shri Bi~ajit Hazra, Treasurer 
8. Representatives of Burn Standard Union (INTUC): 
(i) Shri Asit Bhattacharjee, Joint Secretary 
(ii) Shri Santosh Kumar Ojha, Joint Secretary 
9. Representatives of Burn Standard Security Association: 
(i) Shri Santi Bhattacharjee-; General Secretary 
(ii) Shri Tapan Kumar Ghose, Executive Member 

87 
0. Representative of Burn Sarmik Karmachari Union (AITUC): 
Shri Amar Majumdar, General Secretary 
1. Representatives of the Management of Tyre Corporation of India Ltd.: 
(i) Shri D.N. Banerjee, Chairman & Managing Director 
(ii) Shri T.K. Samaddar, General Manager (P&A) 
(iii) Shri S.K. Roy, Dy. General Manager (P&A) 
(iv) Shri S.C. Bhattacharjee, Director (Prod.) 
(v) Shri S. Chakaraborty, Dy. Manager (Mis.) 
(vi) Shri M.C. Ganguly, P. & A M 
(vii) Shri A.K. Banik, Works Manager 
(viii) Shri K.D. Banerjee, Advisor (O&A) 
(ix) Shri K. Ganguly, Financial Controller 
(x) Shri G. Bandopadhyay, Company Secretary 
.1997 Calcutta 
Representatives of the Tyre Corporation of India Ltd. Employees Union: 
(i) Shri Rathindra Kumar Oeb, General Secretary 
(ii) Shri Prabir Retan Chakraborty 
(iii) Shri Haraohan Mallick 
(iv) Shri Pramathes Sen, General Secretary 
(v) Shri Debdulal Ghosh, Secretary 
Representatives of the Tyre Corporation of India Ltd. Mazdoor Union (INTUC): 
(i) Shri Subodh Kumar Roy Chowdhury, Secretary 
(ii) Shri Subrata Roy Chowdhury, Joint Secretary 
Representatives of the T.D. Kankinara Union (INTUC): 
(i) Shri Narayan B. Das, General Secretary 
(ii) Shri Badar Adikar, Asstt. Secretary 
(iii) Shri Shyam Karmakar, Asstt. Secretary 
(iv) Shri Susanta Guha, G/ A 
Representatives of T.C.I. Workers Union: 
(i) Shri Bimal Adhikar 
(ii) Shri Shyamal Sarkar 
Representatives of N.R.H. Workers Union: 
•. 
(i) Shri Sourin Aditya, President 
(ii) Shri Sunil Mohinta, General Secretary 
Representative of T.C.I. HO (INTUC): 
Shri Ashok Das, Secretary 
' 
I 
~ I 

88 
7. Representative of T.C.I. KNR Works (CITU): 
Shri Sijib Kumar Sen, Asstt. Secretary 
8. Representatives of T.C.I. Ud. Stqff (T&C) Association: 
(i) Shri Dinesh Chatterjee, General Secretary 
(ii) Shri Pradip Chandra, Secretary 
(iii) Shri Bedyut Sanyal, Secretary 
9. Representatives of T.C.I. OffiCers Association: 
(i) Shri Santanu Das Gupta,· General Secretary 
(ii) Shri Bhanu Kumar Basu, Secretary 
(iii) Shri Amita Chatterjee, Secretary 
(iv) Shri Asit Baran Sarkhit, Unit Secretary 
(v) Shri Ashok Mitra, Joint Secretary 
10. Representative of T.C.I. Workmen's Association: 
Shri Dainesh Goswami, General Secretary 
11. Representative of N.R.N. Sramik Union: 
Shri Satyabrata Dutta, General Secretary 
10.1.1997 Calcutta 
1. Representatives of the Management of JESSOP: 
(i) Shri A.K. Sur, Managing Director 
(ii) Shri R.D.G. Raghavan, Secretary 
(iii) Shri S. Chatterjee, Dy. General Manager (F) 
(iv) Shri M. Samajpati, D.F. 
(v) Shri P.K. Mukherjee, D.P. 
(vi) Shri J. Bagchi, General Manager (A&P) 
(vii) Shri U. Hazra, Sr. Manager (Coml.) 
(viii) Shri K. K. Chatterjee, General Manager {CPO) 
2. Representative of the Ministry of Industry, Govt. of India: 
Shri G.S. Bothyal, Under Secretary 
3. Representatives of Jessop Mazdoor Union (CITU): 
(i) Shri Paritosh Lahiri, Vice-President 
(ii) Shri Binay Kirshna Mitra, Organising Secretary 
4. Representatives of Jessop & Company Supervisory Stal1 Association: 
(i) Shri Swapan Kumar Polley, Secretary 
(ii) Shri Biswajit Chakraborty, Executive Member 

89 
5. Representatives of Jessop & Company Staff Association: 
(i) Shri Subir Chandra Sen, Working President 
(ii) Shri A.K. Brahmachary, General Secretary 
6. Representatives of Jessop Shramik Union (INTUC): 
(i) Shri Lal Bahadur Singh, General Secretary 
(ii) Shri Samkar Chakraborty,- Joint Secretary 
7. Representatives of Jessop & Company Employees Association: 
(i) Shri Amitabha Datta, General Secretary 
(ii) Shri S. Banerjee, Secretary 
(iii) Shri K.K. Chakraborty, Secretary 
8. Representatives of the Management of M~ning Allied Machinery Corporation Ltd., Durgapur: 
(i) Shri P.K. Rohatagi, Chairman & Managing Director 
(ii) Shri N.R. Sinha, Asstt. General Manager 
(iii) Shri J .K. Ganguly, Regional Manager 
(iv) Shri R.R. Singh, Manager 
(v) Shri S. Moitra, Manager (PR) 
(vi) Shri P.K. Mandai, Asstt. Controller of Accounts 
9. Representatives of Heavy Engineering Workers Union (INTUC): 
(i) Shri B.K. Chakraborty, President 
(ii) Shri S.S. Paul, Working President 
(iii) Shri Rabin Majumdar, Vice-President 
(iv) Shri Asit Kumar Panthry, General Secretary 
(v) Shri Provat Goswami, Treasurer 
10. Representatives of the MAMCEU (CITU): 
(i) Shri Malay Kanti Dutta, General Secretary 
(ii) Shri R.K. Saba Roy, Secretary 
(iii) Shri S.R. Bhaumik, Secretary 
(iv) Shri Konu Mondal, Secretary 
(v) Shri Dilip Kumar Roy, Secretary 
(iv) Shri D.C. Bhattacharjee, Treasurer 
11. Representatives of Management of Bharat Ophthalmic Glass Ltd.: 
(i) Shri S. Banerjee, Managing Director 
(ii) Shri S.C. Deb Roy, Additional Personnel Manager 

90 
(iii) Shri S.K. Mitra, Sr. Accounts Officer 
(iv) Shri S. Mukherjee, Dy. Sales Manager & Secretary 
12. Representatives of the Bharat Ophthalmic Glass Workers Union (INTUC): 
(i) Shri Gobundo Das 
(ii) Shri Rayeshwar Prasad 
(iii) Shri Ashok Kumar Das 
(iv) Shri Arbinda Nandi 
13. Representatives of the Bharat Ophthalmic Glass Workers Union (CITU): 
(i) Shri Alok Chatterjee, President 
(ii) Shri R.K. Chowdhury, Secretary 
14. .{lepresentatives of Bharat Ophthalmic Glass Mazdoor Union: 
(.i} Shri A.L. Gupta, President 
6{i) K.N. Banerjee, Secretary 
15. Representatives of Bharat Ophthalmic Glass Shramik Union: 
(i) Shri G. Bhattacharya, President 
(ii) Sh9 R.K. Bhattacharya, Secretary 
(iii) Shri G. Bhatt, Treasurer 

476/RS F-7-A 
STUDY REPORT(S) 
OF 
SUB-COMMITTEE-III 

476/RS F-7-B 
. -.·. 

COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE 
1. Shri M. Ramananthan-Convenor 
2. Syed Sibtey Razi 
3. Shri T.M. Venkatachalam 
4. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
5. Shri Chitturi Ravindra 
6. Shri B.L. Shankar 
7. Shri V. Alagirisamy 
8. Shri Chandra Sekhar 
SUB-COMMITTEE-III ON TRENDS IN INDUSTRIAL OUTPUT 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry at its meeting held 
on the 29th October, 1996 constituted five Sub-Committees to examine five different 
subjects pertaining to the Ministries of Industry, Steel and Mines. Sub-Committee-Ill has 
been assigned the task of examining the prevailing trends in industrial output. 
2. In the process of examination, the Sub:Committee heard the views of the Secretary of 
the Ministries of Industry and Power. It also studied the notes and papers received from 
the Planning Commission, the CII, the ASSOCHAM and the FICCI. The Sub-Committee, 
however, could not hear the views of the representatives of the Ministries of 
Communications and Transport as well as the Planning Commission due to paucity of time. 
3. The Sub-Committee began its study with the oral evidence of the Secretary, 
Department of Industrial Policy Promotion, Ministry of Industry and had an interactive 
discussion on the wide ranging interconnected issues reflecting upon the industrial growth 
rate in the current financial year. 
4. The Secretary, at the very outset, admitted that industrial production during the 
period April to August of the current financial year declined to 8.6% as compared to 
12.6% in the corresponding period of the last year. Several sub-sectors of the industry 
namely, electricity, fertilizer, petroleum, textile, steel; etc. were showing signs of 
slowdown. Since, all these sub-sectors belong to the core sector of the economy, any 
negative trend in their growth rate was bound to have a telling impact of the overall 
growth rate. Electricity and mining have, largely, been responsible for bringing down the 
total growth of industrial sector. In case of electricity, it recorded a meagre 2. 5 per cent of 
growth rate in the first quarter of the financial year 1996-97 whereas it was 12.5 per cent 
in the corresponding period of the financial year 1995-96. The performance of Mining 
sector was even worse than the electricity as it could manage to have a nominal growth 
rate of only 1.8 per cent in the same period this year as against the growth rate of 15.4 
per cent last year. Manufacturing sector continued to be in a fluid state. The decline in 
performance of infrastructure industries and major industries can be seen from the 
93 

94 
undermentioned Tables received from the Ministry of Industry alongwith their written 
comments. 
Table-1 Performance of infrastructure industries 
Sl. Industry Weight Growth Rates 
No. 
1992-93 1993-94 1994-95 
1. Electricity 11.429 4.9 7.5 8.5 
2. Coal 6.608 3.8 3.4 3.0 
3. Saleable Steel 5.209 7.0 4.6 11.1 
4. Crude 2.407 (- )11.2 0.3 19.3 
5. Refinery Prod. 1.519 4.0 1.5 4.1 
6. Cement 1.598 0.3 7.1 7.6 
Overall 28.771 3.0 5.3 8.4 
Note: *Provisional Figures for April-Sep., 1996. 
Table-IT Performance of 24 major industries 
l Growth Rates 
Sl. No. Industry 
Weight 1992-93 1993-94 1994-95 
1. Six 
Infrastructure 
Industries 28.77 
2. 18 Other 
Industries 21.60 
3. 24 Industries 50.37 
Note: Separate growth rates are calculated from 1992-93 only. 
*April-Aug., 1996. 
3.0 5.3 8.4 
1.6 6.0 11.1 
2.8 5.8 9.4 
1995-96 1996-97* 
8.2 2.6 
6.4 8.7 
8.5 4.0 
7.2 (-)10.3 
3.6 4.3 
11.2 12.2 
7.8 3.3 
1995-96 1996-97* 
7.8 3.5 
10.3 9.3 
8.7 5.6 
5. The Sub-Committee was further informed that Ministry of Industry tried to identify 
the reasons for this downturn and after an analysis it came to the conclusion that there were 
three major reasons responsible for the present state of growth rate as given below: 
(i) High cost of capital and non-availability of Funds: The cost of capital available 
to the industry is very high. The industry is getting money at an interest rate as 
high 
• 

95 
as 20%. This led to the non-availability of funds thus making the situation in 
money market very tight. 
(ii) Lack of Liquidity in the market: Another factor responsible for downward trend 
has been the liquidity crunch. The squeeze in money supply growth effected by 
RBI resulted in a liquidity crisis. There was acute shortage of money in the 
market because of short supply from RBI. 
(iii) Poor Infrastructure: After liberalisation, the economy registered an increase in 
growth rate. This put extraordinary strain on infrastructure and brought out its 
weaknesses and state of unpreparedness to the fore. Every constituent of the 
infrastructure proved incapable and was found wanting. The performance of 
sectors like electricity generation, petroleum, steel, fertilizers, etc. can be 
quoted as best examples for highlighting the poor state of infrastructure. 
6. Apart from these factors, the analysis of the Ministry identified a couple of other 
reasons such as lack of coordination among Government ministries and departments, 
absence of a coherent picture vis-a-vis liberalisation policy, marginal fall in the savings, delay 
in decision-making as a result of which less foreign direct investment (FDI) proposals were 
received, slump in stock market, increase in PSUs liabilities, etc. 
7. Government were, however, taking all remedial measures to revive the industrial 
output. Accordingly, RBI issued instructions to public sector banks to cut their prime 
lending rates (PLRs). Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) was also reduced by 2% to ease the 
money market. All ministries and departments were taking steps to improve the situation. 
This apart, the Secretary expressed confidence that the growth rate should be in double digit 
though it was too early to say whether it will reach 12 per cent. Since, a number of players 
were involved in the whole process, the growth rate might fall short of the target. 
8. Elaborating further on what needs to be done, the Sub-Committee was informed on 
the issue of foreign investment that an economy, liberalising after years of closed door 
policy, needed free flow of money. But the tight money policy adopted by RBI resulted in 
shortage of capital in the market. This crisis was further compounded by less availability of 
foreign capital. At a time when its neighbouring country, China was attracting more foreign 
investment, India could manage only two billion dollars as foregin investment in 1995-96 as 
against thirty-five billion dollars investment in China. Therefore, India required billions of 
dollars as foreign investment to prop up its economic reforms. He opined that improvement 
in existing facilities and efforts to get more investment for creating new capacity should form 
a part of the strategy to be evolved to get over the crisis. As far as, lack of coordination and 
delay in decision-making was concerned, the Secretary admitted that these two factors were 
also proving to be major hurdles in increase in growth rate. The suggestion for having a 
nodal agency preferably the Department of Industrial Development tor monitoring and 
maintaining the tempo of growth rate was well received by the Secretary. Such a nodal 
agency should also be entrusted with the task of coordinating among all ministries and 
departments in order to ensure speedy disposal of investment proposals and to reach the 
targeted mark of growth rate. 
9. Commenting upon the poor infrastructure, the Sub-Committee was informed that the 
infrastructure was wholly and solely dependent on the public sector or for that matter the 
Government. There has been no private participation or investment on infrastructure as it 
did not yield any profit or financial return. What actually is required to be done is to 
encourage and attract both private as well as foreign investment in this sector. 
10. Similarly, the Secretary emphasized the need to increase savings. As per the data 

96 
available with the Ministry, the savings stood at 24-25% whereas to achieve a growth target 
of 7-8%, there had to be savings to the tune of 28% of GDP. Savings need to register an 
increase of 2%. Government expenditure should be reduced in order to increase the savings. 
At present, larger revenue expenditure has resulted in increased borrowings by Government. 
This continues to be a major impediment in the progress of the economy. Fiscal and revenue 
deficits stood at 5.9 per cent and 3.1 per cent of GDP respectively in 1995-96. Though fiscal 
deficit declined from 8.3 per cent of GDP in 1990-91 to 5.9 per cent in 1995-96, the size of 
the deficit continues to be high. What is more worrying is the high revenue deficit which has 
fallen only by 0.4 percentage point in the last five years, from 3.5 per cent of GDP in 
1990-91 to 3.1 per cent in 1995-96. As a result of high revenue deficit, Government has to 
borrow from the market to meet current expenditures. 
11. The Secretary, in all, was for inprovement of the existing infrastructure, more inflow 
of foreign direct investment, cut in the interest to ease the liquidity crisis, proper 
coordination among various ministries and departments of the Government, reduction in 
Government expenditure and increase in savings, evolution of a coherent industrial policy 
especially vis-a-vis private and foreign investment and so on and so forth. 
12. The Sub-Committee next heard the Secretary, Ministry of Power. Power being a 
major constituent of the infrastructure, has been the most decisive factor in bringing down 
the growth rate of industrial output. First six to seven months of the current financial year 
witnessed drastic fall in the electricity generation. This fall, in turn, had resulted in a 
slowdown in industrial output. The Secretary, Ministry of Power, in his submission informed 
the Sub-Committee that the country had 86,000 MW of installed capacity, out of which, 
about 35,000 MW was hydro and the remaining was completely thermal. The average 
shortage at the national level was 10%. The growth rate in demand is almost about eight per 
cent per annum, whereas the energy generated is about seven per cent per annum. So, there 
is a gap of one per cent year after year. This one per cent gap in demand and supply is the 
reason for power shortage all over the country. The availability of power is dependent on 
rains and availability of coal. This year, the hydro generation has dropped by almost 8% 
because of scanty rains in the catchment areas of almost all the regions of the country. 
Similarly, erratic supply of coal to the thermal power stations led to steep decline in 
electricity generation. The requirement of coal stood at 195 million tonnes last year. It fell 
short by 10 millions tonnes in 1995-96. Non-availability of coal has uniformly been affected 
the performance of power stations. In the current year, the power stations require around 
215 million tonnes of coal but the Ministry of Coal have already made it clear that they 
would not be able to supply more than 195 million tonnes of coal. So, there is a gap of 20 
million tonnes. Same is the case with gas-based units. Due to non-availability of gas, 
production never goes beyond 50---60%. As a result, the gap between demand and supply is 
widening. The demand for power is increasing every year by 8%. But the target is not being 
achieved. The reason why the target is not being achieved is the lack of investment. Private 
participation as well as foreign investments have somehow not been able to materialise. In 
this way, the power shortage continues to persist. 
13. The Sub-Committee was further informed that the Ministry of Power had prepared a 
National Action Plan to improve the condition of the power sector. Modernisation and 
increase in the efficiency of existing power plants, priority to hydro projects, autonomy to 
the State Electricity Boards and improvement in their management, rationalisation of tariffs, 
participation of private sector in distribution and setting up of central as well as State 
Electricity Regulatory Commissions are some of the highlights of this plan. A copy of the 
action plan is placed as Annexure-H. 
14. The Sub-Committee also had the opportunity to examine the background papers and 
notes received from the Planning Commission and various Chambers of Commerce and 
Industry. Close scrutiny of these papers proved helpful for the members to further grasp the 
gravity of the problem. All these papers, in a nut shell, pointed out that the downturn in 
industrial growth has been mainly due to (i) infrastructure bottlenecks, (ii) liquidity crunch, 

97 
(iii) high interest rates; (iv) slump in demand, (v) nsmg revenue expenditure and 
(vi) slowdown in the production activity of major sub-sectors of the industry. 
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
1. The most important factor which had led to slow growth in the industrial production 
is the lack of infrastructure in the country. No parti'YUlar attention has been given during the 
last so many years to develop this sector and to meet the increasing demand of the 
industries. Our ports are congested which takes days and weeks for the ships to get a berth 
at the ports. Similarly, there is a shortage of wagons. The roads cannot cope with the 
increasing demand of the the transport sector and other basic infrastructures are also 
lacking. In fact, the Finance Minister while replying to budget debate last year in the Lok 
Sabha was candid enough to admit that Indian infrastructure was trailing at its seams. He 
had added that as regards electricity, the shortage was around 20%. As regards roads, the 
Finance Minister had this to say: 
" ..... we have only about 74,000 kilometres of-what is called National Highway. But in 
many places the facetious statement is that, it is only a National Highway. It is not a 
National Highway. It ought to be world class roads. 
A gentleman from the Ford Motor Company who have set up a plant now in 
Maharashtra and who are setting up another plant in Tamil Nadu, told me that it takes five 
to nine days for a truck to go from Mumbai ·to a place in Tamil Nadu. If we have an 
efficient and cost effective system and if it takes nine days for goods to move from Mumbai 
to Madras, how is it possible? It should take not more than two days if we have world class 
roads there. That is why we have identified the infrastructure challenge as the second 
challenge after the fiscal challenge."* 
It is a matter of grave concern for the country that in all these years of planned 
economy, the infrastructure had totally been neglected. It speaks volumes of the lack of 
foresightedness and casts a serious reflection on the functioning of the Planning Commission 
which overseas and coordinates the planned development in the country. 
The Sub-Committee, therefore, suggests that action to augment the infrastructure in the 
country should be developed on a war footing and cooperation of all concerned should be 
secured. The policy for private investments should not only be crystal clear but also 
transparent. 
2. Industry has been virtually cash-strapped over the last few months. Two most 
discernible reasons for this are the adoption of tight money policy by RBI and the less flow 
of foreign capital in terms of direct investment. As far as, money policy of RBI is 
concerned, the situation was eased out to some extent by the reduction of CRR by 2%. This 
step made available around Rs. 8,000 crore to the market. With regard to the foreign direct 
investment, the indications have not been found to be as much encouraging as they were 
when the economic reforms were first introduced in India. It has been observed that 
whatever foreign capital has been invested or is being invested, is limited only to consumer 
durables or luxury items, whereas the basic infrastructural areas have been left untouched. 
Understandably, the attraction of foreign investors seems to be to make megabucks with 
scant regard to the creation of infrastructural facilities. The intention of this Sub-Committee, 
is not at all, to concetrate on infrastructure alone, the investment should be evenly dispersed 
so that overall growth could be achieved. It should never be lopsided in any manner. 
Therefore, this Sub-Committee is of the view that steps should be taken to attract foreign 
investment not just for one sector of the economy but for all the fields of economic activities, 
Priority, defmitely, be accorded to hitherto untouched or haltbeartedly touched sectors of the 
economy. 
*Finance Minister while replying to Budge~ deba~ In tbe Lok Sabha on 6.9.1996. 

98 
3. Another problem that dogged the industry is the high rate of interest on the funds 
provided by banks and other financial institutions. Though efforts were made on the part of 
RBI to control the situation, the timing of its intervention was little too late. Almost all the 
public sector banks have lowered their prime lending rates (PLRs) following the guidelines 
issued by RBI. Similarly, the reduction in Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) provided succour to 
the market which was bearing the brunt of liquidity crunch. In this regard, the Sub­
Committee has come to the conclusion that non-availability of easy money to the industry has 
assumed the proportions of a perennial problem. Here the role of RBI becomes significant. 
It being an apex body should take initiative to see that lending norms are further Iiberalised 
so that dying spirits of the market could be revived. Moreover, it should maintain mo:-e 
watchful control over the way the money market moves. 
4. Perhaps, the most crucial factor that has adversely affected the growth rate of 
industrial production, is the actual shortage of power, the survival of modem hi-tech 
industries depend mainly on the availability of power. If the availability of electricity is 
disturbed, the industrial activity gets equally affected within the possibility of its coming to a 
grinding halt within the stroke of a second. Apparently, little over sixty per cent of 
electricity is generated by thermal plants which have to depend on the supply of coal. 
A little delay, in the supply of coal, leads to the closure of generation units. On the other 
hand, in spite of having abundance of water resources, the contribution of hydel electricity 
plants is a mere thirty five per cent. In other words, this is a classic example of improper 
and poor management of natural resources. Although the Ministry of Power has chalked out 
a national action plan in order to improve the power situation, what remains to be seen is as 
to how successful this programme would be. In the opinion of this Sub-Committee, the entire 
power sector needs complete overhauling and restructuring. The present spate of unabated 
power crisis is swaping the entire country. It should be checked and this problem needs to be 
addressed with the help of both short-term as well as long-term measures. Foreign investment 
in the power sector should be encouraged with the emphasis being on hyde) electricity. As a 
short-term measure the focus should be on the modernisation of the existing plants so that 
their efficiency could be enhanced. The transmission and distribution losses of electricity, the 
present rate of which is too high all over the country, also needs to be checked with a strong 
hand. The various State Electricity Boards also need to be revamped with a view to instil 
efficiency in their operation. 
5. Revenue expenditure of the Government has been steadily rising. This compels the 
Government to resort to borrowings. Borrowings in. tum result in diversion of funds away 
from the corporate sector and ultimately leading to the shortage of funds in the market. This 
shortage pushes the interest rates up and creates liquidity crunch. All this is caused by the 
mounting fiscal deficit owing to which the Government has to tum to the market to meet its 
current expenditure. Therefore the need of the hour is to curb the wastefull expenditure and 
to bring the level of fiScal deficit down to manageable limits. The Sub-Committee strongly 
feels that Government should take immediate steps to curb the revenue expenditure with a 
view to increase the savings. The Sub-Committee recommends that all the mega and major 
Government projects should be completed within the given time frame. 
6. Another issue closely linked with the Government expenditure is the domestic 
savings. At present, the domestic savings stand at 24-25% of the GDP. To achieve a growth 
target of 7-8% the percentage of savings should go up. It should in the opinion of the Sub­
Committee, at least regis!..::r an increase of 2%. Requisite incentives need to be offered to 
increase the domestic savings. In this way, the issues of government expenditure, fiscal deficit 
and savings are interconnected and should be dealt with a common frame of mind. 

99 
7. There has been much talk about the lack of coordination among various ministries 
and departments of the government. Lack of coordination hampers the upward movement of 
growth rate as the projects and proposals get stuck at different stages for one reason or the 
other. Although, the policy of single window clearance was given too much media hype, yet 
many a project are delayed because of bureaucratic redtapism and indifference. The need is 
to create an atmosphere of change where each and every agency of the government is well­
acquainted with its work and putting in its best effort to achieve the target. The Department 
of Industrial Development, may be the choice for this job. Such a nodal agency will not only 
do the coordination work but will also be instrumental in putting forward a coherent picture 
of the Indi;tn ..... economic reforms to the world business community. 
Further, the Sub-Committee notes with discontent the statement of the Secretary. IPP 
made before the Sub-Committee that there is no proper coordination in the process of decision 
making in the various departments and industries. This, in the opinion of the Sub-Committee 
leads to delay in the process of decision making. The Sub-Committee fails to understand the 
reasons for lack of coordination in the process of decision making among the various 
Ministries I Departments when there exists & Planning Commission as well as the Committee 
of Secretaries where the differences, if any, among the MinistriesDepartments can be sorted 
out conveniently. The Sub-Committee recommends that efforts should be made to increase 
coordination in the process of decision making so that the projects are completed within the 
prescribed time frame and cost over-runs are also avoided. 
8. The Sub-Committee is constrained to note that the Planning Commission have not 
yet been able to make known details of the 9th Plan which is to be implemented in a little 
over a months time. This, in the opinion of the Sub-Committee prevents the public from 
going in for an advance planning which is very essential for maintaining a steady growth rate. 
The Planning Commission had also not come out with a mid-term review. At present we are 
only 3 years ahead of entering into the year 2001 and the Sub-Committee is apprehensive that 
if the present state of planning continues, India would enter into the next millennium on a 
bullock cart. 
9. The Sub-Committee is of the view that in order to reduce the Government expenditure 
a time has now come that Government should come out with unambiguous policies with 
regard to central public sector undertakings. The country can no longer afford to carry on 
with dilly-dally policies with regard to this important sector of the economy. The Government 
must take hard decision wherever necessary. Time has now come when ideological issues 
should take a back seat and investment decisions should be made only on the basis of pure 
economic considerations. A decision in respect of such of those public sector undertakings 
which have over the year been incurring losses year after year and their equity has become 
zero, must be taken without any futher delay. In respect of such of the undertakings it is not 
necessary for the Government to give non-plan support merely to protect the employment. 
Alternative schemes ought to be thought of such industrial units in a time bound programme. 
The Sub-Committee notes with deep regret in respect of large number of such loss making 
units most of which are now before the BIFR, the Government has not come out with any 
clear cut policy. These units are a drag on the country's economy. 

ANNEXURE- I 
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS 
I 
FIRST MEETING 
The Sub-Committee met at 5.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 28th November, 1996 in 
Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri M. Ramananthan-Convenor 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Syed Sibtey Razi 
3. Shri T. M. Venkatachalam 
4. Shri Jayant Malhoutra 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Deepak Goyal, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Officer 
2. After some discussion, the Sub-Committee decided that representatives of the 
Ministries of Industry, Power, Communication, Transport and Planning Commission be 
called for oral evidence before the Sub-Committee in the first phase to be followed by the 
evidence of the representatives of various Chambers of Commerce and industry to elicit their 
views on the decline in industrial output. 
3. The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 6.00 P.M. to meet again at 4.00 P.M. on the 
lOth December, 1996 to hear the Secretary, Ministry of Industry. 
101 

n 
SECOND :MEETING 
The Sub-Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 19th December, 1996 in Room 
No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri M. Ramananthan -. Convenor 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri T.M. Venkatachalam 
LOK SABHA 
3. Shri B.L. Shankar 
4. Shri Xavier Arakkal 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Om Prakash, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Deepak Goyal, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
Representatives of the Ministry of Industry 
1. Shri N. Mohanty, Secretary 
2. Shrimati Pratibha Karan, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri R. Tripathy, Additional Economic Adviser 
4. Shri M.C. Singh, Deputy Economic Adviser 
5. Shrimati Aditi S. Ray, Joint Director 
2. The Sub-Committee heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses. 
3. A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
4. The Sub-Committee thereafter decided to meet next at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 6th 
January, 1997, and adjourned at 5.25 P.M. 
102 

IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
The SulrCommittee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 29th January, 1997 in Room 
No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri M. Ramananthan-Convenor 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Syed Sibtey Razi 
3. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
LOK SABHA 
4. Shri V. Alagirisamy 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Dcepak Goyal, Under Secretary 
3. Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
1. Shri P. Abraham, Secretary, Ministry of Power 
2. Shri M. I. Beig, Chairman, C.E.A. 
3. Shri J. Vasudevan, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Power 
4. Shri D. P. Sinha, Member (G&O), C.E.A. 
2. The Sub-Committee heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses. 
3. A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
4. The Sub-Committee thereafter decided to meet next on the 7th and the 19th 
February, 1997 aqd adjourned at 12.45 P.M. 
103 

VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
The Sub-Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 5th March, 1997 in Committee 
Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri M. Ramananthan - Convenor 
LOK SABRA 
2. Shri B. L. Shankar 
3. Shri V. Alagirlsamy 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Om Parkash, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Deepak Goyal, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Officer 
2. The Convenor of the Sub-Committee made a reference to the passing away of 
Shri Xavier Arakkal, M.P., Lok Sabha and a Member of the Sub-Committee. The Convenor 
read the condolence resolution and the Sub-Committee observed two minutes silence as a 
mark of respect to the departed soul. 
3. The Sub-Committee thereafter considered and adopted the draft report. 
4. The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 3.30 P.M. 
104 

ANNEXURE-II 
Common Minimum 
National Action Plan 
for Power 
Ministry of Power 
Government of India 
December, 1996 

' \ 

COMMON MINIMUM NATIONAL ACfiON PLAN FOR POWER 
The Chief Ministers met on 16th October and 3rd December, 1996 to discuss and 
deliberate upon the issues pertaining to the power sector. 
Recognized that the . gap between demand and supply of power is widening. 
Acknowledged that the financial position of State Electricity Boards is fast 
deteriorating and the future development of the power sector cannot be: sustained without 
viable State Electricity Boards and improvement of operational performance of State 
Electricity Boards. " 
Agreed that reforms and restructuring of State Electricity Boards are urgent and must 
be carried out in definite time frame. 
Identified creation of Regulatory Commissions as a step in this direction. 
Noted that the requirements of the future expansion and improvement of power sector 
cannot be fully achieved through public resources alone and it is essential to encourage 
private sector participation in generation, transmission and distribution. 
Observed that the changing scenario in the power sector calls for further delegation of 
powers and simplification of procedures. 
A national consensus evolved for improving the performance of the power sector in a 
time bound manner and the following was adopted. 
I. National Energy Policy 
* The Government would soon finalise a National Energy Policy. 
II. State Electricity Regulatory Commission 
* Each State/Union Territory shall set up an independent State Electricity 
Reg~latory Commission (SERC). 
• To set up SERCs, Central Government will amend Indian Electricity Act, 1910 and 
Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948. 
* To start with such SERCs will undertake only tariff fixation. 
* Licencing, planning and other related functions could also be delegated to SERCs as 
and when· each State Government notifies it. 
107 
476/RS F---8-A 

108 
* Appeals against orders of SERCs will be to respective High Courts unless any State 
Government specificully prefers such appeals being made to the Central Electricity 
Regulatory Commission. 
Ill. Central Electricity Regulatory Commission 
• Union Government will set up a eentral Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC). 
• CERC will set the bulk tariffs for all Central generating and transmission utilities. 
• Licencing, planning and other related functions could also be delegated to CERC as 
and when the Central Government notifies it. 
• All issues concerning inter-State now and exchange of power shall also be decided by 
the CERC. 
• To enable setting up of CERC, Central Government will amend Indian Electricity 
Act, 1910 and Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948. 
IV. Rationalisation of Retail Tariffs 
• Determination of retail tariffs, including wheeling charges etc., will be decided by 
SERCs which will ensure a minimum overall 3% rate of return to each utility with 
immediate effect. 
\ 
• Cross-subsidization between categories of consumers may be allowed by SERCs. No 
sector shall, however, pay less than 50% of the average cost of supply (cost of 
generation plus transmission and distribution). Tariffs for agricultural sector will not 
be less than fifty paise per Kwh to be brought to 50% of the average cost in not more 
than three years. 
• Recommendations of SERCs are mandatory. If any deviations from tariffs 
recommended by it are made by a State/UT Government, it will have to provide for 
the financial implications of such deviations explicitly in the State budget. 
• Fuel Adjustment Charges (FCA) would be automatically incorporated in the tariff. 
• There shall be a package- of incentives and disincentives to encourage and facilitate 
the implementation of tariff rationalisation by the States. 
476/RS F-8-B 

109 
V. Private Sector Participation in Distribution 
* State Governments agree to a gradual programme of private sector participation in 
distribution of electricity. The process of private participation shall be initially in one or 
two viable geographical areas covering both urb<Jn and rural areas in a State and the 
State may extend this to other parts of the State gradually. 
VI. Role of Central Agencies 
* The Central Government would make a comprehensive review of the role of Central 
Electricity Authority (CEA). Techno-economic approval of competitively bid power 
projects will be simplified and CEA shall not be concerned with capital cost, tariff and 
other commercial aspects of the project. Powers regarding approval of projects shall 
stand delegated to the States in respect of thermal power stations upto 250 MW. 
However, in respect of thermal projects beyond-250 MW capacity and other schemes, 
CEA's appraisal will continue in respect of planning and other related matters, such as to 
promote best optimal development of the river and its tributaries for power generation 
including proper hydro-thermal coordination; the suitability of location and size of 
thermal power stations; fuel linkages; adequacy of power evacuation facilities covering 
inter-state and intra-state and the transmission schemes form and integral part of the 
National Power Grid for maximization of benefits for the country as a whole. Subject to 
such technical cle,afances which shall be accorded within two months State Governments 
will have powers tb accord approval for power projects. 
* The role of FIPB will be minimised by putting as many projects on· the automatic 
clearance route as feasible. 
* Government of lndia will issue transparent guidelines and delegate more powers for 
environmental clearance to State agencies. State agencies should equip themselves with 
requisite physical and technical expertise. 
* Government of India will delegate more powers to the States for issue of forest 
clearances. Statutory amendments will be made in the relevant Central statutes. 
* Ministry of Environment and Forests have proposed the following delegation to the 
States for environment clearance: 
(i) All co-generation plants and captive power plants up to 250 MW. 
(ii) Coal based plants upto 500 MW using fluidized bed technology subject to sensitive 
areas restrictions. 
(iii) Power staHons upto 250 MW on conventional technology. 
(iv) Gas/Naphtha based station upto 500 MW. 
vn. Autonomy to the State Electricity Boards 
* States will allow maximum possible autonomy to the State Electricity Boards. The State 
Electricity Boards will be restructured and corporatised and run on commercial basis. 
VIII. Improvements in the Management Practices of State Electricity Boards 
* State Electricity Boards will professionalize their technical inventory manpower and 
project management practices. 

110 
IX. Improvement of Physical Parameters 
* Government of India will carry out necessary amendiiMMI in the relevant Acts/Rule to 
allow private participation in transmission. 
* State Governments will provide higher allocation for early oompletion of public sector 
projects. 
* Renovation and modernization of existing power plots allall be done in a time bound 
manner. PFC and other fmancial institutions will give hiahk priority for funding of R & 
M schemes. Clearance to R & M projects will fully be del-sated to the States and no 
clearance will be required from CEA. 
* PLF of those thermal power stations having less tho 40% PLF at present would be 
increased by 3% annually, by 2% in case of those plants vmh PLF between 40 and 60% 
and by 1% for those plants with PLF over 60%. ·The overall PLF in the State sector in 
the country must come up to a minimum of 65% and tile national average to 70% by 
2002 A.D. 
* Compulsory metering at substations and on all major feeders would be introduced. 
Compulsory metering of all ~ew electricity connections as also of connections to 
agriculture sector exceeding 10 HP will be undertaken and completed in two years. All 
electric supplies would be metered by 2002 A.D. · 
* Compulsory annual energy audit of large consumers i.e., 100 KV A and above would be 
undertaken. 
* Time of the day metering would be introduced for big power consumers for better load 
management. 
X. Co-generation/Captive power plants 
* State Governments will encourage Co-generation/Captive power plants. To facilitate 
evacuation of power from these plants to the grids, States shall formulate clear and 
transparent policies for purchase of power and wheeliD& charges which provide fair 
returns to the Co-generation/Captive power plant owners. Captive power plants could 
also sell power to a group of industries as well as other categories of consumers in the 
said industrial zone or area. Wheeling of power from captive power plants to consumers 
located at a distance or through displacement basis shall be encouraged and the States 
will issue clear and transparent long term policies in this regard. 
XI. Advance Action and ffigh Priority for Hydro Projeds ---. 
* A national policy on hydro power development will be evolved by the Central 
Government which, inter-alia, would include development of mega hydro projects, both 
in the public sector and the private sector, at locations with substantial hydro potential, 
along with concomitant transmission facilities for evacuation of power to other Regions/ 
States. States shall prepare a shelf of fully cleared hydro projects for implementation on 
high priority. Special efforts will be made to promote hydro-electric projects in Himachal 
Pradesh and Jammu & Kashmir. 
~II. Due Emphasis for Investment in North-Eastern Region 
* Since there are geographical constraints in the North-Eastern Region, the Government 
shall constantly review the public and private investments being made in that region so 
that these States get equitable shares in the investments in the power sector. 

111 
xm. Alloeation of liquid ,.... 
• Government shall finalise Ute linkages of allocation of liquid fuels for power plants in 
consultation with State Governments soon. 
XIV. Mega power projetM M pit lleads 
• Development of mega p<rir.- projects at mine pitheads, both in the public sector and the 
private sector, with ~ facilities for evacuation of power to other Regions/ 
States would be encouraa-cf. 
SeUJoa up of washeries 
• Coal India Limited and its subsidiaries shall put up washeries at pitheads, wherever 
necessary. In case CIL c:aanot set up the washery, private sector would be permitted to 
set up such washerie1 at pitheads. In either case, supply, washing and transportation of 
coal shall be on the balil of legally enforceable commercial contracts. 

1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 

STUDY REPORT(S) 
OF 
SUB-COMMITTEE-IV 
' 

' 

115 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry in its meeting 
held on the 29th October, 1996 constituted five Sub-Committees on different subjects. The 
Chairman of the Com~ittec authorised the Convenor of each Sub-Committee to chalk out 
the programme of work including study visits of each Sub-Committee. 
I, Ram Deo Bhandari was nominated the Convenor of the Sub-Committee-IV on 
'Mining Sector'. The Sub-Committee was assigned the job of studying the problems in the 
way of mining organisations, the problems of mine workers, development of mining activities 
etc. in various States of the country. For this purpose the Sub-Collllllittee undertook two 
study visits to Calcutta, Bhubaneshwar, Tatanagar, Vdaipur, Mangalore and Bangalore 
during the months of December, 1996 and January, 1997. The study-reports in respect of the 
visits/discussions with various organisations have been given in detail on the following pages. 
RAM DEO BHANDARI, 
Convenor, 
Sub-Committee-IV 

COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE 
1. Shri Ram Deo Bhandari -- Convenor 
2. Shri Kanak Mal Katara 
3. Shri Ritlal Pd. Verma 
4. Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
5. Kumari Frida Topno 
6. Shri Udaysinghrao Gaikwad 
7. Shri K. H. Muniyappa 
8. Shri Bhakta Charan Das 
9. Shri Nitish Bharadwaj 
Discussion with Management of Hindustan Copper Limited, Calcutta 
Sub-Committee IV of Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry 
on Mining Sector met at 3.00 P.M. on 26.12.96 in the Conference Hall of Hotel Hindustan 
International, Calcutta. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ram Deo Bhandari, - Convenor 
M.P. (Rajya Sabha) 
2. Shri Bhakta Charan Das 
M.P. (Lok Sabha) 
3. Shri Rital Pd. Verma 
M.P. (Lok Sabha) 
4. Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
M.P. (Lok Sabha) 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Om Parkash, Deputy Secretary 
Representatives of Hindustan Copper Ltd. Calcutta 
1. Shri K.N. Ghosh, C.M.D. 
2. Shri I. Sen, Director (P) 
3. Shri M. Basu, E.D. (M.P.&S) 
4. Shri S.N. Chakraborty Adv. (F) 
5. Shri T.P. Girish, G.M. (P&MS) 
6. Shri S.N. Singh, G.M. (Peri & Ad) 
7. Shri M.N. Samaddar, D.G.M. (F) 
Presentative of Ministry of Mines, Central Government 
Shri M.E. Madhu Sudan, Industrial Advisor 
The Convenor introd.uced the Members and officers of the Sub-Committee and explained 
in brief the purpose of the visit of the Sub-Committee. 
Shri K.N. Ghosh, C.M.D. of H.C.L. introduced his team of officers and welcomed the 
Committee and informed that presently H.C.L. is the sole producer of primary copper in the 
country with designed capacity to produce 47,500 tonnes of refined primary copper from 
indigenous sources. The main operating units are Khetri Copper Complex at · Khetri, 
Rajasthan; Indian Copper Complex at Ghatsila, Bihar, Malanjkhand Copper Project, 
Madhya Pradesh and Taloja Copper Project, Maharashtra. 
He also informed the Sub-Committee that India is not fortunate in respect of Copper' 
deposits. Inspite of intensive geophysical and geological survey and prospecting and 
exploration activities, no major new deposits could be discovered. The grade ore in India is 
very poor i.e. around 1% as against 2.5 to 3.5% copper content in other parts of the world. 
The geometry of ore body in India is very much unfavourable for large scale mechanisation. 
The by-product content in Indian ore is very low i.e. 4-5% as against 20-40% in other 
116 

117 
parts of the world. The combined effect of all these has made cost of rnmmg and 
beneficiation in terms of copper metal very costly but the smelting and refining cost of 
HCL's plants are comparable to the international cost of production. Copper being a 
strategic metal required for use in Defence, Telecommunication, Space Research, Railways 
and power sector the Government had evolved earlier a number of protective measures like 
levy of varied higher customs duty; canalising the,import of copper and controlling the prices 
of copper through administered pricing system which was much higher than landed cost of 
imported copper. 
However with the liberalisation of economy, canalisation of copper and the system of 
administered prices were done away with from March, 1992 and the import duty on copper 
was reduced to 45% ad valorem on C.I.F. With reduction in customs duty coupled with 
unprecedented fall in LME price of copper. HCL has suffered a huge loss of 69.55 crore 
during 1993-94. But during 1994-95 the scenario changed with increasing customs duty from 
45% to 50% as well as increasing the LME prices and thus the company made a. profit of 
72.26 crore during 1994-95 and a record profit of Rs. 75.84 crores in 1995-96 as the company 
has achieved all time high production of 37,280 tonnes of wire rod at Taloja. 
But at present the customs duty on import of copper has been brought down from 35% 
ad valorem for cathode and wire bar and 40% for wire to a flat rate of 30% for all the 
items. Moreover, the petroleum products have hiked their prices. All these resulted in a loss 
of Rs. 73.22 crore during the first half of the year 1996-97. 
On the efforts of H.C.L. the Sub-Committee was informed that a number of 
uneconomic mines like Lapso Kyanite mine, Dariba mine and operations like Brass Rolling 
mill operation etc. has been closed. H.C.L. is also taking action to close down Mosaboni 
mine in phases where the cost of production is very uneconomical due to the depth 
(1230 m). 
On a specific question by a Member the Sub-Committee was informed that reasons for 
less production than the targets was power shortage and the shut out period of the smelter, 
which for 2 to 21/ 2 months in a year does not work. However the company is considering 
some alternative arrangements. In reply to another question it was informed that now no 
licence is required for import of copper and any body can import it. 
The Sub-Committee was further informed that due to losses the staff was reduced by 
4012 through Voluntary Retirement Scheme and that if no financial assistance is given the 
company will be heading towards closure. The Rakha mines can be further developed if 
funds are made available. 
There was no ecological problem in and around the Company's units. The Company 
was fully aware about the social and welfare activities of its employees. 
Once the expansion of highly profitable Project of Khetri is commissioned the Company 
will be in much better position to face the fluctuations in LME. For the intervening period 
of 2-3 years the company has requested the Government for some temporary relief and 
support on immediate basis to combat the situation arising out of crash LME price so that 
the company could take care of wages of the employees and its growth is not halted. The 
capital investment for green field copper smelt~r and refinery complex of 100,000 TPA 
capacity is around Rs. 1370 crore whereas the same for expansion of capacity of KCC 
smelter and refinery to 100,000 TPA is expected to be only Rs. 528.65 crore. 
The Sub-Committee visited the Ghatsila Copper Complex and was taken inside the 
copper mine. The Sub-Committee received a number of representations from the workers. 
Wherein they demanded that those working for a number of years as contract labour should 
be regularised and their social and welfare needs be attended to. They also demanded that 
their service conditions be improved. It was pleaded that the lease for Sidheshwar-Chapri 

118 
may be renewed in favour of H.C.L./I.C.C. in order to facilitate expansion and at the same 
time the proposed closure of Mosabani and Badia Mines of HCI./ICCIMSB group of mines 
be stopped to save about a lakh of employees and their families. The closure of these mines 
will have a wide ranging effect. 
Indian Copper Complex, Ghatsila has Mosabani Copper mine with 6923 hectare valid 
for 20 years from 16.6.1984. Presently only 187 hectare has been leased but permitted to 
mine from only 37 hectares. The State Govt. of Bihar should grant the permission for lease. 
There is a vast scope of expansion of this mine. It produced 0.02% Uranium worth 
Rs. 12 crores. The refinery for silver/gold requires strict vigil. 
Rakha mine has the area of 785.09 hectare, valid for 20 years w.e.f. 29.8.71. But the 
State Govt. intimated that renewal can be considered only for 23 hectares. Kendadih has an 
area of 1179.60 hectare valid for 20 years w.e.f. 3.6.73. The State Govt. intimated that 
renewal can be considered only for 35.50 hectare but later on the State Govt. agreed for 
669.97 hectare. If the State Govt. does not renew the lease there is a chance of lakhs of 
employees being rendered jobless. The authorities propose to increase the ore from 
900 T.P.D. to 2500 T.P.D. so that people may get employment. The capacity of smelter 
plant is proposed to be increased from 16500 T.P.A. to 31000 T.P.A. 
Shri B.P. Gupta a representative of Bihar State Govt. informed the Sub-Committee that 
H.C.L. extracts 75% of copper from Mosabani mine. They have not put up any extensive 
proposal to ensure the State Govt. that they need whole of the area. The State Govt. would 
never intend that the employees may be rendered jobless or the plant may be closed. The 
question of renewal of the lease is still under the consideration of State Mining Deptt. He 
told the Sub-Committee that in reality the required areas can be renewed but they 
themselves are surrendering some of the mining leases. 
The Sub-Committee recommends that-
(i) Sufficient . financial assistance may be provided to HCL expeditiously as per 
package Ill. 
(ii) Customs duty on imported copper should be increased again to protect the 
indigenous copper mining companies. 
(iii) If the organisation under the Government control fails to run the company 
profitably, foreign companies should not be allowed to take over the production of 
copper etc. and indigenous companies should be given a chance as far as possible 
to upkeep the interests of the organisation. The indigenous copper mining 
companies should be encouraged and joint ventures according to FIPB policies 
should be allowed where equity participation is mainly in the fields of 
infrastructure and equipment. 
(iv) The Mosabani and Badia mines may not be allowed to close down. 
(v) Western mines should be explored on a large scale. 
(vi) The Welfare and service conditions of the employees may be improved and all 
employees may be regularised. The provisions for the welfare activities of 
employees and their families should be sufficiently increased. 
(vii) The hygienic conditions as well as other medical facilities at H.C.L's hospital at 
Mosabani should be thoroughly probed and improved expeditiously. 
(viii) The teachers serving in Central Schools/K.Vs in the Copper Complex etc. may be 
paid by Government and not by H.C.L. 
(ix) The State Government of Bihar may be requested to renew the leases of 
Siddheshvari and Chapri mines expeditiously and the mining process at these may 
be expedited. 
(x) The areas where _gold and silver is refined should have sufficient reliable security 
to prevent pilferage of these metals. 

119 
(xi) The assets/properties of all Executives, connected with copper mining and 
smelting may be got enquired/verified secretly. 
(xii) A separate cell should be created in the Ministry of Mines or in the organisation 
concerned to deal with all matters like payment of wages, welfare measures etc. of 
the contract labourers. 
Meeting with Director (Raw Materials) of SAIL in Calcutta on 27.12.96 
The Sub-Committee assembled in the Conference Hall of Hotel Hindustan 
International, Calcutta to hold discussions with the management of Steel Authority of India 
Ltd. The Convenor introduced the members and officers of the Sub-Committee and 
explained in brief the purpose of the visit. 
PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Shri Ram Deo Bhandari, M.P.-- Convenor 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Radha Mohan Singh, M.P. 
3. Shri Bhakta Charan Das, M.P. 
4. Shri Ritlal Pd. Verma, M.P. 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Om Parkash, Deputy Secretary 
Representatives of Steel Authority of India Ltd. 
1. Shri G.S. Garcha-Dircctor (R.M.D.) 
2. Shri B.K. Agrawal·-E.D. (P. & D.) 
3. Shri B.N. Saha-E.D. (Mines) 
4. Shri P.N. Prasad-B.D. (Coal) 
5. Shri P.K. Dhawan-G.M. (P. & D.) 
6. Shri R.P. Singh -G.M. (Project) 
7. Shri G. Ojha-Dy. G.M. (P. & A.) 
8. Shri K.K. Ojha-Dy. G.M. (~~.:p. Assign) 
9. Shri O.P. Garg-Dy. G.M. (T.S.) 
10. Shri P. Venkatraman-Chief Finance Manager 
Representative of the Ministry of Mines 
Shri M.E. Madhusudan-Industrial Advisor 
Shri G.S. Garcha, Director raw materials of SAIL welcomed the Sub-Committee and 
informed that the Raw Materials Division was formed as a unit of SAIL in 1990 by bringing 
together under one umbrella the captive mines of Bokaro, Rourkela, Durgapur and TISCO. 
The objective of forming Raw Material Division. was to have an integrated development of 
the mines and to coordinate the requirements of raw materials to SAIL steel plants. 
He further informed the Sub-Committee that SAIL operates 9 iron ore mines, 5 lime 

120 
stones, two dolomite mines and 3 collieries. SAIL is self sufficient in iron ore and meets 
about 50% of the flux requirements from captive sources. The Sub-Committee was informed 
that the total iron ore reserve from Kiriburu, Meghahetburu, Gua, Bolani, Bursua, Chiria, 
Dalli-Rajhara mines is 2,937 MT and capacity is 23.7 MTPY; total lime stone reserves from 
Kuteshwar, Bhawanathpur, I.L.Q. Satna, Purnapani & Nandini mines is 413 M.T. with total 
capacity of 5.52 MTPY; Dolomite reserve from Tulsidamar & Hirri mines is 39 MT whereas 
the total capacity is 1.02 MTPY. The iron ore mines at Kiriburu, Meghahatburu, Bolani 
Bursua, Dalli-Rajhara and Gua are fully mechanised. Facilities to wash the ore are also 
provided at Kiriburu, Megbahatburu, Bolani, Bursua & Dalli. 
He informed the Sub-Co11;1mittee that the iron ore requirement will go up to 29.6 MT 
from the current level of 22.4 MT, flux requirement from 7.5 MT to 8.9 MT and coking coal 
from 17.1 MT to 19.2 MT. 
Keeping in mind the long gestation period, RMO has initiated actions during the last 
two years to enchance the capacity of the existing mines and also for opening up of new 
mines. A new iron ore mine at Rowghet in Madhya Pradesh with capacity of 5 MTPA has 
been developed. The new iron ore mine at Chiria with a capacity of 6.5 MTP A is to be 
developed. Its feasibility report has been prepared and further action will be initiated once 
the issue of modernisation of liSCO is finalised. Similarly the capacity of Bursua mine from 
1.8 MTPA to 2.7 MTPA is being augmented. 
In the field of Flux, Kuteswar mine is being modernised to 3.0 MTPA Satna mine is 
being modernised to enhance its capacity from 0.24 MTP A to 0.84 MTPA, a new Baraduar 
dolomite mine with capacity of 1.5 MTPA is being re~opened. Hirri dolomite mine's capacity 
is being expanded from 0.6 MTPA to 0.9 MTPA. New areas for lime stone and dolomite are 
also being searched. 
Shri Garcha further informed that most of the mines of RMD are located economically 
backward tribal regions. But the RMD has taken considerable interest in the peripheral 
development of the villages surrounding the mines. The budget allocations for 1995-96 was 
Rs. 19.20 lakh and 1996-97 it has been raised to Rs. 25 lakhs for improving all the 
necessities for the peripheral villagers. In addition the RMD is providing facilities like 
drinking water, construction of roads and culverts, educational facilities and medical facilities 
to villagers of peripheral villages. 
In reply to question of an honourable member Shri Garcha replied that they have 
sufficient quantities of ores in mines, however they are busy in finding new mines for that 
purpose. There is no cause of worry. 
In reply to a question by another Member, Shri Garcha replied that they are 
maintaining the ecology satisfactorily and they planted 2,33,600 plants. 
The Sub-Committee was happy to note that the Raw Materials Division of SAIL, has 
been doing very well. 
The Sub-Committe~ recommends that the budgetary allocation for welfare activities 
should be raised from the present Rs. 25 lakhs. 
Meeting with Geological Survey of India in Calcutta and Bhubaneshwar 
The Sub-Committee assembled in the Conference Hall of G.S.I. in Calcutta to hold 
discussions with the officers of G.S.I. The convenor introduced the members and officers of 
the Sub-Committee and explained the purpose of the visit. 

PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
121 
1. Shri Ram Deo Bhandari, M.P.-- Convenor 
LOK SABHA 
2. iSbri Ritlal Pd. Verma, M.P. 
3. Shri Radha Mohan Singh, M.P. 
4. Shri Bhakta Charan Das, M.P. 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Om Parkash, Deputy Secretary 
REPRESENTATIVES OF mE G.S.I. 
1. Dr. M. Ramakrishnan - DOG, OP-1 
2. Shri A. Chaudhary - DDG, OP-II 
3. Dr. S. Mazumdar- DOG, ERO 
4. Dr. B. Sengupta - DOG, Marine Wing 
5. Shri A.C. Bhattacharjee - DOG, Coal Wing 
6. Shri D. Chatterjee·- DOG, Coal op. 
7. Shri Suraj Prakash - DOG (Personnel) 
8. Shri M.X. Pal - Director, in-charge-Financing 
9. Shri U. Kumar - DOG (Drilling) 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF MINES 
Shri M.E. Madhusudan - Industrial Advisor 
Dr. M. Ramakrishnan, D.D.G. (Operations) welcomed the Sub-Committee and 
explained the working achievements, targets and objectives of G.S.I. through slides. He also 
informed the Sub-Committee that the main activities of G.S.I. are mineral exploration (coal, 
lignite ores and minerals), systematic geological mapping; specialised thematic studies, 
Airborne geological surveys, Marine surveys, geotechnical investigation, dis-semination of 
information etc. He also informed that the country is more or less self reliant in respect of 
35 minerals which provide adequate support to the basic industries like steel, ferro alloys 
aluminium, cement, refractories, glass & ceramics, agriculture foundries, abrasives, paints 
and borad spectrum of inorganic chemicals. There is, however, very significant gap in 
respect of 17 minerals and metals for which the country is partly or largely dependent on 
imports. 
G.S.I. has been associated with practically every major discovery in the country and has 
a brilliant track record of exploration and assessment of many important mineral deposits. 
G.S.I.'s current shift of thrust from exploration of ba~ metals and ferrous group of minerals 
to gold and diamond have started yielding results. 
j 

122 
Annually around 170 mineral investigations are being taken up in recent years which 
include about 35 for coal and lignite, 45 for gold, 40 for basemetals, 10 for strategic and rare 
minerals, 7 for diamond, 18 for dimension stones and 15 for fertilizer minerals. G.S.I. has a 
chain of laboratories. 
One honourable Member while praising the activities of G.S.I. drew the attention 
towards Supreme Court's recent verdict. The Sub-Committee was ir.formed that this will have 
some adverse effect on their work as most of the exploratory work is to be done in forests. On 
another question the G.S.I. informed that they require financial assistance for replacement of 
old and worn out machinery and equipment replacement of old ship as well as for 
expansionary works during the first year of the 9th Plan. 
One honourable member mentioned about the speciality of shore water whiCh does not 
percolate in the earth near the shore. 
The G.S.I officers of Bhubaneshwer complained that they have to go to dense forests in 
performance of their work where their life is not secured. They should be allowed to stay in 
nearby guest houses. They should be given priority in allotment. The forest department should 
be asked to cooperate with them . They pleaded that for Rs. 1351.- for personal servants a 
justifiable amount may be fixed and sufficient transport facilities may be provided. There are 
no promotional chances to scientists of G.S.I. They demanded that their department should 
be attached with Ministry of Science & Technology. 
The Sub-Committee recommends that:-
(i) The water on the sea shore should be tested to find out what are the qualities that 
the water does not percolate in the soil. 
(ii) G.S.I. should assess the quantum of diamonds in Orissa and Madhya Pradesh areas; 
and report to Govt. 
(iii) In Bihar Champaran, Giridih, Koderma etc. may be explored to find out gold, 
diamonds etc. 
(iv) The grievances of scientists of G.S.I. as to risk to their personal life, raising the limit 
of personal servants etc. may be considered. 
(v) A cess on minerals may be imposed. 
(vi) Sufficient promotional avenues may be opened for scientists in G.S.I. 
Meeting with I.C.C.L., Cboudwar 
The Sub-Committee on its way to Augul also visited the Indian Change Chrome Ltd. 
(I.C.C.L.), Choudwar which is one of the bigges,t plants in the world and has been certified as 
ISO 9002 company with its world class quality product. The employees of the company 
appeared before the Sub-Committee and gave ~ representation. The worry of both the 
management and the workers is that the plant rema,ins closed almost for six months in a year 
due to non-availability of chrome ore as it does not h~ve its any captive mine. A Committee of 
the Central Govt. allowed TISCO to distribute the ch_rome ore to a few contenders including 
ICCL which was also the order of the Supreme Court in July, 1996. The State owned Orissa 
Mining Corporation has appealed to the Supreme O;mrt for allotment of the entire 855 
Hectare of mining area and the appeal is still pending~ Moreover in view of the economic 
liberalisation policy both the State and Central Govts. are encouraging the privatisation for 
faster economic progress. This will result in the closure of ICCL due to non-availability of 
chrome ore. 

123 
The Sub-Committee recommends that the M/o Mines may take remedial measures to 
save this company from closure. 
Meeting with the Representatives of workers of NALCO on 28.12.96. 
" The Sub-Committee met at Augul to hear the views of various labour organisations of 
NALCO Smelter at Augul. · · 
PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Shri Ram Deo Bhundari, M.P. -- Convenor 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Bhakta Charan Dus, M.P. 
3. Shri Radha Mohan Singh, M.P. 
4. Shri Ritlal Pd. Verma, M.P. 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Om Parkash, Deputy Secretary 
Representatives of Workers 
1. Shri Rabindra Kumar Dash, General Secretary (B.M.S.) 
2. Shri Satrughana Tarai, Executive Body Member (B.M.S.) 
3. Shri Bhaskara Chandra Sahoo, Working President (INTUC) 
4. Shri Udit Narayan Saboo, INTUC 
5. Shri Amar Kumar Bahera, Secretary-State (H.M.S.) 
6. Shri Urgasena Sahoo, V.P. I (H.M.S.) 
7. Shri Bichitra Naik, President (SCIST Employees Welfare Association) 
8. Shri Davendra Seth, General Secretary, -do-
Representative of the Ministry of Mines 
Shri M.E. Madhusudan-Industrial Advisor 
The Convenor introduced the members and officers of the Sub-Committee and 
explained the purpose of the visit. 
The organisations explained in detail their practical difficulties, like shortage of staff 
quarters, presence of Fluoride content in the drinking water, inadequate representation of 
S.C. & S.T. employees, inadequate educational facilities for their children. Some of the 
unions also drew the attention of tpe Sub-Committee towards problems relating to 
1 
their 
service conditions like wages, canteen facilities and contract labour problems. The main 
grievance of the association was that the contracts have continuously being awarded to the 
same person(s) of the same family, who are the relations of some executives of the unit. The 
representatives of the assodations pleaded a strong case for providing them the housing, 
4761 RS F-9-A 

124 
drinking water, education and aU other in service facilities. They pleaded for filling of all the 
posts reserved for S.Cs. & S.Ts. They demanded that over bridge be constructed on the 
National Highways to avoid accidents involving workers and their children. 
They also demanded for providing them the same facilities in the matter of gate pass/ 
leave pass like executives. They requested the Sub-Committee that the management may be 
asked to keep a check on the executives so that the workers may not be exploited. They also 
requested for the adoption of pot line rotation for workers. 
The Sub-Committee recommends that the management should look into the genuine 
problems of the employees and solve them expeditiously. 
Meeting with Representatives of Orissa Mining Corporation, Bhubaneshwar on 29.12.96. 
The Committee met in the Conference Hall of Hotel Swosti, Bhubaneshwar. 
PRESENT 
LOK SABHA 
1. Shri Radha Mohan Singh, M.P.-- Convenor 
2. Shri Bhakta Char an Das, M.P. 
3. Shri Ritlal Pd. Vermu, M.P. 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Om Parkash, Deputy Secretary 
Representatives of Orissa Mining Corporation 
1. Shri Sadananda Misru, General Manager 
2. Shri Gangadhar Duni, Gencrui Manager 
Representative of the Ministry of Mines 
Shri M.E. Madhusudan - Industrial Advisor 
Representatives of the Ministry of Mines of Orissa Government 
1. Shri Nityananda Mohanty - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Amulya Mani Gurbadu - Director 
The Convenor introduced the members and officers of the Sub-Committee and 
explained the purpose of its visit. 
The General Manager, Orissa Mining Corporation informed that the mineral 
476/RS F-9-B 
.. 

125 
resources of Orissa are exp1qred by a number of agencies, primarily by the Geological 
Survey of India and the Directorate of Mining & Geology of the State. Other organisations 
viz. O.M.C., SAIL, NALCO, MCL, TISCO and others having mining interests in Orissa 
also do exploration in areas of their interest. All these agencies exchange exploration data, 
examine the result of their exploration and the programme of the coming year, so that there 
is no overlapping of their efforts and a proper coordination is established for achieving the 
best results. 
As a result of such coordinated effort the exploration of tentative reserves in million 
tonnes of coal (46,527) Chromite (183.00), Bauxite (1,670), Iron Ore (3,120), Limestone 
(1,212), Dolomite (1,171) Manganese (49.00) and Graphite (1.5) have been established. 
23 drilling rigs have been put into operation to explore new areas containing Coal, 
Bauxite, Chromite, Iron Ore, Manganese etc. 
There are 581 mining leases in the State covering of tot~l area of 1125 sq. kms., out of 
which mining operation is actively conducted in 370 leases over 919 sq. kms. The important 
minerals produced in those mines are Coal, Chromite, Iron Ore, Manganese, Limestone, 
Dolomite, Bauxite and Graphite. The production of different minerals in 1994-95 was 43.83 
million tonnes and in 1995-96 it v·as 51.12 million tonnes. 
In 1994-95, 2.26 M.T. of minerals worth Rs. 178.43 crores was exported and in 1995-96, 
1.1 M.T. of minerals worth Rs. 209.49 crores was exported. 
The State has sent a detailed proposal for enhancement of royalty on non coal min~rals 
since 1995 and if approved by the Central Government it will go a long way in 
supplementing the internal resources of the State. NALCO is the only organisation owned 
by Govt. of India, who operates bauxite mining which is located at Panchpatmali of Koraput 
district. They produced 2.15 MT in 1994-95 and 2.46 MT in 1995-96. ·The entire transport is 
done by Railways. The aluminium ingots are also transported to Paradeep for export. 
NALCO has set up a captive power plant of 500 MW which utilises the thermal grade coal 
abundantly occuring the Talcher coal field. 
The General Manager, O.M.C. informed the Sub-Committee that there are three 
companies involved in mining i.e. INDAL, LNT and HINDALCO. The total iron ore 
deposit is 3000 M. T. On the Joint Venture with Melanco an expenditure of Rs. 2500 crore 
including a separate railway line from Pachpaani to Paradeep port was incurred. The 
Melantalli mine was leased out to N.M.D.C. but this is not feasible as there is no railway 
line and therefore in could not be explored and a huge amount was wasted on it. The mine 
is lying idle. From Nandmardan mine O.M .. C. proposed that 50% of the mine produce 
should be given to O.M.C. The Sub-Committee was also informed that for the last two years 
steel plants in the country have increased production in their captive mines in order to meet 
the requirement of iron ore and hence totally stopped procurement from other producers. It 
has affected the iron ore produced by Banspani sector iron ore reserves. Alternatively the 
iron ore produced by Banspani sector has to be exported. For that purpose it has to reach 
Paradeep port by a very long route resulting in heavy cost. If a railway line from Banspani 
to Jakhapura is expedited the cost would be half and thus the welfare obligations of mine 
workers as well as their surroundings could be locked well. 
The Sub-Committee recommends that the railway line in Orissa from . Banspani to 
Jakhapura may be expedited. 
The O.M.C. authorities also explained a number of problems in chromite mining. They 
informed that in the State there are 11 chromite mines, two in Dhenkanal, three in keonjhar 
,. 

-------------- -- ----- -----------
126 
and six in Jahazpur. Chromite ore is not sold to any steel plant. Steel plants confine to their 
captive plants. O.M.C. supplies to private parties and the rest is exported. There is a 
recession in the prices of chrome. A Japanese expert team found platinum also in chrome 
ore. The Sub-Committee was informed that the prices of ferro-chromium fluctuate sharply 
between 38 to 90 cents per pound in the International market as against the production cost 
of 42 to 45 cents. During such recession period many of the ferro-chromium plants in the 
country convert their furnaces for producing ferro-manganese till the prices of ferro­
chromium pick up. At this point of time the sale of ferro-chromium in internal market fall.s 
sharply and the situation is not compensated by increase of export because Government of 
India fixes the annual quota of export at 3,00,000 tonne~ per annum and the entire export is 
canalised through M.M.T.C. O.M.C. operates chromite leases by employing a work force of 
about 6000 persons. During the recession period the liquidity position falls sharply. The total 
offtake being limited, addition of new operators will not only induct more number of 
competitors but also aim at prohibitive mining cost for maintenance of 6,000 work force by 
O.M.C. If friable chrome ore is d~alised like iron ore and quota is lifted it may be 
possible for O.M.C. and other operators to explore new areas of international market for 
export of their chromite product and make good the shortfall in internal market. 
The Sub-Committee · recommends that the export of friable chrome ore may be 
decanalised and the quota be lifted immediately. 
The Sub-Committee was informed that in Orissa there is a vast scope for exploration/ 
exploitation of mineral resources. The Ministry of Forests has not been keeping in view the 
proposal of O.M.C. O.M.C. wants the responsibility of scientific mining. The leasing out of 
the coal mines etc. is yet to be examined by O.M.C. · 
The Sub-Committee recommends that the proposal of the State Government of Orissa for 
enhancement of reyalty on non-coal minerals may be cleared expeditiously. 
Meeting with the Management of NALCO on. 29.12.96 
The Sub-Committee assembled in the Conference Hall of Hotel Swosti Bhubaneshwar 
on 29.12.96 to ·bold discussions with the management of NALCO. 
PRESENT 
RAJYA SABRA 
1. Shri Ram Deo Bhandari, M.P. -- Convenor 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Radha Mohan Singh, M.P. 
3. Shri Ritlal Pd. Verma, M.P. 
4. Shri Bhakta Charan Das, M.P. 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Om Parkash, Deputy Secretary 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MANAGEMENT OF NALCO 
1. Shri S.N. Johri, Chairman and Managing Director 
2. Shri S.K. Tamotia, Director (P&T) 
3. Shri B.D. Singh, Director (P&A) 

127 
4. Shri G.S. Panda, Director (Prod.) 
5. Shri R.C. Mohanty, E.D. (S&P.) 
6. Shri P.L. Sahu, E.D. (Fin.) 
7. Shri B. Pahadi, E.D. (Mat.) 
8. Shri S.B. Nayak, E.D. (Tech.) 
9. Shri A. Choudhary, E.D. (Mktg.) 
10. Shri S.K. Misra, E.D. (M&R) 
REPRESENTATIVE OF MINISTRY OF MINES, G.O.I. 
Shri M.E. Madhusudan, Industrial Advisor 
The Convenor introduced the Members and officers of the Sub-Committee and 
explained · the purpose of the visit. 
Shri S.N. Johri, C.M.D. of NALCO, informed the Sub-Committee· that NALCO is 
considered to be a turning point in the 50 years old history of Indian aluminium industry. In 
a major leap forward, NALCO has not only addressed to the country's needs for self 
sufficiency in Aluminium, but also given the country the technology edge in producing this 
strategic metal on the best of world standards. 
While giving a brief account of the working of NALCO the C.M.D. informed the Sub­
Committee that 1995-96 saw the primary metal production reaching an all time high of 5.30 
lakh tonnes, a growth of 9.9% over 1994-95, The domestic consumption in 1995-96 was 
estimated at 5 lakh tonnes, a growth of 11.4% over 1994-95. 
The primary producers with their prices linked to LME have posted comfortable profits. 
In the globalisation process of Indian market the Government have, somehow offered better 
concessions to aluminium imports at a custom tarrif of 12% compared to excise duty of 15% 
on domestic production. He further informed that the company has 11.48% SCs, 4.35% 
S.Ts. & 6.37%, OBCs in 'A' grade posts whereas in 'B' grade the representation is 11.06% 
(S.Cs.), 9.26% (S.Ts.) & 9.()4% (OBCs) in grade 'C' the representation is 19.06% (S.C.); 
23.60% (S.Ts.) and 6.24% (OBCs) and in grade 'D' this representation is 11.46% (SCs.), 
31.65% (S.Ts.) and 27.98% (OBCs). One honourable Member proposed that the Scheduled 
Caste candidates for executive posts should be given some separate special training by 
spending some money on them. The Sub-C~mmittee recommends 'that to fill the backlog of 
vacancies reserved for various categories, special eft'orts may be made to train the persons till 
they attain the required skill and be appointed. 
A few representations received from the employees Unions indicated that they are not 
allotted accommodation. Some people who we_re affected by development of lands have not 
been employed. Medical facilities are not sufficient. The labour class is not treated equally in 
the matter of gate pass. There is a lack of canteen facilities for the children of employees 
and no educational facilities have been· provided. 
The Sub-Committee recommends that all land affected persons be provided suitable jobs, 
proper medical facilities may be provided to all employees and housing problem may be 
solved. The labourers may be provided some facilities in the matter of gate pass. Proper 
canteen facilities should be provided and proper arrangements may be made for imparting 
education to the children of the employees. 

128 
The Sub-Committee visited the hospital run by NALCO and it found the conditions there, 
very horrible. A number of latest machines and equipments were wanting there only. The Sub­
Committee recommends that the conclitions in hospital may be improved. All necessary modern 
machines and equipments may be procured. 
The Sub-Committee was informed by some representatives of workers that in the matter of 
allotment of contracts by tenders some racket is going on as only a few relations of an executive 
are continuously getting the contracts which is causing some discontent among the employe~s. 
The Sub-Committee strongly recommends that in the matter of allotting contracts by tenders 
there should be complete transparency and no undue advantage should be given to anybody. The 
vigilance department should keep an eye on such matters. 
It was pleaded before the Sub-Committee that the rate of customs duty should not be 
decreased further to save the industry. 
While answering a specific question regarding less production of power in 1995-96 the Sub­
Committee was informed that there are restriction on the supply of power so they can't take it. 
The difference is also not much. It was informed that more than 50% of the villages of Orissa 
are not electrified. 
The Sub-Committee was startled to see the specific consumption of alumina· average upto 
Nov-1996 as 1982 Kg. per ton against the norm 2016 Kg/f. The management assured that they 
are paying serious attention to this. 
The Sub-Committee was also informed that the expansionlupgradation plan for Augul 
Smelter worth Rs. 2340 crore has been sent to Govt. and for Damanjodi Smelter plant a 
proposal for Rs. 141 Cr. has been sent out of which Rs. 124/- crores is in the pipelines. It was 
informed that after the expansion NALCO would even then be cheaper. The prices are 
internationally controlled and are market oriented. We export our product to about 25 
countries. 
Discussion witb Director, Uranium Corporation of India Ltd. Jaduguda 
On the 30th December, 1996 the Sub-Committee while returning from Ghatsila mines 
visited the Uranium Corporation of India Ltd. an held discussion with its Director who 
informed the Sub-Committee that Uranium is found in nature in the form of Uranium Jllinerals 
as oxides, hydro-oxides, carbonates, phosphates, sulphates, vandates and molybdate of 
Uranium. There are more than 100 minerals containing Uranium. He also informed that in 
acidic rocks like granite, the average content of Uranium varies from 4 ppm to 8 ppm. However, 
in basic vocks as basalts, the content is of the order of 1 to 20 ppm. Shri Bhasin also informed 
that Uranium is also present in soil and water of the earth. He also informed that in India 1.9% 
of the total energy is produced from 9 units out of which 5 are under construction. The 
authorised and paid up capital figures at present stand at Rs. 360 crores and Rs. 371 crores 
respectively. In the process of production of Uranium, Jaduguda mine and mill, Bhatin mine, 
Narwapahar mine Uranium recovery plants at Surda, Raka mine and Mosaboni mine are 
playing a signif~a~nt role. the work of routine monitoring of radiological and conventional 
hazards in the mine and maintaining survillance on the environment of the uranium mining and 
milling industry is being carried out by BARC etc. All social and welfare aspects of the 
employees were found satisfactory by the Sub-Committee. Shri Bhasin also informed that the 
present installed capacity of the nuclear power stations in India is 1230 M.W. and with the 
commissioning of additional PHWRs under construction its installed capacity will increase to 
2170 MW. 
The imbaluaa in sharlag of beneftts of recovering valuable metals i.e. Uranium, Copper, 

129 
Nickel from copper concentrate tailings supplied by Ws Hindustan Copper Ltd. (PSU under 
the control of Ministry of Mines) to Ws Uranium Corporation (I) Ltd. (PSU under the 
control of Deptt. of Atomic Energy) was brought to the notice of the Sub-Committee. As 
these two units were located nearby (15 kms away), the Committee took the opportunity on 
30.12.96 of seeing the facilities established & discussed these issues. 
Ws Hindustan Copper Ltd. (ICC) Ghatsila, while processing copper, supplies free of 
cost, tailings of Copper concentrates containing small quantities of Uranium to Ws Uranium 
Corporation of India Unit, Jaduguda Mines, ·a Public Sector Undertaking under the 
administrative control of Deptt. of Atomic Energy to recover Uranium. Ws Uranium 
Corporation of India Ltd., having facilities extracts Uranium in small quantities from these 
tailings. Besides, Uranium, UCIL, recovers in small quantities Copper, Nickel from the 
tailings supplies by HCL. The tailings after processing by UCIL are supplied back to HCL for 
proper disposal. In the process of by-products recovery, UCIL bears the cost of transporting 
copper Concentrate tailings and realises the values of. Uranium, Copper and Nickel. M/s 
HCL supplies free of cost copper concentrate tailings, bears the cost of transporting tailings 
from UCIL, Jaduguda & does not share the benefits of by-product recovery of Uranium, 
Copper & Nickel. In the process tie up, even the cost of mining, grinding & crushing of 
copper having small quntities of Uranium are not remitted to HCL by UCIL. 
It is obligatory on the part of HCL to dispose off tailings free of Uranium and 
contribution made by UCIL in recovering small quantities of Uranium requires appreciation. 
However, there are imbalances in the sharing of benefits of recovering valuable metals from 
copper concentrate tailings in the tie-up between HCL & UCIL which are situated 15 to 16 
kms. apart. 
Since the cost of mining, crushing & grinding of copper ore by HCL is appreciated and 
as copper tailings/concentrates are supplied free of cost, the sub-committee recommends that 
the benefits of recovering valuable by-products i.e. Uranium, Copper & Nickel should be 
shared equally between HCL & UCIL and suitable mechanism may be evolved. 
The Sub-Committee also recommends that (i) the safety of workers in handling radio­
active Uranium should further be scrutinised and B.A.R.C's latest report should be sought 
and (ii) the environmental pollution especially water pollution by the wastes of Uranium 
Corporation of India Limited should be further scrutinised. 
Visit to Hindustan Zinc Limited's Lead Smelter at Tundoo on 31st December, 1996 
The Sub-Committee assembled in the Conference Hall at Tundoo to hold some 
discussions with the management of Lead smelter plant. 
PRESENT 
LOK SABRA 
1. Shri Radha Mohan Singh, M.P. -- Convenor 
2. Shri Ritlal Pd. Verma, M.P. 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Om Parkash, Deputy Secretary 

130 
REPRESENTATIVES OF HZL 
1. Shri Ramesh Chandra, A.E.D(s), Udaipur 
2. Sltri S.S. Bedi, Dy. G.M., Tundoo 
3. Dr. R.C. Mishra, Medical Supdt. Tundoo 
4. Shri B. Singh, Dy. Manager(F), Tundoo 
5. Dr. R.S. Jha, Dy. Manager (P&A), Tundoo 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINING DEPARTMf:NT OF STATE GOVERNMENT OF 
BIHAR 
1. Shri B.P. Gupta, Addl. Director (Mines), Ranchj 
2. Shri R. Nag, Dy. Director (Mines), Dhanbad. 
3. Shri S.K. Singh, District Mining Officer, Dhanbad. 
The Sub-Committee was taken round the various units of the smelter plant and was 
made to understand the technical working of various sections. The Sub-Committee also 
visited the staff canteen and hospital complex. 
The Sub-Committee was informed that the lead smelter has the capacity of annually 
producing 8000 tonnes of lead and 12,000 kg. of silver from lead concentrate called Galena 
which is received from its different captive mines of Zawar, Rajpura, Dariba and Agucha, 
all in Rajasthan. The Concentrate is pot sintered. The sinter thus produced is treated with 
hard coke in a low shaft blast furnace from where slag is tapped out and the hard lead 
obtained ,is taken to refinery where in a series of processes it is refined to an extent of 
99.9% purity. Silver is produced as the by product. In all there are 612 workers who work in 
three shifts. Broadly the smelter comprises of charge preparation, sintering blast fumance, 
lead refinery and silver refinery sections. 
On a pointed query the Sub-Committee was informed that the necessary raw material 
i.e. lead concentrate will have to be imported in future depending upon the availability of 
this raw material in the Country. Though this smelter cannot be expanded further but there 
is no question of its being closed. 
During the year 1995-96, 4006 MT of lead and 8695 Kg. of silver was produced by this 
plant. The plant is being maintained satisfactorily and the management is aware of their 
social obligations towards the employees and their families. The medical expenditure per 
employee in 1994-95 was Rs.2432 and in 1995-96 it was Rs.2833 and again the expenditure 
on education of per child of the etpployees during 1994-95 was Rs. 794 and in 1995-96 it was 
Rs.1186. During the year 1995-96 a sum of Rs.7,78,773 was spent on colony for the 
employees & their families. Again a sum of Rs.7,90,843 was spent on transportation of 
school children of employees during .1995-96. On medical facilities a sum of Rs.18,89,386 
was spent during 1995-96 and on cultural, sports and other activities a sum of Rs.2,39,794 
was spent in 1995-96. 
In the hospital maintained by the unit free checking facilities are available to villages all 
around. Drinking water and electricity facilities are also provi4ed to villagers nearby. A 
school is also being run efficiently. // ;'~:' · 
The Sub-Committee was, on the whole, satisfied with visit::Of the plant and with the 
maintenance of various units. The Sub-Committee took keen interest in understanding the 
working in silver refinery. 
The Sub-Committee recommends that the entire process of producinglrefming silver in 

131 
the Tundoo plant should be strictly monitored and if possible it should be computerised by 
way of modernisation. 
Meeting with the Officials of Mines & Geology Department and mM Officials of 
Rajasthan; The Representatives of Workers and the Management of Hindustan Zinc 
Limited, Udaipur 
(i) Meeting with the olliclals of Mines and Geology Directorate and Indian Bureau of 
Mines, Vdaipur, R~Uasth11n 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on 7.1.97 in the Conference Hall of Laxmi Vilas Palace 
Hotel, Udaipur. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Radha M9han Singh -- Convenor 
M.P. (Lok Sabha) 
2. Shri Ritlal Pd. Verma, 
M.P. (Lok Sabha) 
3. Kumari Frida Topno, 
M.P. (Lok Sabha) 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Om Parkash, Deputy Secretary. 
REPRESENTATIVES OF DIRECTORATE OF MINES & GEOLOGY UDAIPUR, 
RAJASTHAN 
1. Shri N.S. Bohra, Director of Mines & Geology 
2. Shri S.G. Bohra, Additional Director (Mines) 
3. Shri S.C. Agarwal, Additional Director (Geology) 
4. Shri S. Saifee, Supdtg. Enginee! (Mining) 
REPRESENTATIVES OF INDIAN BUREAU OF MINES 
1. Shri K.B. Goswami, Regional Controller of Mines, 
2. Shri R.K. Sinha, Dy. Controller of Mines 
REPRESENTATIVES OF WORKERS OF HINDUSTAN ZINC LIMITED, UDAIPUR 
1. Shri P.C. Shrimal, Secretary, Debari Zinc Smelter Mazdoor Sangh (INTUC) 
2. Shri K.S. Shaktawat, Sr. Secretary, Dariba Khan Mazdoor Sangh 
3. Shri N.L. Nagda, Sr. Vice President, Debari Zinc Smelter Mazdoor Sangh 
4. Shri M.L. Ahir, Sr. Secretary, Debari Zinc Smelter Mazdoor Sangh 
5. Shri M.K. LQdha, Secretary (i) HZWF (West Zone) (ii) HZKKSS 
6. Shri Hem Raj Lobar, Joint General Secretary, H.L.W.F. 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MANAGEMENT OF IDNDUSTAN ZINC LT~., UDAIPUR 
1. Shri K. V.K. Seshavataram, C.M.D. 
2. Shri P. Parvathisem, Director (Smelting Operation) 

132 
3. Shri B.K.P. Sinha, Director (Mining Operation) 
4. Shri S.M. Mathur, Director (Vigilance) 
5. Shri S.N. Prasad, Additional, Executive Director (P&A) 
6. Shri C. Sankaran, Company Secretary 
REPRESENTATIVE OF GOVERNMENT OF INDIA MINISTRY OF MINES 
Shri N. Sanyal, Director 
The Convenor introduced the Members and Officers of the Sub-Committee and 
explained in brief the purpose of the Sub-Committee. 
The Director of Mines and Geology !llso introduced his team of officers and informed 
the Sub-Committee as under :-
(a) Ever since the formation of the State of Rajasthan and the inception of the 
Department of Mines and Geology, the department has relentlessly engaged itself in the task 
of exploration and search for minerals on the one hand and development and opening of 
new mines, strengthening of mineral administration activ_ities and enhancement of state 
revenue on the other hand. It has also engaged itself in liaision with the central agencies in 
exploration of different minerals and petroleum in the state. Presently, the State is the sole 
producer of Jaspar and Wollastonite and leading producer of cement and steel grade 
limestone, soap stone, ball clay, calcities felspar, natural gypsum, kaolin, rock-phosphate, 
ochre and building stones besides tungsten, lead-zinc concentrates and copper metal. The 
development of the backward areas like Barmer, Bikaner, Jaisalmer etc. depends on mining. 
Zawan is the oldest mining areas. Lead-zinc and other minerals are in sufficient quantity in 
the State. Agucha mine is a big store for lead and zinc .. Steel grade limestone is available in 
Jaisalmer. 
Out of the 76 projects during the year 1996-97 working has been undertaken at 60 
projects up to December, 1996. The important minerals under these projects are marable, 
granite, cement, and steel grade limestone, lignite, base metals, clays, sand stone etc. 
The value of Minerals produced has gone up from Rs. 3.5 crores in 1950 to over 
Rs. 645 crores in 1993. Whereas the employment in Mines has also increased from 0.32 
lakhs in 1950 to about 3.50 lakhs in 1996. 
In Udaipur circle, constituted by Udaipur, Raj samand, Dungarpur and Banswara 
districts there are 366 mining leases for various major minerals and 32 prospecting .licences 
are in operation and 2969 mining leases are in operation for minor minerals. 
The Department started with a revenue of Rs. 48 lakhs in 1950 which increased to 
Rs. 21,452.20 lakhs in 1995-96 and to Rs. 11,165.751akhs up to December during the year 
1996-97. 
He further informed that the work in 473 leases in reserved forests and 837 leases in 
protected forests and 280 quarry licences areas has been stopped in pursuance of the recent 
judgement of the Supreme Court. The total area affected under the leases is around 664.57 
Sq. Kms. out of the total area of 2935.44 Sq. Kms. The closures of these mining areas will 
affect about 75,000 workers directly engaged in t.he mining sector and the State will be 
deprived of a revenue of Rs. 48.00 crores. All the investment in these affected areas would 
be a loss to the nation and would go waste. 
The Officials of the Indian Bureau of Mines informed that Geological Survey of India is 

133 
an important parent body which meets once a year with HZL, HCL and Mining 
depa:rtment. Since the cost of production of steel grade limestone is higher due to 2.5 
time high transportation charges, it is .imported as it is cheaper. 
Hon'ble Members asked some questions which were replied by the concerned 
officers. 
The Sub-Committee recommends that:-
(i) The latest scientific equipmentslmethods may be used in the mining sectors in 
Rajasthan. 
(ii) Some concessions may be granted on the transportation of the raw materials 
from the mining areos. 
(iii) Mining leases sbould be granted in favour of such persons as may engage the 
labour from the State. 
(ii) Meeting with Representatives of Mine Workers at Udaipur 
The Convenor introduced the Members and officers of the Sub-Committee and 
explained the purpose of thejr visit. Shri Hem Raj introduced his colleagues and 
informed the Sub-Committee that they have very cordial relations with management and 
there is no grievance in any quarter regarding implementation of reservation orders, 
accommodation, labour welfare or other facilities. 
On the query of an Hon'ble Member, it was informed that there are about 1000 
contract labours in Chanderiya for whom there were canteen facilities earlier but the 
same was stopped due to subsidy which is given by the management. The contract labour 
of Chanderiya have their own union which is npt cooperating with the union of regular 
workers. Members stressed that the representatives must do something for the welfare of 
the contract labour and see that the contractors provide facilities to these labour. 
The representatives drew the attention of the Sub-Committee to the situation arising 
out of the recent judgement of the Supreme Court. They informed that in Zawar group 
of mines, two mines have been closed due to the recent judgement of the Supreme Court 
resulting in the unemployment of a large number of labours and affecting their families. 
They also informed that the southern part of Udaipur is inhabited mostly by people 
belonging to S.Ts. and they and their families are mainly affected by the closure of these 
mines. 'They requested the Sub-Committee to do something in this regard. 
(iii) Meeting with the Management of HZL Udaipur 
The Sub-Committee meet at 5.00 p.m. to hold discussions with the management of 
Hindustan Zinc Limited, Udaipur. 
The Convenor introduced the Members and Officers of the Sub-Committee and 
explained its purpose of visit. The Sub-Committee had visited the smelting plant, 
Hospital, and the labour canteen at Chanderiya, Chittorgarh and the Zawar Mines, the 
hospital and the canteen for the mine labour at Zawar. The Convenor informed the 
Management that at Angul the Sub-Committee found the conditions unsatisfactory for the 
welfare of the labourers in respect of hospital facilities and also for the canteen facilities 
and accommodation and service matters. In NALCO there were every type of restrictions 
on the labourers whereas the executives were free from all restrictions. While praising the 
good work being done by the management of H.Z.L. and earning profits, the Convenor 
warned chem against the type of dangers/challenges in NALCO. He 

134 
desired that in future the expenditure incurred on the various welfare activities of the 
periphe~al villages/inhabitants be shown separately. 
The C.M.D. welcomed the Sub-Committee and introduced his team of officers while 
giving briefly the activities of Hindustan Zinc Limited he informed the Sub-Committee as 
under:-
. The HZL is, one of India's leading base metal producers, incorporated in Janaury, 1966 
as a public Sector Company after the take over of the erstwhile Metal Corporation of India 
Limited to develop mining and smelting capacities to substantially meet the domestic 
demand of zinc and lead rnetals. Its specturm of activities range from exploration, mining 
and ore processing to smelting and refining of lead, zinc, silver and cadmium metals. It is 
also an important producer of sulphuric acid, rock phosphate and tungsten concentrate. The 
Company is looking forward to opportunities in gold ~d other minerals. 
In 1990 Government of India upgraded the status of H.Z.L. to schedule 'A' Company 
rated as 'very good'. The Company is one of the Private Sector Enterprises identified by the 
G.O.I for disinvestment of its holdings. So far- the disinvestment 'has been 24.07% of the 
paid up capital and the number of shareholders stands at 11,400 as on 
30.11.1996. 
At present H.Z.L. with its headquarters at Udaipur operates five lead-zinc mines with a 
total lead-zinc ore production capacity of 3.04 million t.p.a. and four smelters with combined 
installed capacity of 149,000 t.p.a. zinc, and 65,000 t.p.a. lead, besides, a rock phosphate 
and tungsten mine. _ 
The production capacity of the mines and smelter plants is as given below:-
S. No. Mine Ore 
capacity 
(TPD) 
1. Zawar Oroup of Mines, Udaipur (Rajasthan) 4,000 
2. Rajpura-Dariba Mine, Rajsamand, (Rajasthan) 2,400 
3. Rampura-Agucha Mine Distt. Bhilwara (Rajasthan) (Under expansion to 
4500 t.p.d.) 3,000 
4. Sargipali Lead Mine, Sundergarh (Orissa) 500 
s. 
6. 
7. 
s. No. 
Agnigundala Lead Mine, Guntur (Andhra Pradesh) 
Maton Rock Phosphate Mine, Udaipur (Rajasthan) 
Degana Tungsten Mine, Nagaur (Rajasthan) 
Smelters 
1. Debari Zinc Smelter Udaipur (Rajasthan) 
2. Vizag Zinc and lead smelter Visakhapatnam (Andhra Pradesh) 
3. Chanderiya Zinc-lead smelter, Chittorgarh (Rajasthan) 
4. Tundoo Led smelter, Dhanbad (Bihar) 
Metal 
Capacity 
Zinc 
49,000 
30,000 
70,000 
240 
600 
150 
(TPA) 
Lead 
22,000 
35,000 
8,000 

135 
The Company earned a net profit before tax during 1995-96 at Rs. 65.71 crore. Whereas 
the sales turnover for 1995-96 had been Rs. 823.35 crores. Over the years the Company has 
implemented a number of technology updating schemes in mining, beneficiation and 
smelting leading to increased competitiveness of its operations. 
HZL is conscious of its responsibility for protection of the environment and ecology. 
The Company is in the forefront in takins well-planned and effective steps to check pollution 
and create healthy surroundings for its workforce and populace· residing in and around its 
units. To promote further growth the Company is contemplating proposals for expansion 
and/or the .opening of new mining and smelting units. 
The Company is going ahead with the expansion of Rampura-Agucha lead-zinc mine 
and beneficiation plant from the existing level of 9 lakh TPA to 13.5 lakh TPA at an 
estimated cost of Rs: 45 crore. The project is scheduled to be completed by the end of 1997. 
Zinc market in the country is expected to expand most at the rate of 6 to 7% during the 
9th Five Year Plan period (1997-2002) offering good opportunity to HZL to expand in its 
core competency area and continue to be a market leader in the domestic zinc market. To 
pursue this objective, HZL is contemplating to expand the existing operations besides setting 
up of a new green field zinc smelter having an annual capacity of 60,000 tonnes at an 
estimated capital outlay of'Rs. 600 crores. However, depending upon the techno-economic 
viability, the capacity could range between 60,000 and 100,000 tonnes per annum. 
As a diversification strategy gold bas been identified as yet another metal by HZL. It 
has undertaken exploration work at Jagpura gold prospect in Banswara District of 
Rajasthan. Under its diversification programme it has signed MOus·for joint ventures with 
different foreign collaborators. Recently, the one with BHPM, Australia has been cleared by 
FIB for exploration/development of base and precious minerals in the country. 
The Company during it11 span of over 30 years of service to the nation has emerged as a 
stronger force to reckon with in the non-ferrous metals sector of the country. Since the 
industrial scenario has become intensively competitive, both domestic and international, a 
conscious, effort is on to channelize the activities of the Company accordingly. While replying 
a question by an bon'ble Member the C.M.D. informed that mining in Sargipali area is 
sufficient for five to seven years. Consultancy has been identified for future plans in the area 
and the market survey is under consideration for the aluminium pipe industry. The Sub­
Committee was informed that due to suspension of the production of concentrate the 
earning of foreign exchange was less. But now we have increased. the production of 
concentrate there will be more profits. With the closure of two Zawar mines due to the 
recent judgement of the Supreme Court, 450 workers were affected and have been 
redeployed, production has come down from 750 t.p.d. to 150 t.p.d. i.e. a loss of 600 tonnes 
per day. They proposed that the mining leases granted before the forest conservation Act, 
1980 should be exempted from the recent Supreme Court judgement. 
The Sub-Committee was also informed that Rampura-Agucha mines can be operated by 
closing other mines. But out of the total about 60% workers are unskilled and they cannot 
be deployed elsewhere. 30% lead and SO% Zinc can. be produced profitably by the surplus 
labour force. Due to non supply of power there is a loss of 3 to 4 crores in one month 
country's Zinc requirement is increasing by 7%. At present only 50% of the demand is met 
and therefore we have to import the metal but we don't want the monopoly of the foreign 
suppliers. • 
• . . 

136 
The Sub-Committee recommends that:-
(i) The Ministry of Finance should, in future, consult the MIDIItry al Mlna etc. 
when proposing 10cb changes in the rates of e:xdse duty I e...coms duty u may be 
affecting the Mlnlstr)l I Ministries thereby. 
(ii) The renewal of the ~~ leases In respect of the miDea workina prior to the 
coming into force of the forest Conservation Act, 1980 should be made automatic. 
(iiiJ Supreme Court must be approached by the Ministry of Minea for arantlnc 
exemption from the recent judgement of the Supreme Court to the mlalna leases/ 
areas which were in operation prior to the Forest Conservatloa Act, 1980. 
(iv) ADotment of. mining leases to private contractors should be banned. 
(v) The migration of labour from other States to Rajasthan should be ltopped 
inunediately. 
(vi) There should be better co-ordination between the Ministry of Mines, Government 
of India and the Rajasthan State Mining Department. 
(vii) Mining leases should be given to indigenous companies and if possible to IUCh a 
company in the State of Rajastba-.. 
Meeting with Representatives of Wor~ers, Omcers' Association and the Managemeat ot 
Kudremukb Iron Ore Company Limited 
The Sub-Committee met at the Conference Hall of Sahyadri Bhawan, Ku~emukh on 
9.1.97 and held discussions with the representatives of workers, the officers' Association and 
the management of Kudremukh Iron Ore Company Limited. 
PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Shri Ram Deo Bhandari, M.P.--Convenor 
LOK SABRA 
2. Shri Radha Mohan Singh, M.P. 
3. Shri Ritlal Pd. Verma, M.P. 
4. Shri K.H. Muniyappa, M.P. 
5. Kumari Frida Topno, M.P. 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Om Parkash, Deputy Secretary 
REPRESENTATIVES OF WORKERS OF KUDREMUKH EMPLOYEES' UNION 
(INTUC) 
1. Shri A.N. Gopinath, President 
2. Shri U. Muniyappa, Vice-President 
3. Shri K.S. Jayakumar, Treasurer 
4. Shri S.S. Kantharaj, Secretary 
5. Shri S. Ranganath Babu, Joint Secretary 
.. ·-

137 
REPRESENTATIVES OF OFFICERS' ASSOCIATION 
1. Shri K. M. Nanjappa of Crushing Department 
2. Shri R. R. Urs, Manager 
3. Shri P. K. Muraleedharan, Deputy General Manager 
4. Shri Jagdish Bhushi, Manager, D & M 
S. Shri P. S. Yareshimi, Senior P.A., C & C. 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MANAGEMENT 
1. Shri K.S. Narayanan, Chairman ~nd Managing Director 
2. Shri S. Murari, Director (Prod. & Ptoj.) 
3. Shri B.S. Kotwal, Director .(Commercial) 
4. Shri B. Jayaram, Executive Director (Perl.) 
S. Shri K.V. Thyagarajan, General Manager (P.P. & S) 
6. Shri K. Gurumurthy, General Manager (Mines) 
7. Shri N.R. Panikkar, General Mana~.,r (Prod.) 
8. Shri K. Viswanathan, Company Secretary 
REPRESENTATIVE OF MINISTRY OF STEEL, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
Shri Ajay Tyagi, Deputy Secretary 
MEETING Wim REPRESENTATIVES OF THE WORKERS 
The Convenor introduced the Members and Officers of the Sub-Committee and 
explained the purpose of the visit of the S4b-Committee. 
The President of the Workers' Union welcomed the Sub-Committee and informed that 
they have very cordial relations with the management of the Company and that they have no 
major grievance against the management. 
On a specific query by an Hon 'ble Member regarding the status of contract labourers, 
the Sub-Committee was informed that there are about 600 to 700 contract labourers. A 
contract labourer gets Rs. 30/- per day. The participation of contract labourers is very 
useful, important and necessary for the Company. The Union has already discussed the 
various problems of contract labourers and have requested the management to extend all 
benefits to them through the contractors concerned. The Union is trying to get further 
higher wage to contract labourers. 
Shri K.H. Muniyappa intimated that recently the Central Labour Minister announced a 
minimum daily wage of Rs. 4<Y- to contract labourers which the Union should strive for the 
contract labourers in the Company. He a1so suggested that a contract labourer with a service 
of 10 years or mor~ should be regularised. The Union President informed that the contract 
labourer is different from the regular labourers. They are directly under the contractor who 
employs them and the contractor pays them. Their job is not of a permanent nature and 
their services are generally terminated after the completion of some work. Thus they go on 
changing their status. The Sub-Committee asked the Union to take up the cause of the 
contract labourers specially the cause of the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe labourers. 
Shri Gopinath intimated that they have three unions and they will make every effort to 
better the lot of the contract labourers. 
' . ~ . 

138 
Meeting with Officers' Assodation 
The officers' representatives informed the Sub-Committee that the performance of the 
Company is satisfactorily good. The officers' union · is not a recognised union. The 
management is not considering seriously their demand for recognising' th~ union. Their scales 
of pay have not been revised inspite of assurances from the Ministry. The representatives 
also drew the attention of the Sub-Committee towards the power problems of the Company. 
Meeting with Management 
The Chairman and Managing Director welcomed the Sub-Committee and informed 
that:- · 
(i) · Kudremukh Iron Ore Company Limited, a wholly owned Government of India 
Enterprise, was established in 1976 ~o develop mine and plant facilities to produce 
7.5 million tonnes of concentrate a year. The min..!and plant facilities were 
commisSioned in 1980 and the first shipment of concentrate was made in October, 
1981. A pelletisation ·plant with a capacity of 3 million tonnes per year was 
commissioned in 1987 for production of high quality blast furnace and direct 
reduction grade pellets for export. 
(ii) The deposits occur as banded magnetite quartzite with an average thickness of iron 
formation extending upto 100 metres. The top layer of iron formation is weathered 
where magnetite is partiully oxid~sed to haematite. The underlying primary BMQ is 
similar to taconite ore. The present scope of mining includes only the weathered ore 
which has an average iron content "of 38 per cent. This is beneficiated to produce 
concentrate of + 67 per cent iron. Kudremukb deposits are known to be one of the 
largest deposits in the world. In one deposit alone, where the mining is currently 
carried out, reserves of 700 milllon tonnes of weathered ore and 450 million tonnes 
of primary BMQ have been proved. Besides, there are other deposits in the vicinity, 
namely, Nellibeedu, Gangrikal, Dababudan, etc., with probable reserve of 3000 
million tonnes. 
(iii) Kudremukh the largest iron ore mine in India, is designed to produce 22.6 million 
tonnes of crude ore per year with a daily production capacity of ROM 100,000 
tonnes. The mine is plunncd for a three-shift operation. Blast holes of 12.25" dia are 
drilled in 14 m benches. The blasting is carried out using slurry explosives. Blasted 
material is loaded by 10.7 cu.m. electrical shovel into large dumpers of 108 metric 
tonne capacity. 
(iv) The mined ore is transported from benches to two Gyratory Crushers capable of 
crushing the ore to minus 7" size. ·n1e crushed ore is screened into coarse and fine 
fractions before feeding to Autogenous Mills. The ore ground to minus 20 mesh size 
is subjected to primary magnetic separation and the concentrate, after regrinding, is 
subjected to secondary magnetic separation to recover the magnetic concentrate. 
Tertiary magnetic separation system has also been incorporated to improve the 
quality of magnetic concentrate. The primary magnetic tailings are subjected to spiral 
separation to recover non-magnetic concentrate which is also gr:ound in ball mills. 
Floatation technique for improvement of concentrate quality has been incorporated. 
Process modifications are being curried out regularly with an objective of improving 
the product specification. The entire operation using the most sophisticated 
equipment from crushing to shiploading is fully automated and computer-controlled. 
Computerised mine planning techniques are used to maintain strict quality control. 

139 
(v) The process of pelletisation involves mining of iron ore concentrate with limestone 
· fines and bentonite as additives. Dry grinding mill for grinding limestone and . 
bentonite to pelletisation process is provided. A small proportion of coke/coal is also 
used as additive for improving the physical and metallurgical properties of pellets. 
The mixed material is fed to pelletising discs of 7.5 m dia for production of green 
pellets which are screened on roller screens to remove the undersize and oversize 
materials. 
(vi) Iron ore concentrate stored in two stockpiles having a total capacity of 400,000 
tonnes is reclaimed by reclaimers and loaded into ships through a shiploader with a 
rated capacity of 6000 tonnes an hour. A loading rate of 30,000 to 35,000 tonnes a 
day is guaranteed for Panamax type vessel. The pellets are reclaimed by a bucket 
wheel reclaimer of 4000 tonnes per hour capacity for shiploading. A captive iron ore 
berth has been provided to handle ships of 65,000 DWT with a loaded draft of 12.5 
meters. With the provision of an exclusive berth, waiting time for ships is eliminated. 
Detailed feasibility studies are being carried out to develop the Mangalore Port to 
handle ships of about 120,000 DWT size. 
(vii) The Company has undertaken quality improvement programme to meet the 
international market requirement and also to augment its concentrator plant 
production capacity to 8.0 m_illion tonnes per year and that of the pellet plant, 
capacity to 3.5 million ton.ries per year. The main process route for quality 
improvement is the incorporation of the Floatation system. The Company proposes 
to have its own Captive Power Generation Plant of about 50 MW capacity at 
Mangalore to reduce its dependence on the State Electricity Grid for power supply 
and also to maintain the committed supply of concentrate and pellets to the 
customers. 
(viii) Kudremukh Iron Ore Company Limited has taken adequate measures to maintain 
the ecological balance. A 65 metre high dam and two mini dams have been built at 
Kudremukh to store plant tailings and mine wash off to avoid pollution of perennial 
rivers. The flora and fauna of the area have been preserved. Over 7.5 million .trees 
have been planted as part of the large scale afforestation programme. Afforestation 
has also been undertaken a top the hills after mining. 
(ix) Kudremukh produces high grade iron ore concentrate ideal for use as sinter feed and 
for pelletisation. The concentrate has been used in Japan, Czechoslovakia, 
Yugoslavia, France, Australia, Romania and China as blend for sintering and in Iran 
and Bahrain as a blend in pellet feed. The remarkable feature of Kudremukh Ore is · 
its low alumina, sulphur, phosphorous, Vanadium and other deletrious elements. 
Magnetite content of ore has an added advantage in terms of lesser fuel requirement 
in sintering and pelletisation. 
Kudremukh pellets have been used in blast furnances of steel mills in Hungary, 
Yugoslavia, Turkey, Australia, Taiwan, U.S.A., China, West Germany, Japan, Poland and 
Czechoslovakia. The pellets have also been used in Malaysia, Iraq, Indonesia, France and 
Qatar for DRI production. Kudremukh pellets are used in the two large direct reduction 
plants set up in the west coast of India. 
The Sub-Committee was also informed that the . Company's power requirement at 
·Kudremukh was 80 MV A and 25 MVA at Mangalore and in terms of energy the power . 
requirement of the Company is about 600 million units. In November, 1995, a power cut of 
50% and demand cut of 30% was imposed on the Company. After Company's efforts it was 
476/RS F-10-A 
• 

140 
given an allocation of 9.0 million units per month from December, :1995 from the 
unallocated quota from central power generating stations. The Company got 9.0 million 
units from central quota out of Neyveli Lignite Corporation's generation,. from 15th 
November, 1996, KEB has withdrawn 9.0 million units from the central allocation and has 
also imposed 50% power cut and 25% demand cut severely hampering production 
operations in terms of quantity to be produced and also quality of material due to power 
interruptions, low voltage and il\adequate frequency cycle resulting in loss of production of 
about 800,000 tonnes of concentrate and 50,000 tonnes of pellets per annum representing a 
loss of turnover of Rs. 80 crores and reduction in profit of Rs. 30 crores. The following is 
urgently required:-
(a) immediate lifting of cut on energy and demand for KIOCL. 
(b) availability of uninterrupted power throughout the day and removal of peak load 
restrictions from 6.00 p.m. to 10.00 p.m. 
(c) Government clearance for the Company to set up a 60 MW power plant at 
Kudremukh on Build-Own-Operate-Maintain (BOOM) basis. Presently, this 
permission is not allowed stating that KIOCL cannot get this clearance unless the 
plant is set up by itself. BOOM route is preferred since there will be no involvement 
from KIOCL and completion date of the power plant will be faster, which is about 
20 months from the date of signing of Power Purchase Agreement and Financial 
Closure. 
(d) Approval for 150,000 tonnes of naphtha is to be cleared for KIOCL whether the 
power plant is to be put up through BOOM route or by KIOCL itself. 
The customs department has recently made a new interpretation that the production 
trucks are not entitled to duty exemption either for equipment or for spares. Unless the duty 
exemption is given, the impact of duty on the cost of production will be highly detrimental 
to KIOCL since it has to compete in the international market with other global mining 
giants. 
Ministry of Finance may be requested for issuing either an adhoc notification or a 
permanent relief through a special dispensation for not levying any customs/excise duty on 
supplies made to KIOCL by way of equipments, stores and consumables. 
Government of Karnataka are demanding fuel escalation charges and threatening 
disconnection of power every now and then. The company feels that fuel escalation charges 
are not applicable as per the Government order. The claims of an amount of almost Rs. 115 
crores by KEB will completely wipe out the financial viability of the Company's exports. 
The claim of fuel escalation charges and also the threat to disoonnect power .may be 
withdrawn. No solution appears to be in sight. 
The company has applied for prospecting licence in the adjoining Nellibeedu and 
Gangrikal areas for exploration and extending mining lease area. Prospecting licence for 
Nellibeedu has been granted and mining lease is yet to be obtained. 
In respect of Gangrikal, Government is yet to issue prospecting licence whereby the 
company can further mine about 550 to 600 million tonnes which will enhance the mining 
life by another 12 to 15 years. 
KIOCL has invested about Rs. 600 crores at 1976 prices and earns foreign exchange of 
Rs. 500 crores per annum which amounts to be more than Rs. 2000 crores at todays prices. 
476/RS F-lO.B 

141 
Unless the mining leases are granted to KIOCL, sucli a huge investment would be forced to 
remain idle for want of ore after about 12 to 15 years. 
• The Chairman and Managing Director informed the Sub-Committee that this company 
is 100% export oriented company having mechanised mines having 120 tonnes production 
truckS', 12 drills 14 cubic Yt\fd shovels. 
Iran failed to pay the funds committed by it. Only initial payment of-£ 255 was made 
so the losses to the company. There was no market for.the company. The company entered 
Japanese market in 1985 with the financial help of Government of India. Other markets 
were also opened for the company and it improved its performance. Its annual turnover 
came to Rs. 500 crores, earning an annual profit of Rs. 100 crores and paid dividend of 
Rs. 20 crore per year. The company has np long term loans to pay. In its future plans the 
company proposes to upgrade its pellet plant to a capacity of 3.5 metric tonne. Conventional 
floatation is also proposed to be upgraded for iron and pig iron. The company's main 
problem was that in a year about four months it rains heavily on the western ghats which 
results in stoppage of work as the area is virtually flooded. Over 4000 production hours are 
lost annually. There is a loss of one metric tonne concentrate production. 
The Sub-Committee was satisfied with arrangements in the canteen for staff and the 
hospital. One Hon'ble Member raised the point relating to contract labour. He said that at 
least minimum wages should be paid to contract labourers and the management ,should 
intervene with the contractors. The management was also requested to give some 
consideration to officers' union also. 
On the environmental front, the company planted 75 lakh plants and 5 lakh seedlings 
are added annually. The roads in the mines are regularly watered. In Mangalore, the 
company has a 90 metre high chimney to control sulphur level in atmosphere. The company 
has natural parks. 
The company has a club for cultural activities. It has 100% housing in Kudremukh and 
75% housing in Mangalore. Drinking water is provided to all. Transport is provided to 
workers and children for schools. 
Only one type of uniform for each and every worker/executive of the company. Free 
medical treatment is provided in the 50 bedded hospital of the company. 
The Sub-Committee was satisfied with the working at the mines and its other units. 
The Sub-Committee recommends that:-
(i) The 25% demand cut and 50% power cut imposed on the company be ·lifted 
immediately and uninterrupted power supply be ensured to the company. 
(ii) Tb" clearance to 60 MW power plant at Kudremukb on Build-Own-Operate­
Maintain (BOOM) basis be given expeditiously to ea8e the power position. 
(iii) The demand of Rs. 115 crores as fuel escalation charges by KEB may be 
withdrawn expeditiously. 
(iv) Approval for 150,000 tonnes of naptha may be cleared. 
(v) The prospecting licence in Nellibeedu and Gangrikal areas for exploration and 
mining may be issued. 
(vi) The Central Board of Excise and Customs Duty should exempt the heavy truck 
loaders from excise duty by redefining transport truck. 

142 
(vii) The working conditions, wages and the welfare of the contract labours may be 
improved. 
Discussions with Representatives of Workers, Officers and the Management of Bharat Gold 
' Mines Ltd. at Kolar Gold Fields on 11th January, 1997 
The Sub-Committee assembled in the Conference Hall of Kolar Gold Mines at Kolar 
Gold Fields on the 11th January, 1997. 
PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Shri Ram Deo Bhandari, M.P.-Convenor 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Radha Mohan Singh, M.P. 
3. Shri Ritlal Pd. Verma, M.P. 
4. Shri K.H. Muniyappya, M.P. 
5. Kumari Frida Topno, M.P. 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Om Parkash, Deputy Secertary 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MANAGEMENT OF B.G.M.L. 
1. Shri R. Gupta, Managing Director 
2. Shri A.N. Sharma; G.M. (Projects) 
3. Shri B.R. Prabhakar, G.M. (Finance) 
4. Shri C. Narayanan, Dy. G.M. (Prod.) 
5. Shri H. Sannamaligai, Dy. G.M. (Perl.) 
6. Dr. S. Dhurgabai, Chief Medical Officer 
7. Shri S. Krishnan, Acting Secretary 
REPRESENTATIVE OF MINISTRY OF MINES, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
Shri Satish Chander, Director 
REPRESENTATIVES OF WORKER'S UNION 
1. Shri. A. Devan, General Secretary, B.G.M.L. Labour Association (INTUC) 
2. Shri W.M. Krishnappa, Treasurer, -do-
3. Shri G. Mani, Joint Secretary, -do-
4. Shri Pandian, Joint Secretary, -do-
5. Shri C. Parthasarthy, President, Bharat Gold Mine Workers Association (B.J.P.) 
6. Shri H. Ramchander, Vice President,. -do-
7. Shri Premchand Jain, General Secretary, -do-
8. Shri M. Veelayutham, Vice-President, BGM. Dr. Ambedkar Workers' Union 
9. Shri Setha Srinivasan, President, B.G.W. Association 
10. Shri A. Kuppuswamy, Secretary, B.G.M.L. Union-Congress(!) 
11. Shri J.S. Mani, Working President, BGM Employees Union-CITU. 
The convenor introduced the members and officers of the Sub-Committee asd explained 
the purpose of ~he visit. The representatives of various unions of workers like B.G.M.L. 

143 
Labour Association, Bharat Gold Min~ Workers' Association, Bharat Gold Mine United 
Employees' Association, B.G.M. Mazdoor Union etc. pleaded before the Sub-Committee 
"for: 
(i) Wage revision of workers which is due w.e.f. 1.1.93. Most of the workers belong to 
s~eduled castes or scheduled tribes. No payment or delayed payment results in 
· s\\{fering by the families of workers. 
(ii) _fayment of Ex-gratia bonus to workers for 1995-96. 
(iii) Early elections of the .Workers' Unions. The fresh elections were due on 17.3.1995: 
(iv) Nomination of a representative of the workers on the Board of Directors of 
B.G.M.L. 
(v) Taking steps to stop the open loot and pilferage of gold etc. from the B.G.M.L. 
(vi) ordering an impartial secret inquiry into the di~proportionate assets acquired by the 
executives of the Company. · 
(vii) Converting B.G.M.L. into an authority like SAIL, GAIL etc. as the management 
has failed to curb the losses, illegal activities and corrupt practices in B.G.M.L. 
(viii) Immediate revoking the reference to B.I.F.R. 
(ix) Apaointing a new C.M.D. with extensive powers to arrive at a revival package in 
consultation with the Workers. 
(x) Deployment of new/latest techniques for mining and ore dressing and if needed 
with foreign collaboration. 
(xi) Immediate deployment of Central Industrial Security Forces. 
The Sub-Committee was informed by the representatives of workers that the employees 
of B.G.M.L. are leading a miserable life due to non receipt of their wages in time. They are 
not being paid any bonus. Wage revision has become due w.e.f. 1.1.93 but nothing is being 
done by the Management. There is no leave encashment in the Company. They also 
complained that there are only 20 doctors for about 60,000 persons. Due to practically no 
security all types of illegal activities and pilferage of gold are going on freely in the 
Company. 
One Hon'ble Member warned the workers to be watchful and careful about their rights. 
They should fight for their interests and try to maintain good relations with the 
management. Any illegal activity should be reported by the workers. 
The officers representatives also desired that Government should render financial 
assistance to the Company and the reference to BIFR should be revoked. They desired that 
the (VRS) Voluntary Retirement Scheme should be made applicable to officers also so that 
they may seek retirement paying way for the promotion of junior staff. 
The Chairman and Managing Director of B.G.M.L. informed the Sub-Committee that 
consequent upon the Company incurring losses continuously and its net worth becoming 
negative from 1988-89 onwards the Company was referred to BIFR and was declared a sick 
unit. A rehabilitation scheme is presently under the consideration of Government. He also 
informed that the tum-round strategy of the Company consists of:-
(i) Underground mining at shallow levels to improve the production of gold from 
650 kg. to 1100 kg. per annum. 

144 
(ii) rationalising manpower from 6200 to 3871 during the next three years. 
(iii) The cost reduction programme. 
(iv) the additional production of gold by processing the tailings through the Carbon-in­
pulp (C.I.P.) plant to be set up by B.G.M.L. 
(v) improving the performance of diversification activities by merging Engineering 
Workshops and project and contracts divisions to exploit market potentials. 
(vi) pursuing identification of new gold deposits for exploitation. 
The Sub-Committee was further informed that with 31st March, 1996 asithe cut off date 
a rehabilitation proposal worth Rs. 186.02 crore was sent to Government. In addition to this 
Government of India was also requested to consider sacrifice amounting to Rs. 340.25 crores 
by conversion of plan loan in equity (Rs. 64 cr.); waiver of non-plan loan (Rs. 62.15 crore); 
waiver of interest on plan and non-plan loctns (Rs. 95.20 crores) and waiver of penal interest 
(Rs. 84.31 crore) and concession on interest for future (Rs. ,33.91 crore). 
The total accumulated loss incurred by the Company on 31.3.1996 stood at Rs. 249.31 
crore which would get reduced to Rs. 125.56 by 31.3.1997 once Government of India 
approves the waiver and write offs proposed by the operating agency. The Company would 
continue to incur losses during the first 3 years of the rehabilitation package and would start 
earning profits from the 4th year and onwards i.e. when C.I.P. plant will be operating at its 
full capacity and producing gold. 
The BIFR have issued a show cause notice for winding up of the Company fixing the 
next hearing on 5.2.1997. The BIFR had stipulated to comply with (a) Company's entering 
into a long term agreement with labour unions encompassing rationalization of manpower, 
settlement of labour dues, productivity norms etc. (b) finalising by operating Agency the 
rehabilitation scheme and conduct a joint meeting of all the parties concerned and report the 
results (this has been complied with); and (c) Government of India's communication of their 
specific views regarding restructuring of capital and liabilities and induction of fresh funds to 
the extent required as suggested in the OA's report. 
The Company has appealed against the show cause notice and has already submitted the 
annual plan 1997-98 and Ninth Five year Plan 1997-2002 taking into account the factors 
envisaged in rehabilitation package submitted by the operating agency. 
The total budgetary support envisaged from Government of India for putting up a 3 
million tonne per annum capacity CIP plant for extraction of gold by treating the old mine 
tailings is Rs. 70 crores which will have to be incurred during 9th Five Year Plan period. 
The expenditure from internal generation will only be during phases II and III of C.I.P. 
project which will be required beyond 9th Five Year Plan period. The expected pr6duction 
of gold from C.I.P. plant from 1997-98 to 2006-2007 will be 8823.30 kgs. Putting up the 
C.I.P. plant is the most important component of the turnaround strategy the Company is 
proposing for its revival and the total amount of Rs. 70 crores is to be provided for during 
the Ninth Plan period. As per OA's report during 1997-98 the gold production is anticipated 
to be 807 kgs. and the turnover during that period would be of the order of Rs. 1050 lakhs. 
Normal replacements and renewals of plant and machinery both in production and 
supporting services have to be met during the initial two years i.e. 1997;-98 and 1998-99 for 
which an outlay of Rs. 2.50 <..Tores each is to be provided for. This assistance would ensure 
projected production. No allocation is envisaged at present beyond 1998-99. 
The Chairman and Managing Director admitted that there is no 100% security but there 

145 
is enough security arrangement. He also informed that his request for deployment of central 
industrial security force has been turned down by Ministry of Home Affairs. He admitted· 
that a number of cases of theft are pending but none of them pertains to theft of gold. He 
also admitted that some misguided unemployed youth illegally entered some of the closed 
mines but were later arrested. He informed that the revision of wages of the employees 
could not be done as there are _no sufficient funds for the purpose. Similarly some welfare 
schemes are pending for want of funds. The Company is haunted by the threat of closure. 
However the company has submitted a rehabilitation package to Government and it is 
pinning high hopes on the C.I.P. plant which is expected to do wonders when installed and 
operates to its. full capacity. 
Keeping in view the evidence tendered by the representatives of the Unions! 
Associations of workers, the representativ~s of officers and the management as well as the 
various recommendations of the predecessor Sub-Committee on B.G.M.L. Kolar this Sub­
Committee recommends that:-
(a) The company has been referred to B.I.F.R. which has issued a show cause 
notice. Now the company ca~ not take any action for Its revival without the 
prior permission of DIFR. Therefore it is utmost necessary and demanding that 
the reference to BU'R be revoked immediately and BGML, Kolar is taken out of 
the purview of the DIFR. 
(b) It is of supreme importance that the fear of imminent closure of BGML, Kolar 
looming large on the workers, their families and other inhabitants majority of 
whom belong to scheduled caste or scheduled tribe, may be allayed. AU these 
penoos are living under a fear psychosis it is necessary to declare clearly that 
this Company wUI, under any circumstances, not be allowed to close down and 
every effort will be made to revive it at the apex national level. 
(c) To bring this company at level immediate rmancial assistance sought by the 
Company throuach Its rehabllltation package should be given and also the 
assistance to lnshll tile CIP plant for recycling the huge stock of old mine tailings 
be made availubl'! at once. 1'o boost the morale of the Company the Ministry of 
Mines must come forward and make avaUable the finances required either as 
budgetary support or son loans to the B.G.M.L. Kolar or stand as a guarantor 
to enable the company to seek loans from financial institutions. 
(d) The management of B.G.M.L. Kolar can also as a last resort, raise the funds for 
the revival of the company by selling its surplus land at the existing market rates 
which can fetch a good amount. · 
(e) The Sub-Committee observed Ught security in copper mines and smelting units 
whereas the security was not found that tight in gold miuiog and smelting units. 
The security· network of the B.G.M.L. should be further tightened and 
streamlined and all out efforts should be made to prevent pilferage of gold or 
other property of B.G.M.L. Governmenl may, after relaxing some of the 
conditions in respect of B.G.M.L., deploy a special case, the central industrial 
security forces expeditiously to sa\·e the company from further losses. Frisking 
may be made compulsory for everyone, irrespective of status, who comes out of 
the premises where gold is produced/stored. 
(t) Survey for more areas for gold extraction should be made by B.G.M.L. teams 
instead of depending on G.S.I. 1'his can be done by entering into suitable 

146 
agreements by gold mining entrepreneurs with indigenous or foreign companies 
of Mrica and Australia having the latest technology and lmow bow in gold 
mining. Government should help B.G.M.L. financially for making it modern in 
acquiring latest mUis and minina equipments as weD as in extractina more 
quantities of gold. 
(g) Kolar gold fields are situated in Karnataka and hence the State Government of 
Karnataka should help D.G.M.L. by charging nominal ~ty tarift' as was 
being done by Sbbnsha Elec,ricjty Project and all the accumulated pending 
arrears against B.G.M.L. may be waived off to help the company. The State 
Government of Karnataka Jbould also be persuaded not tO eharge royalty 
without extending any facUlties to B.G.M.L., Kolar. 
(h) Necessary steps may be taken by management of Bharat Gold Mines Limited to 
provide fresh cool air inside the various working mines to enable the workers to 
do their work peacefully 8Qd efficiently. 
(i) The assets/properties of all Executives connected with gold mining and smelting 
may be got enquired/verified secretly. 
0) The Sub-Committee observed that in a small town like Kolar there was unduly a 
large number of more thaJI 5000 goldsmiths and more than -soo·tfto~rooms. This 
indicates some secret private illegal dealing in gold etc. This may bi'Cbecked up 
thoroughly. 
Meeting with the ~ftlcers of Indian Bureau of Mines, Bangalore on U.l.97 
The Committee met in the Conference Hall of I.B.M. Bangalore at 10.00 a.m. on the 
12th January; 19??· 
PRESENT 
LOK SABHA 
1. Shri Radha Mohan Singh, M.P. -- Convenor 
2. Shri Ritlal Pd. Verma, M.P. 
3. Shri K.H. Muniyuppa, M.P. 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Om Parkash, Deputy Secretary 
REPRESENTATIVES OF INDIAN BUREAU OF MINES 
1. Shri N.M. Sangode, Regional Controller (Mines) 
2. Shri K.K. Chatterjee, lncharge South Zone, Bangalore and Sg. Mine~;al Economist, 
I.B.M., Nagpur 
3. Shri K.H. Rao, Regional Controller of Mines, Bangalore 
4. Shri Y.N. Sontakke, Dy. Regional Ore Dressing Officer, Bangalore 
5. Shri H.V. Nagraj, Asstt. Controller of Mines and Head of Office, Bangalore 
6. Shri K.T. L<;>uis, Dy. Ore Dressing Officer, I.B.M. 
REPRESENTATIVE OF MINISTRY OF MINES, GO~ENT OF INDIA 
Shri Satish Chander, Director 
The Convenor introduced the Members and officers of the Sub-Committee and 
explained the purpose of its visit. 

147 
Shri Sangode also introduced his team of officers and informed the Sub-Committee that 
the Indian Bureau of Mines came into existence on 1.3.1948 under tbe then Ministry of 
Works, Mines and Power for formulation of National Mineral Policy for central coordination 
and planned development of country's mineral resources. Presently the functions of I.B.M. 
are being carried out by various divisions, one of which is Mines Control and Conservation ol 
Minerals Division which functions through Northern Zone (Ajmer), Central Zone (Nagpur) 
and Southern Zone (Bangalore). 
Under the jurisdiction of south zone there <8fe four regional offices at Bangalore, Goa, 
Hyderabad and Chennai besides one sub-regional Office at Nellore. The main responsibility of 
the zonal office is to enforce systematic development of mineral deposits and conservation of 
mineral resources as well as to suggest ways and means to control the adverse impact of 
mining on environment in mining areas under its jurisdiction. This responsibility is discharged 
through regular inspections of working mines, mineral conservation studies, special studies 
and approval of Mining Plan for execution in mines. · 
There are 1138 working mines under South Zonal Office of I.B.M. which are being 
inspected at regular intervals by the officers of four Regional Offices. Suggestions are issued 
thereafter for improvement in respect of:-
(i) Mining and geological problems to maximise extraction. 
(ii) Prospecting, exploration and preparation of geological plaqs. 
(iii) Systematic development of mineral deposits. 
(iv) Working of low gnade ores and their beneficiation for consumption in mineral based 
industries and for export. 
(v) Stacking of low grade ore as well as mineral rejects separately for future use. 
(vi) Maximising the use of low grade material by blending and upgrading the same. 
Out Qf the 1138 working mines, 266 mines are in Bangalore region, 209 mines are in Goa 
region,·473 in Hyderabad region and 190 in Chennai region. In South Zone the annual ore 
production of iron ore is 39.5 to 40 million tonnes; lime stone 31.5 million tonnes; Bauxite 6.6 
lakh tonnes; Manganese 4.6 to 5.2lakh tonnes; gold ore. 4.2 to 4.6lakh-.tonnes; Barytes 3.5 to 
4lakh tonnes; Dolomite 2.5 to 3lakh tonnes; Magnesite '2.5 to 2.6lakh t(,)nnes; clay 4.7_to 5.7 
lakh tonnes; Silica sand 4.5 to 4.8 lakh tonnes. The major activities_of Southern Zone include 
examination of Mining Plans and Mining Schemes, furnishing cimunents to the· Ministry on 
lease renewals and on irrigation projects in the mineralised areas-arid advising the Ministry of 
Mines on mines and minerals as and when such cases are referred to this office. Processing 
and approval of Mining plans and Mining schemes have become the top priority work for all 
the Regional Offices of I.B.M. while processing mining plans, more emphasis is given at the 
planning stage itself for scientific development of mine and protection of environment in close 
proximity of the mines by proposing appropriate measures in the EMP in-built in the Mining 
Plans. Scientifically well conceived mining plans are approval by I.B.M. for implementation in 
the field generally within the stipulated period of 90 days. 
Upto December, 1996 l.B.M. have approved 2415 Mining Plans and 119 Mining 
Schemes. For timely redressal of grievances in respect of disposal of mining plans Mining Plan 
Grievance Committees have been formulated in each region of I.B.M. which take cognizance 
of written complaints received from the mine owners against approving authorities of I.B.M. 
and examine the grievances for suitable redressal. 

148 
In order to enhance awareness amonpt the mine owners and mine employees towards 
environmental protection in . the minirtg areas· each Regional Office plans and organises 
Mines Environment and Mineral Conservation Week (ME & MCW) in. their respective 
regions so that environmental degradation due to mining is controlled and minimised to 
permissible levels. 
On a query from an hon'ble Member Shri Sangode informed that on receipt of any plan 
first of all after examination the plan. is approved and a plan of the ore body is prepared for 
ore realisation. For a viable project the I.B.M. takes three to six months for according its 
final approval. 
He also informed the Sub-Committee that they have very old technology. No new 
technology has been made available to them for Kolar and Hatti gold mines. According to a 
decision of October, 1996 the limit of mining areas has been extended to 5000 Km. from 25 
Km. with the condition that nobody should have the monopoly. The representative of the 
Central Government informed that as per the latest decision an area of 10,000 Km. can be 
given to a Company only for aerial survey which.has to be surveyed within three years. They 
have to invest money and according to the new guidelines not more than 50% of equity has 
been allowed. Shri Satish Chander further informed that there is a clear guideline for 
maintaining environmental norms as well as the welfare activities of the villages situated 
within a radius of S Km. in the mining activities. Barring a few important metals the rest 
have been placed in the charge of State Government concerned. On a specific question from 
the Convenor about the possibility of reviving work at level 32 in Kolar Gold Mines it was 
informed that the mines have been flooded with water. However, after dewatering the mines 
can be worked for further prOduction of gold but· this is subject to further survey. 
Shri Sangode informed that there is a number of posts lying vacant for quite a long time 
and this is affecting the efficient working of I.B.M. He requested that these may be filled up 
and chances of promotion should be provided I enhanced. 
The Sub-Committee recommends that:-
(i) AU vacant posts may be filled up expeditiously. 
· (ii) Promotional avenues may be provided in I.B.M. 
(iii) Latest scientific technology may be made available to I.B.M. 
Discussion with Officers of Geological· Survey of India, Bangalore on 12th January, 1997 
The Committee assembled in the Conference Hall of G.S.I. in Bangalore to hold 
discussion with the officers of G.S.I. 
PRESENT 
LOK SABHA 
1. Shri Radha Mohan Singh, M.P. -Convenor 
2. Shri Ritlal Pd. Verma, M.P. 
3. Shri K.H. Muniyappa, M.P. 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Om . Parkash, Deputy Secretary. 

149 
REPRESENTATIVES OF GEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA, BANGALORE 
1. Shri G.V. Devapriya, Director (Ops.), (Karnataka & Goa), Bangalore. 
2. Shri K.P. Gopalkrishan, Director (Coord.), G.S.I., Bangalore. 
3. Shri S.N. Anand, Director (Geophysics). 
4. Shri K.S. Murti, Deputy Director General (Ops.). 
5. Shri V. Natarajan, Deputy Director General lncharge. 
6. Shri S.S. Murthy, Director Incharge (Ops.). 
REPRESENTATIVE OF MINISTRY OF MINES, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
Shri Satish Chander, Director 
The Convenor introduced the Members and officers of the Sub-Committee and 
explained the purpose of the visit. 
Shri Devapriya welcomed the Sub-Committee and informed that Geological Survey of 
India was established in 1851 for coal exploration and gradually expanded as responsibility/ 
needs arose and thus grown into a multidisciplinary scientific organisation with a strength of 
18,000 employees. A full fledged separate department of airborne surveys mainly for 
deciphering hidden mineral resources was set up during 1965. In 1970 it was merged with 
Geological Survey of India. Initial surveys were carried with foreign collaboration during 
1968-71 and later on with the indigenous knowhow /facility. 
The Headquarter at Bangalore has all specialised divisions--Geophysics, 
Instrumentation, G.M.C. drilling etc. The Zonal officers do the ground evaluation of 
acquired data and detailed integrated studies inCluding exploratory drilling. The total 
strength of employees in Bangalore is 750. Under the Canadian International Development 
Agency's aid programme during 1986 the twin Offer Airborne Survey System was acquired. 
AMSE wing's programmes are drawn up after considering the recommendations of Sub­
Committees and Government directions and plan priorities. Searches were made for 
nonferrous metal deposits in Singhbhum Copper belt, Ranchi Plateau, Cuddapah basin in 
over 90,400 Km. area with a total of 1,44,460 line Kms. traversed. 
The airborne geophysical data-both in analog form and digital tapes are available to 
the interested parties at nominal cost. These are made available after obtaining necessary 
clearances and permissions of Ministry of Defence/Survey of India. There is a lot of 
demand for these outputs. 
Through the sales of maps and publications about Rs.11.70 lakhs have been earned and 
remitted to the Consolidated Fund of India. 
About 36 mineral investigation reports of AMSE· wing were cost estimated and are 
made available to the interested parties. The cost works out to be around 3.3% of the 
operational cost. The rates of charges for sponsored surveys are under active consideration 
of the Ministry for appr.oval. 
For the further improvement it requires special permission for low altitude flight 
surveys; more fluent and quicker clearances from M.C.A. for routine matters; delegation of 
necessary administrative and financial powers for effective operations to Head of 

150 
Dq>artment-more autonomous if needed to compete commercially; provision for incentives 
to the scientists involved in the . commercial I sponsored items for motivation I effective 
involvement, flight allowance to the scientists on board, and all these will go a. long way in 
improving the quality of surveys in a cost effective time }?~und . scheme with a sense of 
involvement among personnel. Sbri S.S. Murthy informed the Sub-Committee that in the 
southern region G .S.I. has been working successfully in the field of airborne surveys. It has 
done a good job in the Indo-Gangetic areas for oil. Further surveys are being conducted by 
.oil authorities separately.The main survey of G.S.I. is fpr minerals and metals. Oil industry 
has been desiring that we should survey for them but G.S.I. has not sufficient manpower 
and whatever staff they have they can survey for hydrocarbons. Reclaiming the abandoned 
mines is also being done by G.S.I. No expansion of staff has taken place after .the Seventh 
Five Year Plan. The D.G.C.A. ,permits drilling over 120 meters but G.S.I. requires drilling 
at 60 meters in which a man goe~ empty stomach which is a very difficult task. 
The Sub-Committee was informed that in the airborne survey there is a lacunae. In the 
first year it is for 5000 Km. and in the second year it is restricted to 2500 Km. only and in 
the third year only 25 Km. is allowed. But in the. airborne survey it is not at all possible tc> 
come to 25 Km. It should remain SOOO Km. which is the only solution. 
The S..b-CommiUee therefore recommends that:-
(i) A levy of Rupee one per toDDe of the extracted ore should be Imposed as cess. 
(ii) G.S.I. should be made the custodian of all surveys/ data except for 15 Km. 
(iii} As a result of G.S.I.'s spendina a lot of money on Investigations/surveys minina 
should be allowed to indiJenous companies so that the nation may benefit from 
this. 

STUDY REPORT (S) 
OF 
SUB-COMMITTEE- V 

SUB-COMMITIEE-V ON STEEL SECfOR 
'· Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry as its meeting held 
on the 29th October, 1996 constituted its five Sub-Committees to examine different sectors 
of industry in tbe country. Of these Sub~Committees, Sub-Committee-V consisting of 
following members was constituted to examine diffe.tent aspeCt:f. oJ the· 'St&~ ~r: 
1. Shri Pradeep Bhattacharya-~ ConvenOI' 
2. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
3. Shri Ananth Kumar 
4. Shrimati Usha Meena 
5. Shri L. Adaikalaraj 
6. Shri Darbara Singh 
7. Shri P.C. Thomas 
8. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
2. The Sub-Committee considered the information furnished by Ministry of Steel and 
visited Calcutta and Durgi\f>ur on the 26th and the 27th December, 1996 and Nagpur, Bhilai 
and Hyderabad from the 6th to 9th January, 1997 and made on the spot study of following 
organisations: 
(1) Central Marketing Organisation (CMO), SAIL, Calcutta 
(2) Indian Iron and Steel Company Ltd. {liSCO), Burnpur 
(3) Hindustan Steel Works Construction Ltd. (HSCL), Calcutta 
(4) Metal Scrap Trading Corporation Ltd. (MSTC) 
(5) Office of the Development Commissioner, Iron and Steel, Calcutta 
(6) Bird Group of Companies, Calcutta 
(7) Durgapur Steel Plant (DSP), Durgapur 
(8) Manganese Ore India Ltd. (MOIL), Nagpur 
(9) Bhilai Steel Plant (BSP), Bhilai (MP) 
(10) Sponge Iron India Ltd. (SilL), Hyderabad 
(11) National Mineral Development Corporation (NMDC), Hyderabad 
Thereafter, the Sub-Committee heard the views of representatives of CII and FICCI in 
the matter. A list of representatives of various organisations who appeared before the Sub­
Committee is placed at Annexure. 
153 

154 
Governments perception regarding performance of Indian Steel Sector 
3. Ministry of Steel vide their letter No. H-11-14(7)'96 dated 6th December, 1996 informed 
.the Sub-Committee that the steel industry in general responded to the policy changes 
enthusiastically. This was evident from the performance of different segments of the industry 
some highlights of which were as under: 
(a) Compared to the production level of 14.33 million tonnes in 1991-92, the production 
of finished steel in 1995-96 had been 21.40 million tonnes, · thereby registering a 
growth of over 49% and an average ·annual growth of 12.33%. In the current year, 
10.66 million tonnes of finished steel has been produced upto September, 1996 
which is 13.3% higher than the production during the corresponding period last 
year. 
(b) Pig iron production which was 1.59 million tonnes in 1991-92, increased to 2.79 
million tonnes during 1995-96, registering an overall growth of over 75%. During 
the current year 1.42 million tonnes of pig iron has been produced upto September, 
1996 which is 7.1% higher than the production during the corresponding period last 
year. From being an importer of pig iron till.1991-92, India has emerged as an 
exporter. The exports were 5.04 lakh tonnes. during 1995-96, earning valuable 
foreign exchange of Rs. 243 crores approximaJely. 
(c) Sponge iron production which was 1.3 million tonnes in 1991-92 increased to 4.4 
million tonnes 1995-96, registering a phenomen;ll growth of over 238%. This year 
till September 1996, 2.313 million tonnes of sponge iron has been produced India is 
already the second largest producer of sponge iron in the world. Export of sponge 
iron tou~hed 0. 79 million tonnes during 1995-96 fetching foreign exchange earnings 
of Rs. 350 crores approximately. Besides, production of sponge iron in the country 
has resulted in considerable savings on import of metallics for the secondary steel 
sector. 
(d) Export of iron and steel, which was mere 3.73 lakh tonnes in 1991-92 reached 20.06 
lakh tonnes in 1995-96 registering a growth of 438%. 
(e) After delicensing of iron & steel industry and as a result of the steps taken for 
creation of additional capacity in the private sector, as on 1.8.96, All India Financial 
Institutions have clearcd20' projects involving an annual capacity of 11.26 million 
tonnes of saleable st~el and investment of Rs. 20.095 crores. Out of these, seven 
projects involving instrument of about Rs. 6238 crores have already been 
commissioned with an annual capacity of 3.91 million tonnes. Eight more projects 
with an estimated capacity of 3.98 million tonnes per annum and involving 
investment of Rs. 8926 crores are under appraisal. 
Central Marketing Organisations (CMO), SAIL 
. 4. Central Marketing Organisations was established in 1963 to handle the marketing 
operation for all the steel plants of the then Hindustan Steel Limited. It has since grown into 
a vast distribution network of 42 Branch Sales Offices, 38 Departmental Stock Yards. 140 
Consignment Stock Yards and 8 Authorised Distributors£xtention Counters. CMO accounts 
for 70% of total sale of saleable steel through its wide net work whereas 30% of steel is sold 
by the plants to customers against orders booked by CMO. The Sub-Committee was 
informed by the·representatives of CMO that in the wake of decontrol of pricing/distribution 
of steel w.e.f. January, 1992 Central Marketing Organisation responded to the needs of the 
challenging market by modifying its systems, procedures and policies. There has been a 
gradual shift from volume orientation to market oriented production and marketing with an 
emphasis on value. 
5. The Sub-Committee expressed their concern over the present stock position of Steel 

155 
which is stated to be three times more than the normal level despite the efforts made by the 
Central Marketing Organisation. The representatives of CMO stated that presently the total 
stocks in the stock yards and plants of SAIL put together exceeded one million tonnes, the 
value thereof corning to Rs. 1,500 crores and the monthly co,st of this inventory is about Rs. 
19 crores. SAIL has however taken a number of steps to increase the sale of steel and check 
the trends of rising inventory viz., (i) vigorous customer contact and follow up of individual 
customer orders for affecting speedier delivery; (ii) orienting product mix to suit market 
needs; (iii) adjusting production as per market requirements; (iv) adopting strategic pricing 
depending upon market segment; (v) competition and quantity linked bulk purchases; and 
(vi) maximising exports of some categories to bring down the stock levels. With regard to 
export potential it was clarified that it depended among other factors on the demands and 
supply in the international market. 
6. On being asked whether new areas were being explored by CMO to promote 
consumption of steel in domestic market particularly in agricultural sector, the Sub­
Committee was informed that promotion and consumption of steel in agricultural sector and 
small scale industries was very much part of SAIL's marketing strategy. 
The Indian Iron and Steel Company Ltd. (liSCO) 
7. liSCO, one of the oldest integrated Steel Plant in India still operates with outmoded 
technology for making of steel mainly due to inadequate investment in updating its 
technology resulting in high cost of production and it is, therefore, unable to compete in the 
open market. The Sub-Committee was informed that cost of production had further 
escalated by the spiralling hike of coal prices, railway freight, D.V.C., power tariff and 
expenditure on petro fuel. The Sub-Committee was informed that the losses of the Company 
have come down ever since its take over by SAIL. Last year the Company suffered badly on 
account of wage revision. 
8. On the proposal for revival.tehabilitation of liSCO the Sub-Committee was informed 
that a proposal in that regard was submitted by SAIL and liSCO to I.D.B.I on the ·2nd 
November, 1994 seeking a budgetary support of Rs. 1100 crores from Government of India. 
The Government expressing its inability to provide this budgetary support suggested for a 
joint venture with a private partner for revival of the Company. Consequent to the SAIL's 
global advertisements seeking joint venture participation, only two parties viz. TPE of 
Russia and MITSUI of Japan submitted their offers. MITSUI later declined to participate in 
the equity. TPE has requested for an extension of time for finalising the issue. 
9. As regards the constraints being faced by the Company on marketing side, the .Sub­
Committee was informed by the Management that liSCO depended heavily on pig iron sale, 
steel production being costlier due to outdated technology of Open Hearth Route. Of late, 
pig iron market of the Company has been seriously affected by the competition in the 
market from the secondary producers which have increased in number and also due to the 
heavy imports from outside. The Company is also facing problems as the market is presently 
continuing to show sluggish trend from the last few months. · 
Hindustan Steel Works Construction Ltd. (HSCL) 
10. HSCL was incroporated in 1964 with the primary objective of undertaking complete 
construction of modern integrated Steel Plants right from the stage of site investigation to 
the stage of commissioning of the plant. The Company today has a wide range of expertise 
in steel sector, power plants, dam construction, bridges, coal handling plants, underground 
communication and transport system, industrial and town ship complexes, etc. The 
476/RS F-ll·A 

156 
Company's turnover crossed over Rs. 400 '-Tore mark in 1995-96. The operational loss of Rs. 
6 crore in 1991-92 changed over to operational profit of Its. 3 crore in 1994-95 and Rs. 5 
crore in 1995-96. The accumulated losses of the Company as on 31st March,.1996 are to the 
tune to Rs. 644 crores. When asked about the reasons for losses the Sub-Committee was 
informed that payments to HSCL were stopped in Libya and loan liability of the Company 
became enormous. The Company also suffers from surplus manpower, Wage liability of the 
Company came to Rs. 170 crores in the 1995-96. Moreover, after the completion of Steel 
Plants in the Country, the Company does not regularly get the jobs in Steel Sector. At the 
same time company is facing Competition from the private sector and lags behind owing to 
its overhead cost. Efforts are being made to increase the turnover position of the. Company 
as also to generate sufficient margin to meet salaries and wages and the fixed costs. The 
Company has diversified its activities into other core sectors, such as coal, power and other 
infrastructural facility projects; real estate business; and seeking joint venture for getting the 
technology for slag reduction and processing including marketing of by products. 
11. The Management of the Company informed the Sub-Committee that the Company 
was a viable and profitable unit withou~ having any past lia~iJity. The main problem the 
Company is facing is on account of finances and efforts are being made to get partner(s) 
who could give loans on moratorium basis on ~e partner with sound balance sheet so that 
financial institution could invest. 
Metal Scrap Trading Corporation Limited (MSTC) 
12. MSTC Ltd. incorporated in 1964 was the canalising agent for import of (i) carbon 
steel melting scrap; (ii) sponge iron/hot briquetted iron; and (iii) re-rollable scrap till 
decanalisation in February, 1992. Presently, the Company's status is the same as of any 
other importer and its operation in the area of foreign trade has suffered. However, the 
efforts were being made to compensate through domestic trade operation by acting as selling 
Agency to more than 200 units in the Government and Public Sector. As a result, there has 
been 90% growth over past three years. 
13. The profits of the Company declined during 1995-96 and 1996-97 mainly due to the 
factors affecting foreign trade. The Company has been declaring dividends ranging from 
20% to 40% and has not sought any budgetary support. 
14. The management of Company further informed the Sub-Committee that they were 
looking forward for assistance of Government for issue of Notification defining the physical 
dimension of Heavy Melting Scrap (HMS) and Re-rollable Scrap including these items, in 
customs classification; and providing a differential duty structure for HMS and re-rollable 
scrap. Apart from this, it also solicits Government's assistance in providing funds for 
working capital; in routing of all· advance licences from all organisations under Ministry of 
Steel through MSTC; and in ensuring aJl organisations under Ministry of Steel to utilise 
Company's services for meeting their import requirements as far as feasible instead of using 
other intermediaries. 
Office of the Development Commissioner, Iron and Steel at Calcutta • 
15. This office is the sponsoring authority of a large number of Iron and Steel making 
units in the secondary steel sectors. This office has the responsibility to see the health and 
growth of this sector from time to time by providing necessary assistance for making 
available inpute materials like Coal, Coke, Furnance oil, power and allotment of Railway 
wagons ~nd other materials. The Sub-Committee was informed thut this office called a 
periodical meetings with the representatives of Central Electricity Authority, R-ailway Board, 
Central Pollution Control Board, etc. to review and sort out the problems being faced by the 
476/RS F-11·8 

157 
secondary sector units in developing their units. This encourages the development of new 
products which are in short supply in the country. 
16. The Development Commissioner, Iron and Steel further informed the Sub­
Committee that Government of India constituted a Joint Plant Committee (JPC) of nine 
members under the Chairmanship of Development Commissioner, Iron and Steel. The JPC 
also managed the funds like the Steel Development Fund, Engineering Goods Export 
Assistance Fund so as to develop the steel industry. 
Bird Group of Companies 
17. Presently, seven companies are working under th~ umbrella of Bird Groups of 
Companies viz., the Orissa Minerals Development Company Ltd. (OMDC), the Karanpura 
Development Company Ltd. (KDCL), the Bisra Stone Lime Company (BSLC), the Slotty 
aild Saxby Limited (SSL), the Burrakure Coal Company Ltd., the Borrea Coal Company 
Ltd. and the Eastern Investments Company Ltd. The Sub-Committee was informed that due 
to huge accumulated losses, heavy burden of outstanding liabilities, excessive manpower, 
etc. these companies were sick and ultimately taken over by the Government of India. With 
the support of Ministry of Steel for the last four years, some problems have been tackled 
and actions have been taken to improve the m?rketability of products through better product 
mix and- enrichment of quality. · 
Durgapur Steel Plant (DSJ•) 
18. The Sub-Committee visited Durgapur Steel Plant at Durgapur and held discussions 
with the representatives of plant. The Sub-Committee was informed that plant was 
producing both primary and secondary products viz. pig iron, billets, slabs, TMT bars, angle, 
railway products like wheel axle, BG sleepers in the primary sector and iron scrap, steel 
scrap, molted slag, grenulated slag in the secondary sector. 
19. On being asked about the marketing of steel produced by the plant, the Sub­
Committee was informed that due to slump for the last 3 months in the steel market, the 
demand of steel has come down and profit ratio has gone down. Domestic demand in the 
steel sector grew at a very low rate. Keeping in view the present competition in .the market 
DSP has changed its policy and customer satisfaction has become the main feature of this 
policy. The plant has started quick service scheme for its customers. On the issue of cost of 
production, it was informed that its cost of production was the lowest in the country and its 
quality had also improved. 
20. The Sub-Committee was also informed that the plant was facing problem on 
account of poor quality of coal. They urged before the Sub-Committee to consider this 
problem and stop the monopoly of coal supplier. The Sub-Committee was further informed 
that the plan~ was in crisis because of market position being very dull and cash loss of the 
plant was on·· the increasing side. 
Manganese Ore India Limited (MOIL) 
21. MOIL is the single largest producer of manganese ore in the country. The 
Company, apart from producing and marketing manganese ore has identified the need to 
expand and diversify its activities by producing value added products based on manganese 
ore. The Company has already put up an Electrolytic Manganese Dioxide (EMD) plant with 
an installed capacity of 600 tonnes per annum. The Company is contemplating to put up 
another EMD plant having capacity of 1200-1500 tonnes per annum at an estimated cost of 
Rs. 10 crore. 
22. The Sub-Committee was informed by the management that during 1995-96 the 
or; 
. )' 
• • ~1'· 

158 
Company crossed Rs. 100 crore business and recorded 8% growth rate in production as 
compared to the previous year. The Company is continuously signing the MOU with 
Government of India and in 1995-96 its performance had been rated 'excellent'. The 
Company earned profit (after tax) of Rs. 10.78 crore in 1995-96 and paid dividend to 
Government at the rate of 20% for the last three years. 
23. Presently, the Company is facing constraints on account of restriction for 
deployment of contractors for production of manganese ore. Earlier the Company was 
engaging petty contractors for extraction of saleable grades of ore from the old dumps. The 
work being of temporary nature was not economically viable for departmental exploitation. 
The management of the Company desired that engagement of contractors for dump mining 
may be allowed which would go a long way in conservation and optimum utilisation of this 
valuable mineral resource. The attention of the Sub-Committee was also drawn to the 
presentation made by MOIL before the Committee on Industry on 15th November, 1995 at 
Bombay. Pursuant to the recommendations of the Committee in its 17th Report presented to 
Parliament on the 7th March, 1996, the Government had taken up the matter with Central 
Advisory Contract Labour Board for grant of exemption to MOIL which is still awaited. The 
Sub-Committee impress upon the Government to expedite the exemption to MOIL from the 
operation of the Government's Notification NO. U. 23013/123/056-LW dated 23rd March, 
1993 prohibiting engagement of contract labour in respect of manganese ore mines. 
Bhilai Steel Plant 
24. BSP, set up in the 2nd Five Year Plan for production of one million tonne of ingot 
steel annually has now took up an ambitious programme to raise its annual production 
capacity of raw steel to 4 million tonnes. After the expansion, the thrust was on removal of 
bottlenecks and investing in addition, in modification and replacement schemes so that the 
capacity utilisation could be increased without investing in new capacity. In the year 1995-96 
the plant produced 4.07 million tonnes of crude steel, 4.38 million tonnes of hot metals and 
3.5 million tonnes of saleable steel. Primarily being an ore based plant, coking coal is 
transported by rail from Bengal and Bihar, Limestone from Nandini and dolomite from Hiri. 
In addition, the plant also gets supply of coal imported from Australia as the domestic coal 
supplied by Coal India Ltd. has more ash content thereby affecting the quality of steel 
produced in the plant. The domestic coal also suffers from frequent price hikes. It was 
suggested by the management in this regard that there should be a check or regulation on 
the frequent price hikes of coal and there should also be an improvement in its quality so 
that additional burden on production of steel is reduced and the dependence upon imported 
coal is also minimised. · 
25. In the course of discussion the Sub-Committee was informed that iron ore 
exploration from Rajhara mines were becoming gradually uneconomic as the ore was 
explored from a very low level and its quality was also low due to less lump content. To 
meet the requirements of plant Raughat mines have been identified which is yet to be 
connected by railways. State Government of Madhya Pradesh have conditionally cleared the 
project on the ground that rail line be extended to Jagadalpur. 
26. With regard to huge build up inventories lying in the stockyards of SAIL and its 
plants, the Sub-Committee was informed that at present BSP was also facing this problem. It 
was hoped that the downward trend in consumption of steel in domestic as well as 
international market would be checked and demand would pick up. The projections for the 
9th Plan revealed that there would be a shortage of steel. BSP is making all out efforts to 
meet out the challenges by according top priority to quality improvement, cost re~uction arid 
better customer service. The Sub-Committee was further informed thut there was a need of 

159 
restructuring of PSUs in the steel sector so as to give ore autonomy to each production unit 
and accordingly the control of holding Company i.e. SAIL needed to be reduced. 
Sponge Iron India Ltd. (SilL) 
27. SilL was incorporated in 1975 with the primary objective of setting up of a 
demonstration project of 30,000 tpa capacity to establish techno economic feasibility of 
manufacturing sponge iron suitable for steel making, using indigenously available iron ores 
and non-coking coals. The demonstration sponge iron plant was commissioned in 1980. 
Thereafter the Company demonstrated the use of sponge iron as substitute to scrap by 
rendering assistance to various steel making units in the country. Presently, the Company 
has reached the optimum level of operations with a production level of 50,000 tonnes of 
sponge iron. There is also a proposal to take up the production of ferro alloys through the 
existing Sub-merged Aic Furnace (SAF) plant which is expected to go for commercial 
production in 1997. With the present operations, the Company is showing a loss of Rs. 50 
lakhs per aunum. Losses are mainly attributable to increase in input costs particularly of coal 
and iron ore, and heavy competition in the market. According to the management, the only 
solution to this problem was to reduce cost of production and it could be done only if the 
Company goes for expansion of the sponge iron capacity from present 60,000 to 120,000 
tonnes. It would result in reduction in the overall cost of the total production by Rs. 500/­
per tonne and achieve overall profit of Rs. 4.5 crore per annum. As per the Company's 
proposal which is presently before the Planning Commission, the expansion would cost Rs. 
50 crore including the captive power plant. 
28. The other area where Company feels handicapped is the availability of cheaper 
imported scrap in comparison to sponge iron for use in the furnaces. This could be possible 
due to reduction of import duties from 45% in 1991 to 5% in October, 1994. The 
management of Company pleaded before the Sub-Committee for increase of import duty by 
10% so as to help the sponge iron industry in general and SilL in particular. The Sub­
Committee desires that Government should look into the matter • 
. 
National Mineral Development Corporation (NMDC) 
29. NMDC was established in 1958 as a public sector company to undertake 
exploitation and development of all minerals other than coal, oil and atomic minerals. 
NMDC had developed several important mines and deposits of iron ore like Kiriburu and 
Meghatuburu iron ore mines in Bihar, Kudrehmukh iron ore deposit in Karnataka, and also 
other mineral deposits .like Khetri copper deposit in Rajasthan, phosphate deposit in 
Mussorie, etc. Some of these were later on handed over to other public sectors and some of 
them later became separate public sector companies. The Sub-Committee was informed that 
as on 31st March, 1996, the authorised share capital and paid up capital of the Company was 
Rs. 150 and 132.16 crores, for respectively, and there is no outstanding loan due to be paid 
to the Government. The profits of NMDC had been around Rs. 100 crores for the last few 
years and the highest ever profit of Rs. 150.46 crores was achieved in 1995-96. NMDC has 
been paying 20% dividend for the last five years amounting to Rs. 26.43 crores each year. 
30. Management of the Company informed the Sub~Committee that full requirements 
of Visakhapatnam Steel Plaut and substantial portion of the requirements of major units that 
have come up in sponge iron sector like Essar Gujarat, Nippon Denro Ispat Ltd. and other 
new iron and steel projects ln und around Karnataka are being met by the Company. It was 
also informed that the Company has got a great potential for supply of iron to steel industry 

160 
and it needs to be further strengthened. It has already started preparing plan for expansion 
of its mining capacity by developing Kumaraswamy B & C block in Karnataka and Bailadila 
10:11 a project in M.P. out of its own resources, without any budgetary support. The Sub· 
Committee desires that Government should encourage NMDC to expeditiously develop mines 
referred to above. • 
31. The Sub-Committee expresses its happiness on the overall performance of NMDC in 
terms of production and profitabUity. The Sub-Committee feels that in view of good technical 
& financial position and experience in exploration and development of many other minerals, 
NMDC is capable of playing a leading role in the development of minerals like diamond, gold 
etc. apart from iron ore. The Government should also take necessary steps for strengthening 
the position of NMDC. 
Confederation of Indian Industries (CII) 
32. The representatives of CII stated that in 1995-96 there has been 13% growth in the 
demand of steel in the country whereas the growth of demand in current year has come 
down to 8-9%. The Sub-Committee was informed that it was_ expected that demands would 
reach 24 million tonne in 1996-97 as against 20 million tonnes in 1995-9~ Besides, there was 
surplus availability of steel due to imports. Import has been on an increase due to decline in 
international prices of steel during the last one , and half year.: Continuous decline in 
international market has been due to excess capacity and depressed demand in international 
market and an early recovery was not likely in international market. 
33. When asked about the competitiveness of domestic production of iron and steel, the 
Committee was informed that in our country the input cost is very high in comparison to the 
developed countries. It comes. to 33--35% in India whereas the same costs 2% in other 
countries. With regard to custom duties, the Sub-Committee was told that custom duties at 
1996-97 level be retained. It was further suggested that there is a need to impose non tariff 
barriers such as fixation quota, local content rule and other quantitative restrictions on the 
line of steps taken by other steel producing countries. High regulatory duty of 10% above 
than that on primary products may be imposed on the imports of secondary and defectives. 
On the issue of. excise duties the Sub-Committee was informed that it should be reduced on 
steel products to 10%; on constructional steel/GC sheet to 5%; and freight and distribution 
charges may be exempted from calculation of assessable value for excise duty. 
Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industries (FICCI) 
34. The Sub-Committee has been informed by the FICCI that there are positive signs of 
revival of Steel industry all over the world. The increase in demand is significant in 
developing countries especially in South East Asia and Pacific basin. In the developed 
countries it is likely that there will be future shortage of metallics aad coke in particular. It 
thus provides a g;)od opportunity for India to become a global player in the induslry. There 
will also be a fundamental change in the demand for steel in India in the long run. India has 
a comparative advantage in the production of steel in terms of raw material cost and labour 
cost but these factors are nullified because of technology handicap. There is a strong need 
for restructuring of Indian steel industry in terms of modernisation and technology 
upgradation. In this context adoption of new technology like COREX in new plants and 
modernisation of existing plants is essential to provide a competitive edge to the Indian steel 
producers. The performance of steel sector depends upon the efficiency of infrastructural 
sector particularly power and transportation net work. 
35. The representative of FICCI who appeared before the Sub-Committee stressed 

161 
upon the need for heavy investment in steel sector and also in infrastructural sector and 
suggested that it could come through Foreign Direct Investment (FDI). At the same time 
the representatives pleaded for Government's strict regulatory control on this issue. They 
felt that there was need for intensive· efforts to popularise consumption of steel with a view 
to augment its demand in the country particularly, in agricultural and construction sector. 
36. With regard to present rates of custom duties on steel products it was suggested that 
·import duty on finished steel items (Semis and finished pr9ducts) should not be reduced for 
a period of 2 years i.e. till 1999. Import duty on essential inputs needed by the domestic 
steel industry should be reduced substantially. As regards Central Excise Duty on 
domestically produced steel the Sub-Committee was informed that it should be lowered from 
15% to 10%. 
OBSERVATIONS 
Marketing and Consumption of Steel 
37. Having gone through the information supplied by the Ministry of Steel, and 
discussions with the Managements and Workers' representatives of the Organisations/ 
Companies referred to in para 2 above and evidence of representatives of CII and FICCI, 
the Sub-Committee expresses its concern on the down ward trend in the entire steel sector, 
despite the appreciable growth in the production of steel in the country. The slump in steel 
sector has not only adversely affected the steel plants but also the industries connected with 
production of iron and steel. It is an indicative of lack of coordination between 'the 
production of steel in the country on the one hand and marketing thereof on the other. Jt 
also indicates that growth in production of the steel in the country has not resulted in 
corresponding growth of consumption of steel. Consequent to the industrial liberalisation 
policy of Government the public sector steel producing units witnessed a different era which 
they were not used to. Now there is a shift from production oriented units to market 
oriented units. Import duties came down drastically resulting in import of steel and leading 
to heavy competition in domestic market. The steel industry in the country is now facing 
problem on account of huge inventories build up in SAIL stockyards and steel plants worth 
Rs. 1800 crores. 
38. The Sub-Committee has been assured by the Ministry of Steel, Central Marketing 
Organisation, SAIL and steel plants visited by the Sub-Committee that this situation is for a 
very short period and that steel industry would pick up and future projection reveal that 
there would be global shortage of steel and the fact that about 30 new projects are coming 
up in the country is also an indication of future consumption trends. The Sub-Committee is, 
however, not convinced by the plea of the Government. 
Impact of revised customs and excise duties 
39. After liberalisation, import duty rates on iron and steel items have been gradually 
reduced over the years. Changes brought about in customs duties in .respect of some of the 
items may be seen from table given below:-
ITEM 
1 2 
1. HR Coils 
2. CR Coils 
IMPORT DUTY 
1993-94 
3 
50% 
75% 
1994-95 
4 
40% 
50% 
1995-96 
5 
30% 
40% 
1996-97 
6 
25.% 
30% 

' 
.. 
162' 
1 2 .. 3 4 5 6 
3. Plates 75% 50% 40% 30% 
4. Bars I Roads Structurals 85% 'j. 50% 40% 30% 
Relaxation of import duties has resulted not only in opening up of domestic iron and 
steel market to international competitors but it has also made the domestic market heavily 
competitive for the domestic producers. Apart from this the domestic producers also 
suffered from the increase of excise duties that has registered growth in respect of the items 
mentioned ranging above from 12.5% in 1993-94 to 15% in 1996-97. 
Export 
40. Presently, as per the policy of Government, the export of iron and steel is freely 
allowed. According to Ministry of Steel, in the last five years the export of saleable steel 
registered a growth of 383% in quantitative terms and 837% in value terms. However, the 
information supplied by C.M.O., SAIL reveal that there has been 24% decline in 1995-96 
compared to 1994-95 in value terms. The export, from the country includes semis, hot rolled 
coils, cold rolled coils, pig iron and sponge iron in addition to the traditional items like 
plate, bars and rods, and structurals. In future export is expected to be of higher value 
added items. The Sub-Committee was informed by the Ministry of Steel that an Expert 
Group has been constituted to evolve a strategy to give impetus to the export of iron and 
steel. 
41. In the process of examination, the Sub-Committee also went into the comparative 
cost of steel produced in India and in other countries. The Sub-Committee felt it necessary 
in view of lifting of international trade barriers where only economic consideration had to 
determine both the domestic and external trade hence the ability of the industry would be 
judged by the lower operation costs and better product quality. 
42. According to the Bureau of Industrial Costs and Prices (BICP) tour report on cost 
study of steel industry of 1995 report, the cost of production of saleable steel in Bokaro and 
Bhilai Steel plants of SAIL during 1994-95 was less then the cost of production in Korea 
(Pohang plant of POSCO) and Japan (Kimitsu plant of Nippon). The cost of production of 
saH~able steel of SAIL during 1994 was less than the cost of production in USA, UK, France 
and Germany. The Sub-Committee is constrained to note that despite the above stated cost 
advantages, the domestic steel producers are not getting the desired markets outside and.are 
also facing grave competition in the domestic market. The Sub-Committee impress upon the 
Government to take appropriate measures to come out of this situation. · 
Partial withdrawal of freight equalisation Policy 
43. After deregulation of pricing and distribution of Steel, Government has. paTtially 
withdrawn the freight equalisation policy removing the freight disadvantages to states located 
near plants. According to present policy the main producer of steel are charging ;.actual 
freight upto the stockyards or freight element as existed earlier under the earlier freight 
equalisation scheme whichever is less. In doing so the freight disadvantage to the states/areas 
located near the steel plants of the main producer~ has been removed and at the same time 
advantage of lower frej$ht equlisation scheme to the distant areas/states has been protected. 
The extra burden on Wtis account is borne by the main producers themselves. There is no 
Government subsidy for this purpose. The annual burden on SAIL alone on this account is 
Rs. 200 crore. Government have also received representations from the states like Tamil 
Nadu, Punjab and Assam for re-introduction of freight equalisation scheme. The Economic 
Research Unit of Joint Plant Committee is presently conducting a study on the impact of 
partial withdrawal of freight equalisation policy. 

163 
Future Projections 
44. Ninth Plan Demand Availability Projections of finished steel pig iron and sponge 
iron available ·with the Government are as under: · 
ITEM 
1. Finished Carbon 
Steel 
2. Alloy and Special 
Steel 
3. Pig iron 
4. Sponge iron 
PROJECfED 
(Demand) 
(Including export 
potential) 
38.68 
(million tonnes) 
2973 
(thousand tonnes) 
43.50 
(Iakh tonnes) 
7.67 
(million tonnes) 
PRO JEerED 
(Availability) 
38.01 
(million tonnes) 
46.50 
(lakh tonnes) 
6.18 
(million tonnes) 
According to Ministry of Steel, the projected gap in finished steel will be met by 
imports. There is no problem anticipated in the availability mat~ing the projected demand 
for alloy and special steel. As regards the sponge iron the MilJistry have stated that there 
would be a net short fall attributable to many of the existing Direct Reduced Iron (DRI) 
units going in for forward integration thereby reducing the availability of merchant sponge 
iron. The Government have adopted a two pronged strategy for increasing steel production 
in the country i.e. through (i) modernisation. and expansion of steel plants in the public 
sector; and (ii) creation of additional capacity in the private sector. 
45. In pursuance of this strategy, SAIL has undertaken a massive modernisation 
programmes of its plants at Durgapur, Rourkela and Bokaro primarily with the objective of 
updating the technology for reducing the cost of production and for improving the quality of 
the products. As regards the creation of additional capacity in private sector, the Ministry of 
Steel informed the Sub-Committee that as on 1st August, 1996 all Indian Financial 
Institutions have cleared 20 projects involving an annual capacity of 11.26 million tonnes of 
Saleable steel and investment of Rs. 20.095 crores. 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
46. The Sub-Committee feels that it is the high time .for the Government to review the ~: 
objectives and functioning steel plants not only in terms of:,mechanism but also the business 
orientation of the management. The Sub-Committee suggests that Government should direct 
the concerned authorities like CMO, SAIL and office of .·DCIS to undertake an exhaustive 
market survey to assess the emerging market dimensions in view of the consumption pattern 
in the country in the coming years. 
47. The Sub-Committee also recommends to the Government to encourage consumption 
of steel in·· rural and agricultural sector. The Sub-Committee bas reasons to believe that this is 
the area.·which has almost been neglected in so far as the consumption of steel is concerned. 
Concerted efforts from the marketing agencies. of the Government are need of the hour for 

164 
promotion of consumption of steel in this sector. The Sub-Committee recommends that direct 
contact be made with institutions such as Agricultural Universities and authorities such as Block 
Development Officers, Industrial Development Officers of the State Governments to assess the 
requirement of the agro processing industries and if necessary, SAIL may set up its own institute 
specifically for promotion of consumption of steel in this sector. 
48~-..he other areas where there is ample scope for consumption of steel is the SSis. In this 
area too the Sub-Committee feels that there should be direct interaction with the entrepreneurs 
with a view to provide them facilities so as to ensure easy process for purchase of steel. This may 
call for an amendment in the present policy of the Government whereby the entrepreneurs have 
to approach the Director of Cottage and Small Scale Industries for the purchase of steel. The Sub· 
Commit~ proposes that entrepreneurs should approach the SAIL directly and if necessary, the 
Central Marketing Organisation may open more branches. It is also pertinent to add here that 
SAIL should encourage the SSI units to manufacture goods which are essential for common 
people. 
49. The Sub-Committee does not find it out place to suggest that Government should also 
explore the possibilities whether there a a need to patronise the engineering industry including 
SSis, and cottage industries with the objective of augmentation of consumption of steel. 
50. Consumption of steel can not substantially grow unless Government comes out in a big 
way for the investment in infrastructural sector. The Sub-Committee appreciates Government's 
policies providing more allocation for the rural development which is essential for the benefit of 
larger section of people. At the same time Sub-Committee also feels equally essential for 
Government to increase investment in urban areas so as to promote the use of steel particularly in 
construction industry. The Sub-Committee, therefore, impress upon the Government to 
encourage private sector to invest in the infrastructural sector and allow them to set up 
engineering and other steel based industries. The Sub-Committee also appeals to the State 
Government to come out with specific schemes I projects promoting steel based industries and if 
necessary, regulations I guidelines be framed so as to change the approach of the entreprenurs as 
well as their own. 
51. The Sub-Committee feels that changes in customs and excise duties have adversely 
affected the domestic producers of iron. and steel as the consumers now have the option to pay 
lower prices on the pretext of availability of cheaper imports. The role of Government in this area 
is very important. The Sub-Committee, therefore, impress upon the Government to rationalise 
the duty structure with a view to protect domestic producers of steel and iron and also ensure that 
the level of duties do not give unnecessary price advantage to the steel producers of other 
countries. The Sub-Committee strongly feels against the reduction of customs duties •.. 
52. The Sub-Committee further desires that Government should also strictly regulate 
imposition of non tariff barriers like fixation . of quota and putting quantitative restrictions on 
import on the Hoes of other steel producing countries. In order to check I reduce the import of 
secondary I defectives of ~R, CR and plates leading to quality deterioration, Government may 
increase import duties on such items and thus accord preference to primary products. 
53. As regards the central excise duties, the Sub-Committee impress upon the Government to 
reduce I exempt the excise duty on freight and distribution from stockyards so as to protect small 
and medium units. 
54. The Sub-Committee impress upon the Government to take necessary steps for 
exploration of markets in other countries and sort out the problems I bottlenecks related .to 
e~ports. 

165 
55. The Sub-Committee feels that extra burdea oa SAIL to the tune of Rs. 200 crore 
mauaUy would adversely affect the maila producers of the Steel Ia publle sector. The Sub­
Committee suggests that the subsidy oa this accouat should be bonae by . the Govenuneat 
itself. 
56. The Sub-Committee feels that after baviaa the experieace of coatiauiaa dowaward 
tread Ia the steel sector both at domestle aad global level tbe Govermneat have to have a very 
cautious approach as il calli for enormou1 lnvestmeal bolla ia public and private Bedor. 

ANNEXURE 
(Vide para 2 of Report) 
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED 
BEFORE THE SUB-COMMITIEE 
S.No. Name Designation Date of appearance 
I. Representati¥es of Central Mark.~ti•ll Organisation (CMO) SAIL, Calcutta 
1. Shri M.K. Moitra Director (Comml.) 26.12.96 
2. Shri B. Basu E.D. (T & S) 
3. Shri P. Ganesan E.D. (Marketing) 
4. Shri B. Mallik Director (Finance) 
Ministry of Steel 
5; Shri Hari Mohan Dy. Secretary 
Ministry of Steel 
H. Representatl¥es of HSCO, Burpur 
1. Shri S.C.K. Patne M.D. 
2. Shri I.K. Bakshi G.M. (Sales) 
3. Shri B.B. Dasgupta G.M. (P & A) 
4. Shri C. Das G.M. (F & A) 
5. Shri B. Mallik Director (Finance) 
Ministry of Steel 
--do-
--do-
--do-
--d<r-
--d<r-
--do-
--do-
--do-
--do-
m. Representati¥es of Hh1dustan Steel Works ConstructiOJJ Ltd. (H.S.C.L.), Calcutlll 
1. Shri Ashim K. Mukherjee M;O. --do-
2. Shri P.K. Gupta Director (Fin.) --do-
3. Shri S.K. Bose G.M. (Commercial) --do-
4. Shri B. Mallik Director (Finance) --d<r-
Ministry of Steel 
5. Shri Hari Mohan Dy. Secretary --do-
Ministry of Steel 
IV. Representati¥es of Metal Scrap Trading Corporation (MSTC), Calcutta 
1. Shri B. Mallik C.M.D. --do-
2. Shri S.C. Sachdev E.D. --do-
166 

3. Shri M. Sengupta 
4. Shri Hari Mohan 
167 
Designation 
C.G.M. 
Dy. Secretary, 
Ministry of Steel 
D~te of appearance 
26.12.96 
-do-
V. Office of the Deve/opme11t Commisslo11er, Jro11 & Steel, Calcutta 
1. Shri R.K. Prasanna D.C. (I & S) 
AdJ. Chairman (J.P.C.) 
2. Shri S.K. Sinha Joint D.C. 
3. Mohd. Mustkim Region~ Dev. 
Commi ·ioner for I & s 
4 .. Shri B. Mallik Director (Finance) 
Ministry of Steel 
5. Shri Hari Mohan Dy. Secretary 
Ministry of Steel 
VI. Representatives of Bird Group of Companies, Calcutta 
1. Shri K.L. Luthra C.M.D 
2. Shri D.J. Sen 
3. Shri P. Ganesan 
4. Shri B. Mallik 
5. Shri Hari Mohan 
Group, F.A. 
E.D. (Marketing) 
Director (Finance) 
Ministry of Steel 
Dy. Secretary 
Ministry of Steel 
VII. Representatives of Durgupur Steel I'kmt, Durgapur 
1. Shri S.B. Singh C.M.D. 
2. Shri S.M. Aeron E.D. {Works) 
3. Shri A. Sankaran G.M. (Mkt.) 
4. Shri P.L. Banerjee G.M. (Proj.) 
5. Shri A.K. Chaturvedi G.M. (MS) 
6. Shri M. Usman Director (P&IR) SAIL 
-do-
~o­
-do-
-do-
-do-
-do-
-do-
-do-
-do-
27.12.96 
-do-
-do-
-do-
-do-
-do-
VIII. Representatives of WtJrkers Union of Durgapur Steel Plant, Durgapur 
1. Shri N.K. Chaturvedi Joint Secretary (AITUC) -do-
2. Shri N.K. Mukherjee -do- -do-
3. Shri Achyut Mukherjee General Secy. (INTUC) -do-
4. Shri R.N. Ganguly Joint Secretary (HSEU) -do-
5. Shri P.K. Das, -do- -do-
IX. Representatives of Mallga11ese Ore l11dia Ltd. (MOIL), Nagpur 
1. Shri O.K. Suhni C.M.D. 6.1.97 
2. Shri T.N. Prasad G.M. (Tech.) -do-

S.No. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Name 
Shri S.M. Bothra 
Shri B.B. Chakrawarthy 
Shri A.K. Thakur 
168 
Designation 
G.M. (Proj.) 
E.D. (Commercial) 
Director 
Mini~try of Steel 
X. RepresenkJtiYes of Bhillli Steel Plant, Bhillli 
1. Shri V. Gujaral C.M~D. 
2. ~hri Y. Singh, E.D. (I>roj.) 
3. Dr. J.N. Mishra, E.D. (M&HS) 
4. Shri Suresh Pandey, E.D. (Works) 
5. Shri C.S. Murthy, E.D. (F&A) 
6. Shri A.K. Thakur, Director, Ministry of Steel 
XI. RepresenllltiYes of Worlcers Union of B.S.P., Bhillli 
1. Shri R.C. Arya, President (INTUC) 
2. Shri R.P. Dwivedi, Vice President 
3. Shri N.P. Sharma General Secretary 
.4. Shri S.L. Sahu Dy. Gen. Secretary 
·s. Shri Bhagwan Singh Secretary 
XII •. RepresenkJtiYes of 0/fwers Association of B.S.P., Bhillai 
1. Dr. A.I. Ganwir, Vice President 
2. Shri B.C. Jain, 
3. Shri A. Jha, 
Genera I Secretary 
-do-
XIII. RepresenllltiYes of Spo1111• Iron l•ulia Ud. (SilL), HydeNW 
Date of appearance 
6.1.97 
-do-
-do-
7.1.97 
-do-
-do-
-do-
-do-
-do-
-do-
-do-
-do-
-do-
-do-
-do-
-do-
-do-
1. Shri S.K. Sharma, C.M.D. 8.1.97 
2. Shri S.N. Murthy, Chief 0. M. (Works) -do-
3. Shri .V.K. Uppal, O.M. (Project) -do-
4. Shri K. Suryanarayan, G.M. (P&R) -do-
5. Shri V. Narahari Deputy G.M. (P&R) -do-
6. Shri A.K. Thakur Director, Ministry of Steel -do-
XIV. Representati~es of Woi'Un Utdon of SilL, Hyderabllll 
1. Shri M. Ratnakar Rao President, SilL (EU) -do-
2. Shri M. Sudhakar General Secretary -do-
3. . Shri Nanda Kumar Member Secretary -do-
XV~ Representatives of National Mi11eral Development CorporatiDn (NMDC) 
1. Shri C. Shyam Mohan C.M.D. -do-
2. Shri S. Jayaraman Director (Finance) -do-
3. Shri P.R. Tripathi Director (Production) -do-
4. Shri V. Satyanarayan Director (Tech.) -do-
5. Shri A.K. Thakur Director M/0 Steel -do-
. .. ·. 

.. 