91stReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/91streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:49]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON INDUSTRY
 
NINETY-FIRST REPORT
ON
COIR BOARD -A PERFORMANCE REVIEW
(PRESENTED TO HON'BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABRA ON 20TH AUGUST, 2002)
(PRESENTED ON THE TABLE OF RAJYA SABRA ON 11TH DECEMBER, 2002)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABRA ON 11 TH DECEMBER, 2002)
 
RAJYA SABRA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 20021 AGRARA YANA, 1924 (SAKA)
E-mail : rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in
Website : http://parliamentofindia.nic.in
CONTENTS
1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2.INTRODUCTION
3.REPORT
4.OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE
5.MINUTES
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
* 1.    Dr. P.C. Alexander -Chairman
         RAJYA SABHA
2.      Prof. M.M. Agarwal
3.      Dr. Abrar Ahmed
4.      Shri Jayantilal Barot
5.      Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
6.      Shrimati Saroj Dubey
7.      Dr. Faguni Ram
8.      Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
9.      Shri P.K. Maheshwari
10.     Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
11.     Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
12.     Shri S. Sivasubramanian
13.     Shrimati Sushree Devi
14.     Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
         LOK SABHA
15.     Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
16.     Kumari Mamata Banerjee
17.     Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
18.     Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
19.     Shri Nepal Chandra Das
20.     Shri Deepak Kumar
21.     Shri Thomas Hansda
22.     Dr. S. Jagathrakshakan
23.     Shri A.C. Jose
24.     Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
25.     Shri Brijlal Khabri

91stReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/91streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:49]
26.     Shri Sunil Khan
27.     Shri Manjay Lal
28.     Dr. K. Malaisamy
29.     Shri A. Narendra
30.     Shri Ananta Nayak
31.     Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
32.     Shri Dharam Raj Singh Patel
33.     Shri Uttamrao Patil
34.     Shri Malyala Rajaiah
35.     Shri P. Rajcndran
36.     Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
37.     Shri Tarachand Sahu
38.     Shri Ramanand Singh
39.     Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
40.     Chowdhary Talib Hussain
41.     Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
42.     Shrimati D.M. Vijaya Kumari
43.     Shri Beni Prasad Verma
 
* Appointed Member and Chairman of the Committee w.e.f. 12th November, 2002 vice Shri T.N. Chaturvedi
   ceased to be the Member of the Committee and Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 20th August, 2002.
 
SECRETARIAT
         Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
         Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
         Shri A. K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
         Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
         Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having been authorised by the Committee,
hereby present this Ninety-first Report on Coir Board -A Performance Review.
 
2.      The Committee, in this context visited the States of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Kerala from 20th to 27th May, 2002 and heard the oral
evidence of Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries, States Government and the Coir Board.
 
3.      The Committee at its meeting held on 9th August, 2002 considered and adopted the Report.
 
4.      The Report was presented to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 20lh August, 2002 by the then Chairman Shri T.N. Chaturvedi.
 
NEW DELHI;
11 DECEMBER, 2002
DR. P.C. ALEXANDER
Chairman.
Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry
 
REPORT
 
COIR INDUSTRY -AN OVERVIEW
 
1.0     Coconut cultivation in India is concentrated in Kerala, which accounts for 48.63 per cent of the total production. Historically, the coir
industry took root in Kerala because of the availability of skilled labour and natural facilities of retting of coconut husk.
 
1.1     The development of the coir industry has been in areas where there is concentration of coconut cultivation and availability of coconut husk.
The coir industry is of great importance to Kerala, where it is second only to agriculture as a source of employment. With the expansion of
coconut cultivation and the concerted efforts of the Coir Board and the respective State Governments, the coir industry is coming up in Tamil
Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, West Bengal and Assam. Kerala is the largest producer of coconuts and its contribution is as much as
50.5 per cent of total production.
 
1.2     Indian coir is exquisite live-in style, hygiene products of traditional and modern design consisting of handmade and machinemade
materials. It is helping a million disadvantaged women to earn their livelihood. Coconut husk is a natural product from a renewable source.
 
1.3 At present, the coir industry is of great importance to coconut producing states in India as it contributes significantly to their economy. This is
because coconut husk, the raw-material for coir industry, is available in abundance as a by-product of coconut industry in regions of concentrated

91stReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/91streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:49]
cultivation. Increased utilization of coconut husks abundantly available in all coconut producing states in India provides scope for development of
coir industry, thus augmenting rural employment. The husk surrounding the seed of the coconut contains coco fibre, the raw material for coir
industry. Coir fibre extracted from the coconut husk is used commercially for the manufacture of a range of products with different end uses.
 
1.4     The coir manufacturing industry producing coir mats, mattings and other floor coverings, was started in India on factory basis over a
hundred yeras ago when the first factory was set up in Alleppey in 1859 by James Darragh, an adventurous Irish born American national.
Enterprising Indians later set up their own coir producing units.
 
1.5     The coir industry has the potential to provide employment at low investment per job, and a large number
of people from the socially and economically weaker sections of society depend on this industry. It is for this
reason that the establishment of coir industry in India gains added significance.
 
COIR BOARD
 
2.0     The Coir Board promotes and facilitates overall sustainable development of the coir industry in India. The Coir Board is an autonomous
organisation establised by the Government of India under the provisions of the Coir Industry Act, 1953 , for promoting the overall development
of the coir industry and upliftment of the living conditions of the workers engaged in this traditional cottage industry. The Coir Board started
functioning w.e.f. July, 1954 with a view to providing infrastructural facilities for carrying out various objectives as laid down in the Coir
Industry Act.
 
2.1     The Coir Board is responsible for sustainable development of the coir industry through research and development, modernisation, quality
improvement, human resource development, market promotion, environmental protection and welfare of all those who are engaged in this
industry. The functions of the Coir Board, as laid down under Section 10 of the Coir Industry Act are as under:
 
(a)
    Promoting exports of coir yarn and coir products and carrying on propaganda for that purpose;
 
(b)    Regulating under the supervision of the Central Government the production of husks, coir yard and products by registering coir spindles
and looms for manufacturing coir products as also manufacturers of coir products, licensing, exporters of coir, coir yarn and coir
products and taking such other appropriate steps as may be prescribed;
 
(c)    Undertaking. assisting or encouraging scientific, technological and economic research and maintaining and assisting in the maintenance
of one or more research institutes;
 
(d)    Collecting statistics from manufacturers of, and dealers in, coir products and from such other persons as may be prescribed, on any
matter relating to the coir industry, the publications of statistics so collected or portions thereof or extracts therefrom;
 
(e)    Fixing grade standards and arranging when necessary for inspection of coir fibre, coir yarn and coir products;
 
(f)     Improving the marketing of coconut husk, coir fibre, coir yarn and coir products in India and elsewhere and preventing unfair
competition;
 
(g)    Setting up or assisting in the setting up of factories for the producers of coir products with the aid of power;
 
(h)    Promoting co-operative organisation among producers of husks, coir fibre and coir yarn and manufacturers of coir products;
 
(i)      Ensuring remunerative returns to producers of husks, coir fibre and coir yarn and manufacturers of coir products;
 
(j)      Licensing of retting places and warehouses and otherwise regulating the stocking and seal of coir fibre, coir yard and coir products both
for the internal market and for export;
 
(k)    Advising on all matters relating to the development of the coir industry;
 
(l)      Such other matters as have been prescribed in the Act or rules made thereunder.
 
STUDY OF THE FUNCTIONING OF THE COIR BOARD BY THE SUB-COMMITTEE FOR THE
MINISTRY OF AGRO AND RURAL INDUSTRY
 
3.0     The Sub-Committee on Ministry of Agro and Rural Industry decided to study the functioning of the Coir Board. The Sub-Committee
consisted of the following Members:
         1. Shri A. C. Jose (Convenor)
         2. Shri M. J. Varkey Mattathil
         3. Shri Brijlal Khabri
         4. Shrimati Vijayakumari
         5 .Shri Jagatrakshkan

91stReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/91streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:49]
 
3.1     The Sub-Committee visited the Head Quarters of the Coir Board at Cochin and its regional offices at Vishakhapatnam and Bangalore in
May, 2002. The Committee's findings and observations are dealt with in the
succeeding paragraphs.
 
COMMITTEES' FINDINGS, OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 
4.0     The Committee, during the course of its .visit to Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Kerala, found that the utilisation of coconut husk for the
production of coir in the country is very low. Hence, there is vast potential for setting up production of coir and coir products. It has also been
given to understand that production of coir fibre has been affected by disease, which reduces the size of the coconut husk, resulting in low yield
and inferior quality fibre. The Committee recommends that all out efforts should be made to check the disease so that the size of the husk remains
normal and yields good quality fibre.
 
4.1     Coir industry, by and large, remains a rural cottage industry, characterized by low productivity, penetration of technology, investments, low
level of managerial skills and reluctance to quickly modernise. The traditional method of fibre extraction and production involves drudgery, is
time consuming and less remunerative, resulting in low wages for all workers engaged in various coir-related activities.
 
4.2     The coir industry consists of two segments viz. white fibre sector and brown fibre sector. Brown coir fibre is extracted from unretted husk.
The white fibre, which is more suitable for the manufacture of coir yarn and value added products, faces severe shortage due to decline in natural
retting facilities. After separating of the nut, the husks are processed by various retting techniques, generally in ponds of brackish water, for three
to six months or in back waters or lagoons for 10 to 12 months for bacterial fermentation. The prospects of white fibre look bleak with the
pressure emanating from growing environmental consciousness. The Committee recommends that Government should explore ways and means
to solve the problem faced by the
white fibre manufacturers in the absence of proper retting facilities.
 
4.3     Extraction of fibre from husk leaves coir pith or coir dust as a solid waste. Extraction of 1 kg. fibre generates 2 kgs of coir pith. It takes up a
large amount of space and its disposal is a problem, although, of late, there are signs of booming export market far the product as it can be
converted into organic manure. The Committee recommends that coir industry should take the opportunity to exploit the untapped export market
and the Government should of the all assiatance to such exporters.
 
4.4     Post-fibre extraction activities are not picking up in the brown fibre sector though there have been positive signs of late. The private sector
is often slow or hesitant to invest in the sector, probably for want of awareness of the potential of this industry. Even the state governments of all
coconut-growing states in the non-traditional areas seems to be oblivious of the vast potential that the sector offers, particularly for employment
generation in .the rural areas at a comaparatively lower level of investment. A more serious problem is that of obtaining skilled workers who are
needed to undertake post-fibre value-added productions activities in the brown fibre sector. All coir development plans, to date, have highlighted
the inadequacy of skilled manpower as the single- most important reason for the tardy development of the coir industry in the brown coir
producing states. The Committee recommends that the government should set up offices of the Coir Board in all brown fibre producing states
and, in coordination with the State Governments, arrange awareness programmes and training programmes for the benefit of private
entrepreneurs and labourers.
 
4.5     The industry is spread far and wide in the coconut growing states in the country, barring a few natural clusters. Even in those clusters, the
industry is not well integrated to take advantage of the development and promotional efforts towards modernisation. The Committee recommends
that in all major coconut growing areas, clusters may be identified where coir industrial activities could be established. In these clusters coir
industrial infrastructure should be set up preferably in the private sector. Basic techno-economic feasibility/consultancy and be given by the Coir
Board for setting up such production infrastructure.
 
4.6     The method of production in vogue has not undergone any significant change over the years. The cost of production has been progressively
rising, rendering it non-competitive in the domestic and export markets. This needs to be looked into more urgently. Technological upgradation is
a sina qua non for the development of the coir industry. Eco-friendly process and production technologies, development of cost-effective and
efficient machinery with higher productivity, which reduces drudgery will have to be developed. Progress in the development of coir machinery
has been very tardy. R&D efforts in machinery development have not been receiving the attention that it deserves. The Committee recommends
that special efforts have to be made to identify the potential coir machinery manufacturers who can be supported with appropriate technology
transfer from any. available areas. This activity may be taken up as joint venture programmes with greater emphasis on private sector
participation ensuring faster commercialisation.
 
4.7     There is a lack of awareness in the potential markets of the country about the coir products and their inherent qualities. The present
marketing network is inadequate and needs to be enlarged. Some of the other problems that have been affecting the coir industry are poor quality
raw materials and end products, lack of product innovation, absence of clear strategy for guiding the direction of exports, inadequate export
promotion, higher freight charges, uncompetitive price structure, competition from synthetic products and other cheaper natural substitutes, etc.
 
4.8     The Committee recommends that a national level project may be evolved for creation of awareness about coir products, development of
market, production of new and diversified goods of mass
consumption and quality assurance. It is understood that some steps have already been taken to establish a Coir Trade Information Centre for
collection analysis, its dissemination of information. It should become one of the principal activities of the Coir Board in the changed

91stReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/91streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:49]
circumstances. This sector can develop through flow of information especially marketing and technology, which is possible through IT assisted
programmes.
 
4.9     Rubberised coir from Sri Lanka and coir geotextiles from Vietnam, cheaper coir products from Thailand and Philippines have taken a part
of the export share held by Indian coir products.
 
4.10   The target for export of coir producing and achievements made during the last three years are given below:
 
Year Target Achievement %age of
 (Rs. in crores) (Rs. in crores) Achievement
1999-2000 325.00 303.05 93.26
2000-2001 355.00 313.66 89.41
2001-2002 403.66 320.58 79.42
 
4.11   It is evident from the above that the gap between the target and its achievement is widening. The Committee recommends that a thrust may
be given to boost export of coir products and assistance of Export Credit Guarantee Corporation may be sought in the matter. The Committee also
recommends that possibility of mutual cooperation in possible areas between India and other neighbouring coir producing countries may be
explored.
 
4.12   In order to overcome the problems outlined above, the Committee feels that the Government should aim at rapid modernisation for the
overall sustainable development of the coir industry, focusing on research and development, quality improvement, human resource development,
better marketing of products and welfare support to the needy, particularly the less-privileged group like women coir workers who constitute
more than 80 per cent of the work force.
 
4.13   The Committee stresses the need for greater emphasis on the involvement of the private sector as well as the concerned state government.
The Coir Board should also take advantage of programmes under other ministries for this sector.
 
4.14   In non-traditional areas where there is a dearth of skilled manpower, particularly traditional skill, the focus must be on production of valued
added goods through modernisation, involving rapid mechanization wherever possible. The Committee recommends that the Coir Board, in
coordination with State Governments should make an endeavour to undertake more sponsored R&D projects in association with reputed agencies
in both the public and private sectors.
 
4.15   Another area which needs immediate attention is manpower development and capacity buildings, as no development can be implemented
without trained and experienced personnel. The Committee feels that appropriate manpower development programme for skill up-gradation in
various fields, especially in non-traditional areas, is to be devised. Efforts for upgradation of the skill of artisans and technical/ managerial
personnel required for the industry are to be organized in coordination with NGOs, cooperative societies and other state government institutions.
State level training institutions should also be revitalized to enable them to undertake HRD-related activities.
 
4. 16 At present, there is a great demand for eco-friendly products throughout the world. Coir is an friendly product and there is an urgent need to
promote both the traditional as well as new products like coir geo-textile, coir pith, garden articles, coir wood substitute and rubberized coir.
Promotion of export market for coir and coir products is of vital importance for the growth of Indian coir industry. There should also be an
attempt to develop the brand image for the Indian coir, which should instantly evoke a sense of unique craftsmanship and assured quality.
 
4.17   A major area for development is the use of coir geo textiles in erosion control applications, and its use as agro mulch. A technology-based
promotion is required for the promotion of coir geotextiles. The Committee desires that initially demonstration projects for the use of coir
geotextiles may be taken up in different parts of the country through different departments like Agriculture, Forest, PWD, Irrigation, etc. A
National Coir Geo-textiles Technology Mission for popularisation of coir geotextiles may be launched with support from the Central and the
concerned State Governments. This would help conserve precious soil, while enabling the coir industry to grow.
 
4.18   In view of this, the focus henceforth should be on increasing coir husk utilisation, modernisation, capacity building through the
involvement of the private sector and State Government, promotion of coir through multi fibre products, improvement in production processes,
extension of coir activities in non- traditional, areas. The Committee, therefore, recommends that financial assistance for technology upgradation,
revitalisation and augmentation of training centres especially in areas where coir is yet to penetrate should be given. Such assistance should also
be given for cluster development programmes and marketing both for internal consumption and export.
 
4.19   The first and the foremost need is better institutional support through the active involvement of the concerned State Governments, specially
in the non-traditional areas, to undertake concerted and focussed measures for the development of the coir industry. The Committee recommends
that each of the State Governments may be advised to set up a separate cell for the coir industry in their respective departments of industry,
preferably under the SSI sector. The District Industries Centre or the District Rural Development Agencies of the concerned districts may be
made the nodal agency for the development of coir where there is coconut cultivation, and entrusted with the responsibility of imparting training,
enterpreneurship development, assistance in getting micro credits, and organising the workers into Self Help Groups for production and
marketing. The technical inputs may be provided be the Coir Board in extending training, especially in the production of value-added goods and
in getting trade information.

91stReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/91streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:49]
 
         Every State capital should have at least one outlet of the Coir Board and exhibitions may be held
periodically in all cities and small towns of the states for awareness as well as marketing purpose.
 
4.20   The cooperative structure in the coir sector is extremely weak. Their productivity is low and commercial viability is also generally poor.
The Committee recommends that specific projects may be taken up for restructuring the coir cooperative societies in all states with the help of the
National Cooperative Development Corporation, for which whole-hearted support of the concerned State Governments' has to be solicited.
 
4.21   The emerging trend in the global arena points to the fact that development of mluti-fibre products has a better future. It is understood that it
is in this context a suggestion has been made to set up a Natural Hard Fibre Development Board with a pre-eminent position for the coir sector.
The Committee recommends that a policy decision may be taken to make this concept come true.
 
4.22   The Committee was informed that the Coir Board has been implementing a project entitled Technology Transfer, Modernisation and
Capacity Building in Indian Coir Sector with funding from UNDP. Under the project, the Board has identified six coir clusters in Tamil Nadu,
Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Kerala. The project is at the half-way stage. The Committee expects that on completion of the project, based on
experience, a replicable strategy for overall development of the industry could be formulated.
 
4.23   The Committee was disturbed by the understaffing of the regional offices of the Coir Board at Visakhapatnam, Bangalore, Pollachi and
Delhi. The Committee was informed that the regional office at Visakhapatnam comprised of nine employees, one regional officer and other
subordinate staff. With this staff, the regional office was incapable of reaching out to the vast area which fell within its purview. The regional
office was handicapped in providing training and cover such a large area in the absence of adequate manpower. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that arrangements should be made to equip the regional offices with sufficient manpower so as to enable it to cater to needs of
remote areas like the North-East states and Jharkhand etc.
 
4.24   The Committee also observes that existing training centres in Andhra Pradesh are unable to sustain themselves as the State Government is
not able to cater to their financial needs. Their functioning runs into rough weather for want of adequate financial support. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Government of India should provide them with sufficient funds for their smooth running.
 
4.25   The Committee came to know that dehusking is not being properly done in Andhra Pradesh. Only a small portion of coconut fibre is being
utilised due to lack of skilled labour. The Committee felt that there was need for more utilisation of husk in Andhra Pradesh. The Committee
recommends that more awareness progr.ammes should be launched in Andhra Pradesh so that coir is not wasted there.
 
5.0     The total annual turnover of coir industry in India is estimated at Rs.1300 crores. In view of the need for improvements and significance of
this industry, the coir sector essentially requires substantial investments. For various reasons the private sectors have not found this sector
attractive enough. In order to attract private investmcnt, the inherent strengths of the coir sector should be made palpably visible through
modernisation, demonstration of successful projects, provision of infrastructural facilities and efficient supportive services. This is possible only
through adequate public funding.
 
5.1     The total outlay proposed by the Coir Board during the Ninth Plan Period (for Plan S&T and Plan General) was Rs. 149 Crore while the
amount sanctioned was Rs.104.14 Crore and, finally, funds to the tune of Rs.56.39 Crore was released. For Plan cooperativisation, which is
implemented by the State Governments and Union Territories (a fund which is directely received by State Governments from the Government of
India) the Coir Board proposed an outlay of Rs.32.75 Crore, while Rs. 11 ,86 Crore was sanctioned and, finally, Rs.2.91 Crore was released. The
Committee also notes that the budget for the Coir Board is only Rs.17. 9 Crore. The Committee feels that there is a need to provide more funds to
the Coir Board to strengthen the coir sector. The Committee recommends the Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries should work out a financial
package for the coir sector to enable it to meet the challenges of economic liberalisation and progressive withdrawal of quantitative restrictions,
etc.
 
5.2     The Committee is constrained to note that in spite of producing exquisite and relatively cheaper products by the Coir industry, it has not
caught up with the consumers due to lack of publicity. In spite of immense export potential of the coir products, export market remains to be fully
tapped. The Committee desires that appropriate action may be taken to give a fillip to the much neglected coir industry and realize its export
potential.
 
5.3     Since the coir industry has the potential to provide employment at lo\v investment per job, and a large number of people from the socially
and economically weaker section of the society depend on this industry, the Committee impresses upon the Government the need to make every
effort to make the coir industry a viable one for the benefit of the rural population.
BSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
         The Committee recommends that all out efforts should be made to check the spread of the disease so that the size of the husk remains
normal and yield good quality fibre.                                              (Para 4)
 
         The Committee recommends that Government should explore ways and means to solve the problem faced by the white fibre manufacturers
in the absence of proper retting facilities.         (Para 4.2)
 

91stReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/91streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:49]
         The Committee recommends that coir industry should take the opportunity to exploit the untapped export market and the Government
should of the all assistance to such exporters.      (Para 4.3)
 
         The Committee recommends that the government should set up offices of the Coir Board in all brown fibre producing states and, in
coordinatioin with the State Governments, arrange awareness programmes and training programmes for the benefit of private entrepreneurs and
labourers.
(Para 4.4)
         The Committee recommends that in all major coconut growing areas, clusters may be identified where coir industrial activites could be
established. In these clusters coir industrial infrastructure should be set up preferably in the private sector. Basic techno-economic
feasibility/consultancy can be given by the Coir Board for setting up such production infrastructure.                                                      (Para 4.5)
 
         Technological upgradation is a sina qua non for the development of the coir industry. Eco- friendly process and production technologies,
development of cost-effective and efficient machinery with higher productivity, which reduces drudgery will have to be developed. Progress in
the development of coir machinery has been very tardy. R&D efforts in machinery development have not been receiving the attention that it
deserves. The Committee recommends that special efforts have to be made to identify the potential coir machinery manufacturers 'v ho can be
supported with appropriate technology transfer from any available areas. This activity may be taken up as joint venture programmes with greater
emphasis on private sector participation ensuring faster commercialisation.            (Para 4.6)
 
         The Committee recommends that a national level project may be evolved for creation of awareness about coir products, development of
market, production of new and diversified goods of mass consumption and quality assurance. It is understood that some steps have already been
taken to establish a Coir Trade Information Centre for collection analysis, its dissemination of information. It should become one of the principal
activities of the Coir Board in the changed circumstances. This sector can develop through flow of information especially marketing and
technology, which is possible through IT assisted programmes.                                                                         (Para 4.8)
 
         The Committee recommends that a thrust may be given to boost export of coir products and assistance of Export Credit Guarantee
Corporation may be sought in the matter. The Committee also recommends that possibility of mutual cooperation in possible areas between India
and other neighbouring coir producing countries may be explored.                                                        (4.11 )
 
         In order to overcome the problems outlined above, the Committee feels that the Government should aim at rapid modernisation for the
overall sustainable development of the coir industry, focusing on research and development, quality improvement, human resource development,
better marketing of products and welfare support to the needy, particularly the less-privileged group like women coir workers who constitute
more than 80 percent of the work force.                                                       (Para 4.12)
 
         The Committee stresses the need for greater emphasis on the involvement of the private sector as well as the concerned state government.
The Coir Board should also take advantage of programmes under other ministries for this sector.         (Para 4.13)
 
         The Committee recommends that the Coir Board, in coordination with State Governments should make an endeavour to undertake more
sponsored R&D projects in association with reputed agencies in both the public and private sectors.         (Para 4.14)
 
         The Committee feels that appropriate manpower development programme for skill up-gradation in various fields, especially in non-
traditional areas, is to be devised. Efforts for upgradition of the skill of artisans and technical/managerial personnel required for the industry are to
be organized in coordination with NGOs, cooperative societies and other state government institutions. State level training institutions should also
be revitalized to enable them to undertake HRD-related activities.(Para 4.15)
 
         Promotion of export market for coir and coir products is of vital importance for the growth of Indian coir industry. There should also be an
attempt to develop the brand image for the Indian coir, which should instantly evoke a sense of unique craftsmanship and assured quality.          
         (Para 4.16)
 
         The Committee desires that initially demonstration projects for the use of coir geotextiles may be taken up in diffrrent parts of the country
through different departments like Agriculture, Forest, PWD, Irrigation, etc. A National Coir Geotextile .Technology Mission for popularisation
of coir geotextiles may be launched with support from the Central and the concerned State Governments. This would help conserve precious soil,
while enabling the coir industry to grow.                                                (Para 4.17)
 
         The Committee, therefore, recommends that financial assistance for technology upgradation, revitalisation and augmentation of training
centres especially in areas where coir is yet to penetrate should be given. Such assistance should also be given for cluster development
programmes and marketing both for internal consumption and export.                                                         (Para 4.18)
 
         The Committee recommends that each of the State Governments may be advised to set up a separate cell for the coir industry in their
respective departments of industry, preferably under the SSI sector. The District Industries Centre or the District Rural Development agencies of
the concerned districts may be made the nodal agency for the development of coir where there is coconut cultivation, and entrusted with the
responsibility of imparting training, enterpreneurship development, assistance in getting micro credits, and organising the workers into Self Help
Groups for production and marketing. The technical inputs may be provided by the Coir Board in extending training, especially in the production
of value-added goods and in getting trade information.

91stReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/91streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:49]
 
         Every State capital should have at least one outlet of the Coir Board and exhibitions may be held periodically in all cities and small towns of
the states for awareness as well as marketing purpose.                             (Para 4.19)
 
         The Committee recommends that specific projects may be taken up for restructuring the coir cooperative societies in all states with the help
of the National Cooperative Development Corporation, for which whole-hearted support of the concerned State Governments' has to be solicited.
(Para 4.20)
 
         The emerging trend in the global arena points to the fact that development of multi-fibre products has a better future. It is understood that it
is in this context a suggestion has been made to set up a Natural Hard Fibre Development Board with a pre-eminent position for the coir sector.
The Committee recommend. that a policy decision may be taken to make this concept come true.                    (Para 4.21)
 
         The Committee was informed that the Coir Board has been implementing a project entilted Technology Transfer, Modernisation and
Capacity Building in Indian Coir Sector with funding from UNDP. Under the project, the Board has identified six coir clusters in Tamil Nadu,
Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Kerala. The Project is at the half-way stage. The Committee expects that on completion of the project, based on
experience, a replicable strategy for overall development of the industry could be formulated.      (Para 4.22)
 
         The Committee, therefore, recommends that arrangements should be made to equip the regional offices with sufficient manpower so as to
enable it to cater to needs of remote areas like the North-East states and Jharkhand etc.                                                                                      (Para
4.23)
 
         The Committee also observes that existing training centres in Andhra Pradesh are unable to sustain themselves as the State Government is
not able to cater to their financial needs. Their functioning runs into rough weather for want of adequate financial support. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Government of India should provide them with sufficient funds for their smooth
running.                                                                                                                                 (Para 4.24)
 
         The Committee recommends that more awareness programmes should be launched in Andhra Pradesh so that coir is not wasted there.
                                                                         (Para 4.25)
 
         The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries should work out a financial package for the coir sector to enable
it to meet the challenges of economic liberalisation and progressive withdrawal of quantitative restrictions, etc.                                                
           (Para 5.1)
 
         The Committee is constrained to note that inspite of producing exquisite and relatively cheaper products by the Coir industry, it. has not
caught up with the consumers due to lack of publicity. Inspite of immense export potential of the coir products, export market ramains to be fully
tapped. The Committee desires that. appropriate action may be taken to give a fillip to the much neglected coir industry and realize its export
potential.                                                                                 (Para 5.2)
 
         Since the coir industry has the potential to provide employment at low investment per job, and a large number of people from the socially
and economically weaker section of the society depend on this industry, the Committee impresses upon the Government the need to make every
effort to make the coir industry a viable one for the benefit of the rural population.                 (Para 5.3)
MINUTES
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday the 9th August, 2002 in Committee Room ‘At’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
 
      PRESENT
1.   Shri T.N. Chaturvedi        -         Chairman
 
      RAJYA SABHA
2.   Dr. Abrar Ahmed
3.   Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
4.   Shrimati Saroj Dubey
5.   Dr. Faguni Ram
6.   Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
7.   Shri P.K. Maheshwari
8.   Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
9.   Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
 
      LOK SABRA
10. Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
11. Shri Nepal Chandra Das

91stReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/91streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:49]
12. Shri A.C. Jose
13. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
14. Shri Sunil Khan
15. Dr. K. Malaisamy
16.  Shri A. Narendra
17. Shri P. Rajendran
18. Dr. B.B. Ramaiah
19. Chowdhary Talib Hussain
20. Shri Chunnilal Bhau Thakur
21. Shrimati D.M. Vijaya Kumari
 
      SECRETARIAT
      Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
      Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director
      Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
      Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
 
2.   Shri A.C. Jose, Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi and Dr. B.B. Ramaiah and other Members of the Committee felicitated the Chairman of the
Committee who had since been designated as the Governor of Karnataka. In the felicitation address, all the three Convenors and other Members
of the Committee appreciated the work done by the Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri T.N. Chaturvedi. They all were of the view that
Shri Chaturvedi gave a new thrust and orientation to the working of the Committee and gave inspiration to the Committee with his valuable
contribution and personal interest in the day-to-day working of the Committee and in a short span of four months, the Committee could present a
record number of '23' reports.
 
      The Chairman, in response, observed that due to the hard work put in by the Sub-Committees it had been possible to prepare such a large
number of reports. He thanked the Convenors of all the sub-Committees, Members of the Committee and the Secretariat for extending
cooperation to him to discharge his duties as the Chairman of the Committee:-
 
3.   The Committee then took up consideration of the following draft reports:-
(a)
    76th Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee's 53rd Report on Modernization, Restructuring and Expansion
Programmes of NALCO.
 
(b)    77th Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee's 67 th Report on Organization, Structure and Performance
Review of Indian Bureau of Mines.
 
(c)    78th Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee's 68 th Report on Working and Performance Review of Mineral
Exploration Corporation Ltd. (MECL).
 
(d)    79th Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee's 65 th Report on Modernization, Restructuring and Expansion
Programmes of Hindustan Lopper Ltd.(HCL).
 
(e)    80th Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee's 66 th Report on Performance Review of Jawahar Lal Nehru
Research Development and Design Centre.
 
(f)     81st Report on Sickness in SSI Sector of Cement Industry in Uttar Pradesh.
 
(g)    82nd Report on MoU system in the Strategic Sector PSEs.
 
(h)    83rd Report on MoU system in the Allied Sector PSEs.
 
(i)      84th Report on Implementation of Prime Minister's Rozgar Yojana (PMRY) in Andhra Pradesh, Kamataka and Kerala.
 
(j)      85th Report on Implementation Status of Financial Assistance-cum-Restructuring Package and Revival of Hindustan Steel Works
Construction Ltd. (HSCL).
 
(k)    86th Report on Performance Review of Metal Scrap Trade Corporation Ltd. (MSTC).
 
(l)      87th Report on Implementation Status of Financial Assistance-cum-Restructuring Package and Revival of Bharat Refractories Ltd.
(BRL).
 
(m)  88th Report on Performance review of Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL).

91stReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/91streport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:49]
 
(n)    89th Report on Modernization, Restructuring and Expansion Programmes of Durgapur Steel Plant (DSP).
 
(o)    90th Report on Sickness in SSI Sector in the City of Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh.
 
(p)    91st Report on Coir Board -A performance Review.
 
4.   The Committee adopted all the above stated reports and authorized its Chairman to make corrections, if any, in the reports. The Committee
decided to present/lay the above mentioned reports on the 13th August,2002. The Committee for this purpose authorized its Chairman to present
the reports in the Rajya Sabha and in his absence Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi and Prof. M.M. Agarwal to present the reports. The Committee also
authorized Dr. B.B. Ramaiah to lay the reports in the Lok Sabha and in his absence authorised Shri A.C. Jose and Shri A. Narendra to lay the
reports.
 
5.   The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 P.M.