 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2014/ Magha, 1935 (Saka) 
REPORT NO.  
259  
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY NINTH REPORT 
ON 
REVIEW OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF KHADI AND 
VILLAGE INDUSTRIES COMMISSION (KVIC) ACT, 1956 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES 
 
(PRESENTED TO  THE RAJYA SABHA ON  19 TH  FEBRUARY, 2014) 
( LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 19 TH   FEBRUARY, 2014) 
 

 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2014/ Magha, 1935 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY NINTH REPORT 
ON 
REVIEW OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF KHADI AND 
VILLAGE INDUSTRIES COMMISSION (KVIC) ACT, 1956 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES 
 
(PRESENTED TO  THE RAJYA SABHA ON 19 TH  FEBRUARY, 2014) 
( LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 19 TH   FEBRUARY, 2014) 
 
 
 

C O N T E N T S 
 
                                                                                                               PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …………………………………………  ( i ) 
 
2. INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………   (ii) 
 
3. REPORT ……………………………………………………………………………    
 
4. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE – AT A  
    GLANCE…………………………………………………………………………… 
 
5. MINUTES………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE   
(Date of Constitution w.e.f.  31 st  August,  2013) 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
     
 1.  Shri K.C. Tyagi —       Chairman  
       2.  Shri M.P. Achuthan  
 3.  Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel  
 4.  Shri Narendra Budania 
    5.  Shri Vivek Gupta  
 6.  Dr. V. Maitreyan   
 7.  Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar  
 8.  Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
 9.  Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
10. Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor  
LOK SABHA 
 
 
11.   Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala 
12.   Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
13. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
14. Shrimati Poonamben Veljibhai Jat 
15. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
16. Shri Hassan Khan 
17. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
18. Shrimati Ingrid Mcleod  
19. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal 
20. Shri Somen Mitra 
21. Shri P. R. Natarajan 
22. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey 
23. Shri Jayaram Pangi 
24. Shri R. K. Singh Patel 
25. Shri B. Y. Raghavendra 
26.   Shri Ramsinh Rathwa  
27.   Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
28.   Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
29.   Ch. Lal Singh 
30.   Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
31.   Shri E.G. Sugavanam 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.      Shri A.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
2.      Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
3.      Shri Roshan Lal, Joint Director 
4.      Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 
(i) 
 
 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamen tary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred Fifty 
Ninth Report on Review of implementation of Khadi a nd Village Industries Commission 
(KVIC), Act, 1956. 
 
2.  The Committee heard the representatives of Mini stry of Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises and Khadi and Village Industries Commission.  
 
3.  The Committee in its meeting held on 17 
th  February, 2014 considered and adopted the 
report. 
 
 
 
 
 
K.C. Tyagi        
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
 
 
New Delhi,  
17 
th  February, 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
REPORT  
 
BACKGROUND 
 
The Khadi and Village Industries Commission (KVIC) is a statutory 
body established by an Act of Parliament, 1956, In April 1957, it took over the 
work of former All India Khadi and Village Industries Board. It functions under 
the administrative control of Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. 
 
2. The statement of objects and reasons of the orig inal KVIC Act, 1956 
states that "with a view to promoting and developing Khadi and Village 
Industries, the Central Govt. constituted a Board called the All India Khadi and 
Village Industries Board and vested it with powers to prepare and organize 
programmes for the production and development of Kh adi and Village 
Industries and to deal with other matters incidenta l thereto.  It has, however, 
been found in actual practice that the work of the 'Board' has been hampered 
by certain procedural and financial difficulties, w hich would be removed if a 
Commission were set up by law.  It is, therefore, p roposed to set up a 
Commission, called All India Khadi and Village Indu stries Commission which 
will be vested with the powers, executive as well a s administrative, for the 
proper development of Khadi and Village Industries.   The bill also provide for 
the All India Khadi and V.I. Board functioning as a n advisory body which will 
advise the Commission generally in the discharge of its duties. “ 
 
3. The Act was amended in 1987 and 2006. The KVIC ( Amendment) Bill, 
2005 was referred to this Committee for examination. The Committee presented 
its Report after due examination that involved inte raction with a range of 
stakeholders.  
 
4. The present KVIC Act has 28 Sections divided in five Chapters and has 
one schedule under Section 2(h) of the Act, enlisti ng the village industries 
under the Act. The Government under Section 26 of t he Act, framed KVIC 
Rules 2006 and the KVIC under Section 27 framed KVIC Regulations, 2007.  
 
 
5. The Amendment of 2005  made the membership of th e KVIC more 
professional and broad-based, it added  more part-t ime members in the  
Commission including  one expert in the field of ma rketing  as improving the 

marketing of Khadi and Village Industry (KVI) produ cts is the most important 
requirements for speeding up the growth of the KVI sector.  
 
6.  Similarly, availability of credit is an importa nt requirement for 
improving the performance of the sector. Therefore,  the amendment included 
the Chairman of the State Bank of India or his nomi nee (not below the rank of 
Deputy Managing Director) as a part-time member of the Commission.. 
 
7. The Act provided for a National KVI Board of uns pecified membership 
to advise the KVIC.  Subsequently, the KVIC Rules 2 006 provided for 51 
Member Board largely consisting of Secretaries and senior executives of 
various departments/agencies of Government of India  and headed by the 
Minister of MSME. 
8. In order to facilitate better coordination with the State Khadi and Village 
Industries Boards established by State Governments,  to obtain regular feed-
back on the problems being faced by the KVI sector in different  zones of the 
country and suggest the measures to resolve difficu lties after reviewing the 
implementation of the programmes at the field level ,  one Zonal Committee in 
each of the six geographical zones of the country w as  provided in the 
Amendment.  
9. The Amendment prescribed for regular meetings of  KVIC, National KVI 
Board and the Zonal Committees.  
10. Also, there were provisions in the Amendment to  give clearer 
demarcation of the roles of the Chairman, Chief Exe cutive Officer and the 
Financial Adviser of the Commission. 
11. The Amendment dealt extensively with the possib le financial resources 
of the KVIC and the extensive control of the Govern ment over Commission’s 
financial and administrative powers. 

12. The Committee in its 177 th  Report on the KVIC (Amendment) Bill, 2005  
had observed and hoped that  “ it is expected and b elieved that with these 
proposed changes, the KVIC will become more profess ional and relevant in the 
times to come and be better equipped in the dischar ge of its key role in 
facilitating generation of sustainable and wide-spr ead non-farm employment in 
the rural areas of the country.” 
13. In reply to a query whether the objectives of t he Amendment were 
realized in terms of performance of KVI sector.    
14. The Committee was informed that in quantitative  terms the growth of 
KVI sector pre and post Amendment Act, 2006 has imp roved as has been 
indicated below: 
  
• Fund disbursement for the activities of KVI program me 
increased by 159.17% i.e. Rs. 1426.44 crore during the year 
2012-13 against Rs. 550.39 crore in 2005-06 which i ndicates 
annual 22.74% averages growth in the last 7 years.  
 
• Performance of KVI programmes in terms of productio n has 
increased from Rs. 12383.84 crore during 2005-06 to  Rs. 
24024.24 crore during the year 2012-13 which regist ered total 
94% growth. It indicates 13.43% annual averages growth in last 
7 years.  
 
• Employment in Khadi and V.I. programmes has reached  to 
124.76 lakh persons in 2012-13 i.e. it has register ed  50.73% 
growth against the 82.77 lakh persons employment ge nerated 
during 2005-06 which indicates 7.25%  averages grow th in last 
7  years.  
 
15. After having discussions on functioning of the KVIC on different 
occasions, the   Committee agreed to review the implementation of t he KVIC 
Act in view of rapid changes in growth potential in  the KVI sector, emerging 

economic scenario, demographic changes and urbaniza tion and address a few 
structural issues..  
Statutory standing of the KVIC Act 
 
16. In view of the fact that in 1956, the Khadi and  Village Industries was not 
on the Union list of Seventh Schedule of Constituti on and has subsequently 
been included in the Eleventh Schedule for Panchaya ti Raj Institutions ( PRIs), 
the Committee enquired about the  statutory basis o f the KVIC Act, whether it 
was at all desirable to put Khadi & Village Industry in the Eleventh Schedule in 
context of their skills and financial resources needed to support KVI sector.  
 
17. The Committee also sought to know if present Ac t engaged local bodies 
in the bodies created under the Act. The Committee enquired if Government 
proposed to devolve finance to local bodies to impl ement KVI schemes and as 
such what will be the role of KVIC, if such schemes  are delegated to local 
bodies as per the Constitution. The Committee also sought the views if any 
amendment in the Act was required in view of Eleventh Schedule.  
 
18. In its written replies the Ministry submitted t hat though Khadi and 
Village industries was included in the Eleventh Sch edule of the Constitution, 
thereby empowering them to implement the schemes, the Entry 97 of the Union 
List ( List I) of the Seventh Schedule empowered th e Central Government to 
make legislation on the matters not enumerated in e ither the List II ( State List) 
or  the List III ( Concurrent List). Khadi and Vill age Industries was one such 
matter which has neither been mentioned in List II nor in List III. Therefore, 
statutory status of the KVIC Act is justified. 
 
19. The Secretary, M/o MSME in his oral evidence be fore the Committee 
stated: 

 “ Sir, coming to the first issue which is the apparen t conflict or 
reconciliation that may be required between the KVI C Act and the XI 
Schedule, we believe that there is actually no conf lict as such as far as 
the Act is concerned.  In our submission to the Com mittee, we have 
pointed out that under Entry 97 of the Union List o f the VII Schedule, the 
Union can legislate in respect of the khadi and vil lage industries.  Sir, 
our understanding is that in the three Lists, in th e Union List, the State 
List and the Concurrent List, if there is no subjec t which is specifically 
mentioned, because these are the only areas where t he legislation can 
happen, actually XI Schedule does not confer any po wers for legislation, 
one has to see whether a particular legislation can  be made by the 
Union, by the State or by the Union in consultation with the State.  So, we 
believe that legislation can be made under Entry 97 .  So, as such, the 
KVIC Act does not become ultra vires of the Constitution.  However, with 
the coming in force of the XI Schedule, the Constit ution 73 rd  Amendment, 
there is no doubt that the subject of khadi and vil lage industries has been 
mandated also for the Panchayati Raj institutions.  So, one has to see 
that in the functioning of the Central Government, State Government, 
KVIC, KVIC institutions and the Panchayati Raj inst itutions, how the 
provisions in the XI Schedule can be taken into acc ount, what activities 
are such which can be conducted at the level of the  Panchayats and what 
are those activities which might be required by way  of facilitation, 
funding, etc., from other levels of the Government.  In short, what we feel 
in the Ministry is that there is a role for the Panchayati Raj institution.  “ 
 
20. However, the Committee remains unconvinced of the statutory status 
of the KVIC Act. As per the reply of the Secretary and the written reply, 
the Act was framed under Entry 97 of the Union List  that gave the 
residuary powers which rest with the Union in 1956.  However, with 
inclusion of Khadi and Village industries in the El eventh Schedule 
enumerating subjects under the powers and responsib ilities of Panchayati 
Raj Institutions ( PRIs) read with the Article 243 (A), power of law making 
on the subjects enlisted in the said Schedule inclu ding KVI sector, rests 
inter alia  with the State legislature. And as such can not be  covered under 
the residuary powers of the Union in List I. Conver sely, the State 
Government would not have the legislative competenc e in respect of KVI 

sector regardless of Article 243 (A) as residuary p owers are to be vested in 
the Union Government. The Committee therefore recom mends that the 
Ministry may review the statutory position in consu ltation with relevant 
Ministry/agency to give KVIC firm statutory status.  
 
21. Regarding the desirability of keeping KVI secto r in the Eleventh 
Schedule, the Ministry stated that “ considering the fact that the Central Govt. 
has enacted the KVIC Act, 1956 for ensuring massive  promotion and 
development of Khadi and Village Industries in the country, it is not desirable 
to put Khadi and Village Industries in the Eleventh  Schedule, rather it should 
be included in the Union List under Seventh Schedule. ”   
 
22. Regarding the skills and financial strength of Panchayati Raj Institutions 
to implement KVI schemes, the Committee was informed that though the KVIC 
Act did not envisage any role for local bodies, how ever, as per Rule 32 of the 
KVIC Rules, local bodies were also included as the beneficiaries to receive 
grants and subsidies from the KVIC.  Detailing involvement of local bodies, the 
Committee was informed that the representatives of the local bodies were 
included in the District Level Task Force constitut ed to screen proposals for 
PMEGP.   
 
23. Further, in response to  the question regarding  role of KVIC, if KVI  
schemes are to be delegated to local bodies as per the Constitution, the Ministry 
suggested that if the schemes were to be devolved t o the local bodies, it would 
be appropriate to route the funds and schemes to lo cal bodies through KVIC so 
as to ensure proper monitoring and implementation o f the schemes by the local 
bodies.  It was stated that KVIC needed to be strengthened for the purpose. 
 

24. The Committee is of the view that the Government m ust ascertain 
the ways of devolution of funds to Panchayati Raj I nstitutions ( PRIs) and 
monitor and audit their performance in implementing  the Government 
schemes. In this regard the Committee also emphasiz es the need for an 
institutional linkage between KVIC and the State KV IBs supported by 
explicit statutory provisions instead of implicit Rules. 
 
Definitions  
 
25. The Committee sought to review certain definiti ons in Section 2 of the 
Act, in view of changing economic and demographic s cenario and to give 
greater coverage to the KVI programmes. 
 
26. It sought the views on Section 2 (cc) pertainin g to fixed capital 
investment which also includes cost of land unlike definition of MSMEs, 
Section 2(d) pertaining to definition of Khadi whic h does not include poly 
khadi and also excludes innovation of efficient cha rkhas, Section 2(ff) 
regarding need to update the definition of rural ar ea, Section 2 (i) pertaining  to 
per worker fixed capital investment of Rs. 1 lakh.  
 
 
  
 
(i) Poly-Vastra 
 
 
27. Regarding definition of  “Khadi”, it meant any cloth woven on 
handlooms in India from Cotton, Silk or Woolen yarn  handspun in India or 
from a Mixture of any two or all of such yarns.   
 
“Poly-vastra” in the Schedule is defined as any clo th woven on handlooms in 
India from yarn and handspun in India from a Mixtur e of manmade fibre with 

either Cotton, Silk or Wool or with any two or all of them or from Mixture of 
Man-made fibre yarn handspun in India with either C otton, Silk or Woollen 
yarn handspun in India or with any two or all of such yarns. 
 
28. The Committee observed that the definitions of khad i and           
Poly-vastra are limited to cotton, woolen or silk y arns or mixture thereof. 
The definition does not include synthetic yarn. To that extent the definition 
needs to be revised to include Poly-vastra. The def initions include 
handspun fibre and handloom woven cloth. It does no t include innovations 
like E charkhas, which are meant to increase the productivity, which is one 
of the objectives of the KVIC under Section 15 (2) (e). The Committee feels 
that the definition should be flexible enough to in clude technological 
advances which is the mandate of the Commission.  
 
(ii) Village Industry and Rural Area 
 
 
29. The Committee had sought Ministry’s views on th e definitions as 
mentioned in Sections 2(cc), 2 (ff) and 2(h) and no ted that the Ministry too 
agreed that there was a need to change the definiti on of Village Industry and 
Rural Area in the KVIC Act.  
 
30. The Committee notes that the Sections 2 (ff) perta ining to ‘rural 
area’ and 2 (i) regarding village industry acknowle dges that these are 
dynamic concepts and that the Government could chan ge the parameters 
by notifications. However, no notification has been  issued to change these 
definitions, ever since last amendment to the Act i n 2006.  The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should change the defi nition in consultation 
with the KVIC through notification.  
 

31. The Committee also recommends that like MSME Develo pment Act, 
the definition of  ‘ Fixed per Capita’ investment s hould only include plant 
and machinery and not the cost of land, workshed etc.    
 
32. The Committee takes note of the list of Village in dustry included in 
the Schedule framed under Section 2 ( h). The Commi ttee is of the opinion 
that States should be given flexibility in deciding  the Village industry. This 
will facilitate greater coverage of the Village ind ustry schemes and make 
them more relevant to local traditional crafts, ski lls and employment 
needs. 
 
Demarcation between powers and functions of Commiss ion and the Chief 
Executive Officer  
 
  33. The Committee acknowledged that one of the ob jectives of the 
Amendment was clearer demarcation of the powers and  functions of 
Commission and the Chief Executive Officer.  Howeve r, the ambivalence 
persisted due to Section 4 (1A) regarding Commissio n’s powers of general 
superintendence in day to day affairs and Section 5(1) and (1A) that gave power 
of general superintendence also to CEO.  The Commit tee sought further 
elaboration from the Ministry in this regard in con text of Sections 4 (1A), 5 (1) 
and (1A), Rules 10,11 and 12.  
 
34. The Committee was informed that according to Se ction 4 (1A)  the 
exercise of all powers and discharge of all functio ns under this Act, including 
general superintendence, direction and management o f day-to-day affairs of the 
Commission shall vest in the Commission. Further, a ccording to Section 5 (1), 
the Chief Executive Officer shall exercise such pow ers and discharge such 
functions in respect of general superintendence ove r the affairs of the 
Commission and its day-to-day management, under the  general 

superintendence, direction and management of the Co mmission. Section 5(1A) 
further underscores that the Chief Executive Office r shall exercise such powers 
of general superintendence and management.  
 
35. These Sections read with relevant Rules make th e demarcation clear. As 
per Rule 10, the powers of the Chairman of the KVIC  is limited to the matters 
pertaining to the meetings of the Commission and gi ving directions as to the 
method of carrying out the decisions of the Commission.  Whereas according to 
Rule 11, the Chief Executive Officer is charged wit h duty to deal with the 
meetings of the Commission such as convening the me etings of the 
Commission and drawing up of agenda and maintenance  of minutes of the 
meeting under the direction of the Chairman while Rule 12, particularly Rule 12 
(a) empowers the CEO to coordinate, supervise and c ontrol the works of all the 
departments, establishments, officers and staff of the Commission.  
 
36. The Committee found an anomalous situation exis ts in the Act as 
powers of the Commission under Section 4(1) have be en delegated to the 
CEO under Sections 5 (1), (1A) of the same Act and not through any 
subordinate legislation.    
                          
37. The Committee is of the opinion that the intent of the Act and its 
provisions is abundantly clear. The power of genera l and not specific 
supervision is given to Commission in order to ensu re its administrative 
autonomy required to facilitate its mandate. As the Commission meets once 
a month and by implication can not supervise day-to  day affairs of the 
Commission, the Act itself empowers the CEO to supe rvise the day to day 
affairs. In view of Sections 4(1), 5(1) and (1A) an d Rules 10, 11 and 12 
made by the Central Government under Section 26, th e Committee feels 
that the demarcation is fairly clear that Commissio n is essentially a policy 
making body and powers bestowed on it are incidental.  

 
38. Section 27 of the Act prescribe the Commissions pow ers to frame 
regulations thereby setting broad parameters of adm inistrative policies in 
consonance of its objectives, financial and human r esources. The CEO is 
required to carry out the administration and superv ision as per the broad 
administrative policies determined by the Commissio n through 
Regulations.   The Committee is of the view that ge neral superintendence 
on the part of Commission in its day-to day affairs  as envisaged in Section 
4(1A) is oxymoron. Committee accordingly recommends  that that word “ 
day to day” should be deleted. Similarly, General S uperintendence on the 
part of Chief Executive Officer under Section 5(1) too should b deleted and 
consequential changes be made in the Act. As part o f general 
superintendence, the Commission though may seek inf ormation from the 
CEO on general administrative matters. 
 
Terms and Conditions of service of Chief Executive Officer and Financial 
Advisor  
 
39. Section 13 (2) expects that the terms and condi tions for the Chief 
Executive Officer and the Financial Advisor may be prescribed.  
 
40. The Committee observes that no Rule has been fr amed by the 
Government in this regard. The Committee is of the view that the terms 
and conditions for engagement of these two critical  positions may be 
prescribed immediately. The terms of engagement sho uld clearly specify 
the requirement of previous experience of prospecti ve candidates in the 
Khadi or Village Industries or associated fields. A lso the choice of 
candidates must not be limited to Government by dep utation, instead 

should be open to members of senior management of B anks, financial 
institutions and PSUs. The selection should be made  through an 
independent body like Public Enterprises Selection Board.  
 
Financial Autonomy of the KVIC 
 
  
41. The Committee noted that the Act envisaged fina ncial autonomy for 
KVIC. Considering that Khadi is essentially a finan cially viable vocation,  the 
Committee sought to know if the KVIC had any plan t o attain financial 
autonomy instead of seeking autonomy despite gettin g annual budgetary 
support from the Government.  
 
42.  The Committee was informed that though the KVI C Act envisages 
financial autonomy for KVIC, it was still dependent  on the budgetary support 
because the KVIC is a statutory body created by an Act of the Parliament with 
the social objectives of providing employment opportunities. It is a promotional 
and developmental organization for Khadi and Villag e Industries in the rural 
areas and that the KVIC implements these programmes  as per scheme 
guidelines and pattern of assistance approved by th e Govt. of India. It was 
stated that there is no provision of any income gen eration by the KVIC for 
implementing the programmes, therefore the objectiv e of KVIC is not profit 
motive.  
 
43. As per the Section 17, the Central Government a fter due appropriation 
made by Parliament, pays to Commission in each fina ncial year such sums as 
may be considered necessary for the performance of the functions of the 
Commission under this act. Also, under Section 17 A , the Commission may for 
the purpose of development of Khadi and Village Ind ustries receive gifts, 
grants, donations or benefactions from the Governme nt or any other persons. 
Under Section 21, the Commission has the power to b orrow money against the 

security of funds provided for khadi or village ind ustries or against any other 
asset. As such the KVIC receives fund from the Gove rnment and it does levy 
any fee or charges. 
 
44. The Committee noted the constraints in achieving th e financial 
autonomy and also observed the reluctance in attain ing it. It was stated 
that the KVIC is basically a promotional body and d oes not engage in any 
commercial activities, the question of attainment o f financial sustainability 
in the present set up is too remote.  Instead it was left to the planners of our 
country to consider whether to change the present r ole of KVIC from a 
promotional body to a commercial body. 
 
45. However, the Secretary, M/o MSME in his present ation before the 
Committee did offer that KVIC should leverage its p osition and generate 
resources with the financial institutions or fundin g agencies to generate 
resources to finance its Schemes. However, at prese nt the KVIC generated 
minimal resources on its own and depended predomina ntly on the Government 
for its finances.  
 
“ the other set of issues relates to the financial autonomy of KVIC.  This issue 
had arisen also in one of the earlier meetings and in that as well as in our 
submission before the Committee, we have said that if the KVIC is able to raise 
sufficient resources, it will certainly justify det ermination by KVIC itself of how 
it will utilise those resources. But as things stan d, the KVIC is receiving non-
Plan assistance to the tune of about Rs. 250 crores  every year; Plan assistance, 
for various schemes, the budgeted amount is about R s.1650 crores and its own 
resources are only to the tune of about Rs. 36 crores.  Out of these Rs. 36 crore, 
about Rs. 16 crore  are arising from the bank inter est on funds which the 
Central Government has been giving from time to time.  So, in effect, the overall 
resources generated would work out to be about rupe es 10 crores or so.  So, in 
a budget of over nearly rupees 2,000 crores, the in ternal resources of the KVIC 
which are not linked to the funds which the Government is giving either through 
Plan or non-Plan budgetary support is to the tune of about rupees 10-12 crores.  
In this situation, we have to see what kind of func tional autonomy KVIC can 
actually enjoy because, as mentioned, the bulk of t he resources are for Plan 

schemes and within that the major content is for th e Prime Minister’s 
Employment Generation Programme where the KVIC is t he nodal agency.  So, 
for the Plan scheme, Sir, it is incumbent that the guidelines are followed.  We 
are taking the approval of the Cabinet for these programmes and there are a set 
of guidelines.  There is also a procedure which the  Ministry itself has to follow 
for the release of funds and we are subject to audit, internal audit as well as the 
control of the Ministry of Finance and its represen tatives in the Ministry of 
MSME through the internal finance wing.  So, given that situation, there is very 
little leeway, in my opinion, for allowing a total financial autonomy to the 
KVIC.  However, elsewhere, Sir, you have mentioned that should the KVIC be 
encouraged to have functional autonomy and financia l autonomy.  To that, my 
answer is, ‘certainly yes’, because the Act also pe rmits the KVIC to raise 
resources from elsewhere and this is probably an ar ea which has not been fully 
explored by the KVIC.  Maybe, earlier it was not po ssible for the KVIC to raise 
resources and to receive endowments, but in today’s  context where globally the 
emphasis is on sustainability, green products, envi ronmentally-friendly 
products, in this changed context, there may be pos sibility even for an 
institution like KVIC to position itself and to rec eive funds from sources other 
than the Government.  If that happens, certainly, t he degree of financial and 
functional autonomy which the KVIC can enjoy will be greatly enhanced.   
 
46. The Committee is of the view that the KVIC has neither been given 
the financial autonomy nor was in position to attai n financial autonomy 
despite provisions in the Act.  It has to seek approval from the Government 
at every stage. The Committee is of the view that K VIC should be allowed 
to re-appropriate funds from khadi and Village Indu stry funds, under the 
intimation to the Ministry. KVIC should also be all owed to spend the 
resources generated by it.  
 
47. The Committee is also of the view that the Gove rnment should 
release the Funds in time, but its should be obliga tion of the KVIC of 
keeping the Government informed of the expenditure out of annual 
Budgetary Grants. However, it is essential that KVI C even as a 
promotional organisation for a commercially viable vocation like khadi 
and Village Industries, must leverage itself to generate its own finances.  

 
48. The Committee wonders that if KVIC could access  the funds like 
RIDF. The Ministry may explore if KVIC could avail institutional finances 
from Banks, as a Micro Finance Institution and from  RIDF. The Ministry 
should gradually promote KVIC as specialized resour ce agency and 
financial institution for village industries from b eing a promotional 
organization. Sections 17, 17A and 21 give powers to KVIC to raise funds.  
 
 
49. The Ministry should persuade KVIC to leverage i ts position with 
financial institutions like SIDBI, NABARD, National  Backward Class 
Finance & Development Corporation, National SC Fina nce Corporation, 
National ST Finance Corporation, National Minoritie s Development 
Finance Corporation, Rashtriya Mahila Kosh etc. to raise finances for its 
schemes.  For which the KVIC will have to evolve a sound business model. 
The Committee recommends that Rules 32, 33 and 34 s hould be made 
more substantive.  
 
50. The Committee is of the view that despite prono unced objective of 
the Act, the KVIC may not be able to attain full ad ministrative autonomy 
unless it attains financial autonomy.  It must shed  its reluctance and evolve 
into a self sustaining organization.  
 
51. In this regard the Committee sought details of new Khadi Reform and 
Development Programme( KRDP) with the assistance of ADB.  
 
52. It was informed that Khadi Reform and Developme nt Programme 
(KRDP) was developed after protracted discussion an d suggestion put forth by 
all stake holders of Khadi. The same was placed bef ore CCEA and with the 

direction of CCEA, it is being implemented by KVIC.   KVIC decided that in 
order to assign direct reform assistance to most po tential institutions the views 
of Zonal Committees may be obtained. Accordingly, K VIC has identified the 
first 300 institutions to be supported under direct  reform assistance in 
consultation with the Zonal Committees. 
 
 
53. Under the programme, a Marketing Organization i s being set up as a 
Joint Venture Company between KVIC and a selected p rivate partner with 49% 
and 51% shareholding respectively. On setting up of  the Organization, its role 
would be for brand building, quality control and to  grow the business of KVI 
products in international markets. 
 
54. The Committee may remind that the Khadi as a conce pt evolved 
independent of government support. It was a tool an d symbol of protest 
and not a captive vocation of Government.  To conti nue to make it 
dependent of grants from the Government will defeat the very purpose and 
message of khadi.  
 
National Khadi and Village Industry Board 
 
 
55. The Committee recognized that the Act provided for setting up of a 
National KVI Board. It sought to know the impact of  such Board on the 
functional and financial autonomy of the KVIC consi dering the existence of 
National KVI Board headed by the Minister.  Could s uch a Board, comprising 
largely of Minister and Secretaries of the Governme nt act in an advisory 
capacity.   
 

56. The Committee   noted that Section 16  obliged the KVIC to adhere to 
the directions of the Government whereas Section 11  of the Act required the 
KVIC to ordinarily consult the Board in discharge of its function.  
  
57. In written reply the Committee was informed tha t the Section 10 of the 
KVIC Act deals with the Constitution of the Nationa l Khadi and V.I. Board.  
According to Rule 15 of the KVIC Rules, the Nationa l KVI Board shall consist 
of 51 Members, largely Executives representing the different Departments 
connected with rural development and chaired by the  Minister of MSME 
(formerly ARI).  Considering the large representati on in the Board, it can 
function only as an Advisory Body and it may not be  able to frame policies and 
programmes for the KVIC.   
 
58. Section 16 of the Act deals with the powers of the Central Govt. to give 
direction to the Commission in the discharge of its  functions.   Since the 
directives on behalf of the Central Govt. are being  issued by the Ministry of 
MSME, there will not be any conflict between the ad vice given by the National 
KVI Board and the directives given by the Ministry of MSME as the Chairman 
of the Board is the Minister of MSME itself.  Howev er, Section 16 of the Act 
dilutes the autonomous character of the KVIC to a great extent.   
 
59. The Committee accepts the assertion that Section 16  of the Act does 
dilute the autonomous character of the KVIC to a gr eat extent. The 
Committee also takes note  of an unprecedented arra ngement under 
Sections 10 and 11 where 51 Member National KVI Boa rd chaired by the 
Minister concern and largely consisting of Secretar ies of relevant 
Ministries of Government of India will advise a 13 Member KVIC of which 
10 Members are part-time Members. The Committee won ders if such an 
arrangement exists anywhere in the Government where  a larger body 

headed by the executive Minister renders advice to a smaller Commission 
under the administrative and financial control of that Ministry.  
 
60. The Committee wonders if the Minister, who disc harges executive 
functions could act in advisory capacity to another  body under its 
administrative control. Such an arrangement is furt her complemented by 
Section 16 of the Act which makes directions of the Government obligatory 
upon the KVIC. The situation is indeed paradoxical if not oxymoron. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry must give ti me bound final 
approval to any administrative or financial proposal from the KVIC.  
 
61. Moreover, during the evidence, the Secretary in formed the 
Committee that the National KVI Board has not been meeting regularly as 
mandated in the Act. The Committee takes such state of affairs seriously. A 
statutory Board headed by Minister breaching the st atutory mandate is 
indeed a serious issue. It only highlights the redu ndence of such a 
superfluous arrangement.  
 
62. The Committee recommends that the Government’s powers under 
Section 16 too should be mitigated. Rules should be  framed under this 
Section to limit the powers of Government to give d irection. Powers should 
also be given to KVIC to discuss the issue and appr ise the Government of 
its views.  
 
63. The Committee reiterates that the autonomy of KVIC  is likely to 
remain constricted due to its continued reliance ov er Government for 
finances. It is the mandate given to KVIC to exerci se autonomy and the 
Commission ought to generate resources independent of Government. 

There are provisions in the Act to enable KVIC to g enerate resources 
provided KVIC formulates viable business case.   
  
64. The Committee also takes note of the composition o f the KVIC. The 
objective of the last Amendment of 2005 was to infu se greater 
professionalism to the KVIC. It provided for four e xperts as non-official 
part-time Members of the Commission. The Committee is surprised to note 
that despite having a specialized in-house body Mah atma Gandhi Institute 
for Rural Industrialization (MGIRI), the Act does n ot provide any scope 
for the Institute. The professional mandate of the Institute almost coincides 
with the demands of the KVIC i.e to strengthen rura l industrialization, 
enhance rural employment in rural areas. The Instit ute is designed as a      
“ mechanism that would  provide high quality of sci ence, technology and 
management inputs and support in a comprehensive ma nner to KVI 
sector.” The Committee therefore recommends that th e expert 
representatives  of MGIRI may be included in the Co mmission under 
Section 4(2) (b) and existing part-time non-governm ent experts and also 
government representatives may be involved with the  KVIC as per 
requirement under Section 9 of the Act. This will b ring about a closer 
institutional linkage between KVIC and MGIRI.   
 
Linkage between KVIC and the State Khadi and Village Industries Boards  
 
65. The Committee noted that there are State KVIBs.  However, the Act does 
not prescribe the linkage between KVIC and the KVIB.       
 
66. Regarding the linkage between KVIC and State KV I Board is concerned, 
it is clarified that the relationship between the K VIC and KVI Board is not 
defined anywhere in the KVIC Act or Rules. However,  as per the definition of 
the term" Borrower"  contained in the  KVIC Rules a nd KVIC Loan Rules 

includes a board established under any law for the development of Khadi and 
village industries also. Further, for all practical purposes, KVIC is treating State 
KVI Boards as one its implementing agencies. 
   
67. The Committee sought clarification if there cou ld be an overlap or 
conflict in domains of State KVIBs and the State Directorates of KVIC. 
 
68. It was submitted that as regards the question w hether the State KVI 
Board is different from State KVIC Directorates is concerned, it is clarified that 
though both the organizations are pursuing similar objectives, but they are 
governed by different Acts and functioning independ ently.  The State KVIC 
Directorates are the branch offices of the KVIC ope ned in all the States and 
Union Territories to facilitate the speedy discharg e of the functions of the 
KVIC.  With this arrangement in force, both KVIC an d KVIBs have been 
successfully implementing the KVI programme in fulf illing the objectives of 
the Commission in terms of creating employment oppo rtunities in the country 
in the last several decades  
 
69. The Committee is of the view that given the sho rtage of manpower 
and resources faced by the State Directorates of KV IC and considering 
similar mandate of State KVIBs, the Ministry has no t been able to justify 
the existence of State Directorates. Instead the KV IC must conserve its 
scarce resources for more useful purposes than depu ting them for similar 
assignments as State KVIBs. For this there is a nee d for institutional 
linkage between the KVIC and State KVIBs supported by explicit 
statutory provision. The Zonal Committee could prov ide a forum where 
KVIC and State KVIBs converge to discuss the impact  and shortcomings 
of KVIC schemes.  
 

70. In this regard the Committee also recalled its observations in its 177 th  
Report on the KVIC (Amendment) Bill, 2005 : 
 
“In order to facilitate better coordination with th e State Khadi and Village 
Industries Boards established by State Governments,  obtain regular feed-back 
on the problems being faced by the KVI sector in th e six zones of the country 
and suggest to the Commission measures to resolve d ifficulties after reviewing 
the implementation of the programmes at the field l evel, provision for 
constitution of one Zonal Committee in each of the six geographical zones of 
the country has also been provided in the Bill.” 
 
71. The Committee had further stated in the Report:  
 
“3.7.1    The Committee welcomes the formation of Zonal Commi ttees and 
the measures towards  decentralized  functioning of  KVIC, however, with a 
view to ensuring participation of the real stakehol ders, at least one   
representative of  institutions having not less tha n ten years of   experience 
with khadi and/or village industries with good trac k record of performance 
from  each one of the States in the zones should be  made members of the 
Zonal Committee.   The Committee understands that t he voluntary   
institutions/co-operatives implement the programmes  of the KVIC, 
therefore,   their direct  involvement in the  Zona l Committee would enable 
them to realize the  correct field  position/  corr ect  feed    back  from the 
field and thus would be helpful in decision making – process .    
 3.7.2    The Committee received the suggestion that in many States the 
Chairman of the State Khadi and Village Industries Boards of the States is 
politically appointee with Ministerial rank and it may not be feasible for him 
to attend the meeting of the Zonal Committee.  Acco rdingly, the Central 
Government may decide the representative of the Sta te KVIBs as member of 
the Zonal Committee in consultation with the State Governments.  The 
Committee also agrees with the view point and there fore recommends that  
in place of the Chairman, State KVIB, the represent ative of each of the State 
Khadi and Village Industries Boards of the States o r  the Government of 
each of States in the zone,  as the case may be,  t o be notified by the Central 
Government within 30 days in consultation with Stat e Government 
concerned –member “.   
 
72. To a query regarding role and inputs given by t he Zonal Committees, the 
Ministry informed that the Zonal Committees have di scussed several major 

issues in its meetings. The major issues discussed,  reviewed and recommended 
by the Zonal Committees were pertaining to:- 
i. Position of financial support to the weaker institu tions i.e.  
SC/ST/Minority/OBC, and newly enlisted Khadi institutions. 
 
ii. Review for social security measures extended to the  KVI 
artisans through various Welfare Schemes, Workshed for 
individual as well as group artisans, Artisans Insu rance Scheme 
i.e. Children Education Scholarship, Death claims, etc. 
 
iii. Provide necessary guidance for implementation of KV I 
activities in the Zones. 
 
iv. Extend support/guidance for marketing of KVI produc ts                 
through exhibitions as per Commission’s directions.  
 
73. The Committee sought to know if the Zonal Commi ttees had been fully 
constituted as per the composition prescribed in the Section 12 (A) (1) 
 
74. The Ministry in its response informed the Commi ttee as per the Act, one 
representative of each of the State Khadi and Villa ge Industries Boards of the 
States or, as the case may be, the Government of ea ch State in the Zone, to be 
notified by the Central Government in consultation with the State Government 
concerned and one representative of an institution of repute, working for at least 
ten years in the Khadi or Village Industries sector  and having a good record of 
performance, from each State in the Zone, to be not ified by the Central 
Government, are to be nominated to the Zonal Commit tee. The KVIC had 
requested the Ministry of MSME to accord approval a s well as for notification 
in the Gazette. The same was under process.   
 
75. The Committee expresses serious concern over th e erosion of 
statutory institutions prescribed under the Act. Th e National KVI Board 
does not meet as per the provisions of Act. The Zon al Committee are not 
fully formed despite Committee’s recommendation tha t same should be 

notified within 30 days. The Committee is persuaded  to wonder if these 
bodies are superfluous or have been relegated to redundence. In absence of 
representation of States and khadi institutions, th e Zonal Committee can 
not fulfill its mandate.  In this regard the Commit tee recalls that the initial 
proposal in the Act did not include the khadi insti tution and it was only on 
Committee’s recommendations that the khadi institutions were included in 
the Act. However, despite, provision in the Act, th e Government does not 
comply.  
76. Also the Committee is of the view that in order  to reduce the 
unwieldy size of Zonal Committees the representativ e of the State KVIC 
Directorates should be excluded as the Zonal Deputy  CEO  of the 
Commission is  included in the Zonal Committee. The  Committee 
recommends that Ministry and KVIC should consider the recommendation 
and make necessary changes.  
 
77. The Committee also recommends that the Government s hould set up 
a statutory functional linkage between KVIC and State KVIBs and till such 
time should revitalize the Zonal Committees.  
 
 
78. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry  should 
include the details of the activities/meetings/agen da of the 
boards/committees/other bodies created under this A ct. The Annual 
Report should also include the Rules and Regulation  made under relevant 
Sections of this Act.   
 
******* 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS – AT A GLANCE 
 

 
1. However, the Committee remains unconvinced of the statutory status 
of the KVIC Act. As per the reply of the Secretary and the written reply, 
the Act was framed under Entry 97 of the Union List  that gave the 
residuary powers which rest with the Union in 1956.  However, with 
inclusion of Khadi and Village industries in the El eventh Schedule 
enumerating subjects under the powers and responsib ilities of Panchayati 
Raj Institutions ( PRIs) read with the Article 243 (A), power of law making 
on the subjects enlisted in the said Schedule inclu ding KVI sector, rests 
inter alia  with the State legislature. And as such can not be  covered under 
the residuary powers of the Union in List I. Conver sely, the State 
Government would not have the legislative competenc e in respect of KVI 
sector regardless of Article 243 (A) as residuary p owers are to be vested in 
the Union Government. The Committee therefore recom mends that the 
Ministry may review the statutory position in consu ltation with relevant 
Ministry/agency to give KVIC firm statutory status.  
(Para 20) 
2. The Committee is of the view that the Government  must ascertain 
the ways of devolution of funds to Panchayati Raj I nstitutions ( PRIs) and 
monitor and audit their performance in implementing  the Government 
schemes. In this regard the Committee also emphasiz es the need for an 
institutional linkage between KVIC and the State KV IBs supported by 
explicit statutory provisions instead of implicit Rules. 
(Para 24) 
3. The Committee observed that the definitions of k hadi and           
Poly-vastra are limited to cotton, woolen or silk y arns or mixture thereof. 
The definition does not include synthetic yarn. To that extent the definition 
needs to be revised to include Poly-vastra. The def initions include 
handspun fibre and handloom woven cloth. It does no t include innovations 

like E charkhas, which are meant to increase the productivity, which is one 
of the objectives of the KVIC under Section 15 (2) (e). The Committee feels 
that the definition should be flexible enough to in clude technological 
advances which is the mandate of the Commission.  
(Para 28) 
4. The Committee notes that the Sections 2 (ff) per taining to ‘rural 
area’ and 2 (i) regarding village industry acknowle dges that these are 
dynamic concepts and that the Government could chan ge the parameters 
by notifications. However, no notification has been  issued to change these 
definitions, ever since last amendment to the Act i n 2006.  The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should change the defi nition in consultation 
with the KVIC through notification.  
(Para 30) 
5.  The Committee also recommends that like MSME Develo pment Act, 
the definition of  ‘ Fixed per Capita’ investment s hould only include plant 
and machinery and not the cost of land, workshed etc.    
(Para 31) 
6. The Committee takes note of the list of Village industry included in 
the Schedule framed under Section 2 ( h). The Commi ttee is of the opinion 
that States should be given flexibility in deciding  the Village industry. This 
will facilitate greater coverage of the Village ind ustry schemes and make 
them more relevant to local traditional crafts, ski lls and employment 
needs. 
(Para 32) 
7. The Committee found an anomalous situation exist s in the Act as 
powers of the Commission under Section 4(1) have be en delegated to the 
CEO under Sections 5 (1), (1A) of the same Act and not through any 
subordinate legislation.    

             (Para 36) 
             
8. The Committee is of the opinion that the intent of the Act and its 
provisions is abundantly clear. The power of genera l and not specific 
supervision is given to Commission in order to ensu re its administrative 
autonomy required to facilitate its mandate. As the Commission meets once 
a month and by implication can not supervise day-to  day affairs of the 
Commission, the Act itself empowers the CEO to supe rvise the day to day 
affairs. In view of Sections 4(1), 5(1) and (1A) an d Rules 10, 11 and 12 
made by the Central Government under Section 26, th e Committee feels 
that the demarcation is fairly clear that Commissio n is essentially a policy 
making body and powers bestowed on it are incidental.  
(Para 37) 
9. Section 27 of the Act prescribe the Commissions powers to frame 
regulations thereby setting broad parameters of adm inistrative policies in 
consonance of its objectives, financial and human r esources. The CEO is 
required to carry out the administration and superv ision as per the broad 
administrative policies determined by the Commissio n through 
Regulations.   The Committee is of the view that ge neral superintendence 
on the part of Commission in its day-to day affairs  as envisaged in Section 
4(1A) is oxymoron. Committee accordingly recommends  that that word “ 
day to day” should be deleted. Similarly, General S uperintendence on the 
part of Chief Executive Officer under Section 5(1) too should b deleted and 
consequential changes be made in the Act. As part o f general 
superintendence, the Commission though may seek inf ormation from the 
CEO on general administrative matters. 
(Para 38) 
10. The Committee observes that no Rule has been fr amed by the 
Government in this regard. The Committee is of the view that the terms 

and conditions for engagement of these two critical  positions may be 
prescribed immediately. The terms of engagement sho uld clearly specify 
the requirement of previous experience of prospecti ve candidates in the 
Khadi or Village Industries or associated fields. A lso the choice of 
candidates must not be limited to Government by dep utation, instead 
should be open to members of senior management of B anks, financial 
institutions and PSUs. The selection should be made  through an 
independent body like Public Enterprises Selection Board.  
(Para 40) 
11. The Committee noted the constraints in achievin g the financial 
autonomy and also observed the reluctance in attain ing it. It was stated 
that the KVIC is basically a promotional body and d oes not engage in any 
commercial activities, the question of attainment o f financial sustainability 
in the present set up is too remote.  Instead it was left to the planners of our 
country to consider whether to change the present r ole of KVIC from a 
promotional body to a commercial body. 
(Para 44) 
12. The Committee is of the view that the KVIC has neither been given 
the financial autonomy nor was in position to attai n financial autonomy 
despite provisions in the Act.  It has to seek approval from the Government 
at every stage. The Committee is of the view that K VIC should be allowed 
to re-appropriate funds from khadi and Village Indu stry funds, under the 
intimation to the Ministry. KVIC should also be all owed to spend the 
resources generated by it.  
(Para 46) 
13. The Committee is also of the view that the Gove rnment should 
release the Funds in time, but its should be obliga tion of the KVIC of 
keeping the Government informed of the expenditure out of annual 

Budgetary Grants. However, it is essential that KVI C even as a 
promotional organisation for a commercially viable vocation like khadi 
and Village Industries, must leverage itself to generate its own finances.  
(Para 47) 
14. The Committee wonders that if KVIC could access  the funds like 
RIDF. The Ministry may explore if KVIC could avail institutional finances 
from Banks, as a Micro Finance Institution and from  RIDF. The Ministry 
should gradually promote KVIC as specialized resour ce agency and 
financial institution for village industries from b eing a promotional 
organization. Sections 17, 17A and 21 give powers to KVIC to raise funds.  
(Para 48) 
15. The Ministry should persuade KVIC to leverage i ts position with 
financial institutions like SIDBI, NABARD,  National Backward Class 
Finance & Development Corporation, National SC Fina nce Corporation, 
National ST Finance Corporation, National Minoritie s Development 
Finance Corporation, Rashtriya Mahila Kosh etc. to raise finances for its 
schemes.  For which the KVIC will have to evolve a sound business model. 
The Committee recommends that Rules 32, 33 and 34 s hould be made 
more substantive.  
(Para 49) 
 
16. The Committee is of the view that despite prono unced objective of 
the Act, the KVIC may not be able to attain full ad ministrative autonomy 
unless it attains financial autonomy.  It must shed  its reluctance and evolve 
into a self sustaining organization.  
(Para 50) 
17. The Committee may remind that the Khadi as a co ncept evolved 
independent of government support. It was a tool an d symbol of protest 

and not a captive vocation of Government.  To conti nue to make it 
dependent of grants from the Government will defeat the very purpose and 
message of khadi.  
(Para 54) 
18. The Committee accepts the assertion that Sectio n 16 of the Act does 
dilute the autonomous character of the KVIC to a gr eat extent. The 
Committee also takes note  of an unprecedented arra ngement under 
Sections 10 and 11 where 51 Member National KVI Boa rd chaired by the 
Minister concern and largely consisting of Secretar ies of relevant 
Ministries of Government of India will advise a 13 Member KVIC of which 
10 Members are part-time Members. The Committee won ders if such an 
arrangement exists anywhere in the Government where  a larger body 
headed by the executive Minister renders advice to a smaller Commission 
under the administrative and financial control of that Ministry.  
(Para 59) 
19. The Committee wonders if the Minister, who disc harges executive 
functions could act in advisory capacity to another  body under its 
administrative control. Such an arrangement is furt her complemented by 
Section 16 of the Act which makes directions of the Government obligatory 
upon the KVIC. The situation is indeed paradoxical if not oxymoron. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry must give ti me bound final 
approval to any administrative or financial proposal from the KVIC.  
(Para 60) 
20. Moreover, during the evidence, the Secretary in formed the 
Committee that the National KVI Board has not been meeting regularly as 
mandated in the Act. The Committee takes such state of affairs seriously. A 
statutory Board headed by Minister breaching the st atutory mandate is 

indeed a serious issue. It only highlights the redu ndence of such a 
superfluous arrangement.  
(Para 61) 
 
21. The Committee recommends that the Government’s powers under 
Section 16 too should be mitigated. Rules should be  framed under this 
Section to limit the powers of Government to give d irection. Powers should 
also be given to KVIC to discuss the issue and appr ise the Government of 
its views.  
(Para 62) 
22. The Committee reiterates that the autonomy of K VIC is likely to 
remain constricted due to its continued reliance ov er Government for 
finances. It is the mandate given to KVIC to exerci se autonomy and the 
Commission ought to generate resources independent of Government. 
There are provisions in the Act to enable KVIC to g enerate resources 
provided KVIC formulates viable business case.   
(Para 63) 
  
23. The Committee also takes note of the compositio n of the KVIC. The 
objective of the last Amendment of 2005 was to infu se greater 
professionalism to the KVIC. It provided for four e xperts as non-official 
part-time Members of the Commission. The Committee is surprised to note 
that despite having a specialized in-house body Mah atma Gandhi Institute 
for Rural Industrialization ( MGIRI), the Act does not provide any scope 
for the Institute. The professional mandate of the Institute almost coincides 
with the demands of the KVIC i.e to strengthen rura l industrialization, 
enhance rural employment in rural areas. The Instit ute is designed as a ‘ 
mechanism that would  provide high quality of scien ce, technology and 
management inputs and support in a comprehensive ma nner to KVI 

sector.” The Committee therefore recommends that th e expert 
representatives  of MGIRI may be included in the Co mmission under 
Section 4(2) (b) and existing part-time non-governm ent experts and also 
government representatives may be involved with the  KVIC as per 
requirement under Section 9 of the Act. This will b ring about a closer 
institutional linkage between KVIC and MGIRI.   
(Para 64) 
24. The Committee is of the view that given the sho rtage of manpower 
and resources faced by the State Directorates of KV IC and considering 
similar mandate of State KVIBs, the Ministry has no t been able to justify 
the existence of State Directorates. Instead the KV IC must conserve its 
scarce resources for more useful purposes than depu ting them for similar 
assignments as State KVIBs. For this there is a nee d for institutional 
linkage between the KVIC and State KVIBs supported by explicit 
statutory provision. The Zonal Committee could prov ide a forum where 
KVIC and State KVIBs converge to discuss the impact  and shortcomings 
of KVIC schemes.  
(Para 69) 
25. The Committee expresses serious concern over th e erosion of 
statutory institutions prescribed under the Act. Th e National KVI Board 
does not meet as per the provisions of Act. The Zon al Committee are not 
fully formed despite Committee’s recommendation tha t same should be 
notified within 30 days. The Committee is persuaded  to wonder if these 
bodies are superfluous or have been relegated to redundence. In absence of 
representation of States and Khadi Institutions, th e Zonal Committee can 
not fulfill its mandate.  In this regard the Commit tee recalls that the initial 
proposal in the Act did not include the Khadi Institution and it was only on 
Committee’s recommendations that the Khadi Institut ions were included 

in the Act. However, despite, provision in the Act,  the Government does 
not comply.  
(Para 75) 
26. Also the Committee is of the view that in order  to reduce the 
unwieldy size of Zonal Committees the representativ e of the State KVIC 
Directorates should be excluded as the Zonal Deputy  CEO  of the 
Commission is  included in the Zonal Committee. The  Committee 
recommends that Ministry and KVIC should consider the recommendation 
and make necessary changes.  
(Para 76) 
27. The Committee also recommends that the Government s hould set up 
a statutory functional linkage between KVIC and State KVIBs and till such 
time should revitalize the Zonal Committees.  
 (Para 77) 
 
28. The Committee further recommends that the Minis try should 
include the details of the activities/meetings/agen da of the 
boards/committees/other bodies created under this A ct. The Annual 
Report should also include the Rules and Regulation  made under relevant 
Sections of this Act.   
(Para 78) 
 
******* 