163rd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/163rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:28]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON
INDUSTRY
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY THIRD REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
COMMITTEE'S 147TH REPORT ON
CREDIT FLOW TO SSI SECTOR IN THE
REGION OF BULANDSHAHAR
(MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES)
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 5TH MAY, 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK  SABHA ON 5TH MAY, 2005)
E-mail:rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
MAY,  2005/VAISAKHA, 1927 (SAKA)
CONTENTS
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2. INTRODUCTION
3. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
4. OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
5. MINUTES
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
   1.  Shri Santosh Bagrodia         –---       Chairman
        RAJYA  SABHA
   2.  Prof M.M. Agarwal
   3.  Shri Surendra Lath
   4.  Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
   5.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
   6.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   7.  Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
   8.  Dr. Vijay Mallya
   9.  Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
10.  Shrimati Vanga Geetha
        LOK  SABHA
11.  Shri Guharam Ajgalle
12.  Shri Kailash Baitha
13.  Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
14.  Shri Subhash Deshmukh

163rd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/163rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:28]
15.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
16.  Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria
17.  Shri Sunil Khan
18.  Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato
19.  Shri Prakash Paranjpe
20.  Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel
21.  Shri Rajnarayan
22.  Shri Bagida Ramakrishna
23.  Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
24.  Shrimati Rubab Sayeda
25.  Shri Gurjeet Singh Rana
26.  Shri Manvendra Singh
27.  Shri Ganesh Singh
28.  Shri Suraj Singh
29.  Shri Chandramani Tripathi
30.  Shri Girdhari Yadav
31.  Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
        SECRETARIAT
        Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
        Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
        Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
        Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
        I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having been authorised
by the Committee, hereby present this One Hundred Sixty third Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Committee’s 147
th Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in the region of
Bulandshahar (Ministry of Small Scale Industries).
2.     The Committee examined and considered the Action Taken Notes supplied by the Government (Ministry of Small
Scale Industries) on the recommendations contained in its 147 th Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in the region of
Bulandshahar (Ministry of Small Scale Industries).
3.     The Committee in its meeting held on 3rd May, 2005 considered and adopted the Report.
 
SANTOSH BAGRODIA
NEW DELHI ;                                                                                                                                    Chairman,
3rd May, 2005                                                                                              Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry.
REPORT
         The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Small Scale Industries
on the Recommendations contained in the 147th Report (of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Industry) on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in the Region of Bulandshahr, Uttar Pradesh pertaining to the Ministry of
Small Scale Industries . The Report was presented /laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha on the 26th August,
2003.
2.      Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Small Scale Industries in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as follows:
Chapter - I- The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry:- 43; 44 and 52
The Committee is pleased to observe that the Ministry has accepted its recommendation as mentioned in Chapter -I of
the Report.
Chapter - II- The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the

163rd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/163rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:28]
Government’s replies:- 49 and 51
In respect of these recommendations the Committee is convinced with the logic and explanation advocated by the
Ministry and therefore does not want to pursue further.
Chapter - III- The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies of the
Ministry:- 42; 46 and 48
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementations of recommendations contained in Chapter-III and
desires that the Ministry should furnish logical explanation in respect of these recommendations.
Chapter - IV- The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry have not been
received:- 45; 47 and 50
         In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV, the Ministry has either furnished the interim replies or
couched its language in vague terms like noted for compliance/guidance, recommendations have been forwarded to
Government of U. P. therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in respects
of recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention and spirit of the
recommendations of the Committee.
3.      The details of the ATR is being discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.
CHAPTER - I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
1.0    Awareness amongst the SSI entrepreneurs about the various schemes/ facilities
1.1    The Committee understands that there is a lack of awareness amongst the SSI entrepreneurs about the various
schemes/ facilities being offered by the Government and financial institutions. It has resulted in largely under financing
of various schemes. The Committee therefore recommends that the Government and financial institutions should give
wide publicity and conduct awareness campaigns on the loan schemes amongst the SSI entrepreneurs so that the
benefits of various schemes percolate down to the grass root level. The Committee also directs that all the banks in the
area should invariably display in every branch the facilities being offered by them as well the websites of banks and
Government Organisations should be updated, especially in respect of the information regarding the Credit Guarantee
Fund Scheme.(Para 43)
Action Taken
1.1.1As decided at the second meeting of the Standing Advisory Committee (SAC) on Flow of Institutional Credit to
SSI Sector, held on 3
rd April, 2002, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) advised the banks to display in their branch
premises, the limits up to which the collateral-free loans are available and other relevant information relating to
financing of the SSI sector. Subsequently, as decided at the third meeting of the SAC held on
15th January, 2003, it was reiterated to the banks that their branches should display the availability of collateral
free/composite loans, schemes like Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme/National Equity Fund / Credit Guarantee
Fund Scheme for Small Industries, time schedule for disposal of applications, etc. The RBI has informed that
compliance reports on this have been received from all public sector banks.
1.1.2Further, to increase awareness of the schemes/facilities to the SSI sector, the State Bank of India came out with a
“Charter for SSI” which was advertised in all leading newspapers. The Indian Banks’ Association (IBA) has also issued
circular dated 31st March, 2003 to all member banks to come out with similar charter for SSI sector. All 27 public sector
banks have issued “Charter for SSI”.
l.1.3  The Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) has been disseminating information on its schemes of
assistance among the SSI entrepreneurs through seminars/ workshops organized by various local industries associations,
besides the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), Federation of Small & Medium Industries (FOSMI), etc. In order to
create greater awareness amongst SSI units, business campaigns/meets are organized at district headquarters, industry
centres and SSI clusters by the SIDBI. SSI entrepreneurs are given information on relevant schemes on one-to-one basis
during discussion on their projects. Besides, the salient features of all the schemes of the SIDBI are hosted on its

163rd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/163rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:28]
website www.sidbi.com.
l.1.4  The CGTSI has also been taking necessary steps to publicise the Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme for Small
Industries and create awareness of the scheme among the member banks/lending institutions, SSI entrepreneurs and
other stakeholders. The CGTSI has forwarded posters on the Credit Guarantee Scheme to the Zonal Offices/Regional
Offices of the banks so that Branch Offices display the same for the SSI borrowers. Further, the advertisements relating
to the scheme have also been published in Hindi.
1.1.5Under its letter dated 15 th September, 2004, the RBI has informed that regular training programmes are being
organized by the banks for officers/staff so as to improve their work performance. In pursuance of the decisions taken at
the meeting of the Parliamentary Standing Committee held with the officials of banks/financial institutions during its
visit to Mumbai in June, 2001, RBI vide  its circular dated 14 th July, 2001 has advised all banks to conduct
entrepreneurship development training programmes and also give exhaustive training to their staff members sensitizing
them to the needs of the SSI sector. The feedback received from the banks shows that some banks have taken necessary
steps in this regard.
l.1.6  The IBA has forwarded the recommendation of the Committee to all public sector Member Banks for initiating
necessary action. As per the information received from the banks, various steps have been taken to enhance awareness
of the schemes/facilities being offered to SSI entrepreneurs, by way of publishing and posting on websites the “SSI
Charter”, printing and distribution of brochures/ pamphlets/ posters on schemes/ loan facilities for SSI for display at the
branches and conducting workshops, seminars, awareness campaigns, meetings with SSI Associations and training/
sensitization programmes for the Branch Managers/ Staff.
Recommendation
1.2    The Committee was informed that the SSI sector is under constant threat due to globalisation and their products
required to be marketed efficiently. The Committee appreciates the efforts and assistance extended by the NSIC.
However, the SSI Associations demand that in addition to their existing activities, the NSIC should organize exhibitions
for promoting the marketing of the goods produced in the area is justified. The Committee also feels that NSIC should
certainly help the SSIs in this respect. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the NSIC should come forward to
organize exhibitions for displaying products of the SSI units in various metros so as to enable to get more orders to
make viable the existing units which suffer from the under utilization of capacities for want of orders.(Para 44)
Action Taken
1.2.1The NSIC has established a permanent Display Centre to show case the products of SSI units at Okhla, New Delhi.
The SSI units from Khurja and adjoining areas have been provided facilities to display their products free of cost.
1.2.2The National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) in association with Kutir Chinni Patra Sangathan, Khurja,
SIDBI and SISI, organized on 22
nd September, 2003 an awareness campaign at Bulandshahr and 150 SSI units
participated in the event. 35 SSI units from Bulandshahr and adjoining areas participated in Handicrafts Expo’2004
exhibition organized by the NSIC at its Exhibition Centre in New Delhi during 12 th to l6th March, 2004 for which built-
up stalls were provided free of cost to the participating units.(Para 52)
Recommendation
1.3    There is no SSI bank branch in the district and it should be immediately set up. The normal bank branches are also
not located in all the industrial clusters. Each industrial area should have at least one branch. The Committee is of the
view that SSI branch exclusively to cater to the needs of the entrepreneurs and SSI units in the area be set up at the
earliest.
Action Taken
1.3.1The RBI has informed that as per the extant instructions, all banks (public sector banks, in particular) are required
to operationalise more specialised SSI branches to ensure that every district and SSI clusters within a district are served
by at least one specialised SSI bank branch. In view of the difficulties experienced by banks in opening full-fledged
specialised SSI branches due to lack of potential in any district, as per the decision of the Standing Advisory Committee
(SAC) on Flow of Institutional Credit to SSI Sector banks have been advised to categorise general banking branches
with more than 60 per cent advances to SSI sector as specialised SSI branches. As on 31
st March, 2004, the public
sector banks have 497 specialised SSI branches all over the country.

163rd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/163rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:28]
1.3.2The RBI’s Regional Office at Lucknow has advised the three major banks in the region, viz., Punjab National
Bank, State Bank of India and Oriental Bank of Commerce to examine the feasibility of opening specialised SSI
branches in each of the industrial clusters in the region. They have also advised the Convenor to the District
Consultative Committee for Bulandshahr to discuss the issue at the District Consultative Committee (DCC) and District
Level Review Committee (DLRC) meetings. The Punjab National Bank has informed that to provide timely and
adequate credit to the SSI units, it has set up specialized SSI Credit Cell at Lead District Main Branch, Civil Lines,
Bulandshahr, Branch Office at Sikandrabad Industrial Area and Branch Office at Khurja.
CHAPTER - II
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation
2.0    Milk cooperative sector
         The Committee notes that taking into account the quantum of milk produced in the district which is next to Gujarat
and is in the non-cooperative sector, there is a strong demand for an organisational support for procurement, processing
and transportation of the milk and also to provide the best price to the producers. The Committee therefore, recommends
that considering the quantum of milk produced the Government should provide necessary support either through
cooperative sector or by setting up a public sector unit to tap the potential available in the area in an organized manner.
(Para 49)
Action Taken
2.1    The Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying has informed that Bulandshahr
district in Uttar Pradesh was covered under the Operation Flood Project. The milk production in Bulandshahr was
estimated to be 24.38 lakh litres per day in 2003. The District Cooperative Milk Producers Union in Bulandshahr has
868 functioning primary milk cooperative societies, which serve about 87 per cent of l,103 (revenue) villages in the
district. The District Union collects more than one lakh litres of milk per day. The milk processing capacity of the Union
is 60 thousand litres per day and chilling capacity 80 thousand litres per day. Further, a large number of private dairy
plants are located in the district, with an estimated total capacity of approximately 21 lakh litres for milk processing and
7 lakh litres for milk chilling per day.
Recommendation
2.2    Attaching Bulandshahr with NSIC in Delhi
2.2.1As regards the support from the NSIC it was demanded that this district should be attached to Delhi instead of
Agra. The NSIC may identify at least five units in consultation with the District Industries Officer and project them as
model for others to follow. The Committee is of the view that the Government should explore the possibilities to attach
Bulandshahr with Delhi instead of Agra so as to encourage the entrepreneurs. It is also of the view that the NSIC should
develop some units in consultation with the DIO as model units.(Para 51)
Action Taken
2.2.2As informed by the NSIC, Bulandshahr district is serviced by NSIC Zonal Office at NOIDA. However, technical
inspection of SSI units from Bulandshahr area under the Single Point Registration Scheme for Government Stores
Purchase Programme is being referred to the Small Industries Service Institute (SISI), Agra.
CHAPTER - III
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE HAS NOT
ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
Recommendation
3.0    Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Small Industries (CGFTST)
3.1    The Committee is constrained to note that benefit of the Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Small Industries (CGFT)
are not reaching to the SSI entrepreneurs. The Committee recommends that the Government and the SIDBI to ensure

163rd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/163rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:28]
that all the requisite steps be taken for its success and an action taken report be furnished to Committee within three
months.(Para 42)
Action Taken
3.1.1The Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Small Industries (CGTSI) has been making continuous efforts for creating
awareness about the Credit Guarantee Scheme since its inception. For this purpose, it has been organizing region-wise
seminars/programmes for the Member Lending Institutions (MLIs), i.e., commercial banks, etc., to explain the details of
the scheme and benefits available to both MLIs and small enterprises. The CGTSI has also been deputing its officials to
workshops/ training programmes organized by the MLIs for their Credit officials to explain the procedure of lodging
applications under the Scheme and other operational modalities. Further, CGTSI/SIDBI officials have been participating
in exhibitions/ fairs and attending seminars and other programmes /meetings organized/convened by the SSI
Associations and Central/State Government Departments besides, the State Level Inter-Institutional Committee (SLIIC)
and State Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC) meetings, etc. Till December, 2004, CGTSI has participated in around 273
such seminars/ workshops-cum-training programmes/meetings/exhibitions/fairs throughout the country and provided
information on the Credit Guarantee Scheme to various stakeholders. Through such concerted efforts, the awareness
levels in MLIs/Industry have shown a distinct improvement, which is reflected in the increased coverage by MLIs under
the scheme.
3.1.2As on 3lst December, 2004, 21,234 proposals involving aggregate credit amount of Rs. 419.90 crore, have been
approved under the Credit Guarantee Scheme on an all ­India basis. Out of this, 6,458 proposals involving credit
amount of around Rs. 38 crore pertain to Uttar Pradesh. The number of proposals covered in Uttar Pradesh is the highest
among all the States. From Bulandshahr district, 18 proposals involving credit amount of around Rs. 35.24 lakh have so
far been covered under the Credit Guarantee Scheme.
Further Recommendation
3.1.3The Committee notes that eighteen proposals involving credit amount of Rs. 35.24 lakh have so far been covered
under the Credit Guarantee Scheme for Bulandshahr. However, the Committee is of the view that there is a need to
broaden the base of Credit Guarantee Scheme for accelerated proliferation of small enterprises in the country. The
Committee endorses that Bulandshahr is one of the commercial centre of U.P. and recommends that concerted efforts
should be taken to cover more cases under credit guarantee scheme.
Recommendation
3.2    Declining trend in credit flow to SSIs
3.2.1The Committee is very much concerned about the declining trend in credit flow to SSIs. The steps taken by the
Ministry of SSI to enhance credit flow to SSI sector are not adequate. The Committee is of the view that non
compliance of the RBI guidelines is the major reason which has resulted in the decline of credit flow. The Committee,
therefore, impress upon the Government to take serious measures to arrest this trend. Further, the Committee
recommends that the Standard Advisory Committee on Credit Flow should be given more powers to monitor the
situation and advise the Government in this regard.
(Para 46)
Action Taken
3.2.2The flow of credit to SSI sector from the public sector banks has gone up from Rs. 29,482 crore in March, 1996 to
Rs. 58,277 crore in March, 2004 (provisional available data) in absolute terms. However, credit to SSI sector, as
percentage to Net Bank Credit (NBC), has come down mainly because the rate of growth in advances to SSI sector is
not commensurate with the rate of growth in NBC. This issue was deliberated in the meeting of the Parliamentary
Standing Committee with the CMDs of public sector banks and SIDBI held on 10
th January, 2005. The Ministry of SSI
has been taking up the problems faced by the SSI sector in credit flow from the banks/ institutional sources with the
RBI’s Standing Advisory Committee (SAC) from time to time and based on the decisions taken, the banks have been
advised by the RBI to take the needful action accordingly.
3.2.3To ensure adequate credit flow to SSI sector, the Government and RBI have taken various measures which inter
alia include simplified procedure for computing the working capital requirement of SSI units on the basis of minimum
20 per cent of the projected annual turnover of the borrowing unit for limits up to
Rs. 5 crore, advising the banks to fix self-set target for growth in advances to SSI sector, fixing time frame for disposal
of loan applications, enhancement in composite loan limit from Rs.50 lakh to Rs. 1 crore, dispensing with collateral

163rd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/163rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:28]
security requirement for loans up to Rs. 25 lakh to SSI units having good track record and financial position,
enhancement of credit limit under Laghu Udhyami Credit Card (LUCC) from Rs. 2 lakh to Rs. 10 lakh based on
satisfactory track record, etc.
3.2.4As announced by the Government, a Small and Medium Enterprises (SME) Fund has been structured by SIDBI
with an initial envisaged corpus of Rs. 10,000 crore spread over 2 years, i.e., FY 2005 and FY 2006 for providing
impetus to the growth of SME sector. The interest rate on assistance out of the Fund has been kept concessional and
competitive at up to 2 per cent below SIDBI’s PLR, which at present works out to up to 9.5 per cent per annum.
3.2.5As regards the recommendation that more powers be given to the Standing Advisory Committee (SAC) to monitor
the situation and advise the Government, it may be stated that the Committee is chaired by a Deputy Governor of the
RBI. The Secretary, Ministry of SSI; Secretary, Ministry of Finance; Chairman, National Bank for Agriculture and
Rural Development (NABARD); Executive Director in-charge of Rural Planning and Credit Department, RBI;
Chairman, SIDBI; Chairman, State Bank of India and Chairman, Khadi and Village Industries Commission (KVIC) are
its permanent members. The Public Sector Banks, State Financial Corporations (SFCs) and SSI Associations are also
represented on this Committee by rotation. The Committee holds meetings regularly to review the flow of credit to the
SSI sector and problems faced by the sector in securing adequate flow of credit and to suggest improvements in the
procedures and modifications in the policies. The action taken on the decisions of the Committee are deliberated upon
and monitored at the subsequent meetings.
Further Recommendation
3.2.6The Committee knows that the flow of credit to SSI sector from the public sector banks has gone up Rs. 29,482
crore in March, 1996 to Rs. 58,277 crore in March, 2004 but the percentage of net bank credit to SSI sector has come
down from seventeen per cent in 1998 to almost ten per cent in 2004 because of the fact that the rate of growth in
advances to SSI sector is not commensurate with the rate of growth in net bank credit. This is the main concern of the
Committee which has been expressed by the Committee during the course of the meetings held on 1
st September, 2004,
10th January, 3rd March, 2005 with the representatives of nationalized banks and Banking Division. The same issue was
discussed in detail in the meeting of Sub-Committee for Ministry of Small Scale Industries (of Standing Committee on
Industry) held on 19th March and 11th April, 2005 with the select nationalized banks. In the meeting held on 11 th April,
2005, the SSI Associations, also hailing from Bulandshahr, expressed their resentment and anguish over the inadequate
credit flow to SSI sector.
3.2.7The Committee expresses its deepest concern over the pathetic credit flow to SSI sector in general and in the region
of Bulandshahr and is of the considered view that the declining trend of percentage to net bank credit to SSI sector
needs to be arrested at the earliest rather it needs to be reversed to almost to the level of 17 to 18 per cent, if the goal of
12 per cent growth rate in the SSI sector as the target set in 10th Five Year Plan is to be achieved.
Recommendation
3.3    Roads and transport facilities
3.3.1The Committee was also informed that the roads and transport facilities are grossly inadequate and the district has
no direct railway link. Moreover, by-pass roads are required to resolve the problem of traffic jam in Dadri and
Sikendrabad towns in the district. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government of India should extend
necessary support to the State Government of Uttar Pradesh to develop the necessary road and rail links for proper
growth of SSIs in the area.
(Para 48)
Action Taken
3.3.2This matter was taken up with the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MORTH) and the Ministry of
Railways for appropriate action. The MORTH has informed that the National Highway No. 91 (Ghaziabad-Kanpur
Road) is not a four-lane road throughout and around Dadri town, there is often traffic congestion. That Ministry is
considering expanding the width of this section of the highway to four-lane. The State PWD has also submitted certain
proposals for relieving congestion on this highway which is at present under that Ministry’s consideration. The traffic
congestion around Sikandrabad town on this highway is also in the knowledge of the MORTH. In consultation with the
State Government of U.P., that Ministry is considering ways to expand the road width to relieve traffic congestion.

163rd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/163rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:28]
Further Recommendation
3.3.3The Ministry of SSI should take up the issue of direct railway link to Bulandshahr for the betterment of SSI sector
and making the city commercially viable. Moreover, adequate follow up action should be taken with Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways (MORTH) for immediate expanding the width of National Highway No. 91 (Ghaziabad-
Kanpur road) into at least a four lane road so that the traffic problem in Dadri and Sikandrabad town in resolved for the
smooth transportation of SSI products.
CHAPTER - IV
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
Recommendation
4.0    Constitution of the Committee by the lead bank
4.1    The Committee took note of the complaints of the apathetic attitude of the officers and staff of the State
Government and banks. The entrepreneurs are harassed in the guise of rules and procedures and thus setting up of an
unit becomes a Herculean task. The Committee strongly feels that it has to be done away with if industry has to grow. It
is therefore required that a Committee be set up by the lead bank i.e., Punjab National Bank consisting of Banks’
representatives, Director of Industries, local MP’s and MLA’s and members of the SSI associations to resolve the
problems of SSI entrepreneurs and monitor the lending of loans. This Committee should meet quarterly to review the
position. The Committee therefore recommends for constitution of the said Committee at the earliest.(Para 45)
Action Taken
4.1.2The RBI has informed that instructions already exist for simplification of procedural formalities and simplified
application forms for sanction of loans to SSI entrepreneurs. To make available timely credit to the SSI sector, a time
frame has been fixed for disposal of loan applications, viz., up to Rs. 25,000/- within 2 weeks and up to            Rs. 5
lakh, within 4 weeks provided the loan applications are complete in all respects and accompanied by a ‘check list’.
Further, the RBI has issued “Guidelines on Fair Practices Code for Lenders” to all banks and all-India Financial
Institutions for their implementation. In addition, to reduce hardship being faced by the SSI entrepreneurs in      securing
term loan and working capital from separate financial institutions/banks, the banks have been advised to extend
composite loans (the limit for which has been recently enhanced from Rs. 50 lakh to Rs. 1 crore) through a single
window so that the entire financing requirement is met by single documentation and security/charge creation process.
4.1.3As regards setting up of a Committee to look into the problems of the entrepreneurs under the lead bank in the
district, the RBI has stated that in each district there are two fora, viz., the District Consultative Committee (DCC)) and
District Level Review Committee (DLRC) which hold meetings quarterly to review the position of credit flow to
different sectors, including credit flow to SSI sector. Elected public representatives (MPs/ MLAs) are also invited to
participate in discussion in the DLRC meetings.
4.1.4The recommendation of the Committee has been forwarded to the Government of Uttar Pradesh for taking
appropriate action. The IBA has also forwarded the recommendation of the Committee to all public sector Member
Banks for initiating necessary action. The Punjab National Bank has informed that its Regional Office, Bulandshahr is
being advised to set up a Committee to solve the problems of SSI entrepreneurs.
Recommendation
4.2    Development of Industrial Area in the District
4.2.1The Committee was informed that the industrial units are scattered and there is no developed industrial area in the
district. The Committee therefore recommends that the State Government of Uttar Pradesh should be approached to
develop industrial estates to shelter the SSI units with necessary infrastructure.(Para 47)
Action Taken
4.2.2The recommendation of the Committee has been forwarded to the Government of Uttar Pradesh for taking
appropriate action in the matter.
Recommendation

163rd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/163rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:28]
4.3    Exclusive Zone For Food Processing
4.3.1The Committee also observes that the SSI sector comprises of lot of units engaged in the food processing and there
is no exclusive zone for food processing in the area. It was also informed that adequate cold storage facility is not
available for these units. The Committee, therefore, recommends that necessary steps should be taken to set up food
processing zone in the area to assist the SSI units engaged in food processing and also to enhance cold storage
facilities.(Para 50)
Action Taken
4.3.2The recommendation of the Committee has been forwarded to the Ministry of Food Processing Industry and the
State Government for taking appropriate action.
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
COMMITTEE ----- AT A GLANCE
CREDIT GUARANTEE FUND TRUST FOR SMALL INDUSTRIES (CGFT)
         The Committee notes that eighteen proposals involving credit amount of Rs. 35.24 lakh have so far been covered
under the Credit Guarantee Scheme for Bulandshahar. However, the Committee is of the view that there is a need to
broaden the base of Credit Guarantee Scheme for accelerated proliferation of small enterprises in the country. The
Committee endorses that Bulandshahar is one of the commercial centre of U.P. and recommends that concerted efforts
should be taken to cover more cases under credit guarantee scheme.(3.1.3)
DECLINING TREND IN CREDIT FLOW TO SSIS
         The Committee knows that the flow of credit to SSI sector from the public sector banks has gone up Rs. 29,482
crore in March, 1996 to Rs. 58,277 crore in March, 2004 but the percentage of net bank credit to SSI sector has come
down from seventeen per cent in 1998 to almost ten per cent in 2004 because of the fact that the rate of growth in
advances to SSI sector is not commensurate with the rate of growth in net bank credit. This is the main concern of the
Committee which has been expressed by the Committee during the course of the meetings held on 1
st September, 2004,
10th January, 3rd March, 2005 with the representatives of nationalized banks and Banking Division. The same issue was
discussed in detail in the meeting of Sub-Committee for Ministry of Small Scale Industries (of Standing Committee on
Industry) held on 19
th March and 11th April, 2005 with the select nationalized banks. In the meeting held on 11 th April,
2005, the SSI Associations, also hailing from Bulandshahar, expressed their resentment and anguish over the inadequate
credit flow to SSI sector        (3.2.6)
         The Committee expresses its deepest concern over the pathetic credit flow to SSI sector in general and in the
region of Bulandshahar and is of the considered view that the declining trend of percentage to net bank credit to SSI
sector needs to be arrested at the earliest rather it needs to be reversed to almost to the level of 17 to 18 per cent, if the
goal of 12 per cent growth rate in the SSI sector as the target set in TenthFive Year Plan is to be
achieved.                          (3.2.7)
ROADS AND TRANSPORT FACILITIES
         The Ministry of SSI should take up the issue of direct railway link to Bulandshahar fro the betterment of SSI
sector and making the city commercially viable. Moreover, adequate follow up action should be taken with Ministry of
Road Transport and Highways (MORTH) for immediate expanding the width of National Highway No. 91 (Ghaziabad
Kanpur road) into at least a four lane road so that the traffic problem in Dadri and Sikandrabad town in resolved for the
smooth transportation of SSI
products.                                                                                                                                         (3.3.3)
MINUTES
XIV
FOURTEENTH  MEETING
         The Committee met at 5.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 3
rd May, 2005 in Committee Room 'E', Basement, PHA, New
Delhi.
         PRESENT

163rd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/163rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:28]
   1.   Shri Santosh Bagrodia   —   Chairman
         RAJYA  SABHA
   2.   Prof M.M. Agarwal
   3.   Dr. K. Malaisamy
   4.   Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   5.   Dr. Vijay Mallya
   6.   Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
         LOK  SABHA
   7.   Shri Guharam Ajgalle
   8.   Shri Kailash Baitha
   9.   Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
10.   Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria
11.   Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel
12.   Shri Rajnarayan
13.   Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
         SECRETARIAT
         Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
         Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
         Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
2.      At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee.
3.      The Committee then took up the following Reports for its consideration:—
(i)    161
st Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 132 nd
Report on MoU Performance in respect of Select Public Sector Undertakings.
 (ii)   162nd Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 146th
Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in Maharashtra.
(iii)   163rd Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 147 th
Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in the Region of Bulandshahar.
(iv)   164th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 150 th
Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises).
(v)   165th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 151 st
Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Department of Heavy Industries (Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises).
(vi)   166
th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 152nd
Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries.
(vii)  167th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 153 rd
Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Ministry of Small Scale Industries.
(viii)168th Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) pertaining to Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises).
(ix)   169 th Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) pertaining to Department of Heavy Industries (Ministry of
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises).
(x)   170th Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) pertaining to Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries.
(xi)   171st Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) pertaining to Ministry of Small Scale Industries.

163rd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/163rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:28]
4.      The Committee decided to present these reports in the current session. After a brief discussion the Report were
adopted.
5.      The Committee authorized Prof. M.M. Agarwal and in his absence Dr. K. Malaisamy to present the Reports to the
Rajya Sabha. Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel and in his absence Shri Rajnarayan to lay the copies the Reports in the
Lok Sabha.
4.      The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 P.M.