115th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/115threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:02]
 
     PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYASABHA 
  
           DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
           STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
ONE HUNDRED-FIFTEENTH REPORT
 
ON
                  
ACTION TAKEN ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE  81st   REPORT ON ‘SICKNESS IN
SSI SECTOR OF CEMENT INDUSTRY IN UTTAR PRADESH’ PERTAINING TO THE MINISTRY OF
SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON  10TH DECEMBERM, 2002)
(LAID ON THE TABLE  OF THE  LOK SABHA ON 10TH DECEMBER, 2002)
 
 
                 RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
                 NEW DELHI
 
 
                DECEMBER, 2003/VAISAKHA, 1924 (SAKA)
 
 C O N T E N T S
 
  1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                            
 2.  INTRODUCTION                                                         
 3.  REPORT                                                                                                                                
(i) CHAPTER – I                                                                                                
Recommendations/Observations have been accepted by the
Government
 
(ii)
  CHAPTER–II                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                           
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not
to pursue in view of the Government's replies
 
(iii) CHAPTER–III
                                                                                                    
                                                                             
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee
has not accepted replies of the Government
 
(iv)
   CHAPTER–IV                                                                                                   
                                                                                          
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
                                                                                                                   
 

115th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/115threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:02]
  4.       MINUTES                                                                                                                                                  
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
                  Shri P.C. Alexander      — Chairman
                                
                        RAJYA SABHA
2.      Prof. M.M. Agarwal
3.      Shri Jayantilal Barot
4.      Shri K. Chandran Pillai
5.      Dr. M.N. Das
6.      Smt.  Saroj Dubey
7.      Shri Faguni Ram
8.      Shri Lajpat Rai
9.      Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
10.  Shri P.K. Maheshwari
11.  Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
12.  Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
13.  Shri S. Sivasubramanian
14.  Smt. Sushree Devi
15.  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
 
LOK SABHA
16.  Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
17.  Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
18.  Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
19.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das
20.  Shri K Francis George
21.  Shri Thomas Hansda
22.  Md. Anwarul Haque
23.  Shri A.C. Jose
24.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
25.  Shri Mansoor Ali Khan
26.  Shri Sunil Khan
27.  Shri Deepak Kumar
28.  Shri Manjay Lal
29.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
30.  Shri A. Narendra
31.  Shri Ananta Nayak
32.  Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
33.  Shri Uttamrao Patil
34.  Shri Malyala Rajaiah
35.  Shri P. Rajendran
36.  Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
37.  Shri Tarachand Sahu
38.  Shri Ramanand Singh
39.  Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
40.  Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
41.  Shri V. Vertiselvan
42.  Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari
43.  Shri Ram Prasad Singh
44.  Shri Radha Mohan Singh
45.Shri Vijay Sankeshwar
 
SECRETARIAT
 

115th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/115threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:02]
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K.Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri  K.P.Singh ,Under Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
 
 
 INTROD
UCTION
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having   been  authorized  by
the Committee, hereby present this  One hundred-Fifteenth Report on the  Action Taken  by the Government on the
Recommendations  contained in  the  81
st Report of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry on
‘Sickness In SSI Sector of Cement Industry in Uttar Pradesh’ pertaining to the Ministry of Small Scale Industries.
 
2.         The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry considered and adopted the Draft report at its
meeting held on the 6
th May,  2003.
 
3.         The 81
st Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry was presented to Rajya
Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the10th December, 2002.
 
NEW DELHI;
December 10  ,2002
Dr.P.C.Alexander
Chairman Department -related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry
 
 REPORT
 
 
1.      The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained
in its81ST Report of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry on ‘Sickness in SSI Sector
of Cement Industry in Kanpur’ of the Ministry of Small Scale Industries which was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid
on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 10th December, 2002.
2.      Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the recommendations contained in the
Report.  They have been categorized as follows:
           (i)       Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Government: - Paras 1.1 and 1.2
(Chapter - I).
 (ii)       Recommendations/Observations, which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies: - Paras 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3 (Chapter - II)
   (iii)       Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies of the
Government: - Paras 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7, 3.8, 3.9, 3.10, 3.11, 3.12, 3.13, 3.14, 3.15, 3.16, 3.17, 3.18 and
3.19(Chapter - III).
 (iv)      Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have been placed separately. (Chapter-IV).
3.         The Committee is pleased to observe that the Ministry of Small Scale Industries has accepted its recommendations
as mentioned in Chapter –I of the Report. 
4.         In respect of the recommendations made in Paras 1.1 and 1.2 in Chapter-II, the Committee is convinced with the
logic and explanation advocated by the Ministry of Small Scale Industries and therefore does not want to  pursue  them
further .
5.         The Committee expresses its concern over non-implementation of recommendations contained in Chapter-III and
desires that the Ministry of Small Scale Industries would furnish logical explanation in respect of these recommendations
for consideration of the Committee.

115th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/115threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:02]
6.           Observations and Recommendations at a glance may be seen in Chapter IV.
7.         The Details of the ATR is being discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.
 
 
 
 CHAPTER – I
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT
 
 
HARASSMENT OF DEFAULTING CEMENT UNITS
 
1.1       Recommendations  
 
Uttar Pradesh Finance Corporation portfolio has, at present, 48 cement  manufacturing units.  Out of 48 units only 2
units are regular in payment whereas 1 unit has recently gone in production.  As per the study conducted by the Uttar
Pradesh Finance Corporation, these units are facing problems relating to market recession like in transportation cost, wage
cost, ban on mining, unimplemented units, temporary default, etc.  The Committee notes the plethora of problems being
faced   by the cement units.  In the circumstances, the Committee observes that the reported harassment of these units,
instead of reviving them by the Uttar Pradesh Finance Corporation, as mentioned by the Association, needs to be looked
into.
(Para 5.10)
Action Taken
 
UPFC has submitted that there is no harassment of the defaulting cement units by the Corporation.  The Corporation
has been trying to contact every unit for One Time Settlement (OTS). The fact is that with the existing sale price of the
cement, none of the small scale units would be viable. The Corporation is of the view that though there has been
improvement in the demand of cement all over the country, the sales realization per bag has not improved. Even if such
units come into production they would not be able to break even and repay the Corporation’s dues. It would be in the
interest of the borrower to settle the dues of the Corporation through One Time Settlement only.
            Under the refinance scheme, SIDBI does not usually interfere with the decision on individual cases by PLIs
including SFCs.  Specific cases, if referred to, SIDBI may look into it in consultation with UPFC.
 
REVIVAL OF SICK SSI UNITS
1.2       Recommendation    
 
The Committee also notes that as per norms specified by the Reserve Bank of India, a sick unit is considered as
potentially viable, if it would be in a position, after implementing a relief package spread over a period not exceeding five
years from the commencement of the package from banks, financial institutions, Government (Central/State) and other
concerned agencies, as may be necessary, to continue to service its repayment obligations as agreed upon including those
forming part of the package, without the help of the concessions after the aforesaid period.  The repayment period of
restructuring debts should not exceed seven years from the date of implementation of the package.
(Para 6.5)
Action Taken
 
The Reserve Bank of India has issued revised, detailed, transparent and non-discretionary guidelines for
rehabilitation of current, sick and potentially viable Small Scale Industrial units, based on the recommendation of the Kohli
Committee, on 16th January, 2002.  Any proposal of revival, eligible under the above revised scheme, is examined by the
financing bank and necessary action taken, thereon.
 
 
 CHAPTER – II

115th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/115threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:02]
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
 
 
THE DEMAND OF CEMENT  
 
2.1       Recommendation  
 
            The study report further mentioned that the immediate future is not very encouraging. However, once the
Government starts the revival of the economy through investment in infrastructure and construction activity picks up, the
demand for cement will grow.
(Para 5.3)
Action Taken
 
With the indications of revival of the economy in the recent months and growth in economic activity including
investments in housing and infrastructure sector, per capita consumption of cement is likely to go up driving such growth of
demand for cement with increasing GDP.
 
HARASSMENT OF DEFAULTING CEMENT UNITS
 
2.2       Recommendation    
 
            The Central Government had announced in the 8 th Five Year Plan about construction of double express highway,
houses for millions, generation of power to take the electricity to the rural areas.  Had such activities relating to
infrastructure building arisen the present state of low intake of Cement would not have arisen.  In fact, market demand of
cement was not in line with the Government’s projection.  In subsequent budgets of the Central Government the above
schemes did not find place, resulting in decline in demand of Cement.
(Para 5.11)
 
Action Taken 
 
There has been a growing thrust on infrastructure in  each subsequent budget and policy announcements. The Prime
Minister’s announcements in 1998 to construct 2 million houses annually during the 9 th Five Year Plan and to construct
concrete roads connecting the four mega cities covering around 6000 kms under the project- “ Golden Quadrilateral” and “
North-South, East-West Expressways” are significant. Implementation of such projects is likely to contribute to growth of
cement demand. 
 
ASSISTANCE TO GIANT CEMENT INDUSTRIES
 
2.3
       Recommendation      
 
The giant units which take 5-6 years to produce cement started production in 1996 in UP after taking financial
assistance from IDBI on easy terms and flooded the market with cement at a cheaper rate and ousted smaller units by
waging an unfair and unequal competition. Had the development work regarding building up infrastructure started before
1992  or during 1992-96 the smaller units would have survived and established themselves.
(Para 5.12)
Action Taken
 
            IDBI had extended assistance to companies such as Mysore Cements Ltd., for setting up a 0.5 million tons per
annum grinding unit at Jhansi, U.P. (Rs. 7.3 crore @  17.5% p.a. in 1987 and further Rs. 3 crore @ 19.5% p.a. for
modernization of the unit in 1992), Birla Corporation for setting up 0.4 million tons per annum  at Rae Bareli  (Rs. 40 crore
@ 16.25% p.a. in September, 1998) and to ACC for setting up a 0.6 million tons per annum  grinding unit at Tikaria, U.P.
(Rs. 40 crore @ 15.5% p.a. in 1998).
IDBI has not extended any soft loans to its assisted cement companies in UP. The assistance has been granted as per
the extant guidelines of IDBI prevailing at that time.

115th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/115threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:02]
 
 CHAPTER – III
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE HAS NOT
ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
EFFECT OF RISE IN COST OF POWER COUPLED WITH BORROWING COST ON THE
CEMENT INDUSTRY
 
3.1       Recommendation    
 
            Uttar Pradesh Financial Corporation made a study regarding mini cement plants financed by the Corporation. The
study report inter-alia  mentioned that the performance of the cement industry is closely linked with the industrial growth of
the country. In the period from 1993-94 to 1995-96, when the industrial growth was higher, the scenario in the segment was
bright. In 1995-96 with 11.7% industrial growth, the cement production grew at 10.6%. As the industry slowed down in
1996-97, so did the cement segment. The same downward trend continued in 1998-99. According to the industry sources,
the current take-off position is inadequate to generate more profits, as the low price realization is still not matching the
production cost. The recession in construction activity, low investment in major infrastructure projects, rise in the cost of
power etc. coupled with high borrowing cost has marked down the industry’s earnings.
(Para 5.1)
 
Action Taken
 
            The growth of cement industry was affected due to slowdown in the industrial growth and general economic
recession.
            Regarding cost of power, Ministry of Power is aware that for development of the economy, electricity has to be
affordable. To remain competitive in the global economy, Indian Industry needs to reduce the cost of inputs including
power. To address the issue of rising cost of power for industries etc., the Ministry of Power has adopted a two – pronged
strategy – Reduction of cost of power itself on the one hand and reduction and    elimination of cross subsidies, on the other.
The Ministry constituted an Inter-Disciplinary Group under the Chairmanship of Special Secretary (Power)  to go into the
question of reducing the cost of power.  The report of the Group is being implemented.  As regards reduction of cross
subsidies, the Electricity Regulatory Commissions Act, 1998 empowers the Regulatory Commissions for the purpose. So far
13 State Electricity Regulatory Commissions have passed tariff orders, which reflect a trend towards tariff rationalization
and progressive reduction of cross subsidies.
            As regards high borrowing cost, the lending rates have gone down after the deregulation of interest rates regime. The
RBI in its mid-term review of monetary and credit policy for 2002-03 has cut the benchmark bank rate by quarter percent to
6.25 per cent and cash reserve ratio (CRR) to 4.75 per cent from 5 percent. The Commercial Banks are expected to lower
their lending rates for borrowers.  As per extant guidelines the banks are required to fix their own prime lending rates
(PLRs) and the maximum band over the PLR.  The interest rates on loans up to Rs. 2 lakh should not exceed the PLR and
that beyond Rs. 2 lakh is left to the discretion of the banks subject to PLR and the maximum bands.  The banks have been
advised to accord SSI units with a good track record the benefit of lower spreads over the PLR.
 
Further Recommendation
 
 
            The Ministry of Power has adopted a two pronged strategy – Reduction of cost of power  it self on the one hand and
reduction elimination of cross subsidies, on the other. The Committee would like to know how far reduction of the cost of
power,  tariff rationalization progressive reduction of  cross subsides  have been achieved in the state of Uttar Pradesh.
            The banks have been advised to accord SSI Units with a good track record, the benefit of lower spreads over the
PLR. The Committee would like to know how the number of SSI Units benefited by such advice given to the banks.
 
STAGNATION OF MINI CEMENT PLANTS
 
3.2
       Recommendation   
 

115th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/115threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:02]
            Another major constraint in this segment is excess capacity. During the growth phase of the industry, almost all
major players in this sector had gone for huge capacity addition. As a result, the installed capacity of cement industry
doubled in the last four years. In 1996-97 the installed capacity was 96.25 million tonnes, going up to 105.25 million tonnes
in 1997-98. Some additional capacity is still expected to be installed in the coming years. Due to the huge capacity available
with major plants, they have encroached upon the segment of the mini cement plants by entering the remotest areas. Mini
cement plants,which traditionally used to cater to the local markets of remote areas, were therefore badly affected.
(Para 5.2)
Action Taken
 
            The Ministry of Commerce & Industry had requested Tariff Commission (erstwhile BICP) on January 22,1999 to
undertake a study of mini cement plants and suggest measures for their revival in view of deteriorating operational
efficiency. The Tariff Commission conducted the study on all India basis and submitted a report which, however, did not
recommend granting of any further concession to the mini cement plants.
            The report concluded that after delicensing of cement industry, as part of liberalization policy in 1991, the growth of
mini-cement plants stagnated. Large cement plants, on the other hand, registered higher growth both in capacity and
production. The large cement plants being high volume and low cost producers, contributing about 95 per cent of the total
cement production in the country, are the market price leaders. Mini cement plants are the followers and vulnerable to low
sales realization. From the recommendations of the Tariff Commission it emerges that revival of these units is possible only
when they improve their operational efficiency.  
 
Further Recommendation
 
            As a result of liberalization the cement industry has been delicensed. The result was stagnation of mini cement plants
and registration of higher growth by large cement plants. As per Tariff commission recommendation, these units can be
revived when they improve their operational efficiency. Tariff Commission has not given any plan of action in this regard.
Ministry of Small Scale Industries should suggest some measures to improve their operational efficiency.
 
HIGH RATE OF INTEREST CHARGED BY UPFC
 
3.3
       Recommendation   
 
The Uttar Pradesh Finance Corporation also entrusted ICRA with the job of preparing a report on the cement sector. 
The ICRA had cited high interest rate charged by Uttar Pradesh Finance Corporation as one of the problems faced by the
SSI units in cement sectors.
(Para 5.4)
Action Taken
 
The Banks / FIs usually determine the rate of interest to be charged on their term loans based on their cost of funds,
administrative overheads and also the risk perception of the borrower. Accordingly, the SFCs ( including UPFC) have been
retaining a margin of 3 % per annum over the rate of interest on refinance made available by IDBI and SIDBI.
With regard to the rate of interest charged by SIDBI on the refinance, it may be mentioned that the refinance rates,
as a matter of policy, are fixed below the prime lending rate (PLR) so that the cost of funds to the ultimate borrowers is
contained. With a view to mitigating the hardships of the SSI units because of the upward revision in interest rates during
early 1990s, SIDBI, in May,1995, gave an opportunity as a one time measure to SFCs including UPFC to review such cases
and claim refund of excess interest charged to certain categories of borrowers subject to the condition that similar benefit
should be passed on to their ultimate borrowers.
 
Further Recommendation
 
            It is not known whether UPFC had taken the opportunity offered by the SIDBI to review  the cases where excess
interest was charged to certain borrowers. If  UPFC had reviewed such cases. The Committee may be apprised of the
number of cases in which the benefit was passed on to their ultimate borrowers. 
 
3.4       Recommendation     
   
The Committee observes that the State Government had revised the rate of interest from 13.5% to 19.75% in 1991-
92.  The reasons for charging high rate of interest by Uttar Pradesh Finance Corporation was due to the fact that it got loans

115th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/115threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:02]
from SIDBI/ IDBI at a higher rate.  The Committee, however, feels that revising the rate of interest was not in the interest of
mini cement plants.  The Government should have calculated the viability of those projects before revising the rate of
interest as it proved a disincentive for SSIs in the cement sector.  As regards giving loan by SIDBI/ IDBI on higher rate of
interest to Uttar Pradesh Finance Corporation, the Committee observes that the matter should have been sorted out by the
U.P. Administration with SIDBI/ IDBI.
(Para 5.5)
 
Action Taken
 
Uttar Pradesh Financial Corporation (UPFC) gets its refinance from SIDBI/IDBI for its loan disbursals. The interest
rates of the Corporation are charged in line with refinance rates by retaining 2 or 3% as intermediation charges. UPFC has
reported that most of the cement units had been sanctioned term loans in late eighties and they did fairly well thereafter.   It
was only during 1995-96 when such units went in for major expansion, which was immediately followed by industrial
recession.  Thereafter, these units started defaulting. The interest rate charged by the Corporation were in line with the
interest rates prevailing that time in the financial sector.  At the time of working out the profitability, such units were found
viable even at this higher rate of interest.  It was only when the cement from big plants started flowing in the market, such
units started facing competition.  The small scale units could not raise their sale price in consonance with rise in input cost
because of constraints of the market.  Most of the financial institutions do not revise their interest rate during the currency of
loan.  The interest rates are fixed and are the same which are prevailing at the time of first disbursement.  Thus it would not
have been possible for the Corporation to lower the interest rates even if these units started defaulting.
 
Further Recommendation
 
            From the Ministry’s comments the sordid tale of mini cement plants in Uttar Pradesh has come to the fore. These
plants cannot be held responsible as they have become victims due to delicensing  of cement industry. The Committee
suggests that the Ministry of Small Scale Industries should mediate between the UPFC and SIDBI to find a suitable solution
like one time settlement.
 
WAIVING OF INTEREST BY UPFC
 
3.5       Recommendation  
 
The Committee notes that SSIs engaged in this business took loans from the financial institutions/ banks, but due to
industrial slow down  and stiff competition from giant plants they had to dispose of their products through distress sale,
which contributed to accumulation of interest against the principal amount of loan.  Raising of interest by Government
under such circumstances proved to be the death knell for the SSIs in the cement sector.  The Committee further notes that
Rajasthan Financial Corporation, under a one time settlement, not only waived the interest completely but also waived 20%
principal amount so that the mini cement units situated in Rajasthan may survive.
(Para 5.6)
 
Action Taken
 
The UPFC has stated that they are not aware of any such scheme of waiver of interest completely and also waiver of
20% of principal amount of the mini cement plants in Rajsthan.  The Corporation would be writing to RFC to find out the
details about this scheme.
The Board of U.P. Financial Corporation had decided to charge only 12% simple interest on the outstanding loan
amount from the date of first default, while deciding the OTS of these cases.  Further, the amount paid by the units during
the interregnum would also be deducted from the OTS amount.  Further, the Corporation has approved some of the OTS
cases even by charging 7-8% simple interest on outstanding principal amount from the date of first default.  This has been
done keeping in view the paying capacity of the borrower.  Thus, the Corporation has been quite sympathetic to the
problems of sick cement units.
 
 
 
Further Recommendation
 
            The Committee wonders what prevented Ministry of Small Scale Industries to find out from  RFC about the scheme

115th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/115threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:02]
and explore the possibility whether it cannot be followed in toto in Uttar Pradesh. The Committee takes strong exception to
the fact that the Ministry of Small Scale Industries has left it to UPFR to find out from RFC if there was any scheme of
waiving from SSI units in Rajasthan.
 
3.6       Recommendation    
 
The units of Uttar Pradesh are working in a climate of apathy.  Uttar Pradesh Finance Corporation, in a letter dated
October 4,2000 addressed to “Udyog Bandhu” (A Forum of Industrial Associations), mentioned that the members of the
mini cement plants association desired that whatever repayment (by way of interest or repayment) they have made till date
to the Corporation may be adjusted towards principal and balance may be recovered from them in easy installments. The
Board had already rejected this proposal earlier. However, if there is any demand of the association for waiver of total or
part of interest, the same is to be taken to the Board again for its approval.
(Para 5.7)
Action Taken
 
The UPFC has stated that keeping in view large scale recession prevailing in cement sector, the Corporation has
been quite sympathetic to the problems of mini cement units. The amount paid by the cement units by way of interest or
principal has been adjusted towards total OTS amount which has been arrived after adding 7% to 12% simple interest from
the date of first default on the principal outstanding. As rightly mentioned UPFC Board has rejected the proposal of OTS on
principal outstanding only. As regards the waiver of part of interest is concerned the same is acceptable to the Corporation.
Further Recommendation
 
The Committee still feels that the decision taken by R.F.C can be followed in the SSI Sector in Uttar Pradesh also.
The Committee therefore recommends that the UPFC may explore the possibility of taking similar decision as taken by
R.F.C, Rajasthan.
3.7
       Recommendation     
 
The Committee fails to understand as to why Uttar Pradesh Finance Corporation is not able to bail out the units in
UP taking a cue from the RFC when the units in UP are struggling for survival.
(Para 5.8)
 
Action Taken
 
UPFC has stated that they are not aware of the scheme of RFC. They would be writing to RFC to find out the details
of the scheme.
 
Further Recommendation
 
The Committee hopes that the details of the scheme would be found by UPFC and  implemented without
delay.
 
INTER DEPARTMENTAL COORDINATION TO HELP SSI UNITS
 
3.8       Recommendation     
 
From the memorandum submitted by the Association, the Committee notes that problems of the units were to be
deliberated by a High Power Committee under the Chairmanship of the Chief Minister. In this regard, the Directorate of
Industries, UP, in their letter dated August 1
st ,2000 requested Secretary, UP Administration, to place the matter before the
said High Power Committee. It appears that such a sensitive matter was not brought before that Committee.  It reflects lack
of coordination between the departments of the Government.  Similar situations also prevail at the central level also.  On
various occasions, the Committee observed that various Ministries did not have an integrated approach to solve the
problems of the industry.  The Committee observes that if SSI units are to be given a boost, the different departments of the
State Government and Central Government are to work in a coordinated manner.
(Para 5.9)
 
Action Taken
 

115th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/115threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:02]
The Directorate of Industries, U.P. has stated that U.P. Mini Cement Plants Association submitted a letter on the
problems of mini cement industries to the Directorate in the year 2000 which was sent to the U.P. Government to place
before the High Power Committee of Udyog Bandhu under the Chairmanship of the Hon’ble Chief Minister. However, due
to some unavoidable circumstances the proposed meeting on October 21 st ,.2000 could not be held.  Meanwhile, a letter
from the Association on the issues concerning the same subject matter was received which has been referred vide letter
dated October 4th ,2002 with recommendations of the Directorate for consideration at the State Government level. The main
problems raised by the Association relate to facilities desired from the UPFC. The Corporation has apprised regarding the
present status on the action/ steps taken in the matter.  Thus, U.P. Financial Corporation and the State Government are
serious about taking positive action.
The State Level Inter-Institutional Committee (SLIICs) have been set up in all the States under the Chairmanship of
Secretary, Industries Department of the concerned State to deal with the problems of coordination for rehabilitation of sick
SSI units.
 
Further Recommendation
 
            The Committee is happy to note that UPFC and State Governments are serious about taking positive action. The
Committee would like to know the follow up action taken in the matter.
 
TECHNOLOGY USED IN MINI CEMENT PLANTS
 
3.9
       Recommendation   
 
            The Central Government had facilitated in establishing the mini cement plants to meet the demand of cement in the
emerging scenario of building up of infrastructure facilities in the country by enabling the SSI sector to get loans from the
IDBI.  In all, 126 units were set up, of which 50% were in the category of integrated units (which produced cement out of its
own manufactured clinkers) and 50% were in the category of grindingunits (which ground clinkers to produce cement after
purchasing clinkers from the big units).  This method of producing cement by the SSI sector received a setback when the
Supreme Court banned mining of limestone and as a consequence, limestone mines were closed in Dehradun.   As a result,
thesupply of major raw material i.e. limestone, had stopped and self-producing capacity of units for making clinker
vanished.  The remaining units are doing only grinding by purchasing clinker from the big units.  The woes of SSI sector
did not end here.  The capacity to produce clinker and producing cement out of clinker has not only been taken away by the
big units from the SSI sector, the price of clinker sold by them to small units has been raised to such an extent that either the
small units are unable to purchase it from big units or if they purchase and grind them, they would not be able to sell that
cement in the market because of high cost of production, resulting in closure of mini cement plants.
(Para 5.13)
 
Action Taken
 
The manufacture of cement in the composite units is made by calcining the typical  composition either in a vertical
shaft kiln or rotary kiln.  The environmental factors or other problems like dependence on large units for clinkers,
inadequacies in infrastructure,   rise in input costs etc. coupled with lower sales realization have affected the mini cement
plants.  As revealed by the study conducted by the Tariff Commission among the rotary kiln plants, plants which have
upgraded their capacity have improved their productivity and energy efficiency which had a favourable impact on their cost
of production as well as profitability.  Vertical shaft kiln plants were affected more severely than rotary kiln plants. 
 
Further Recommendation
 
            The Committee feels that by improving the technology, the mini cement plants still may be made viable. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Small Scale Industries may lend a helping hand to SSI Sector in this
regard.
 
INCENTIVES TO LARGE CEMENT PLANTS
 
3.10     Recommendation          
 
Recently, the UP Government had offered 100% concession of Sales tax for 12 years to those industries whose

115th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/115threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:02]
investment is over PSUs crore.  Under this scheme, the giant cement industries like ACC and Satna Cement have
established their grinding unit of total 8.6 lakh tonnes per annum capacity in Rai Bareily District of UP  and are availing of
this concession.  The State Government would lose a huge amount of revenue by granting this concession to the giant units. 
The cement so produced after grinding by the giant units is much cheaper and their selling price is much lower than that of
mini plants.  All the more, the giant units are availing double concessions: -
(a)
    Firstly, as a manufacturer of intermediate product i.e. clinker, they are availing sales tax exemption in their parent
State; and
(b)   they are availing sales tax concession in UP as a manufacturer of cement.
(Para 5.14)
 
Action Taken
 
            While cement (large/small) units set up in backward areas are eligible for sales tax benefits, small scale units enjoy
excise duty benefits.  The issue of availability of sales tax/ other benefits to cement units (either large or small) is a State
subject and will have to be addressed by the State Government. 
            Ministry of Finance has informed that in the Conference of Chief Ministers of States/ UTs held on 16
th November,
1999, it was decided sales tax based incentive schemes must be withdrawn by all the State Governments.  Accordingly,
most of the State Governments have withdrawn sales tax based incentives given to industries, except the pipeline cases.
 
 
Further Recommendation
 
            Although sales Tax is a state subject the Committee desires that Ministry of Small Scale Industries should obtain the
information from the State Government for information of the Committee.
 
3.11
     Recommendation  
 
            During the course of oral evidence before the Sub-Committee, the SSI association expressed the apprehension that
those giant industries would leave UP after 12 years and establish their units in other States to avail sale tax concession. 
The Committee was informed that small units are given only two years sales tax free concession as against 12 years to the
giant units.
(Para 5.15)
Action Taken
 
Same as given under para 5.14.  In view of the position stated, the apprehension that giant industries would leave the
State and establish their units elsewhere to avail  sales tax concession is unfounded. 
 
Further Recommendation
 
            The Committee would like to know whether any large Company has left the State after availing concession
for twelve years.
 
3.12     Recommendation    
            Uttar Pradesh Finance Corporation’s letter dated 4 th October 2000 addressed to “Udyog Bandhu” corroborates the
above fact.  The study made by ICRA had concluded that integrated mini cement units were not viable.  The report further
concluded that in case the unit took up grinding function alone, the operation could become viable with some incentives. 
The study had further concluded that the units could be marginally viable if they were granted total sales tax exemption.  It
has been further mentioned that Government of UP had granted 12 years sales tax exemption to big units.  The revenue loss
to Government from these two units alone would be Rs. 345 crores.  It had been reported that there was a third new large
unit coming up in the State.  Revenue loss from this unit alone would be Rs. 691 crores.
(Para 5.16)
 
Action Taken
 
            The only concession  that is at present available to mini cement plants is in the nature of reduced excise duty to those
mini cement plants which produce cement up to 99,000 MT per annum. So far as concessions to mini cement units for the
revival of these units in the State of Uttar Pradesh by way of preference treatment for their product, waiver of sales tax, etc.

115th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/115threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:02]
is concerned, the matter concerns the State Government.
 
Further Recommendation
 
            The Committee desires that the information may be obtained from the State Government for information of the
Committee.
 
PURCHASE PREFERENCE POLICY
 
3.13     
Recommendation   
 
            The above communication is the testimony of the fact how small units are discriminated against and have been
forced to wage a battle against stronger competitors.
When the small units were gasping for oxygen, UP government issued a circular in 1998 asking its cement
consuming departments to send their demands to small-scale industries only.  In spite of this, Government departments are
not complying with the order.  As a result, the order remained on paper only without any visible results.  The Committee
feels that a mechanism to monitor the compliance of the Purchase Preference Policy should have been evolved if the
Government really wanted to help the SSI sector.   The  Committee  observes that an early action
 
 
to monitor the compliance of the order even now may save the situation for the dying SSI units.
(Para 5.17)
Action Taken
 
The issue of preferential treatment to small- scale cement units for their product  pertains to the U.P. Government.
There already exists a Government Purchase & Price Preference Policy wherein certain facilities/ benefits are being
provided to the SSI units as a marketing support measure. The Draft “Small Enterprises Development Bill” under 
consideration of the Ministry of SSI  also covers the aspect of measures for trade protection.
 
Further Recommendation
 
The Committee desires that Ministry of Small Scale Industries may obtain information from the State Government
about the extent to which Purchase and Price Preference Policy is implemented for the benefit of mini cement plants.
 
CREDIT FLOW TO MINI CEMENT PLANTS
 
3.14     
Recommendation   
 
Another factor which has crippled the mini cement plants is the lack of credit flow to the sector. While the giant
units had no difficulty in securing loans from banks and FIs, the small units are still struggling to get loans from banks even
after the announcement made to the effect that loan would be given without any collateral security. In addition, restriction
on load carrying capacity of trucks proved to be a strangulatory provision for the mini cement plants.
(Para 5.18)
 
Action Taken
 
 The RBI has advised the banks in January, 2002 to extend the benefit under the increased exemption limit of 
borrowal accounts for obtention of collateral securities of Rs. 5 lakh to all SSI units  so as to ensure flow of credit to this
sector.  Further, the RBI in April, 2002 has advised the banks that they may, on the basis of good track record and financial
position of the units, increase the limit of dispensation of collateral requirement for loans from the existing Rs. 5 lakh to Rs.
15 lakh. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
 
The Committee would like to know the extent of credit flown to mini cement plants under the R.B.I.
guidelines.
 

115th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/115threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:02]
ECONOMIC RECESSION AND SLOW DOWN IN THE ECONOMY
 
3.15     Recommendation   
 
In nutshell, a vision was created during the successive Five Year Plans and notifications issued in 1979 that huge
infrastructure would be created nationwide but large cement plants would not be in a position to supply the required
quantum of cement. SSI sector was encouraged to set up mini cement plants to meet the demand of additional quantum of
cement in view of its lower capital cost, quicker installation and higher employment potential coupled with the exploitation
of smaller limestone deposits by it in rural and hilly areas. These units were given loan assistance by the banks and FIs and
they started setting up units when the cement industry was hailed as the harbinger of overall development of the state. The
good days for the SSI sector did not last long due to economic recession when construction activities come to a low ebb.
(Para 6.1)
 
Action Taken
 
            Following the decontrol   of Indian Cement Industry   there   had  been   large-scale   capacity   expansion  and 
growth   in  cement production in the country, particularly,  in the 90’s.  However, upsurge in demand for cement was not as
expected due to general recession and slowdown in the economy affecting the industrial growth.  Large cement plants in the
vicinity of mini cement plants tend to charge lower prices which have further eroded the profitability of the mini cement
plants.  Rise in input costs coupled with lower sales realization further affected profitability.  Vertical shaft kiln plants were
affected more severely than rotary kiln plants. 
 
Further Recommendation
 
            The Comments of the Ministry of the Small Scale Industries reveal the stark reality. Vertical shaft kiln plants have
no future but rotary kiln plants can survive the situation with upgraded capacity. Now the question before the Government
whether uneconomic plants may be given decent burial or they may be given technological advice to upgrade their capacity.
The Committee recommends that an all out effort may be made by the Government to the help the mini cement plants.
 
 
PROBABILITY OF MINI CEMENT PLANTS TO REPAY LOAN
 
3.16     
Recommendation   
 
            SSI’s cup of sorrow was full when the Uttar Pradesh Finance Corporation increased the rate of interest from 13.5%
to 19.75% per cent and the giant units flooded the market with their brand of cement at a much lower price than that of mini
cement plants which in turn were forced them to sell cement at a price lower than their cost of production. They failed to
pay interest on the principal amount and the banks and FIs shut their doors to these sick units.
(Para 6.2)
Action Taken
 
SIDBI has opined that the rate of interest in term loan is determined usually at the time of disbursement and does not
vary during the entire period of the loan.  Such of those cases of potentially viable sick SSI units could be covered under
SIDBI’s Refinance Scheme for Rehabilitation of sick SSI units subject to the proposals meeting the norms and parameters
of the scheme.  Under the scheme, it was possible to consider reduction of interest rate, if so warranted. 
 
 
Further Recommendation
 
            The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Small Scale Industries may make an effort to bring the SSI units
under the ambit of SIDBI’s scheme for Rehabilitation of sick  SSI units.
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF ICRA REPORT ON MINI CEMENT PLANTS
3.17      Recommendation    
 
Uttar Pradesh Finance Corporation made a study about problems and possible revival scheme of mini cement plants

115th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/115threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:02]
through ICRA, which suggested complete waiver of interest coupled with full exemption of sales tax and imposition of 15%
price preference for the revival of mini cement plants. But so far, no positive step has been taken to save the industry.
(Para 6.3)
Action Taken
 
UPFC has stated that M/s ICRA had arrived at this conclusion about three years back. The ground situation during
this time has changed significantly. It would need fresh calculation to find out as to whether these sick units would be viable
in case they are given total interest waiver coupled with full exemption of sales tax and imposition of 15% price preference.
 
Further Recommendation
 
It is clear that no action was taken to implement ICRA report. It remains on paper only. Had it been implemented the
plight of SSI units would have been different.  The Ministry in their own comment admitted that there was need to have
fresh calculation about the viability of the sick units. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take a fresh
initiative in this regard.
 
RECENT DEMAND FOR CEMENT
 
3.18     Recommendation  
 
The Committee observes that in the recent past, there has been an overall increase in the rate of growth in the cement
industry.  This is an indication that construction activity has again picked up.  But these activities are confined to certain
places in the country and, by and large, large industries are able to reap the benefit of such a situation.  The renewed demand
for cement has not percolated to the lower level of the industry.  The Committee feels a lending hand should be given to
those sick units.  Ways and means should be explored to bail out them from then pathetic situation.
(Para 6.4)
Action Taken
 
Ministry of Commerce & Industry, Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion has stated that cement is now fully
decontrolled industry and no licence is required from that department for setting up of cement plant in any part of the
country either in large or small scale sector. Further, the Central Government does not provide any incentives for setting up
a small scale unit in the cement sector. The only concession that is at present given to mini cement plants is in the nature of
reduced excise duty which is granted to those mini cement plants which produce cement up to 99,000 MT per annum. As
mentioned earlier, the Ministry of Commerce & Industry had requested Tariff Commission (erstwhile BICP) to undertake a
study of mini cement plants and suggest measures for their revival. The Tariff Commission in its report did not recommend
granting of any further concession to the mini cement plants.
            The cases of potentially viable sick SSI units could, however, be considered under SIDBI’s Refinance Scheme for
Rehabilitation of sick SSI units subject to the proposals meeting the norms and parameters of the scheme. 
 
 
 
Further Recommendation
 
            From the reply given by the Ministry of SSI it is clear that revival of mini cement plants in Uttar Pradesh mainly
depends on the State Government and SIDBI. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should impress upon the State
Government and SIDBI to come out with some measures to help the industry.
 
ROLE OF MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES IN REVIVING SICK UNITS
 
3.19     Recommendation  
 
In view of the RBI guidelines, the Committee recommends that Ministry of Small Scale Industries, in consultation
with the RBI, Lead Bank, Uttar Pradesh Finance Corporation, and UP Administration should make an attempt to revive
these units keeping in view the ICRA report as well as action initiated by the Rajasthan Financial Corporation so that these
units, which are more or less victims of circumstances, can survive.
(Para 6.6)

115th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/115threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:02]
 
Action Taken
 
As regards, mechanism to assess the sickness of SSIs and revival route for sick SSIs, the RBI has issued on 16 th
January,2002  revised, detailed, transparent and non-discretionary guidelines based on Kohli Committee recommendations
and has advised the banks to implement the revised guidelines and take a sympathetic attitude and strive for rehabilitation in
respect of viable SSI units, particularly, wherever the sickness is on account of circumstances beyond the control of
entrepreneurs.  These guidelines, inter alia, provide for waiving of penal rate of interest, and for extension of working
capital at 1.5 percentage points below the prevailing fixed/ prime lending rates.  Provision has also been made in these
guidelines for extension of term loans at reduced rates of interest. 
 
The UPFC has also stated that they would be writing to Rajasthan Financial Corporation (RFC)  to find out the
details about the scheme of RFC.
 
Further Recommendation
 
From the replies by the Ministry of Small Scale Industries it is clear that they do not want to involve themselves in
reviving activity. They want State Government, RBI and SIDBI to do the rescue work. Ministry’s negative attitude would
further mar whatever the chances are there, of reviving the sick industries. The Committee desires that the Ministry of Small
Scale Industries should play a proactive role instead of watching the closure of the units from a distance. The Committee
therefore reiterates its recommendation given in paragraph 6.6 of its 81
st report.
 
 CHAPTER – IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
            The Ministry of Power has adopted a two pronged strategy – Reduction of cost of power  it self on the one hand and
reduction elimination of cross subsidies, on the other. The Committee would like to know how far reduction of the cost of
power,  tariff rationalization progressive reduction of  cross subsides  have been achieved in the state of Uttar Pradesh.
            The banks have been advised to accord SSI Units with a good track record, the benefit of lower spreads over the
PLR. The Committee would like to know how the number of SSI Units benefited by such advice given to the banks.
(Para 3.1)
 
            As a result of liberalization the cement industry has been delicensed. The result was stagnation of mini cement plants
and registration of higher growth by large cement plants. As per Tariff commission recommendation, these units can be
revived when they improve their operational efficiency. Tariff Commission has not given any plan of action in this regard.
Ministry of Small Scale Industries should suggest some measures to improve their operational efficiency.
(Para 3.2)
 
            It is not known whether UPFC had taken the opportunity offered by the SIDBI to review  the cases where excess
interest was charged to certain borrowers. If  UPFC had reviewed such cases. The Committee may be apprised of the
number of cases in which the benefit was passed on to their ultimate borrowers. 
(Para 3.3)
   
            From the Ministry’s comments the sordid tale of mini cement plants in Uttar Pradesh has come to the fore. These
plants cannot be held responsible as they have become victims due to delicensing  of cement industry. The Committee
suggests that the Ministry of Small Scale Industries should mediate between the UPFC and SIDBI to find a suitable solution
like one time settlement.
(Para3.4)
 
            The Committee wonders what prevented Ministry of Small Scale Industries to find out from  RFC about the scheme
and explore the possibility whether it cannot be followed in toto in Uttar Pradesh. The Committee takes strong exception to
the fact that the Ministry of Small Scale Industries has left it to UPFR to find out from RFC if there was any scheme of
waiving from SSI units in Rajasthan.
(Para3. 5)
 
The Committee still feels that the decision taken by R.F.C can be followed in the SSI Sector in Uttar Pradesh also.

115th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/115threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:02]
The Committee therefore recommends that the UPFC may explore the possibility of taking similar decision as taken by
R.F.C, Rajasthan.
(Para 3.6)
 
The Committee hopes that the details of the scheme would be found by UPFC and implemented without delay.
(Para 3.7)
 
            The Committee is happy to note that UPFC and State Governments are serious about taking positive action. The
Committee would like to know the follow up action taken in the matter.
(Para 3.8)
 
            The Committee feels that by improving the technology, the mini cement plants still may be made viable. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Small Scale Industries may lend a helping hand to SSI Sector in this
regard.
  (Para 3.9)
 
            Although sales Tax is a state subject the Committee desires that Ministry of Small Scale Industries should obtain the
information from the State Government for information of the Committee.
          (Para 3.10)
 
            The Committee would like to know whether any large Company has left the State after availing concession for
twelve years.
(Para 3.11)
 
            The Committee desires that the information may be obtained from the State Government for information of the
Committee.
  (Para 3.12)
 
The Committee desires that Ministry of Small Scale Industries may obtain information from the State Government
about the extent to which Purchase and Price Preference Policy is implemented for the benefit of mini cement plants.
(Para 3.13)
 
The Committee would like to know the extent of credit flown to mini cement plants under the R.B.I. guidelines.
  (Para 3.14)
 
            The Comments of the Ministry of the Small Scale Industries reveal the stark reality. Vertical shaft kiln plants have
no future but rotary kiln plants can survive the situation with upgraded capacity. Now the question before the Government
whether uneconomic plants may be given decent burial or they may be given technological advice to upgrade their capacity.
The Committee recommends that an all out effort may be made by the Government to the help the mini cement plants.
(Para 3.15)
 
                        The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Small Scale Industries may make an effort to bring the SSI
units under the ambit of SIDBI’s scheme for Rehabilitation of sick  SSI units.
   (Para 3.16)
 
It is clear that no action was taken to implement ICRA report. It remains on paper only. Had it been implemented the
plight of SSI units would have been different.  The Ministry in their own comment admitted that there was need to have
fresh calculation about the viability of the sick units. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take a fresh
initiative in this regard.
(Para 3.17)
 
            From the reply given by the Ministry of SSI it is clear that revival of mini cement plants in Uttar Pradesh mainly
depends on the State Government and SIDBI. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should impress upon the State
Government and SIDBI to come out with some measures to help the industry.
(Para 3.18)
 
From the replies by the Ministry of Small Scale Industries it is clear that they do not want to involve themselves in

115th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/115threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:02]
reviving activity. They want State Government, RBI and SIDBI to do the rescue work. Ministry’s negative attitude would
further mar whatever the chances are there, of reviving the sick industries. The Committee desires that the Ministry of Small
Scale Industries should play a proactive role instead of watching the closure of the units from a distance. The Committee
therefore reiterates its recommendation given in paragraph 6.6 of its 81st report.
(Para 3.19)
 III
 
TENTH MEETING
 
 
            The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday the 6 th May, 2003 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
1.
                              Dr. P.C. Alexander  --  Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.                              Prof. M.M. Aggarwal
3.                              Dr. M.N. Das
4.                              Shri Faguni Ram
5.                              Shri Lajpat Rai
6.                              Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
7.                              Shri P.K. Maheshwari
8.                              Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
9.                              Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
10.                          Shri K. Chandran Pillai
 
LOK SABHA
 
11.                          Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
12.                          Shri Francis George
13.                          Shri A.C. Jose
14.                          Shri Manjay Lal
15.                          Shri A Narendra
16.                          Shri Ananta Nayak
17.                          Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
18.                          Shri V. Vertiselvan
19.                          Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari
 
SECRETARIAT
           
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
            Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
            Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
            Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
 
2.
                              At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee.
 
 
3.
                              The Committee then took up the following draft Report for its consideration:-
 
(i)                  115th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendation Contained in the Committee’s
Eighty-first Report on Sickness in SSI Sector of Cement Industry in Uttar Pradesh (Ministry of Small Scale
Industries)

115th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/115threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:02]
 
4.                              The Chairman requested the Members to give any suggestion or change in the Report, if required.  After a brief
discussion the Reports were adopted.
5.                              The Chairman nominated Prof. M.M. Aggarwal and in his absence Shri Khan Gufran Zahidi, Members Rajya
Sabha to present these reports to the Rajya Sabha.  He also nominated Dr. B.B. Ramaiah and in his absence Shri A.C. Jose,
Members Lok Sabha to present these reports in the Lok Sabha on 8th May, 2003.
 
6.
                              The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M.